==PAGE:1==
Radar Integrity Monitoring
through Multimodal Sensor Fusion
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Radar Integrity Monitoring
through Multimodal Sensor Fusion
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Christian Rømer Thulstrup
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Christian Rømer Thulstrup, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsted Plads,
Bygning 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis was prepared over five months at the Centre for Collaborative Autonomous
Systems, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment of the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
It is expected that the reader has a fundamental understanding of state space modelling,
linear algebra, statistics, and probability theory to get the full output of the thesis.
Christian Rømer Thulstrup ­ s183691
Signature
Date
ii
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This project aims to develop a radar integrity monitoring system. Such a system will
make navigation safer and help pave the road for autonomous shipping. Integrity moni­
toring happens through a consistency­based fault detection method, where residuals are
created by comparing the radar with a virtual radar.
The virtual radar is created by fusing Electronic Nautical Charts (ENC), Automatic Identifi­
cation Systems (AIS), Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS), and Computer Vision
sensors. Parts of this fusion are done through Error State Kalman Filters (ESKF), which
track the vessels and buoys close to the vessel. It is shown that tracking these objects is
possible with the ESKF.
One residual for the fault detection is created by estimating the vessel’s position from
the radar and ENC data and comparing this with the GNSS position. The other residual
compares the difference between objects’ positions in the radar and the virtual radar.
A part of the ESKF includes the visual input. Therefore, the project tries to develop a deep
learning network that can extract the type, position, size, and orientation of an object found
at sea. After exploring seven models, it was found that features extracted from a Faster
R­CNN backbone network perform best. Further development is necessary for a fully
functional estimation network.
The fault detection algorithm is tested on synthetic and real data. It is shown that the
performance of the synthetic data is excellent. On the real data, the performance is not
as consistent. It finds some faults but is inconsistent, and the risk of missing them is
significant.
The project concludes that a working radar integrity monitoring system is possible. How­
ever, additional development time is required before it can be robust using real radar
data.
Radar Integrity Monitoring
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Roberto Galeazzi, Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark
Thank you for providing an interesting project, pointers for the direction, and great insights
into the necessary theory.
Peter Nicholas Hansen, Post doc, Technical University of Denmark
Thank you for your help, whether through theoretical discussion, access to data, or com­
putational power for development.
Jonathan Eichild Schmidt, PhD student, Technical University of Denmark
Thanks for the help regarding designing and training neural networks.
Yaqub Aris Prabowo, Post doc, Technical University of Denmark
Thanks for your support in getting access to the necessary sea charts.
iv
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
List of Symbols and Abbrevations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Methods and tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Thesis contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Structure of the report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Maritime Industry and Data Acquisition
7
2.1
Maritime Automation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Measurement platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Reference frames
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.4
Data acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3
Visual Estimation
21
3.1
Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Bird’s­Eye­View . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.3
Implementation of Bird’s­Eye­View . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4
Virtual Radar
49
4.1
Error State Kalman Filter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.2
Implementing the Virtual Radar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
4.3
Performance Error State Kalman Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5
Radar Integrity Monitoring
69
5.1
Fault detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5.2
Implementation of fault detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
5.3
Performance of the fault detection algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
6
Discussion
87
6.1
Visual estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
6.2
Virtual radar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
6.3
Fault Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
7
Conclusion
91
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Bibliography
93
A Example of file structure
97
Radar Integrity Monitoring
v
==PAGE:8==
B Error state derivation
99
C Synthetic data for Error State Kalman Filter Test
102
vi
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:9==
List of Symbols and Abbreviations
The next list describes several symbols and abbreviations that will be later used within
the body of the document.
E
Expected value
AIS
Automatic Identification System
BEV
Bird’s­Eye­View
CDF
Cumulative Density Function
CNN
Convolution Neural Network
COG
Course Over Ground
CVAT Compute Vision Annotation Tool
ECDIS Electronic Chart and Display System
ENC
Electronic Nautical Chart
ESKF Error­State Kalman Filter
FPN
Feature Pyramid Network
GLR
Generalised Likelihood Ratio
GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System
GPS
Global Positioning System
IoU
Intersection over Union
KDE
Kernel Density Estimation
LSTM Long­Short­Term Memory
LWIR Long Wave Infrared ­ often used for cameras
MMSI Maritime Mobile Service Identity
NIR
Near Infrared
OSM
OpenSeaMap/OpenStreetMap ­ Open Source map
R­CNN Regional­based Convolution Neural Network
RADAR Radio Detection and Ranging
ResNet Residual Network
RGB
Red Green Blue ­ Used within camera and images to describe colour channels
RPN
Regional Proposal Network
SOG
Speed Over Ground
Radar Integrity Monitoring
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The maritime industry is responsible for around 90% of all freight worldwide. This is be­
cause it is cheap, sustainable, and very reliable [1]. It is, therefore, critical for the global
world if one wants to keep the trade across borders.
The integrity of the navigational instruments is crucial for the secure, reliable and safe
handling of ships, whether they are human­operated or autonomously operated. Natu­
rally, the chance of a human finding errors decreases as human intervention and manual
checking decrease.
Like many other industries, the maritime sector is also at risk for cyberattacks. As the
vessels become more connected, they become more vulnerable. This will require better
security, but even the best security system in the world cannot keep all attackers out [2].
These cyberattacks can also target the integrity of the sensors on board the vessel, such
as radar, Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS), or Automatic Identification System
(AIS) [3].
Therefore, this project will present a method to ensure the integrity of vessels’ onboard
radars. This is done by fusing information from GNSS, ENC, AIS, and images obtained
from onboard cameras, which can then be used as a ground truth to compare the radar
data.
1.1
Problem statement
The project aims at developing an integrity monitoring system for marine radar to ensure
dependable target detection. To do this, a virtual radar is developed to detect and track
static and dynamic targets near the vessel so they can be compared to the radar. The
virtual radar is created by fusing data from multiple vision systems, such as the Auto­
matic Identification System (AIS), Electronic Nautical Chart (ENC), Compass, and Global
Navigation Satellite System (GNSS).
The project objectives are:
• Create a neural network to estimate the position, size, orientation, and type of ships
and buoys from a multiple vision system.
• Develop a virtual radar by fusing the output from the network, ENC, GNSS, AIS, and
heading.
• Develop a fault detection algorithm to monitor the integrity of the radar.
• Evaluate the fault detection algorithm using synthetic and real data.
Radar Integrity Monitoring
1
==PAGE:12==
1.2
Literature review
The following section will give a high­level description of the literature surrounding the
project. Some of the literature will also appear later in the thesis, describing it more thor­
oughly from an implementation perspective.
1.2.1
Threats to the maritime industry
The SAFENAV report [3] was carried out by DTU Electrical Engineering as a public con­
sultancy for the Danish Maritime Authority. The report aims to analyse potential threats
to the navigational instruments onboard vessels. Additionally, it also suggests methods
that could automatically validate the sensor readings.
It finds that the Automatic Identification System (AIS), Electronic Chart and Display Sys­
tem (ECDIS), Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS), and Radio Detection and Rang­
ing (RADAR) can all be victims of various attacks. The common denominator of the at­
tacks is that they will often be either jamming or spoofing attacks. The jamming attacks
are easy to detect since they make the sensor unusable. Spoofing, however, can be more
tricky to detect since it will still provide information. This information will be faulty, leading
to dangerous situations for the vessel and its surroundings.
The report offers two different approaches to mitigating the problem. Firstly, it encourages
the vessels to protect their cyber systems using best cybersecurity practices. However,
this approach will not guarantee that all attacks can be avoided. Therefore, an indirect
approach is also proposed.
In the indirect approach, the integrity of the sensors is monitored by a consistency analy­
sis. This consistency analysis is based on measurements from the sensors onboard and
how the different measurements can be related. If any of the measurements violate the
relation, it is a sign that some of the sensors are faulty.
An example of this consistency­based approach can be seen in [4]. Here, the radar and
the Electronic Nautical Chart (ENC) are used to detect a fault in the GNSS receiver. This is
done by comparing the radar data with the ENC data and estimating the vessel’s position
from this comparison. This estimated position is combined with the GNSS position to
create a residual. It is shown that by using both a Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) and
Gaussian­based Generalised Likelihood Ratio (GLR) test, it can be detected if the GNSS
has a fault.
1.2.2
Creating Bird’s­Eye­View
A wish to make object detection in the maritime industry is not a new thing. In [5], this is
explored more deeply. It describes how perception is crucial for making ships, especially
autonomous ones, safer and more efficient. It also investigates how different neural net­
works can be used for object detection at sea. Since vessels are sailing at all times of the
day, it is essential that the perception tasks can also be performed at night. Therefore,
[6] explores how cameras with different light bandwidths perform. It was found that the
performance of RGB, NIR, and LWIR cameras is very similar in the time around dusk or
twilight. This indicates that the combination of different types of cameras can be beneficial
to the detection task.
Localisation is a typical computer vision task that uses many different approaches. An
approach with a monocular camera has been explored in [7]. This approach is very ge­
ometric oriented, detecting the vessel in the image and using it to determine metrics to
localise the vessel. It uses a neural network to estimate the vertical distance to the vessel.
This approach has, however, only been used on one type of vessel and in one direction.
2
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:13==
The automotive industry has much more research regarding localisation and 3D geom­
etry reconstruction. The paper, [8], is a review study that explores many different ways
of creating a Bird’s­Eye­View in automotive research. It describes how three overall ap­
proaches exist: camera­only, LiDAR­only, and LiDAR­camera fusion. By comparing the
various approaches, it can be seen that the methods fusing the data generally have a
higher performance. None of the performances are poor, showing that it is possible.
The camera­based pipeline is described as three parts in the 3D detection by [8]. The first
part extracts 2D features from all available cameras. The next step is to transform these
2D features into the 3D space. This can be done either by geometric transformations,
network­based transformations, or a combination of both. The last step is to make a
3D prediction from the transformed features. Sometimes, the 3D decoder and 2D to 3D
transformation are combined in one instance. It is discussed that all approaches have
benefits and drawbacks depending on the setting.
At the Tesla AI Day 2021 [9], it was shown how fusing the image data would improve the
performance of their 3D reconstruction. This fusion is based on the images through time
and the other onboard sensors and information such as GPS and city maps.
1.2.3
Radar Fault Detection
Continuing the discussion of the automotive industry, it is also interested in assuring the
integrity of the radar data. In [10], a machine learning approach is attempted to solve this
problem. The network starts by estimating the velocity and yaw rate of the vehicle from the
radar scan. Another neural network compares these estimations to the velocity and yaw
rate, which other sensors on the car measure. They show that detecting anomalies where
the radar range has been distorted is possible. In the paper, however, they also argue that
it is necessary to make further improvements before it can be used in production­grade
environments.
As shown above, the automotive industry also utilises cameras for their task. Therefore,
the paper [11] explores an approach to fault detection using images. They insert radar
cross section signals and images into a neural network to detect abnormal signals. The
part of the network handling the images extracts distance, vehicle type, and angle. This
is compared by a network to information from the branch handling the radar cross section
signals. It is shown that they have an accuracy above 90% using this method.
It is, however, not just in the automotive industry that radar fault detection has been in­
vestigated. The aviation industry also has an interest in reliable radar data. Looking at
[12], it explores how a Kalman Filter can be used to estimate systematic errors in radar
data. It is described how their approaches successfully estimate the error for the radar
data. It is also explained that it works best in the simulated data, which will often be the
case.
1.2.4
Summary
This literature review shows that the maritime industry needs to trust its sensors. However,
these sensors are vulnerable to attacks. A consistency­based approach to fault detection
for a GNSS receiver has already been shown to be effective.
It has also been shown that other fields have already been monitoring the integrity of
their radar systems. Different approaches have been investigated across the fields, some
using neural networks and others following a more classical fault detection approach.
A way to make residuals for radar data is to estimate the relative position of other objects
and compare it to the radar. In the automotive industry, it is shown how this can be done
Radar Integrity Monitoring
3
==PAGE:14==
using camera­based approaches for 3D position estimation. These estimations can then
be fused with other data for a better and more robust estimation.
Considering these things, it can be seen that monitoring the integrity of the radar is highly
needed to ensure safe navigation and pave the road to autonomous shipping. By taking
inspiration from other domains, such as the automotive and aviation industries, it is also
likely that it is technically achievable.
1.3
Methods and tools
The process of developing a radar integrity monitoring system is divided into several parts.
These parts include estimating position, size, and orientation from images, fusing infor­
mation for a virtual radar, and developing a fault detection algorithm. How these pieces
are connected can be seen in figure 1.1.
The automotive industry inspires the estimation of position, size, and orientation. A neural
network is built with a backbone to extract features from images. These features are then
used as input to another part of the network, where the position, size, and orientation
prediction is estimated.
An Error State Kalman Filter fuses the different measurements to create the virtual radar
itself. This well­tested method is used in several industry implementations. The fused
information is then illustrated in a radar­like view. This information is also used to create
residuals by comparing it to the radar data.
The last part is the fault detection algorithm. A Generalised Likelihood Ratio (GLR) test
algorithm will be used for this. This is because it is a well­tested approach which can
detect unknown changes in the mean and variance of a residual.
1.4
Thesis contributions
For this project, the following resources have been provided:
• Measurements obtained from a multimodal sensor platform mounted on the ship
Aurora
• Electronic Nautical Charts (ENC) for the Danish side of Øresund
• API for visualising ENC in a Bird’s­Eye­View (BEV)
The following things have been produced for the project:
• Made a pipeline for annotation and annotated 400 time steps of six images. Total
annotated 2400 images.
• Seven deep learning networks to estimate the position, orientation, size, and object
type. One backbone works well for 2D estimation, and one model has the potential
to work for 3D estimation.
• Python functions to plot buoys and ships in a BEV.
• Python class for an Error State Kalman Filter for object tracking.
• Localisation from radar readings.
• Functions to generate residuals from the radar and the virtual radar.
• Python class for Fault Detection Algorithm using GLR algorithm for a simplified prob­
lem 7.4 in [13].
4
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:15==
• Developed an integrity monitoring system that shows it, with further development,
is possible to detect faults.
1.5
Structure of the report
The report is structured roughly chronologically as the different parts have been imple­
mented. Some things might have developed in parallel, though. The theory is typically
introduced in the chapter where it has been used for the implementation. The connection
between chapters 2, 3, 4, and 5 can be seen in figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Overview of how the technical chapters are connected.
Chapter 2 gives a more profound introduction to the problem. It also introduces the mea­
surement platform used in the project. Lastly, it describes the measurement campaign
for the data acquisition.
Chapter 3 in the report describes estimating a 3D position from images. It describes the
development of different models used for this estimation.
Chapter 4 starts by explaining how the other data types have been extracted and used
to create the virtual radar. The last part of the chapter describes how the different data
sources are fused.
Chapter 5 explains how the fault detection is done. It will explore how the residuals are
created and how they behave. The GLR change detection algorithm is introduced and
implemented to find the faults by using the behaviour of the residuals.
Chapter 6 will be a discussion of the results of the project. There will be some discussions
throughout the report, but the overall summary and discussion of the chapters will wait for
this one. Lastly, it describes potential work that can build on the project.
Chapter 7 is the conclusion that will sum up the project.
Radar Integrity Monitoring
5
==PAGE:16==
6
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Maritime Industry and Data Acquisition
This chapter introduces topics relevant throughout the full report. It starts with a general
introduction to automation in the maritime industry.
It then introduces the measurement platform and the relevant sensors mounted on it. Each
sensor section starts with a theoretical background before describing the specific sensor
used in the experiments. Since this project aims to develop a fault detection algorithm
for faults in the radar, the section about X­band radar will also include a part of potential
threats to the radar.
Afterwards, a section describes the different reference frames used in the implementation.
Lastly, the data acquisition itself will be described.
2.1
Maritime Automation
The automation of the maritime industry has the potential to give several benefits. These
benefits include operational safety, higher efficiency, lower cost, increased environmental
sustainability, and ease of scaling [14].
It is, however, not without any risks. Increased automation also implies a heightened
dependency on the ship’s sensors. These sensors can break down or be the target of a
hostile attack [3].
The SOLAS Convention Chapter V Safety of Navigation, Regulation 19 [15] determines
the required sensors for a vessel above a specific size. These are
• A nautical chart of the area of operations.
• A magnetic compass.
• A GNSS system.
• Echo sound depth measurement device.
• X­band radar.
• Speed log.
• Automatic Identification System, AIS.
• Gyro compass.
• Speed and distance measuring device.
Extra sensors will also be necessary to achieve proper automation. These sensors will
have two different purposes. The first purpose is to obtain some data that is normally
only obtained through the onboard crew. This could be seeing other vessels or a more
precise distance measurement to a pier. The second purpose is to check whether the
Radar Integrity Monitoring
7
==PAGE:18==
different sensors are working. Examples of sensors that could help solve these problems
are LiDAR, RGB cameras, and LWIR cameras.
Talking about automation in the maritime industry is not necessarily just about making
autonomous ships. It is also about helping the captain and the rest of the crew to make
better decisions. This can help avoid accidents with economic and environmental conse­
quences and, in the worst case, human casualties.
2.2
Measurement platform
The measurement platform used for the data acquisition has been developed by the DTU
Electro ­ Automation and Control group for use in various settings within the area of mar­
itime autonomy research. It consists of several parts, and the ones relevant to this project
are described more in depth below. The platform in full view can be seen in figure 2.1.
(a) Front­view of the platform.
(b) Side­view of the platform
Figure 2.1: The measurement platform assembled in the basement of 326 at DTU.
2.2.1
X­band radar
A radar operates by sending out an electromagnetic wave and measuring the signal, re­
turned as an echo from an object. It can get the distance to the object by measuring the
time it takes for the signal to hit the object and be reflected again. The direction of the
object can be found by having a narrow beam width directional antenna, which gives the
angle of the return signal [16].
Generally, a radar consists of five elements: a transmitter, an antenna, a receiver, a radar
processor, and a user interface. The transmitter generates an electromagnetic signal,
which will reflect on the targets and then be measured by the radar. The antenna then
sends out this signal and records the echoes of the signal. A radar is mounted on a rotating
joint to ensure it can find targets in all directions. This rotation angle is then measured to
get the relative bearing of the echo.
The radar receiver amplifies the echoes so that they are processed. Here, it is paramount
that noise is not amplified since this could lead to false readings. The amplified signals are
then passed to the radar processor. This component analyses the signal and transforms
it into an image with all the detected objects. Lastly, the user interface displays the image
and makes it possible to adjust the radar settings [3].
In the maritime industry, the X­band radar is most commonly used. The X­band uses fre­
quencies between 8GHz and 12.5GHz. This corresponds to wavelengths around 24mm
8
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.2: An X­band radar mounted on a ship. The transmitter, antenna, and receiver
are visible here [17].
to 37mm. Usually, these radars are relatively small, and it is possible to have small beam
widths, which makes it easier to have a satisfactory resolution of relative bearings [16].
Figure 2.2 shows an example of an X­band radar radar. The radar processor and user
interface are not visible in the image.
X­band radar unit
The radar on the platform is a Broadband 3G Radar. It was developed in collaboration
between Lowrance, Simrad Yachting, and B&G. It has the benefit that it continuously emits
a signal while at the same time also being able to detect the returning signal. Since it has
a continuous emission, the signal is not extensively polluted with a lot of noise close to
the origin area, making detecting targets close to the vessel easier. It also has a lower
emission energy, which means it is safer to be close to the radar for the personnel on
the vessel [18]. The radar can be seen in figure 2.3, and relevant information from the
datasheet can be seen in table 2.1.
Figure 2.3: Image of the radar installed on the measurement platform.
Radar Integrity Monitoring
9
==PAGE:20==
Relevant metrics
Radar ranges
50m to 24nm
Rotation
24/36 rpm ± 10%
Transmitter Frequency
9.3GHz to 9.4GHz
Sweep time
1.3ms ± 10%
Sweep bandwidth
75MHz
Horizontal beam width
5.2◦± 10%
Vertical beam width
25◦± 20%
Noise
Less than 3dB
Table 2.1: Broadband 3G Radar relevant specifications [18]
When the radar measures data, it does so as a scanline. On a full rotation, there are 2048
scanlines, with the 0th scanline straight ahead. The data from the radar is presented as a
bearing angle tick, a distance tick, and an amplitude. The amplitude describes the amount
of signal that is returned. To get the bearing and distance in units that can be worked with,
it is necessary to convert them. The conversion for the bearing is
θdegrees = θticks
360◦
2048
(2.1)
Where θ is the bearing. For the distance, the conversion is
dmeters = dticks
10
√
2
(2.2)
The d is the distance to the target [19].
This data type has, however, been preprocessed so that it instead comes as a Bird’s­Eye­
View. You can also see it when sailing a vessel and using the radar. In figure 2.4, you
can see an example of a single­time instance of the radar image.
Figure 2.4: Example of how the radar signal as BEV looks like
10
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:21==
The report will differ in which of the data structures that are used depending on the specific
need. The scanline data has the benefit that it is finer in detail, while the image is faster
to process and is similar to what the navigator would see on a ship.
Threats to X­band radars
The radar can be subject to several malicious attempts to render them useless, with worse
performance, or showing false information. There are several ways this can be done. It
could be spoofing, jamming, interference [20], or hacking [3].
Jamming is to overwhelm a signal with another signal such that the signal is disturbed.
This could be done by increasing the noise level in the radar data.
Spoofing involves generating false signals, which can lead to detecting the wrong prop­
erties of existing targets or targets that do not exist. It could be achieved by making an
artificial echo signal that the radar processor believes is one from the radar itself.
Interference is a broad term that often covers disruptive techniques not captured by jam­
ming or spoofing. It could be to eliminate sources or resources. A way to do this is to
obscure some signals so they will not return to the radar [20].
Since radars are computer­based, it is possible to hack into them. This was shown at
the Naval Dome in the winter of 2017. They could remove targets from the radar screen
without the crew noticing it since the radar itself displayed that it was fully functional [3].
2.2.2
Global Navigation Satellite System
The phrase Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) is a designation for constellations
of satellite systems that can be used for localisation. There exist several different systems,
and some of these systems are GPS, GALILEO, and BeiDou. These systems can also
be targets of attacks [3]. A proposal for combating these attacks can be seen in [4].
The American Global Positioning System (GPS) is an example of how a general GNSS
system works. GPS contains three main parts: space, control, and user. The space
part is the constellation of satellites. They have an altitude of around 20, 000km above the
surface of the Earth, and their orbit time is around 12 hours. The satellites fly in six different
planes, which should ensure that all users can always see four satellites no matter where
they are on Earth.
Theoretically, knowing where the satellites are from their starting configuration should
always be possible. However, this is not the case. Therefore, the control part of the GPS
consists of tracking stations on the surface. The stations calculate each satellite’s orbital
model and the clock correction and send them to them.
The last part of GPS is the user part. It consists of antennas and receivers. When a
GPS signal is received, the position of the satellite and the time for the signal to get to the
receiver are used to estimate the user’s position, velocity, and time. To get an accurate
estimation, it is necessary to have more satellites within line of sight and precise times for
the satellites. This is why one can see at least four satellites and the control stations and
calculate the clock correction [21].
GNSS unit
The onboard GNSS unit is a Furuno Satellite Compass model SC­70. It is a unit that
has been designed to be used at sea. Therefore, it is durable in the conditions one can
encounter at sea, and it is assumed that no performance degradation has happened over
the years. Relevant metrics can be found in table 2.2, while the GNSS antenna can be
seen in figure 2.5.
Radar Integrity Monitoring
11
==PAGE:22==
Relevant metrics
Receiving frequency
1575.42MHz (GPS/GALILEO), 1602.5625MHz (GLONASS)
Positional accuracy (approx)
10m (GPS), 5m (DGPS), 3m (WAAS), 7m (MSAS)
Course accuracy
0.4◦RMS
SOG accuracy
0.2kn rms (3 or 4 satellites), 0.02kn rms (5+ satellites)
Antenna
SC­703/1303
Table 2.2: Furuno Satellite Compass SC­70 relevant specifications [22]
However, the speed over ground, SOG, and Course Over Ground, COG, were not recorded.
Therefore, these have been interpolated from the vessel’s position, naturally leading to
higher uncertainty. The interpolation was done by finding the speed and course between
two GNSS measurements and taking a running average with a window size of 5.
Figure 2.5: Image of the GPS antenna installed on the measurement platform.
2.2.3
Automatic Identification System
The Automatic Identification System, AIS, is required for all passenger vessels, vessels
over 300 gross tonnage on international voyages, and vessels above 500 gross tonnage.
It automatically sends information such as position, heading, speed, and identification
[23]. The identification will at least be the vessel’s Maritime Mobile Service Identity (MMSI)
number. An MMSI number is a requirement for all stationary­mounted radios, which are
connected to the equipment itself and may only be used by the vessel, which is registered
[24].
The information is obtained by the sensors on board the ship. It is then sent to other
nearby vessels and receiver stations, which upload it online. There are different ways
it can be sent. It can either be done through the vessels’ radio or a satellite. Since
the implementation, it has made it easier for navigators to notice other boats and their
intentions [23].
Figure 2.6: Image of the AIS receiver used on the measurement platform.
12
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:23==
AIS receiver
The AIS receiver on the platform is the em­trak R100 AIS Dual Channel Receiver. It has an
SO239 50Ωantenna for receiving the data. Its receiver sensitivity is better than −107dBm
when accepting a 20% error rate. The receiver channels are fixed at 161.975MHz and
162.025MHz, each with a bandwidth of 25kHz [25]. The receiver can be seen in figure
2.6.
When sending AIS signals, the messages are compressed, so the data with as little band­
width as possible. At the same time, it also makes it possible to check the integrity of the
message. To decode this message, the package pyais has been used in this project [26].
2.2.4
Electronic Nautical Chart
Throughout many years, it has been mandatory for maritime vessels to carry sea charts for
the area in which they are sailing. With modern technology, these will often be Electronic
Nautical Charts (ENC). The ENC is an overall terminology covering different base data
structures. The common denominator is that they contain the objects one can encounter
at sea and objects on land that can help one determine one’s position [27].
In Denmark, Geodatastyrelsen is responsible for the navigational charts. Denmark has
full ENC coverage. The standards used are S­52 and S­57 version 3.1 [28].
Open Source versions of ENC also exist. An example of this is the OpenSeaMap. Here,
everyone can contribute with information about sea marks, data collected while sailing,
and knowledge about local harbours. The maps do not meet the requirements for full
navigation, but they can be an excellent supplement in areas where one misses some
sea charts or more local information. The data here can be found in different formats
such as KAP, MbTiles, and GeoJSON [29].
Obtaining the ENC
The sea charts are not placed on the measurement platform. They have been obtained
after the data collection and combined with the other measurements. They cover the area
between Helsingør and Helsingborg, where the measurement campaign was made. This
is described further in section 2.4.
Geodatastyrelsen has provided the Danish side of the waters between Helsingør and
Helsingborg. These were obtained in a previous research project in the fall of 2023. The
measurement uncertainty for the charts can be seen in figure 2.7. It can be seen that
Denmark’s coastline is in confidence zone C. It is not very precise, and Geodatastyrelsen
only assures an accuracy of ±500m. A qualitative comparison with other online maps
makes it look very similar. The most important part of the ENC for the project is the coast.
Since it can be seen from space, it is assumed it is more precise, and the measurement
uncertainty does not describe what is uncertain in the sea chart. Therefore, it is assumed
that it is sufficient for this use case.
The charts for the Swedish part of Øresund are found through OpenSeaMap. It has been
extracted through the BBBike Extract Service [30] as a GeoJSON file. This extract con­
tained all the available data that OpenStreetMap has collected around Helsingør and Hels­
ingborg. This includes, e.g., roads, city names, and restaurants. Therefore, the files were
filtered.
The GeoJSON file has a list of features. Each feature is a dictionary with the keys: type,
geometry, and properties. The type field is the same for all the features because it de­
scribes that it is a feature. The geometry has a type, which tells whether it is a single point,
a line, or a polygon. Geometry also includes the coordinates for the feature. Lastly, the
Radar Integrity Monitoring
13
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.7: A plot of the area around Helsingør with the confidence of the measurements
plotted. The plot is made with code provided by Oda Byskov Aggerholm.
properties are another dictionary. This dictionary contains one or more keys, and these
keys have a description attached.
To filter the GeoJSON file, all features were chosen to be looped through to determine
whether they should be kept based on the feature’s properties. A feature was kept if either
one of the keys in the properties contained the words seamark, floating, or maritime or if
the description of one of their keys was breakwater, coastline, or pier. There were still too
many attributes irrelevant to creating a virtual radar. Therefore, all features with the key
maritime but no description were thrown out, and all keys named seamark:type with one of
the description separation_boundary, ferry_route, separation_line, restricted_area, navi­
gation_line, separation_zone, harbour, sea_area, separation_lane, inshore_traffic_zone
were also thrown out since these are not physical properties.
The uncertainty of OpenSeaMap is not provided, so it cannot be quantified. However,
by visually comparing the extracted map’s shoreline to other online maps’ shorelines, it
can be seen that they are very similar. Therefore, it is assumed that it is sufficient for the
project.
2.2.5
Camera
Looking at the camera from a mathematical point of view corresponds to taking a 3D
object and projecting it onto a 2D plane. The 2D plane is usually called the image plane.
The origin of the image plane is found in the upper left corner, and it counts positively
down and to the right.
A classic way to do this projection is through the pinhole camera model. An illustration of
the pinhole camera model can be seen in figure 2.8. Here, all points in the 3D world have
to go through the same point, called the principal point. The image plane is positioned at
a distance from this point along the optical axis. This distance is called the focal length.
14
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.8: Illustration of the pinhole camera model. It shows how a point X is projected
onto the image plane [31].
The projection from the 3D coordinates to the 2D coordinates is then
q = KQc =


f
0
px
0
f
py
0
0
1

Qc
(2.3)
Here q is the point in 2D homogeneous coordinate, K is the camera intrinsic matrix, Qc is
the 3D inhomogeneous coordinate in the camera reference frame, f is the focal length,
px is the x­coordinate part of the principal point, and py is the y­coordinate part of the
principal point.
The above model assumes that the 3D points are in a coordinate system, where the
principal point is at the origin, and the z­axis goes perpendicularly away from the image
plane. This might not be the case since the cameras might not be in the same coordinate
system as the reference currently being worked on. Besides, it is possible to have multiple
cameras, which will naturally not be in the same coordinate system.
Therefore, it is necessary to transform from the world reference frame to the camera
reference frame. This is done with a 3D rotation matrix and a translation vector.
Qc =
[
R
t
]
Qw
(2.4)
Here Qc is the same as before, R is the 3D rotation matrix, t is the 3D translation vector,
and Qw is the 3D homogeneous coordinate in the world reference frame.
By combining equation 2.3 with equation 2.4, it is possible to have the projection from the
world reference frame onto the image plane [32].
q = KQc = K
[
R
t
]
Qw
(2.5)
Radar Integrity Monitoring
15
==PAGE:26==
This projection assumes rather ideal behaviours, which are rarely, if ever, achieved in the
real world. Often, the image will be a bit distorted. There are two main kinds of distortion:
radial and tangential.
The radial distortion will make lines that otherwise are straight appear rounded in the
image. This distortion will follow the formula.
qdistorted = q(1 + k1r2 + k2r4 + k3r6)
(2.6)
Where qdistorted is the distorted coordinate, q is the undistorted coordinate, r is the dis­
tance from the principal point, and ki is the radial distortion coefficients. The radial distor­
tion affects the point’s coordinate equally in both dimensions.
Going on to the tangential distortion makes some parts of the image look nearer than ex­
pected. It often comes from the lens not being fully aligned with the image plane. Mathe­
matically, it is modelled as [33].
xdistorted = x + (2p1xy + p2(r2 + 2x2))
(2.7)
ydistorted = x + (p1(r2 + 2y2) + 2p2xy)
(2.8)
Where xdistorted and ydistorted are the distorted coordinates, x and y are the coordinates,
and pi are the tangential distortion coefficients.
RGB
A lot of different kinds of imaging exist. One of the most common is the visible light
spectrum images, also often called colour images. This spectrum ranges from around
430nm to 790nm in wavelength, where the short waves are violet, while the long waves
are red [34].
One of the enormous benefits of working with colour images is the information stored in
the colours themselves. In the maritime industry, an example of this could be the lanterns
that help differentiate between the starboard and port side of a vessel [35].
RGB camera units
On the platform, STURDeCAM20_CUXVR is the RGB camera. The camera was initially
designed for the NVIDIA Jetson TX2/Xavier development kit. It consumes relatively little
energy while still being able to capture high­quality data. It has a low latency during cap­
ture, which makes it ideal for real­time applications, where the knowledge of the capture
time is essential [36]. The camera can be seen in figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9: Image of the RGB camera installed on the measurement platform.
16
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:27==
The relevant data has been extracted from the datasheet and can be seen in table 2.3.
This does not tell the whole story, however. Therefore, the calibrated numbers are in table
2.4. It is worth noting that the effective field of view and effective focal length are not equal
to the ones in the datasheet. This can be due to imperfections in the lens or the specific
setup at the data acquisition time.
Relevant metrics
Resolution
1920 x 1080
Sensor type
12­Bit RGB bayer
Pixel size
3.0µm x 3.0µm
Focal length
3.74mm
Field of View
102◦(Horizontal), 57.5◦(Vertical)
Table 2.3: STURDeCAM20_CUXVR relevant specifications [36]
Calibration metrics
Principal point
(941.7376, 530.9439)
Effective focal length
1182.1px
Effective Field of View
78.16◦(Horizontal), 49.10◦(Vertical)
Distortion coefficient 1
−3.5345343610−1px
Distortion coefficient 2
1.7372757410−1px
Distortion coefficient 3
1.7425234210−4px
Distortion coefficient 4
3.1512020210−4px
Distortion coefficient 5
−5.0523248610−2px
Table 2.4: Camera calibration provided by Christian Laurberg Haslund Westerdahl, who
had made a calibration together with a project group in the fall of 2023
LWIR
Another dominant kind of imaging is the infrared image. The infrared spectrum starts
where the visible light spectrum stops at around 0.8µm. The other end is at 1000µm. It is
often divided into five segments: near­infrared NIR, short­wave infrared SWIR, mid­wave
infrared MWIR, long­wave infrared LWIR, and far­infrared FIR. The long­wave infrared is
between 8µm to 15µm and is the technology considered in this project.
Many items, especially living objects, emit heat, which can be seen in the LWIR region
of the electromagnetic spectrum. This has the benefit that infrared waves in the long­
wave region can be used for thermal imaging. An LWIR camera can see objects that are
warmer than the background since the warmer object has a more intense light in the LWIR
Figure 2.10: Image of the LWIR camera installed on the measurement platform.
Radar Integrity Monitoring
17
==PAGE:28==
region [34]. This might be a benefit at sea, especially at night, as it should allow one to
see objects from a greater distance since the sea is often colder than the vessels, where
people and machines generate heat.
LWIR camera units
The platform is also equipped with LWIR cameras, where two of the cameras captured
data while mounted on the ferry. These cameras are FLIR ADK cameras. In the table
2.5, relevant data from the datasheet can be seen together with data collected during a
calibration. The cameras can primarily detect light at the wavelengths between 8µm and
14µm [37]. How the camera physically looks can be seen in figure 2.10.
Relevant metrics
Resolution
640 x 512
Principal point
(320, 256)
Effective focal length
686.24px (Horizontal), 703.35px (Vertical)
Effective Field of View
50◦(Horizontal), 40◦(Vertical)
Distortion coefficient 1
−0.55327581px
Distortion coefficient 2
0.38995068px
Distortion coefficient 3
−0.0140041px
Distortion coefficient 4
−0.00541292px
Distortion coefficient 5
−0.19493859px
Table 2.5: Combination of data from the datasheet [37] and a camera calibration provided
by Peter Nicholas Hansen
2.3
Reference frames
When describing one’s position in the world, it is possible to do it in many different ways,
called one’s reference frame. In the maritime world, using the geodetic reference frame is
a common way to do it. It is defined by a latitude ϕ, longitude λ, and altitude h. It tries to
model the Earth’s ellipsoid with the semi­major axis a, semi­minor axis b, and an inverse
flattening 1
f . How these are in respect to each other can be seen in figure 2.11. The most
common version is the WGS 84, which defines the model descriptors as follows:
Figure 2.11: Illustration of how the geodetic reference frame is built. The left image shows
the north pole upwards and the equator in the middle. The right image is seen with the
north pole in the centre.
18
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:29==
a = 6378137
(2.9)
b = 6356752.314245
(2.10)
1
f = 298.257223563
(2.11)
The latitude describes the angle in the meridian plane, where the equator is the reference.
It belongs in the ϕ ∈[−90, 90] range. On the other hand, the longitude is the angle in
the equatorial plane, where the prime meridian is the reference. It is within the range
λ ∈[−180, 180]. The altitude, then, is the height above the reference ellipsoid.
Another commonly used reference frame is the body reference frame. It has the origo
defined within the vessel, while the x­axis follows the ship’s heading, the y­axis is per­
pendicular to the x­axis to starboard, and the z­axis points downward into the ocean. An
illustration of it can be seen in figure 2.12. The units of the axes are most often metres,
but sometimes, nautical miles are used instead in the maritime industry. This reference
frame is frequently used to position other objects relative to the vessel.
Figure 2.12: Illustration of the body reference frame.
2.4
Data acquisition
The data used in this project was obtained in collaboration with the shipping company
ForSea. The measurement campaign was conducted on their ferry, Aurora, between the
evening of April 4th and the afternoon of April 15th, 2023. Aurora sails between Helsingør
and Helsingborg.
Different measurement equipment has different sampling times. For simplicity and to
reduce the computational cost, it has been decided to sample the data every two seconds.
The latest sample for each measurement equipment is taken as the measurement at that
time. Most of the data has a sampling time between one and two seconds, which is
the reason for the two­second interval since it will ensure that the onboard sensors have
measurements available at most time steps.
Since the measurement campaign was conducted over 11 days, limiting the period used
in the project has been necessary. An overview of available data has been plotted in
figure 2.13 to determine a proper period. In the figure, all types of measurements have
been collected in one combined table. The figure shows blue if there is a measurement
at the sample time and red if there is no measurement at the sample time.
Looking at the figure 2.13, it can be seen that the LWIR cameras did not capture any data
until April 7th at around noon. Therefore, this period can be excluded. It can also be seen
Radar Integrity Monitoring
19
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.13: Figure of data availability throughout the full measurement period. Blue bars
indicate that the data is available, while red bars state that the data is not available.
that the X­band Radar has quite a few fallouts after April 12th at 10:00 UTC+2, which
results in this period being excluded. The radar also had a minor fallout on the evening
of April 7th.
It is also worth looking at the four AIS rows at the bottom of the figure. It can be seen that
there are also some fallouts. However, this does not necessarily mean that the system
has been down. Since the AIS system requires data from other vessels, it might also
be because no other vessels close by were sending any AIS data in that period. It is
also likely that the AIS message for each vessel will have several samples between the
measurements.
Figure 2.14: Figure of data availability throughout the limited measurement period. Blue
bars indicate that the data is available, while red bars state that the data is not available.
Since the period where measurements are available is quite large, it has been decided to
make it smaller than what could have been chosen. The final period was from April 8th at
08:00 UTC+2 to April 9th at 22:00 UTC+2. This has been selected because it gives two
full days and a night, where most of the time is with minimal cloud coverage [38].
20
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Visual Estimation
The following chapter focuses on making a position estimate from visual input. It starts by
introducing the theoretical foundation for the solution and an introduction to Deep Learn­
ing. Afterwards, it continues to introduce the building blocks and their theoretical founda­
tion.
After introducing the network blocks, the general approach to generating Bird’s­Eye­View
in the automotive industry is introduced. It then continues to the implementation of the ma­
chine learning algorithms. Firstly, it describes the process necessary before it is possible
to train the networks. This includes the preprocessing of the images and their annotation.
Lastly, the different networks that have been built are described. The general structure
is introduced for each model. Performance evaluation is also described, and a short
discussion is made.
3.1
Deep Learning
Machine learning is concerned with how machines, specifically computers, can learn from
data. Learning should be seen as the computer optimising some parameters to solve a
task most efficiently in terms of some measures the developer has described.
One method within Machine Learning is the area of Deep Learning. The name of this field
comes from how it is visualised. When visualising Deep Learning, it is often described as
a graph with several layers, which can also be considered a deep graph. Each of these
layers shows how a more complex concept can be understood by relating it to a simpler
concept. This concept might also have come from a more straightforward concept. An
illustration of this can be seen in figure 3.1.
A typical way to look at Deep Learning networks is through the multilayer perceptrons,
MLPs, also known as feedforward neural networks. The object of these networks is to
estimate the parameters, θ of a function, f. This function with the parameters is used to
map from an input x to an output y.
y = f(x; θ)
(3.1)
For a function to be considered a deep learning network, it needs to be constructed by
several layers. It could look like the following.
f(x) = f(3)(f(2)(f(1)(x)))
(3.2)
The innermost function, f(1), is called the first layer or the input layer, and the outermost
layer is called the output layer. All layers that are in between these are called the hidden
Radar Integrity Monitoring
21
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.1: A high­level description of what happens in a Deep Learning network. The
first hidden layer splits the inputs into simple features, e.g., lines and light intensity. The
second hidden layer then makes more complex features, e.g., corners. The third hid­
den layer can describe larger objects, e.g., doors, legs, or wheels. The last layer is the
prediction layer [39].
layers. They are named as such because the inputs and outputs of these layers are not
shown. The total number of layers is called the depth of the network.
Likewise, a feedforward network can be illustrated graphically. A such illustration can be
seen in figure 3.2. It is a network with two inputs, two outputs, and a single hidden layer.
All the layers, except for the output, contain a bias node, which can help if a particular
property should be shifted a bit.
Many different types of mapping exist between the inputs and outputs of the various layers.
A straightforward version of this is the linear unit. It has the following function:
y = W⊤x + b
(3.3)
Here y are the outputs of the specific neuron, x are the inputs to the neuron, W is the
weights that should be learned, and b is a bias that is introduced. The bias should also
be learned.
When creating Deep Learning networks, it is also possible to consider an entire network as
a building block. In that way, it is possible to combine different types of networks, where
one benefits from the unique properties of each network. However, this can have the
disadvantage that the network becomes very large. Later in this chapter, some different
types of networks will be introduced.
An essential part of training neural networks is creating a proper cost function, also called
a loss function. The cost function must include the metrics the network needs to learn.
22
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.2: A simple feedforward network with two inputs (blue), a hidden layer (grey),
and two outputs (green). The input and hidden layers also have a bias node (yellow).
When estimating a continuous value, a commonly used loss function is a mean­squared
error function. This takes the difference between the estimated and targeted values and
squares it.
Another typical task for a deep learning network is to classify between different objects. A
typical loss function for this task is to use cross entropy. It will look similar to the following.
ln = −
C
∑
c=1
yclog(pyc)
(3.4)
In this formula, C is the total number of classes, yc is a binary number that describes if
it is the correct classification, and pyc is the certainty of the prediction of a given class
between 0 and 1 [39].
3.1.1
Convolutional Neural Networks
A convolutional neural network (CNN) is an often­used type of network when working with
images. CNNs are remarkable because they use convolution in one or more layers.
Since images are two­dimensional, the formula for convolution looks like this.
S(i, j) = (I ∗K)(i, j) =
M
∑
m=−M
N
∑
n=−N
I(i −m, i −n)K(m, n)
(3.5)
Here, I is the image with the origin in the upper left corner, K is the kernel used for the
convolution with the origin in the middle, i is the horizontal coordinate in the image, j is
Radar Integrity Monitoring
23
==PAGE:34==
the vertical coordinate in the image, M is the width of the kernel, and N is the height of
the kernel.
Typically, a CNN layer consists of three parts. The first part uses convolution, often done
in parallel and creating many linear activators. The second part goes through some ac­
tivation state. The rectified linear activator is a simple one, which sets all values below
zero to zero. All positive values are kept as they are. The last part is the pooling stage.
Pooling makes the representation almost invariant to small translational changes in the
input. This is done by replacing the output with statistics on the nearby outputs. A typically
used statistic is the max pooling. This takes the largest value in a neighbourhood around
the specific output and uses this as the output of the pooling stage [39].
3.1.2
ResNet
When using Deep Learning networks, it is often thought that a deeper network will always
result in better performance. However, this is not the case, and networks with many
layers might risk encountering degradation. The degradation of the training accuracy can
be seen in some networks with many layers, which have more significant training errors
and test errors than a network with fewer layers.
A solution to this problem can be found in the residual network, ResNet. The way it works
is by introducing a residual building block that is defined as
y = f(x) + x
(3.6)
Here, the input is also passed directly to the output. It has the assumption that the dimen­
sions of y and x are the same. Convolutional layers often result in different dimensions
between the input and output. Therefore, a linear projection is also introduced, Ws.
y = f(x) + Wsx
(3.7)
The residual layer is most often not used at each convolutional layer. Instead, two CNN
blocks are usually combined into one block, which results in the generalised block be­
coming.
y = f(x) + Wsx = f(2)(f(1)(x)) + Wsx
(3.8)
This block is used for the ResNet18 and ResNet34 designs and can be seen in figure
3.3a. The numbers describe the amount of layers in the network. For ResNets with more
layers, the block is replaced with a bottleneck design instead. It can be seen in 3.3b. It is
mainly done to reduce the needed resources for a deeper network.
The creators of ResNet trained the network on an image set called ImageNet. The weights
gained from this training can be downloaded and used as a starting point for future training
of one’s network [40].
3.1.3
Feature Pyramid Network
When detecting an object, it is most often necessary for the detection to be scale invariant.
This could be due to the object being at different distances and sizes. An often­used way
to do this is to use image pyramids, where the image is scaled down multiple times. A
disadvantage of this approach is that it will require a lot of extra memory to have the space
for all the different scales of the same image. It will often also need a lot of computing
power.
24
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:35==
(a) An example of the residual block
used for the ResNet18 and ResNet34
networks
(b) An example of the bottleneck block
used for the ResNet50, ResNet101,
and ResNet152 networks
Figure 3.3: The primary building blocks used in the ResNet networks [40]. The first part
in each block is the size of the convolutional filter, and the second part is the number of
output filters.
Another way is to use a convolutional network, such as ResNet, which has a pyramidal
feature hierarchy. Generally, the network works by first having a bottom­up pathway fol­
lowed by a top­down pathway. The bottom­up pathway comes from a convolution network
backbone, where the last layer of each stage is chosen for its features. A stage consists
of blocks that have the same image size.
The top­down pathway will guess at higher­resolution features by upsampling the features
found in the more coarse layers. It adds these upsampled features with a lateral connec­
tion to the features found at the same level in the backbone architecture. Figure 3.4 [41]
shows this connection between the bottom­up and top­down pathways.
Figure 3.4: An illustration of how the bottom­up structure is connected to the top­down
approach [41].
Radar Integrity Monitoring
25
==PAGE:36==
3.1.4
Faster R­CNN
Several different types of networks work with the task of detecting objects in an image.
One of these networks is the Faster R­CNN. It contains two distinct parts where: the
first is a Regional Proposal Network, RPN, that is used to propose regions of interest,
while the second is a detector that uses the proposed regions. Combined, they form a
unified network for object detection. This unified network also shares convolutional layers
between them. The overall network structure can be seen in figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Overall structure of the Faster R­CNN network [42].
The RPN is a deep, fully convolutional network. It inputs an image and outputs a list of
rectangular proposals. Each of the proposals has a score that describes how likely it is to
be an object compared to being part of the background. A small sliding window is used to
generate the region proposals. The window is slid over the last part of the convolutional
feature map. This map can be obtained by, e.g., ResNet. Since it is a sliding window, the
fully connected layers are shared across the spatial locations.
In the Faster R­CNN network, different scales are handled through anchors. An anchor in
this context is a reference box centred at the sliding window. These anchors have different
heights and aspect ratios, which are then used to make predictions at different scales with
varying configurations of bounding boxes [42].
The second part of the Faster R­CNN is the detector. Here, the Fast R­CNN is used. It
starts with a max pooling layer, which converts the proposed regions into a small feature
map. These maps are sent through fully connected layers, transforming into a feature
vector. Lastly, this feature vector is sent through two different fully connected layers. The
first layer is used to predict the object type, while the second layer is used to predict the
bounding box. The network structure can be seen in figure 3.6 [43].
Training the Faster R­CNN takes four steps. This is necessary since the network should
be seen as a unified network, but at the same time, the output of the RPN is also the input
to the Fast R­CNN, as can be seen in the top of figure 3.5. First, the RPN is trained alone
to give some proposed regions to the Fast R­CNN. The second step is to train the Fast
R­CNN alone. For the third step, the Fast R­CNN is used to initialise the training for the
RPN. Here, the shared layer is introduced, but it is not tuned. Lastly, the RPN weights
26
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.6: The Fast R­CNN network structure [43].
are fixed to train the R­CNN and shared convolutional layers. After these four steps, one
has a trained Faster R­CNN network [42].
3.1.5
LSTM
The networks introduced so far have all been of the feedforward type. These networks
only consider what is happening in the given sample. Another type of network is the
Recurrent Neural Network, which also includes some memory about what has happened
in previous samples. An example of such a network is the Long­Short­Term Memory
(LSTM) Network.
The fundamental structure of the LSTM consists of an input layer, a recurrent LSTM layer,
and an output layer. There are two overall approaches when diving deeper into how it
works beneath the surface. In the first approach, the only connection to the output layer
is from the recurrent projection layer. A second non­recurrent layer is also connected to
the output for the second approach. The overall structure for the two types of the network
can be seen in figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Visual depiction of how the two different LSTM networks work. Found in the
original paper [44].
A benefit of using a recurrent network is the knowledge that is kept and transferred to
the next time step. By having this memory, a prediction can become more precise when
it is known that there is a connection from one sample to the next in line. However,
these networks are often complex to train. Many of these problems are handled with the
proposed structure of the LSTM network [44].
Radar Integrity Monitoring
27
==PAGE:38==
3.1.6
Network training
When a Deep Learning network has been created, it is time to train it. Several ways exist to
train a network, but only supervised learning is considered in this case. Supervised image
recognition training requires annotated images, which can be viewed as the solution to a
specific problem.
The overall steps in training a network are first to put an input through the network and
get some estimations from that. The output from the network is then compared to the
annotations with a loss function. Afterwards, this loss is used to calculate the gradients
for all the weights, which is done in the reverse order compared to the normal flow in the
network. Lastly, all the weights have to be updated.
As can be seen, calculating the gradient is very important for training a network. The
reason behind this is that a gradient will point in the direction that the weights need to go
for minimising the value of a function, in this case, the loss function [39].
When the gradients have been calculated, it is time to update the weights. Optimisers
often handle this. In this report, we focus on the Adaptive Moment Estimation, Adam.
Adam is relatively easy to implement. It builds on the premise that you first calculate the
first two moments. These moments will likely have a bias. This bias is then calculated
before the weights are updated. This is calculated recursively for a predefined period or
until some stopping criteria have been met. The equations for this look like this.
s = ρ1s + (1 −ρ1)g
(3.9)
r = ρ2r + (1 −ρ2)g ⊚g
(3.10)
ˆs =
s
1 −ρt
1
(3.11)
ˆr =
r
1 −ρt
2
(3.12)
∆W = −ϵ
ˆs
√ˆr + δ
(3.13)
W = W + ∆W
(3.14)
Here s is the first biased moment estimate, r is the second biased moment estimate, ˆs is
the corrected bias in the first moment, ˆr is the corrected bias in the second moment, g is
the calculated gradient, ⊚is an element­wise multiplication operator, ρ1 and ρ2 are decay
rates in the moment estimate, t is the time step, W is the weights, ∆W is the change in
the weights, δ is used for numerical stabilisation, and ϵ is the step size also called learning
rate [39].
In the equations above, it can be seen that the learning rate is considered a constant.
It is, however, not always the optimal approach. At the start, you would like to have a
higher learning rate since it is pretty likely that you are not close to a minimum for the
loss function. As the number of training epochs increases, you will likely be close to the
minimum. It can, however, be hard to hit this minimum if you have a high learning rate
since you might overshoot quite a bit from the actual target. Therefore, it is customary
to use a learning rate scheduler. A scheduler lowers the learning rate over time, thereby
increasing the likelihood of finding the optimal minimum for the loss function [45].
28
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:39==
3.1.7
Evaluating a machine learning network
Several approaches exist when evaluating the performance of a deep learning network,
and a single one cannot fully describe the performance. Two common approaches are
precision and recall. The precision describes how trustworthy a network’s detections are.
The recall, on the other hand, describes how well it then finds objects. The formulas for
the two are:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(3.15)
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(3.16)
Here, TP is the number of true positives, the number of actual objects in an image. FP
is the number of predictions the network falsely thought was an object. Lastly, FN is the
number of objects not found by the network.
Regarding coordinates in both 2D and 3D space, it is not enough to find the object. It is
also essential that it correctly describes the bounding box. To measure this, it is common
to use Intersection over Union (IoU). This is calculated by
IoU = Aoverlap
Aunion
(3.17)
Aoverlap is the area that two bounding boxes cover, while Aunion is the total area the two
bounding boxes cover. An example can be seen in figure 3.8. The area can be exchanged
for volume when describing bounding boxes in the 3D space [46].
Figure 3.8: Example of IoU. Aoverlap is the purple area, and Aunion is the red, blue, and
purple area.
3.2
Bird’s­Eye­View
There has been immense interest in creating a bird’ s­eye view (BEV) in the autonomous
driving sector. The benefit of BEV is that it has no problem with scaling or occlusion. It
is also very similar to how maps are usually represented, which makes it easier to create
planning and control modules based on it.
It is possible to make a BEV from several different sensors. These sensors include radar,
LiDAR, and vision in the automotive industry. In this section, the vision will be the focus.
The overall BEV pipeline for camera­only approaches consists of three steps. The first is
a 2D feature extractor, a view transformation, and a 3D decoder. Often, the view transfor­
mation and 3D decoder are combined into one. The reason for combining them is that it
Radar Integrity Monitoring
29
==PAGE:40==
is possible to do a pure network­based transformation and detection, where it is possible
to utilise that objects have specific features that are also interesting in the BEV setting.
The overall structure can be seen in figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: An illustration from the automotive industry of how the input images are trans­
formed into 3D position estimates [8].
The feature extraction has taken inspiration from the 2D perception arena. It often has
some backbone pretraining, where different backbones can be used. An example could
be the ResNet or ResNet combined with an FPN.
There are three overall approaches to the view transformer. The first approach is the 2D­
3D method. This method predicts a depth distribution based on the 2D features lifted into
a voxel space. A network often does the depth prediction, but it is also possible to do it
with disparity.
The second approach is an inverse transformation, also known as the 3D­2D method.
The methods assume that all corresponding 3D points are on a horizontal plane. With
that assumption, it is then possible to map these points to the 2D plane with the intrinsic
and extrinsic for the cameras. When mapped, it is possible to estimate where the 2D
features should be in the 3D with the inverse interpolation.
Lastly, there are the pure­network­based methods. Here, a Deep Learning network is
used to make the predictions. Some predictions are made directly to the BEV feature
space, while others estimate the 3D position, size, and orientation instead, and these will
then be projected onto the BEV plane. It is also in this approach that the 3D decoder is
incorporated in the network itself [8].
3.3
Implementation of Bird’s­Eye­View
The following section describes how a Bird’s­Eye­View, BEV, is obtained from the different
cameras. It describes the necessary preprocessing steps, how the images have been
annotated for use in training, the structure of the model, and how the model has been
trained. PyTorch was used to make the Deep Learning model.
The BEV estimates the position, size, orientation, and type of objects that the cameras
can see. This information will be used later in the project to create a virtual radar.
3.3.1
Tensor
Before diving into the implementation, tensors will be described briefly since these are a
fundamental building block when using machine learning toolboxes.
30
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:41==
Tensors can be seen as generalisations of scalars and vectors. It is also possible to
describe entities in even more dimensions so they can be characterised as n­dimensional
arrays.
The dimensions in the array are also called rank. The rank of a scalar is 0 since it only
has a magnitude. The vector then increases the rank to 1 since it also has a direction in
addition to the magnitude. The subsequent rank increase has two directions and is called
a dyad. This can be continued to an n’th dimension.
Each direction in a tensor is usually a direction in 3D space [47]. This is, however, not
always the case when it comes to machine learning. Here, multi­dimensionality is the
crucial part. The space might, therefore, be up to k’th space [48].
3.3.2
Pre­processing of images
Standardising the image through preprocessing is essential to ensure the best perfor­
mance for the Deep Learning algorithm. This should also make it easier to replace cam­
eras or use the system in another setup.
The first step is to calibrate the images. Here, the intrinsics and distortion coefficients
described in section 2.2.5 are used together with OpenCV’s undistort function. OpenCV
is a computer vision toolbox that has implemented many algorithms that make it easy to
start working with computer vision [49].
In figure 3.10, a calibration can be seen of the RGB images, while a calibration of an LWIR
image can be seen in figure 3.11. For both sets of images, it can be seen that the images
have been straightened out. It is most evident if one looks at the horizon to the right or
at the apartment block on the left side of the image. The horizon becomes flat, while the
apartment block is almost straight.
(a) Image taken from the part of the vessel
facing towards Denmark uncalibrated.
(b) Image taken from the part of the vessel
facing towards Denmark calibrated.
Figure 3.10: RGB image before and after calibration
Since the model is constructed using PyTorch, it is also necessary to convert the six
images into tensors. Since the specific model determines how this tensor should look, it
is described in its respective parts later in the report. However, they all utilise the PyTorch
transformer.
The transformer is a tool that enables one to perform several steps simultaneously. The
most crucial step is converting the images from the initial data structure to a tensor. Other
steps it does could be cropping the image, resizing the image, or normalising the ten­
sor. The resizing and cropping of the image can make the computation lighter, while the
normalisation can help make the network more robust.
Radar Integrity Monitoring
31
==PAGE:42==
(a) Image taken from the part of the vessel
facing towards Denmark uncalibrated.
(b) Image taken from the part of the vessel
facing towards Denmark calibrated.
Figure 3.11: LWIR image before and after calibration
3.3.3
Annotation of images
When creating a machine learning algorithm with images as input, annotating images
that can be used to train the network is essential. The annotation has been done in the
Computer Vision Annotation Tool tool, CVAT [50], where the Python extension FiftyOne
[51] has been used to send the jobs to CVAT and quality control of the annotations.
The annotation was done with the six images in parallel, four RGB images and two LWIR
images. In each image, all ships and buoys are marked with a bounding box. Figure 3.12
shows an example of this. Each of these unique objects is then assigned an ID number.
If an object is visible in multiple cameras, the ID number has to be the same across the
cameras. The ID number is reused across different frames.
Besides the ID numbers, each object is also annotated with its length, width, and height,
consistent between frames. They are also annotated with their relative position, where the
reference frame is the body reference frame for the ship with origo at the GNSS receiver.
This relative position will naturally change between each frame as either the ship itself
moves or the other vessels that can be seen move.
Figure 3.12: Example of the bounding boxes seen on an annotated image. The numbers
are put on as the certainty of a prediction. Here, it is one since it is the ground truth.
32
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:43==
When the annotation is done in CVAT, it has to be transformed into a labelling system that
can be used for the training. The labelling system consists of three parts. First of all, there
are the label documents. There is a label document for each time stamp for each camera
that has all the objects that can be seen from the specific camera at a given timestamp.
The document is structured as it can be seen in listing 3.1.
1
# format: [i1,i2,u1,u2,x,y,z,dx dy,dz,yaw,category_name,id]
2
627 637 434 447 -438.0 86.0 0 0.5 0.5 2.0 0.0 buoy 1
Listing 3.1: Structure of the label files
In this document, (i1, u1) is the upper left corner of the bounding box, (i2, u2) is the lower
right corner of the bounding box, (x, y, z) is the 3D coordinate of the object, (dx, dy, dz) is
the width, length, and height of the object, yaw is the yaw of the object, category name is
the type of the object, and id is a unique id given to the object.
Secondly, it is necessary to structure the image files consistently so that they are easy to
access for the training loop of the model. It ended up being structured with a folder for
each camera where all the images for a given camera are stored. The naming convention
is the timestamp for when the image is taken. It can be seen in listing A.1, which can be
found in appendix A.
A challenge is that the RGB and LWIR cameras did not take the images simultaneously
since they have different capture frequencies. This was solved by sampling every two
seconds and taking the latest image taken for each camera. The difference in time be­
tween the images is assumed to be negligible since the movement that can happen in the
worst­case time difference is small compared to the distance that should be estimated.
The last part of the conversion involves extracting images to validate the training result.
To achieve this, two text files are created, one for the training and validation images. They
contain the timestamps for their respective images so that the training algorithm knows
which images to take for the specific task.
In total, 400 timestamps have been annotated, 20 of which have been extracted for val­
idation. This totals 2400 images annotated. 13182 previously annotated images have
been used to train the backbone to find buoys and ships more accurately.
3.3.4
Training of network
Before training a Deep Learning network, it is necessary to choose an optimiser. Choosing
a scheduler is also beneficial to ensure a faster convergence to the model’s optimum.
In this project, the optimiser, Adam, has been chosen because it is easy to use, relatively
efficient in updating the parameter, and rather robust across different models. Depending
on the testing, the base learning rate was selected differently for each model.
For the scheduler, the StepLR has been chosen. It reduces the learning rate by γ for
every predefined step size. This reduction was executed every ten epochs, with a value
of 0.1 for every model. The choice landed on this one because it is easy to use and to
understand how it works behind the scenes.
A challenge when training a network is often handling the batching of the training data.
Here, PyTorch provides a DataLoader tool. A custom dataset class called MaritimeIm­
ageDataset must be defined to use this.
A custom dataset primarily contains two parts: an initialisation part and a data extraction
part. The data extraction can then again be split into two parts: one for the data itself and
Radar Integrity Monitoring
33
==PAGE:44==
another for the labels. Many of the other parts depend on the specific model of how the
MaritimeDataset was implemented, which will be described later.
When the dataset has been defined, it is possible to train the network. This is done by
loading the training and validation data with the data loader. The training is then done
through a different number of loops called epochs. Each epoch consists of two parts: one
for the training and one for the validation.
The training part of an epoch loops through all the batches in the training dataset. The
data is run through the model, and each batch is predicted. Then, it calculates the pre­
diction loss, which is then used to propagate backwards through the model to update the
gradients. The total loss is also summed up between the batches. Lastly, the optimiser
updates all the model weights using the gradients calculated with the loss for the batch.
After running through all the batches to train for the epoch, it is time for the validation. The
model is set in evaluation mode, and the validation data is run through it. Afterwards, the
loss is calculated cumulatively between the validation batches, and the validation part is
over.
The last part of an epoch is to save the training and validation loss and update the sched­
uler to know when it should decrease the learning rate. This is done to survey how the
loss changes throughout the training.
It is worth noting that training a network requires a lot of time. The training time can differ
depending on the size of the training dataset, model size, and available hardware. It is
not uncommon for a model to require more than 12 hours of training.
3.3.5
Creating custom datasets
As mentioned, different versions of the custom dataset, MaritimeDataset, have been
made for the project to accommodate the needs of the different models regarding in­
puts and labels. Even though they are different, there are also quite some similarities.
Therefore, the first custom dataset will be described more deeply, while the second and
third will highlight how it differs.
Version 1
In the initialisation, the following are determined. The path to the folders containing the
cameras, a list of the image timestamps, the path to the folders containing the labels, and
the PyTorch transformer as described in section 3.3.2.
Regarding data extraction, the dataset class provides both the data and the labels. For
the data, it is just as described in the image preprocessing section, 3.3.2. It is loaded from
the paths and the provided index for the timestamp the user wants to load.
Looking at the labels instead, each label file consists of a line with all the objects found at
that time. The relative position, size, and orientation are all read and normalised, ensuring
that their values will be between −1 and 1. The classes are written as a string, but a one­
hot encoding is used for each class when they are read. In this case, ship objects have
the first entry as 1, while the buoy has the second entry as 1. All the parts of the labels
read are returned as tensors for each kind of label, as well as their relative position, size,
orientation, and class.
Version 2
The second version of the custom dataset has been rewritten to use the built­in Faster R­
CNN loss function. The dataset’s initialisation is the same as in version 1. The difference
is in the construction of the images and labels.
34
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:45==
The images are no longer returned as a combined tensor. Instead, they are returned as
a list of tensors. Therefore, the images are loaded, transformed into tensors, and added
to a list. This list is then returned.
The most significant difference is in the label tensors. As with the images, they are re­
turned as a list of labels, one label for each image. Each label is a dictionary with the
keys: boxes, labels, position, orientation, and size. Each of these elements is a tensor for
all the objects in the 2D image. The boxes element is added compared to version one. It
describes all the bounding boxes of the objects. The labels might also seem new, but it
is just a renaming of the class’s name, which adheres to the Faster R­CNN requirement.
Instead of being one­hit encoded, each class has an integer larger than 0 because 0 is
reserved for the background. The ship is assigned to 1, and the buoy is assigned to 2.
Version 3
The last version has been rewritten to train the backbone for detecting objects in 2D. It has
also been extended to use the old annotated images, increasing the number of images
that can be used for this. This has the consequence that it looks pretty different from
versions one and two.
The first change can be seen in the initialisation. Here, it saves a list of paths to the
specific folders containing the images and labels, whereas the other had the path to the
main folder instead. It also creates a list containing the file type for the images in each
path and how many images are in that folder.
The first part of the function retrieves the image, and the corresponding tensor determines
which path to look at. When this has been determined, it finds the corresponding image
and label. The image and label retrieval is similar to the one in version two. The most
significant difference is that the label dictionary only contains the bounding boxes and
labels since the remaining parts are only relevant in the 3D case.
3.3.6
Loss functions
As with the custom datasets, the loss function changes depending on the model. The
different versions of the loss functions are, therefore, described below.
Version 1
The first loss function considers the four parameters the network should estimate: relative
position, size, orientation, and object class. It also has a penalty for detecting too many
or too few objects.
Since relative position, size, and orientation are continuous metrics, the loss for each is
calculated as a Mean Squared Error. On the other hand, the object class is a classification
metric; therefore, a Cross­Entropy metric is used instead. Lastly, the penalty for detecting
too many or too few objects is multiplied by the difference between the estimated and
actual number of targets.
The total loss is then calculated as the sum of each loss multiplied by a weight. The
weights are relative, and we try to tell the model what is most essential to get correct by
this difference. For the position, the weight is 0.5, the size has the weight 0.2, the weight
for the orientation is 0.1, and the object class weight is 1. The penalty for each object
detected by too many or too few is 5.
The reason behind this distribution is that the weight for detecting too many or too few
must be of a size that can be comparable with the other. Classifying the objects correctly
is also essential since this will likely significantly impact the size estimation. After this, the
position must be correct. Placing the object correctly on the virtual radar is impossible
without the proper position. The size and orientation are still nice to estimate, but if they
Radar Integrity Monitoring
35
==PAGE:46==
are incorrect, they will not have significant consequences for the performance of the virtual
radar.
Version 2
The second loss function has a slightly different approach. First, it utilises the built­in loss
function in the PyTorch implementation of Faster R­CNN. This loss describes the loss due
to a wrongly classified object and the loss of how far away the estimated bounding boxes
are from the actual bounding boxes.
However, the Faster R­CNN is only the first part of the loss calculation. The second part
is quite like version one for the position, size, and orientation. For each of these, a Mean
Squared Error is calculated. These are then added to the loss found by the built­in loss
for Faster R­CNN.
3.3.7
Building the machine learning networks
The networks were inspired by the BEV models created for autonomous cars. Seven
main structures have been developed, and they have been tuned to get the best results.
Each model’s general structure is described, and its performance is analysed.
Each model has been tweaked through testing to optimise their performance. Therefore,
the specific sizes of the blocks are not noted down, but how the sizes change between
similar models is described.
Model 1 was created first, while models 2 through 5 can be seen as modifications of
the model based on input from others in the research group. They were developed and
trained in parallel; however, the text will treat them individually. Models 6 and 7 are the
last to be developed and take a different approach to the problem.
Model 1
The first model contains different parts. It can be seen in figure 3.13, and the various parts
will be described below.
Figure 3.13: Figure of how Deep Learning model 1 is constructed
The first part of creating a model for making a BEV is to define a backbone for the model.
The chosen backbone of the Deep Learning network is a combination of the ResNet50[40]
and a Feature Pyramid Network[41].
First, it takes the last layer from each stage of the ResNet50 network and extracts the
features. The first layer has been excluded since the features in that layer are very large
and will consume a considerable amount of memory. The ResNet50 is initialised with
weights that are obtained from ImageNet. This is to reduce the amount of training needed
for the network.
The ResNet50 results are four feature layers. These extracted features are input into the
Feature Pyramid Network (FPN). To ensure that the FPN has the correct input size, a
36
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:47==
single test tensor is run through ResNet50 so that the output dimension can be checked.
The dimension of the output is then defined as the input to the FPN, and the number of
output channels is chosen to be 256. An extra max pooling layer is introduced as the last
layer of the FPN to ensure that it is more robust to translation changes.
With the backbone defined, the next step in this model is the Long Short­Term Memory
(LSTM) block. This has been chosen since it should be able to help utilise the fact that a
buoy or vessel cannot move that much relative to the ship between two timestamps.
The size of the input to the LSTM is equal to the output of the backbone. This is the
product of the number of output channels, a quarter of the width, and a quarter of the
height of the input images. It is also possible to adjust the number of hidden layers and
the size of each of these layers.
After the LSTM block, it is time for the head of the Deep Learning network. Here, the output
of the LSTM block is split into four different linear blocks. The outputs of these blocks are
then used as input to another layer of linear blocks. These blocks are responsible for
predicting the relative position, size, orientation, and object class, where the predictions
are the outputs from the four blocks.
Figure 3.14: The training and validation loss of model 1 displayed in one graph.
Model 1 used the first version of the MaritimeDataset. Its training used 380 image sets,
while the validation used 20 image sets. The loss function is also the first version.
The training and validation loss can be seen in figure 3.14, where it is plotted with a
logarithmic y­axis. Looking at both the training and validation, it can be seen that the
losses decrease a lot during the first ten epochs, whereas the losses keep decreasing but
at a slower rate. When it gets to around the 20th epoch, the losses become almost flat.
In some epochs, they go a bit further down, while in others, they increase a bit.
When the training and validation losses stop decreasing with more training loops, it is a
sign of it being stuck. This is not a good sign since it has likely found a local optima that
gives a similar loss for all inputs.
By trying to send a single image set through the model, it can be seen that this is the
case. The output is five estimations, where all the positions, sizes, orientations, and class
Radar Integrity Monitoring
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.15: Figure of how Deep Learning model 2 is constructed
predictions are the same. Another image set is also tried, which again results in five
predictions where all the metrics are the same, and they are also the same as the first
image set.
This error might be caused by either having too little training material or the wrong model
for the task. The model was trained several times with different parameters. It did, how­
ever, result in the same every time. Since all the predictions across the image sets are
the same, it is most likely due to the model. Therefore, other models are proposed that
might perform better.
Model 2
The second model, shown in figure 3.15, looks very similar to model one. The main
difference can be seen in the second last layer, where instead of the linear blocks already
being split out, they have a combined linear block.
The reason behind trying out a model with a combined linear block after the LSTM block is
that the position, size, and class are closely correlated. Therefore, a combined linear block
is hoped to allow better predictions. The model should also be slightly lighter because the
larger combined linear block is smaller than the four separate linear blocks.
Figure 3.16: The training and validation loss of model 2 displayed in one graph.
The second model uses the same MaritimeDataset version and loss function as the first
for the training. The training with the training and validation loss plotted together can be
38
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:49==
seen in figure 3.16.
Starting with the new model’s good part, the training and validation losses are much closer.
This is positive because it indicates that the model is not very biased towards the training
set. However, it has a similar problem to the first model, in which the losses get to a
steady state. In this case, it happens even faster. It could be because the model is a bit
smaller and has fewer weights that need to be updated.
The same investigation of sending an image set through the model ends with the same
result as with model one. It gives precisely five predictions, where all the metrics are
the same for all image sets that have been put through it. Therefore, this model is also
dropped.
Model 3
The third model is another variation of the first model. The structure of model 3 can be
seen in figure 3.17. The difference is that the LSTM block has been removed. This was
removed to test whether it would work better without it.
Figure 3.17: Figure of how Deep Learning model 3 is constructed
It was initially introduced to benefit estimation. After all, the connection should be in posi­
tion between two measurements. However, it might work the opposite if it hinders updat­
ing the estimate to the correct amount.
Another reason it might work better is that it is quite a large block, and removing it makes
it possible to make the linear blocks larger. These may be better than an LSTM block for
this specific task.
As with the previous models, the third model uses MaritimeDataset version one and the
first loss function in the training. The combined loss plot for the training and validation
can be seen in 3.18. It is worth noting the validation loss is several orders of magnitude
larger than the training loss.
Looking at the two figures, it can be seen that both the training and validation loss fluctuate.
There does not seem to be a trend in the direction of the loss. Sometimes, it would be
because the training data is too messy. However, since the previous models could reach
a steady state, it is not that likely.
Instead, it is likely due to the model not being large enough, so it cannot get all the details
it needs. This makes sense since the most significant difference between the first model,
and this is that a block has been removed. The other blocks have increased in size a
bit, but it is not enough to compensate for the loss of complexity that occurred when the
LSTM block was removed.
Radar Integrity Monitoring
39
==PAGE:50==
Figure 3.18: The training and validation loss of model 3 displayed in one graph.
Due to the model’s inability to train, no test of running image sets was performed on it.
This would most likely not have given any useful results for further analysis of the model.
The model was dropped, and other models were approached instead.
Model 4
The fourth model is shown in figure 3.19. It can be seen that it combines the experiments
from models three and four to one. This excludes the LSTM block and incorporates the
second last layer into one linear block. This was a natural extension of the variations of
the models that were made after the test of model one.
Figure 3.19: Figure of how Deep Learning model 4 is constructed
The training result with training and validation loss plotted together can be seen in figure
3.20. However, there is a large spike in the validation loss in the first epoch, making it
impossible to get proper details of the remaining training and validation loss. Additionally,
the fluctuations in the training loss are rather small. Therefore, a version where the first
two epochs are skipped and the training and validation loss is split into two plots can be
seen in figure 3.21.
First, the training loss increases slightly in the first couple of epochs. At around epoch 10,
it takes a large step down before it steps further down at around epoch 18 and becomes
40
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.20: The training and validation loss of model 4 displayed in one graph.
relatively stable. Even though it looks like it is going up and down a lot, it is worth noting
that the change happens at the third decimal.
Turning to the validation loss instead, it has much more variation. It does, however, still
have an overall downward going tendency. This large variability is not admirable since it
suggests that the model cannot make proper predictions on image sets that were not a
part of the training.
Due to the significant validation loss, it was not tested with individual image sets. The
reason behind the poor performance is likely the same as seen in model three. The
performance is also the reason behind dropping further work with this model type.
Figure 3.21: The training and validation loss of model 4 is displayed in two graphs to see
more detail. The early peak has been removed.
Model 5
As mentioned, a suspicion for the lousy performance of models 3 and 4 compared with
models 1 and 2 is that by removing the LSTM, the model becomes much smaller, which
might also result in worse performance. Therefore, a new model, five, has been imple­
mented. This model can be seen in figure 3.22. Instead of having only a single combined
linear block, a series of linear blocks have been implemented. The thought behind this is
Radar Integrity Monitoring
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.22: Figure of how Deep Learning model 5 is constructed
that it will help the model combine features more complexly, which could help extract the
required metrics better.
As with the previous models, the same loss function and version of MaritimeDataset are
used. The combined training and validation loss is plotted in figure 3.23. It can be seen
that it has a similar problem as it was seen in model 4. This time, however, the training
loss is very large in the first iteration. To see more detail, the first two epochs are skipped,
which can be seen in 3.24. The orders of magnitude are not different this time, therefore,
the two data series are kept in the same graph.
By comparing the two losses, it can be seen that the training loss quickly declines to a
relatively steady state, and after nine epochs, it does not decline anymore. It can also
be seen that a step up, which happens around the 6th epoch, ends up going down to the
Figure 3.23: The training and validation loss of model 5 displayed in one graph.
42
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:53==
Figure 3.24: The training and validation loss of model 5 displayed in one graph, where
the early peak is removed.
same plateau as before the step.
On the other hand, the validation starts by declining, then taking some steps upward
before falling again and finding a relatively steady state. This steady state is found around
the 10th epoch.
It is also worth noting that only 20 epochs were made for this model. This was because
the other trainable models had hit their steady state around this point. For this model,
it happened earlier, and it will likely not have changed much by training for another 30
epochs.
The test from models one and two of sending an image set through the model was re­
peated for this model. It did, however, end up with the same result. Once again, it gave
precisely five predictions with the same positions, sizes, orientations, and class predic­
tions. As before, the metrics are the same regardless of which image set passes through
the model. Due to another failure, this model was also dropped, and the standard struc­
ture used so far was also dropped.
Model 6
Since the first five models did not work, another approach was taken. The previous models
tried to estimate the position, size, and orientation directly from the six images. In this part,
the objects were first found in the images before trying to estimate their position, size, and
orientation. It also differs because it is not a combined model. Instead, it is implemented
as one class with two submodels. The model’s overall structure can be seen in 3.25.
The first part of the model goes through the Faster R­CNN module. This is built into
PyTorch and can be initialised with pre­trained weights. The anchors for the algorithm
are generated with the AnchorGenerator class, which is also a standard in PyTorch. The
anchors are initialised as 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, and 512 with the aspect ratios 0.5, 1.0,
and 2.0. This should enable the block to find objects of many different sizes. Lastly, it is
created to train all layers and the minimum score of 0.5 for the detections before returning
them.
In the next part, the features are extracted for each image and put into the combined
linear blocks. This took inspiration from model five to get enough complexity to correctly
Radar Integrity Monitoring
43
==PAGE:54==
Figure 3.25: Figure of how Deep Learning model 6 is constructed
estimate an object’s position, size, and orientation. Lastly, it splits out into three blocks,
one for each metric that is to be estimated.
Due to an error in the training loop for this model, only the training loss for the model was
recorded. The training loss for the model can be seen in 3.26. This training used the
second version of MaritimeDataset. It can be seen that around epoch 8, a large spike in
the loss occurred. Afterwards, it can be seen that the loss follows a downward slope that
is extremely steep in the beginning, while it becomes more flat through each iteration of
training, where only a few iterations result in a slight growth in the loss. It is much like
how one would expect a successful training would be.
Since the training loss looked nice, a set of images was again tried to run through the
model to see the predictions. Once again, it did not give a good result. Since the back­
Figure 3.26: The training loss of model 6
44
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:55==
bone structure had changed, the network did not detect anything instead of having a fixed
number of detections with the same position, size, and orientation. Due to this failure, a
new approach was tried in model 7.
3.3.8
Model 7
This last model’s significant difference from model 6 is that the LWIR images have been
excluded. This ensures that the differing data types do not confuse the model. The ap­
proach to the training has also been altered, and it takes two steps. The first step is to
train the backbone, Faster R­CNN, to detect ships and buoys in the 2D images. This
part uses the second version of the MaritimeDataset. The second step is to train the 3D
estimation, where the weights in the backbone are kept unchanged. This alternative ap­
proach should ensure that the lowest consistent loss for the model would not be achieved
by not detecting anything at all.
Since the approach to the training changed, an old database with already annotated im­
ages was found. This resulted in an additional 13182 images, which should also improve
the training. However, these images have only been annotated in 2D, so they can only
be used to train the detection of individual images. The data was recorded at Aalborg in
June 2020 on a smaller vessel with only one camera. Since the vessel was smaller, it
had more manoeuvres, and the background in Aalborg is more varied compared to the
trips taken between Helsingør and Helsingborg.
Figure 3.27: The training and validation loss of the 2d part of the model is displayed in
two graphs to see more detail.
The loss for training the 2D part of the model can be seen in figure 3.27. It can be seen
that the validation loss starts with having some large spikes, but after epoch 20, it settles
down, and after epoch 40, it gets close to being flat.
The training loss starts high before it, around epoch 30, and gets to a level where values
change within the same bounds. It can be seen that this bound is around 10−3, which is
a rather low loss.
By testing the 2D network on an image, it can be seen that it works. In figure 3.28, an
example can be seen. By first looking at figure 3.28a, it can be seen that it finds many
objects. Many of these objects are also some that should not be found. However, looking
Radar Integrity Monitoring
45
==PAGE:56==
(a) All detections plotted in the image
(b) Image with threshold applied to the de­
tection
(c) Image with threshold and overlapping
squares have been filtered
(d) Manually annotated image
Figure 3.28: Example set of detection in a 2D image. The certainty score is written above
the bounding box.
at the certainty scores, which are written above the bounding boxes, it can be seen that
most have a low certainty score.
Because of the many false detections, a threshold for the certainty score was set to 0.3.
The result of this filtering can be seen in figure 3.28b. It can be seen that it took away
many of the false detections. The next problem is that the same object is found several
times, where the bounding box differs. Therefore, a second sorting of detections is made.
The sorting starts by comparing all the detections and checking if they pairwise have an
overlap. If they have more than a 20% overlap, the detection with the lowest certainty
score is dropped. It could be argued that the overlap percentage should be larger since
there might be an overlap between two different objects. However, it was determined that
this risk was relatively low compared to the risk of an object being detected several times.
The problem with detecting the same object several times is that it risks making it harder
to estimate its size.
The result of the last sorting can be seen in figure 3.28c, where it has found one buoy and
three ships. When comparing it to the annotated image, shown in figure 3.28d, it can be
seen that it has found three out of four objects, and it has made a false detection. The
detection it missed is the starboard buoy placed at the Helsingborg harbour entrance. It is
not clearly visible, and the green colour does not stand out in the background. The extra
detection is one found near Helsingør. It is minimal and has light pixels overall. This might
be because the image set from Aalborg contains ships like this, or it could be a vessel
docked at Helsingør.
The network’s performance is also checked for the validation and training datasets. The
46
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:57==
Precision
Recall
IoU
Validation set
0.875
0.968
0.940
Training set
0.721
0.713
0.955
Table 3.1: Performance metrics of the backbone network
comparison to the annotated images is done after the filtering described above. The
performance metrics can be seen in table 3.1. It can be seen that the overall performance
is very high. Especially for the IoU, it is large, and the bounding boxes for the true positives
are, therefore, exact. This is positive for the potential to estimate the vessels’ size properly.
In the validation dataset, it is clear to see that it has very few objects that it misses, while
it is also rather trustworthy in the detections it does have. For the training dataset, both
of these metrics are lower. In an object detection case, it is, however, still a respectable
performance.
It is worth noting that the model performs better on the validation dataset than on the
training dataset. Usually, one would expect the training dataset to have the highest per­
formance. In this case, it might be because the validation dataset only consists of images
from the original dataset. These images do not have as much variation as the ones from
the Aalborg dataset. Therefore, it could suggest that the network is overfitted to the im­
ages it encounters in the original dataset.
Figure 3.29: The training and validation loss of model 7 displayed in one graph.
After successfully training the backbone, the next step is to train the position, size, and
orientation estimation part. The loss for the training and validation can be seen in figure
3.29.
The first thing worth noting is that the validation loss spikes dramatically shortly after the
20th epoch. At around the same time, the training loss also increases slightly. They stay
above the initial value until epoch 40, quickly decreasing again. It could be because the
Radar Integrity Monitoring
47
==PAGE:58==
weights step between two bad points that it is high until epoch 40. The optimiser lowers
the learning rate every 20th epoch, so it might be that results in the loss again being
lowered. Looking at the split data instead, the training loss becomes flat at around epoch
70. After this, the result is likely not improved at all.
By testing the new network with a set of images, it can be seen that it has four predictions,
and the different predictions have different positions and orientations. The sizes were two
different, but it is to be expected since only three different types of vessels were presented
in the dataset. This is a good sign that some progression has been made in the ability to
detect the position.
Number predictions
Number targets
Position error [m]
4.00
3.26
346
Table 3.2: Performance metrics of the 3D estimator network
In table 3.2, a test of all the images was made. Here, it can be seen how many targets were
found and the average position error between the prediction and the true target. First, it
is worth noting that the predictions are 4.00. This is because the number of predictions is
always 4, no matter the input. Looking at the position error instead, it can be seen that it
is high but still in a size that indicates that some learning has occurred.
The test result indicates that there is still some work to be done. However, it does not
seem impossible. In the context of this project, however, it will not be investigated further
because of the time limitation. Therefore, when vision estimation is mentioned in the
development of this project, the annotated distance, size, and orientation will be used.
48
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 4
Virtual Radar
The following chapter discusses the creation of the virtual radar itself. The first part intro­
duces the Error State Kalman Filter, which will fuse the different sensors. This introduction
is first done of the standard Kalman Filter before describing how it can be changed to be­
come the Error State Kalman Filter.
Afterwards, it describes how the virtual radar was implemented. It starts by explaining
how the buoys and shoreline are extracted from the ENC. Afterwards, it continues by
explaining how the data from the AIS is loaded.
Lastly, the Error State Kalman Filter is implemented practically. The initial implementation
is done on some synthetic data before showing the result on real data.
4.1
Error State Kalman Filter
This section considers the Kalman Filter and its complementary form, also called the
Error­State Kalman Filter.
4.1.1
Kalman Filter
A system can be described with the state space equations:
xk = Fxk−1 + Guk−1 + w,
w ∈N(0, σw)
(4.1)
yk = Cxk + v,
v ∈N(0, σv)
(4.2)
Here xk is the state at sample k, xk−1 at sample k −1, yk is the measured state at sample
k−1, uk−1 is the input to the system at sample k−1, F is the state transition matrix, G is the
input matrix, C is the output matrix, w is the process noise which is Gaussian distributed
with covariance σw, and v is the measurement noise which Gaussian distributed with
covariance σv.
Often, it is necessary to know the exact state of the system. This is not possible directly
due to several reasons. One reason is that it is not always possible to install sensors that
directly measure all the states. Another reason is that even when it is possible to make
the measurement, these measurements will be influenced by noise. A way to estimate
the states is to use the Kalman Filter.
The Kalman Filter works in two parts: a time update and a measurement update. The
first part to consider is the time update. It happens at each time sample k. Here, the
estimation of the state is propagated with the knowledge of the system. Therefore, the
uncertainty of the estimate also increases. The general equations look like the following:
Radar Integrity Monitoring
49
==PAGE:60==
ˆx−
k = Fˆx+
k−1 + Guk−1
(4.3)
ˆyk = Cˆx−
k
(4.4)
P−
k = FP+
k−1F⊤+ σw
(4.5)
In these equations ˆx−
k is the state prediction in the time update at sample k, ˆx+
k−1 is the
estimated states in the measurement update at time k −1, ˆyk is the predicted output,
P−
k is the covariance of the estimate for the time update, and P+
k is the covariance of the
estimate for the measurement update.
Sometimes, the measurements do not come as often as one wishes to update the pre­
diction. This could happen if a poor measurement has been performed or the system
is designed to have more frequent inputs than measurements. Therefore, it is at times
required that two time updates happen in a row. In this case, ˆx+
k−1 is changed out with
ˆx−
k−1.
The other part of the Kalman Filter is the measurement update. It is executed every time a
new measurement is made. It is assumed that a measurement is always made at sample
k. Here, the uncertainty is decreased, and the error of the state is estimated by comparing
the measurement with the predicted measurement. The equations look like the following:
(P+
k )−1 = (P−
k )−1 + C⊤σ−1
v C
(4.6)
Kk = P+
k C⊤σ−1
v
(4.7)
ˆx+
k = ˆx−
k + Kk(yk −ˆyk)
(4.8)
The only new symbol is Kk, which is the Kalman gain.
The standard Kalman Filter requires linear, or close to linear, systems only influenced by
white noise. Extensions of the Kalman Filter also exist to combat this. These could be the
Extended Kalman Filter or the Unscented Kalman Filter, which can handle nonlinearities.
If the problem is that the noise is not white Gaussian noise, then one can instead use the
Particle Filter [21].
4.1.2
Complementary Filtering
The standard Kalman Filter estimates the entire state directly but requires the system to be
linear or close to it. This is often not the case in real­life systems. If one instead tracks the
error state ˜xk = xk −ˆxk, then the algebraic manipulation will ensure that the assumptions
hold with the system being linear. This kind of filter is called a complementary filter or
Error State Kalman Filter. The Error State Kalman Filter looks like the original Kalman
Filter but includes an error state instead of the standard prediction. It has the following
time update:
˜xk = F˜x+
k−1
(4.9)
And the following measurement update:
zk = yk −ˆyk
(4.10)
ˆ˜x+
k = ˜x−
k + K(zk −C˜x−
k )
(4.11)
50
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:61==
The Kalman gain and state estimate covariance is the same as for the normal Kalman
Filter. The state prediction can be found by:
ˆx+
k = ˆ˜x+
k + ˆx−
k
(4.12)
Since the error over time will be small, the calculations in the Kalman Filter can adhere to
the linear requirement [21].
4.1.3
Observability
For a Kalman Filter to work, the system must be observable. This ensures that all states
can be recreated from the output and the internal dynamics. There are several different
ways to check observability. The one chosen here is through the construction of the
observability matrix.
The observability matrix is constructed as follows:
Mo =


C
CF
CF2
. . .
CFn−1


(4.13)
Here, n is the number of rows in F. A system is said to be observable if and only if the
observability matrix has full rank [21].
4.2
Implementing the Virtual Radar
The following section will describe the implementation of the virtual radar. An overview of
the blocks that go into the virtual radar can be seen in figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Overview of the building blocks for the virtual radar.
4.2.1
Displaying the ENC in the Virtual Radar
As described in section 2.2.4, the sea charts used have been found in two different places.
This also results in two different methods to extract the sea charts and change them to
one radar­like view.
Radar Integrity Monitoring
51
==PAGE:62==
The charts in the format obtained from Geodatastyrelsen have been used at DTU Electro
­ Automation and Control group for several years. Earlier, these were also used in the
BEV format, which resulted in the creation of SeaChartAPI. It was created by Thomas
Enevoldsen, with the oldest registered commit from 2019 [52].
The API creates a SeaChart object from the path to the specific map file. It is possible
to extract the buoys and land polygons from this object. The buoys are returned as a list
of dictionaries, where the most important fields in this case are the CoordY and CoordX,
which are the latitude and longitude, respectively. On the other hand, the land is a list of
coordinates for the corners of the polygon.
When the land and buoys have been extracted, the Draw function from SeaChartAPI can
be used to create an image. Firstly, the circular background is drawn, which represents
the water. In this case, the background will be black. Then, it is possible to add the land
to the same image. The buoys have not yet been added since these coordinates should
be extracted and drawn when the buoys from the OpenSeaMap have been found.
The next part is to extract the equivalent data from the OpenSeaMap charts. Even though
the overall data structure is different, the SeaChartAPI should still be used. Therefore,
the main focus is on transforming the data for that API.
Starting with the land, the first task is to extract the relevant features from the GeoJSON
file. Since the data has been filtered, the features of interest are the ones that either
have the key natural or area. When these have been identified, there are two different
approaches. The first is for the features that are already in a polygon form. A feature in
the polygon form has the same first and last coordinate, which closes the figure. These
can be directly added to an array. The other approach is for the non­polygons. Here, an
extra point, far inland, is added at the end of the array. In this way, it ensured that the
whole land is filled out. With this point added, the list of points can also be added to the
array.
The next step is to extract the buoys. Here, it is features with at least one key in the
properties containing the phrase seamark:buoy that should be extracted. When all the
coordinates of the buoys have been extracted, these should be saved as a list of dictio­
naries so they have the fields CoordY and CoordX.
(a) An example of what the virtual radar
looks like when it only contains the land
and the buoys. The range is 5655m.
(b) An example of what the radar looks
like. The range is 5655m.
52
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:63==
After extracting both the land and buoys and changing their format to the SeaChartAPI,
the land can be drawn like before. The buoys from both sea charts can then be combined
into one list.
The first step for each buoy is to convert its geodetic coordinates to the body reference
frame instead. This is done by finding the distance and bearing from the vessel to the
buoy. The coordinates in the body reference frame can be found with this distance and
bearing. Lastly, this should again be converted into a coordinate in the virtual radar image.
The last step after the land and the buoys have been plotted is to crop the image with the
radius that the radar also has. This makes it look more like the radar. Figure 4.2a shows
an example of the result.
As can be seen, the image is much cleaner when compared to a real radar image, e.g.,
the one in figure 4.2b. There are several reasons behind this. First, this image has no
noise since the buoys and land are taken directly from the ENC. It is also much easier
to see all the land. With the normal radar, the signal can be obstructed by either high
buildings or hills, which can hide the area behind it. Lastly, the other ships are not yet
plotted on the radar, which would give more blobs.
4.2.2
Including the AIS data in the Virtual Radar
The next step in the implementation is to load the AIS data. Since the various vessels
upload their AIS data at different times, it has been decided that all AIS data uploaded
between the previous and the current time step are considered uploaded at the current
time step. Should a vessel have sent more than one AIS package within this time, the
latest is considered. Besides, all the MMSI numbers are looked up at VesselFinder [53],
and the AIS data is discarded if it is not found there. This is because the number is not
from a vessel but from a radio station on land. Since the data regarding the vessel size
is static, this is also found at VesselFinder.
Figure 4.3: An example of what the virtual radar looks like when it contains the land, the
buoys (green circle), and the ships (red ellipse). The range is 2000m.
Afterwards, the position and Course Over Ground (COG) are found by decoding the AIS
message. This information makes it possible to draw the vessel on the virtual radar.
Firstly, the vessel’s coordinates are converted into a relative position, which again is con­
verted to a coordinate on the virtual radar. The size and course of the vessel are then
used to determine the corners of a rectangle which symbolises the vessel. It is assumed
that the vessel’s coordinates are in the middle of the vessel. With these corners, the ves­
Radar Integrity Monitoring
53
==PAGE:64==
sel can be drawn on the virtual radar. An example of the combined virtual radar can be
seen in figure 4.3
4.2.3
Error State Kalman Filter
An error­state Kalman filter is used to fuse the data from the Deep Learning network, AIS,
and ENC. Each buoy and ship will be tracked through their own Kalman Filter because it
makes it easy to draw on the virtual radar. It makes the overhead in the computation a bit
larger. On the other hand, it is easier to stop tracking an object if it gets outside the range
of the virtual radar.
The objects will be tracked in the body reference frame. Because of that, it will be assumed
that the main vessel will not move, but it will instead be the objects that move. The reason
behind it is that a radar measures in the body reference frame, and the virtual radar should
mimic this behaviour.
State definition
The states of each object are
x =


x
y
v
a
θ
ω
α


(4.14)
x is the x­coordinate of the object, y is the y­coordinate, v is the speed of the object, a
is the acceleration, θ is the orientation around the object’s centre point, ω is the angular
velocity, and α is the angular acceleration. See the connection between x, y, and θ in
figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Overview of the states x, y, and θ
Inputs
Even though measuring any input directly to the object is impossible, its relative position is
still affected by how our vessel moves. These inputs to the system are defined as follows.
u =
[δx
δy
]
(4.15)
54
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:65==
Here, δx is how the movement of the platform vessel affects the object in the x­direction,
and δy is how the movement of the platform vessel affects the object in the y­direction.
The state estimation will indirectly consider the information if these are set to zero.
Kinematic model
With the states and inputs defined, it is possible to write the state equations for how the
system transfers from one time step to the next:


xk+1
yk+1
vk+1
ak+1
θk+1
ωk+1
αk+1


=


xk + ∆tvkcos(θk) + 1
2∆t2akcos(θk) + δx
yk + ∆tvksin(θk) + 1
2∆t2aksin(θk) + δy
vk + ∆tak
ak
θk + ∆tωk + 1
2∆t2αk
ωk + ∆tαk
αk


+ w
(4.16)
Besides the states and the inputs, ∆t is the sample time, and w is a vector describing the
noise affecting the individual states of the system.
Error state model
The next step is to define the error state, which is as follows:
˜x = x −ˆx
(4.17)
Since it is the error state, it is assumed to have the zero­vector as the expected value:
E[˜x] = 0
(4.18)
The error states can then be found as


˜xk+1
˜yk+1
˜vk+1
˜ak+1
˜θk+1
˜ωk+1
˜αk+1


=


xk+1
yk+1
vk+1
ak+1
θk+1
ωk+1
αk+1


−


ˆxk+1
ˆyk+1
ˆvk+1
ˆak+1
ˆθk+1
ˆωk+1
ˆαk+1


=


˜xobj,k + ∆tvkcos(θk) −∆tˆvkcos(ˆθk) + 1
2∆t2akcos(θk) −1
2∆t2ˆakcos(ˆθk)
˜yobj,k + ∆tvksin(θk) −∆tˆvksin(ˆθk) + 1
2∆t2aksin(θk) −1
2∆t2ˆaksin(ˆθk)
˜vobj,k + ∆t˜a
˜aobj,k
˜θk + ∆t˜ωk + ∆t2˜αk
˜ωk + ∆t˜αk
˜αk


(4.19)
It is possible to simplify this further. First, it uses isolating the estimated state in the error
state definition, ˆx = x −˜x. It also uses that E[˜x] = 0, which mean it can be assumed that
cos(θk) ≈cos(θk −˜θk) and sin(θk) ≈sin(θk −˜θk). By utilising this, it is possible to simplify
the total error states to:
Radar Integrity Monitoring
55
==PAGE:66==
˜x =


˜xk+1
˜yk+1
˜vk+1
˜ak+1
˜θk+1
˜ωk+1
˜αk+1


=


˜xk + ∆t˜vkcos(θk −˜θk) + 1
2∆t2˜acos(θk −˜θk)
˜yobj,k + ∆t˜vobj,ksin(θk −˜θk) + 1
2∆t2˜asin(θk −˜θ)
˜vk + ∆t˜ak
˜ak
˜θk + ∆t˜ωk + ∆t2˜αk
˜ωk + ∆t˜αk
˜αk


(4.20)
Since the expected value of the error states are all 0, then the sinusoidal functions can be
approximated to be:
sin(θk + ˜θ) = sin(θk) −˜θcos(θk)
(4.21)
cos(θk + ˜θ) = cos(θk) −˜θsin(θk)
(4.22)
With this approximation, the error state equations can be simplified to:
˜x ≈


˜xk + ∆t˜vk(cos(θk) −˜θksin(θk)) + ∆t2 1
2˜ak(cos(θk) −˜θksin(θk))
˜yk + ∆t˜vk(sin(θk) −˜θkcos(θk)) + ∆t2 1
2˜ak(sin(θk) −˜θkcos(θk))
˜vk + ∆t˜ak
˜ak
˜θk + ∆t˜ωk + ∆t2˜αk
˜ωk + ∆t˜αk
˜αk


(4.23)
The full derivation can be found in appendix B.
Linearisation
The next step is to linearise the error state equations, which the simplification has made
easier:
˜x ≈


˜xk + ∆t˜vkcos(θ0) −∆t˜v0˜θksin(θ0) −∆t˜vk˜θ0sin(θ0) + ∆t2 1
2˜akcos(θ0) −∆t2˜a0˜θksin(θ0) −∆t2˜ak˜θ0sin(θ0)
˜yk + ∆t˜vksin(θ0) −∆t˜v0˜θkcos(θ0) −∆t˜vk˜θ0cos(θ0) + ∆t2 1
2˜asin(θ0) −∆t2˜a0˜θkcos(θ0) −∆t2˜ak˜θ0cos(θ0)
˜vk + ∆t˜a
˜ak
˜θk + ∆t˜ωk + ∆t2˜αk
˜ωk + ∆t˜αk
˜αk


(4.24)
Everything with the subscript 0 is the initial value in these equations. By again using the
assumption E[˜x] = 0 then the equations can be simplified to:
˜x ≈


˜xobj,k + ∆t˜vobj,kcos(θ0) + ∆t2 1
2˜a(cos(θ0)
˜yobj,k + ∆t˜vobj,ksin(θ0) + ∆t2 1
2˜asin(θ0)
˜vobj,k + ∆t˜a
˜aobj,k
˜θobj,k + ∆t˜ωobj,k
˜ωobj,k


(4.25)
56
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:67==
State transition matrix
These equations can also be expressed in the state transition matrix:
F =


1
0
∆tcos(θ0)
1
2∆t2cos(θ0)
0
0
0
0
1
∆tsin(θ0)
1
2∆t2sin(θ0)
0
0
0
0
0
1
∆t
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
∆t
1
2∆t2
0
0
0
0
0
1
∆t
0
0
0
0
0
0
1


(4.26)
Output matrix
The measurements for buoys come from the ENC and visual, while the measurements for
ships come from the AIS and visual. The buoys do not, as such, have an orientation, but
to standardise the Kalman Filter, it is just set to zero. For a single type of measurement,
the output, therefore, looks like this:
Cn =


1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0


(4.27)
Where the n can be either AIS, ENC, or visual. If both types of measurements are avail­
able at the same time, then the observation matrix is altered to look like:
C =
[CAIS/ENC
CV isual
]
(4.28)
Observability
With the state transition matrix and the output matrix defined, it is possible to analyse
the observability. For this analysis, it is assumed that only one kind of measurement is
available. With that assumption, the observability matrix ends up like the following:
Mo =


1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
∆t cos(θ0)
1
2∆t2 cos(θ0)
0
0
0
1
∆t sin(θ0)
1
2∆t2 sin(θ0)
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
∆t
1
0
2∆t cos(θ0)
2∆t2 cos(θ0)
0
0
0
1
2∆t sin(θ0)
2∆t2 sin(θ0)
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2∆t
1
0
3∆t cos(θ0)
9
2∆t2 cos(θ0)
0
0
0
1
3∆t sin(θ0)
9
2∆t2 sin(θ0)
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
3∆t
1
0
4∆t cos(θ0)
8∆t2 cos(θ0)
0
0
0
1
4∆t sin(θ0)
8∆t2 sin(θ0)
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
4∆t
1
0
5∆t cos(θ0)
25
2 ∆t2 cos(θ0)
0
0
0
1
5∆t sin(θ0)
25
2 ∆t2 sin(θ0)
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
5∆t


(4.29)
Radar Integrity Monitoring
57
==PAGE:68==
The next step is to find the rank of the matrix. It is:
Rank(Mo) = 6
(4.30)
As can be seen, the observability matrix has full rank. From this rank test, it can be
deduced that the system has full observability, and it is possible to recreate all the states.
4.2.4
Implementing the Error State Kalman Filter
When the mathematical description of the Error State Kalman Filter is done, it is time to
implement it. It has been implemented in Python as a class, which allows you to create
a Python object for each object that needs tracking. It also allows for the saving of some
additional information that is relevant to drawing the virtual radar.
Initialisation
The first step for each object is to initialise the filter, which happens when the first mea­
surement is made. This initialisation requires the step time, initial state, process noise,
measurement noise for ENC/AIS and vision, the object type, and the object size. In addi­
tion, the error states are also initialised to zero, and the state covariance is set to 100 for
all entries except the sub­matrix related to the orientation, which is set to 5.
The step time in this implementation is always two seconds. Since the initialisation hap­
pens when the first measurement is made, this measurement is used as the initial state,
as no better guess exists at this point.
The different noises are used to tune the Kalman Filter to determine how much it should
rely on the system equations and how much it should rely on the measurements. This
is determined by combining system knowledge and tuning to improve performance. For
the implemented Kalman Filter, it is assumed that none of the noises for process and
measurements are correlated. The process noise ended up being:
σw = diag














(30m)2
(30m)2
(
0.5m
s
)2
(
0.05 m
s2
)2
(15◦)2
(
6
◦
s
)2
(
1
◦
s2
)2














(4.31)
For all the noises, they have been tuned to get the final value. The description here is,
therefore, how they initially were chosen. The position is set at this level because, with a
fast­going vessel, it is not unusual that it can sail 30 knots, which is approximate (15◦)2.
If the course is wrongly estimated, this can easily become an error in this size. Since
the overall assumption for the filter is that the acceleration is constant, the speed is set
around
(
0.5m
s
)2 since it should not change much between measurements. In contrast,
the acceleration is set even lower because it should not change.
For the heading, the standard deviation is set to 15◦= π
6 rad because the vessel might
change heading between measurements if the vessel chooses to change direction just af­
ter the latest measurement. This can become quite a difference if it is around 30s between
measurements. Since the next two are at a rate of change, it is assumed that the vessels
have a constant angular acceleration. They should, therefore, be relatively stable.
58
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:69==
σv,ais/enc = diag




(10m)2
(10m)2
(3◦)2




(4.32)
Since the AIS data is obtained from the onboard GNSS and is on open waters, it is rela­
tively precise because there are no obstructions between the vessel GNSS and the satel­
lites. The largest source of error is likely from a delay in receiving the data. This delay
would be small, so it should not influence it much.
σv,vission = diag




(200m)2
(200m)2
(35◦)2




(4.33)
The visual measurements can be very imprecise. This is especially true when the other
object is small and far away. Therefore, the uncertainty is deemed to be very large.
The last two initialisation entries, the object type and size, depend on the specific object.
These are for drawing the object on the virtual radar. The entries are obtained from the
AIS data, if available, or they will be from visual estimation.
Time update
In the time update, the first step is to update the state transition matrix to have the cor­
rect connection between the object’s orientation, θojb, and how the speed influences the
change in x and y.
Afterwards, the error state is updated as in equation 4.9, and the state covariance matrix
is updated with equation 4.5.
Measurement update
The measurement update is only run when a measurement is available. The first part
updates the measurement noise so it uses the correct depending on the type of measure­
ment. Afterwards, it calculates the innovation as in equation 4.10, the state covariance
with equation 4.6, and the Kalman gain by equation 4.7.
4.3
Performance Error State Kalman Filter
The following section will describe the performance of the implemented Error State Kalman
Filter. The first part will describe the filter’s performance on synthetically generated data.
This data was also used to tune the filter, which resulted in the noises described in section
4.2.4. The last part of the chapter will describe the performance of tracking a vessel in
real data.
4.3.1
Synthetic data
To ensure proper performance, the initial development of the Error State Kalman Filter
was tested on synthetic data. Four different scenarios were created, which can be seen
in table 4.1. The tests have two vessels: a platform vessel and a target vessel. The
platform vessel is tracking the target vessel.
Only one type of measurement has been used for all the tests, which is assumed to be the
AIS. For each measurement, there is added normal distributed noise with the variances:
σmeas,pos =
[(10m))2
0
0
(10m))2
]
σmeas,ori = (3◦)2
(4.34)
Radar Integrity Monitoring
59
==PAGE:70==
Test
Pos self [ϕ, λ]
Pos other [ϕ, λ]
θself[◦]
θother[◦]
vself[m
s ,
◦
s]
vself[m
s ,
◦
s]
1
(56.00, 12.67)
(56.00, 12.67)
270
90
(0, 0)
(5, 0)
2
(56.00, 12.67)
(56.00, 12.67)
270
90
(5, 0)
(5, 0)
3
(56.00, 12.67)
(56.00, 12.68)
270
90
(5, 1)
(5, 0)
4
(56.00, 12.67)
(56.00, 12.68)
270
180
(5, 0)
(5, 1)
Table 4.1: Starting conditions
Besides the added noise, four different frequencies were used to obtain measurements.
These measurements are every time step, every three­time step, every five­time step, and
every ten­time step. This mimics the real world, where the AIS data will not be available
at every time step. However, it is uncommon that it will be more than 30s between the
measurements.
The first test has both vessels at the same point. The platform vessel stays at the initial
point for the full test, where its heading is directly west. The target vessel’s heading is
directly east, moving with a constant speed of 5m
s ≈9.8kn. The movement can be seen
in figure 4.5, displayed in the geodetic and body reference frames. Both vessels can also
(a) The movement of the platform ves­
sel and target vessel in the geodetic
reference frame. The movement starts
in the red cross and ends in the red di­
amond.
(b) The movement of the platform ves­
sel and target vessel in the geodetic
reference frame with latitude over time
shown
(c) The movement of the target ves­
sel in the body reference frame. The
movement starts in the red cross and
ends in the red diamond.
(d) The movement of platform vessel
and target vessel in the geodetic ref­
erence frame with longitude over time
shown
Figure 4.5: First synthetic test data
60
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:71==
be seen in how they move in latitude and longitude over time.
The performance of the Error State Kalman Filter for test one can be seen in 4.6. Here,
all the plots are in the body reference frame. Three is a plot of the position, distance in
the x direction over time, distance in the y direction over time, and orientation over time.
Looking at the results, the overall performance is rather good for the position estimation.
It is also clear that the error becomes smaller over time. Most of this is in the early stages,
(a) The movement of the target ves­
sel in the body reference frame. The
movement starts in the red cross and
ends in the red diamond.
(b) The movement of the target vessel
in the x direction
(c) The relative rotation of the target
vessel in the body reference frame
(d) The movement of the target vessel
in the y direction
(e) The the relative absolute distance
for the vessel
Figure 4.6: First synthetic data tracking with Kalman Filter with various steps between
measurements
Radar Integrity Monitoring
61
==PAGE:72==
where it gets steady around the true value after around 30 time steps. Looking at the
orientation instead, it is not as consistent. It can be seen that it varies more from the
ground truth. However, it does not diverge, and since the error is around the true value,
then it would not cause a decrease in performance, which also can be seen in the position
estimations.
Comparing the different measurement intervals shows that the more often the measure­
ment is available, the better the performance, which is also to be expected. Since a fault
detection algorithm analyses the performance through several time steps, it should not
give a problem for the fault detection since it still keeps around the true value.
Figure 4.7: The state covariance for x, y, and θ
The covariance plot, 4.7, consists of four plots. The first plot has all the different covari­
ances plotted together. However, one of them has a significant spike early on. Therefore,
they have been split into three plots: x, y, and θ, where they have been capped to see
the details better. For all the plots, it can be seen that the variance increases, and then
it decreases rapidly when a measurement is available. This is as expected, and it is an
indicator that the filter is working properly. The covariance is the same for all the synthetic
data. Therefore, the plot is not included in the next ones.
62
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:73==
(a) The movement of platform vessel
and target vessel in the geodetic ref­
erence frame. The movement starts in
the red cross and ends in the red dia­
mond.
(b) The movement of the target ves­
sel in the body reference frame. The
movement starts in the red cross and
ends in the red diamond.
Figure 4.8: Second synthetic test data
(a) The movement of the target ves­
sel in the body reference frame. The
movement starts in the red cross and
ends in the red diamond.
(b) The the relative absolute distance
for the vessel
(c) The relative rotation of the target
vessel in the body reference frame
Figure 4.9: Second synthetic data tracking with Kalman Filter with various steps between
measurements
The second test with synthetic data can be seen in figure 4.8 for the movement in space.
See figure C.1 for the same graphs as the first test. The difference between the first and
Radar Integrity Monitoring
63
==PAGE:74==
second tests is that the platform vessel starts moving with a speed of 5m
s ≈9.7kn. Looking
at this in the body reference frame, this would be equivalent to the platform vessel being
still and the target vessel having a speed of 10 m
s ≈19.4kn.
The performance of the Error State Kalman Filter also shows that the two tests are very
similar, which can be seen in figure 4.9, position change over time can be seen in figure
C.2. By looking at the position, it can be seen that it has a similar error in the early parts.
Around the same time as before, the errors become small. The main difference can be
seen in the amplitude of the error and the distance in the body reference frame that the
vessel has moved before it is handled. Both of these metrics are roughly doubled. This
is because the case comes down to the relative speed of the target vessel being doubled
compared to before.
Looking at the orientation instead, it can be seen that it is almost identical to the prior test.
It also makes sense since the estimation of the relative orientation of the target vessel
should not change since the true relative orientation of the target vessel has not changed.
In this model, the vessel’s speed does not influence its orientation.
(a) The movement of the platform vessel
and target vessel in the geodetic reference
frame. The movement starts in the red cross
and ends in the red diamond.
(b) The movement of the target vessel in
the body reference frame. The movement
starts in the red cross and ends in the red
diamond.
Figure 4.10: Third synthetic test data
The third test introduces a bit more variation. First, it has a new starting point for the
target vessel, which moves it further east. It also introduces an angular velocity of 1
◦
s for
the platform vessel, which results in it making a circle.
Figure 4.10 shows the result of this change, while all the graphs can be seen in figure C.3.
First, looking at figure 4.10a does not look like a fully circular movement. This is because
it is in the geodetic coordinate frame, which does not have equal lengths of latitude and
longitude, especially at points far from the equator. Another thing worth noting can be
seen in figure 4.10b. Here, it can be seen that the target vessel’s position in the body
reference frame is an outward spiral.
The change of orientation can be seen in the performance of the Error State Kalman Filter,
which can be seen in figure 4.11. To see the relative x and y distance over time, see figure
C.4. It is especially clear for the simulation, where the measurement happens every ten
times. Looking at the distance, it can be seen that the error increases the most when the
orientation is the furthest away from the initial orientation. For the simulations that have
measurements every five steps or more often, it can be seen that they do not accumulate
64
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:75==
to the extent that is highly problematic for the virtual radar. This should not be problematic
for the real­world scenario since it should have measurements more often than every 30
seconds.
Looking at the orientation instead, it can be seen that the estimations follow the ground
truth rather well. One of the estimations has many jumps quite a bit around the 90th
time step. It looks like a lot, but it is primarily due to the heading being constrained to be
between 0◦and 360◦, which is in the area around the shift between them. This is to be
expected with the measurement noise.
The last test can be seen in figure 4.12 with all graphs in figure C.5. Instead of the platform
vessel moving in a circle, it is the target vessel that has a circular motion. The main
difference can be seen in figure 4.12b, where instead of a spiral, it has a soft curve which
suddenly changes direction. The target vessel also has a different initial heading. This is,
however, not seen clearly in the plot.
Figure 4.13 shows the Error State Kalman Filter’s performance for the last test. All graphs
(a) The movement of the target vessel in the
body reference frame. The movement starts
with the red cross and ends with the red di­
amond.
(b) The the relative absolute distance for the
vessel
(c) The relative rotation of the target vessel
in the body reference frame. The movement
starts in the red cross and ends in the red
diamond.
Figure 4.11: Third synthetic data tracking with Kalman Filter with various steps between
measurements
Radar Integrity Monitoring
65
==PAGE:76==
(a) The movement of the platform ves­
sel and target vessel in the geodetic
reference frame. The movement starts
in the red cross and ends in the red di­
amond.
(b) The movement of the target ves­
sel in the body reference frame. The
movement starts in the red cross and
ends in the red diamond.
Figure 4.12: Fourth synthetic test data
(a) The movement of the target ves­
sel in the body reference frame. The
movement starts in the red cross and
ends in the red diamond.
(b) The the relative absolute distance
for the vessel
(c) The relative rotation of the target
vessel in the body reference frame
Figure 4.13: Fourth synthetic data tracking with Kalman Filter with various steps between
measurements
can be seen in figure C.6. It can be seen that it has much the same performance as the
third test. This is also to be expected since it is primarily a change of perspective.
66
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:77==
(a) The movement of Hamlet in the
body reference frame. The movement
starts in the red cross and ends in the
red diamond.
(b) The movement of Hamlet in the x
direction
(c) The relative orientation of Hamlet
(d) The movement of Hamlet in the y
direction
Figure 4.14: Test on real data with tracking the vessel Hamlet
With the synthetic test completed successfully, it is time to test the Error State Kalman
Filter on some real data.
4.3.2
Performance of Error State Kalman Filter on real data
The Error State Kalman Filter is tested on real data in the last part of this chapter. This
is done by tracking the vessel Hamlet with the MMSI number 219622000. It was chosen
since it was easy to find in both the visual and AIS data.
The performance of the filter can be seen in figure 4.14. It can be seen that the Error
State Kalman Filter follows the visual measurement a lot. This is likely due to the visual
part providing measurements at every time step. Compared to the AIS, they are still close
to each other for a long time.
It is worth noting that the distance in x and for the first 300s has a step­like behaviour, which
comes from the visual measurements. However, this does have roughly the same overall
behaviour as the AIS measurements. When the visual data becomes more smooth, it can
be seen that the filter estimation behaves the same way.
Looking at the orientation, it can be seen that the filter also follows the vision measure­
ments for this metric. Looking at the sudden change in orientation, which happens at
around 650 seconds, it can be seen that the filter makes it robust to this change. It is very
positive.
Radar Integrity Monitoring
67
==PAGE:78==
The overall performance of the Error State Kalman Filter is satisfactory to ensure that the
estimate can be used to track an object. This is under the assumption that the majority
of measurements are within the expected noise. Should the AIS or visual measurements
consistently make bad measurements, the filter cannot estimate the states of the object
correctly.
68
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 5
Radar Integrity Monitoring
The following chapter describes how the integrity of the radar is monitored. It starts by
introducing the theoretical foundation for fault detection. This is in general terms, and it
introduces the mathematics behind a specific change detection algorithm.
The chapter then continues by describing how fault detection is implemented. First, it
explains how the residuals are created and then analyses them. Then, it describes the
concrete implementation of the algorithm.
The last part of the chapter evaluates the performance of integrity monitoring. The first
tests are on synthetically generated data, and then they continue to try it out on real data.
5.1
Fault detection
When talking about faults, one generally means something which interrupts normal be­
haviour. These faults can be due to malfunctioning hardware, but as described in the
section 2.2.1, it can also be external agents that want to interrupt the system’s function.
Fault detection is the field which explores whether a fault has happened to a system.
A general dynamic system consists of a time series of inputs, U, and corresponding out­
puts, Y, measured at discrete time points. It is usually not possible to inspect the sys­
tem directly. Therefore, it is necessary to use knowledge of the inputs and outputs and
how these are connected through the dynamic system. This connection is described in a
model, which the diagnostic algorithm uses to determine whether a fault has occurred.
A diagnostic algorithm is commonly built on the principle of system consistency. System
consistency means that the system’s outputs are as expected when looking at its inputs.
A benefit of this principle is that one does not need knowledge of how the system behaves
during a specific fault to check whether a fault has occurred. If it is known how a specific
fault influences the system, it is also possible to isolate the fault, which can be used to fix
the issue.
One way to build a consistency­based fault detection algorithm is through residuals. A
residual is defined as
r(t) = y(t) −ˆy(t)
(5.1)
where y(t) is the measurement of the system and ˆy(t) is the estimated output for the
given input. Because of this definition, it is expected that the residual should be 0 when
the system is without a fault.
There are several ways to generate the residuals. One approach to this is through a
Kalman Filter, described in the section 4.1. The Kalman Filter was initially made to esti­
mate the states, but the output can easily be calculated from these [13].
Radar Integrity Monitoring
69
==PAGE:80==
5.1.1
Change detection algorithms
When a residual has been obtained, it is necessary to detect whether a fault has occurred.
A residual should, in theory, always be 0, but this is rarely the case due to noise and
potential unmodelled parts in the system. Therefore, it is instead necessary to make a
metric to say how likely it is that a fault has occurred.
More formally, you want to test which of the two hypotheses is correct. The first H0 is the
nominal case, while H1 is that a change has happened. These have the parameters θ0
and θ1, where the parameters for the nominal case are known.
A general approach for the change detection algorithms is Neyman­Pearson’s approach.
Here, one has a measurement z with the probability density function of this measurement
as p(z). In the case that the system is fault­free, the probability density function is p(z) =
pθ0(z), while when the system is faulty, it is instead p(z) = pθ1(z).
With these two different probability density functions, you want to know which function the
measurement belongs to. One measure to make this decision is the ratio between these.
Since the residuals should be Gaussian, the log­likelihood ratio gives some excellent
properties for calculation.
s(z) = ln pθ1(z)
pθ0(z)
(5.2)
This ratio has the following statistical properties:
Eθ0(s) =
∫∞
−∞
s(z)pθ0dz < 0
(5.3)
Eθ1(s) =
∫∞
−∞
s(z)pθ1dz > 0
(5.4)
Here, Eθ0 is the expected value of s(z) when the actual probability density function is pθ0.
Likewise, Eθ1 is the expected value of s(z) when the actual probability density function is
pθ1. This property can be used to raise the alarm since it is relatively easy to check which
of the distributions a series of measurements belongs to.
There are several ways that a system can fail. The Generalised Likelihood Ratio (GLR)
algorithm is one way to do this. For the following analysis that leads to the GLR algorithm
used here, it is assumed that the two hypotheses are:
H0 : L(z(i)) = N(µ0, Q)
(5.5)
H1 : L(z(i)) = N(µ0 + ˜ρ(i −k0)ν, Q)
(5.6)
The nominal case assumes a multidimensional Gaussian distribution with mean µ0 and
covariance Q. Both of these values are known. For the alternative hypothesis, the co­
variance remains the same, while the mean has been changing by a known vector profile
˜ρ(i−j) that is scaled by an unknown factor ν. This fault happens at time instant k0 and for
i < k0 the vector profile is ˜ρ(i −j) = 0. It is also assumed that the input z(i) is Gaussian
distributed and independent of each other.
The log­likelihood function between the two hypotheses is then,
70
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:81==
Sk
j (ν) =
k
∑
i=j
ln
pµ0 + ˜ρ(i−j)ν(z(i))
pµ0(z(i))
= ν
k
∑
i=j
˜ρ(i−j)⊤Q−1(z(i)−µ0)−ν2
2
k
∑
i=j
˜ρ(i−j)⊤Q−1˜ρ(i−j)
(5.7)
Besides the already seen values, j is a hypothetical time for when the fault happened.
By taking the differential concerning ν and equating it to 0, it is possible to estimate the
magnitude of the change as follows.
ˆν(k, j) =
∑k
i=j ˜ρ(i −j)⊤Q−1(z(i) −µ0)
∑k
i=j ˜ρ(i −j)⊤Q−1˜ρ(i −j)
(5.8)
This estimation can now be inserted into equation 5.7, which can be used to make a
decision formula, g(k).
g(k) =
max
k−M+1≤j<k
(
max
ν
Sk
j (ν)
)
=
max
k−M+1≤j<k

ˆν(k, j)
k
∑
i=j
˜ρ(i −j)⊤Q−1(z(i) −µ0) −ˆν(k, j)2
2
k
∑
i=j
˜ρ(i −j)⊤Q−1˜ρ(i −j)


(5.9)
Here, M is the number of measurements that should be kept for the change detection.
This ensures that a bad reading does not trigger an alarm. A fault detection system is not
worth much if people do not trust it because it keeps raising false alarms.
Since the distribution for a fault detection algorithm has an average of zero, µ0 = 0,
it is possible to simplify these equations. If, simultaneously, you also assume that the
dynamical profile of the error is a constant, ˜ρ, the equations become even simpler. By
first looking at equation 5.8 it becomes
ˆν(k, j) =
∑k
i=j ˜ρ⊤Q−1z(i)
(k −j)˜ρ⊤Q−1˜ρ
(5.10)
This new equation can be inserted into equation 5.9, which, with this and the new as­
sumptions, simplifies to
g(k) =
max
k−M+1≤j<k



∑k
i=j ˜ρ⊤Q−1z(i)
(k −j)˜ρ⊤Q−1˜ρ
∑
˜ρ⊤Q−1z(i) −
(∑k
i=j ˜ρ⊤Q−1z(i)
)2
2
(
(k −j)˜ρ⊤Q−1˜ρ
)2 (k −j)˜ρ⊤Q−1˜ρ


=
max
k−M+1≤j<k



(∑k
i=j ˜ρ⊤Q−1z(i)
)2
(k −j)˜ρ⊤Q−1˜ρ
−
(∑k
i=j ˜ρ⊤Q−1z(i)
)2
2(k −j)˜ρ⊤Q−1˜ρ


=
max
k−M+1≤j<k



(∑k
i=j ˜ρ⊤Q−1z(i)
)2
2(k −j)˜ρ⊤Q−1˜ρ



(5.11)
This decision formula is used in the GLR algorithm to raise an alarm. The general algo­
rithm follows the following steps at each time sample:
Radar Integrity Monitoring
71
==PAGE:82==
1. Acquire new data z(k)
2. Compute g(k)
3. Raise alarm if g(k) > h
The previous section shows that the GLR algorithm has two overall tuning parameters,
M and h. The two influence the detection time, the time between false alarms, and the
memory consumption of the algorithm. Therefore, most of the time tuning should be spent
on these connected such that a lower M also requires a lower h if the risk of not finding
an error does not increase.
To get an initial idea of the size of the threshold, h, it is possible to use the following
formula
h = F −1(1 −α; M)
(5.12)
where F is the distribution’s cumulative density function (CDF) of the distribution and α is
the confidence of getting a false alarm [13].
5.2
Implementation of fault detection
The following section describes how fault detection has been implemented. The first part
explains how the residuals were obtained. Afterwards, these residuals will be analysed
before the fault detection is implemented.
The fault handled is a rotation of the radar data.
5.2.1
Creating residuals
Two residuals are created for the fault detection algorithm: one for the land and one for
the ships and buoys. These two approaches are chosen because they have different
characteristics, which will be shown later.
Land
The residual for matching the radar readings with the shorelines in the ENC is based
on estimating the vessel’s position and heading from the radar readings. This approach
is based on paper [4]. Here, it is shown that it is possible to estimate the position and
heading by matching the radar readings to the ENC.
When the radar is fault­free, the difference between the estimated and GNSS positions
should be zero. The same is the case for the heading. Should there be a fault on the radar,
then it would also affect the position and heading estimation. This would then result in the
difference between the estimation and measurement should no longer be zero.
The first step in describing the approach of the localisation algorithm is to look at a single
point from the radar. For this point, it is calculated how like it is on the shoreline. First, the
minimum Euclidean distance is calculated:
D(p, M) = min ||Tp0(p)||, ∀p0 ∈M
(5.13)
In this equation, p is the point, M is all the points in the shoreline, Tp0 is a transformation
into a local geodetic reference frame, and p0 is the centre of the local geodetic reference
frame.
With this, the likelihood of the point being on the shoreline can be calculated:
72
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:83==
L(z|xk, M) ≜phit
1
√
2πσLFM
e
−1
2
(
D(zgeo,M)2
2σ2
LF M
)
+
1
ρmax
prandom
(5.14)
Here, zgeo is the radar reading, z, in the geodetic reference frame, ρmax is the maximum
distance of the radar readings, and xk is the vessel’s position and heading at time step k.
The last parameters phit, prandom, and σLFM are parameters that can be chosen. They can
loosely be defined as phit being the proportions of radar points that are on the shoreline,
prandom as the likelihood of a radar reading being false, and σLFM is the standard deviation
of the distances.
This probability function is then used to calculate the probability of each point. To get a
combined metric, all these are summed:
L(Zk|xk, M) =
∑
z∈Zk
L(z|xk, M)
(5.15)
Here, Zk is all the radar points in a radar reading at time k. This differs from the paper,
where it is instead a product. The change is made to ensure that the change in position
and heading becomes evident in the likelihood function. Here, the product had a risk of
obscuring it because the data far from the shore could significantly lower the total value.
With the total likelihood calculated, it is possible to start the estimation of the position is
possible. This is done by finding the position and heading, which maximises the likelihood
that the radar measurement matches the ENC:
ˆxk = arg max
xk
L(Zk|xk, M)
(5.16)
Optimising ˆx is an iterative process. The paper used the Particle Swarm Optimisation
(PSO) algorithm to find this optimal point. It will also be implemented here since it has
been shown to work. The idea behind this is to initialise several particles within an area in
the vector space and let them move around based on both their knowledge of the overall
swarm’s best position for the swarm’s movement and their knowledge of the best position
for its movement.
The first part initialises the algorithm. Here, N particles are created the following way:
xi(0) = U(xmin, xmax)
(5.17)
with U(xmin, xmax) is a uniform distribution in the area where the optimisation should take
place. A fitness score, f(xi) is calculated for each particle. The particle with the best
fitness score is saved as the global best, g [54]. The initialisation can be different. In this,
it will be the SPSO 2011 standard is used [55]:
vi(0) = U(xmin −xi(0), xmax)
(5.18)
With the initialisation, the next part is to run through the rest of the algorithm. This part is
run n times. It starts with updating the velocity for each of the N points:
Radar Integrity Monitoring
73
==PAGE:84==
vi(k + 1) = wvi(k) + ϕpr1(xbest
i
−xi(k)) + ϕqr2(g −xi(k))
(5.19)
Here w, ϕp, and ϕq are the tuning parameters of the algorithm. r1 and r2 are random uni­
formly distributed numbers in the interval between 0 and 1. These are generated in every
iteration of the algorithm. The last variable not described is xbest
i
, which is the position
where the particle had the best fitness score.
As mentioned, there are three tuning parameters. The first, w, is an inertia constant and
should have a value below 1. If it is larger, the algorithm will likely diverge. ϕp is called the
cognitive coefficient. This is because it looks at its position. The constant, ϕq, is called
the social constant because it looks at the group’s overall position. Both ϕp and ϕq can
be initially set to around 2 and be tuned from there.
With this new velocity, it is possible to update the position of the particle:
xi(k + 1) = xi(k) + vi(k + 1)
(5.20)
Lastly, the fitness score is calculated for the particle. If it is better, then xi(k + 1) will be
considered the new xbest
i
. This will also be compared with g, and it becomes the new
global best if it is better [54].
In the case of this project, the chosen parameters are:
xmin =
[
−0.004
−0.01
−180
]⊤
(5.21)
xmin =
[
0.004
0.01
90
]⊤
(5.22)
w = 0.8
(5.23)
ϕp = 1.8
(5.24)
ϕq = 2
(5.25)
The position has been chosen since it corresponds to an error radius of around 500m,
and the heading can be the entire rotation in error. The others have been found through
experimentation.
Buoys and ships
The approach to creating residuals for the buoys and ships is quite different from the land
case. Here, a residual is created for each buoy and ship. The object is matched to a
radar reading then transformed into the body reference frame. The residual for the single
object becomes:
robj =
[xres
yres
]
=
[xvirtual
yvirtual
]
−
[xradar
yradar
]
(5.26)
Here, the coordinates with the subscript with virtual are from the virtual radar, while the
ones with the subscript radar are from the radar readings.
The approach to matching the buoys and ships to a radar target is a naive approach.
Each object is compared to all radar readings, and the closest radar reading is assumed
to be the correct one. More sophisticated approaches might be possible, but for this initial
investigation, it is deemed sufficient.
74
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:85==
When all the residuals have been calculated, the final residual becomes:
rtotal = 1
N
∑
robj∈Robj
robj
(5.27)
Here, it iterates through all the found residuals, Robj, and takes the average of it. This
residual, rtotal, will be used in the fault detection algorithm.
5.2.2
Residual analysis
The following section analyses the residuals. This analysis is done on both synthetic and
real radar data. The synthetic data is generated from the real data by taking all the points
from the land, buoys, and ships and adding noise to the distance, bearing, and amplitude.
The noise was:
Wdistance = N(0, 10m)
(5.28)
Wbearing = N(0, 1◦)
(5.29)
Wamplitude = B(10, 1)
(5.30)
B describes the beta distribution.
Besides this, 150 points were uniformly scattered around the radar readings:
prandom =
[
U(0, ρ)
U(0◦, 360◦), Wamplitude
]
(5.31)
Land
Table 5.1 shows some relevant statistical parameters for the land residual. Looking at the
synthetic data first, it can be seen that the variation and the mean are minimal. This is
because most of the residuals were the zero vector, with some few that deviated. The
covariance matrix for the measurements is:
Qsynthetic =


1.050 · 10−13m2
−5.733 · 10−6m2
1.069 · 10−2m◦
−5.733 · 10−6m2
6.404 · 10−12m2
1.078 · 10−1m◦
1.069 · 10−2m◦
1.078 · 10−1m◦
1.660 · 10−4(◦)2


(5.32)
These measurements indicate that the residual is very robust. Since most residuals are
zero, plotting them does not make sense. Since they are so small, they can be assumed
to be Gaussian.
(a) Autocorrelation for the x
part of the land residual
(b) Autocorrelation for the y
part of the land residual
(c) Autocorrelation for the θ
part of the land residual
Figure 5.1: Autocorrelation for the residual when generated from the synthetic data
Radar Integrity Monitoring
75
==PAGE:86==
x
y
θ
Mean synthetic, µsynthetic
−1.272 · 10−8m
−2.429 · 10−8m
2.325 · 10−4 ◦
Variance synthetic, σ2
synthetic
1.050 · 10−13m2
6.404 · 10−12m2
1.660 · 10−4 (◦)2
Mean real, µreal
9.064 · 10−4m
5.873 · 10−3m
−25.46◦
Variance real, σ2
real
2.728 · 10−6m2
4.376 · 10−6m2
1.670 · 103 (◦)2
Mean real turned, µreal,rot
−1.087 · 10−3m
5.563 · 10−3m
−30.22◦
Variance real turned, σ2
real,rot
3.691 · 10−6m2
6.870 · 10−6m2
2.904 · 103 (◦)2
Table 5.1: Parameters for the land residual
Another assumption for the GLR algorithm is that each sample is independent. To inves­
tigate this, the autocorrelation for the three parts in the residual is plotted in figure 5.1.
Here, it can be seen that only the sample itself has any correlation. Therefore, it can be
seen that the samples are independent.
With this and the assumption of Gaussian distribution, the residual upholds the conditions
for the GLR algorithm.
Going on to the real radar data, it can be seen that its mean is further away from zero. It
is especially visible in the heading. It is also clear that it has a larger variance. Combined,
it has the covariance matrix:
Qreal =


2.728 · 10−6m2
2.011 · 10−7m2
3.560 · 10−2m◦
2.011 · 10−7m2
4.376 · 10−6m2
6.360 · 10−2m◦
3.560 · 10−2m◦
6.360 · 10−2m◦
1.670 · 103(◦)2


(5.33)
(a) Distribution of the x resid­
ual
(b) Distribution of the y resid­
ual
(c) Distribution of the θ resid­
ual
Figure 5.2: Land residual for real radar data plotted in a histogram.
Figure 5.2 shows the three parts of the residuals plotted in a histogram. The heading
shows that it has a few outliers around −200◦, which can explain the significant variance
and why the mean is so relatively far from zero. For the other two, it is not as extreme.
Their distributions are closer to being Gaussian except for a few bins much larger than
expected.
As with the synthetic data, the autocorrelation has been and can be seen in figure 5.3. It
can also be seen that it is not entirely uncorrelated. However, all of the data points have
a correlation below 0.2. Even though it can be discussed whether it fulfils the condition of
being independent, it is deemed close enough, and it should be possible to use the GLR
algorithm to detect changes.
76
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:87==
(a) Autocorrelation for the x
part of the land residual
(b) Autocorrelation for the y
part of the land residual
(c) Autocorrelation for the θ
part of the land residual
Figure 5.3: Autocorrelation for the land residual when generated from the real radar data.
Figure 5.4a shows the radar data as an overlay on the virtual radar. Looking at the left
part of the image, it seems like a mismatch between the virtual and real radars. This can
be because the radar and the heading measurement sensors are not perfectly aligned. To
correct this, the radar data is rotated 8◦, as shown in figure 5.4b. This looks like it aligns
much better. Therefore, it is also analysed when this change has been applied.
(a) Radar measurements not rotated
(b) Radar measurements rotated 8◦
Figure 5.4: Virtual radar, yellow, with the true radar measurements, blue, put on top
These results can also be seen in table 5.1. Here, it can be seen that the difference
between the coordinates is not that big from one to the other. For the heading, however, it
can be seen that the mean is further from zero, and the variance is larger. The covariance
matrix is:
Qreal,rot =


3.691 · 10−6m2
2.712 · 10−7m2
3.543 · 10−2m◦
2.712 · 10−7m2
6.870 · 10−6m2
1.178 · 10−1m◦
3.543 · 10−2m◦
1.178 · 10−1m◦
2.904 · 103(◦)2


(5.34)
The histograms can be seen illustrated in figure 5.5. It looks like the histograms for the
radar data were not rotated. The main difference is the normal distributions are a bit wider,
and the heading residual has more measurements that can look like outliers.
Radar Integrity Monitoring
77
==PAGE:88==
(a) Distribution of the x resid­
ual
(b) Distribution of the y resid­
ual
(c) Distribution of the θ resid­
ual
Figure 5.5: Land residual for real radar data turned 8◦plotted in a histogram.
The autocorrelation for the residuals obtained from the rotated radar data can be seen in
figure 5.6. This has a few points having a larger correlation than 0.2. It is not optimal, but
it should not be in an amount that would breach the independence assumption.
(a) Autocorrelation for the x
part of the land residual
(b) Autocorrelation for the y
part of the land residual
(c) Autocorrelation for the θ
part of the land residual
Figure 5.6: Autocorrelation for the land residual when generated from the real radar data
turned 8◦
Buoys and ships
The statistics for the next residual can be seen in table 5.2. By once again starting with
the synthetical data, a covariance matrix can be created:
Qsynthetic =
[3039.94m2
257.04m2
257.04m2
2886.06m2
]
(5.35)
This has much more variance than the synthetical data for the land residual. Therefore,
the two parts are plotted in figure 5.7. Looking at the figure, it can be seen that it does
not fully follow a normal distribution. The main difference can be seen at the centre of the
distribution, where it is a bit higher than expected for the normal distribution. The differ­
ence, however, is not more than the residual can still be assumed to follow the Gaussian
distribution.
Figure 5.8 shows the autocorrelation for the ships and buoys residual generated from
the synthetic data. It can be seen that almost all the points are within the 0.05 correla­
tion boundaries. Together with the data being almost Gaussian distributed, it should be
possible to use the GLR algorithm for change detection.
The next step is to look at the real radar data. Looking at the mean and the variance, it
78
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:89==
(a) Distribution of the x residual
(b) Distribution of the y residual
Figure 5.7: Ships’ and buoys’ residual for synthetic radar data plotted in a histogram.
(a) Autocorrelation for the x
part of the land residual
(b) Autocorrelation for the y
part of the land residual
Figure 5.8: Autocorrelation for the ships and buoys residual when generated from syn­
thetic radar data turned.
can be seen that it is no longer distributed around zero, and its spread is much larger.
The covariance matrix is:
Qreal =
[ 349723m2
−498649m2
−498649m2
1001351m2
]
(5.36)
The data is also illustrated in figure 5.9. Here, it can be seen that the x component has
most of its data distributed around −800. If one ignores the large spike in the middle,
it can be seen that most of the remaining data does follow a normal distribution rather
well, though the mean is not as expected. For the y component, it can be seen that it is
closer to being distributed at around zero. It has a few substantial entries and a spike in
the middle. This is, however, not so much that it cannot be approximated with a normal
x
y
Mean synthetic, µsynthetic
−6.70m
0.837m
Variance synthetic, σ2
synthetic
3039.94m2
2886.06m2
Mean real, µreal
−1012.7m
187.3m
Variance real, σ2
real
3.497105m2
1.001106m2
Mean real rotated, µreal,rot
−548.82m
15.31m
Variance real rotated, σ2
real,rot
2.163105m2
3.417105m2
Table 5.2: Parameters for the object residual
Radar Integrity Monitoring
79
==PAGE:90==
(a) Distribution of the x residual
(b) Distribution of the y residual
Figure 5.9: Ships’ and buoys’ residual for real radar data plotted in a histogram.
distribution.
The autocorrelation, shown in figure 5.10, shows that most points are within the 0.2 bound­
ary. At lag 15, however, a single point is much larger than 0.5. If ignoring that point, the
rest of the data can be considered good as uncorrelated.
(a) Autocorrelation for the x part of
the land residual
(b) Autocorrelation for the y part of
the land residual
Figure 5.10: Autocorrelation for the ships and buoys residual when generated from the
real radar data turned 8◦
Due to the potential misalignment between the heading and the radar heading that was
shown earlier, it is also analysed for the ships and buoys residual. Looking at table 5.2
and comparing it to the data that is not rotated, it can be seen that the mean is much closer
to zero. It also has much less variance, especially for the y component. The covariance
matrix for it is:
Qreal,rot =
[ 216315m2
−243116m2
−243116m2
341657m2
]
(5.37)
The mean and variance are visualised with a histogram in figure 5.11. It can be seen that
the overall distributions look much alike. The main difference is that the x component is
closer to zero. It is, however, still not distributed around that point.
The last part of the analysis of the residual is the autocorrelation, which can be seen in
figure 5.12. It can be seen that it does have a slightly lower correlation overall. However,
it still has a single point at lag 15, which is much larger than the rest. Putting this point
aside, this can also be seen as the residuals being independent.
80
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:91==
(a) Distribution of the x residual
(b) Distribution of the y residual
Figure 5.11: Ships’ and buoys’ residual for real radar data plotted in a histogram.
5.2.3
Fault detection algorithm
In the above section, it has been shown that the distributions, especially the ones on real
radar data, do not follow a Normal Gaussian Distribution. It has, however, been decided to
implement the GLR algorithm introduced in section 5.1.1. First of all, it is a relatively easy
algorithm to implement, and the distributions should be close enough to Gaussian to work
as proof of concept. Secondly, it will work as a benchmark to which future implementations
of a change detection algorithm for radar faults can be compared.
During the analysis of the residuals, two versions of the real radar data were analysed, one
that was rotated 8◦and one that was not. In the end, it ended up being the version without
the rotation that has been implemented in the fault detection algorithm. It is because
the residual for the land matching is closer to being Gaussian distributed around zero,
whereas none of the two residuals for the object matching did that.
The algorithm has been implemented as a class in Python, making it easy to track the two
residuals as objects. First, it is initialised with the covariance, alarm threshold, window
size, error vector profile, and residual dimension. This makes it adjustable to the specific
use case. It also creates space to save the amount of residuals corresponding to the
window size.
The two main functions are update_GLR and decision_function. The update_GLR takes
and stores the newest residual while throwing out the oldest residual. After that, it up­
dates the decision function with decision_function before checking if the alarm should be
triggered. decision_function uses the equations described in section 5.1.1.
(a) Autocorrelation for the x
part of the land residual
(b) Autocorrelation for the y
part of the land residual
Figure 5.12: Autocorrelation for the ships and buoys residual when generated from the
real radar data turned 8◦
Radar Integrity Monitoring
81
==PAGE:92==
Under the assumption of Gaussian distribution, the initial guess for the threshold can be
found. The CDF is a chi­squared distribution since it is a series of normally distributed
measurements. By selecting the window size to be 15 and the certainty of a false alarm
probability to 10−5, it can be found to be
h = F −1(1 −10−5, 15) = 50.49
(5.38)
This will be investigated further when describing the implementation for the specific resid­
ual. The window size was chosen to be 15 because it makes it possible to detect changes
within 30 seconds. At the same time, it also helps uphold the assumption of the samples
being independent by excluding the high correlation found at a lag of 15 in the residual
analysis. The false alarm probability has been set very low because too many false alarms
will lower the trust in the system, and it risks having the users disregard the alarms when
a fault actually happens.
Land
The cumulative density functions are evaluated to determine whether the threshold is
correct. In figure 5.13, this can be seen for the decision function for the land residual.
Starting by looking at the synthetic data, it can be seen that the calculated threshold
would give a probability lower than 0.01 for a false detection. It is a great probability but
not at the desired level. Therefore, the threshold is set to:
hland,syn = 160
(5.39)
This should ensure that the false alarm rate is very low. However, since the sample size
is limited, no guarantees can be made.
(a) Cumulative Density Function for
synthetic radar data
(b) Cumulative Density Function for
real radar data
Figure 5.13: Cumulative Density Functions for the decision function for the land residual
fault detection object. The dashed line is the desired false alarm probability.
Looking at the CDF for the real radar data instead shows that the threshold calculated will
not prevent a false alarm. Therefore, it will have to be much larger:
hland,real = 2.5 · 107
(5.40)
This should make it possible to prevent false alarms in fault­free cases. From the residual
analysis, it was also expected that the assumption of a Gaussian distribution would not
hold, so it makes sense that it should be larger.
82
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:93==
Buoys and ships
The same analysis is necessary for the land residual decision functions. The CDF for
the synthetic and real data cases can be seen in figure 5.14. The first thing worth noting
is that the CDF for the synthetic function is not near fulfilling the threshold. This is even
though the residual is relatively close to a Gaussian distribution. For it to minimise the
risk of having a false detection, the threshold is set to:
hobject,syn = 9 · 107
(5.41)
(a) Cumulative Density Function for
synthetic radar data
(b) Cumulative Density Function for
real radar data
Figure 5.14: Cumulative Density Functions for the decision function for the object residual
fault detection object. The dashed line is the desired false alarm probability.
The CDF is graphed in figure 5.14b for the last decision function. It can be seen that its
metric is much larger. To have a proper threshold for the false alarm rate to be low enough
for the design, it has to be set to:
hobject,real = 3.5 · 1012
(5.42)
With this value, it should have a false alarm probability of 1 · 10−5.
5.3
Performance of the fault detection algorithm
The following part evaluates the fault detection algorithm’s performance. First, it shows
the algorithm’s performance on synthetically generated radar data before proceeding to
real radar data.
The test compares a run with no fault with a test run where the radar data has been rotated
by 40◦. This error is introduced at the start of the test run.
5.3.1
Synthetic radar data
Since the two fault detection algorithms work independently, they will be presented indi­
vidually. The results for the land residual are shown in the figure 5.15. It can be seen that
the one without a fault behaves very nicely, with a value most often close to zero. It has a
few spikes around 50 and 250, where it increases. However, setting the threshold at the
point it has been will not result in a false alarm.
In the faulty run, the decision function goes high very fast. The algorithm raises the alarm
within the first few samples. It also stays high for the full extent of the test run. The level
of the decision metric is several orders of magnitude larger than the non­faulty case.
Radar Integrity Monitoring
83
==PAGE:94==
(a) Decision function for non­faulty run
(b) Decision function for non­faulty run
Figure 5.15: Decision function for synthetically generated radar data for the land residual.
Carrying on to the buoys and ships residual instead. This fault detection object also per­
forms well, as shown in figure 5.16. The non­faulty case has a decision function hovering
around 1·107 with some spikes going much higher. This is quite a bit higher than the case
for the land residual, and it is still below the threshold set for this algorithm.
(a) Decision function for non­faulty run
(b) Decision function for non­faulty run
Figure 5.16: Decision function for synthetically generated radar data for the ships and
buoys residual.
However, compared to the faulty run, the decision function is several orders of magnitude
larger in this case. The alarm is raised after around three samples, corresponding to six
seconds.
Overall, it does not matter which of the two residuals is used for this data. Both perform
very well with the synthetic radar data in this scenario and can quickly alert the necessary
entities.
5.3.2
Real radar data
The last part is the test on the real data. These were made with only 50 samples. The
simulation time was very high, so it was the only feasible thing to do.
The land residual decision function can be seen in figure 5.17. In the fault­free case, it
can be seen that it is much more volatile than the case for the synthetic data. It can be
seen that it has several spikes, where the one around sample 9 almost gets higher than
84
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:95==
the decision boundary. It does, however, not trigger a false alarm.
(a) Decision function for non­faulty run
(b) Decision function for non­faulty run
Figure 5.17: Decision function for real radar data for the land residual.
In the fault simulation, unlike in the synthetic case, it does not stay above the threshold.
It detects the fault the first time after five samples, but it increases again after that. This
bouncing up and down could imply that it will not be able to detect errors that are smaller
than the 40◦. Additionally, there might be times when it could not detect the error at all.
Continuing to the decision function for the object residual. This can be seen in figure 5.18.
The first thing worth noting is the false alarm it triggers around sample 26. It can also be
seen that it suddenly increases a lot around that time. Most of the time, however, it stays
quite a bit below the threshold.
(a) Decision function for non­faulty run
(b) Decision function for non­faulty run
Figure 5.18: Decision function for real radar data for the ships and buoys residual.
Lastly, the decision function for the object residual, where a fault is present, can be seen
in figure 5.17b. First of all, it is worth noting that in sample 25, the decision function will
trigger an alarm for the first time. This is the same time that the non­faulty case also
had a huge spike. This could indicate that a general fault might be present in the original
dataset. The second thing that can be noticed is that an alarm is triggered only one extra
time. Therefore, it is not sure that this decision function can detect faults at all since this
could also be a coincidence.
Overall, fault detection for real data is not very reliable at the moment. The land residual
Radar Integrity Monitoring
85
==PAGE:96==
decision function is the most reliable of the two, but even this might not detect a fault. The
next chapter will discuss some of the potential reasons.
86
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 6
Discussion
This chapter discusses the results from the previous chapters. The discussion focuses
on the system’s performance and what might have been done differently if more time had
been available.
6.1
Visual estimation
At the end of Chapter 2, it was clear that the solution did not work satisfactorily for esti­
mating the 3D coordinates, size, and orientation. It was, however, shown that the network
could detect the objects in the individual images. The performance was also improved
compared to the first attempts, and it was possible to get differentiated position estimates.
The first thing that could be improved is the amount of training data. For the project, 400
time steps have been annotated and could be used for the training. It is hard to say how
many images would be necessary for a decent performance. An order of magnitude more
images would likely be required. Another issue is that all the images were also taken at
the same time, which makes them very similar. The considerable similarity will make it
harder for the network to perform well in different environments and weather conditions.
Lastly, it could also be a benefit to make the data acquisition at a time when more leisure
vessels are sailing.
An obvious issue for the network is that it, at all times instances, predicts that exactly four
objects are present in the images. This is likely an issue related to how the features from
Faster R­CNN are forwarded into the 3D estimation parts of the network. Likely, the way
it is done at the moment loses some information. Some of this lost information could be
the certainty of the detection. Therefore, it should be investigated further how this can be
done in a way so the necessary information is kept.
Lastly, due to time constraints, integrating LWIR images was impossible. However, getting
them included at some later point will still be beneficial. It will potentially require training
an additional network that can extract the features from the LWIR images like the current
backbone network does for the RGB images. It was likely a poor choice to start out by
getting one network to extract such different data sources.
6.2
Virtual radar
Chapter 3 showed that tracking objects with information obtained from various sources
was possible. This gave an overview of the objects around the vessel. At the same time,
it was shown that this information could be transformed into a virtual radar to visualise it.
The overall performance of the fault detection objective was satisfactory. However, the
tracking could be improved to handle headings far away from the initial heading. One way
to handle this could be to include the error state in some regard when updating the error
state transition matrix. Another approach could be to find a way to reset the Error State
Radar Integrity Monitoring
87
==PAGE:98==
Figure 6.1: Virtual radar with the true radar measurements put on top marked in blue
Kalman Filter once in a while. Additional experimentation would be required to determine
whether it should be with a specific frequency or if another metric would be better for
determining the reset.
Although the visualisation does not directly influence the performance of the integrity mon­
itoring, it would be beneficial if it were also approved. Currently, the vessels are only drawn
as rectangles perpendicular to the axis of the body reference frame. It would be an im­
provement if it were possible to draw the orientation more clearly in the virtual radar to
give an observer a better understanding of how the vessel moves relative to one’s own
vessel.
6.3
Fault Detection
Overall, fault detection works very well for synthetic data, but it is not reliable for real data
yet. For the faulty synthetic radar data, the decision algorithms take a value several orders
of magnitude larger than that for the non­faulty synthetic radar data.
In the performance of the change detection algorithm, it can be seen that it is doing poorly
for the ships and buoys residual in the real radar data. With the analysis of the residual,
it is, however, to be expected since it is not zero mean.
Again, looking at the radar data being put on top of the virtual radar, see figure 6.1, it is
possible to see a potential reason. In the water, four buoys and one ship can be seen.
However, no radar measurement is close to many of them. It is especially clear for the
ship in mid­centre and the buoy almost all the way to the left.
The missing radar reading can be explained by the radar range setting for the measure­
ment campaign, which was 5655m. Figure 6.2 shows a radar measurement and the cor­
responding ENC for the area around the radar. In this measurement, the radar range
was set to 488m. Comparing the two images, it is easy to see that the buoys can be
seen on the radar. Therefore, it would be great to test this implementation in more depth,
where the radar setting is much shorter. This should make it easier for the radar to detect
the smaller targets such as the buoys. Investigating whether it will positively impact land
matching would also be interesting.
88
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:99==
(a) Radar measurement taken in Limfjor­
den July 2022. The buoys are marked with
green circles
(b) ENC for the area around the radar mea­
surement
Figure 6.2: Radar measurement and ENC for earlier measurement campaign.
The matching between the real and virtual radars for ships and buoys seems to work for
the synthetic data. However, it would be possible to make it much more robust if another
approach than the naive one, were implemented. This approach could use geometrical
properties where three or more objects were found in the virtual radar, and a polygon was
made from these points. This polygon should then be matched in the real radar instead.
To get even more robustness, an object could be part of several polygons, and a score
could be calculated depending on how confident the algorithm is of a point being a match.
Currently, the land residual is created by estimating the vessel’s position from the radar
data. It could be interesting to explore another approach, where it instead tries to match
land features from the geometric shape. This could be done by using the polygons that can
be extracted from ENC and comparing them to the boundaries of the object’s perimeter
that can be seen in the radar data. This way, creating one overall residual might also be
possible instead of having two parallel ones.
In this implementation, an approach has been used which assumes that the residuals are
Gaussian distributed. As shown in the residual analysis, this is not true. Therefore, it could
be interesting to see whether better performance could be achieved using another, more
suitable probability distribution. One suggestion could be the Kernel Density Estimation
(KDE) since it is possible to alter this much more so it better follows the acquired data.
Radar Integrity Monitoring
89
==PAGE:100==
90
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:101==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The project’s objective was to develop a virtual radar that could be utilised to monitor the
integrity of the data provided by the radar. The virtual radar was developed by fusing
information from cameras, AIS, ENC, and GNSS. The integrity was monitored through a
fault detection algorithm that used residuals that could be generated from radar and virtual
radar data.
Ultimately, it was impossible to develop a solution to make 3D estimations of the coordi­
nates, size, and orientation of an object the cameras saw. The final product did, however,
indicate that it will be possible with more development time and more annotated images.
The project also showed that tracking objects in a maritime environment is possible with
ENC, AIS, and GNSS data. The synthetic vision data also showed that this could be
added to improve tracking. It ended up being a well­performing tracker, which made it
possible to create residuals for radar fault detection.
Creating two different residuals, one for the land matching and one for the buoys and ships
matching, was a good approach. Both worked well in the tests made with the synthetically
generated radar data, where the two fault detection algorithms detected the fault rapidly.
The real radar data was less reliable. It was shown that it could detect faults, but it is not
as confident, and it might take a long time before the fault is discovered. However, it is a
great starting point for future work that can improve the fault detection algorithm.
Overall, the project showed that it is possible to make a radar integrity monitoring system
by combining AIS, ENC, and GNSS data with the potential for further improvement by
adding visual aids. Additional testing and development will have the potential to improve
the monitoring significantly.
7.1
Future work
In addition to the discussion above, other ways exist to improve and expand the project.
Some of these ideas will be described here.
In Chapter 2, it was described how radars can be modified in several different ways. How­
ever, this project only handles one specific fault mode. Therefore, exploring how other
failure modes can be managed is natural. This could be distortion in the range measure­
ment or targets that have been removed or added. Using some geometric dependencies
extracted from the virtual radar for the target faults would be beneficial.
Taking inspiration from the automotive industry again, it would be interesting to look into
making 3D estimations of all objects in the cameras’ view. Besides having an additional
source for matching with the ENC, it would also have the potential to find more objects in
the water if it knew what water looked like. It could help avoid collisions with small sailing
Radar Integrity Monitoring
91
==PAGE:102==
vessels, canoes, and dropped containers. It would also be a benefit when doing a search
and rescue operation.
To be able to do this, the first step would be to segment many images for a training dataset.
This will be a large task; it might be optimised using tools like Segment Anything from Meta
[56]. Another approach that could be interesting to explore in this regard is the potential of
making synthetic image data, which is described in [57]. If it is possible to use this pipeline,
it will be possible to significantly increase the available training data with a relatively small
work effort.
This project is intended to provide proof of concept. Therefore, it has not been developed
with execution speed in mind. It would need to be optimised before it will be viable for
real­time radar integrity monitoring. A significant optimisation potential can be found in the
position estimation from the radar readings and ENC. One part of the optimisation would
be to exchange the particle swarm optimisation for another faster approach. This could be
gradient descent or another algorithm in this family. Another part is utilising parallelisation
better. The code is currently run partially in parallel. It should be possible to improve this
to increase the algorithm’s efficiency.
92
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
[1]
Azimi Cargo and Aviation Services. Sea vs Air vs Land Freight. 2022. URL: https:
//www.linkedin.com/pulse/sea-vs-air-land-freight-247azimi.
[2]
Global Maritime Forum, Marsh, and International Union Of Marine Insurance. Global
Maritime Issues Monitor 2022. 2022. URL: https://www.maritimeissues.org/#overview.
[3]
Roberto Galeazzi et al. Cyber­resilient Navigation for Highly Automated Surface
Vessels. eng. Tech. rep. 2022.
[4]
Dimitrios Dagdilelis et al. “Cyber­resilience for marine navigation by information fu­
sion and change detection”. und. In: (2022), p. 18.
[5]
Jonathan Binner Becktor. “Robust Maritime Object Detection”. eng. 2023.
[6]
Jonathan Dyssel Stets et al. “Comparing Spectral Bands for Object Detection at Sea
using Convolutional Neural Networks: Paper”. eng. In: Journal of Physics: Confer­
ence Series (online) 1357.1 (2019), p. 012036. ISSN: 17426596, 17426588. DOI:
10.1088/1742-6596/1357/1/012036.
[7]
Sanjaya Amarasinghe, Nihal D. Kodikara, and D. Sandaruwan. “Location estimation
in a maritime environment using a monocular camera”. eng. In: 2014 14th Interna­
tional Conference on Advances in Ict for Emerging Regions, Icter 2014 ­ Confer­
ence Proceedings (2014), pp. 21–28. ISSN: 23776854. DOI: 10.1109/ICTER.2014.
7083874.
[8]
Hongyang Li et al. “Delving into the Devils of Bird’s­eye­view Perception: A Review,
Evaluation and Recipe”. und. In: (2023).
[9]
Tesla. Tesla AI Day. 2021. URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j0z4FweCy4M.
[10]
Rafal Michal Burza. “Application of Neural Networks for Validation of Data Integrity
in Large Automotive Radar Datasets”. eng. In: Signal Processing ­ Algorithms, Ar­
chitectures, Arrangements, and Applications Conference Proceedings, Spa 2023­
(2023), pp. 71–76. DOI: 10.23919/SPA59660.2023.10274466.
[11]
Dian Ning and Dong Seog Han. “Radar Fault Detection via Camera­Radar Branches
Learning Network”. eng. In: 5th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
Information and Communication, Icaiic 2023 (2023), pp. 463–467. ISSN: 28316991,
28316983. DOI: 10.1109/ICAIIC57133.2023.10067071.
[12]
IEEE, I JONSDOTTIR, and AS HAUKSDOTTIR. “Integrity monitoring and estima­
tion of systematic errors in radar data systems”. eng. In: Record of the Ieee 1995
International Radar Conference (1995), pp. 310–316. DOI: 10.1109/RADAR.1995.
522564.
[13]
Mogens Blanke et al. Diagnosis and Fault­tolerant Control, 3rd Edition. eng. Springer,
2015, pp. 1–695. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-662-47943-8.
[14]
Sedna. Top 5 opportunities for automation in the Maritime Industry. URL: https:
//sedna.com/resources/top-benefits-of-automation-in-the-maritime-industry.
[15]
International Maritime Organization. SOLAS Convention Chapter V, Regulation 19.
2002.
[16]
M.I. (ed.). Skolnik. Radar handbook. eng. Ed. by Merrill I. Skolnik. McGraw­Hill,
1990, Getr. Zählung (unknown).
Radar Integrity Monitoring
93
==PAGE:104==
[17]
High Contrast. License: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/de/deed.en. URL:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ship_radar_of_the_Scenic_Emerald.JPG.
[18]
Simrad Lowrance and B&G. Broadband 3G Radar.
[19]
Adrian Dabrowski, Sebastian Busch, and Roland Stelzer. “A Digital Interface for Im­
agery and Control of a Navico/Lowrance Broadband Radar”. In: Jan. 2011, pp. 169–
181. ISBN: 978­3­642­22835­3. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-22836-0_12.
[20]
A. W. Doerry. “Comments on radar interference sources and mitigation techniques”.
eng. In: Proceedings of Spie ­ the International Society for Optical Engineering
(2015). ISSN: 1996756x, 0277786x. DOI: 10.1117/12.2075743.
[21]
Jay A. Farrell. Aided Navigation ­ GPS with High Rate Sensors. 2008.
[22]
LTD. Furuno Electric CO. Operator’s Manual Satellite COmpass.
[23]
Said Lamey Tawfik. “Automatic Identification System (AIS): Notes and Impacts”.
eng. In: Maritime Studies 2005.145 (2005), pp. 14–20. ISSN: 08102597, 07266472.
DOI: 10.1080/07266472.2005.10878797.
[24]
Danish Maritime Authorities. Vejledning til kaldesignal. 2023. URL: https://www.
soefartsstyrelsen.dk/publikationer-og-vejledninger/vejledninger/2020/sep/vejledning-
til-kaldesignal.
[25]
em­trak Marine Electronics Limited. em­trak R100 AIS Channel Receiver, Product
Manual.
[26]
M0r13n. pyais. Version 2.6.4. Apr. 2024. URL: https://github.com/M0r13n/pyais.
[27]
Charles Hays. What is an Electronic Navigational Chart (ENC)? URL: https://www.
amnautical.com/blogs/news/what-is-an-electronic-navigational-chart-enc.
[28]
Geodatastyrelsen. Nautical Charts. URL: https://eng.gst.dk/danish-hydrographic-
office/nautical-charts.
[29]
OpenStreetMap. OpenSeaMap. URL: https://www.openseamap.org/index.php?id=
openseamap&L=1.
[30]
Wolfram Schneide. BBBike Extract Service. 2024. URL: https://extract.bbbike.org/.
[31]
Olaf Peters. License: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by­sa/4.0/deed.en. URL:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Central_Projection_Idealised_Camera_
Model.png.
[32]
Richard. Szeliski. Computer Vision : Algorithms and Applications, Computer Vision.
eng. Springer International Publishing AG, 2022.
[33]
OpenCV. Camera calibration. 2024. URL: https://docs.opencv.org/3.4/dc/dbb/
tutorial_py_calibration.html.
[34]
Rafael Gonzales and Richard Woods. Digital Image Processing. Pearson, 2018.
[35]
International Maritime Organization. COLREG: Convention on the International Reg­
ulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1972. IMO Publication. International Mar­
itime Organization, 2003. ISBN: 9789280141672. URL: https://books.google.dk/
books?id=_ZkZAQAAIAAJ.
[36]
e­con Systems India Pvt Ltd. STURDeCAM20_CUXVR.
[37]
FLIR Systems OEM & Emerging. Getting Started guide for the FLIR ADK with USB,
GMSL, and Ethernet Connector Options.
[38]
Danmarks Meteorologiske Institut. Vejrarkiv. 2024. URL: https://www.dmi.dk/
vejrarkiv.
[39]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http://www.
deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016.
[40]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. eng. In: Proceed­
ings of the Ieee Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition 2016­ (2016), pp. 770–778. ISSN: 2332564x, 10636919. DOI: 10.1109/
CVPR.2016.90.
94
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:105==
[41]
Tsung Yi Lin et al. “Feature pyramid networks for object detection”. eng. In: Pro­
ceedings ­ 30th Ieee Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Cvpr
2017 2017­ (2017), pp. 936–944. ISSN: 2332564x, 10636919. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.
2017.106.
[42]
Shaoqing Ren et al. “Faster R­CNN: Towards real­time object detection with region
proposal networks”. eng. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
2015­ (2015), pp. 91–99. ISSN: 10495258.
[43]
Ross Girshick. “Fast R­CNN”. und. In: (2015).
[44]
Haşim Sak, Andrew Senior, and Françoise Beaufays. “Long Short­Term Memory
Based Recurrent Neural Network Architectures for Large Vocabulary Speech Recog­
nition”. und. In: (2014).
[45]
Shreenidhi Sudhakar. Learning Rate Scheduler. 2017. URL: https://towardsdatascience.
com/learning-rate-scheduler-d8a55747dd90.
[46]
Jonathan Hui. mAP (mean Average Precision) for Object Detection. 2018. URL:
https://jonathan-hui.medium.com/map-mean-average-precision-for-object-detection-
45c121a31173.
[47]
Joseph C. Kolecki. “An Introduction to Tensors for Students of Physics and Engi­
neering”. und. In: (2002).
[48]
Vahid Naghshin. Tensor Basics in PyTorch. 2021. URL: https://medium.com/codex/
tensor-basics-in-pytorch-252a34288f2.
[49]
G. Bradski. “The OpenCV Library”. In: Dr. Dobb’s Journal of Software Tools (2000).
[50]
CVAT.ai Corporation. Computer Vision Annotation Tool (CVAT). Version 2.8.2. Nov.
2023. URL: https://github.com/opencv/cvat.
[51]
B. E. Moore and J. J. Corso. “FiftyOne”. In: GitHub. Note: https://github.com/voxel51/fiftyone
(2020).
[52]
SeaChartAPI. 2023. URL: https://gitlab.gbar.dtu.dk/shippinglab/SeaChartAPI.
[53]
VesselFinder. Vessels Database. 2024. URL: https://www.vesselfinder.com/vessels.
[54]
Bastien Chopard and Marco Tomassini. “Particle swarm optimization”. eng. In: Nat­
ural Computing Series (2018), pp. 97–102. ISSN: 16197127. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-
319-93073-2_6.
[55]
Maurice Clerc. “Standard Particle Swarm Optimisation”. In: HAL open science (2012).
[56]
Alexander Kirillov et al. “Segment Anything”. In: arXiv:2304.02643 (2023).
[57]
Jonathan Binner Becktor et al. “Bolstering Maritime Object Detection with Syn­
thetic Data”. eng. In: Ifac­papersonline 55.31 (2022), pp. 64–69. ISSN: 24058963,
24058971. DOI: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2022.10.410.
Radar Integrity Monitoring
95
==PAGE:106==
96
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:107==
Appendix A
Example of file structure
1
￿￿￿
2
ImageSets￿
3
   ￿￿￿train.txt￿
4
   ￿￿￿val.txt￿￿￿
5
Images￿
6
   ￿￿￿camera_rgb0￿
7
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933600_rgb0.png￿
8
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933602_rgb0.png￿
9
   ￿   ￿￿￿****￿
10
   ￿   ￿￿￿XXXXXXXXXX_rgb0.png￿
11
   ￿￿￿camera_rgb1￿
12
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933600_rgb1.png￿
13
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933602_rgb1.png￿
14
   ￿   ￿￿￿****￿
15
   ￿   ￿￿￿XXXXXXXXXX_rgb1.png￿
16
   ￿￿￿camera_rgb2￿
17
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933600_rgb2.png￿
18
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933602_rgb2.png￿
19
   ￿   ￿￿￿****￿
20
   ￿   ￿￿￿XXXXXXXXXX_rgb2.png￿
21
   ￿￿￿camera_rgb3￿
22
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933600_rgb3.png￿
23
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933602_rgb3.png￿
24
   ￿   ￿￿￿****￿
25
   ￿   ￿￿￿XXXXXXXXXX_rgb3.png￿
26
   ￿￿￿camera_lwir1￿
27
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933600_lwir1.png￿
28
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933602_lwir1.png￿
29
   ￿   ￿￿￿****￿
30
   ￿   ￿￿￿XXXXXXXXXX_lwir1.png￿
31
   ￿￿￿camera_lwir2￿
32
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933600_lwir2.png￿
33
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933602_lwir2.png￿
34
   ￿   ￿￿￿****￿
35
   ￿   ￿￿￿XXXXXXXXXX_lwir2.png￿￿￿
36
labels￿
37
   ￿￿￿camera_rgb0￿
38
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933600.txt￿
39
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933602.txt￿
40
   ￿   ￿￿￿****￿
41
   ￿   ￿￿￿XXXXXXXXXX.txt￿
42
   ￿￿￿camera_rgb1￿
43
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933600.txt￿
44
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933602.txt￿
45
   ￿   ￿￿￿****￿
46
   ￿   ￿￿￿XXXXXXXXXX.txt￿
47
   ￿￿￿camera_rgb2￿
48
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933600.txt￿
49
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933602.txt￿
Radar Integrity Monitoring
97
==PAGE:108==
50
   ￿   ￿￿￿****￿
51
   ￿   ￿￿￿XXXXXXXXXX.txt￿
52
   ￿￿￿camera_rgb3￿
53
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933600.txt￿
54
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933602.txt￿
55
   ￿   ￿￿￿****￿
56
   ￿   ￿￿￿XXXXXXXXXX.txt￿
57
   ￿￿￿camera_lwir1￿
58
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933600.txt￿
59
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933602.txt￿
60
   ￿   ￿￿￿****￿
61
   ￿   ￿￿￿XXXXXXXXXX.txt￿
62
   ￿￿￿camera_lwir2￿
63
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933600.txt￿
64
   ￿   ￿￿￿1680933602.txt￿
65
   ￿   ￿￿￿****￿
66
   ￿   ￿￿￿XXXXXXXXXX.txt
Listing A.1: Structure of the image sets
98
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:109==
Appendix B
Error state derivation
This is a more in­depth derivation of the error state. The error state is as follows:
˜x = x −ˆx
(B.1)
Since it is the error state, it is assumed to have the zero­vector as the expected value:
E[˜x] = 0
(B.2)
The error states can then be found as
Radar Integrity Monitoring
99
==PAGE:110==


˜xk+1
˜yk+1
˜vk+1
˜ak+1
˜θk+1
˜ωk+1
˜αk+1


=


xk+1
yk+1
vk+1
ak+1
θk+1
ωk+1
αk+1


−


ˆxk+1
ˆyk+1
ˆvk+1
ˆak+1
ˆθk+1
ˆωk+1
ˆαk+1


=


xk + ∆tvkcos(θk) + 1
2∆t2akcos(θk) + δx
yk + ∆tvksin(θk) + 1
2∆t2aksin(θk) + δy
vk + ∆tak
ak
θk + ∆tωk + 1
2∆t2αk
ωk + ∆tαk
αk


−


ˆxk + ∆tˆvkcos(ˆθk) + 1
2∆t2ˆakcos(ˆθk) + δx
ˆyk + ∆tˆvksin(ˆθk) + 1
2∆t2ˆaksin(ˆθk) + δy
ˆvk + ∆tˆak
ˆak
ˆθk + ∆tˆωk + 1
2∆t2ˆαk
ˆωk + ∆tˆαk
ˆαk


=


xk −ˆxk + ∆tvkcos(θk) −∆tˆvkcos(ˆθk) + 1
2∆t2akcos(θk) −1
2∆t2ˆakcos(ˆθk)
yk −ˆyk + ∆tvksin(θk) −∆tˆvksin(ˆθk) + 1
2∆t2aksin(θk) −1
2∆t2ˆaksin(ˆθk)
vk −ˆvk + ∆tak −∆tˆak
ak −ˆak
θk −ˆθk + ∆tωk −∆tˆωk + 1
2∆t2αk −∆t2ˆαk
ωk −ˆωk + ∆tαk −∆tˆαk
αk −ˆαk


=


˜xobj,k + ∆tvkcos(θk) −∆tˆvkcos(ˆθk) + 1
2∆t2akcos(θk) −1
2∆t2ˆakcos(ˆθk)
˜yobj,k + ∆tvksin(θk) −∆tˆvksin(ˆθk) + 1
2∆t2aksin(θk) −1
2∆t2ˆaksin(ˆθk)
˜vobj,k + ∆t˜a
˜aobj,k
˜θk + ∆t˜ωk + ∆t2˜αk
˜ωk + ∆t˜αk
˜αk


(B.3)
As can be seen, most of the expressions have been simplified only to contain the error
state. However, the parts containing the sinusoidal functions have not. It is possible. The
first step is to collect the non­state terms:
∆tvkcos(θk) −∆tˆvkcos(ˆθk) + 1
2∆t2akcos(θk) −1
2∆t2ˆakcos(ˆθk) =
∆t(vkcos(θk) −ˆvkcos(ˆθk)) + 1
2∆t2(akcos(θk) −ˆakcos(ˆθk))
(B.4)
∆tvksin(θk) −∆tˆvksin(ˆθk) + 1
2∆t2aksin(θk) −1
2∆t2ˆaksin(ˆθk) =
∆t(vksin(θk) −ˆvksin(ˆθk)) + 1
2∆t2(aksin(θk) −ˆaksin(ˆθk))
(B.5)
The next step us to use that ˆx = x −˜x. This transforms the equations to:
100
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:111==
∆t(vkcos(θk) −(vk −˜vk)cos(θk −˜θk)) + 1
2∆t2(akcos(θk) −(ak −˜ak)cos(θk −˜θk)) =
∆t(vkcos(θk)−vkcos(θk−˜θk)+˜vkcos(θk−˜θk))+1
2∆t2(akcos(θk)−akcos(θk−˜θk)+˜akcos(θk−˜θk))
(B.6)
∆t(vksin(θk) −(vk −˜vk)sin(θk −˜θk)) + 1
2∆t2(aksin(θk) −(ak −˜ak)sin(θk −˜θk)) =
∆t(vksin(θk)−vksin(θk−˜θk)+˜vksin(θk−˜θk))+1
2∆t2(aksin(θk)−aksin(θk−˜θk)+˜aksin(θk−˜θk))
(B.7)
Finally, since E[˜x] = 0, then is can be assumed that cos(θk) ≈cos(θk −˜θk) and sin(θk) ≈
sin(θk −˜θk), which further simplifies the expressions to be:
∆t˜vkcos(θk −˜θ) + 1
2∆t2˜acos(θk −˜θ)
(B.8)
∆t˜vobj,ksin(θk −˜θ) + 1
2∆t2˜asin(θk −˜θ)
(B.9)
By inserting this, the total error states become:
˜x =


˜xk+1
˜yk+1
˜vk+1
˜ak+1
˜θk+1
˜ωk+1
˜αk+1


=


˜xk + ∆t˜vkcos(θk −˜θk) + 1
2∆t2˜acos(θk −˜θk)
˜yobj,k + ∆t˜vobj,ksin(θk −˜θk) + 1
2∆t2˜asin(θk −˜θ)
˜vk + ∆t˜ak
˜ak
˜θk + ∆t˜ωk + ∆t2˜αk
˜ωk + ∆t˜αk
˜αk


(B.10)
Since the expected value of the error states are all 0, then the sinusoidal functions can be
approximated to be:
sin(θk + ˜θ) = sin(θk) −˜θcos(θk)
(B.11)
cos(θk + ˜θ) = cos(θk) −˜θsin(θk)
(B.12)
With this approximation, the error state equations can be simplified to:
˜x ≈


˜xk + ∆t˜vk(cos(θk) −˜θksin(θk)) + ∆t2 1
2˜ak(cos(θk) −˜θksin(θk))
˜yk + ∆t˜vk(sin(θk) −˜θkcos(θk)) + ∆t2 1
2˜ak(sin(θk) −˜θkcos(θk))
˜vk + ∆t˜ak
˜ak
˜θk + ∆t˜ωk + ∆t2˜αk
˜ωk + ∆t˜αk
˜αk


(B.13)
Radar Integrity Monitoring
101
==PAGE:112==
Appendix C
Synthetic data for Error State Kalman Filter
Test
(a) The movement of platform vessel and
target vessel in the geodetic reference
frame. The movement starts in the red cross
and ends in the red diamond.
(b) The movement of platform vessel and
target vessel in the geodetic reference
frame with latitude over time shown
(c) The movement of the target vessel in
the body reference frame. The movement
starts in the red cross and ends in the red
diamond.
(d) The movement of platform vessel and
target vessel in the geodetic reference
frame with longitude over time shown
Figure C.1: Second synthetic test data
102
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:113==
(a) The movement of the target vessel in
the body reference frame. The movement
starts in the red cross and ends in the red
diamond.
(b) The movement of the target vessel in the
x direction
(c) The relative rotation of the target vessel
in the body reference frame
(d) The movement of the target vessel in the
y direction
(e) The the relative absolute distance for the
vessel
Figure C.2: Second synthetic data tracking with Kalman Filter with various steps between
measurements
Radar Integrity Monitoring
103
==PAGE:114==
(a) The movement of the platform vessel
and target vessel in the geodetic reference
frame. The movement starts in the red cross
and ends in the red diamond.
(b) The movement of the platform vessel
and target vessel in the geodetic reference
frame with latitude over time shown
(c) The movement of the target vessel in
the body reference frame. The movement
starts in the red cross and ends in the red
diamond.
(d) The movement of the platform vessel
and target vessel in the geodetic reference
frame with longitude over time shown
Figure C.3: Third synthetic test data
104
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:115==
(a) The movement of the target vessel in the
body reference frame. The movement starts
with the red cross and ends with the red di­
amond.
(b) The movement of the target vessel in the
x direction
(c) The relative rotation of the target vessel
in the body reference frame. The movement
starts in the red cross and ends in the red
diamond.
(d) The movement of the target vessel in the
y direction
(e) The the relative absolute distance for the
vessel
Figure C.4: Third synthetic data tracking with Kalman Filter with various steps between
measurements
Radar Integrity Monitoring
105
==PAGE:116==
(a) The movement of the platform vessel
and target vessel in the geodetic reference
frame. The movement starts in the red cross
and ends in the red diamond.
(b) The movement of the platform vessel
and target vessel in the geodetic reference
frame with latitude over time shown
(c) The movement of the target vessel in
the body reference frame. The movement
starts in the red cross and ends in the red
diamond.
(d) The movement of platform vessel and
target vessel in the geodetic reference
frame with longitude over time shown
Figure C.5: Fourth synthetic test data
106
Radar Integrity Monitoring
==PAGE:117==
(a) The movement of the target vessel in
the body reference frame. The movement
starts in the red cross and ends in the red
diamond.
(b) The movement of the target vessel in the
x direction
(c) The relative rotation of the target vessel
in the body reference frame
(d) The movement of the target vessel in the
y direction
(e) The the relative absolute distance for the
vessel
Figure C.6: Fourth synthetic data tracking with Kalman Filter with various steps between
measurements
Radar Integrity Monitoring
107
==PAGE:118==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsted Plads, Bygning 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.electro.dtu.dk
