==PAGE:1==
The impact of global warming and oil pollution
on the early development of Calanus hyperboreus
Emilie Skrubbeltrang Thomsen (s183486)
Master of Science in Engineering (Aquatic Science and Technology)
Technical University of Denmark
ABSTRACT: The Arctic ecosystem is undergoing rapid changes due to climate change, resulting in earlier sea ice
melt and increased risks of oil pollution from expanding shipping routes. These environmental changes are likely altering
the timing of phytoplankton blooms, crucial for Arctic food webs. Calanus hyperboreus, a key zooplankton species in
Arctic ecosystems, is highly vulnerable to these changes. This study aimed to investigate the impacts of temperature,
oil exposure, and maternal effects on the early developmental stages of C. hyperboreus nauplii. Female copepods were
collected from Disko Bay, Greenland, and exposed to experimental conditions simulating elevated temperatures and
oil exposure. Eggs were collected from these females and distributed into treatment groups maintaining the maternal
temperature conditions, with or without additional oil exposure. Key measures including hatching success, growth rates,
development, and survival were assessed. Results showed that offspring from females exposed to both elevated temper-
atures and oil had a significantly reduced hatching success and survival. Offspring exposed to higher temperatures and
maternal oil exposure exhibited slower growth and development compared to the control. Notably, offspring developing
under the same conditions as their maternal source showed enhanced growth and developmental pattern relative to those
in differing conditions. These findings highlight the vulnerability of C. hyperboreus to the combined stressors of climate
change and oil pollution in the Arctic. The observed impacts on early life stages highlight potential disruptions in energy
transfer within Arctic food webs, with implications for the whole ecosystem.
KEYWORDS: Maternal effects - Calanus hyperboreus - Phenological mismatches - Arctic ecosystems - Nauplii de-
velopment
June 15th, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Master Thesis
Preface
This master thesis has been conducted during this Spring semester. It has a scope of 30 ECTS
credits. The master thesis has been prepared at DTU Aqua - National Institute of Aquatic Resources at
the Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby. It has been prepared within the requirements
for a Master of Science (M.Sc.) degree in Aquatic Science and Technology. I would like to thank my
supervisors Torkel Gissel Nielsen (DTU Aqua - National Institute of Aquatic Resources) and Sinja Rist
(DTU Aqua - National Institute of Aquatic Resources) for the help and guidance during this project.
Additionally, I would like to thank Iliana Vasiliki Ntinou for her invaluable help with the experimental
work of this thesis. Her support and expertise were essential to completing the experiments success-
fully. Thank you for your dedication and assistance.
Emilie Skrubbeltrang Thomsen, s183486
June 15th, 2024
DTU Aqua
National Institute of Aquatic Resources
Technical University of Denmark, DTU
Henrik Dams Allé
Bygning 202
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 35 88 33 00
aqua@aqua.dtu.dk
i
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Materials and Methods
4
2.1
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Development of Nauplii
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Hatching Success . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Length Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.3
Nauplius Stages Over Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.4
Developmental Delay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.5
Survival . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.6
Statistical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Results
8
3.1
Development of Nauplii
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.1
Hatching Success . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.2
Length Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.3
Nauplius Stages Over Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.4
Developmental Delay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.5
Survival . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Discussion
14
4.1
Potential maternal effects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Arctic Climate Change Impacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Conclusion
21
6
Acknowledgements
22
7
Appendix
28
7.1
Nauplii stages over time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7.2
Developmental delay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.3
Survival . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
ii
==PAGE:4==
Master Thesis
1
Introduction
The consequences of climate change are evident
in Arctic ecosystems, where atmospheric temper-
atures have increased three times faster than the
global average over the past 49 years (Thorman
et al., 2020). The increase in temperature leads
to the melting of sea and glacier ice.
Follow-
ing this will the albedo effect, where diminishing
ice cover leads to increased absorption of sun-
light, accelerates the melting of ice, leading to
significantly reduced sea ice extent and thickness
(ACIA, 2005, IPCC, 2019, Pistone et al., 2014).
The warming will also cause earlier breakup of
ice in the spring. Currently, the breakup of sea
ice begins around April in Disko Bay (Møller and
Nielsen, 2020).
Yet, depending on local condi-
tions and climate, the exact timing may vary.
If the current trend continues, it is predicted
that the breakup of sea ice could occur earlier
by the mid-21st century with spring bloom hap-
pening in May or even as early as April (Stroeve
et al., 2012). The earlier spring bloom is caused
by the fact that the bloom is triggered by the
increased light intensity reaching the water (Ar-
rigo et al., 2008, Edwards and Richardson, 2004,
Leu et al., 2011, Søreide et al., 2010). With the
melting of sea ice, the Arctic Ocean will open
opportunities for new shipping routes. Using the
shorter Northern Sea Route (NSR) instead of the
Suez Canal offers the potential to significantly
reduce the distance between Europe and Asia
by approximately 40 %, cut fuel consumption by
over 50 %, and lower CO2 emissions by 49-78
% in shipping operations (Aksenov et al., 2017,
Schøyen and Bråthen, 2011, Wu et al., 2023).
Nevertheless, with the increased shipping comes
an increased risk of oil spills.
Already, several
oil spills have been reported in the Arctic.
In
Alaska, oil spills of approximately 8,000 liters
are considered to occur frequently with an av-
erage of 85 spills per year. Additionally, larger
oil spills (409,000 to 708 million liters) have been
recorded from transportation accidents, pipeline
leaks, offshore drilling accidents and natural dis-
asters. All happened between the 1900s and the
2010s (Wright et al., 2022).
The Arctic pelagic food web comprises various
species that have adapted to thrive in the cold
and limited daylight of the region (Post et al.,
2009, Wrona et al., 2006). The base of the food
web is constituted by phytoplankton, microscopic
algae that harness energy from sunlight through
photosynthesis.
They form the primary source
of energy for the whole ecosystem (Ardyna and
Arrigo, 2020). Phytoplankton are consumed by
marine copepods. These crustaceans are abun-
dant and dominate the zooplankton in the Arctic
(Hirche and Mumm, 1992, Sasaki et al., 2016),
where they serve as primary food for various
fish larvae and marine mammals such as whales
(Banas et al., 2021, NOAA, 2017). Thus, cope-
pods act as a critical energy transfer, efficiently
channeling energy from primary production to
higher trophic levels.
Additionally, copepods
contribute to nutrient cycling and carbon se-
questration as they incorporate carbon in their
bodies when grazing on phytoplankton.
Upon
death or consumption by predators, this carbon
either respires back into the water or is trans-
ported to the seafloor. This process contributes
Page 1 of 32
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis
to the ocean’s carbon cycle by potentially al-
lowing carbon to be sequestered for long periods
(Jónasdóttir et al., 2022, Pinti et al., 2023, Visser
et al., 2017).
One copepod species that is highly adapted to
the cold Arctic ecosystem is the species Calanus
hyperboreus (Falk-Petersen et al., 2009, Jung-
Madsen et al., 2013). It is regarded as a genuine
Arctic species, found in polar waters. Its large
size and high lipid content make it an important
energy source for organisms in higher trophic
levels (Swalethorp et al., 2011, Toxværd et al.,
2019). The life cycle of C. hyperboreus is adapted
to the Arctic.
During the winter months, C.
hyperboreus remains in diapause in the deeper
waters, where the females spawn (Falk-Petersen
et al., 2009). Due to the high lipid content, the
eggs are positively buoyant, which causes them
to float to the surface (Conover, 1967, Sømme,
1934). Towards the surface, the eggs will hatch
and the nauplii start developing. Once they have
reached the surface the spring bloom has started
and the nauplii have reached their feeding stage
(Conover, 1967, Henriksen et al., 2012, Jónasdót-
tir, 2019, Kattner et al., 2007). However, with
global warming comes the melting of ice cover
and temperature rise, which alter the timing of
the spring bloom, potentially causing a mismatch
with the arrival of nauplii.
In addition to climate change, the Arctic faces
the threat of oil pollution.
As global interest
in Arctic oil exploration grows, so does the risk
of oil spills and contamination (Toxværd et al.,
2018, Toxværd et al., 2019). Crude oil comprises
predominantly hydrocarbons, but it may also
contain sulfur, nitrogen, oxygen, and assorted
metals, its composition varying by type. A sig-
nificant worry associated with crude oil relates
to its content of polycyclic aromatic hydrocar-
bons (PAHs), potent toxins capable of disturbing
membrane fluidity (Almeda et al., 2013, De Flora
et al., 1991, Hylland, 2006, Yu, 2002). Studies
have shown that exposure to pyrene, a compound
often found in oil, can have significant impacts on
C. hyperboreus survival, reproduction, and lipid
metabolism. Nørregaard et al. (2014) found an
impact of pyrene on the reproduction and graz-
ing behavior of C. hyperboreus, while Toxværd
et al. (2018) found that pyrene exposure during
overwintering can lead to reduced energy storage
and reproductive output in the spawning season,
with toxic effects that manifest after exposure has
ceased. These findings underscore the vulnerabil-
ity of C. hyperboreus to oil pollution, especially
during critical life stages and overwintering peri-
ods.
Another (unpublished) study conducted in paral-
lel with this study, investigated the reproductive
performance of female copepods under various
temperature and crude oil exposure conditions,
shedding light on potential ecological implica-
tions. It was tested whether temperature and oil
exposure influenced parameters such as egg pro-
duction, mortality rates, and fecal pellet produc-
tion.
Moreover, maternal effects from changes
in female copepods’ reproductive output could
have downstream consequences on the survival
and development of their nauplii and eggs, po-
tentially affecting copepod population dynamics
Page 2 of 32
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis
and ultimately influencing marine ecosystems.
The phenomena of maternal effects occur when
an offspring’s phenotype is influenced by factors
from its mother, such as the genes and the en-
vironment. For maternal effects to happen, it is
presumed that the mother transfers mRNA or
proteins to the eggs, which can then affect the
gene expression without altering the genes (Sali-
nas et al., 2013, Schier, 2007). Another aspect
is the adaptive maternal effects, which happens
when the mothers change their behavior in re-
sponse to environmental cues, leading to changes
in their offspring. For example, maternal expo-
sure to oil can induce phenotypic changes in the
offspring that enhance their ability to cope with
oil pollution (Incardona et al., 2011).
Overall,
this is described as transgenerational plasticity
(TGP) and includes the scenario where the en-
vironment of the parents influences the traits of
their offspring based on environmental variations
in both generations.
TGP has been observed
in various organisms, including plants (Johnsen
et al., 2005, Blödner et al., 2007, Alexander and
Wulff, 1985), insects (T. Mousseau and Dingle,
1991, Blanckenhorn, 2000, Steigenga and Fis-
cher, 2011), birds (Sultan et al., 2009), and fish
(Salinas and Munch, 2012, Swain and Lindsey,
1986, Dentry and Lindsey, 1978), whereas re-
search in maternal effects alone has primarily
focused on the freshwater invertebrate Daphnia
magna (Boersma et al., 2000, Coakley et al.,
2018, Mikulski and Mazurczak, 2023), with lim-
ited studies on marine copepods.
This study aims to explore the maternal effects
on C. hyperboreus nauplii, particularly how ex-
posed females impact the development of their
eggs and nauplii.
Eggs from exposed females
were collected and grouped based on maternal
treatments, with or without oil exposure.
We
monitored hatching success, nauplii development,
and survival to understand the interactions be-
tween environmental stressors, maternal effects,
and offspring development in copepods, which is
essential for predicting ecosystem responses to
environmental changes in the Arctic.
We hy-
pothesized that exposure of female organisms to
oil would have detrimental effects on their off-
spring, leading to increased mortality, decreased
hatching success, and slower growth and develop-
ment in the nauplii. Similarly, direct exposure of
nauplii to oil was anticipated to result in higher
mortality rates, reduced hatching success, and
impaired growth and development. Additionally,
rising temperatures were predicted to generally
enhance the growth and development of nauplii
but may also elevate mortality among them. Fur-
thermore, we hypothesized that when oil expo-
sure and warming occurred simultaneously, their
combined impact would be more severe than ei-
ther factor alone. Finally, we hypothesized that
nauplii raised in the same environment as their
maternal source demonstrated higher survival,
increased hatching success, and more advanced
development stages compared to nauplii raised in
different environments.
Page 3 of 32
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Experimental setup
One hundred Calanus hyperboreus females were
collected during October 2023, from a loca-
tion 16.22 km south of the Arctic Station
(69◦6′24.9012′′N,
53◦30′38.52′′W)
by
vertical
towing of a 300 µm WP3 net with a non-filtering
cod end at 400 m depth in Disko Bay, West
Greenland. In situ temperature and salinity at
the collection site were ∼2.8 ◦C and 34 psu, re-
spectively. Upon collection, the 100 females were
transported to individual 250 mL bottles in a cold
room with in situ conditions. Subsequently, the
females were divided into four treatment groups,
each consisting of 25 individuals.
The differ-
ent treatments were labeled as follows: (A) 3 ◦C
(control), (B) 3 ◦C + crude oil, (C) 5 ◦C, and
(D) 5 ◦C + crude oil. Additionally, it is worth
noting that an experiment was conducted with
these females to assess the impacts of oil and
warming, although this is not part of the current
project.
A concentration of 1 µL · L−1 Light
Louisiana Sweet Oil was used. The preparation
of the sample was conducted in accordance with
the methodology outlined in Rist et al. (2024).
To summarize, the oil was mixed with seawater
under high-speed magnetic stirring to create oil
droplets with an average diameter of 8 µm. 95 %
of these droplets fell within the range of 1 to 20
µm. This suspension was then used to introduce
crude oil into experimental bottles at a concen-
tration of 1 µL · L−1.
The seawater was prepared by combining 0.2 µm
filtered seawater (FSW, salinity of 24 psu) with
salt under stirring to ensure complete dissolution
of the salt in the water. The copepods stored at
3 ◦C were kept in a cold room, while those stored
at 5 ◦C were kept in a fridge. All bottles were
stored in the dark. Copepods were inspected for
maturation level and egg production was mon-
itored three times a week from December 1st,
2023, to February 19th, 2024.
Friday, January 12th, 2024, the eggs were col-
lected and pooled according to their respective
treatment groups.
Each treatment group con-
sisted of eggs from females exposed to specific
environmental conditions: A (3 ◦C), B (3 ◦C +
oil), C (5 ◦C), and D (5 ◦C + oil). Subsequently,
the eggs were evenly divided into two new groups,
maintaining consistent temperatures throughout
the process (Figure 1). For one group, designated
as A-, B-, C-, and D-, the eggs were transferred to
freshly prepared glass bottles containing FSW at
the same temperature as experienced by their ma-
ternal sources. For the other group, designated
as A+, B+, C+, and D+, the eggs were simi-
larly transferred to new glass bottles with FSW
at the corresponding temperature. However, in
this case, the oil was introduced. The oil, pre-
pared using the method described earlier (Rist et
al., 2024), was added to the bottles with a con-
centration of 1 µL · L−1.
This arrangement allowed for the investigation
of the potential impact of the maternal environ-
ment, particularly recurrent oil exposure, on the
developmental outcomes of the nauplii.
Tripli-
cates were conducted for each new treatment.
The treatments were assigned the same label as
their maternal environment, with the designa-
tion (-) or (+) added. The designation (-) corre-
Page 4 of 32
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis
Figure 1: The distribution of copepods for an experiment investigating the development of nauplii. The maternal treatment is
represented by the labels A (3 ◦C), B (3 ◦C + oil), C (5 ◦C), and D (5 ◦C + oil). Eggs from the different treatments were distributed
into new bottles based on their maternal environment with or without the addition of oil. The treatments were labeled identically
to their maternal environment, with the addition of either a minus sign or a plus sign. The absence of oil was indicated by the use
of the (-) sign, while the presence of oil was indicated by the use of the (+) sign.
sponded to no oil being added, while the designa-
tion (+) corresponded to oil being added. Again,
all bottles were stored in the dark.
The density of eggs varied between treatment
groups, as not all four maternal treatments pro-
duced the same number of eggs (Table 1).
Table 1: Distribution of eggs from different maternal environ-
ments for nauplii development investigation. Variations in egg
density across treatment groups highlight differences in repro-
ductive output among maternal conditions.
2.2
Development of Nauplii
Ten days after the start of the experiment, pic-
tures were taken of five nauplii from each bottle
to determine the size and developmental stage.
This was done weekly on the same day until at
least one individual of copepodite stage I was
found in all bottles.
The nauplius stages were
determined based on the criteria in Hygum et al.
(2000) and Jung-Madsen et al. (2013).
After two weeks of monitoring the development,
the eggs in treatments D- and D+ had not
hatched or the nauplii were dead.
Given that
these eggs were derived from a single female,
it was decided to conduct a second experiment
utilizing eggs from multiple females of the same
treatment group.
At the same time, it was observed that most nau-
plii in the other bottles started reaching the feed-
ing stage. The feeding stage is defined as nauplius
stage III by Conover, 1967, as the proctodeum
opens into the mid-gut, and green cells can be ob-
Page 5 of 32
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis
served internally when food is offered. The nau-
plii were fed with a concentration of 400 µg/L of
Thalassiosira weissflogii and Rhodomonas salina
in a 50:50 ratio. Both algae cultures were main-
tained in 0.2 µm FSW with B1 growth medium
(Hansen, 1989) and additional silicate for T.
weissflogii.
The cultures were maintained at a
constant temperature of 18 ◦C.
To ensure ex-
ponential growth of the algae, the cultures were
diluted with a new medium three times per week,
kept constantly aerated, and exposed to an illu-
minance of 60 lux and a 14:10 day:night cycle.
During the experimental period, the concentra-
tion of algae was continuously monitored to en-
sure consistent food concentration.
This was
done by taking a 10 mL sample from all bottles
without oil. Thereafter, the algae concentration
was measured using the Beckman Multisizer 4e
Coulter Counter. After measuring the concentra-
tion, the amount of R. salina and T. weissflogii
that had been consumed was calculated, and the
corresponding amount of algae was added back
to maintain the desired concentration. For the
bottles containing oil, it was not possible to mea-
sure the algae concentration directly due to oil
interference with the Coulter Counter. Instead,
we measured the algae concentration in identical
bottles without oil.
These oil-free bottles (A-,
B-, C-, and D-) were of the same type and origin
as those containing oil (A+, B+, C+, and D+,
respectively). We then assumed that the algae
concentration in the oil-containing bottles would
be approximately the same as in the oil-free bot-
tles. Therefore, the algae concentration from the
oil-free bottles was used to ensure consistent food
availability in the oil-containing bottles.
2.2.1
Hatching Success
Five days into the nauplii experiment, another
round of egg collection from the females was con-
ducted to initiate a hatching experiment. Sim-
ilar to the previous procedure, eggs from fe-
males in all treatment groups were collected and
pooled within their respective maternal treat-
ment groups. Subsequently, these eggs were di-
vided into two new treatment groups, mirroring
the methodology described earlier and depicted in
Figure 1. The eggs in each new treatment group
(A-, A+, B-, B+, C-, C+, D-, and D+) were
then transferred to clean glass Petri dishes, with
oil added to the treatments requiring it.
Trip-
licates were conducted for all treatments.
The
eggs were maintained at temperatures matching
those experienced by their maternal sources for
eight days.
Following this period, the samples
were fixed using Lugol’s solution, and the nauplii
were counted using a stereo microscope.
This experiment was conducted a few days later
than the commencement of the nauplius exper-
iment, as the females had not produced suffi-
cient eggs to run both experiments simultane-
ously while ensuring an adequate sample size.
2.2.2
Length Measurements
The sub-sample of the five nauplii was used to
measure the size once a week for seven weeks.
The living nauplii were placed in a drop of water
on a Petri dish and photographed using a Leica
M50 stereo microscope with a Leica EC3 camera.
A picture of a calibration slide was taken for the
magnification and camera zoom level used. For
naupliar stages, the total length (carapace + tail)
was measured as in Jung-Madsen et al. (2013),
Page 6 of 32
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis
whereas for copepodite stages the prosome length
was measured, with the use of Image J software
(Schneider et al., 2012). The length was manually
outlined three times for each individual, and the
average of these values was calculated.
Tessier
and Goulden (1982) noted the inherent bias in
optical methods when applied by different scor-
ers. To mitigate this, they recommended using a
single scorer consistently. In this study, all nau-
plii images were analyzed by the same observer
to ensure scoring consistency, reducing observer
bias effects.
2.2.3
Nauplius Stages Over Time
The pictures of nauplii were used to detect the
developmental stages. For this part, a new cat-
egorical variable was created to categorize devel-
opmental stages into meaningful groups: "Before
feeding stage," "After feeding stage," and "Cope-
podite".
Here the "Before feeding stage", con-
sisted of nauplii stage I and II, "After feeding
stage" consisted of nauplius stage III-VI, as it
was defined that the nauplii start feeding when
they reach stage III (Conover, 1967).
Developmental stage percentages were plotted
against days from the initiation of the experiment
for each treatment group. Line plots were gener-
ated to illustrate the temporal changes in stage
percentages.
2.2.4
Developmental Delay
The data were filtered for each treatment and
stage combination to extract the day from the
start of the experiment when each stage was ob-
served for the first time. The minimum days from
the start of the experiment for each treatment-
stage combination was plotted.
2.2.5
Survival
Survival was calculated as the proportion of sur-
viving nauplii at the end of the experiment. The
number of individuals in each nauplius stage was
also determined for each treatment. It was calcu-
lated if there was a significant difference between
the number of individuals in each nauplius stage
at the end of the experiment. Again, the nauplius
stages were divided into three categories: ’Before
feeding stage’, ’After feeding stage’, and ’Cope-
podite’.
2.2.6
Statistical analysis
R (R Core Team, 2024) was used to plot the
total length of the nauplii in the different treat-
ments over time.
The time series was divided
into two sections: 1) Before feeding (sampling
days 10 and 17) and 2) After feeding (sampling
days 24-52). A linear regression model was fitted
to each treatment group, generating logarithmic
trend lines to visualize the growth patterns over
time.
The growth rates were calculated as the
slope of the trend lines.
Several statistical tests were conducted to test
the treatment effects on different characteristics.
The characteristics measured were hatching suc-
cess, total length, stages observed on each sam-
pling day, sampling day each stage was first ob-
served, survival, and the number of each stage
observed at the end of the experiment. Bartlett’s
K-squared statistic was used to test for homoge-
neous variances, while the Shapiro-Wilk test and
Q-Q plots were used to evaluate the normality as-
Page 7 of 32
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis
Figure 2: Hatching success measured in percentage of hatched eggs for the different treatments. The hatching experiment was
run over eight days with three replicates per treatment. The colors corresponds to the following nauplii treatments: (i) blue =
treatment A- (3 ◦C) and A+ (3 ◦C + oil), (ii) yellow = treatment B- (3 ◦C) and B+ (3 ◦C + oil), (iii) red = treatment C- (5 ◦C)
and C+ (5 ◦C + oil), and (iv) green = treatment D- (5 ◦C) and D+ (5 ◦C + oil). Different letters indicate significant differences
between treatment groups.
sumption of the characteristic’s distribution. In
the case of normally distributed data, a one-way
ANOVA was conducted to test for significant dif-
ferences in the given characteristic among treat-
ment groups. Separate ANOVA models were fit-
ted for treatment, oil, temperature, and their in-
teractions. A significance level of 5 % was used.
No post hoc tests were performed; therefore, sig-
nificant differences were reported based on the
ANOVA results alone.
For
not
normally
distributed
data
a
non-
parametric analysis was conducted.
In this
case the Kruskal-Wallis test served as a non-
parametric alternative to ANOVA, examining dif-
ferences in the characteristics across treatments.
Post hoc Dunn’s test was performed for pairwise
comparisons if the Kruskal-Wallis test indicated
significant differences. Again, a significance level
of 5 % was used (Posit team, 2024, Brockhoff et
al., 2018).
The ANOVA analysis was applied solely to exam-
ine the significant differences in the abundance
of various developmental stages (’Before feeding
stage’, ’After feeding stage’, and ’Copepodite’)
at the end of the experiment. For all other data,
which did not meet the assumption of normality,
the non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test followed
by Dunn’s post hoc test was utilized.
3
Results
3.1
Development of Nauplii
3.1.1
Hatching Success
The hatching success test showed that all treat-
ments had a hatching success rate above 96 %,
except for D- and D+.
Specifically, D- had a
Page 8 of 32
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis
hatching success of 59 %, while D+ had a hatch-
ing success of 61 % (Table 2, Figure 2).
The statistical analysis of hatching success re-
vealed that D- and D+ had significantly lower
hatching success compared to B-, B+, and C+.
Additionally, B- and B+ were significantly differ-
ent from C-.
Table 2: The mean hatching success and standard deviation
(SD) for the hatching experiment, conducted over eight days
with triplicates for all treatments. The hatching success is ex-
pressed as a percentage of hatched eggs.
3.1.2
Length Measurements
The repeated experiment for D- and D+, again
showed that the eggs had not hatched or the nau-
plii were dead after two to three weeks. Thus, the
results from the two treatments are not included
in the following.
The initial measurements of total length, taken
for the first time when the nauplii were assessed,
varied from 0.176 to 0.467 mm across all treat-
ments.
Before feeding, the growth rates were
as follows: 5.5 ± 3.3 µm · day−1 for A-, 13.9 ±
5.1µm·day−1 for A+, 3.1±1.7µm·day−1 for B-,
2.3±5.3µm·day−1 for B+, −1.9±3.1µm·day−1
for C-, and 1.9 ± 3.9 µm · day−1 for C+ (Table 3
and Figure 3A).
By the end of the experiment, the range of to-
tal naupliar length across all treatments had ex-
panded to 0.273-1.288 mm.
Following feeding,
the growth rates were 10.3 ± 1.8 µm·day−1 for A-
, 4.6±1.8µm·day−1 for A+, 6.6±1.2µm·day−1 for
B-, 9.2±1.1µm·day−1 for B+, 5.9±1.7µm·day−1
for C-, and 7.2 ± 1.4 µm · day−1 for C+ (Table 3
and Figure 3B).
Table 3: Mean growth rates of nauplii subjected to different
experimental conditions both before (day 10-17) and after feed-
ing (day 24-52). Growth rates are presented in micrometers per
day (µm · day−1) (± SD).
The analysis of growth rate before feeding indi-
cated no significant difference between treatments
originating from the same maternal source (A-
vs A+, B- vs B+, and C- vs C+), nor between
treatments A- and B+. However, significant dif-
ferences were observed between all other combi-
nations.
Additionally, when comparing growth rates after
feeding, no significant difference was found when
comparing A- vs B+ as well as A+ vs C-. Fur-
thermore, no significant differences were observed
when comparing treatments B- and B+ with C-
and C+. All other combinations showed signifi-
cant differences in growth rate after feeding.
Page 9 of 32
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis
Figure 3: Total length (µm) of nauplii over time for different treatments. The colors represent the following treatments: (i)
blue = A- (3 ◦C) and A+ (3 ◦C + oil), (ii) yellow = B- (3 ◦C) and B+ (3 ◦C + oil), and (iii) red = C- (5 ◦C) and C+ (3 ◦C +
oil). (A) The total length (µm) was measured for each treatment before feeding, covering the initial two measurement days (day
10-17). Treatments without oil addition are represented by square points, while treatments with oil addition are represented by
triangle points. Significant differences between treatment groups are denoted by distinct letters. (B) The total length (µm) was
measured for each treatment after feeding, covering the last five measurement days (day 24-52). Treatments without oil addition are
represented by square points, while treatments with oil addition are represented by triangle points. Significant differences between
treatment groups are denoted by distinct letters.
3.1.3
Nauplius Stages Over Time
Results showed that in A-, all nauplii commenced
at the "Before feeding stage," gradually transi-
tioning to the "After feeding stage" around day
17. By day 38, 93 % of nauplii had reached the
"After feeding stage" (Figure 4A). In A+, nau-
plii similarly began at the "Before feeding stage,"
with the appearance of "After feeding stages"
around day 17. From this point onwards, a fluctu-
ation between the dominant stages was observed
until day 38, where the "Before feeding stage" di-
minished, yielding dominance to the "After feed-
ing stage." However, "Before feeding stages" per-
sisted until the end of the observation period
(Figure 4D).
The initiation pattern B- showed a dominance of
the "Before feeding stage" diminishing over time.
The percentage of nauplii in the "After feeding
stage" increased steadily, reaching around 67 %
by the end of the observation period (Figure 4B).
For B+, the nauplii initiated at the "Before feed-
ing stage," experiencing a rapid decline in this
stage’s percentage while the "After feeding stage"
rapidly increased until day 31. Subsequently, a
slight decrease was observed, with the appearance
of copepodites towards the end of the observation
period (Figure 4E).
C- exhibited a mixed initiation of nauplii at both
the "Before feeding" and "After feeding" stages,
with the former dominating initially with 80 % of
nauplii belonging to the "Before feeding stage".
Throughout the observation period, the propor-
tion of nauplii at the "After feeding stage" re-
mained below 50 %, with "Before feeding stage"
persisting dominance until the end (Figure 4C).
In C+, nauplii started at both the "Before feed-
Page 10 of 32
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis
Figure 4: The percentage distribution of nauplii developmental stages over time for different experimental treatments. Each plot
represents a specific treatment group: A (A-), B (B-), C (C-), D (A+), E (B+), and F (C+). The stages are categorized as "Before
Feeding Stage" (green), "After Feeding Stage" (red), and "Copepodite" (blue).
ing" and "After feeding" stages, with the former
dominating initially with 80 % of nauplii belong-
ing to the "Before feeding stage".
Over time,
the percentage of nauplii in the "Before feeding
stage" gradually decreased, while the "After feed-
ing stage" increased, reaching approximately 80
% by the end of the observation period. Notably,
copepodite stages were observed as early as day
45 in this treatment (Figure 4F).
The statistical tests conducted to analyze the
presence of different stages across various sam-
pling days revealed significant differences in treat-
ments.
On day 17, there were notable distinc-
tions between treatments.
Specifically, A- and
A+ differed from both B- and B+, as well as C-.
Additionally, B- showed differences compared to
C-. By day 24, B+ showed significant differences
from B- and C-. Furthermore, A- differed from
C-. Meanwhile, on day 31, B+ exhibited a differ-
ence compared to C-. Day 38 findings indicated
difference between A+ from both A- and B+.
Moreover, did B+ differ from C-. Finally, on day
45, treatments at 3 ◦C (A-, A+, B-, and B+)
differed from C-. There was also a significant dif-
ference between the two treatments at 5 ◦C (C-
vs C+). While on the last sampling day, day 52,
there was a significant difference between A- and
B- as well as C- (See Table 4 in the Appendix for
the statistical results).
When investigating the number of individuals in
each stage category for the distinct treatments at
the end of the experiment, it showed that A- and
the two treatments at 5 ◦C (C- and C+) did not
have any nauplii in the ’Before feeding stage’.
On the other hand, the other treatments were
Page 11 of 32
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis
Figure 5: The distribution of percentages of nauplii in different stages across various treatments at the end of the experiment.
The mean ± standard deviation is indicated on the plots. (A) The number of ‘Before feeding stages’ in the different treatments.
(B) The number of ‘After feeding stages’ in the different treatments. (C) The number of ‘Copepodites’ in the different treatments.
The colors correspond to the following treatments of nauplii: (i) Blue represents A- and A+, (ii) Yellow represents B- and B+, and
(iii) Red represents C- and C+.
shown to have individuals in this category (See
Figure 5A). The statistical tests showed no sig-
nificant difference in the number of individuals in
this stage category when comparing the different
treatments (Table 6 in the appendix for the final
count of individuals at each developmental stage
across different treatments). The results further
showed that A- and A+ had a higher number
of nauplii in the ’After feeding stage’ category
compared to the other treatments at the end of
the experiment (See Figure 5B).
The ANOVA analysis showed that C+ had a sig-
nificant impact on the number of individuals in
the ’After feeding stage’. Significant differences
were determined directly from the ANOVA re-
sults, with no post hoc tests performed.
There was a similar number of individuals in the
’Copepodite stage’ at the end of the experiment
in all treatments (See Figure 5C). The statisti-
cal tests also revealed no significant difference be-
tween the treatments.
Page 12 of 32
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis
Figure 6: The delay between stages for the different treatments. Each point on the plot represents a specific stage within one
treatment, with the x-axis denoting the treatment and the y-axis representing the number of days from the start of the experiment
that the particular stage did first appear.
3.1.4
Developmental Delay
The first two nauplius stages (NI and NII) were
observed with no significant delay across the dif-
ferent treatments (Figure 6). Nauplius stage III
(NIII) appeared one week later in A- compared
to the other treatments. For stage NIV, it was
observed for the first time after 17 days in all
treatments maintained at 3 ◦C (A-, A+, B-, and
B+). However, in treatments maintained at 5 ◦C
(C- and C+), this stage was observed later, at
38 and 31 days, respectively. Stage NV was first
observed after 31 days in B-.
It was observed
one week later (after 38 days) in A+, and an-
other week later (after 45 days) in the remain-
ing treatments.
Stage NVI was observed after
38 days in all treatments except for B+ and C-.
In these two treatments, NVI did not appear to
have been reached within the time frame of the
sub-sampling, or at least it was not captured in
the sample. The first appearance of copepodite
stage I (CI) was observed in C+ after 45 days. In
the rest of the treatments, CI was observed one
week later, after 52 days (Figure 6 and Table 5 in
the appendix).
3.1.5
Survival
A- and A+ resulted in a mean survival of 42±0.01
% and 42 ± 6.4 %, respectively, while B- had a
mean survival of 25 ± 2.9% and 28 ± 8.4 % for
B+. Furthermore, C- resulted in a mean survival
of 31 ± 3.7 % , while C+ resulted in a mean sur-
vival of 24±4.6 %. These results suggest that A-
and A+ resulted in the highest survival. These
were followed by C-, B- and B+, and finally, C+
(Figure 7). Yet, the statistical analysis showed
that there was no significant difference in mean
survival between treatments.
Page 13 of 32
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis
Figure 7: The mean survival (percentage of nauplii alive) across different treatments. The colors correspond to the following
treatments of nauplii: (i) blue = A- and A+, (ii) yellow = B- and B+, and (iii) red = C- and C+.
4
Discussion
We investigated the impact of temperature, oil
exposure, and potential maternal effects on the
survival and development of Calanus hyperboreus
nauplii.
The hatching success was tested at elevated tem-
peratures. Jung-Madsen et al. (2013) found simi-
lar hatching successes for C. hyperboreus at tem-
peratures of 2.5 ◦C and 5 ◦C.
They suggest no
effect of temperature on the hatching success,
which is also observed in our study.
Maternal
oil exposure and direct nauplii exposure did not
significantly impact hatching success in our in-
vestigation. Similar results for direct oil exposure
were found by Toxværd et al. (2018), when test-
ing the hatching success for the closely related
species Calanus glacialis and their eggs exposed
to pyrene at a temperature of 2.5 ◦C.
Yet, none of them tested the combined effect
of increased temperature and oil exposure. Our
study shows that maternal exposure to higher
temperatures (5 ◦C) combined with oil reduces
copepod nauplii hatching success by approx-
imately 40 % compared to the control.
This
suggests reduced reproductive fitness under con-
ditions of elevated temperature and oil exposure.
This could lead to changes in the population
dynamics with a reduced C. hyperboreus popu-
lation potentially causing a bottom-up effect on
the Arctic food web (Falk-Petersen et al., 2007).
The significantly reduced hatching success ob-
served in the combined exposure treatment sug-
gests a synergistic effect of temperature and oil.
Increased temperature can intensify the toxic ef-
fects of oil by increasing the metabolic rates of
organisms, which in turn can enhance the uptake
of oil (Perrichon et al., 2018).
The synergistic
effects were also observed in the nauplii devel-
opment experiment.
Here is it observed that
nauplii originating from females exposed to both
Page 14 of 32
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis
warming and oil died after two to three weeks.
This happened both at the original and the re-
peated experiment.
These results suggest that
exposure to both elevated temperature and ma-
ternal oil pollution can have detrimental effects
on the nauplii development (Li et al., 2021, Pas-
parakis et al., 2016).
Furthermore, literature
suggests that climate change might influence the
fate, distribution, and toxicity of contaminants.
Yet, most risk assessments and regulations do not
consider, how the combination of elevated tem-
perature and pollution will affect an organism
or an ecosystem. An important consideration as
pollutants may be altered under climate change
(Hutton et al., 2024). Therefore, this study plays
an important role in understanding the combined
effects of climate change and oil pollution, which
have been shown to have detrimental effects on
copepod egg hatching.
The lower growth rate before feeding observed
in treatments involving maternal oil exposure in-
dicates that the oil may have a minor negative
impact.
Yet, the impact is not as significant
as the impact of higher temperatures observed
in the two treatments with nauplii exposed to
warming.
The lowest growth rates observed
are in the treatments with warming both be-
fore and after feeding, suggesting that higher
temperatures negatively impact naupliar growth.
Higher temperature is often associated with in-
creased growth as seen in Grenvald et al. (2013).
The temperature affects the aerobic metabolism,
which is responsible for the organism’s activity,
reproduction, and physiological processes. As the
water temperature increases, numerous aquatic
animal’s metabolic rate also increases (Rubal-
caba, 2024).
Nevertheless, if the temperature
increases too much, it can become an excessive
stressor. Instead of boosting the metabolic rate
and promoting growth, it may reduce growth.
This is documented by Clarke and Bonnet (1939),
who found similar results for the related species
Calanus finmarchicus. Here it was observed that
an increase in temperature resulted in reduced
growth, suggesting that elevated temperatures
had a negative impact on the growth of the cope-
pods, which is in alignment with our observa-
tions. This suggests that Arctic warming could
affect the growth of nauplii before they start feed-
ing, as warmer temperatures were linked to lower
growth rates. Reduced growth due to maternal
oil or warming could potentially lead to a pop-
ulation of smaller adult copepods, affecting the
energy transfer in the food chain. Additionally,
Campbell et al. (2001) demonstrated that higher
temperatures were also associated with a reduc-
tion in the length, which in our study was used
to calculate the growth rate, suggesting that the
length of copepods was inversely related to tem-
perature.
This observation by Campbell et al.
(2001) was also noted in the presence of food.
This indicates that even when food was avail-
able, the effect of temperature on copepod size
and hence growth rate persisted.
A positive influence of food was observed as all
growth rates increased with the addition of food.
The positive correlation between food availabil-
ity and growth is also noted in Campbell et al.
(2001). They showed that food availability had a
significant impact on the growth rate of naupliar
Page 15 of 32
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis
stages, where higher food concentrations gener-
ally resulted in higher growth rates.
The growth rates obtained after feeding in our
study indicate that lower temperatures promote
better growth even after feeding.
The reduced
growth rate observed in the treatment with ma-
ternal oil, again indicated a negative impact of
oil exposure. However, the growth rate is not re-
duced when oil is also introduced to the nauplii,
suggesting a maternal effect (discussed later).
The developmental stages over time showed that
the control followed a typical developmental pro-
gression in C. hyperboreus with ’After feeding
stages’ appearing after 17 days.
Both Conover
(1967) and Jung-Madsen et al. (2013) observed
this stage earlier in their experiments (after 8
and 11 days, respectively). The later observation
in our study may be attributed to the seven-day
intervals between sampling, rather than more
frequent monitoring.
Additionally, it could be
influenced by the effects of sub-sampling.
The fluctuating and slowed developmental pat-
tern observed in oil exposed nauplii at 3 ◦C, in-
dicates that the exposure to oil during naupliar
development causes a slowed developmental pat-
tern, impacting the overall growth and health of
C. hyperboreus. This may lead to imbalances in
the ecosystem, since the nauplii may not time
their development with other important events
such as the spring bloom. Similar results were
noted by Grenvald et al. (2013). They observed
that with a concentration of 100 nM of pyrene,
the development of the copepods C. glacialis and
C. finmarchicus was slowed. Furthermore, they
demonstrated that exposure to high pyrene con-
centrations at low temperatures prolonged the
mean development time (MDT) significantly dur-
ing the development to the fourth naupliar stage
(NIV) in C. glacialis.
The slowed development for treatments exposed
to maternal oil suggests that oil exposure may
have a detrimental effect on the growth and devel-
opment of C. hyperboreus offspring, potentially
impairing their ability to thrive in polluted en-
vironments. Yet, when oil was introduced again
during the naupliar development, a more rapid
transition was observed compared to when oil
was only present for the females or only during
nauplii development. This suggests that a long-
lasting or recurrent oil exposure happening both
for the female and the nauplii might accelerate
developmental transitions at lower temperatures.
An early development could also cause a mis-
match with the spring bloom as the nauplii will
be ready to feed before food is available. More-
over, this could impact other animals in the food
chain because the copepods might mature faster,
potentially causing predators to miss them as a
food source at the usual time. This disruption
could lead to a significant change in the availabil-
ity of prey for higher trophic levels, affecting the
balance of the ecosystem.
A slowed development was observed for the treat-
ments at 5 ◦C, indicating that higher tempera-
tures might slow the development of C. hyper-
boreus nauplii. Other studies (Campbell et al.,
2001, Jung-Madsen et al., 2013) have found that
with increasing temperature, the development
accelerates, and the mean development time is
Page 16 of 32
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis
reduced.
However, Jung-Madsen et al. (2013)
used eggs from females acclimatized at 2.5 ◦C,
whereas our study used eggs from females ac-
climatized to higher temperatures (5 ◦C).
This
could suggest that, since the females were also
exposed to higher temperatures, it negatively
affected the development of the offspring, com-
pared to only exposing the nauplii. The slowing
of development might affect the availability of
copepods as a food source for predators at the
usual time, leading to disruptions in the feed-
ing relationships within the ecosystem. It might
also cause a mismatch in the timing of life events
for C. hyperboreus such as when they start feed-
ing on the phytoplankton spring bloom. Jung-
Madsen et al. (2013) demonstrated that starved
C. hyperboreus nauplii generally only reached the
naupliar stage III, whereas fed treatment devel-
ops until stage V, meaning that in the case of
a mismatch with the spring bloom, the nauplii
might only develop until stage III as there is no
food for them and the development is terminated.
The stages present at the end of the experiments,
suggest that lower temperatures (3 ◦C) are more
favorable for reaching later developmental stages.
This indicates that elevated temperature will de-
lay the development to later stages, which is also
supported by the development pattern.
Thus,
suggesting that the optimal condition for the
survival and development of C. hyperboreus nau-
plii appears to be 3 ◦C.
For the investigation of developmental delay,
early nauplii life stages (NI to NIV) were observed
at the beginning of the experiment.
Conover
(1967) noted that stages NI-NIV appeared within
14 days of hatching, whereas Jung-Madsen et al.
(2013) found these stages within 20 days of hatch-
ing, which is consistent with our findings. Our
study also observed that later nauplius stages
(NV-CI) appeared after 31-52 days. This aligns
somewhat with Conover (1967), who identified
these stages between 18 and 65 days.
Jung-
Madsen et al. (2013) observed stage NV after 27
days, whereas our study found these stages after
31 days.
However, there were some differences in devel-
opmental stage timings between treatments, no-
tably with stage VI appearing a week before
stage V in both the control treatment and the
treatment with warming and naupliar oil. Never-
theless, it is assumed that stage V may have been
present earlier than recorded but was missed dur-
ing our sub-sampling process.
The method of sub-sampling presents various
challenges that can potentially affect the ac-
curacy of the results.
A key issue is the lack
of synchronous development among individuals
within the same sample, leading to differences
in observed developmental stages. This lack of
synchrony could result in misleading conclusions
about developmental timelines.
Furthermore,
sub-sampling errors occur when the sub-sample
does not accurately represent the whole popu-
lation causing certain stages to be underrepre-
sented or overrepresented. These problems can
complicate data analysis and can lead to incor-
rect conclusions. As a way to mitigate the errors,
researchers can increase the sample size (Ander-
son et al., 2000). The findings observed in this
Page 17 of 32
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis
experiment highlight potential challenges with
our sampling methods. Despite these challenges,
we maintain confidence in the reliability of our
results, given the systematic and consistent ap-
proach we employed during sampling.
Yet, to
address the observed differences, increasing the
number of individuals sampled could provide a
more comprehensive understanding of the devel-
opment and minimize the challenges with sub-
sampling.
The result of the mean survival suggests that
warming together with naupliar oil exposure re-
duces the survival of C. hyperboreus nauplii by
18 %. Furthermore, maternal oil exposure might
also reduce the survival of nauplii. Yet, none of
the reductions are significant. Our findings are
consistent with another study by Hildebrandt
et al. (2014), which demonstrated that temper-
ature directly did not impact the survival of C.
hyperboreus.
Moreover, Toxværd et al. (2019)
demonstrated that direct exposure to pyrene did
not reduce the survival of C. hyperboreus in align-
ment with our results.
Overall, the treatment with nauplii oil expo-
sure at 3 ◦C exhibited reduced growth after feed-
ing and a fluctuating and slowed developmen-
tal pattern.
Despite this, the survival rate of
nauplii exposed to oil at 3 ◦C was comparable
to the control, suggesting potential resilience to
oil exposure at lower temperatures. Conversely,
treatments with maternal oil exposure exhib-
ited slightly lower survival rates, reduced growth,
and more slowed developmental stages, indicat-
ing heightened sensitivity to oil exposure. Treat-
ments with elevated temperatures also displayed
reduced growth.
Furthermore, the treatments
resulted in slower development and reduced sur-
vival, possibly indicating increased vulnerability
to elevated temperatures.
These findings suggest that both temperature
and oil exposure influence the developmental
outcomes of C. hyperboreus nauplii, with po-
tential ecological implications for energy transfer
between trophic levels. Increased oil contamina-
tion, especially in warmer waters, may exacerbate
the vulnerability of key zooplankton species, dis-
rupting food webs and impacting higher trophic
levels dependent on these organisms for food.
4.1
Potential maternal effects
Maternal effects can significantly influence the
phenotype and fitness of offspring in various or-
ganisms. These effects are observed in the mea-
surement of growth rates after feeding. Here, it is
observed that offspring from treatments exposed
to the same environment as their maternal source
have significantly higher growth rates compared
to the nauplii exposed to a different environment
but originating from the same maternal source
(A- vs A+, B- vs B+, and C- vs C+). When pro-
ducing eggs, the female responds to her current
environment by providing cues to the eggs. These
cues can influence the phenotype of the nauplii
without altering their genotype (Adkins-Regan
et al., 2013, Schier, 2007). One way this can hap-
pen is through the transfer of mRNA or other
proteins that will alter gene expression patterns
without changing the underlying DNA sequence
(Schier, 2007, Shama et al., 2014). The females
Page 18 of 32
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis
can also transfer essential hormones or other bio-
chemicals to their offspring in their eggs and
by that influence offspring development, growth
rates, and physiological functions (Adkins-Regan
et al., 2013, Shama et al., 2014, Yin et al., 2015).
Moreover, can the environmental conditions, such
as temperature or contaminants, experienced by
the female during the reproduction period, di-
rectly impact the egg development.
This can
potentially affect the offspring phenotype (Allen
et al., 2008, Escribano et al., 1998, Vehmaa et al.,
2012). By these mechanisms, the phenotype of
the nauplii will be changed in a such way that
it increases its fitness as long as it is experienc-
ing the same environment as the maternal source
(Marshall and Uller, 2007, Vehmaa et al., 2012).
For treatments coming from a female without oil
(A-, A+, C-, and C+), the nauplii also with-
out oil (A- and C-) have a higher growth rate
compared to the counter part with oil (A+ and
C+). This could be attributed to the fact, that
oil exposure will reduce the growth.
However,
for the nauplii coming from a maternal source
exposed to oil, the opposite is observed. Here it
is the nauplii developed in oil that have a higher
growth rate than the one without oil. This is sug-
gested to be because the nauplii with oil share
the same environment as their maternal source,
implying that the females may have altered the
offspring’s phenotype to adapt to environments
with oil presence.
Maternal effects are also evident for nauplii at
3 ◦C, when looking at the developmental pattern.
Here, the two treatments with identical envi-
ronments as their maternal source showed the
most similar developmental patterns, whereas
their counterpart showed more or less disruptive
development.
This indicates a maternal effect,
potentially enhancing the fitness of the nauplii.
However, the maternal effect is not evident at
5 ◦C, indicating that the warming may be too
severe a stressor for the females to confer any
maternal effects to the nauplii.
Overall, the observations demonstrated that nau-
plii exposed to the same environment as their
maternal source have significantly higher growth
rates and showed less disruptive developmental
patterns, suggesting that maternal environment
plays a critical role in offspring fitness (T. A.
Mousseau and Fox, 1998, Burgess and Marshall,
2014). This adaptation mechanism can improve
the resilience of populations in polluted environ-
ments (Salinas et al., 2013, Schier, 2007). Fur-
thermore, our study demonstrated that nauplii
from non-oil-exposed mothers grow better in oil-
free environments, while those from oil-exposed
mothers grow better in oil-contaminated environ-
ments. This suggests that maternal exposure to
oil induces phenotypic changes in the offspring
that enhance their ability to cope with oil pol-
lution (Incardona et al., 2011). This adaptation
could have significant ecological implications, as
it implies that populations of C. hyperboreus in
oil-polluted areas might develop resilience over
generations. However, it also suggests that sud-
den changes in pollution levels could disrupt these
adaptations, leading to reduced growth and fit-
ness (Donelson et al., 2018).
Page 19 of 32
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis
4.2
Arctic Climate Change Impacts
This study demonstrated that with a tempera-
ture increase from 3 ◦C to 5 ◦C, the growth and
development rate of nauplii are reduced and con-
sequently reach their feeding stage later. When
the spring bloom is also happening earlier in
the season, this will cause a mismatch between
the nauplii development and the phytoplankton
spring bloom (Cohen et al., 2018). If the nauplii
do not time their development with the spring
bloom they will not be able to fully utilize the
bloom and by that store sufficient lipids for the
overwintering (Falk-Petersen et al., 1990). With
the mismatch of timing, there is a risk of starva-
tion. As stated earlier have Jung-Madsen et al.
(2013) demonstrated that starved C. hyperboreus
nauplii generally only reached the naupliar stage
III, whereas fed treatments develop to stage V.
In that case the nauplii may cease development
at stage III due to insufficient food, resulting in
the termination of their growth caused by a mis-
match with the spring bloom.
With the reduction in C. hyperboreus size and
slowing of development, an important energy
transfer might be reduced, potentially having
cascading effects on the Arctic marine food web
(Durant et al., 2005, Wassmann et al., 2011).
Furthermore, it is also predicted that with the
warming of the oceans, the main distribution of
the three Calanus species will change.
C. fin-
marchicus will move more pole-wards and as C.
hyperboreus is decreasing in population due to
slower growth and development, C. finmarchicus
might dominate more in the Arctic (Beaugrand
and Reid, 2003, Møller and Nielsen, 2020, Scott
et al., 2000). This could also have cascading ef-
fects on the food web as C. finmarchicus contains
less lipid compared to C. hyperboreus and by that
would transfer less energy to higher trophic levels
(Scott et al., 2000).
Additionally, with the decrease in ice cover, the
risk of oil pollution increases as the breakup of
ice enables new shipping routes and this region is
home to the largest remaining prospective reser-
voirs of oil and gas in the world (Aksenov et al.,
2017, Peters et al., 2011, Schøyen and Bråthen,
2011).
Exposure to crude oil has been shown
to have detrimental effects on marine copepods.
The current study demonstrated that naupliar
exposure to crude oil resulted in slower growth
and disruptive development patterns.
This ad-
ditional stressor can exacerbate the phenology
mismatch. If nauplii are already struggling to de-
velop in time due to shifting bloom periods, the
added impact of oil contamination can further
hinder their development and survival. However,
oil exposure alone could also lead to a phenology
mismatch. The slower growth and disrupted de-
velopment of the nauplii compared to the control
group might cause them to reach their feeding
stage later in the season, consequently delaying
their arrival during the spring bloom. This sug-
gests that the nauplii may be unable to fully
exploit the bloom, resulting in insufficient lipid
accumulation (Søreide et al., 2010, Wassmann
and Reigstad, 2011, Zhu et al., 2018).
The oil concentration used in this study was 1
µL · L−1 (approximately 850 µg · L−1). Several
Page 20 of 32
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis
studies (Fingas, 2017, Rabalais, 2003, Whitney,
1994) have demonstrated that oil concentrations
can be quite high in the vicinity of a spill im-
mediately following the incident.
For instance,
the Exxon Valdez spill resulted in concentrations
of up to several mg/L in the immediate after-
math (EPPR, 2017, EVOSTC, 1990).
On the
contrary, continuous discharges of oil from e.g.,
shipping or industrial activities, will usually re-
sult in a lower, but more persistent concentration
of oil (AMAP, 2015, National Academies, 2017).
This concentration will often be in the range of
a few µg/L to tens of µg/L. This implies that
the concentration used in this study represents a
relatively high exposure scenario and by that is
relevant for acute exposure conditions happening
during an oil spill (AMAP, 2010). Our results are
thus useful for assessing the immediate impact on
nauplii, which is critical for understanding acute
toxicity and the potential immediate effects on
local populations. Even though 1 µL·L−1 is high,
studying its effects helps to identify thresholds at
which oil begins to have detrimental effects on
copepod populations. To better understand the
chronic effects of oil pollution, such as those hap-
pening during shipping, a lower concentration
is suggested as it would more accurately reflect
the constant exposure scenario that the copepods
are experiencing. This could support the under-
standing of the long-term impacts on growth,
reproduction, and survival, as well as potential
bio-accumulation effects, while the oil spill sce-
nario tested in this study helps understand the
short-term effects such as mortality and hatch-
ing (AMAP, 2010, AMAP, 2015, PAME, 2013,).
Both scenarios are crucial for understanding the
impacts of oil pollution in the Arctic.
Future research should include more focus on the
combined effects of climate change and pollution
e.g., oil exposure, to fully understand the envi-
ronmental consequences in the Arctic. Studying
the long-term effects of these combined stressors
on copepod populations could lead to a better un-
derstanding of adaptive strategies and resilience
mechanisms, which could ultimately aid in the
development of more effective conservation and
management strategies in the Arctic region.
5
Conclusion
This study investigated the effects of temper-
ature, oil exposure, and potential maternal ef-
fects on Calanus hyperboreus nauplii survival and
early development. The findings revealed signifi-
cant maternal effects since nauplii exposed to the
same environment as their maternal source ex-
hibited higher growth rates, suggesting a crucial
role of maternal adaptation in offspring fitness.
Our study emphasized the vulnerability of Arctic
ecosystems to climate change, with rising temper-
atures negatively impacting nauplii growth and
development, potentially leading to phenological
mismatches with important life events such as
the spring bloom. Additionally, with the poten-
tial opening of new shipping routes in the Arc-
tic, it might increase the risk of oil spills. This
can further impact ecological imbalances as oil
exposure has been demonstrated to result in re-
duced growth and slower development. Further-
more, the results demonstrated that maternal ex-
posure to elevated temperatures and oil exposure
Page 21 of 32
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis
lead to significantly reduced nauplii survival. In
conclusion, this research highlights the necessity
for comprehensive assessments of the effects of cli-
mate change and pollution on Arctic ecosystems.
6
Acknowledgements
I express my heartfelt gratitude to my supervi-
sors, T.G. Nielsen and S.E. Rist, whose invalu-
able support and guidance played a pivotal role
in the successful completion of this project. Their
dedication and enthusiasm greatly facilitated the
entire process. Additionally, I extend my thanks
to I. V. Ntinou for her assistance and dedication
in the laboratory, without which the practical as-
pects of this project would not have been possible.
Page 22 of 32
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis
References
ACIA. (2005). Arctic climate impact assessment. Arctic Coun-
cil.
Adkins-Regan, E., Banerjee, S. B., Correa, S. M., & Schweitzer,
C. (2013). Maternal effects in quail and zebra finches:
Behavior and hormones. General and Comparative
Endocrinology, 190, 34–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ygcen.2013.03.002
Aksenov, Y., Popova, E. E., Yool, A., Nurser, A. G., Williams,
T. D., Bertino, L., & Bergh, J. (2017). On the fu-
ture navigability of arctic sea routes: High-resolution
projections of the arctic ocean and sea ice. Marine
Policy, 75, 300–317. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.marpol.2015.12.027
Alexander, H., & Wulff, R. (1985). Experimental ecological ge-
netics in plantago: X. the effects of maternal temper-
ature on seed and seedling characters in p. lanceolata.
Journal of Ecology, 73, 271–282. https://doi.org/10.
2307/2259783
Allen, R. M., Buckley, Y. M., & Marshall, D. J. (2008).
Offspring size plasticity in response to intraspecific
competition: An adaptive maternal effect across life-
history stages. American Naturalist, 171(2), 225–237.
https://doi.org/10.1086/524952
Almeda, R., Wambaugh, Z., Wang, Z., Hyatt, C., Liu, Z.,
& Buskey, E. J. (2013). Interactions between zoo-
plankton and crude oil: Toxic effects and bioaccu-
mulation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. PLoS
ONE, 8(6), e67212. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0067212
AMAP. (2010). Assessment 2007: Oil and gas activities in the
arctic - effects and potential effects (tech. rep.). Arc-
tic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP).
Oslo, Norway. http://www.amap.no/documents/
doc/amap-assessment-2007-oil-and-gas-activities-
in-the-arctic-effects-and-potential-effects/89
AMAP. (2015). Arctic ocean review 2013 - synthesis (tech.
rep.). Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme
(AMAP). Oslo, Norway.
Anderson, D. R., Burnham, K. P., & Thompson, W. L. (2000).
Null hypothesis testing: Problems, prevalence, and
an alternative. Journal of Wildlife Management, 64,
912–923. https://doi.org/10.2307/3803199
Ardyna, M., & Arrigo, K. R. (2020, October). Phytoplankton
dynamics in a changing arctic ocean. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41558-020-0905-y
Arrigo, K. R., van Dijken, G., & Pabi, S. (2008). Impact of a
shrinking arctic ice cover on marine primary produc-
tion. Geophysical Research Letters, 35(19).
Banas, N. S., Møller, E. F., Laidre, K. L., Simon, M., Ellingsen,
I. H., & Nielsen, T. G. (2021). Reconciling be-
havioural, bioenergetic, and oceanographic views of
bowhead whale predation on overwintering copepods
at an arctic hotspot (disko bay, greenland). Frontiers
in Marine Science, 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.
2021.614582
Beaugrand, G., & Reid, P. C. (2003). Long-term changes in
phytoplankton, zooplankton and salmon related to
climate. Global Change Biology, 9(6), 801–817.
Blanckenhorn, W. (2000). Temperature effects on egg size
and their fitness consequences in the yellow dung
fly scathophaga stercoraria. Evol Ecol, 14, 627–643.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1010911017700
Blödner, C., Goebel, C., Feussner, I., Gatz, C., & Polle, A.
(2007). Warm and cold parental reproductive envi-
ronments affect seed properties, fitness, and cold re-
sponsiveness in arabidopsis thaliana progenies. Plant
Cell and Environment, 30, 165–175. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1365-3040.2006.01615.x
Boersma, M., Boriss, H., & Mitchell, S. E. (2000). Maternal
effects after sexual reproduction in Daphnia magna.
Journal of Plankton Research, 22(2), 279–285. https:
//doi.org/10.1093/plankt/22.2.279
Brockhoff, P. B., Møller, J. K., Andersen, E. W., Bacher, P., &
Christiansen, L. E. (2018). Introduction to Statistics
at DTU.
Burgess, S. C., & Marshall, D. J. (2014). Adaptive parental
effects: The importance of estimating environmen-
tal predictability and offspring fitness appropriately.
Oikos, 123(7), 769–776.
Campbell, R. G., Wagner, M. M., Teegarden, G. J., Boudreau,
C. A., & Durbin, E. G. (2001). Growth and devel-
opment rates of the copepod calanus finmarchicus
reared in the laboratory. Marine Ecology Progress
Series, 221, 161–183. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3354 /
meps221161
Clarke, G. L., & Bonnet, D. D. (1939). The influence of tem-
perature on the survival, growth and respiration of
calanus finmarchicus. https://about.jstor.org/terms
Coakley, C. M., Nestoros, E., & Little, T. J. (2018). Testing
hypotheses for maternal effects in Daphnia magna.
Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 31(2), 211–216.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jeb.13206
Cohen, J. M., Lajeunesse, M. J., & Rohr, J. R. (2018). A
global synthesis of animal phenological responses to
climate change /631/158/2165/2457 /631/158/2039
/129 /141 /139 letter. Nature Climate Change, 8,
224–228. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0067-3
Conover, R. J. (1967). Reproductive cycle, early development,
and fecundity in laboratory populations of the cope-
Page 23 of 32
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis
pod Calanus hyperboreus. https://about.jstor.org/
terms
De Flora, S., Bagnasco, M., & Zanacchi, P. (1991). Genotoxic,
carcinogenic, and teratogenic hazards in the marine
environment, with special reference to the mediter-
ranean sea. Mutation Research/Reviews in Genetic
Toxicology, 258(3), 285–320. https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1016/0165-1110(91)90013-L
Dentry, W., & Lindsey, C. (1978). Vertebral variation in ze-
brafish (brachydanio rerio) related to the prefertiliza-
tion temperature history of their parents. Canadian
Journal of Zoology, 56, 280–283. https://doi.org/10.
1139/z78-037
Donelson, J. M., Salinas, S., Munday, P. L., & Shama,
L. N. (2018). Transgenerational plasticity and cli-
mate change experiments: Where do we go from here?
Global Change Biology, 24(1), 13–34.
Durant, J. M., Hjermann, D. Ø., Anker-Nilssen, T., Beaugrand,
G., Mysterud, A., Pettorelli, N., & Stenseth, N. C.
(2005). Timing and abundance as key mechanisms af-
fecting trophic interactions in variable environments.
Ecology Letters, 8(9), 952–958.
Edwards, M., & Richardson, A. J. (2004). Impact of climate
change on marine pelagic phenology and trophic mis-
match. Nature, 430(7002), 881–884.
EPPR. (2017). Guide to oil spill response in snow and ice
conditions in the arctic (tech. rep.). Emergency Pre-
vention, Preparedness and Response (EPPR). https:
//oaarchive.arctic-council.org/handle/11374/1737
Escribano,
R.,
Rodriguez,
L.,
&
Irribarren,
C.
(1998).
Temperature-dependent development and growth of
calanus chilensis brodsky from northern chile. Journal
of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 229(1),
19–34. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0022-0981(98)00038-0
EVOSTC. (1990). Oil spill facts - questions and answers
(tech. rep.). Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Coun-
cil (EVOSTC). http://www.evostc.state.ak.us/facts/
qanda.html
Falk-Petersen, S., Mayzaud, P., Kattner, G., & Sargent, J. R.
(2009, January). Lipids and life strategy of arctic
calanus. https://doi.org/10.1080/17451000802512267
Falk-Petersen, S., Pavlov, V., Timofeev, S., & Sar-Gent, J. R.
(2007). Climate variability and possible effects on arc-
tic food chains: The role of calanus.
Falk-Petersen, S., Sargent, J. R., Hopkins, C. C. E., & Ørit-
sland, N. A. (1990). Trophic relationships and lipid
composition of zooplankton in arctic waters. Polar
Biology, 10(4), 231–241.
Fingas, M. F. (2017). Oil spill science and technology (M. Fin-
gas, Ed.). Gulf Professional Publishing.
Grenvald, J. C., Nielsen, T. G., & Hjorth, M. (2013). Effects
of pyrene exposure and temperature on early devel-
opment of two co-existing arctic copepods. Ecotoxi-
cology, 22, 184–198. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10646-
012-1016-y
Hansen, P. J. (1989). The red tide dinoflagellate alexandrium
tamarense: Effects on behaviour and growth of a.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24837956
Henriksen, M. V., Jung-Madsen, S., Nielsen, T. G., Møller,
E. F., Henriksen, K. V., Markager, S., & Hansen,
B. W. (2012). Effects of temperature and food avail-
ability on feeding and egg production of Calanus hy-
perboreus from Disko Bay, western Greenland. Ma-
rine Ecology Progress Series, 447, 109–126. https :
//doi.org/10.3354/meps09421
Hildebrandt, N., Niehoff, B., & Sartoris, F. J. (2014). Long-
term effects of elevated co2 and temperature on the
arctic calanoid copepods calanus glacialis and c. hy-
perboreus. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 80(1), 59–70.
https : / / doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
marpolbul.2014.01.050
Hirche, H.-J., & Mumm, N. (1992). Distribution of dominant
copepods in the nansen basin, arctic ocean, in sum-
mer. Deep Sea Research Part A. Oceanographic Re-
search Papers, 39(2, Part 1), S485–S505. https://doi.
org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0198-0149(06)80017-8
Hutton, S. J., Siddiqui, S., & Brander, S. M. (2024). Ecotox-
icology challenges during climate change scenarios.
In Aquatic ecotoxicology: Understanding pollutants,
aquatic organisms, and their environments (pp. 147–
165). Springer Nature. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-031-53130-9_11
Hygum, B. H., Rey, C., & Hansen, B. W. (2000). Growth and
development rates of Calanus finmarchicus nauplii
during a diatom spring bloom.
Hylland, K. (2006). Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (pah) eco-
toxicology in marine ecosystems. Journal of Toxicol-
ogy and Environmental Health, Part A, 69(1-2), 109–
123. https://doi.org/10.1080/15287390500259327
Incardona, J. P., Collier, T. K., & Scholz, N. L. (2011). Oil
spills and fish health: Exposing the heart of the mat-
ter. Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental
Epidemiology, 21(1), 3–4.
IPCC. (2019). Special report on the ocean and cryosphere in a
changing climate (srocc).
Johnsen, O., Daehlen, O., Ostreng, G., & Skroppa, T. (2005).
Daylength and temperature during seed production
interactively affect adaptive performance of picea
abies progenies. New Phytologist, 168, 589–596. https:
//doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2005.01538.x
Page 24 of 32
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis
Jónasdóttir, S. H., Naustvoll, L., Teglhus, F. W., Agersted,
M. D., Grenwald, J. C., Melle, W., & Nielsen, T. G.
(2022). Calanus finmarchicus basin scale life history
traits and role in community carbon turnover during
spring. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 79, 785–802.
https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsac013
Jónasdóttir, S. H. (2019, March). Fatty acid profiles and pro-
duction in marine phytoplankton. https://doi.org/
10.3390/md17030151
Jung-Madsen, S., Nielsen, T. G., Grønkjær, P., Hansen, B. W.,
& Møller, E. F. (2013). Early development of Calanus
hyperboreus nauplii: Response to a changing ocean.
Limnology and Oceanography, 58, 2109–2121. https:
//doi.org/10.4319/lo.2013.58.6.2109
Kattner, G., Hagen, W., Lee, R. F., Campbell, R., Deibel, D.,
Falk-Petersen, S., Graeve, M., Hanse, B. W., Hirshce,
H. J., & Jonasdottir, S. (2007). Perspectives on ma-
rine zooplankton lipids. Canadian Journal of Fish-
eries and Aquatic Sciences, 64, 1628–1639. https://
doi.org/10.1139/F07-122
Leu, E., Søreide, J. E., Hessen, D. O., Falk-Petersen, S., &
Berge, J. (2011). Consequences of changing sea-ice
cover for primary and secondary producers in the eu-
ropean arctic shelf seas: Timing, quantity, and qual-
ity. Progress in Oceanography, 90(1-4), 18–32.
Li, X., Wang, C., Li, N., Gao, Y., Ju, Z., Liao, G., & Xiong,
D. (2021). Combined effects of elevated temperature
and crude oil pollution on oxidative stress and apop-
tosis in sea cucumber (apostichopus japonicus, se-
lenka). International Journal of Environmental Re-
search and Public Health, 18(2). https://doi.org/10.
3390/ijerph18020801
Marshall, D. J., & Uller, T. (2007, December). When is a ma-
ternal effect adaptive? https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
2007.0030-1299.16203.x
Mikulski, A., & Mazurczak, D. (2023). Maternal effect in salin-
ity tolerance of daphnia–one species, various pat-
terns? PloS One, 18(4), e0283546. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0283546
Møller, E. F., & Nielsen, T. G. (2020). Borealization of arctic
zooplankton-smaller and less fat zooplankton species
in disko bay, western greenland. 65, 1175–1188. https:
//doi.org/10.2307/26938116
Mousseau, T., & Dingle, H. (1991). Maternal effects in insects:
Examples, constraints, and geographic variation. In
E. Dudley (Ed.), The unity of evolutionary biology
(pp. 745–761). Dioscorides Press.
Mousseau, T. A., & Fox, C. W. (1998). The adaptive signifi-
cance of maternal effects. Trends in Ecology and Evo-
lution, 13(10), 403–407. https://doi.org/https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0169-5347(98)01472-4
National Academies. (2017). Arctic environmental responsibil-
ity: Legal, economic, and policy considerations (tech.
rep.). National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine.
NOAA. (2017, October). Copepods: Cows of the sea. https:
//www.fisheries.noaa.gov/feature-story/copepods-
cows-sea
Nørregaard, R. D., Nielsen, T. G., Møller, E. F., Strand, J.,
Espersen, L., & Møhl, M. (2014). Evaluating pyrene
toxicity on arctic key copepod species calanus hyper-
boreus. Ecotoxicology, 23, 163–174. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10646-013-1160-z
PAME. (2013). Arctic ocean review final report (phase ii 2011-
2013) (tech. rep.). Protection of the Arctic Marine
Environment (PAME). https://www.pame.is/index.
php/projects/arctic-ocean-review/aor-ii-2011-2013
Pasparakis, C., Mager, E. M., Stieglitz, J. D., Benetti, D.,
& Grosell, M. (2016). Effects of deepwater horizon
crude oil exposure, temperature and developmental
stage on oxygen consumption of embryonic and lar-
val mahi-mahi (coryphaena hippurus). Aquatic Tox-
icology, 181, 113–123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
aquatox.2016.10.022
Perrichon, P., Mager, E. M., Pasparakis, C., Stieglitz, J. D.,
Benetti, D. D., Grosell, M., et al. (2018). Combined
effects of elevated temperature and deepwater hori-
zon oil exposure on the cardiac performance of lar-
val mahi-mahi, coryphaena hippurus. PLOS ONE,
13(10), e0203949. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0203949
Peters, G. P., Nilssen, T. B., Lindholt, L., Eide, M. S., Glom-
srød, S., Eide, L. I., & Fuglestvedt, J. S. (2011). Fu-
ture emissions from shipping and petroleum activities
in the arctic. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics,
11, 5305–5320. https://doi.org/10.5194/acp- 11-
5305-2011
Pinti, J., Jónasdóttir, S. H., Record, N. R., & Visser, A. W.
(2023). The global contribution of seasonally migrat-
ing copepods to the biological carbon pump. Limnol-
ogy and Oceanography, 68, 1147–1160. https://doi.
org/10.1002/lno.12335
Pistone, K., Eisenman, I., & Ramanathan, V. (2014). Obser-
vational determination of albedo decrease caused by
vanishing arctic sea ice. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 111(9), 3322–3326.
Posit team. (2024). RStudio: Integrated Development Environ-
ment for R. Posit Software, PBC. Boston, MA. http:
//www.posit.co/
Post, E., Forchhammer, M. C., Bret-Harte, M. S., Callaghan,
T. V., Christensen, T. R., Elberling, B., Fox, A. D.,
Gilg, O., Hik, D. S., Høye, T. T., Ims, R. A., Jeppe-
Page 25 of 32
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis
sen, E., Klein, D. R., Madsen, J., McGuire, A. D.,
Rysgaard, S., Schindler, D. E., Stirling, I., Tamstorf,
M. P., . . . Aastrup, P. (2009). Ecological dynam-
ics across the arctic associated with recent climate
change. Science, 325(5946), 1355–1358. https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.1173113
R Core Team. (2024). R: A language and environment for sta-
tistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Com-
puting. Vienna, Austria. https://www.R-project.org/
Rabalais, N. (2003). Oil in the sea. Issues in Science and Tech-
nology, 20(1), 74–78.
Rist, S., Rask, S., Ntinou, I. V., Varpe, Ø., Lindegren, M.,
Ugwu, K., Larsson, M., Sjöberg, V., & Nielsen, T. G.
(2024). Cumulative impacts of oil pollution, ocean
warming, and coastal freshening on the feeding of arc-
tic copepods. Environmental Science and Technology.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.3c09582
Rubalcaba, J. G. (2024). Metabolic responses to cold and warm
extremes in the ocean. PLoS Biology, 22. https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3002479
Salinas, S., & Munch, S. (2012). Thermal legacies: Transgener-
ational effects of temperature on growth in a verte-
brate. Ecology Letters, 15, 159–163. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1461-0248.2011.01721.x
Salinas, S., Brown, S. C., Mangel, M., & Munch, S. B. (2013).
Non-genetic inheritance and changing environments.
Non-Genetic Inheritance, 1(1), 38–50.
Sasaki, H., Matsuno, K., Fujiwara, A., Onuka, M., Yamaguchi,
A., Ueno, H., Watanuki, Y., & Kikuchi, T. (2016).
Distribution of arctic and pacific copepods and their
habitat in the northern bering and chukchi seas. Bio-
geosciences, 13, 4555–4567. https://doi.org/10.5194/
bg-13-4555-2016
Schier, A. F. (2007). The maternal-zygotic transition: Death
and birth of rnas. Science, 316(5823), 406–407. https:
//doi.org/10.1126/science.1140693
Schneider, C. A., Rasband, W. S., & Eliceiri, K. W. (2012).
Nih image to imagej: 25 years of image analysis. Na-
ture Methods, 9, 671–675. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nmeth.2089
Schøyen, H., & Bråthen, S. (2011). The northern sea route ver-
sus the suez canal: Cases from bulk shipping. Journal
of Transport Geography, 19(4), 977–983. https://doi.
org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2011.03.003
Scott, C. L., Kwsaniewski, S., Falk-Petersen, S., & Sargent,
J. R. (2000). Lipids and life strategies of Calanus
finmarchicus, Calanus glacialis and Calanus hyper-
boreus in late autumn, Kongsfjorden, Svalbard. Polar
Biol, 23, 510–516.
Shama, L. N., Strobel, A., Mark, F. C., & Wegner, K. M.
(2014). Transgenerational plasticity in marine stickle-
backs: Maternal effects mediate impacts of a warming
ocean. Functional Ecology, 28(6), 1482–1493. https:
//doi.org/10.1111/1365-2435.12280
Sømme, J. D. (1934). Animal Plankton of the Norwegian Coast
Waters and the open sea.
Søreide, J. E., Leu, E., Berge, J., Graeve, M., & Falk-Petersen,
S. (2010). Timing of blooms, algal food quality and
calanus glacialis reproduction and growth in a chang-
ing arctic. Global Change Biology, 16(11), 3154–3163.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2486.2010.02175.x
Steigenga, M., & Fischer, K. (2011). Within- and between-
generation effects of temperature on life-history traits
in a butterfly. Journal of Thermal Biology, 32, 396–
405. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtherbio.2007.06.001
Stroeve, J., Serreze, M., Holland, M., Kay, J., Malanik, J.,
& Barrett, A. (2012). The arctic’s rapidly shrinking
sea ice cover: A research synthesis. Climatic Change,
110(3-4), 1005–1027.
Sultan, S., Barton, K., & Wilczek, A. (2009). Contrasting pat-
terns of transgenerational plasticity in ecologically
distinct congeners. Ecology, 90, 1831–1839. https://
doi.org/10.1890/08-1064.1
Swain, D., & Lindsey, C. (1986). Meristic variation in a clone
of the cyprinodont fish rivulus marmoratus related
to temperature history of the parents and of the em-
bryos. Canadian Journal of Zoology, 64.
Swalethorp, R., Kjellerup, S., Dünweber, M., Nielsen, T. G.,
Møller, E. F., Rysgaard, S., & Hansen, B. W. (2011).
Grazing, egg production, and biochemical evidence of
differences in the life strategies of Calanus finmarchi-
cus, C. glacialis and C. hyperboreus in Disko Bay,
Western Greenland. Marine Ecology Progress Series,
429, 125–144. https://doi.org/10.3354/meps09065
Tessier, A. J., & Goulden, C. E. (1982). Estimating Food Lim-
itation in Cladoceran Populations.
Thorman, R. L., Richter-Menge, J., & Druckenmiller, M. L.
(2020). Arctic report card. https://doi.org/10.25923/
mn5p-t549
Toxværd, K., Dinh, K. V., Henriksen, O., Hjorth, M., &
Nielsen, T. G. (2018). Impact of Pyrene Exposure
during Overwintering of the Arctic Copepod Calanus
glacialis. Environmental Science and Technology, 52,
10328–10336. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acs . est .
8b03327
Toxværd, K., Dinh, K. V., Henriksen, O., Hjorth, M., & Nielsen,
T. G. (2019). Delayed effects of pyrene exposure dur-
ing overwintering on the Arctic copepod Calanus hy-
perboreus. Aquatic Toxicology, 217. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.aquatox.2019.105332
Page 26 of 32
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis
Vehmaa, A., Brutemark, A., & Engström-Öst, J. (2012). Ma-
ternal effects may act as an adaptation mechanism for
copepods facing ph and temperature changes. PLoS
ONE, 7. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone .
0048538
Visser, A. W., Grønning, J., & Jónasdóttir, S. H. (2017).
Calanus hyperboreus and the lipid pump. Limnology
and Oceanography, 62, 1155–1165. https://doi.org/
10.1002/lno.10492
Wassmann, P., Duarte, C. M., Agustí, S., & Sejr, M. K. (2011).
Footprints of climate change in the arctic marine
ecosystem. Global Change Biology, 17(2), 1235–1249.
Wassmann, P., & Reigstad, M. (2011). Future arctic ocean sea-
sonal ice zones and implications for pelagic-benthic
coupling. Oceanography, 24(3), 220–231. Retrieved
May 24, 2024, from http://www.jstor.org/stable/
24861317
Whitney, J. (1994). Shoreline countermeasures manual alaska.
Wright, S. K., Allan, S., Wilkin, S. M., & Ziccardi, M. (2022,
January). Oil spills in the arctic. Springer Interna-
tional Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-87853-5_7
Wrona, F. J., Prowse, T. D., Reist, J. D., Hobbie, J. E.,
Lévesque, L. M. J., & Vincent, W. F. (2006). Cli-
mate Impacts on Arctic Freshwater Ecosystems and
Fisheries: Background, Rationale and Approach of
the Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA). AM-
BIO: A Journal of the Human Environment, 35(7),
326–329. https://doi.org/10.1579/0044-7447(2006)
35[326:CIOAFE]2.0.CO;2
Wu, D., Tian, W., Lang, X., Mao, W., & Zhang, J. (2023). Sta-
tistical modeling of arctic sea ice concentrations for
northern sea route shipping. Applied Sciences, 13(7).
https://doi.org/10.3390/app13074374
Yin, X. W., Zhao, N. X., Wang, B. H., Li, W. J., & Zhang, Z. N.
(2015). Transgenerational and within-generational in-
duction of defensive morphology in Brachionus ca-
lyciflorus (rotifera): Importance of maternal effect.
Hydrobiologia, 742(1), 313–325. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10750-014-1995-1
Yu, H. (2002). Environmental carcinogenic polycyclic aro-
matic hydrocarbons: Photochemistry and phototox-
icity. Journal of Environmental Science and Health,
Part C, 20(2), 149–183. https://doi.org/10.1081/
GNC-120016203
Zhu, S., Fu, X., Ng, A. K., Luo, M., & Ge, Y.-E. (2018). The en-
vironmental costs and economic implications of con-
tainer shipping on the northern sea route. Maritime
Policy and Management, 45(4), 456–477. https://
doi.org/10.1080/03088839.2018.1443228
Page 27 of 32
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis
7
Appendix
7.1
Nauplii stages over time
Table 4: Statistical analysis of the stages present at each sampling day. P-values are indicated and a significance level of 5 % is
used.
Sampling day
Comparison
P-value
Significant difference
10
A- vs A+
0.5793728
No
10
A- vs B-
0.0933179
No
10
A+ vs B-
0.26760183
No
10
A- vs B+
0.5793728
No
10
A+ vs B+
1
No
10
B- vs B+
0.26760183
No
10
A- vs C-
0.0933179
No
10
A+ vs C-
0.26760183
No
10
B- vs C-
1
No
10
B+ vs C-
0.26760183
No
10
A- vs C+
0.09633179
No
10
A+ vs C+
0.26760183
No
10
B- vs C+
1
No
10
B+ vs C+
0.26760183
No
10
C- vs C+
1
No
17
A- vs A+
0.7024056
No
17
A- vs B-
0.05608486
No
17
A+ vs B-
0.02187964
Yes
17
A- vs B+
0.02187964
Yes
17
A+ vs B+
0.007483498
Yes
17
B- vs B+
0.7024056
No
17
A- vs C-
0.0005845659
Yes
17
A+ vs C-
0.0001330457
Yes
17
B- vs C-
0.1264379
No
17
B+ vs C-
0.2517019
No
17
A- vs C+
0.0001330457
Yes
17
A+ vs C+
0.00002636026
Yes
17
B- vs C+
0.0560848589786144
No
17
B+ vs C+
0.126437933547872
No
Page 28 of 32
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis
17
C- vs C+
0.702405632855703
No
24
A- vs A+
0.434262169356412
No
24
A- vs B-
0.0506069719870053
No
24
A+ vs B-
0.240844523567942
No
24
A- vs B+
0.695827166847364
No
24
A+ vs B+
0.240844523567941
No
24
B- vs B+
0.0189884804299642
Yes
24
A- vs C-
0.00176194257984695
Yes
24
A+ vs C-
0.0189884804299642
Yes
24
B- vs C-
0.240844523567942
No
24
B+ vs C-
0.000433772128060423
Yes
24
A- vs C+
0.0244439815688022
Yes
24
A+ vs C+
0.138404481085017
No
24
B- vs C+
0.741944258597778
No
24
B+ vs C+
0.00843263821058896
Yes
24
C- vs C+
0.410394642997842
No
31
A- vs A+
0.711455608057636
No
31
A- vs B-
1
No
31
A+ vs B-
0.711455608057636
No
31
A- vs B+
0.073232417214635
No
31
A+ vs B+
0.153317422013405
No
31
B- vs B+
0.073232417214635
No
31
A- vs C-
0.138978029145251
No
31
A+ vs C-
0.0643842989527765
No
31
B- vs C-
0.138978029145251
No
31
B+ vs C-
0.00117346436530131
Yes
31
A- vs C+
0.459419089335754
No
31
A+ vs C+
0.267125904666277
No
31
B- vs C+
0.459419089335754
No
31
B+ vs C+
0.0117917442235034
Yes
31
C- vs C+
0.459419089335754
No
38
A- vs A+
0.0218796421076448
Yes
38
A- vs B-
0.251701895724774
No
38
A+ vs B-
0.251701895724774
No
Page 29 of 32
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis
38
A- vs B+
1
No
38
A+ vs B+
0.0218796421076448
Yes
38
B- vs B+
0.251701895724774
No
38
A- vs C-
0.00223861973274309
Yes
38
A+ vs C-
0.444777695149811
No
38
B- vs C-
0.0560848589786144
No
38
B+ vs C-
0.00223861973274309
Yes
38
A- vs C+
0.00223861973274309
Yes
38
A+ vs C+
0.444777695149811
No
38
B- vs C+
0.0560848589786144
No
38
B+ vs C+
0.00223861973274309
Yes
38
C- vs C+
1
No
45
A- vs A+
0.429220788255263
No
45
A- vs B-
1
No
45
A+ vs B-
0.429220788255263
No
45
A- vs B+
0.69264889364195
No
45
A+ vs B+
0.235705782864476
No
45
B- vs B+
0.69264889364195
No
45
A- vs C-
0.000374592233336094
Yes
45
A+ vs C-
0.00566025039473188
Yes
45
B- vs C-
0.000374592233336094
Yes
45
B+ vs C-
0.00007729731
Yes
45
A- vs C+
0.369658358284534
No
45
A+ vs C+
0.915116043644916
No
45
B- vs C+
0.369658358284534
No
45
B+ vs C+
0.196226835274203
No
45
C- vs C+
0.00780821150157374
Yes
52
A- vs A+
0.0983104217317836
No
52
A- vs B-
0.0255108217953435
Yes
52
A+ vs B-
0.561592304510123
No
52
A- vs B+
0.495598990173025
No
52
A+ vs B+
0.33121488022768
No
52
B- vs B+
0.120626874599629
No
52
A- vs C-
0.0329554374596011
Yes
Page 30 of 32
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis
52
A+ vs C-
0.631564958809313
No
52
B- vs C-
0.919588008798437
No
52
B+ vs C-
0.146725554385234
No
52
A- vs C+
0.306711766463762
No
52
A+ vs C+
0.528070359994848
No
52
B- vs C+
0.225729731590635
No
52
B+ vs C+
0.733317874254786
No
52
C- vs C+
0.266792374503298
No
7.2
Developmental delay
Table 5: Day that the given naupliar stage was first observed in the given treatment
NI
NII
NIII
NIV
NV
NVI
CI
A-
10
10
17
17
45
38
52
A+
10
10
10
17
38
38
52
B-
10
10
10
17
31
38
52
B+
10
10
10
17
45
45
52
C-
10
10
10
38
45
NA
52
C+
10
10
10
31
45
38
45
Page 31 of 32
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis
7.3
Survival
Table 6: The table shows the number of individuals in each nauplii stage for the different treatments at the end of the experiment
as well as the percentage of survival for each treatment.
Treatment
NI
NII
NIII
NIV
NV
NVI
CI
CII
Total
Start
Individuals alive (%)
Average alive (%)
A-
0
0
8
8
9
6
11
1
43
103
41.75
42.23
A-
0
0
6
8
7
12
11
0
44
103
42.72
A+
0
3
17
19
2
1
0
0
42
103
40.78
42.07
A+
0
0
2
3
13
17
16
4
55
103
53.40
A+
0
0
7
4
4
9
9
0
33
103
32.04
B-
0
0
7
4
3
5
2
0
21
97
21.65
25.09
B-
1
0
10
6
3
6
3
1
30
97
30.93
B-
0
2
5
4
2
5
4
0
22
97
22.68
B+
0
0
3
3
5
7
9
0
27
97
27.84
27.49
B+
0
1
0
5
3
0
3
0
12
97
12.37
B+
0
5
8
6
8
9
5
0
41
97
42.27
C-
0
0
11
1
4
6
2
0
24
62
38.71
31.18
C-
0
0
5
1
1
2
3
0
12
62
19.35
C-
0
0
10
6
3
0
3
0
22
62
35.48
C+
0
0
10
6
2
3
2
0
23
62
37.10
24.19
C+
0
0
1
1
2
0
3
0
7
62
11.29
C+
0
0
7
5
2
0
1
0
15
62
24.19
Page 32 of 32
