==PAGE:1==
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity
Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake
Simulations
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm
Wake Simulations
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Luca Bertolani
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Matematiktorvet, Building 303B, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months (2024/01/29 - 2024/06/21) at the Techni-
cal University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng. with a workload corresponding to 30 ECTS.
Prerequisites
It is expected that the reader has some familiarity with machine learning concepts, such
as the ones covered in 02456, basic functional analysis concepts such as vector norms,
integral transforms and function spaces and a minimal understanding of Partial Differential
Equations.
Author
Luca Bertolani, M.Sc. Student,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Technical University of Denmark, DTU.
Supervisor
Allan Peter Engsig-Karup,
Associate Professor in Scientific Computing,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Technical University of Denmark, DTU
Supervisor
Pierre-Elouan Mikael Réthoré,
Head of Section, Department of Wind and Energy Systems,
Department of Wind and Energy Systems,
Technical University of Denmark, DTU
Supervisor
Paul van der Laan,
Senior Researcher,
Department of Wind and Energy Systems,
Technical University of Denmark, DTU
Luca Bertolani - s220647 - Friday, June 21st 2024
ii
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Accurate wind farm wake simulations are crucial for the planning and operations of wind
farms. Among the most important applications are Annual Energy Production assess-
ments and Wind Farm Layout optimisation. These applications require multiple calcula-
tions of the wake, which can be computationally expensive. For that reason, most com-
monly, simplified engineering models are chosen over more accurate Computational Fluid
Dynamics (CFD) based models due to their lower computational cost. Data-Driven sur-
rogates have the potential to bridge the gap by allowing fast inference at precision levels
close to the CFD models. The inference of data-driven surrogates can be validated by
CFD models, allowing the two to also work together to accelerate runtimes.
In this thesis, we present a resolution-invariant, data-driven surrogate for wind farm wake
simulations using a Fourier Neural Operator (FNO)-based algorithm. Initially, the algo-
rithm is developed and validated on a synthetic dataset, followed by its application to
Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes Actuator Wind Farm (RANS-AWF) simulations at mul-
tiple resolutions, where the input is the wind-farm thrust force distribution and the output
is the downstream wind speed.
We introduce a novel multi-resolution training approach along with an effective loss-weighting
strategy. The algorithm is then evaluated against test data at a higher, unseen resolution.
The results demonstrate that the FNO can accurately encode a resolution-invariant map-
ping between layouts and flow fields under various conditions, using only low-resolution
data. This thesis establishes the groundwork for a fully parametric surrogate capable of
providing rapid, high-fidelity wake estimations for wind farms.
Furthermore, by evaluating multiple architectures and parameters, this thesis offers an
extensive experiment log-book for applying FNO-based algorithms to RANS-based sim-
ulations, facilitating future research.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Luca Bertolani, MSc Mathematical Modelling and Computation, DTU
Allan Peter Engsig-Karup, Supervisor, DTU Compute
For first introducing me to Scientific Machine Learning and for the teaching provided.
Pierre-Elouan Mikael Réthoré, Supervisor, DTU Wind
For first presenting to me the problem of wake estimation in wind energy.
Maarten Paul van der Laan, Supervisor, DTU Wind
For the data generation procedure and consultation regarding all matters relevant to the
dataset.
Friends and Family
I would like to thank my friends and family for being there and supporting me in these last
six months, in no particular order:
Verena Seeber, Marco Bertolani, Irina Martin, Flavio Sarno, Carlos Ramos Gonzalez,
Andreas Stehle, Alberto Lahoz Soler, Mikkel Skov Benthem, Paulina Benthem Ciano.
iv
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context and Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis Overview and Novelty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Scientific Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Wake Models in Wind Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
The Fourier Neural Operator
11
3.1
Problem setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Neural Operator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Fourier Neural Operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4
Multi-Grid Tensorized Fourier Neural Operator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
RANS-AWF
17
4.1
Governing Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
RANS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
RANS Application to Wake Modelling and RANS-AWF . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5
Setup
21
5.1
Data Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6
Experiments
31
6.1
Synthetic Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.2
RANS-AWF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
7
Discussion
49
7.1
Positives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7.5
Environmental Impact and Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Bibliography
55
A Windfarm layouts
59
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Context and Motivation
As the development of offshore wind energy grows, there is a growing need for fast and
accurate estimations of wind turbine wake interactions and wind farm wake interactions.
”Wake” refers to the turbulent airflow pattern and reduced wind speed created as the wind
passes through and around turbine blades, leading to a wind speed deficit behind the tur-
bines that recovers at some distance based on variables such as atmospheric conditions.
An example can be seen in figure 1.1.
The accurate estimation of the wake is crucial for Annual Energy production (AEP) as-
sessments and life-cycle estimations [1]. For AEP assessments, correctly estimating the
wake allows us to assess how much production is lost in downstream wind farms and
wind turbines in given weather conditions. This also allows for better wind farm layout
optimisation in the planning stage, allowing for optimal layouts to be found, which use
space efficiently while minimising the production losses due to wake effects. In short, one
wants to keep wind turbines reasonably close to each other while minimising interaction
losses. In terms of life-cycle estimation, the turbulence in the wake of wind turbines and
wind farms can put stress on the turbine blades, thus shortening their life span. A correct
estimation of such effects allows for the mitigation of said effects and a coherent and ac-
curate financing of wind projects. The accuracy of the AEP assessment can dictate the
profitability of the wind project, a poor AEP assessment can lead to significant monetary
losses [1], making this a problem worth studying. Beyond financial considerations, the
accuracy of AEP assessments and the accurate estimation of wake deficits are critical
for the environmental efficacy of offshore wind energy. This thesis contributes to enhanc-
ing the reliability of renewable energy solutions, supporting the advancement of global
environmental objectives.
The number of flow cases for which the wake deficit needs to be estimated to assess
the AEP can be very high, often in the order of 104 therefore in practical applications
faster, less accurate wake models are often employed [2]. Such models sacrifice accu-
racy for computation time by employing analytical or hybrid models, which include many
assumptions which are not always accurate. Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD)-based
models, on the other hand, compute the wake more accurately, with fewer assumptions
but a longer computation time. In recent years, Reynold Averaged Navier Stokes (RANS)
have been applied for the wake estimation of singles turbines where the wind turbine hub
is modelled as an actuator Disk (RANS-AD) and for wind farms through RANS with actua-
tor wind farm (RANS-AWF) that represents a wind farm as a distributed drag force similar
to a forest canopy model [3].
In RANS-AWF, the horizontal drag force distribution is created by superposing 2D Gaus-
sian functions, each centred at the wind turbine locations. Enhancing the refinement of the
RANS-AWF model further aligns the flow dynamics of the wind farm with those predicted
by RANS-AD [4]. RANS-AWF requires precursor simulations for the input of the wind farm
drag force and wind farm power which can be obtained through RANS-AD or the more
computationally viable RANS-LUT[5]. When RANS-LUT or some other low-fidelity model
is used as a precursor, the RANS-AWF model is much cheaper to run than the RANS-AD.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Wakes in the wind farm Horns Rev due to spontaneously condensed water
vapour. Photographer: Christian Steiness (February 12th 2008), courtesy of Vattenfall.
The RANS-based models have a higher accuracy at the cost of computation time. This
has led to some effort into the development of data-driven surrogates [6], which can pro-
vide fast and accurate estimation of the wake deficits but struggle to generalise to new
conditions and therefore need to be retrained for different flow cases. A further issue with
the existing data-driven RANS surrogates is the dependency on the mesh used in train-
ing. Thus, if a change in resolution is required, the surrogates would be required to be
trained again on the new resolution. The lack of flexibility that comes with these issues is
the point we aim to target in this work.
In an ideal world, it would be desirable to have a wake model which fulfils the following
requirements:
• Fast: The inference time needs to be kept under control for its use to become
widespread.
• Fidelity-Invariant: A model which encodes fundamental dynamics and physical
effects and can produce results both for a large wind farm as well as a single turbine
with the required fidelity level.
• Parametric: A model which can take input parameters indicating the conditions and
that can encode the dynamics across the parameter space.
• Accurate: A model which can produce reliable and accurate results, which are
coherent with measurement data.
2
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:11==
Current models miss at least one of these requirements, CFD-based models are not fast
enough, engineering models are not accurate enough, and current data-driven surrogates
are not parametric and not fidelity-invariant.
In recent years, neural operator techniques have been presented as a generalization of
neural networks which, instead of learning maps between an input set and an output set,
learn maps between infinite-dimensional function spaces [7]. This higher level of abstrac-
tion provides greater flexibility and generality compared to traditional neural networks. A
particular methodology which has shown promise in this context is the Fourier Neural
Operator (FNO) [8]. The FNO has several key properties that make it a very suitable
approach for building a wake deficit model.
• Resolution Invariance: Unlike conventional data-driven approaches, FNO learns
the dynamics of the system in the Fourier space, making it invariant to resolution.
This means there is no need for high-resolution data during training, significantly
reducing computational demands. Furthermore, it allows for fidelity-invariant en-
coding of the flow. This is further validated by our results.
• Zero-shot Super Resolution: FNO is capable of zero-shot super-resolution. This
implies that it does not just map a given resolution to another; it can generate outputs
at any desired resolution. This flexibility is particularly advantageous in wake deficit
estimations where varying levels of detail may be required.
• Superior to CNNs and GANs Compared to Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs),
the FNO architecture has shown better performance, especially at learning low-
frequencies [9]. Compared to Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), which have
a known issue in ”hallucinating” details [10], FNOs infer in higher resolutions by
using features learned in frequency space at lower resolutions, making them more
physically reliable and reducing the requirement of introducing physical constraints
such as conservation laws in the cost function.
Incorporating FNO into our modelling approach addresses the existing challenges with
RANS-based surrogates and offers a pathway towards more efficient, flexible, and accu-
rate wake deficit estimations for offshore wind farms.
In principle, a FNO-based approach has the potential to be at the foundation of an ideal
wake model, fulfilling the requirements listed above.
1.2
Problem Statement
This thesis addresses the challenge of improving wind farm wake deficit modelling in
offshore wind energy projects. Current RANS-based models, while accurate, are often
too computationally expensive for practical use, leading to a dependency on faster but
less precise alternatives. This research aims at a solution through the application of a
Fourier Neural Operator (FNO)-based algorithm for encoding fidelity-invariant maps of
RANS-AWF simulations. This is pursued through a resolution invariant surrogate. The
process is the following: Train the algorithm to learn input-output maps on coarse, low-
fidelity flow cases and infer high-fidelity flow cases given the high-fidelity input.
The development of the surrogate model will proceed incrementally, beginning with tri-
als on simplified datasets and advancing to the complex dynamics of RANS-AWF data,
systematically addressing the associated challenges.
Ultimately, this thesis aims to validate the efficacy of the innovative application of Fourier
Neural Operators in the context of wind farm wake modelling.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
3
==PAGE:12==
1.3
Thesis Overview and Novelty
The thesis is structured as follows. In chapter one we give context over the relevance of
the treated subject and motivate the format of our study.
In chapter two, the related literature is explored, providing context over the current state
of the art in Scientific Machine Learning and wind turbine wake modelling. Finally, the
intersection of the two fields is discussed.
In chapter three, the Fourier Neural Operator is formally presented in a rigorous math-
ematical way as a part of the family of methods called neural operators. A parallel dis-
cussion of the code equivalents of the theory is presented as well as model optimisations
over the original FNO algorithm.
In chapter four, The RANS-AWF model is presented by first introducing a rough derivation
of RANS as a turbulence model for the Navier Stokes equation and further discussing
the modelling choices in applying this numerical technique to wind energy applications,
specifically to model wind farm wakes through the RANS-AWF model.
In chapter five, we discuss the technical setup on which the experiments are run, starting
with a description of the datasets used: initially the synthetic ”toy” dataset, followed by the
complete RANS-AWF dataset. Then the implementation details are discussed, including
aspects of the code and the configuration and hyperparameters of the complete codebase.
The novel loss-weighting and the multi-resolution approach are also presented at the end
of the chapter.
In chapter six we present the experiments that have been performed, presented iteratively
with a critical evaluation of the results, of the problems faced along the way and the further
steps taken. First, the work on the synthetic dataset is presented and then the work on
the RANS-AWF data. Finally, an evaluation of the best model on RANS-AWF data is
presented.
In chapter seven we summarise the results and discuss the successes and failures of the
thesis. We give suggestions for future work before reaching the conclusion of the thesis.
Finally, we briefly discuss the environmental impact of this work.
This thesis presents some aspects of novelty, such as
• A Multi-Resolution Training approach to Fourier Neural Operators, including com-
parison and evaluation of competing approaches. This is crucial for the effective-
ness of this work and has the potential to transfer to other similar applications.
• A Loss Weighting approach for the applications of FNOs to wind farm wakes. Mul-
tiple loss weighting approaches have been tested and the most successful one has
shown to be instrumental in the success of the thesis. The loss weighting tackles the
problem of the singularities at the wind-turbine locations which is a limitation in the
application of data-driven surrogates to RANS-based wake models in wind energy.
• A detailed Log Of Experiments and analyses in the application of FNOs to wind
farm wake simulations. This could inspire future research by showing not only the
successful approaches but also the ones which did not give the best results.
• A strong Proof Of Concept in creating resolution invariant surrogates for RANS-
based wind farm wake deficit simulations. This provides a strong case for the con-
tinuation of research along the lines of this master thesis.
4
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:13==
2
Related Work
This thesis falls within at least two different domains:
• Scientific Machine Learning: An interdisciplinary field integrating principles and
techniques from scientific computing and machine learning, aimed at creating mod-
els and algorithms for efficient processing and interpretation of complex, often high-
dimensional, scientific data. It leverages the predictive capabilities of machine learn-
ing in conjunction with the structured, physics-based approach of scientific comput-
ing.
• Wind Turbine Wake Modelling: Algorithms and computational methods used to
simulate and predict the wake effects produced by wind turbines. These models
characterize complex flow patterns, including velocity deficits and turbulence, oc-
curring downstream of turbines. This is crucial for optimizing wind farm layouts,
estimating energy production, and mitigating impacts on downstream turbines.
In this chapter, we will try to give an overview of the current research ecosystem around
these domains and their intersection. Finally, we will put this thesis into context as to how
it adds to the current research ecosystem
2.1
Scientific Machine Learning
To fully grasp the significance of Scientific Machine Learning (SciML), one must first con-
sider the role of scientific computing in solving fundamental scientific problems. Scientific
computing is a field dedicated to solving complex scientific problems by using computa-
tional methods. This often means finding numerical solutions to Partial Differential Equa-
tions (PDEs). Many established numerical methods to solve PDEs can achieve a very
high accuracy, and most importantly there is a robust theoretical framework behind them.
The theoretical framework of established numerical methods such as the Finite Elements
Method (FEM), Finite Difference Method (FDM), Finite Volume Method (FVM) and Spec-
tral Methods includes theorems and proofs that guarantee convergence, stability and er-
ror bounds making them very safe and applicable for engineering. There are however
limitations to the traditional solvers. There is a trade-off between resolution and computa-
tion time, meaning that highly accurate solutions require a long time to run and can be a
bottleneck for engineering development. Moreover, changing parameters, boundary con-
ditions, initial conditions or resolution requires the whole computation to be re-run from
scratch. The field of Scientific Machine Learning aims to address these challenges by
incorporating Machine Learning techniques.
In this field, a core strategy utilizes Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) [11]. ANNs can
approximate solutions to PDEs, because of their universal function approximation capa-
bilities [12], meaning that a feed-forward neural network with at least one hidden layer can
approximate any non-linear function. These methods are computationally expensive to
train and do not have convergence guarantees or, in general, a robust framework such as
the one for established numerical methods. However, once trained, the inference time can
be much lower than traditional solvers. Although very promising, these kinds of methods
have weak generalisation capabilities, lower accuracy than traditional solvers and, like
traditional solvers they are resolution-dependent, meaning that a change in the training
data resolution requires re-training of the networks.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
5
==PAGE:14==
One way to improve the generalisation capabilities of ANNs applied to PDEs is through
Physics Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) as introduced by Raissi et al. [13], which
take advantage of the built-in automatic differentiation capabilities of ANNs to incorporate
Physical laws into the loss function. This leads the network to learn a map that not only
minimises the residuals from the training data but also satisfies the physical laws, often
encoded as residuals to a partial differential equation. These kinds of approaches show
much better extrapolation capabilities but still suffer from the other downsides of ANNs
applications to PDEs such as lower accuracy and resolution-dependency, with the further
difficulty of accurately stating the physical laws and balancing the physical loss term with
the data-driven loss term. Wang et al. [14] offer a comprehensive review of common
pitfalls encountered when training PINNs, highlighting the critical importance of adhering
to various optimization steps to ensure their effective performance. This reliance on nu-
merous tricks and hacks to achieve functionality underscores a significant drawback of
PINNs, casting doubt on their practicality and robustness in real-world applications.
Operator-based techniques have emerged as a powerful paradigm in SciML. These tech-
niques leverage the concept of learning mappings between infinite-dimensional spaces,
which is fundamentally different from the finite-dimensional mappings typically handled
by standard ANNs. The theoretical foundation for these techniques stems from the ap-
proximation theorem for operators [15] stating that a single non-linear layer in a neural
network can approximate any continuous operator.
Deep Operator Networks (DeepONets), introduced by Lu et al. [16], represent a sig-
nificant advancement in operator-based techniques. DeepONets are designed to learn
mappings from a given input function to an output function, effectively approximating the
underlying operator that governs the transformation. This is achieved by structuring the
network into two branches: A branch net that processes the input function at specific
points, and a trunk net that encodes the domain of the output function.
Another approach to operator learning, neural operators, proposes a mesh-independent
and resolution-invariant approach to learning operators. Neural operators, as detailed by
Kovachki et al. [7] abstract the learning process further by focusing on the continuous
nature of the input and output spaces, rather than discretizing these spaces as in tradi-
tional methods or even DeepONets. This abstraction enables neural operators to learn
mappings that are not tied to a specific resolution or mesh, offering significant advantages
in terms of flexibility and efficiency.
Neural operators function by learning a representation of the operator, which can then
be applied to any input function within the learned space, regardless of its resolution.
This approach addresses the computational bottlenecks associated with high-resolution
simulations and circumvents the need to re-train the model for different resolutions or dis-
cretizations. As such, neural operators represent a paradigm shift in how computational
problems in science and engineering can be approached.
While deep operator networks (deepONets) have been explored for multi-fidelity approaches,
they often struggle to efficiently generalize across data of varying quality. DeepONets can
be adapted for multi-fidelity problems by aiding the learning process through low-fidelity
data, to limit the need for high-fidelity data [17]. However, this approach doesn’t fully ad-
dress the challenge of developing an operator that is invariant to the fidelity or resolution
of the input data. It is instead a technique to reduce the amount of data needed.
This is where the Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) offers a more effective solution for han-
dling multi-fidelity data. FNOs are inherently resolution-invariant and they can seamlessly
6
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:15==
handle data at different fidelity levels without changes to the network architecture.
Nevertheless, multi-fidelity training approaches have been explored for the FNO as well.
FNO improves prediction accuracy by initially training on lower-quality data and fine-tuning
with higher-quality data. This method outperforms traditional strategies that rely solely on
high-fidelity data and also surpasses other deep learning models like U-Net and CNNs
when trained under comparable conditions [18].
FNO’s ability to operate independently of resolution is a significant advantage, making it
versatile across various domains. For instance, in the downscaling of climate data, FNO
achieves remarkable results without the need for initial high-resolution training, outper-
forming established methods like Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and Convo-
lutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [19] [20]. It also excels in reconstructing fluid flow from
sparse data, proving to be more effective than methods based on Proper Orthogonal De-
composition (POD) and CNNs [21].
Highlighting FNO’s capabilities, FourCastNet, an advanced global weather prediction model,
leverages Adaptive Fourier Neural Operators and transformers to achieve unparalleled
accuracy in weather forecasting. Importantly, it also significantly reduces prediction times,
illustrating FNO’s ability to enhance both the precision and efficiency of computational
models [22].
An overview of the methods described in this section can be found in figure 2.1
PROS
CONS
PRECISE: Arbitrarily high accuracy
SLOW
TRUSTWORTHY: Theorems for
stability and convergence
RESOLUTION-DEPENDENT
STAND-ALONE: New
parameters require a new run
NUMERICAL SOLVERS
VANILLA
ANN-SURROGATES
PROS
CONS
FAST INFERENCE
STAND-ALONE
RESOLUTION-DEPENDENT
CANNOT EXTRAPOLATE
DATA HUNGRY
PROS
CONS
BETTER EXTRAPOLATION THAN
ANN
STAND-ALONE
LOWER DATA REQUIREMENTS
RESOLUTION-DEPENDENT
FAST INFERENCE
REQUIRES PHYSICAL MODEL
PHYSICS INFORMED NEURAL NETWORKS
NEURAL OPERATORS
(General)
FOURIER NEURAL OPERATOR
PROS
CONS
FAST-INFERENCE
DATA HUNGRY
RESOLUTION-INVARIANT
LIMITED TO IMAGE-IMAGE
MAPPING
GENERALISE OVER MULTIPLE
PARAMETERS 
(function to function map)
PROS
CONS
FAST-INFERENCE
DATA HUNGRY
GENERALISE OVER MULTIPLE
PARAMETERS 
(function to function map)
RESOLUTION-DEPENDENT
solution
solution
solution
solution
Figure 2.1: Overview of the section with the advantages and disadvantages of the ap-
proaches described. To be read from the top-left, following the arrows for the incremental
improvements addressing the limitations.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
7
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Wake Models in Wind Energy
The importance of accurate wind turbine wake modelling cannot be overstated in the
field of wind energy, where efficiency gains significantly impact overall energy production.
The Technical University of Denmark (DTU) has been at the forefront of this research,
contributing to the field with both analytical and Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD)-
based models. A comprehensive review by Göçmen et al. [23] provides an insightful
analysis of six wake models, offering a perspective on their performance through bench-
marking against Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) measurements in
both offshore and onshore settings. The models under scrutiny include the Jensen and
Larsen models, known for their analytical approach, and the more computationally in-
tensive Dynamic Wake Meandering, Fuga, as well as Reynolds Averaged Navier Stokes
(RANS) and Large Eddy Simulations (LES) models from the Ellipsys3D solver [24, 25,
26], a 3D general-purpose CFD solver utilizing a block-structured finite volume approach.
Each model presents a distinct approach to handling inflow conditions, wake summation,
boundary conditions, rotor modelling, and governing equations, resulting in varying levels
of complexity, fidelity, and computational demands.
The comparative analysis reveals that RANS-based models emerge as a promising com-
promise between model fidelity and computational efficiency. Further advancements in
RANS methodologies have aimed to enhance their applicability and accuracy. Notable
improvements include the development of multi-fidelity models by combining the Larsen
model and a RANS-based model [27], the integration of data-driven surrogates through
ANNs [6], the creation of lookup tables [5], and novel parametrizations such as the al-
ready mentioned RANS-AWF [3], each contributing to the refinement and practicality of
wake modelling for wind turbines.
The application of CFD approaches to Wake modelling has garnered interest beyond the
scope of DTU’s pioneering work. An editorial review in energies [28] provides a contem-
porary overview, highlighting the prominence of LES and RANS techniques. Sanderse
et al. [29] give an older but more comprehensive review, with more context into the field
and comparisons of different methods to model the rotors. The actuator disk is found to
be the most computationally viable one. Finally, it advocates for RANS due to its superior
computational efficiency, despite its lower fidelity compared to LES. Furthermore, the au-
thors call for methods to quantify uncertainty in wake models and coupling with mesoscale
atmospheric models.
In terms of data-driven surrogates of CFD models, Zhang et al. [30] have used a Con-
volutional Neural Network Autoencoder to learn a surrogate of LES simulations with an
actuator surface model of the rotor. In their setup, they train on LES simulations snap-
shots and output and validate on the time-averaged flow field and show good results for
their test case of wind turbines at the Sandia National Laboratories Scaled Wind Farm
Technology (SWiFT) facility.
2.3
Summary
We have summarized the current research ecosystem around wake models and how it
is turning towards RANS-based models as the go-to approach to balance fidelity and
computation time. This also allows us to explore and validate data-driven surrogates on
data that is accurate but not prohibitively expensive to generate.
The Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) is selected as the foundation for our data-driven en-
coding approach due to its unique property of encoding function maps which are resolution
invariant, setting it apart from other competing methods.
8
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:17==
The capacity to integrate and learn from multi-fidelity data further positions FNOs as a
practical tool for encoding RANS-based simulations.
Leveraging both high- and low-
fidelity data allows for significant improvements in simulation fidelity, particularly valuable
in scenarios where high-fidelity data are limited or costly to acquire. These scenarios
could arise in future expansions of this study and are important to keep in mind.
Moreover, FNOs, like other neural operator-based techniques, have the potential to gen-
eralize across varying flow conditions and turbine configurations, enhancing their applica-
bility. The high inference speed of FNOs further satisfies one of the primary requirements
of an ideal wake model, ensuring efficiency and practicality.
In summary, applying FNOs in wind turbine and wind farm wake simulations presents
a promising approach. It combines resolution independence, multi-fidelity data utiliza-
tion, and computational efficiency. This method addresses current modelling challenges,
marking a potentially significant advancement in wind energy research.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
9
==PAGE:18==
10
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:19==
3
The Fourier Neural Operator
This chapter summarises the formal definition of the Fourier Neural Operator as presented
by Li et al. [8]. First, the mathematical framework is conceptualised, and then the neu-
ral operator is presented in a general way. Then the specific Fourier Neural Operator is
presented with figure 3.1 giving a visual representation of the structure. From here we
segway into the code correspondence of the implementation from the neuraloperators
library [31] to provide a section that is friendly to both the mathematician and the pro-
grammer. We then get into more specifics about the Multi-Grid Tensorized Fourier Neural
Operator and how it improves the FNO.
3.1
Problem setup
Let D ⊂Rd be a bounded and open set, A = A
 D; Rda
and U = U
 D; Rdu
be separable
Banach spaces of functions taking values in Rda and Rdu respectively.
Let G† : A →U be a general map between A and U.
Suppose we have observations {aj, uj}N
j=1 where aj is sampled from A and uj = G† (aj).
Here we use the † symbol to represent the ”true” mapping that is to be learned by the
operator.
We define the parametric map
G : A × Θ →U
or equivalently,
Gθ : A →U,
θ ∈Θ
(3.1)
for some finite-dimensional parameter space Θ by choosing θ† ∈Θ so that G
 ·, θ†
=
Gθ† ≈G†.
We can define a cost functional C : U ×U →R and seek a minimiser of the problem which
will then become the Loss in the neural network architecture which aims to find G.
min
θ∈Θ
h
C

G(a, θ), G†(a)
i
.
(3.2)
Practically speaking, θ represents the parameters, i.e. the weights of the underlying neural
network.
3.2
Neural Operator
The neural operator, as proposed in [7], is formulated as an iterative architecture v0 7→
v1 7→. . . 7→vT where vj for j = 0, 1, . . . , T −1 is a sequence of functions each taking
values in Rdv. In general, one can identify three components.
1. The input a ∈A is lifted to a higher dimensional representation v0(x) = P(a(x)) by
P which is usually parameterized by a neural network.
2. Iterations of updates vt 7→vt+1 (defined below).
3. The output u(x) = Q (vT (x)) is the projection of vT by Q : Rdv →Rdu.
The updates described in point 2 above vt 7→vt+1 take the form
vt+1(x) := σ (Wvt(x) + (K(a; ϕ)vt) (x)) ,
∀x ∈D
(3.3)
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
11
==PAGE:20==
where K is parameterized by ϕ ∈ΘK, W : Rdv →Rdv is a linear transformation, and
σ : R →R is a non-linear activation function. K(a; ϕ) is described as a kernel integral
operator:
(K(a; ϕ)vt) (x) :=
Z
D
κ(x, y, a(x), a(y); ϕ)vt(y)dy,
∀x ∈D
(3.4)
Note that at this stage κ is some unknown function. The way we decide to constrain or
parametrise this function is effectively what separates the different sorts of neural opera-
tors as they are described by Kovachki et al. [7]. In general, a Kernel Integral Operator
is also known as an integral transform and many commonly used transforms fall into this
class, such as the Fourier Transform or the Laplace Transform. So to get into the specifics
of the Fourier Neural Operator, what we do is specify the form or better said the constraints
that are put on κ.
3.3
Fourier Neural Operator
If we remove the dependence on a and we impose κϕ(x, y) = κϕ(x −y), then we obtain a
convolution operator. If we apply the convolution theorem (the Fourier transform of a con-
volution of two functions (or signals) is the pointwise product of their Fourier transforms)
we get that the Kernel integral operator becomes
(K(a; ϕ)vt) (x) = F−1 (F (κϕ) · F (vt)) (x),
∀x ∈D
(3.5)
where F is the Fourier Transform. This is used to parametrize κϕ directly in Fourier space.
(K(ϕ)vt) (x) = F−1 (Rϕ · (Fvt)) (x)
∀x ∈D
(3.6)
where Rϕ is the Fourier transform of a periodic function κ : ¯D →Rdv×dv parameterized
by ϕ ∈ΘK.
Since κ is assumed to be periodic, it admits a Fourier series expansion, this allows us to
work with the discrete modes k ∈Zd. The Fourier series is truncated at a maximal number
of modes kmax, which allows for a finite-dimensional parametrisation of Rϕ as a complex-
valued (kmax × dv × dv)-tensor comprising a collection of truncated Fourier modes. We
can constrain R to be conjugate symmetric since κ is real-valued.
In practical applications the domain D is discretized with n ∈N points, thus vt ∈Rn×dv and
F (vt) ∈Cn×dv. Since we convolve vt with a function which only has kmax Fourier modes,
we may simply truncate the higher modes to obtain F (vt) ∈Ckmax×dv. Multiplication by
the weight tensor R ∈Ckmax×dv×dv leads then to
(R · (Fvt))k,l =
dv
X
j=1
Rk,l,j (Fvt)k,j ,
k = 1, . . . , kmax,
j = 1, . . . , dv.
(3.7)
When the discretization is uniform with resolution s1 × · · · × sd = n, F can be replaced by
the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT).
12
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.1: (a) The full architecture of neural operator. (b) Fourier layers. Figure from Li
et al. [8]
3.3.1
Code equivalents of the theory
In the matter of a practical implementation the values for da,dv,du are respectively the
number input channels, the hidden channels and the output channels. These represent
the dimensions of the data. In most cases, and specifically in the cases treated in this
thesis, the shape of the tensor data is (batch size, number of channels, width, height). In
terms of the notation used in the theory, the spatial dimensions are si, so the width corre-
sponds to s1 and the height corresponds to s2, lowecase d is the number of dimensions
and n is the number of points in a sample (s1 × · · · × sd = n).
So aj will have shape (batch size, da, s1, s2) and uj will have shape (batch size, du,s1,
s2). Both maps P and Q are used to lift or project the data onto spaces of different di-
mensions. This is done through Convolutional Neural networks (CNNs) with kernel size
of one. These 1 × 1 convolutions are a common choice in CNNs to reduce or expand
the number of channels and to parametrise a channel-wise map without considering the
spatial structures in the image. Specifically, these maps have two layers so for example
for P it goes from da to an intermediate amount of dimensions first and then to dv. Later
in section 5 we will call this intermediate number of dimensions lifting_channels. In the
case of Q the intermediate channel will be called projection_channels. dv will be called
hidden_channels.
Fourier Layer
Equation (3.3) describes the general form of the operator layer, in that context, Wvt(x)
is the skip connection which is a matrix multiplication, implemented using 1 × 1 convolu-
tions layers without activation function. The activation function is by default a Gaussian
Error Linear Unit (GELU), but in principle, any activation function could work. The Kernel
Integral Operator is implemented using Spectral convolutions as described below.
A discrete fourier transform is taken along the spatial dimensions s1 and s2, the size of
the fourier transform Fvt is (batch_size, dv, s1, s2/2 + 1). The reason for the size change
in the last dimension is because The FFT of a real signal is Hermitian-symmetric so the
full FFT output contains redundant information. torch.fft.rfftn() is used to calculate the
FFT, which instead omits the negative frequencies in the last dimension. The number of
modes kmax is a d dimensional element (recall that in this case d = 2) with the number
of fourier modes (k1, k2/2 + 1) where (k1,k2) are set as n_modes in section 5. For the
remaining part of the spectral convolution an empty tensor of shape (batch_size, dv, s1,
s2/2 + 1) is initialised and filled using (3.7). R is effectively the weight tensor and where
the fundamental learning happens, these are the values that get backpropagated.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
13
==PAGE:22==
In adherence to (3.7) this procedure involves the contraction of the input tensor, Fvt, with
a transformation matrix R. It systematically computes the sum of products between Rk,l,j
and (Fvt)k,j iterating across j which indexes the channels in the input tensor for each k
and l, where k indexes the modes, and l indexes the output channels.
The output is then inverse transformed and added to the skip connection and finally the
non-linearity is applied, again a GELU function or the function defined at initialisation.
3.4
Multi-Grid Tensorized Fourier Neural Operator
In practice we use many of the extensions to the original FNO, as presented by Kossaifi et
al [32] which improve the performance and scalability of the original FNO algorithm while
also improving the accuracy.
3.4.1
Multi-Grid Decomposition
This modification of the FNO algorithm includes a domain decomposition, where the in-
put domain is decomposed into local regions with the addition of hierarchical levels of
information. The farther regions of the domain are being downsampled to lower resolu-
tions in proportion to the distance from the lower level. This can be better understood
from figure 3.2 which is taken from the original paper and summarises the improvements.
To make this decomposition work, this improved version of the algorithm employs an H1
Sobolev norm as loss which combines the L2 norm of the function itself (which measures
the square-integrable size of the function) and the L2 norm of its gradient (which mea-
sures the square-integrable size of the function’s rate of change). This ensures smooth
predictions.
Note that the multi-grid domain decomposition is based on the idea that the solution in
a local region of space depends (mostly) on the input in the same local region. Note
that this approach is only implemented for square inputs. This is not the case for the
RANS-AWF dataset employed and is thus not used by us. It is nevertheless an interesting
improvement of the FNO architecture for large scale problems that is worth mentioning
for the completeness of the chapter.
3.4.2
Tensor Factorisation
Among the T layers of the FNO, the weights in the Fourier domain for each layer (Rϕ)
can be parametrised into a single tensor Z. With increasing layers, dimensions, or input
sizes, the number of learnable parameters can increase exponentially fast.
To tackle the problem but still allow the FNO to be large enough to capture complex pat-
terns, Kossaifi et al. [32] propose a low-rank tensor factorisation for Z by means of Tucker
decomposition. This factorisation allows the model to maintain a lower number of param-
eters while providing regularization, thereby both increasing performance and decreasing
memory requirements.
The Tucker decomposition factorizes a tensor into a core tensor multiplied by a matrix
along each mode (dimension) of the tensor. Consider, for simplicity, Z to be a 3D tensor
although the concepts that follow can be generalized to N-dimensional tensors.
The Tucker decomposition can be denoted as:
Z ≈Z ×1 A ×2 B ×3 C
where Z is the core tensor, and A, B, C are the factor matrices corresponding to each
mode of the tensor Z. Here, ×n denotes the n-mode product between a tensor and a
matrix.
14
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.2: Overview of the MG-TFNO, from Kossaifi et al [32]. ”First (left), a multi-grid
approach is used to create coarse to fine inputs that capture high-resolution details in a
local region while still encoding global context. The resulting regions are fed to a ten-
sorized Fourier operator (middle), the parameters of which are jointly represented in a
single latent space via a low-rank tensor factorization (here, a Tucker form). Here F de-
notes Fourier transform. Finally, the outputs (right) are stitched back together to form the
full result. Smoothness in the output is ensured via the choice of the loss function.”
Formally, the n-mode product of a tensor X ∈RI1×I2···×IN and a matrix U ∈RJ×In along
mode n is defined as:
(X ×n U)i1...in−1jin+1...iN =
In
X
in=1
Xi1...in...iN Ujin
This decomposition significantly reduces the number of parameters in the model by allow-
ing Z to be much smaller than Z, and the matrices A, B, and C to compactly represent
the original tensor’s modes.
To control the level of factorization, a rank parameter is used in the implementation. This
parameter specifies the dimensions of the core tensor Z and indirectly the dimensions of
the factor matrices A, B, and C. By setting the rank parameter to a value less than 1,
we scale the dimensions of each mode of the tensor by this factor, effectively reducing
the overall number of parameters. For example, a rank of 0.8 implies that each mode’s
dimensions are reduced to 80% of their original values, maintaining 80% of the tensor’s
parameters.
3.4.3
Backbone Improvements
Preactivation
Adds a non-linearity before the FNO block, the same as the ones used in other parts of
the network, by default a Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GELU).
Skip connection
Three skip connection options can be chosen:
• Soft-gating applies soft-gating by weighting the channels of the given input. Given
an input x of size ‘(batch-size, channels, height, width)‘, this returns ‘x * w ‘ where w
is of shape ‘(1, channels, 1, 1)‘.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
15
==PAGE:24==
• Linear does a 1x1 convolution as the default approach explained earlier in the chap-
ter
• Identity does an identity mapping
Use MLP
If use mlp is set to true, then a non-linearity is applied and a channelwise Multi-Layer
Perceptron (MLP), again in the form of 1x1 convolutions plus the same skip connection
as the FNO skip connection, unless otherwise specified.
16
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:25==
4
RANS-AWF
This chapter aims at providing context to the RANS-AWF approach to wake modelling
by first introducing the physical problem description and the governing equations. This
is followed by a rough derivation of the RANS equations and a small discussion about
turbulence closure models. Finally we lead to modelling choices when applying RANS to
wake models for wind energy and the specific case of RANS-AWF.
4.1
Governing Equations
One can assume the fluid flow in wind turbine wakes to be governed by the incompressible
Navier-Stokes equations in the case of wind speeds in the range of 5 −25m/s and when
not considering the blade tips. The equations describe mass and momentum conservation
and can be written as
∂u
∂t + (u · ∇)u = −∇p + 1
Re∇2u
(4.1a)
∇· u = 0
(4.1b)
plus eventual boundary, initial conditions and external forces. where u is the flow field, p
is the pressure and Re is the Reynolds number.
Reynolds Number
The Reynolds number is a dimensionless quantity that characterizes the nature of the
flow. High Reynold numbers indicate turbulent flow, while low numbers indicate laminar
flow. It is defined as:
Re = vL
ν ,
(4.2)
where:
• v is the characteristic velocity of the fluid, which is chosen to represent the typical
speed of the fluid in the region or situation of interest
• ν is the kinematic viscosity, which is a measure of a fluid’s resistance to flow and
deformation under gravity and is defined as the ratio of the dynamic viscosity µ to
the fluid density ρ, ν = µ
ρ.
• L is a characteristic length scale of the system, in our case, it could be for example
the diameter of the rotor of a wind turbine.
To resolve all turbulence scales exactly, a direct numerical simulation would be required,
which is not a feasible option from a computational perspective. The alternative is to
employ turbulence models which take into account the turbulence without modelling it
directly. One such method is the Reynold Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS).
4.2
RANS
The following derivation is inspired by chapter 7 in Alexander J. Smits lecture notes on
fluid dynamics [33].
In RANS, the flow quantities are split into an average and a fluctuating component, in what
is called Reynolds decomposition. So the flow field u can be separated into its average
component u and its fluctuating component u′
u(x, t) = u(x) + u′(x, t)
(4.3)
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
17
==PAGE:26==
Consider that u in general is a vector of components (u1, u2, u3). When plugging this into
the mass conservation (4.1b) we find
∇u = 0 = ∂u1
∂x + ∂u2
∂y + ∂u3
∂z + ∂u′
1
∂x + ∂u′
2
∂y + ∂u′
3
∂z
(4.4)
By time averaging this equation we find that all fluctuating components equate to zero
which in turn also means that all of the averaged components also need to equate to zero
so:
∇· u = 0
(4.5)
and
∇· u′ = 0
(4.6)
Moving on to the momentum we show what happens when plugging the Reynolds decom-
position into the equation. Since this derivation can be messy when using all coordinates,
we limit to one coordinate only, which nevertheless allows to show the main ideas. The
momentum equation for the u1 components becomes
∂u1
∂t +

u1
∂
∂x + u2
∂
∂y + u3
∂
∂z

u1 = −∂p
∂x + 1
Re∇2u.
(4.7)
Applying the Reynolds decomposition we get
∂
∂t(u1 + u′
1) + u1
∂u1
∂x + u1
∂u′
1
∂x + u′
1
∂u1
∂x + u′
1
∂u′
1
∂x
(4.8)
+u2
∂u2
∂y + u2
∂u′
2
∂y + u′
2
∂u2
∂y + u′
2
∂u′
2
∂y
(4.9)
+u3
∂u3
∂z + u3
∂u′
3
∂z + u′
3
∂u3
∂z + u′
3
∂u′
3
∂z
(4.10)
= −∂p
∂x −∂p′
∂x + 1
Re∇2u1 + 1
Re∇2u′
1.
(4.11)
By time averaging the whole equation many terms disappear and we are left with
u1
∂u1
∂x + u′
1
∂u′
1
∂x + u2
∂u2
∂y + u′
2
∂u′
2
∂y + u3
∂u3
∂z + u′
3
∂u′
3
∂z = −∂p
∂x + 1
Re∇2u1.
(4.12)
This can be rearranged by using the chain rule, for u1, u′
1
∂u′
1
∂x = ∂u′
1u′
1
∂x
−u′
1
∂u′
1
∂x and similarly
for the u2 and u3 terms. One finds that the second terms for the three expressions sum
up to u′
1(∇· u′) = 0. So the equation becomes:
u1
∂u1
∂x + u2
∂u2
∂y + u3
∂u3
∂z + ∂u′
1u′
1
∂x
+ ∂u′
1u′
2
∂y
+ ∂u′
1u′
3
∂z
|
{z
}
Reynolds stresses
= −∂p
∂x + 1
Re∇2u1.
(4.13)
This is the resulting equation for the first component, which is similar to what one would
get for the other components.
From here on most of the effort is in modelling the Reynolds stresses, which are the
components 4,5,6 of the equation. The Reynold stresses can be interpreted as turbulent
diffusive forces
18
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:27==
The whole equations can be written for the vector u as
(u∇)u + ∇(u′u′) = −∇p + 1
Re∇2u,
(4.14)
or equivalently in terms of of the fluid density ρ and kinematic viscosity ν as
(u∇)u + ∇(u′u′) = −1
ρ∇p + ν∇2u.
(4.15)
To get rid of the fluctuating components and only model the flow based on the averaged
component we try to express the fluctuating components in term of the mean flow. A com-
mon approach uses the Boussinesq hypothesis [34] relating the Reynolds stress tensor
with the mean velocity gradients through the turbulent Eddy viscosity νT . Two of the most
commonly used turbulence closure models in wind energy wake applications are the k −ϵ
and k −ω models [29]. The k −ϵ model employs one PDE for the turbulent kinetic en-
ergy k and one for the turbulent diffusion ϵ, with a number of constants that have been
determined by applying the model to general flow situations.
The k −ω model has one PDE for the turbulent kinetic energy k and one for the rate of
dissipation ω of k into internal thermal energy. This model has been found to be better
near blade surfaces [29].
4.3
RANS Application to Wake Modelling and RANS-AWF
To apply RANS to wake modelling in wind energy there are a couple of things left to be
specified. These are
• Rotor Model and wind turbine model.
• Boundary conditions, including Inflow and outflow conditions.
• Mesh and resolution.
• Meso-scale effects
Rotor and Wind turbine model
The two main rotor models that are of interest to us are the Actuator Disk (AD) and the
Actuator Wind Farm (AWF). The rotor exerts a force f on the flow acting as a momentum
sink. In the AD model, f acts on the rotor as a disk of surface A and it is expressed in
terms of the thrust coefficient CT . The axial force can be expressed as
f = 1
2ρU 2
refCT A,
(4.16)
with Uref as the reference inflow wind speed, which for the upstream turbines can be
taken to be equal to U∞(i.e. the ambient wind speed, assumed to be constant), while for
wake affected turbines, different estimation methods exist.
In the Actuator Wind Farm approach, the wind farm is modelled as a single entity with a
distributed thrust force
Fwf(x, y, z) = 1
2ρCT,wfA(x, y, x))|U|Ui
(4.17)
where CT,wf is the wind farm thrust coefficient, A(x, y, z) is the wind farm force distribution
representative of the wind turbine density, and Ui is the local velocity vector.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
19
==PAGE:28==
A(x, y, z) is distributed over a Cartesian grid, with the vertical component representing the
rotor area slices and the horizontal one representing the wind turbine density. The wind
turbine positions are represented as two-dimensional Gaussian functions f(x, y)
f(x, y) = exp

−(x −xwt)2
2σ2x
−(y −ywt)2
2σ2y

,
(4.18)
where xwt and ywt describe the wind turbine positions and σx and σy the standard de-
viations in the x and y direction. The horizontal force distribution is finally obtained by
superposing the Gaussian functions for each turbine. Equation (4.17) depends on the
local velocity and a local wind farm thrust coefficient CT,wf.
CT,wf is a function of both inflow wind speed and wind direction and it is calculated numer-
ically by first running turbine specific simulations (for instance RANS-AD) to calculate the
total wind farm thrust force for a range of wind speed and directions. Then the RANS-AWF
simulations are performed for the same flow cases to calculate CT,wf using an iterative
algorithm as described in Van Der Laan et al [3].
Boundary conditions, Mesh and Meso-scale effects
The other points mentioned can be grouped together since they are very interdependent.
In the simulation of wind farm wakes, accurately modeling the inflow conditions is crucial
for capturing the dynamics of wind flow within the farm. Ideally, one could employ an
Atmospheric Boundary Layer (ABL) model incorporating Coriolis forces and atmospheric
turbulence to simulate the inflow with high fidelity. This approach would allow for the
inclusion of meso-scale effects, providing a detailed representation of the atmospheric
conditions impacting the wind farm. However, a comprehensive ABL model may extend
beyond the practical scope of our study. Therefore, to maintain a focused and manageable
research scope, we will utilize a constant inflow model. This simplified model serves as
a pragmatic compromise, enabling us to explore the core objectives of enhancing wind
farm wake simulations using the Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) without the complexities
introduced by varying atmospheric conditions.
It is common practice to set the boundary conditions to a constant velocity, denoted as U∞,
while employing a Cartesian grid for spatial discretization. This grid sometimes features
a non-uniform resolution that becomes more coarse towards the boundaries to efficiently
capture the flow dynamics with a lower computational cost. However, to apply the FNO
we require a uniform resolution across the Cartesian grid which allows to use the Fast
Fourier Transform.
20
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:29==
5
Setup
This chapter is meant to give a detailed description of our data generation process and our
technical setup, there are details which are necessary for the full understanding of the work
but that might not be fully required if the reader just aims at a high-level understanding.
We start by describing our datasets and data generation and then move on by detailing
the code setup and the hyperparameters handling.
5.1
Data Generation
Two data sets are used in the scope of this work, the first being a simple synthetically
generated data set and the second is the data set representing the RANS-AWF flow cases.
The synthetic data set is mainly used to gain some basic experience and an intuitive
understanding of the algorithm.
5.1.1
Synthetic Dataset
To start validating the code and the algorithm and to start learning some lessons about
it we generate a synthetic dataset. The dataset is generated by creating random input
conditions as sparse matrices with a random amount of ones between 1 and ⌈N/10⌉,
where the N is the size of the matrix. Here the interval is closed on the left and open on
the right. So a 64 × 64 size matrix will have a number of ones that is sampled between 1
and 7 and then randomly placed on the matrix.
The operator that we try to approximate in this dataset applies a transformation of the input
mapping to three separate channels, all as super-positions of functions of the distance to
each point and parameterised by a dilation parameter. The function for the first channel
is a Gaussian function, the second one a sine and the third one a cosine. This synthetic
operator is clarified in algorithm 1 and an example is shown in figure 5.1. We generate
10000 samples at a 64 × 64 resolution, 10000 at a 32 × 32 resolution and 10 at a 128 × 128
resolution. The data is generated using a Python script which follows the logic of algorithm
1.
Algorithm 1 Synthetic Operator Algorithm
Require: Input data matrix with shape N × N, dilation factor
N ←shape of input data matrix[0]
(x, y) ←indices of non-zero elements in input data
n_points ←number of non-zero elements
output ←zero matrix of shape (3, N, N)
for i in range(n_points) do
for j in range(N) do
for k in range(N) do
dist ←
p
(x[i] −j)2 + (y[i] −k)2/N
output[0, j, k] ←output[0, j, k] + exp(−dist2/dilation)
output[1, j, k] ←output[1, j, k] + sin(dist/dilation)
output[2, j, k] ←output[2, j, k] + cos(dist/dilation)
end for
end for
end for
output ←normalize each channel between -1 and 1
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 5.1: Example of a sample from the synthetic operator described in algorithm 1.
Input conditions on top and the three output channels on the bottom. dilation 0.05. All
values displayed are dimensionless.
5.1.2
RANS-AWF
The RANS-AWF data is simulated using the flow solver EllipSys3D [24, 25, 26] using a
generic wind turbine model based on the turbine used in Van der Laan et al. [4], charac-
terised by the specific parameters: A rotor diameter of 236 m, from here on we refer to it
as D, hub height of 150 m thrust coefficient of 0.8, power coefficient of 0.45 and tip speed
ratio of 8.0.
Figure 5.2: Example of one of the flow cases in the dataset with inflow wind direction at
290° and wind turbine inter-spacing s/D = 7, wind farm force distribution [ m−2 ] on the
left and the corresponding downstream wind speed as a fraction of the inflow wind speed
on the right. Wind inflowing from top to bottom.
22
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:31==
We simulate conditions with a wind speed at hub height set to 10 m/s, covering wind di-
rections from 270 to 315 degrees at 3-degree intervals. This range is selected to represent
varying wind farm orientations, effectively treating each direction as a unique layout con-
figuration. The ambient turbulence intensity is maintained at 4.7%. The resulting flow
variables are scaled to an inflow of 1 m/s. We only consider the flow at hub height and
for the refined area around the wind farm where a uniform horizontal spacing is applied.
The resulting data is thus two-dimensional on the plane of the hub height.
Four uniformly spaced horizontal grid sizes are applied around the wind farm: dx = dy =
2D, D, D/2, D/4, each leading to a different resolution.
Several wind turbine inter-spacing of s/D = 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. are used, which together with ten
different geometries, give 50 different wind farm layouts. The geometries used are:
• 2 × 2
• 3 × 3
• 4 × 4
• 3 × 3 - minus 1, where the centre tur-
bine is missing
• 4 × 4 - minus 1, where a single inner
turbine is missing, for example, the
NW turbine
• 4 × 4 - minus 1, where a single inner
turbine is missing, for example, the
SE turbine
• 4 × 4 - minus 2, where two inner tur-
bines are missing, for example, the
two North turbines
• 4 × 4 - minus 2, where two inner tur-
bines are missing, for example, the
NW and SE turbines
• 4 × 4 - minus 3, where three inner tur-
bines are missing, for example, the
NW, SW, and SE turbines
• 4 × 4 - minus 4, where all inner four
turbines are missing
All layouts are presented in the Appendix. These layouts could all be considered ”regular”
but by introducing missing turbines, we create more complex flow situations. This can
also happen for real wind farms, where sometimes a planned turbine cannot be built. For
example, two turbines are missing in the Lillgrund offshore wind farm due to a shipwreck.
The turbines are placed in a square area that fits the largest applied layout. The actual
area is larger to resolve the wind farm flow, 10D for the western, northern and southern
margins, and 72D (corresponding to 3 wind farm lengths) for the eastern (downstream)
margin.
The input data is the wind farm force distribution A as in (4.17) and the output considered
is the stream-wise wind speed U normalised with respect to U∞.
This results in 16 × 5 × 10 = 800 cases for each of the four grid levels, leading to 3200
total cases, the resulting flow resolutions are 59 × 28, 117 × 55, 233 × 109 and 465 × 217.
Note that the angle range chosen covers all cases in the case of a regular layout due
to symmetry. That is not the case however for irregular layouts. There some weaker
symmetries come into play. So the layouts are not exactly the same, but in most cases,
their mirrored version will be covered in the dataset. In other cases, although not covered
in the dataset we claim that the layouts will be similar enough. See an example of the
rotation of an irregular layout in figure 5.3
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5.3: Example of an irregular layout at different inflow angles.
5.2
Implementation
This section outlines the practical steps taken to implement our Fourier Neural Operator
(FNO)-based model for wind farm wake simulation fidelity enhancement. It details the
configuration and training setup in a higher level of detail, with algorithms and specifica-
tions.
Note that as the work in this thesis progressed, the setup has been updated iteratively.
Here we present the final setup.
Our implementation can be found on GitHub at https://github.com/Luca-DTU/FNO-Wake-
fidelity-Enhancement and it is based on the neural operator library, which accompanies
Kossaifi et al. [32]. We use Hydra [35] to manage the configurations and the Optuna
hyper-parameter optimisation framework [36], which seamlessly integrates with Hydra as
a plug-in, to be able to effectively search the hyper-parameter space for the best combi-
nation. For specific versioning of the libraries used, we refer to the requirements file in
the GitHub repository.
All the models are trained using the GPU queue on the DTU High-Performance Compute
cluster [37], specifically the gpuv100 and the gpua100 queues are used, which employ
respectively NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU and NVIDIA Tesla A100 GPU.
Below follows a high-level walk-through of our implementation and some aspects of the
library used.
5.2.1
Code Structure
The code is designed with a strong emphasis on object-oriented programming and mod-
ularity. Configuration files are used to manage all parameter settings.
Data Loading and Processing
Data source objects follow a consistent structure, enabling them to be loaded into the
main script according to the configuration. This allows to seamlessly switch between the
synthetic data set, the RANS-AWF dataset or any other dataset. The data source objects
include an extract method that accepts several keyword arguments. This method outputs
a tuple of tensors, X and y, each with the shape(N_samples, N_channels, width, height).
24
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:33==
Each data source object also has an evaluation method.
Algorithm 2 Data Loading and Processing
Data Loading:
Initialize DataSource based on configuration
X_train, y_train ←DataSource.extract(**train_kwargs)
X_test, y_test ←DataSource.extract(**test_kwargs)
Processing:
train_loader, test_loader, data_processor ←data_format(**kwargs)
Then the data is formatted into train_loader, test_loader and data_processor objects through
the data_format function which also defines the transformations to be applied to the data
and all of the properties of the data loaders, including batch size and multi-resolution load-
ing. The data transformation options are to standardise the input and/or output to zero
mean and unit variance and whether to add positional encoding, which adds two channels
to the input as a mesh grid defined by the grid boundaries which encodes the position of
the input relative to the boundaries. In the code, these options will be denoted respectively
by encode_input, encode_output and positional_encoding.
Model Initialisation
At this point, we initialise all of the model-related objects, such as the model itself, the
optimiser, the scheduler and the losses used for training and evaluation. Note that the
model is initialised with a number of input and output channels based on the data, so it
has to come here at the earliest.
The optimiser is a standard Adam optimiser to which a learning rate and learning rate
decay parameter are applied based on the configuration. A learning rate scheduler is used
to be defined in the configuration as one of the ones available in torch.optim.lr_scheduler.
Finally, the losses are defined, to be chosen between the L2, H1 and weighted L2 loss,
with a spatial weighting structure defined by functions called based on the configuration.
The arguments taken by the model are described below in table 5.1, directly from the
class docstring from the code base [31].
we are not going to control all of these arguments, specifically, we will look into the subset
shown in the hyper-parameters that follow at the end of this section, when not specified
the model will take the default arguments.
We use the default weight initialisation. Specifically, Xavier initialisation for the Fourier
layers, i.e.
N

0,
2
√chin + chout

,
the other components of the neural network are initialised following Pytorch default initial-
isation.
Training
At this point we pass the model to a Trainer class which we implemented with a couple
of small modifications from the neuralop Trainer class, which deals with all the boilerplate
related to training the model, namely iterating over batches, calculating losses, back-
propagation, data pre and post-processing, learning rate scheduling and performance
optimisations.
Configuration
The parameters managed in our configuration files are presented in table 5.2.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
25
==PAGE:34==
Table 5.1: Model Parameters for the Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) as implemented in
the code base [31]
Parameter
Type
Description
n_modes
int tuple
Number of modes to keep in Fourier Layer,
along each dimension. The dimensionality of
the TFNO is inferred from “len(n_modes)“.
hidden_channels
int
Width of the FNO (i.e., number of channels).
in_channels
int, optional
Number of input channels, by default 3.
out_channels
int, optional
Number of output channels, by default 1.
lifting_channels
int, optional
Number of hidden channels of the lifting block
of the FNO, by default 256.
projection_channels
int, optional
Number of hidden channels of the projection
block of the FNO, by default 256.
n_layers
int, optional
Number of Fourier Layers, by default 4.
max_n_modes
None or int tuple, optional
If not None, allows to incrementally increase
the number of modes in Fourier domain during
training. This can be updated dynamically dur-
ing training.
fno_block_precision
str ’full’, ’half’, ’mixed’, op-
tional
Precision mode for the FNO block.
stabilizer
str ’tanh’ or None, optional
Stabilizer to use before FFT in the FNO block,
by default None.
use_mlp
bool, optional
Whether to use an MLP layer after each FNO
block, by default False.
mlp_dropout
float, optional
Dropout parameter of MLP layer, by default 0.
mlp_expansion
float, optional
Expansion parameter of MLP layer, by default
0.5.
non_linearity
nn.Module, optional
Non-Linearity module to use, by default F.gelu.
norm
F.module, optional
Normalization layer to use, by default None.
preactivation
bool, default is False
If True, use resnet-style preactivation.
fno_skip
’linear’, ’identity’, ’soft-gating’,
optional
Type of skip connection to use in FNO, by de-
fault ’linear’.
mlp_skip
’linear’, ’identity’, ’soft-gating’,
optional
Type of skip connection to use in MLP, by default
’soft-gating’.
separable
bool, default is False
If True, use a depthwise separable spectral con-
volution.
factorization
str or None, ’tucker’, ’cp’, ’tt’,
optional
Tensor factorization of the parameters weight to
use, by default None.
joint_factorization
bool, optional
Whether all the Fourier Layers should be
parametrized by a single tensor (vs one per
layer), by default False.
rank
float or rank, optional
Rank of the tensor factorization of the Fourier
weights, by default 1.0.
fixed_rank_modes
bool, optional
Modes to not factorize, by default False.
implementation
’factorized’,
’reconstructed’,
optional
Forward mode to use if factorization is not None.
decomposition_kwargs
dict, optional
Additional parameters to pass to the tensor de-
composition, by default .
domain_padding
None or float, optional
Percentage of padding to use, by default None.
domain_padding_mode
’symmetric’, ’one-sided’, op-
tional
How to perform domain padding, by default
’one-sided’.
fft_norm
str, optional
FFT normalization mode, by default ’forward’.
26
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:35==
Table 5.2: Configuration Parameters
Parameter Group
Parameter
Comment
TFNO
as in table 5.1
adam
lr
float
weight_decay
float
scheduler
name
pytorch class name
args
keyword arguments
train
epochs
int
batch_size
int
test_batch_size
int
loss
l2, h1 or weightedL2
test_loss
loss_weighting_function
list, for weightedL2 loss
multi_resolution
mode
’batch_wise’,
resolution_wise’
or
’epoch_wise’
shuffle
bool
data_format
encode_input
bool
encode_output
bool
positional_encoding
bool
grid_boundaries
list[list], like [[0,1],[0,1]]
data_source
name
train_args
Specific based on the datasource
test_args:
Specific based on the datasource
evaluate_args:
Specific based on the datasource
5.2.2
Weighted Loss functions
Loss weighting and multi-resolution have been introduced throughout the work, to our
knowledge these approaches are novel so they deserve their own section
Losses
Consider the Lp norm as
∥x∥p =
 n
X
i=1
|xi|p
! 1
p
,
where x is an n-dimensional tensor, with p = 2 we have the L2 norm. In the practical
implementation, this is applied through the torch.norm function.
Let ˆy be the output of our Neural Operator, of shape (batch_size, n_channels, width, height),
same as the target data y to be evaluated against. We henceforth indicate the dimensions
of the tensors as bs, d, s1, s2 respectively, in accordance with chapter 3. An operation taken
along some but not all dimensions is expressed through the use of superscripts, so for
instance, if a function or operator f only acts on the spatial dimensions s1, s2, then it will
be indicated as fs1,s2.
Our standard L2 loss is defined as
LL2 = ∥ˆy −y∥2
∥y∥2
.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
27
==PAGE:36==
Now considering the shape of y and ˆy it is not completely obvious whether the loss is
taken over all dimensions or just a subset. In our standard approach, the L2 loss is taken
over the spatial dimensions only and then summed over batch sizes and channels, so
that the final expression of the loss is
LL2 =
X
bs
X
d
∥ˆy −y∥s1,s2
2
∥y∥s1,s2
2
.
(5.1)
The H1 loss is taken similarly but as a sum of the L2 loss plus the L1 loss taken over
the first spatial derivative of ˆy and y separately. The spatial derivatives are implemented
through central differences.
LH1 =
X
bs
X
d


∥ˆy −y∥s1,s2
2
,
 ∂ˆy
∂s1 −∂y
∂s1

s1,s2
2
,
 ∂ˆy
∂s2 −∂y
∂s2

s1,s2
2

2


∥y∥s1,s2
2
, ∥∂y
∂s1 ∥s1,s2
2
, ∥∂y
∂s2 ∥s1,s2
2

2
(5.2)
Weighted Loss
In the case of the weighted L2 losses what is done instead is first an L2 loss over the
non-spatial dimensions, i.e.
∥ˆy −y∥bs,d
2
∥y∥bs,d
2
,
to which a weighting function fW (X) : R2 →R2 , taking the form of fW (X) = X ⊙W is
applied. ⊙is intended as the Hadamard product between the two-dimensional matrices
X and W. Finally, an L2 norm is applied again over the spatial dimensions. As such, the
final form of the weighted loss is
LL2
W =
fW
 
∥ˆy −y∥bs,d
2
∥y∥bs,d
2
!
s1,s2
2
.
(5.3)
Several forms of fW (X) are defined.
Consider the matrix X to be comprised of the spatial dimensions x and y, representing
height and width respectively. The characterisations of fW (X) (henceforth f(x, y)), which
have been implemented are:
• A a linear weighting across the height, i.e.
f(x, y) = kx.
k is chosen in a resolution-invariant way, such that f(min(x), y) = 0 and f(max(x), y) =
1
• A loss weighting term which has a smooth sink at a point (i.e. the centre of the
wind farm) and which tends asymptotically to one as it goes further. This would take
attention away from the centre of the farm which is the least coherent (read physical)
in the RANS-AWF dataset. Such a function could be
f(x, y) = 1 −
1
k((x −x0)2 + (y −y0)2) + 1
k would once again be chosen based on some criteria for the desired shape and
(x0, y0) would indicate the centre of the turbine.
28
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:37==
• A loss weighting term which gives more weight to the central axis along the wind
direction and less as it goes out, something like
f(x, y) = 1 −tanh(ky2)
• The Hadamard product of each of these weightings with one another.
The three weightings for the loss are shown in figure 5.4 for spatial data in the shape and
ratio of the RANS-AWF dataset.
Figure 5.4: Loss weightings tested, from left to right on the top, linear loss weighting,
central axis loss weighting (f(x, y) = 1 −tanh(ky2)) chosen in a way that the sides have
weight 0.5 and the central sink (f(x, y) = 1 −
1
k((x−x0)2+(y−y0)2)+1), scaled in a way that
the value of the weights at the sides, at the x0 level are 0.95. On the bottom the different
products between each two weight type combination. On the bottom right the product of
all three weights.
5.2.3
Multi Resolution
Consider our data as a list of tensors at multiple resolutions, i.e.
Data : List[Tensor] = [R1, R2, ..., Ri, ..., Rn].
Each Tensor Ri has shape (bs, d, s1,i, s2,i) so the same number of channels and number
of samples, but a different spatial size as defined by s1,i, s2,i. The samples are ordered in
the same way, so that the layouts are indexed in the same at each resolution.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
29
==PAGE:38==
To handle processing operations, each Ri gets its own data processor class. Each Ri
also gets its own torch Dataset object and data loader.
We consider three approaches for the multi-resolution training
• Batch Wise: This is our default approach. At each epoch, at each Batch, the res-
olutions are processed in sequence, so for example at a batch size of 64, at each
batch iteration, the model will process 64 samples at R1, then 64 samples at R2
all the way to Rn before moving on to the next batch. By default, the samples are
coordinated throughout the resolutions, meaning that each batch will present the
same layouts at different resolutions. An option (shuffle = True) is provided to allow
shuffling these samples randomly for generalisation, this can be applied to the other
approaches as well. More on that later.
• Resolution Wise: Here the hierarchy between batch and resolution flips. So at each
epoch, first all of the batches at a given resolution are processed before moving on
to the next one.
• Epoch Wise: This approach is the transfer-learning approach as employed by Lyu
et al. [27]. The whole network is trained at growing resolutions. So first the whole
network is trained through all epochs and all batches at R1, then the learning rate
scheduling is reset and with the current optimised weights, the network is fine-tuned
on R2, and this continues all the way to Rn.
The three approaches we consider can be understood in the diagrams below,
Batch Wise
Epoch
Batch
R1
R2
...
Rn
Resolution Wise
Epoch
R1
R2
Batch
Batch
...
Rn
Epoch Wise
R1
Epoch
Batch
R2
Epoch
Batch
...
Rn
Shuffling
The option of shuffling the order of the samples in each resolution allows for coupled
shuffling across the resolutions or for independent shuffling. In coupled shuffling, each
resolution is shuffled with an identical random number generator so that each batch at
each resolution will present the same layouts. This is the default approach. Alternatively,
the samples are shuffled independently of each other in the loading process. The idea is
that independent shuffling could improve the generalisation capabilities of the Operator.
This option is controlled by the shuffle parameter in the multi-resolution parameter group,
if set to true, the shuffling will be independent, otherwise, it will be coupled.
30
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:39==
6
Experiments
In this chapter, we present the experiments and their corresponding results in an iterative
manner.
In Section 6.1, we discuss the initial experiments conducted on the synthetic dataset.
While these experiments are not significant on their own, they provide valuable insights
that inform the choices and experiments detailed in the main part of this chapter. Specif-
ically, Section 6.2 describes the experiments and efforts that led to the development of
the final model used on RANS-AWF data.
6.1
Synthetic Dataset
Kossaifi et al. [32], obtain their results with the following, here directly cited from the paper.
”We train all models via gradient backpropagation using a mini-batch size of
16, the Adam optimizer, with a learning rate of 1e−3, weight decay of 1e−4,
for 500 epochs, decreasing the learning rate every 100 epochs by a factors of
1/2. The model width is set in all cases to 64 except when specified otherwise
(for the Trimmed FNO), meaning that the input was first lifted (with a linear
layer) from the number of input channels to that width. The projection layer
projects from the width to 256 and a prediction linear layer outputs the pre-
dictions. 10000 samples were used for training, as well as a separate set of
2000 samples for testing. All experiments are done on a NVIDIA Tesla V100
GPU. To disentangle the effect of each of our components, the comparisons
between the original FNO, the MGFNO, TFNO, and the MG-TFNO were con-
ducted in the same setting, with a mini-batch size of 32, modes of 42 and 21
for the height and width, respectively, and an operator width of 64. For the
comparison between our best models, we use all the modes (64 and 32) and
a mini-batch size of 16, which leads to improved performance for all models
but longer training times. For each comparison, the same setting and hyper-
parameters were used for all models.”
What is intended by width here corresponds to the number of hidden channels. This is a
good reference point to keep in mind as we search for the best conditions to successfully
fulfil the goal of this thesis. We start our experiments on the synthetic dataset, starting
with 1000 samples at 64 × 64 for training and 10 samples at 128 × 128 for testing. On
this dataset, we run a Bayesian hyper-parameter search over the parameters described
in table 6.1 through 50 iterations, optimised on the sum between the H1 and L2 test loss.
The best parameters combination found is presented in table 6.2.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
31
==PAGE:40==
Table 6.1: Parameter Ranges and Choices for the first hyper-parameter search. The
search progresses over 50 iterations. The search syntax is the default search syntax
for hydra with the range command i.e. range(start, stop, step) indicating evenly spaced
values within a given interval. Values are generated within the half-open interval [start,
stop), with spacing between values given by step. The choice parameter searching over
the discrete set of parameters indicated in parenthesis.
Parameter Group
Parameter
Option
TFNO
n_modes
range(8, 32, 4)
hidden_channels
range(16, 64, 8)
projection_channels
range(32, 128, 16)
rank
range(0.1, 0.9, 0.05)
train
batch_size
choice(32, 64, 128, 256)
data_format
encode_input
choice(True, False)
encode_output
choice(True, False)
positional_encoding
choice(True, False)
Table 6.2: Best parameter combination from the search described in table 6.1.
Parameter Group
Parameter
Value
TFNO
n_modes
12
hidden_channels
24
projection_channels
32
rank
0.85
train
batch_size
256
data_format
encode_input
true
encode_output
true
positional_encoding
true
From here on, we decide to expand the hyper-parameters we search for to include some
more choices, with the unspecified ones being the best parameters found in the previous
search.
The details of the second optimisation are shown in table 6.3, with the optimal resulting
parameters shown in table 6.4. An example of a test set prediction produced with this
model is shown in figure 6.1. Here we can note We see that in general the shape is cap-
tured to an acceptable level and the non-linear operator we defined can be approximated
by the proposed algorithm at a higher resolution than the ones seen in training.
Table 6.3: Parameters of the second Bayesian search, again over 50 iterations, the syntax
follows the same logic as table 6.1.
Parameter Group
Parameter
Option
TFNO
lifting_channels
range(64, 256, 64)
n_layers
choice(3, 4, 5)
use_mlp
choice(True, False)
preactivation
choice(True, False)
fno_skip
choice(’linear’, ’identity’, ’soft-gating’)
joint_factorization
choice(True, False)
32
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:41==
Table 6.4: Best parameter combination from the search described in table 6.3.
Parameter Group
Parameter
Value
TFNO
lifting_channels
256
n_layers
4
use_mlp
true
preactivation
true
fno_skip
soft-gating
joint_factorization
true
Figure 6.1: Example of a prediction on the unseen test set at 128×128 resolution, using the
model trained with the parameters specified in table 6.4. From left to right, the prediction
of the neural operator, the test sample and the difference between the two. All values
displayed are dimensionless.
After these two hyper-parameter searches we start to set up experiments to target specific
questions. First, we investigate the potential improvement by increasing the size of the
training set to 10000 samples.
Then back on the 1000 samples we investigate different types of learning rate scheduling
and epochs over four scheduling options that build onto each other. We draw inspiration
from Kossaifi et al. [32] in halving the learning rate every 100 epochs and running for
500 epochs, then we add an additional halving at epoch 500 and train to epoch 750, then
we add a further halving at epoch 750 and train to 1000 epochs and finally, we extend
this same training to epoch 10000. It turns out that all of these strategies perform worse
than the one we started with, which employs an order of magnitude reduction at epochs
150, 500, 1000 and runs for 2000 epochs. Furthermore, out of these four strategies, the
simpler one is the best performing, i.e. the one running to epoch 500.
Another direction we investigate is multi-resolution training. We keep the set-up as after
the second hyper-parameter optimisation but train on both 64 × 64 and 32 × 32 resolution
samples. We find that the accuracy on the test set here decreases significantly. We
believe the reason for this is the increased complexity of training at multiple resolutions,
to address this we crank up the model in the next iteration, to a bigger model, which we
train on the full dataset at both resolutions. This increases the accuracy to a level that is
close to the single network trained on a single resolution.
We stopped our experiments on the synthetic data here as we have collected some good
pointers about the parameters of the network and gained an intuition about it. A summary
of the results with the H1 and L2 test losses on the 128 × 128 data can be found in table
6.5.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
33
==PAGE:42==
Table 6.5: H1 and L2 test losses on the 128×128 data using different model specifications,
training data and training scheduling. In the training scheduling column, gamma indicates
the reduction rate of learning at the given milestones.
Training Scheduling
Model
Training Data
Parameter count
L2 Loss
H1 Loss
Scheduler milestones:
[150,500,1000]
gamma: 0.1
Epochs: 2000
n_modes: [12,12]
hidden_channels: 24
projection_channels: 32
factorization: tucker
rank: 0.85
1000 samples at
64 \times 64$ resolution
≈350 000
0.465
0.470
Scheduler milestones:
[150,500,1000]
gamma: 0.1
Epochs: 2000
n_modes: [12,12]
hidden_channels: 24
projection_channels: 32
factorization: tucker
rank: 0.85
use_mlp: True
preactivation: True
fno_skip: soft-gating
joint_factorisation: True
1000 samples at
64 \times 64$ resolution
-
0.413
0.408
Scheduler milestones:
[150,500,1000]
gamma: 0.1
Epochs: 2000
-
10000 samples at
64 \times 64$ resolution
-
0.405
0.389
Scheduler milestones:
[100,200,300,400]
gamma: 0.5
Epochs: 500
-
1000 samples at
64 \times 64$ resolution
-
0.452
0.460
Scheduler milestones:
[100,200,300,400,500]
gamma: 0.5
Epochs: 750
-
-
-
0.529
0.50
Scheduler milestones:
[100,200,300,400,500,
750]
gamma: 0.5
Epochs: 1000
-
-
-
0.531
0.473
Scheduler milestones:
[100,200,300,400,500,
750]
gamma: 0.5
Epochs: 10000
-
-
-
0.530
0.525
Scheduler milestones:
[150,500,1000]
gamma: 0.1
Epochs: 2000
Multi-resolution:
1000 samples at 64x64
1000 samples at 32x32
-
0.553
0.547
-
n_modes: [24,24]
hidden_channels: 64
factorization: tucker
rank: 0.85
use_mlp: True
preactivation: True
fno_skip: soft-gating
joint_factorisation: True
Multi-resolution:
10000 samples at 64x64
10000 samples at 32x32
≈9 250 000
0.416
0.405
34
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:43==
The main take-aways from the experiments on the synthetic data-sets, that will inform our
search on the RANS-AWF data are the following:
• Multi-resolution training requires a bigger Network. This can be evinced by the re-
sults shown in table 6.5, where it can be noted the good performance of small net-
works on single resolution and the superior performance of a larger architecture at
multi-resolution.
• When training on a single resolution, a smaller network can be the best choice for
generalisation.
• More data improves results but not by a lot. This is most likely related to new data
not providing new information in a statistical sense, but just introducing redundancy
by containing different realisations of the process.
• The backbone improvements from Kossaifi et al [32] should be used.
• Training for 2000 Epochs at one order of magnitude decreases at 150, 500, 1000 is a
good scheduling strategy.
• It is harder to get good results using multi-resolution and a bigger network compared
to just using single resolution and a smaller one.
• The overall low accuracy of the inference can most likely be traced back to issues
with the sharpness of the input and with the denaturation of the resolution invariance
through the final normalisation procedure in the operator.
Inspecting figure 6.1, the position of the ones in the starting conditions are clearly
distinguishable in the residuals, leading to believe that the learned operator fails at
these locations, or in general has a hard time. There might be singularities which
harm the learning process. This could be related to the fact that the reference op-
erator (algorithm 1) is defined on functions of the distance to the input points.
On the other hand, we also see an incorrect capture of the levels. This might be
due to the normalisation operation at the end of the operator described in algorithm
1 which invalidates the resolution invariance in terms of the levels.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
35
==PAGE:44==
6.2
RANS-AWF
Here we present the work towards the successful application of the algorithm on the
RANS-AWF dataset. We describe the issues faced along the way and how those were
tackled. Finally, we present a comprehensive evaluation of our best model.
6.2.1
First Approach and Data Issues
The first thing we looked at, was to ensure that the pre-processing operations show similar
advantages on this data, as well as getting an idea about the number of modes needed to
resolve the flow. We investigate training at a horizontal grid spacing of D and testing at a
horizontal grid spacing of D/2. Regardless of the number of modes used and of the pre-
processing operations employed, there is a general problem of inability to capture the full
range of values in the test set. An example of such inference is shown in figure 6.2. Here
we can clearly note the large discrepancy in the captured range, although a qualitative
evaluation shows a generally correct shape estimation.
Similar results are found using multi-resolution training, indicating that there might be a
deeper problem.
The data set itself presents challenges in this case in that the size of the horizontal grid
spacing employed in the RANS-AWF simulation actually influences the range of values.
We show an example flow case at all four given grid spacings in figure 6.3. Furthermore,
the enlargement of the ranges of values follows very closely a linear relationship with the
inverse of the horizontal grid spacing, as shown in figure 6.4 where we show the minimum
across the dataset for each grid spacing employed. A linear model fits with an impressive
R2 of 0.984.
Naturally, it will be hard to infer the correct range of values at a higher resolution without
imposing constraints.
Figure 6.2: Example of a prediction of the downstream wind-speed U as a fraction of the
inflow [dimensionless] on a test set sample showcasing the strong bias in the prediction
and the inability to fully capture the range. From left to right, the predicted streamwise
velocity, the target, the point-wise difference between the two and the cross section ex-
tracted at the level of the black dashed line showing the prediction in the far wake.
36
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:45==
Figure 6.3: Input wind farm force distribution [ m−2 ] for an example layout (Above) and
Target stream-wise wind speed as a fraction of the inflow (Below) of the same flow case at
the four different resolutions used. Note how the range of values changes in the outputs
and the inputs
Figure 6.4: Minimum stream-wise wind speed as a fraction of the inflow across the RANS-
AWF dataset at the provided grid-spacings and the relative linear fit.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
37
==PAGE:46==
It seems that in general there is an issue in capturing the full range of values regardless
of change of ranges due to resolution. In figure 6.2 for example, the range of predicted
values is too far off to be only justified by the change in range due to the change of
resolution. To target this limitation, there are a couple of options that are worth looking
into:
• Extend the input of the neural operator to inform about the change in range
• There might be a sparseness problem with most of the output being a field of uniform
values at 1. This could be targeted by:
– Change in activation function from GELU to Tanh, which would probably take
attention away from getting the ones right as every high output will be mapped
to one directly.
– Smart weighting of the loss function to focus learning on the most important
areas of the domain.
• Lehmann et al [38] have a very detailed tracking of the influences of hyperparame-
ters over the FNO and specifically they found that:
– An increase in the number of layers corresponds to a decrease in bias and an
increase in accuracy, so it might make sense to go up to 16 layers. So far we
have only experimented on small variations (3,4,5)
– They also similarly to Kossaifi et al [32] find it beneficial to work with a very low
batch size, which contrasts with what we found on the synthetic dataset
• The dataset is generally well representative of the types of flow cases and in our
work on the synthetic dataset we found minimal improvement by increasing the size
of the dataset. We thus don’t believe that it will be beneficial to generate more
samples.
6.2.2
Input Update
The change in the data range and the challenge of capturing this range can be explained
by the fact that our input AAWF is a dimensionless density, meaning it has dimensions of
m−2. This input only provides information about the turbine distribution but not about the
varying drag coefficient. The main reason why using different grid sizes in the AWF model
leads to different results is because of how these sizes affect the spreading of forces in
the model. When we use larger grid sizes, the forces spread out more across the grid.
This spreading makes it necessary to use a lower drag coefficient to reach the same total
force as with a finer grid. Basically, the larger the grid, the more the forces get diluted, and
we need to adjust our calculations accordingly. Additionally, the AWF model is designed
to extract the same momentum, independent of grid size which means that we would get
the same wake deficit far downstream. Of course, the flow in and near the wind farm
is affected by the grid size, but the far-away wake should become grid-independent. To
better account for these changes, we then update our input by adding the stream-wise
force, which is measured in newtons. So our input now is no longer A but it is Fwf as
described in (4.17), which has units Nm−2. In figure 6.5 such input is shown with the
relative output.
38
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:47==
Figure 6.5: Input wind farm distributed thrust force [ Nm−2 ] for an example layout (Above)
and Target stream-wise wind speed as a fraction of the inflow (Below) of the same flow
case at the four different resolutions used. Note how the range of values changes in the
outputs and the inputs
6.2.3
Far-Wake Focus
Since the main importance of the AWF model is to correctly evaluate the far wake, another
strategy could be to weigh the loss term to give further weight to the far wake, so we
introduce a new loss type, called weightedL2 loss, which is an L2 loss weighted linearly
along the stream-wise direction such that the weight upstream is zero and the weight
downstream is one.
To get an initial idea of the impact of this change in input, the weighted loss and other
factors mentioned above such as the change in activation function, number of layers and
batch size we run a small grid search of 16 combinations given by the parameters com-
binations presented in table 6.6
Table 6.6: Grid search parameters over the RANS-AWF data.
Parameter Group
Parameter
Option
TFNO
n_layers
choice(4, 8)
non_linearity
choice(tanh, gelu)
train
batch_size
choice(64, 32)
loss
choice(weightedL2, h1)
For the sake of this experiment we don’t need to optimise the accuracy but just check
whether it helps to solve the range capture problem so we train over 250 epochs only with
the learning rate halving at every 50th epoch. In this search, we use the new input Fwf and
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
39
==PAGE:48==
we first run the grid search by training on a horizontal grid spacing of D/2 and testing at
D/4. The results are shown in table 6.7 and an example prediction of the best-performing
run is shown in figure 6.6. Here we note little improvement with the inability to capture the
range still remaining. Marginal improvements are found using the tanh activation function
and the weighted L2 loss as well as a higher number of layers.
Figure 6.6: Example of a prediction of the downstream wind-speed U as a fraction of
the inflow [dimensionless] on a test set sample using the best-performing model from
table 6.7. From left to right, the predicted streamwise velocity, the target, the pointwise
difference between the two and the cross section extracted at the level of the black dashed
line showing the prediction in the far wake.
Table 6.7: Grid search results from the grid search described in table 6.6, the test loss is
displayed for different combinations of Number of layers, batch size, Activation function
and Loss type over a training run, trained at horizontal grid spacing of D/2 with evaluation
at the highest resolution horizontal grid spacing of D/4.
Layers
Batch Size
Non-linearity
Loss type
L2 loss
8
32
tanh
weightedL2
0.045
4
64
gelu
weightedL2
0.046
8
64
tanh
weightedL2
0.048
8
32
gelu
weightedL2
0.048
4
64
tanh
weightedL2
0.050
8
64
gelu
weightedL2
0.051
4
32
gelu
h1
0.051
8
64
tanh
h1
0.052
4
32
tanh
weightedL2
0.052
4
64
tanh
h1
0.052
4
32
tanh
h1
0.052
4
64
gelu
h1
0.053
8
32
gelu
h1
0.053
8
32
tanh
h1
0.053
4
32
gelu
weightedL2
0.054
8
64
gelu
h1
0.054
40
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:49==
6.2.4
First Success
To fully understand the effect of the change of input and to facilitate the learning process
of the network we need to experiment on a training run with training data at multiple res-
olutions. As such we run a training with this configuration and multi-resolution data. The
results in this case are more promising. Table 6.8 shows the L2 loss over the test set
given different hyperparameter combinations. Here we note the improvements provided
by the use of more layers, the Tanh activation function and the weighted Loss function,
which appears to be the most impactful improvement. Of particular interest is that by op-
timising the weighted loss in training, the test results are better on the equally weighted
loss. A flow case from the test-set predictions with the best-performing model from this
grid search is depicted in figure 6.7.
This model is the first viable model that we reached. From here on we can investigate
whether a longer training schedule improves the results.
Table 6.8: Grid search results, the test loss is displayed for different combinations of the
Number of layers, batch size, Activation function and Loss type over a multi-resolution
training run (horizontal grid spacing of 2D, D and D/2), with evaluation at the highest
resolution horizontal grid spacing of D/4.
Layers
Batch Size
Non-linearity
Loss type
L2 loss
8
64
tanh
weightedL2
0.028
8
32
tanh
weightedL2
0.029
4
64
gelu
weightedL2
0.031
4
64
tanh
weightedL2
0.037
8
64
gelu
weightedL2
0.041
4
32
tanh
weightedL2
0.041
4
32
gelu
h1
0.042
8
64
tanh
h1
0.042
4
32
gelu
weightedL2
0.045
4
64
gelu
h1
0.046
8
32
tanh
h1
0.050
4
64
tanh
h1
0.052
4
32
tanh
h1
0.053
8
64
gelu
h1
0.053
8
32
gelu
h1
0.055
8
32
gelu
weightedL2
0.057
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.7: Example of a prediction of the downstream wind-speed U as a fraction of
the inflow [dimensionless] on a test set sample using the best-performing model from
table 6.8. From left to right, the predicted streamwise velocity, the target, the pointwise
difference between the two and the cross section extracted at the level of the black dashed
line showing the prediction in the far wake.
6.2.5
Further Loss Weighting Exploration
At the same time, we continue on the insight of the weighting of the loss function to test
whether more sophisticated weightings can provide a better result.
The three losses are tested while simultaneously testing a higher number of epochs and a
different training schedule. Specifically 1200 epochs with learning rate halving at epochs
50, 100, 200, 400, 800. This experiment reveals no improvement with the newly chosen
losses and furthermore, a weakened performance using the new learning scheduling.
The linear loss weighting is still superior to no weighting at all.
6.2.6
Optimising the Operator
Now that we are confident that the linear weighting in the loss function is the best ap-
proach, we look at expanding further in the number of layers by testing our best set-up
so far with a varying number of operator layers. Here we find a 12-layer configuration to
work best, as shown in table 6.9. In figure 6.8 we show an example of a prediction on the
test set, here we can note the improvement in the prediction, which at this point is very
close to the test data. In the same figure, we also note the development of the training
loss with the learning rates halvings being clearly distinguishable.
Table 6.9: Grid search results, the test loss is displayed for different combinations of
Number of layers and epochs over a multi-resolution training run (horizontal grid spacing
of 2D, D and D/2), with evaluation at the highest resolution horizontal grid spacing of
D/4.
Layers
Epochs
L2 loss
12
500
0.025
12
250
0.029
16
250
0.031
16
500
0.031
8
500
0.033
8
250
0.036
42
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.8: Above, example of a prediction of the downstream wind-speed U as a fraction
of the inflow [dimensionless] on a test set sample using the best-performing model from
table 6.9. From left to right, the predicted streamwise velocity, the target, the pointwise
difference between the two and the cross section extracted at the level of the black dashed
line showing the prediction in the far wake. Below is the training loss of said model over
the epochs.
6.2.7
Other Multi-Resolution Approaches
Here we investigate the other multi-resolution approaches that have been discussed in
our thesis. The running configuration of our test is our best configuration so far, overridden
with the different multi-resolution approaches.
The results are presented in table 6.10. Here we can note that our default approach shows
superior performance over the other options.
Furthermore, the fine-tuning approach, i.e. epoch-wise does not provide better perfor-
mance than the single resolution training.
Also noteworthy that in general, independent shuffling provides better performance, this
is not the case for batch-wise training. Upon closer examination, we notice that this is a
case of divergence in the training process. More on that in the next section.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
43
==PAGE:52==
Table 6.10:
Grid search results over multi-resolution training runs with different ap-
proaches, all including horizontal grid spacings of 2D, D and D/2, with evaluation at
the highest resolution horizontal grid spacing of D/4.
Mode
Shuffle
L2 loss
batch wise
False
0.028
resolution wise
True
0.030
resolution wise
False
0.035
epoch wise
True
0.046
epoch wise
False
0.052
batch wise
True
0.060
6.2.8
On Divergent Training
One important thing to note is the occurrence of divergence in the training of the Operator.
Throughout this chapter, many of the worst-performing setups are actually not inherently
bad performers, but they perform weakly due to divergence happening in training. What
is intended here with divergence is that through the training process, the training loss
suddenly explodes, i.e. grows to very high values and doesn’t recover the pre-explosion
levels. One such example is given in figure 6.9 and the corresponding final predictions in
figure 6.10. These figures relate to the worse parameter combination of table 6.10. This
phenomenon happens for all of our training runs at low batch sizes (≤16) and sometimes
for other batch sizes too.
Low batch sizes are more prone to divergence due to the increased stochasticity in the
gradient estimates during training. With smaller batch sizes, each update to the model
parameters is based on a limited sample of the data, which can introduce significant noise
and variability into the gradient calculations. This variability can lead to unstable updates,
causing the training process to occasionally encounter extremely large or small gradient
values. Consequently, the model may experience sudden spikes in the training loss, lead-
ing to divergence. This is in contrast to larger batch sizes, where gradients are averaged
over more data points, providing more stable and reliable updates, and thereby reducing
the risk of divergence.
We believe this is due to the network training process hitting weakly defined float val-
ues such as infinities that cause it to diverge. We believe that this happens through the
loss of information in the gradient, which breaks backpropagation. It is not a completely
predictable occurrence as it could be due to floating point errors. There are however con-
figurations which are more stable than others, for instance as a function of batch size as
discussed above. One possible solution could be to build a detection system and trigger
the restart of the training. Such a detection system can be based on a very simple logic,
e.g. if the training loss is ten times higher than the lowest value seen so far.
Another direction could be to test gradient clipping or similar techniques and evaluate their
effect on the operator. These are however not implemented in this thesis but are intended
as a suggestion for the future continuation of this work.
Finally, there is also the chance that this might be due to the lack of normalisation in the
input.
Input normalisation in our set-up is not completely straightforward, and it has been shown
to not provide accuracy advantages. It could have been a good approach however to
mitigate divergence.
44
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:53==
Similarly, batch normalisation or layer normalisation could have been beneficial, as well
as experiment with different weight initialisation methods.
Figure 6.9: Training loss for the worst performing model from table 6.10. The divergent
behaviour can be noted close to epoch 100. The loss never recovers completely.
Figure 6.10: Example of a prediction of the downstream wind-speed U as a fraction of
the inflow [dimensionless] on a test set sample using the worse-performing model from
table 6.10. From left to right, the predicted streamwise velocity, the target, the pointwise
difference between the two and the cross section extracted at the level of the black dashed
line showing the prediction in the far wake. This provides an example of the prediction of
a neural operator that incurred divergence in training.
6.2.9
Model Evaluation
Here we evaluate the best-performing model over the different dimensions of our dataset.
Specifically what we want to analyse is:
• Performance as a function of inflow angle
• Performance as a function of layout shape
• Performance as a function of Turbine inter-spacing
Best Model Summary
The best model has 32 modes on both height and width, 32 hidden channels, 12 FNO
layers, a factorisation rank of 0.85, a tanh non-linearity and it is trained with a learning
rate halving at epochs [50, 100, 150, 200, 250] for 500 epochs using a batch size of 64 and
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
45
==PAGE:54==
linearly weighted L2 loss. The multi-resolution training is performed batch-wise without
independent shuffling.
Evaluation
In figure 6.12 we show the mean L2 test loss as a function of several parameters. what
emerges here is a very uniform loss as a function of the inter-spacing, with more variation
being due to wind farm layout and rotation (i.e. wind direction). Specifically, the layouts
for which the wake has many wind turbines in the way are the most difficult for the model
to map. We can see that by the difficulty in capturing shape 2 (see appendix to look at the
shapes) and at wind inflow angle 315°, which produces the most rhomboid configurations.
Specifically, the best performing layout is found for shape 0, with inter-spacing of 6D and
inflow wind direction at 282°. The worst performing layout is found for shape 2, inter-
spacing of 5D and wind direction of 315°. The relative predictions are shown in figure
6.11. Here we can note how the prediction quality between the best and worst-performing
test cases is not too big. Proving the robustness of the model-
It is probably fair to say that the model won’t generalize well to big layouts.
Figure 6.11: Best performing sample on the test case (above) and worst performing one
(below)
46
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.12: Mean L2 Loss over the test samples at horizontal grid spacing of D/4 as a
function of (from left to right) wind turbine inter-spacing, layout shape and wind direction.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:57==
7
Discussion
This thesis aimed at encoding a resolution-invariant input-output map of Reynolds-Averaged
Navier-Stokes Actuator Wind Farm (RANS-AWF) simulations, at varying conditions. A
reasonably accurate and robust mapping over changing conditions on unseen (higher)
resolutions is learned between the thrust force distribution and the downstream flow field.
To achieve the results of this thesis, a novel multi-resolution training approach as well as
loss weighting has been introduced. The effect of these improvements have been instru-
mental in achieving the results, providing a significant improvement over standard tech-
niques, as we presented in chapter 6. Specifically considering the improvements shown
in table 6.8 over table 6.7, indicating the strong improvements of the multi-resolution ap-
proach. The results of table 6.7 show on their own the improvements provided by the
weighted loss function, and the results of table 6.10 show the superiority of our multi-
resolution approach compared to other approaches.
This study showcases the potential for the use of the Fourier Neural Operator for building
surrogates of CFD-based wake models.
7.1
Positives
• Accuracy: Our model can approximate the streamwise wind deficit from wind tur-
bines in a fairly accurate way, achieving an average L2 loss of 0.025 for our best
model over the 800 test cases examined.
• Robustness: Our model is robust over changing conditions, having a similar accu-
racy upon different layouts and wind directions.
• Speed: Arguably the best advantage of this surrogate is the fast inference time,
which is negligible when compared to a numerical simulation. The inference time
for one test case on a standard laptop using a CPU is less than one second. On our
setup, described in section 5.2, the training times for the best-performing model are
approximately one hour, this also opens the possibility for combining training and
inference in a single step. Later in section 7.5 we go into more detail about training
times and time to generate data as we try to estimate our carbon footprint.
• Potential Super-Resolution Cost Saving: Consider that the CPU time for the gen-
eration of our data-set is mostly spent on the finest resolution, D/4, specifically 75%
of the time is spent on the data at horizontal grid spacing of D/4, 19% for D/2, 5%
for D and 1% for D/2. This means that it would be computationally viable to use the
current algorithm, or a specialised version for fidelity enhancement purposes while
still gaining a net saving in computation times.
• Data-Driven: Being fully data-driven and not relying on physical equations makes
the model easy to apply to other problems and mitigates the risk of misspecification
of parameters and incompleteness of equations.
7.2
Limitations
• Common limitations to data-driven models: Data-driven models, like the one we
developed, often need large amounts of data to train effectively and ensure accu-
racy. The quality and quantity of this data are crucial for the model’s performance.
These models can also struggle when asked to make predictions outside the range
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
49
==PAGE:58==
of their training data, known as extrapolation. Additionally, they can be sensitive
to noise and outliers in the data, which can negatively affect their performance.
Another challenge is that these models can be less interpretable than traditional
physics-based models, making it harder to understand how they arrive at their pre-
dictions.
• Generalization to Large Layouts: The model exhibits challenges in generalizing
to significantly larger wind farm layouts. The worst performance on the test case is
on a 4x4 layout, which is the largest size considered. This limitation suggests that
while the model is robust for certain configurations, its performance may degrade
with increased complexity and scale.
• Varying conditions: The current model encodes wake fields for specific conditions
and the generalisation capabilities to different levels of atmospheric turbulence and
wind speeds are not taken into account. This would make it difficult to directly use
this model in a commercial setting at the current state.
• Near-Turbine accuracy: The region near the turbines is hard to evaluate with ac-
curacy and our algorithm does not do a good job there. For the specific use case
of the RANS-AWF model, the far wake is more important. In general, however, it
would be desirable to accurately resolve the whole domain.
• RANS-AWF specific: It could be desirable to learn the wake from a higher fidelity
simulation. The resolution invariant properties of the FNO could be used in that
regard to learn the general physics of wakes and then apply them to a large context
such as the one on the wind farm. RANS-AWF has limitations in that it includes
many modelling approximations that make it probably harder to approximate.
• Training Layouts: The layouts used in training have a somewhat regular shape,
whereas, in reality, very irregular and complex layouts exist. An example of this
can be seen in figure 7.1, which displays the layout of the Moray East wind farm in
Scotland.
50
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:59==
Figure 7.1: Relative turbine placement in the Moray East wind farm, retrieved from
Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moray_East_Wind_Farm (2024, June 15).
7.3
Future Work
In general, this is a good step forward towards a general Neural network-based wake
deficit model. Multiple improvements need to take place before that goal is reached.
• Multi-dimensional Input: Expanding the dimensions of the operator to be parametrised
by atmospheric conditions such as atmospheric turbulence and wind speed. This
could be achieved in multiple ways. Some directions worth investigating are to build
the parametrisation within the FNO architecture or through a hybrid FNO-DeepONet
architecture where the FNO is set up as either the branch or the trunk net in the
DeepONet.
A similar approach is pursued by Jiang et al. [39].
• Multi-fidelity training data: Combine RANS-AD training data to build a more gen-
eral wake surrogate model that works for both single turbine and wind farm at vary-
ing levels of fidelity. This could be a very interesting avenue of research, although
challenges in coherence between the two data sources are to be expected. Along
the same lines of thought, it could make sense to train on higher fidelity data, such
as ones from Large Eddy Simulations (LES) or even Direct Numerical Simulations
(DNS) to encode correct dynamics at a low resolution and generalise to complex
settings through the neural operator.
• Using Measurement data:Using sparse SCADA data to correct biases in the nu-
merical simulations and in the training procedure at a final fine-tuning step.
• Multi-dimensional output: Extend the prediction to more dimensions, like turbulent
kinetic energy or different wind speed components.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
51
==PAGE:60==
• 3 Dimensions: Extending the model from two spatial dimensions to three spatial
dimensions will be necessary for a full surrogate. I believe however that that should
be the last step, after having explored other improvement opportunities first.
• Leverage AI-based weather models: Several AI-based weather models have been
published recently, such as Pangu-Weather [40], FourcastNet [22], GraphCast [41]
and more. Among those, FourcastNet is partly based on a Fourier Neural Opera-
tor architecture. It could be a good idea to investigate whether these models can
have a place in wind turbine and wind farm wake modelling. The similar architec-
tural backbone could allow for a transfer-learning approach, where these general
weather models could be used as base models to be fine-tuned on the specifics of
encoding wake effects. Furthermore, this would allow for an automatic inclusion of
mesoscale effects.
7.4
Conclusion
Along the path to create fast and accurate wake deficit models, there is a space for the
use of Fourier Neural Operators and this study demonstrates the viability of these classes
of algorithms by encoding a robust and accurate surrogate of RANS-AWF simulations,
which achieves a similar precision as the original simulations, have a very fast inference
time and are not bound by the resolution used.
By addressing the challenges and limitations of our proposed approach, there is a strong
potential to build better wake deficit models in the future.
7.5
Environmental Impact and Sustainability
Computational research demands notoriously a lot of energy and this thesis is not an
exception. While providing a potential long-term positive impact on the climate by means
of improving the efficiency, accuracy and computation time of Annual Energy Production
assessments and life-cycle analyses of wind farms. The effort to achieve the results of
this Master thesis is not carbon neutral. Furthermore, there is a non-zero risk that this
thesis will not lead to further improvements and that its results will not be picked up in the
future.
In a recent editorial in Nature Computational Science [42], the role of it is called upon
by computational researchers to estimate the carbon footprint of their research. Many
existing resources are presented, among which the green calculator [43], which we use.
We separately calculate the impact of the generation of our training data and the impact
of the experiments and training runs carried out to find the right set-up for the model to
perform well.
• The impact of the experiments: As detailed in the thesis, the experiments are run
on a single-core GPU, Nvidia Tesla v100 or Nvidia Tesla a100. In the calculator,
only the Nvidia Tesla v100 is represented, so that is the one chosen. We reserve
32GB of memory for our runs, which is however not fully utilized at all times, so we
assume a usage factor of 0.5. The amount of hours of training along all experiments
in the thesis can be considered to be between 100 and 200 hours. Based on the
calculator, which also takes into account the location of our server to account for the
energy mix, we can estimate the CO2 emissions (CO2e) to be within 3.85 kg and
7.71 kg, which stems from an estimated energy usage within 27.04 kWh and 54.08
kWh.
52
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:61==
Consider however, that this is just an estimate. In reality, much more complexities
arise when trying to calculate the carbon footprint in a GPU-CPU setup:
– Accurate Estimation of Energy Consumption:
* Different nodes have varying CPU and GPU configurations, affecting their
power consumption. The same GPU architecture is hosted on different
CPU nodes.
* Actual utilization of CPU and GPU resources during training and inference
fluctuates, impacting power consumption. Memory usage, I/O operations,
and baseline power consumption of servers must also be considered.
* Efficiently allocating computational resources while maintaining high per-
formance is challenging. Over-provisioning resources can lead to unnec-
essary energy usage, while under-provisioning can result in prolonged
training times.
– Carbon Footprint Calculation:
* Accurate tracking of all computational activities, including node usage and
duration, is essential but not always readily available or easy to compile.
* Tools and calculators used to estimate carbon footprints rely on assump-
tions that may not fully capture the specificities of the computational tasks
involved.
• The impact of the generation of our training data: The number of CPU hours
to generate the training and testing samples is in the order of 5000 CPU hours,
generated with five nodes at the DTU Sophia cluster [37], each node has 32 physical
cores, amounting to 160 total cores. The CPU model in the cluster is the AMD
EPYC 7351. Using this information to estimate the carbon footprint through the
green calculator, we instead input the AMD EPYC 7343 CPU, as the most similar
one available. Unluckily we have not kept track of the specific memory availability
of the core used, which however ranges between 4 and 8 GB per core. Accounting
for 32 hours of computing, this translates to a range of CO2e between 16.32 kg and
18.13 kg, which stems from an estimated energy usage between 114.49 kWh and
127.23 kWh.
In total, we can estimate the computational total carbon footprint of this work to be around
20kg CO2e.
If the results of this thesis are utilised for either direct use or further improvement and gen-
eralisation in subsequent research, the potential savings in CO2e could be much higher
than the cost, by considering the very low inference speed of the neural network compared
to the direct RANS-AWF simulation.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
J. C. Y. Lee and M. J. Fields. “An overview of wind-energy-production prediction
bias, losses, and uncertainties”. In: Wind Energy Science 6.2 (2021), pp. 311–365.
DOI: 10.5194/wes-6-311-2021. URL: https://wes.copernicus.org/articles/6/311/
2021/.
[2]
Cristina L. Archer et al. “Review and evaluation of wake loss models for wind energy
applications”. In: Applied Energy 226 (2018), pp. 1187–1207. ISSN: 0306-2619.
DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.05.085. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S030626191830802X.
[3]
M. P. van der Laan et al. “A new RANS-based wind farm parameterization and
inflow model for wind farm cluster modeling”. In: Wind Energy Science 8.5 (2023),
pp. 819–848. DOI: 10.5194/wes- 8- 819- 2023. URL: https://wes.copernicus.org/
articles/8/819/2023/.
[4]
M. P. van der Laan et al. “Simulating wake losses of the Danish Energy Island
wind farm cluster”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 2505.1 (May 2023),
p. 012015. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/2505/1/012015. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.
1088/1742-6596/2505/1/012015.
[5]
J. Criado Risco et al. “A RANS-based surrogate model for simulating wind turbine in-
teraction”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 2505.1 (May 2023), p. 012016.
DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/2505/1/012016. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-
6596/2505/1/012016.
[6]
J. P. Schøler et al. “RANS-AD based ANN surrogate model for wind turbine wake
deficits”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 2505.1 (May 2023), p. 012022.
DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/2505/1/012022. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-
6596/2505/1/012022.
[7]
Nikola Kovachki et al. Neural Operator: Learning Maps Between Function Spaces.
2023. arXiv: 2108.08481 [cs.LG].
[8]
Zongyi Li et al. Fourier Neural Operator for Parametric Partial Differential Equations.
2021. arXiv: 2010.08895 [cs.LG].
[9]
Shaoxiang Qin et al. Toward a Better Understanding of Fourier Neural Operators:
Analysis and Improvement from a Spectral Perspective. 2024. arXiv: 2404.07200.
[10]
Wenbo Li et al. Best-Buddy GANs for Highly Detailed Image Super-Resolution.
2021. arXiv: 2103.15295.
[11]
Hrishikesh Viswanath et al. “Fast Resolution Agnostic Neural Techniques to Solve
Partial Differential Equations”. In: (Jan. 2023).
[12]
Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. “Multilayer feedforward net-
works are universal approximators”. In: Neural Networks 2.5 (1989), pp. 359–366.
ISSN: 0893-6080. DOI: 10 . 1016 / 0893 - 6080(89 ) 90020 - 8. URL: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0893608089900208.
[13]
M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G.E. Karniadakis. “Physics-informed neural networks:
A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving non-
linear partial differential equations”. In: Journal of Computational Physics 378 (2019),
pp. 686–707. ISSN: 0021-9991. DOI: 10.1016/j.jcp.2018.10.045. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999118307125.
[14]
Sifan Wang et al. An Expert’s Guide to Training Physics-informed Neural Networks.
2023. arXiv: 2308.08468 [cs.LG].
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
55
==PAGE:64==
[15]
Tianping Chen and Hong Chen. “Universal approximation to nonlinear operators by
neural networks with arbitrary activation functions and its application to dynamical
systems”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 6.4 (1995), pp. 911–917. DOI:
10.1109/72.392253.
[16]
Lu Lu et al. “Learning nonlinear operators via DeepONet based on the universal ap-
proximation theorem of operators”. In: Nature Machine Intelligence 3.3 (Mar. 2021),
pp. 218–229. ISSN: 2522-5839. DOI: 10.1038/s42256- 021- 00302- 5. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/s42256-021-00302-5.
[17]
Lu Lu et al. Multifidelity deep neural operators for efficient learning of partial differ-
ential equations with application to fast inverse design of nanoscale heat transport.
2022. arXiv: 2204.06684 [physics.comp-ph].
[18]
Yanfang Lyu et al. “Multi-fidelity prediction of fluid flow based on transfer learning
using Fourier neural operator”. In: Physics of Fluids 35.7 (July 2023), p. 077118.
ISSN: 1070-6631. DOI: 10.1063/5.0155555. URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.
0155555.
[19]
Peishi Jiang et al. “Efficient Super-Resolution of Near-Surface Climate Modeling
Using the Fourier Neural Operator”. In: Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth
Systems 15.7 (2023). e2023MS003800 2023MS003800, e2023MS003800. DOI:
10.1029/2023MS003800. eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/
10.1029/2023MS003800. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1029/2023MS003800.
[20]
Qidong Yang et al. Fourier Neural Operators for Arbitrary Resolution Climate Data
Downscaling. 2023. arXiv: 2305.14452 [cs.LG].
[21]
Xiaoyu Zhao et al. “RecFNO: A resolution-invariant flow and heat field reconstruc-
tion method from sparse observations via Fourier neural operator”. In: International
Journal of Thermal Sciences 195 (2024), p. 108619. ISSN: 1290-0729. DOI: 10.
1016/j.ijthermalsci.2023.108619. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1290072923004805.
[22]
Jaideep Pathak et al. FourCastNet: A Global Data-driven High-resolution Weather
Model using Adaptive Fourier Neural Operators. 2022. arXiv: 2202.11214 [physics.ao-ph].
[23]
Tuhfe Göçmen et al. “Wind turbine wake models developed at the technical uni-
versity of Denmark: A review”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 60
(2016), pp. 752–769. ISSN: 1364-0321. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2016.01.113. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S136403211600143X.
[24]
N. N. Sørensen. “General purpose flow solver applied to flow over hills”. PhD thesis.
Roskilde, Denmark: Risø National Laboratory, 1994.
[25]
J. A. Michelsen. Basis3D - a platform for development of multiblock PDE solvers.
Tech. rep. AFM 92-05. Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark, 1992.
[26]
DTU Wind and Energy Systems. PyWakeEllipSys v4.0. https : / / topfarm . pages .
windenergy.dtu.dk/cuttingedge/pywake/pywake_ellipsys/. 2024.
[27]
Y. M. Wang et al. “Multi-fidelity wake modelling based on Co-Kriging method”. En-
glish. In: vol. 753. 3. The Science of Making Torque from Wind 2016, TORQUE
2016 ; Conference date: 05-10-2016 Through 07-10-2016. IOP Publishing, 2016.
DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/753/3/032065. URL: https://www.events.tum.de/?sub=29.
[28]
Antonio Crespo. “Computational Fluid Dynamic Models of Wind Turbine Wakes”.
In: Energies 16.4 (2023). ISSN: 1996-1073. DOI: 10.3390/en16041772. URL: https:
//www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/16/4/1772.
[29]
B. Sanderse, S.P. van der Pijl, and B. Koren. “Review of computational fluid dynam-
ics for wind turbine wake aerodynamics”. In: Wind Energy 14.7 (2011), pp. 799–819.
56
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:65==
DOI: 10.1002/we.458. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/we.458.
URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/we.458.
[30]
Zexia Zhang et al. “Time-Averaged Wind Turbine Wake Flow Field Prediction Us-
ing Autoencoder Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: Energies 15.1 (2022). ISSN:
1996-1073. DOI: 10.3390/en15010041. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/15/
1/41.
[31]
Jean Kossaifi et al. neuraloperator. https://github.com/neuraloperator/neuraloperator.
2023.
[32]
Jean Kossaifi et al. Multi-Grid Tensorized Fourier Neural Operator for High-Resolution
PDEs. 2023. arXiv: 2310.00120 [cs.LG].
[33]
Alexander J. Smits. Lectures in Fluid Mechanics Viscous Flows and Turbulence.
2000.
[34]
J. Boussinesq. Essai sur la théorie des eaux courantes, Mémoires présentés par
divers savants à l’Académie des Sciences 23. 1877.
[35]
Omry Yadan. Hydra - A framework for elegantly configuring complex applications.
Github. 2019. URL: https://github.com/facebookresearch/hydra.
[36]
Takuya Akiba et al. “Optuna: A Next-generation Hyperparameter Optimization Frame-
work”. In: Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining. 2019.
[37]
DTU Computing Center. DTU Computing Center resources. 2022. DOI: 10.48714/
DTU.HPC.0001. URL: https://doi.org/10.48714/DTU.HPC.0001.
[38]
Fanny Lehmann et al. “3D elastic wave propagation with a Factorized Fourier Neural
Operator (F-FNO)”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering
420 (2024), p. 116718. ISSN: 0045-7825. DOI: 10.1016/j.cma.2023.116718. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0045782523008411.
[39]
Zhongyi Jiang et al. Fourier-MIONet: Fourier-enhanced multiple-input neural op-
erators for multiphase modeling of geological carbon sequestration. 2023. arXiv:
2303.04778 [cs.LG].
[40]
Kaifeng Bi et al. Pangu-Weather: A 3D High-Resolution Model for Fast and Accurate
Global Weather Forecast. 2022. arXiv: 2211.02556 [physics.ao-ph].
[41]
Remi Lam et al. GraphCast: Learning skillful medium-range global weather fore-
casting. 2023. arXiv: 2212.12794 [cs.LG].
[42]
“The carbon footprint of computational research”. In: Nature Computational Science
3.8 (Aug. 2023), pp. 659–659. ISSN: 2662-8457. DOI: 10.1038/s43588-023-00506-2.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-023-00506-2.
[43]
Loïc Lannelongue, Jason Grealey, and Michael Inouye. “Green Algorithms: Quan-
tifying the Carbon Footprint of Computation”. In: Advanced Science 8.12 (2021),
p. 2100707. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / advs . 202100707. eprint: https : / /
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/advs.202100707. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/advs.202100707.
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:67==
A
Windfarm layouts
The 800 layouts used in the RANS data set, here at an horizontal grid spacing of 1.0
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:69==
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:71==
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
63
==PAGE:72==
64
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:73==
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
65
==PAGE:74==
66
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:75==
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
67
==PAGE:76==
68
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:77==
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
69
==PAGE:78==
70
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:79==
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
71
==PAGE:80==
72
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:81==
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
73
==PAGE:82==
74
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
==PAGE:83==
Fourier Neural Operator-Driven Multi-Fidelity Surrogate of RANS-based Wind Farm Wake Simulations
75
==PAGE:84==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Matematiktorvet, Building 303B
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
