==PAGE:1==
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
A means to address an overburdened healthcare
system?
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
A means to address an overburdened healthcare system?
Master Thesis
22 of June, 2024
By
Alberte Drivsholm and Marie Hoel
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report ti-
tle, etc.
Cover photo:
https://www.apoteket.dk/dosispak
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Management and Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Technology, Manage-
ment and Economics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Industrial Engineering and Management, MSc Eng.
Alberte Drivsholm - s193988
Signature
Date
Marie Hoel - s193960
Signature
Date
ii
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Background: With an ageing population and a labour force struggling to keep up, Denmark
is expected to lack 15,000 social and healthcare workers in just 10 years. Furthermore,
a growing number of patients with poly-pharmacy increases the risk of medication er-
rors, potentially jeopardising patient safety. Overcoming these challenges necessitates a
cold prioritisation of the warm hands alongside the utilisation of technology for increased
efficiency and patient safety. Automatic multi-dose dispensing (MDD) can potentially ad-
dress both problems, but a number of barriers stand in the way for its dissemination. This
study aims to explore some of these barriers and identify potential solutions to overcome
them.
Method: A comprehensive literature review and 11 semi-structured interviews with repre-
sentatives from relevant stakeholder groups formed the basis for an analysis of the use
of MDD in the Danish healthcare system, drawing on principles and methods from lean
healthcare and change management.
Result: The study found that most challenges and frustrations with MDD were linked to
hospitalisations or medication changes and associated with failure to adhere to MDD
guidelines, extensive communication flows, unclear division of responsibilities, and lack
of interprofessional collaboration.
Conclusion: It seems plausible that lean and change management tools can reduce bar-
riers towards MDD in the Danish healthcare system. To address such barriers, this study
suggests initiatives to support collaboration between stakeholders, initiatives to address
psychological and emotional barriers of change, and a strategy for scaling up an interven-
tion promoting MDD in hospitals. The study supports the most recent analyses of the use
and dissemination of MDD in Denmark by contributing with new theoretical perspectives
and suggestions rooted in lean and change management.
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
This report documents our master thesis in Industrial Engineering and Management at
the Technical University of Denmark. The report was prepared by Alberte Drivsholm and
Marie Hoel under supervision from Peter Jacobsen, Associate Professor Emeritus at the
Department of Technology, Management and Economics at DTU.
We would like to extend special thanks to Peter Jacobsen for his professional guidance,
great engagement, and positive support for the project. Additionally, we thank the 12
stakeholders who contributed to the project with their professional expertise, experiences,
and opinions, which formed the basis for our analysis. Finally, we would like to thank
friends for facilitating important contacts to stakeholders.
iv
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review
2
3
MDD in Denmark
7
3.1
Current initiatives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
The Danish healthcare system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Theoretical foundation
15
4.1
Lean Healthcare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Organisational change
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Change management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.4
Model of Collaboration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Methodology
26
5.1
Process mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.2
Semi-structured interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.3
Affinity Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.4
Hot spot analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
6
Results
29
6.1
Initial process maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.2
Identified problems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6.3
Hotspots analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.4
Areas of intervention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.5
Case example: Bispebjerg Hospital
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
7
Discussion
44
7.1
1. Initiative: Improve the cross-sectional cooperation . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7.2
2. Initiative: Increase the focus on transition management . . . . . . . . . . 56
7.3
3. Initiativ: Continuing rather than pausing MDD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
7.4
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
8
Conclusion
75
Bibliography
76
A
Muusmann’s 19 recommendations
86
B
Stakeholder interviews
87
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
v
==PAGE:8==
B.1
Summary of interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
B.2
Generic interview guide (in Danish)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
C
Hotspots analysis
90
C.1
Initiation of MDD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
C.2
Hospitalisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
C.3
Medication changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
D
Process maps
93
D.1
Initial process maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
D.2
Post-interview process maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
vi
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Challenges with recruiting and retaining healthcare professionals combined with a rapidly
growing elderly population are among the largest and most debated issues facing Den-
mark in recent years (Lægeforeningen, 2023). According to the most recent report from
the Ministry of Finance, it is estimates that between 2023 and 2035, there will be an in-
crease of 192,000 more individuals aged over 70, and demand for social and healthcare
assistants will exceed supply by more than 15,000 (Finansministeriet, 2023). A similar
report has been conducted by the Medical Association, estimating a requirement for an
additional 40,000 healthcare professionals by 2030 when all professions are taken into
account (Lægeforeningen, 2023). However, since the labour force is not growing in the
same pace as the elderly population, overcoming these recruitment challenges requires
prioritising human resources while leveraging existing and new technology to enhance
and streamline work processes (Robusthedskommissionen, 2023).
One of the areas where technology has significant potential to streamline tasks and free
up nursing staff is in medication dispensing. In contemporary eldercare practices, this
task is primarily done manually, which is very time-consuming and requires high levels
of concentration and an environment free of disruptions to minimise errors. A recent
report prepared by Muusmann for the Local Government Denmark (KL) and the Danish
Regions estimates that transitioning from manual to automated multi-dose dispensing
(MDD) can free up 600 full-time equivalents in the medium term (3-4 years) and 900 in the
long term (Muusmann & Danske Regioner, 2023). Additionally, MDD reduces medication
errors from 2-4 per 100 manual doses to 2 per million automated doses (Muusmann &
Danske Regioner, 2023) and allows patients to buy only the precise number of pills they
require, leading to reduced medication waste which is both economically and environmen-
tally advantageous (Hoffmann, 2021; Nielsen, 2024).
Thus, MDD holds significant potential to relieve a strained healthcare system and increase
patient safety. Despite this, it still not fully utilised in Denmark. The Muusmann report
investigated barriers to MDD and identified a number of initiatives to support the dissem-
ination of MDD in the Danish healthcare system. However, many initiatives are broad and
lack clear, tangible steps or measures of success. Therefore, the aim of this report is to
dig deeper into existing challenges with MDD and formulate a series of specific solutions
to address chosen issues or obstacles. This leads to the following research question:
How might multi-dose drug dispensing (MDD) enhance efficiency and safety
within healthcare and offer a solution to the demographic challenges facing
Denmark, including an ageing populace, a diminishing working-age demographic,
and labour scarcities? Additionally, what specific initiatives could support the
dissemination of MDD, and how should these be effectively implemented?
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Literature review
A comprehensive literature review was conducted with the objective to gain knowledge of
multidose drug dispensing through the state-of-the-art literature. The inclusion criteria for
the searching were all qualitative and quantitative studies and literature reviews related
to the topic, both on a global basis, but with an emphasis on Denmark and the Nordic
countries. The first search was conducted in December 2023 and the last in May 2024.
The following databases were used when searching: DTU Findit, Scopus, PubMed and
Web of Science, using keywords such as ”multi*dose drug dispensing”, ”automated dose
dispensing” and ”dosisdispensering”. The exact searches are demonstrated in table 2.1.
Database
Search string
Results
DTU Findit
”multi*dose drug dispensing”
72
Scopus
”multi*dose drug dispensing”
29
DTU Findit
((multidose OR multi-dose) AND ”drug dispensing”) OR
”automated drug dispensing”
157
DTU Findit
”multi*dose drug dispensing” AND review
14
PubMed
”multi*dose drug dispensing” OR ”automated drug dis-
pensing” (filter: latest 10 years)
26
Web of Sci-
ence
”multi*dose drug dispensing” OR ”dosisdispensering”
OR ”unit dose dispensing”
68
Table 2.1: The various search strings used for the literature review
As seen in table 2.1, the discourse on multidose drug dispensing is characterised by a
sparse literature base, with few results. Furthermore, the majority of publications have
emerged within the past decade, indicating a relatively novel field of study. A search query
for ”multi*dose drug dispensing” in DTU Findit yielded only 72 results, of which 51 were
published within the most recent decade. To identify potentially missed articles during
the direct searches, various reference lists were in addition manually looked through, as
an alternative approach to find relevant literature.
2.0.1
Multi-dose drug dispensing
Some patients find it challenging or are simply not capable of managing their own medica-
tion. In these cases, health care professionals can decide to dispense the medication via a
dosing aid. This can be particularly useful for patients with poly-pharmacy, that is patients
using five or more medications (Varghese et al., 2024). As the number of older adults with
poly-pharmacy is increasing, the use of dosing aids is also rising (Mertens et al., 2018).
Multi-dose drug dispensing (MDD) is an example of such, promoted as an adherence aid
to ensure better medical treatment for patients with poly-pharmacy and/or medication
management problems (Josendal et al., 2022). The health technology is common in hos-
pitals around the world, in primary care in Australia and some European countries (Rechel,
2
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:11==
2018). In particular, it is widely used in the Nordic countries and the Netherlands, where
MDD is offered as an alternative to ordinary prescriptions (OPs) (Vallius et al., 2022).
With MDD, solid medications (tablets and capsules) are removed from their original pack-
aging and machine-packed into disposable unit bags, where each dose unit bag contains
all the medication intended for each scheduled administration occasion (Bobrova et al.,
2019). The bags are individually labelled with patient data, date, medication contents and
time for intake (Sjöberg et al., 2011), and are delivered with a 2-week frequency (van Rein
et al., 2018). In acute situations, where changes regarding the patient’s medication has to
be made immediately, new unit bags can also be made and delivered within a couple of
days, either to replace, or supplement the current unit bags. Nevertheless, the necessity
for such occurrences is infrequent (Apotekerforeningen, 2022). Some medications are
not licensed to be repacked and provided as MDD, such as chewing tablets, liquids and
antibiotics (Sjöberg et al., 2011). As a consequence, most patients are given both MDD
as well as ordinary prescriptions (Reuther et al., 2011). The typical MDD users are nor-
mally elderly patients who consistently use several regular medications, with difficulties
handling and administering their medication (Halvorsen et al., 2012; Mertens et al., 2018;
Sjöberg et al., 2011).
MDD can only be prescribed by a physician, normally a general practitioner (GP). However,
the proposal to initiate is often suggested by a municipal district nurse in close contact
with the patient (Sjöberg et al., 2011). The GPs, usually in collaboration with a nurse, are
in charge of the drug treatment, prescriptions and impact, while the pharmacists review
the doses, drug interactions and potentially inappropriate medication (PIM) (Vallius et al.,
2022).
2.0.2
Benefits
The use of multi-dose drug dispensing has the potential to free up municipal personnel
resources through less manual medication handling, and simultaneously increase patient
safety (Kleist, 2023). More municipal personnel resources are freed up by reducing the
medication administration time, and patient safety is enhanced by improving adherence
and minimising dispensing errors (Bobrova et al., 2019). In terms of patient’s experience
and satisfaction with dosing aids, little is known. However, a study conducted in the
Netherlands, where MDD users were interviewed, 90% expressed a general positive opin-
ion, and stated that the MDD system supported them with their medication management
(Mertens et al., 2019b).
Figure 2.1: Benefits of MDD identified in the literature.
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
3
==PAGE:12==
The following paragraphs elaborate on the benefits related to the MDD service identified
in the literature, supported by conducted studies to substantiate the argument.
Reduction in drug use
The MDD service is characterised by, among other things, a reduced amount of drug
wastage and a detailed review of the patient’s medication list (Mertens et al., 2019b).
As a result, drug use may be reduced. The first nationwide controlled study to investigate
this was conducted in Finland in 2007 (Sinnemäki et al., 2017). The study examined the
effect of MDD on drug use in elderly primary care patients enrolled in the service in 2007.
It aimed to determine if the MDD service reduced drug use. Over a one-year period, the
findings indicated a decrease in drug use, but recommended further research to establish
causality.
Reduction in medication errors
Another benefit of MDD is its potential to reduce the amount of medication errors by ex-
changing manual labour with automatic machines. Medication errors is currently a big
challenge within primary healthcare, generating high costs and much suffering(Bardage
et al., 2014). According to the Danish Patient Safety Authority (DPSA), 55.4% of adverse
events reported in the Danish healthcare system are due to medication errors (Mertz et al.,
2021). According to the Muusmann report, using MDD instead of manual dose dispens-
ing can reduce medication errors from 1.8-4.0 times per 100, to only 2.0 per 1,000,000
(Muusmann & Danske Regioner, 2023).
Increased adherence
Medication adherence, also know as medication compliance, is defined as the ”act or ex-
tent of conforming to a provider recommendation/prescription based on timing, dosage,
and frequency of medication use” (Cramer et al., 2008). In other words, it is the extent to
which a patient follows medical instructions (Watanabe & Suzuki, 2014). Non-adherence
or poor adherence can result in devastating health outcomes and is thus an issue of global
health importance (Aremu et al., 2022). Studies published by the World Health Organisa-
tion (WHO) have shown that, on average, 50% of people with chronic diseases do not take
their prescribed medication as recommended (Naderi et al., 2012; Sabaté & World Health
Organization., 2003).
MDD addresses this issue and has the potential to improve medication adherence by sim-
plifying the medication management process (Josendal et al., 2022). To the best of our
knowledge, only two studies have been conducted investigating the association between
MDD and better medication adherence (Kwint et al., 2013; van Rein et al., 2018), both of
which have shown that MDD indeed was associated with improved medication adherence.
Reduce workload for nurses
One of the main motivational factors to increase the use of the MDD service is the pos-
sibility to free up municipal personnel resources. To date, nurses in elderly care typically
spends around 30 minutes per patient to manually dispense medication for a 14 days
period (Muusmann & Danske Regioner, 2023). As previously mentioned, the Muusmann
report estimates that transitioning from manual drug dispensing to MDD can free up 600
full-time equivalents in the medium term (3-4 years) and 900 in the long term (Muusmann
& Danske Regioner, 2023).
4
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:13==
2.0.3
Challenges
Despite the apparent benefits of MDD, there are also examples of the contrary, highlight-
ing challenges and barriers with MDD. In terms of patient safety, some studies have found
that using the MDD service can reduce drug use and medication errors, while others show
an increased risk of potentially inappropriate drug use and medication errors (Josendal &
Bergmo, 2021; Reuther et al., 2011; Sjöberg et al., 2011; Wallerstedt et al., 2013). These
studies conclude that the expected benefits of MDD are only partially achieved, and that
initiating the service can lead to negative effects such as poly-pharmacy (Josendal et al.,
2022), challenging the idea that MDD increases patient safety. Furthermore, there is a
consensus that the system lacks clear routines and distribution of responsibilities. This
is particularly frequent in connection with MDD patients being hospitalised.
Figure 2.2: Challenges with MDD identified in the literature.
Poly-pharmacy and inappropriate drug use
Poly-pharmacy has many different definitions, with the most common being five or more
medications daily (Masnoon et al., 2017; Varghese et al., 2024). It is associated with
medication errors, poor medication adherence, drug-drug interactions, higher medica-
tion costs, and potentially preventable emergency room visits and hospitalisations, es-
pecially for older adults (Tamura et al., 2012; von Buedingen et al., 2018). Moreover, poly-
pharmacy increases the risk of using potentially inappropriate medications, i.e., medica-
tions that have more risks than benefits and more likely than others to cause adverse
events (Charles et al., 2022). Thus, it is of essence to avoid these.
The MDD service is promoted as an aid to avoid the occurrences of poly-pharmacy and
inappropriate drug use (Josendal & Bergmo, 2021). However, multiple studies suggest
the contrary, that MDD increases the number of potentially inappropriate medications
(Sjöberg et al., 2011; Wallerstedt et al., 2013). A longitudinal study conducted in Sweden
established a causal relationship between the MDD system and poly-pharmacy, revealing
an augmented medication regimen for patients transitioning to the service (Wallerstedt
et al., 2013). Moreover, medication errors were nearly six times more frequent among
older patients using MDD compared to those receiving ordinary prescriptions. More re-
cent studies have reported similar findings: Bobrova et al. also found that the initiation
of the MDD system increased the number of medications, and that the findings could not
be explained by the increased disease burden for these patients (Bobrova et al., 2019).
Josendal et al. found that about one out of four MDD patients in elderly home care service
were exposed to potentially inappropriate medications (Josendal et al., 2020). Finally, the
most recent study, looking into the the drug use before and after transition to MDD service
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
5
==PAGE:14==
among persons with Alzheimer’s disease, also showed an increase in drug use among pa-
tients put on MDD (Vallius et al., 2022).
Unclear routines and distribution of responsibilities
In 2010, a study was conducted in Finland, which to the best of our knowledge was the
first investigating the process of initiating MDD. The aim was to look into the type of med-
ication review that was conducted, how a patient’s medication list was reconciled, and
finally what changes were made to the patient’s medications upon the initiation of MDD.
The findings showed an ineffective use of resources, with inconsistent methods of con-
ducting the medication reviews. Moreover, tasks such as a prescription review, often
involved two to four health care professionals, although only one is needed (Sinnemäki
et al., 2014).
Hospitalisation
Health care professionals are facing grave challenges during the care transition phase
of MDD processes, such as hospitalisation. A study conducted at Bispebjerg hospital
in 2010 showed that although MDD is frequent among the patients being admitted to the
acute medical admissions ward, identification and registration of it is only performed spo-
radically (Reuther et al., 2011). Moreover, of patients admitted to the hospital, changes in
MDD medication were made for 58,3% and interviews with the health care professionals
revealed large challenges in MDD handling with raised work load upon discharge (Reuther
et al., 2011).
2.0.4
Summary and identified necessities
Comprehensive literature reviews reveal that studies comparing MDD to manual dose dis-
pensing are few and inconclusive (Bardage et al., 2014; Josendal et al., 2022; Sinnemäki
et al., 2013; Statens beredning för medicinsk utvärdering., 2009). While the MDD service
has the potential to free up municipal personnel resources, the evidence regarding its im-
pact on patient safety remains uncertain. MDD has been promoted as an adherence aid,
expected to improve medication management and reduce medication errors. However,
the effects of the MDD service in primary care, as of now, are primarily experience-based
rather than evidence-based (Josendal et al., 2022). Furthermore, studies investigating the
same topics yield contradictory results, demonstrating inconsistency in the findings. For
instance, studies investigating the impact of MDD on drug use report varying outcomes,
with Sinnemäki et al. identifying a reduction, whereas Vallius et al. observed the opposite.
Nevertheless, health authorities continue to encourage MDD in primary care, and its use is
increasing (Rechel, 2018). As a consequence, there is a consensus in the literature on the
need for additional research to overcome current barriers and fully harness the potential
of MDD. Sinnemäki et al. has found the MDD procedure to need more standardisation,
particularly medication reconciliation and review for MDD patients. Josendal et al. claims
there is a need to involve all actors in the process and define their responsibilities. In
particular, there has been identified a need for improved systems during care transitions,
such as during hospitalisation.
6
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:15==
3
MDD in Denmark
3.0.1
Development in the use of MDD
MDD was launched in Denmark in 2001, and the number of users grew steadily during
the following years as shown in figure 3.1 (Reuther et al., 2011). In 2014, however, the
growth started to decline, likely due to the integration of the shared medication card –
Fælles Medicinkort (FMK), which did not support MDD (Muusmann & Danske Regioner,
2023). FMK was designed to create transparency by allowing all relevant healthcare pro-
fessionals to access a combined overview of each patient’s issued prescriptions. Without
FMK support, MDD prescriptions required a separate workflow compared to ordinary pre-
scriptions (OPs), thereby adding complexity to the workflow and potentially contributing
to declining usage (Sunhedsdatastyrelsen, 2023).
Figure 3.1: Development in the use of MDD in Denmark from 2003-2021. The left axis
shows the number of weekly MDD packages in millions and the right axis shows the
number of individuals on MDD in thousands. Source: Muusmann and Danske Regioner,
2023.
In 2020, FMK was updated to support MDD and in 2021, a temporary agreement between
the Regional Salary and Tariff Board (RLTN) and the Danish Organization of General Prac-
titioners (PLO) was introduced that guaranteed GPs a fee of 450 DKK for starting up pa-
tients on MDD (Muusmann & Danske Regioner, 2023). These initiatives likely played a
significant role in the observed rise in the use of MDD from the end of 2021 to the end
of 2023, as seen on figure 3.2. Currently, there are approximately 50.000 users of MDD
in Denmark per month, a number that has increase with over 30% in less than two years
(Kleist, 2023). More than half of these patients are 75 years old or more, as can be seen
from table 3.1.
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.2: Development in the use of MDD in Denmark from 2021-2023. Source:
Kleist, 2023.
Patients receiving MDD in Denmark, 65+
36.965
Patients receiving MDD in Denmark, 75+
28.710
All patients receiving MDD in Denmark
50.020
Base population
5.936.307
Table 3.1: Source: Own calculations based on data from the Medicine Statistics Regis-
ter (as of May 30, 2024), Sunhedsdatastyrelsen.
3.0.2
Municipal variation
The number of patients receiving MDD in Denmark varies significantly across municipali-
ties. As illustrated in figure 3.3, the national average of MDD users aged over 75 was 4.2%,
with variations ranging from 0.4% to 16.9% among the 91 municipalities included in the
analysis (Kleist, 2023). The differences in MDD usage across municipalities in Denmark
may be due to different practices regarding the use of MDD and variations in health status
across municipalities, affecting the likelihood of receiving MDD (Kleist, 2023). Nonethe-
less, the key takeaway is that there is a potential to increase the usage of MDD in Denmark
– in some municipalities more than others. According to Kleist et al. the number of MDD
users would increase by 10,000 or 25%, if all municipalities reached the national average
for MDD users. Furthermore, if all municipalities matched the usage levels of the top 10%,
the national number of MDD users would increase by approximately 120%.
8
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.3: The number of MDD users aged over 75 years old across Danish municipal-
ities in the third quarter of 2023. Among 75+ year-olds, the lightest blue municipalities
have less than 1.5% MDD-users, while the darkest blue municipalities have more than
6%. Source: Kleist, 2023.
3.0.3
Comparison to neighbouring countries
Another indication of underlying potential is evident when comparing the number of MDD
users in Denmark to those in other countries. Compared to neighbouring countries, Den-
mark is falling behind in the implementation of MDD (Apotekerforeningen, 2022). Figure
3.4 shows the potential number of MDD users in Denmark if it had the same relative pro-
portion of MDD users to inhabitants as our four neighbouring countries. The red level in
the columns represents the current Danish level, while the dark green parts indicates the
potential increase, illustrating how many additional citizens would need to be initiated on
MDD to match these countries.
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.4: MDD users in Denmark (red) compared to the amount of users in four com-
parative countries (dark green). Source: Apotekerforeningen, 2022.
The substantial differences in the dissemination of MDD across the Nordic countries illus-
trate its untapped potential in the Danish healthcare system. While Netherlands, with its
different healthcare financial model, is less relevant for comparison, the Nordic countries
are indeed well-suited. They share many similarities with Denmark, such as primarily tax-
financed healthcare systems and municipal responsibility for primary care, making them
good benchmarks for evaluating potential (Mertz et al., 2021).
3.1
Current initiatives
As presented in the above sections, MDD can help mitigate the growing labour shortage in
home and nursing care, enhance patient safety, and improve the overall quality of patient
journeys. To tackle the decreasing number of patients on MDD over the past decade,
address the significant variations in MDD usage across municipalities, and increase the
limited adoption of MDD in Denmark compared to neighbouring countries, some initiatives
have been undertaken.
3.1.1
KL, Danish Regions and Muusmann
In the summer of 2022, KL and the Danish Regions agreed that there was a need for a na-
tional plan within the healthcare system to support the dissemination of MDD (Muusmann
& Danske Regioner, 2023). This led to an extensive analysis report, which was created by
the Danish consultancy firm Muusmann and released in 2023. The report investigated the
use of MDD in Denmark through interviews with representatives from the most relevant
stakeholder groups. The main goals of the analysis were:
1. To uncover the organisational, economic and legislative barriers that restrict the
dissemination of MDD.
2. To map out and, to the extent possible, quantify the benefits and potential draw-
backs of the dissemination of MDD.
10
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:19==
3. The analysis should lead to actionable recommendations that can contribute to pro-
moting MDD, including the prerequisites necessary to implement these recommen-
dations.
Muusmann found that effective dissemination of MDD require collaboration between mu-
nicipalities, GPs, pharmacies, and hospitals, primarily driven by the municipalities, and
that MDD holds a significant untapped potential. In an illustrative calculation concern-
ing the total time spent per patient annually when transferring from manual dispensing to
MDD, Muusmann observed a reduction of nine hours across all involved stakeholders (see
figure 3.5). These time savings are not evenly distributed between the different stakehold-
ers. While municipalities enjoy significant time reductions, GPs and pharmacies have to
incur additional time commitments with MDD compared to manual dispensing.
Figure 3.5: Calculation example of the yearly time gains by introducing automated
MDD instead of manual dispensing. Source: Muusmann and Danske Regioner, 2023.
Besides the time calculations, Muusmann included an overview of the costs associated
with MDD, shown in figure 3.6. This shows that the primary portion of the expenses is cov-
ered by the regions, with a smaller part covered by the patient. This part is even smaller for
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
11
==PAGE:20==
patients with an extensive medication consumption, as the regions fully cover their MDD
package fee. Additionally, members of health insurance ”Denmark” have their expenses
reduced by 50-100%. The vast majority of the annual payments are directed towards phar-
macies as MDD packaging fees, with only 150 DKK allocated to the GPs. When comparing
the annual payments to the additional time spent by these to stakeholder groups, it be-
comes clear that the economic incitement is stronger for the pharmacies than for the GPs.
This corresponds to Muusmann’s findings regarding stakeholder motivation, where GPs
are generally more sceptical than e.g. municipalities.
Figure 3.6: Overview of the distribution of costs associated with MDD. Source: Muus-
mann and Danske Regioner, 2023.
Based on time calculations shown in figure 3.5 and the projection of a potential increase
of 40,000 patients on MDD over the next 3-4 years, Muusmann’s estimates that MDD can
release around 600 full-time equivalents annually in municipalities. In the long run, the
capacity is estimated to increase to 60,000 patients on MDD, corresponding to 900 full-
time equivalents. To initiate work on unlocking this untapped potential, a cross-sectional
implementation plan was developed, consisting of 19 individual recommendations which
are included in appendix A.
The findings and recommendations outlined in the Muusmann report provide a robust
groundwork for the advancement of MDD adoption. Nevertheless, many of the recom-
mendations are very broad, focusing on how the different stakeholders should approach
MDD, what considerations they should factor in, and which possible actions they should
explore further. Thus, as previously mentioned, the aim of this report is to delve deeper
into Muusmann’s findings, going into detail with parts of the MDD system, and provide
additional concrete recommendations to support the work of Muusmann.
12
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:21==
3.2
The Danish healthcare system
To create the best possible foundation for understanding the MDD service and its barriers
in Denmark, this section serve as a brief introduction to the Danish healthcare system, its
structure and the IT systems currently being used by the different stakeholder groups.
3.2.1
Structure
The Danish healthcare system is largely decentralised, as illustrated in figure 3.7, and
operates across three political and administrative levels: the state, the regions and the
municipalities (Ministry of Health, 2017).
Figure 3.7: Organisation of the public sector in Denmark. Source: Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and COWI, 2022.
The state holds the overall regulatory and supervisory functions in health and elderly care.
The five regions are primarily responsible for the hospitals, the general practitioners (GPs)
and for psychiatric care. Finally, the 98 municipalities are responsible for a number of
primary healthcare services as well as for elderly care (Ministry of Foreign Affairs & COWI,
2022).
In 2022, 22 health clusters or ”Sundhedsklynger” were established to foster collabora-
tion across the different administrative levels of the system. The clusters bring together
municipalities, GPs, and hospitals and facilitate collaboration around certain groups of
patients, including elderly people and patient with chronic diseases or psychiatric disor-
ders (Kommunernes Landsforening, n.d.). There are a total of four-five health clusters in
each region. They serve as cross-sectoral frameworks, but the authority responsibility for
individual services still lie with the regions and municipalities (Bech & Kjellberg, 2022).
Clusters are also used among GPs to support quality development in general practice
(Madsen et al., 2022). There are 115 of these supported by KiAP, Quality in General Prac-
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
13
==PAGE:22==
tice, who provides material and resources for the GP’s work with quality improvement with
regard to a number of different topics, including MDD (KiAP, n.d.). In contrast to some of
the other topics, the so-called ”cluster package” about MDD is not only directed towards
GPs, but also towards pharmacies and municipalities, and encourages these stakehold-
ers to collaborate on MDD (KiAP, 2024a).
3.2.2
Health Data
The Danish healthcare system is recognised as one of the most digitally advanced in the
world (Sundhedsdatastyrelsen, 2021). It is characterised by extensive electronic commu-
nication between healthcare professionals, systematic use of health data, and digitised
workflows (Ministry of Foreign Affairs & COWI, 2022). The integration of various IT sys-
tems in the healthcare system is managed by MedCom, a non-profit organisation owned
by the Ministry of the Interior and Health, Danish Regions and KL. It enables cross-sector
communication and secure data sharing (Ministry of Foreign Affairs & COWI, 2022).
All data on medication is handled in FMK. FMK is the basis of the data infrastructure, devel-
oped and operated by the Danish Health Data Authority (Danish: Sundhedsdatastyrelsen).
FMK includes information about citizens’ current and old medication, accessible to all rel-
evant stakeholders – patients, GPs, hospitals, pharmacists and municipalities. This ac-
cess ensures that they can perform the tasks necessary to ensure proper management
of medication, including MDD.
In the regions, health records are handled in electronic patient record (EPJ) systems deliv-
ered by two different distributors. Sundhedsplatformen is used in Region Zealand and the
capital region and delivered by Epic, while the remaining three regions have their own EPJ
systems all delivered by Systematic (Danske Regioner, 2022). Information can be shared
between all systems via the electronic health record on Sundhed.dk.
Lastly, there are six different EPJ systems for GPs, delivered by five different distributors.
These systems include MultiMedWEB, MyClinic, NOVAX, WinPLC, Clinea, and XMO (Prak-
tiserende Lægers Organisation, n.d.). Besides these there are multiple other EPJ and EOJ
(”elektronisk omsorgsjournal) used by different healthcare professionals across the dif-
ferent regions and municipalities (MedCom, n.d.-b).
14
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:23==
4
Theoretical foundation
This study investigates MDD and the associated processes from lean and change man-
agement perspectives. These two management approaches form the theoretical founda-
tion for our analysis and discussion and will be presented in the following sections. While
lean management focuses on improving processes and eliminating waste, change man-
agement focuses on ensuring that improvements are adopted smoothly and effectively
by the people in the organisation. Thus, lean management projects can benefit from in-
corporating change management concepts to achieve more sustainable results.
4.1
Lean Healthcare
Healthcare organisations are under constant pressure to adapt to new procedures and
technologies while upholding and enhancing performance, quality of care, and patient
satisfaction (van Rossum et al., 2016). One increasingly acknowledged strategy for im-
proving the efficiency and effectiveness of healthcare systems involves the adoption of
lean principles in the healthcare sector (Brandão de Souza & Pidd, 2011). Application of
lean principles to optimise workflows within healthcare is also known as lean healthcare.
The concept of lean stems from the manufacturing industry and was originally introduced
by Taiichi Ohno in the 1950’s as Toyota’s Production Systems (Torabi et al., 2018). Later
it became known as ’lean thinking’ or ’lean manufacturing’ and spread from the car man-
ufacturing industry to many other public and commercial sectors (Leite et al., 2020). The
basic idea of lean linking is to create more value with fewer resources (Gardiner & Reefke,
2019). In other words, lean thinking is a strategic initiative that seeks to improve pro-
cesses by reducing the amount of non-value adding activities and increasing the flow of
material, information, etc. At the core of the philosophy, Taiichi Ohno introduced three
deviations indicating inefficient allocation of resources: Muda, Mura, and Muri (Helmold
et al., 2022):
• Muda means waste and is defined as any activity that require resources (man power,
material, equipment, space, time, money, etc.) without creating any value to the end
user. There are seven types of waste including transportation, inventory, motion,
waiting, overproduction, over-processing and defects.
• Mura is defined as irregularity or imbalance in workloads and is the main driver of
Muda. For example, capacity variations between different stations in a production
system can cause bottlenecks that lead to the accumulation of waste, e.g., in the
form of waiting time or overproduction.
• Muri refers to overburden of resources, e.g., workers or machinery. Muri can be
caused by Mura or by excessive removal of Muda. In time, this overburden can lead
to employee absenteeism, stress or breakdown of machines.
The seven types of wastes mentioned under Muda arise from the manufacturing industry,
but similar wastes have been identified in the healthcare sector. These include, among
others, unnecessary movement of people or equipment, duplicate tests and documents,
stressed overworked staff, and procedural errors or delays (Torabi et al., 2018). Waste is
present in almost all healthcare processes and creates inconsistencies in the daily work
flows, quality of care and motivation of healthcare workers (Bharsakade et al., 2021).
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
15
==PAGE:24==
Within the healthcare system, patient are recognised as the main customers (van Rossum
et al., 2016). However, for the successful implementation of lean principles, it is neces-
sary to consider healthcare professionals as equally significant customers (Baslyman et
al., 2019). Thus, sustainable lean initiatives should aim to deliver value to all stakeholders
across the healthcare supply chain in which they are introduced.
4.1.1
Success factors
Several studies have concluded that lean management methodology can be implemented
within healthcare systems with minor adjustments and result in significant enhancement
of work processes, resource utilization and, ultimately, patient care (Brandão de Souza
& Pidd, 2011; Torabi et al., 2018). According to van Rossum et al. there are three main
success factors that support the implementation of lean healthcare (van Rossum et al.,
2016). The first success factor is transformational leadership, characterised by senior
management’s top-down commitment to creating visions and inspiring employees. The
second factor is team leadership, fostering a bottom-up approach where employees are
encouraged to recognise waste within the system, propose solutions, and take responsi-
bility for implementing them. The third factor is workforce flexibility, defined as the organ-
isation’s emphasis on adapting employees’ knowledge, skills and behaviour to accommo-
date changes in the work environment.
However, as with any other complex system involving many different stakeholders, a num-
ber of implementation barriers exist. These have delayed the adoption of lean manage-
ment techniques within the healthcare system compared to the manufacturing industry
and must be recognised and overcome in order for the implementation to be successful
and sustainable (Brandão de Souza & Pidd, 2011).
4.1.2
Implementation barriers
Some of the most recognised barriers for the implementation of lean healthcare are re-
lated to the organisational structure of the healthcare system. These include the presence
of functional and professional silos as well as the traditional hierarchy of healthcare staff,
hindering collaboration within and across different departments and functions (Brandão
de Souza & Pidd, 2011; Mann, 2005). Furthermore, political and cultural barriers, both
local and national, can inhibit sustainable improvements in the healthcare system (Leite
et al., 2024).
Another category of implementation barriers is related to the knowledge and mindset of
healthcare professionals. Examples include the difficulty of healthcare professionals in
understanding and embracing the principles and terminology of an approach derived from
the manufacturing industry (Leite et al., 2024). Furthermore, Ben-Tovim et al. highlights
the ”fire-fighting” mentality of healthcare professionals as potential barrier (Ben-Tovim
et al., 2008; Brandão de Souza & Pidd, 2011). They argue that healthcare professionals
typically rely on rapid, experience-driven decision-making, in contrast to the principles of
lean practice that necessitate thorough root cause analysis of process obstacles and a
data-driven, evidence-based approach to finding solutions.
In a large literature study investigating the implementation of lean in complex healthcare
systems up until September 2013, D’Andreamatteo found that the emergency setting is
the most investigated and that further research is needed within home care, primary care,
community care, and the throughout the entire healthcare supply chain (D’Andreamatteo
et al., 2015). This study is time-limited and therefore does not test the actual implemen-
tation of lean to the MDD process. However, focusing on the entire process from assess-
16
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:25==
ment of patient eligibility to administration of MDD medication includes investigating all
the above-mentioned healthcare settings. Thus, this study enhances the body of knowl-
edge concerning lean healthcare, addressing the current gap in available information.
4.2
Organisational change
The introduction of the MDD service in the Danish healthcare had the underlying inten-
tion of improving the current system through change, a common experience in complex
healthcare systems (Pomare et al., 2019). Change is an essential lever for success in a
world impacted by successive evolution (Boudallaa et al., 2023). Thus, understanding and
implementing it has long been a priority for those with a vested interest in adapting and
optimising in an ever-changing environment, of which the healthcare system is a excellent
example of (Graham et al., 2022). With limited resources, an ageing population, and rising
costs of pharmaceuticals, healthcare organisations have had to transform service deliv-
ery to enhance efficiency, quality of care, patient satisfaction, and overall performance
(Le-Dao et al., 2020). Such deliberate actions and strategies, implemented to modify, im-
prove, or overhaul significant components in the healthcare organisation, are examples
of organisational change (Boudallaa et al., 2023).
There are two types of organisational change: adaptive and transformational (Stobierski,
2020). However, some changes can also encompass both, falling somewhere between
the two. Adaptive changes refer to small, incremental modifications that organisations
make to address evolving needs over time. In contrast, transformational changes are
more extensive and larger in scope. They often entail simultaneous shifts in mission and
strategy, organisational structure, people and processes, and thus typically require con-
siderable time and effort implement effectively (Stobierski, 2020). The implementation of
MDD is an example of the latter.
4.3
Change management
Research suggests that failed organisational change initiatives range from one-third to as
high as 80% of attempted change efforts (Whelan-Berry & Somerville, 2010). As a con-
sequence, considerable research efforts have been deployed to fill that knowledge gap
and support managers in the field of change management (Appelbaum & Wohl, 2000).
Change management is defined as ”the entire process that goes from the perception of
an organisational problem to the definition of a framework of actions allowing for the de-
velopment, choice, and implementation of a solution in optimal conditions for success”
(Boudallaa et al., 2023). In other words, it is a structured approach to manage organi-
sational change, ensuring smooth transitions and successful outcomes from conception
and preparation to implementation and resolution (Miller, 2020).
To effectively manage change, organisations often rely on change management mod-
els. These provide systematic frameworks to navigate the complexities of organisational
change, serving as compasses that can facilitate or lead change efforts (Errida & Lotfi,
2021; R. Harrison et al., 2021). The models offer step-by-step guidance, principles, and
strategies to facilitate smooth transitions, minimise resistance, and ensure sustainable
change. A vast amount of change management models have been developed over the
years (R. Harrison et al., 2021), and this report will address three of such: Kotter’s 8-step
Model, Bridges’ Transition Model, and the Model for Improvement.
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
17
==PAGE:26==
4.3.1
Kotter’s Eight-Step Change Model
John Kotter is considered one of the foremost authorities on leadership and change. He
believes that organisational change can be effectively managed trough an eight-step ap-
proach, known as Kotter’s Eight-Step Model to Change Management (Campbell, 2008).
This framework, illustrated in figure 4.1, was first introduced in a 1995 article in the Har-
vard Business Review and later elaborated in his book Leading Change. Drawing on his ex-
tensive business and research experience, Kotter’s model outlines a sequential process
designed to overcome resistance and ensure sustained change. When first introduced,
the model achieved immediate success, and despite being developed 29 years ago, it
still remains a cornerstone in the field of change management to this day, also within
healthcare (R. Harrison et al., 2021). It offers a clear, step-by-step approach, that empha-
sises communication, employee engagement and leadership. Kotter explains the lasting
relevance of the framework with people’s behaviour, seeing as ”the most fundamental
mistakes smart people make when they are trying to make big changes, especially im-
plementing high stakes strategies or initiatives, are mostly still the same today” (Kotter,
2012).
Figure 4.1: A visualisation of Kotter’s eight steps to transforming an organisation.
Source: https://mutomorro.com/kotters-8-step-change-model/
The eight steps outlined by Kotter for transforming an organisation are:
1. Establish a sense of urgency about the need to achieve change.
The first step of the model is about establishing a sense of urgency. One of Kotter’s
fundamental observations of which his model is grounded in is that people generally
resist change (Aziz, 2017). He strongly believes that it is impossible to overstate the
severity of the challenges caused by an inadequate or unaligned sense of urgency
(Kotter, 2012). Put differently, if people do not recognise the necessity for change,
18
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:27==
they are unlikely to embrace it. This step is typically associated with strong leader-
ship, and often requires bold or risky actions (Appelbaum et al., 2012).
2. Form a powerful guiding coalition.
The second step is to form a powerful guiding coalition. According to Kotter, no
single individual can lead and manage the change process in an organisation alone,
no matter how competent or charismatic they might be (Kotter, 2012). Thus, as-
sembling a group with power, influence in the organisation, and energy to lead the
change is critical to its success. This coalition should include people who possess
expertise, credibility, the capacity for leadership, with respectful reputations and re-
lationships.
3. Form a strategic vision and initiatives.
Once a guiding coalition has been assembled, one their first tasks is to formulate
a ”clear and sensible vision for the transformation effort” (Kotter, 2012). A well-
defined vision is essential to guide, align, and motivate action. Without it, there is a
risk of confusion and the potential for time-consuming projects that may lead the
organisation in the wrong direction or result in stagnation (Kotter, 2012).
4. Communicate the vision.
”Major change is usually impossible unless most employees are willing to help, often
to the point of making short-term sacrifices” (Kotter, 2012). Therefore, it is crucial
to clearly communicate the vision of the change effort to engaging employees both
emotionally and intellectually. The stakeholders involved need to understand and be
attracted to the potential benefits, and believe in the feasibility of the transformation.
Clear and compelling communication can reduce uncertainty and ambiguity, thereby
enhancing motivation.
5. Empower others to act on the vision.
Implementing significant changes requires the active participation of a large num-
ber of people. Consequently, the next step of Kotter’s model focuses on empower-
ing employees by removing barriers and giving stakeholders a sense of control over
the change process. This typically involves addressing obstacles related to skills,
structures, supervisors or systems, while providing the necessary support and re-
sources to drive the change forward (Kotter, 2012). Training is one approach, as
emphasised by Kotter, that equips employees with essential skills and knowledge,
reducing resistance and boosting confidence (Appelbaum et al., 2012; Armenakis
& Bedeian, 1999). Comprehensive training helps employees to engage in challeng-
ing tasks and adapt to new roles and responsibilities, thus, ensuring their effective
contribution to the change process (Kotter & Schlesinger, 2008).
6. Plan for and create short-term wins.
Complex transformations generally take time, and without short-term goals to meet
and celebrate, these efforts to change strategies or restructure businesses, risk los-
ing momentum (Kotter, 2012). This step is about actively looking for ways to obtain
clear performance improvements, establish goals and reward the people involved
when achieved, to avoid employees giving up or actively join the resistance. Short-
term wins generate self-confidence and provide reassurance that the change efforts
are on the right track, paying off (Kotter, 2012).
7. Consolidate improvements and produce more change.
The penultimate step of Kotter’s model is about ensuring the momentum built up
by early wins is maintained. ”Until changes sink down deeply into the culture, which
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
19
==PAGE:28==
for an entire company can take three to ten years, new approaches are fragile and
subject to regression” (Kotter, 2012), hence managers have to use the short-term
wins to plan for the further change process and drive deeper and more substantial
changes within the organisation. These first successes can also serve to neutralise
cynics, and help leaders prove the ”new way is working” (Kotter, 2012).
8. Institutionalise new approaches.
The final step focuses on embedding change into the organisation, which is essen-
tial for long-term success. If not embedded in the social norms and values, these
new behaviours risk deteriorating once the initial change pressures diminish. For
the change to truly take hold, the new approaches must be anchored in the organi-
sations culture, becoming ”the way we do things here” (Kotter & Schlesinger, 2008).
Without this institutionalisation, the hard-earned changes may gradually fade, as
people tend to revert to their familiar and comfortable routines (Kotter, 2012).
4.3.2
William Bridges theory of transitional management
The second change management model addressed in this report is William Bridges’ the-
ory of transitional management. In contrast to Kotter’s process-oriented step-by-step ap-
proach, Bridges’ model focuses on the human side of change, emphasising the psycho-
logical transitions and emotions people undergo during it.
A fundamental element of this theory is the distinction made between ”change” and ”tran-
sition” – two terms that are often used interchangeably, but in Bridges’ theory have two
widely different starting points. Change is the external event or situation, such as a new
business strategy or technology, hence the focus and starting point revolves around the
desired outcome the change will produce (Armour & Tovell, 2015). Transition on the other
hand, refers to the internal psychological process people go through to come to terms
with the new situation the change brings about. To deal with transitions, people will have
to leave their old situations behind, hence the starting point is not the outcome, but rather
the ending (William Bridges Associates, 2024). Bridge’s believes that it is the transitions
which determines the success or failure of a project, not the changes, and that no change
will occur without a successful transition (Campbell, 2008).
The model of transitional management consists of three distinct stages one must pro-
ceed for a transition to work: the ending, the neutral zone and the new begging. As the
illustration of the framework in figure 4.2 indicates, these phases are not strictly sequen-
tial and transition between them is often ”marked by a change in the dominance of one
phase over the other rather than an absolute shift from one to another” (Bridges & Bridges,
2017). Hence it is not uncommon that people in transition find themselves in two phases
at the same time. Despite the inexplicit boundaries, the order of the three phases cannot
be altered and must start with an ending.
20
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.2: An illustration of William Bridge’s model for transition. Source: William
Bridges Associates, 2024.
The ending
The first phase of transition, which marks its beginning is an ending – a concept that may
seem paradoxical. However, Bridges argues that ”before you can begin something new,
you have to end what used to be. Before you can learn a new way of doing things, you have
to unlearn the old way” (Bridges & Bridges, 2017). Thus, this initial phase involves letting
go of previous practices, recognising losses, such as relationships, processes, team mem-
bers, or locations, and learning to manage them. Identifying and preparing for this phase
is often the greatest challenge for people undergoing transition. Consequently, failing to
acknowledge or support this phase results in more problems for organisations than any
other factor (William Bridges Associates, 2024).
The neutral zone
The next phase refer to an in-between time, when the old is gone, but the new is not fully
operational – a stage known as the neutral zone. This phase is the seedbed for new be-
ginnings and is the very core of the transition process (William Bridges Associates, 2024).
Bridges describes it as ”the psychological no-man’s-land between the old reality and the
new one,” where people learn about their future rolls and create new processes (Bridges
& Bridges, 2017). It is a time when all the old clarities break down, but the new way does
not feel comfortable yet. The neutral zone is characterised by uncertainties and frustra-
tions. People might become confused regarding priorities, experience miscommunica-
tion or lose confidence in the organisation. However, it is also the time when repatterning
takes place, making it the time when innovations is most possible. ”Old and maladaptive
habits are replaced with new ones that are better adapted to the world in which the organ-
isation now finds itself,” (Bridges & Bridges, 2017).
The new beginning
The final stage is about coming out of the transition, making a new beginning. It involves
new attitudes, values and understandings and is where people develop the new identity.
If the transition has been managed well, people should be left feeling reoriented and re-
newed. The new beginning is when people understand their purpose – the part they play
and how to contribute and participate most effectively to make the change begin to work
(William Bridges Associates, 2024).
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
21
==PAGE:30==
4.3.3
The Model of Improvement
The third change management model used in this report is the Model for Improvement
shown in figure 4.3. This is a simple change management model introduced by Langley
et al. from the Associates in Process Improvement in 1996. According to the authors, the
model was developed as a more flexible and comprehensive alternative to the rigid, step-
by-step approaches to improvement (Langley et al., 2009). For this reason, the model has
been widely used to enhance the professional, user-perceived, and organisational quality
in both Danish and international healthcare systems (Dansk Selskab for Patientsikkerhed,
n.d.). The model raises three fundamental questions about the purpose, type and impact
of the change and seeks to answer these through an iterative process using the Plan-Do-
Study-Act (PDSA) cycle (Institute for Healthcare Improvement, n.d.-a).
Figure 4.3: Model for Improvement developed by Associates in Process Improvement.
What are we trying to accomplish?
The first question addresses the aim of the improvement initiative, which is essential for
quality improvement (Silver et al., 2016). The more specific the aim is, the better are the
chances that it will lead to improvement (Berwick, 1996). Additionally, aims should be
measurable, ambitious and externally oriented in order to drive fundamental changes and
lead to significant gains that matter to the patients and to society (Berwick, 1996; Institute
for Healthcare Improvement, n.d.-b). To guide the development of project aims, health-
care institutions can make use of six acknowledged, overarching goals for improvement.
These state that healthcare should be Safe, Effective, Patient-centred, Timely, Efficient, and
Equitable (Committee on Quality of Health Care in America, 2001).
How will we know that a change is an improvement?
The second question focuses on measurement for the purpose of learning, making in-
formed decisions, and understanding causes (Berwick, 1996). Berwick argues that health-
care scientists are often too obsessed with perfect measurements. However when im-
proving systems, there is no need for randomisation, power calculations, and large sam-
ples. Instead, the emphasis should be on acquiring just enough information to move for-
ward in the learning process (Berwick, 1996). Measurement selection should focus on
22
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:31==
choosing a few simple, accurate, and reproducible measures that can effectively track
whether the intervention has improved the system (Silver et al., 2016).
What change can we make that will lead to an improvement?
The last questions is all about identifying the most promising change concepts and avoid-
ing the ones that will not lead to an improvement (Berwick, 1996). Ideas can come from
different places, including experts, theory, evidence, or personal experience (Silver et al.,
2016). As not all ideas will turn out as expected when implemented in practice, they should
be tested first.
PDSA cycles
To turn the selected change ideas into action and connect that action to learning, the
Model for Improvement makes use of iterative PDSA cycles (Langley et al., 2009). These
include planning the relevant tests, doing the experiments, studying the outcomes, and
acting based on the learning (Silver et al., 2016). Besides testing change concepts, PDSA
cycles can be used to answer one or more of the model’s three questions, e.g., by sup-
plementing the existing knowledge base used to identify suitable measures in the second
question (Langley et al., 2009).
4.4
Model of Collaboration
Besides the three change management frameworks, this report uses D’Amour’s Struc-
turation Model of Collaboration, shown in figure 4.4, to analyse the collaboration between
healthcare professionals. This model was first introduced by D’Amour et al. in 1999 and
based on the concept of collective action in relation to organisational sociology, which
was defined by Croziel and Friedberg in the late 1970’s (D’Amour et al., 1999). The model
is developed based on comprehensive studies of collaboration within the healthcare sec-
tor and has been confirmed through multiple case-studies (D’Amour et al., 2005). It is
specifically targeted towards healthcare professionals and administrators, serving as a
tool to diagnose the collaboration and pinpoint areas for improvement.
Figure 4.4: D’Amour’s Four-Dimensional Model of Collaboration. Adapted from
(D’Amour et al., 2008).
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
23
==PAGE:32==
The model focuses on inter-professional and inter-organisational collaboration, in other
words, how well different professions and different organisations cooperate to achieve
common goals. According to D’Amour, four different dimensions are required for a well-
functioning collaboration: two dimensions focusing on the inter-personal relationships
and two focusing on the organisational setting. Each of the dimensions contains a set
of indicators that can be used to assess collaboration processes related to the given di-
mension. These indicators have been verified through multiple case-studies with various
stakeholders (D’Amour et al., 2008). The dimensions are influenced by external and struc-
tural factors such as resources, financial constraints, and policies, which must therefore
be taken into account when the model is applied.
Shared goals and vision
The first relational dimension involves the team adopting shared objectives, recognising
different motives and allegiances, and acknowledging the diverse definitions and expec-
tations of collaboration.
The two indicators for this dimension are Goals, which is an essential starting point for
collaboration, and Client-centred orientation vs. other allegiances, which covers the differ-
ent types of allegiances formed between the different stakeholders and how these can
create an asymmetry of interests.
Internalisation
The second relational dimension refers to professionals’ recognition of their inter-dependencies
and the importance of managing them, which fosters a sense of belonging, understand-
ing of each other’s values and disciplines, and mutual trusts.
The two indicators for internalisation are Mutual acquaintanceship, referring to the need
for professionals to know each other both personally and professionally, and Trust, which
can be expressed using David Maister’s equation (Maister et al., 2001):
Trust = Credibility + Reliability + Intimacy
Self-interest
(4.1)
Formalisation
The first organisational dimension focuses on the existence and use of formalised guide-
lines, which document the desired behaviours and outputs and clarify roles and responsi-
bilities.
The indicators for this dimension are Formalisation tools, which describe the responsi-
bilities and expectations of the different stakeholders, e.g., in the form of protocols, and
Information exchange, which relies on a solid information infrastructure that is important
for establishing trust between professionals.
Governance
The second organisational dimension refers to the leadership functions that provide di-
rection and assistance to professionals, as they implement initiatives related to inter-
professional and inter-organisational collaboration.
There are four indicators for this dimension: Centrality, referring to the existence of a
common direction which is pointed out by central authorities and guides action, (Local)
leadership, which can be emergent or connected to a specific position, Support for innova-
tion, which draws on internal and external expertise and provides a foundation for leaning
and implementing changes, and lastly Connectivity, which refers to the construction of
bonds between individuals and organisations, e.g., using feedback systems, allowing for
rapid and continuous adjustments.
24
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:33==
Due to variations in the achievement of the different indicators, D’Amour established a
continuum ranging from 1 to 3, with 3 being the highest degree of achievement. When ap-
plying the model, each indicator is assessed and a grade from 1-3 is assigned, depending
on the degree of achievement of that specific indicator. To ensure a standardised assess-
ment, D’Amour et al. have developed a table describing the three levels of achievement
for each of the indicators. This table is included in figure 4.5 and will be used to assess
collaboration between healthcare professionals in this report.
Figure 4.5: Indicators of collaboration and their different degrees of achievement
(D’Amour et al., 2008).
D’Amours proposes three different types of collaboration base on the extent to which
the organisation has achieved the ten indicators. These types are Active collaboration
– a sustainable collaboration characterised by a strong common goal, good interper-
sonal relations, and consensus about governance mechanisms, Developing collabora-
tion – an evolving collaboration where goals, inter-organisational relationships and gov-
ernance rules are still under negotiation, and Potential collaboration – a situation where
collaboration does not yet exists or where there are strong opposing forces that hinder its
establishment.
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
25
==PAGE:34==
5
Methodology
Besides the literature review and theoretical framework forming the knowledge founda-
tion for this report, we have used a number of different methods for the analysis. These
include process mapping of the most central MDD processes, 10 semi-structured inter-
views with different stakeholders, and an evaluation of opportunities for improvement
using an affinity diagram and a hotspots analysis.
5.1
Process mapping
A prerequisite for being able to identify waste in a process is to have a detailed under-
standing of the process. There are several different process mapping tools used in lean
management to help visualise and understand process flows. This study uses a swim-
lane diagram, which is a type of flow chart that visualises sequential process steps and
delineate responsibilities (Gadatsch, 2023).
Figure 5.1: The structure of a swimlane diagram. Source:
https://grapholite.com/Diagrams/Swimlane
The swimlane diagram is divided into a number of rows or lanes corresponding to the
different stakeholders. Start/finish points, process steps and decision points are marked
with different shapes as shown in figure 5.1. Based on Muusmann’s report, we have iden-
tified the five following stakeholder groups, excluding the patients: GPs (and GP assis-
tants), municipal nurses/assistants (covering both nursing homes and home care), distri-
bution pharmacies, packing pharmacies, and hospitals.
A detailed draft was made outlining the MDD processes related to initiating a patient on
MDD and adjusting their MDD medication in connection with hospitalisation. These are
included in Appendix D.1 and were used as boundary objects during our stakeholder inter-
views. Boundary objects, typically physical objects, are capable of transmitting informa-
tion between different groups and inciting action (Fenton, 2007). The goal of using these
26
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:35==
was to focus the discussion on concrete work tasks associated with MDD and to allow
the various stakeholders to review and refine the workflow and identify the main places
where problems arise. Input and corrections were incorporated into the final versions of
the swimlane diagrams, are included in Appendix D.2.
Besides swimlane diagrams, simplistic process maps were made to gain a quick overview
of the overall process steps associated with MDD (Gadatsch, 2023).
Figure 5.2: Simplistic process map
5.2
Semi-structured interviews
Semi-structured interviews were used to obtain a thorough understanding of the roles
and responsibilities of the different stakeholders involved in the MDD process. The type of
interviews are characterised by using a combination of open- and closed-ended questions
and are specifically useful for gathering information about tasks and task flows (Wilson,
2014).
A total of 11 interviews were conducted with participants representing the different stake-
holder groups, including municipality, general practice, hospitals, and pharmacies. The
first 10 interviews served as the foundation for our analysis, while the final interview pro-
vided details about a specific MDD project included in the discussion. An overview of
the interviews can be found in Appendix B. The first 10 interviews were based on the in-
terview guide, provided in Danish in Appendix B.2, which was tailored to the stakeholder
group that the participant represented. During these interviews, the process maps were
reviewed with the participants, who confirmed or rejected specific process steps listed
for their respective stakeholder group and made input and corrections. This approach
helped to centre the conversation around the participant’s specific work tasks in relation
to MDD as well as their points of interaction with the other actors. Furthermore, the visual
process map made it easy for the participant to pinpoint exactly where in the process flow
problems usually occur. To ensure comprehensive collection and documentation of infor-
mation, each interview was recorded and all insights were documented on post-it notes
for later use.
5.3
Affinity Diagram
An affinity diagram was used to organise the insights collected from the first 10 stake-
holder interviews. The affinity diagram, also known as KJ method, was developed by the
Japanese cultural anthropologist Jiro Kawakita in the 1960’s (Otieno, 2023). The model
uses a bottom-up approach to structure a diverse set data and extract meaningful insights
from it.
The diagram was constructed from fragments of data documented on post-it notes. Each
source of information was assigned a unique colour, allowing us to trace the information
back to specific interviewees later in the process. Besides insights from our stakeholder
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
27
==PAGE:36==
interviews, we included the open questions and under-explored areas that we had identi-
fied in the Muusmann report. The latter was done to reduce research overlap. The post-it
notes were structured and grouped together through an inductive process to identify the
most relevant focus areas for the continuation of the analysis. The resulting affinity dia-
gram contained a total of 25 clusters with unique titles reflecting the underlying problem.
5.4
Hot spot analysis
In addition to the affinity diagram, we used an approach derived from the hotspots analysis
or hotspotting to identify critical process steps in the MDD process. Hotspots analysis
normally belongs in the toolbox of life cycle management and is a method used for rapid
assimilation and analysis of information from various sources, among others stakeholder
concerns (Barthel et al., 2015). The outputs from the analysis can be used to identify and
prioritise actions or impact reduction opportunities. Hotspot analysis generally relies on
quantitative data, such as geographical points or locations (Columbia School of Public
Health, n.d.), but can also incorporate qualitative data, such as expert knowledge (Barthel
et al., 2015).
The approach used in this report had three steps, which are illustrated in figure 5.3.
• First, the post-it notes containing the information obtained from the stakeholder
interviews were colour coded and divided into three categories according to their
charge: red for negative statements, green for positive statements, and light blue
for neutral statements. Post-it notes containing open questions and under-explored
areas in the Muusmann report were assigned a darker blue colour to be able to differ
these from the interview notes.
• Second, the individual post-it notes were placed under the process step, that they
belonged to in the three simplified process maps. Post-it notes associated with
more than one process step were duplicated and placed under each associated step
to yield the full visual overview of the process.
• Third, the hotspots were identified by visual inspection of the simplified process
maps. The processes that had the largest concentration of red post-it notes were
selected for further analysis and identification of improvement initiatives.
Figure 5.3: The approach used to identify problematic process steps, defined af
hotspots.
28
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:37==
6
Results
6.1
Initial process maps
In order to gain a comprehensive understanding of the processes and stakeholders in-
volved in the MDD service, initial process maps were created. These maps served as
boundary objects during the subsequent interviews, facilitating the affirmation, correc-
tion or supplementation of the various steps. The development of these initial process
maps drew upon the Muusmann report, state-of-the-art literature, and other official doc-
uments pertaining to MDD in Denmark (KL & Praktiserende Lægers Organisation, 2023;
Medcom, 2023).
There are essentially two main approaches to medication dispensing: manual drug dis-
pensing and automated drug dispensing (Muusmann & Danske Regioner, 2023). The MDD
service falls under latter. However, both methods were investigated to gain a deeper un-
derstanding of their distinctions, as well as their potential benefits and challenges.
6.1.1
Manual drug dispensing
The process of manual drug dispensing begins with a medical consultation. The GP cre-
ates a prescription in FMK, where he/she specifies the dosage, time of intake, and distribu-
tion pharmacy. The pharmacy then packs the medication according to the prescription,
with the pills remaining in their original packaging. The medication is thereafter either
sent directly to the patient or nursing home (which is most common), or picked up at the
pharmacy by the patient, relatives, or in rare cases, a nurse. Municipal nurses dispense
the pills, placing them in plastic boxes labelled with the date and time of intake. Figure
6.1 offers a simplified workflow illustrating the main steps of the manual dispensing pro-
cess, whereas a more detailed one can be found in Appendix D.1.1. The detailed process
map illustrates how the majority of tasks related to manual medication dispensing are
the responsibility of the municipalities, as most of the processes are situated within their
swimlane.
Figure 6.1: The process of manual medication dispensing.
6.1.2
Automated multi-dose drug dispensing
In automated drug dispensing, machines are used to replace manual tasks. The pro-
cesses involved are more complex than those related to manual dispensing and have
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
29
==PAGE:38==
therefore been classified into three primary processes: (1) the initiation of MDD, (2) hos-
pitalisation and (3) changes to MDD medication. Detailed process maps for each category
are provided in Appendix D.1; however, for readability, these processes are visualised as
simplified flows in the report (figure 6.3, 6.4, and 6.5).
There are six distinct stakeholders involved: the patient, the GP, the nurse, the packing
pharmacy, the distribution pharmacy and the hospital. The icons shown in figure 6.2 are
applied to the simplified process flows to illustrate the distribution of responsibilities, in-
dicating which stakeholders are involved in each step of the process.
Figure 6.2: Visual representation of the stakeholders involved in the processes.
Initiation of MDD
The MDD service is most often initiated by a nurse, based on their evaluation regarding the
patient’s eligibility. If the patient is considered eligible for MDD, he/she is informed about
the service, and will have to provide his/her consent before initiation. Subsequently, the
nurse contacts the GP, requesting a formal eligibility assessment of the patient. As of
today, physicians are the only one authorised to do so (Retsinformation, 2024).
Upon initiation, a MDD prescription is created in FMK, specifying the dosage, time of in-
take and a corresponding distribution pharmacy. It is the GP’s responsibility to ensure
that the patient has sufficient medication until the first delivery of the medication rolls ar-
rives. The MDD prescription is accessed through FMK by the distribution pharmacy, who
creates a MDD card based on the information available. The MDD card is sent to the pack-
ing pharmacy, who controls and checks the information, before initiating the packaging.
When completed, the newly packed dose rolls are sent pack to the distribution pharmacy.
The medication is reviewed and controlled according to the MDD card and is either sent
directly to the patient/nursing home, or stored until pick-up at the pharmacy. The actual
administration of the MDD medication is either handled by the patient themselves, with
instructions from healthcare personnel, or by a nurse, either at the patient’s private home
or at a nursing home.
Figure 6.3: A simplified process flow of the initiation of MDD.
30
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:39==
The detailed process map for the initiation of MDD in Appendix D.1.2 highlights the com-
plexity of the automated system compared to the manual system, noting the increased
number of processes involved. Additionally, it demonstrates that MDD relies on the in-
volvement of various stakeholders, necessitating cross-sectional collaboration, as the
processes traverse multiple swimlanes.
Hospitalisation
Patients receiving the MDD service are often the ones with poly-pharmacy and somewhat
demanding treatment plans, hence hospitalisation is a common occurrence (Muusmann
& Danske Regioner, 2023). The intended course of action upon admission to a hospi-
tal is to put MDD on hold, pausing the production of new medication rolls. The patient
is treated, prescribed the necessary medication (OPs) and discharged from the hospital.
Subsequently, the GP conducts a new eligibility assessment, evaluating whether or not
the MDD prescription should be reactivated. During hospitalisation, most tasks and all
decisions falls under the responsibility of the hospital personnel, as illustrated in the pro-
cess map in Appendix D.1.3. The involvement of other stakeholder groups occurs only
when the MDD card is put on hold, and otherwise after discharge.
Figure 6.4: A simplified process flow of the steps involved during hospitalisation of a
patient receiving MDD.
Changes to medication
The process of modifying an MDD prescription begins with a re-evaluation of the patient’s
eligibility and the continued value of the MDD service. If the service is deemed beneficial,
the GP implements the necessary changes by either creating new prescriptions or updat-
ing existing ones in FMK. Changes then become visible to the distribution pharmacy, and
will be effected with the next delivery of MDD rolls. In cases where changes need to be
implemented immediately, the GP directly contacts the distribution pharmacy to initiate
the production of emergency rolls. The subsequent steps proceed as previously outlined
under the ”initiation of MDD.”
Figure 6.5: A simplified process flow of of changes are made to an MDD prescription.
Similar to the initiation of MDD, making changes to medication also requires the involve-
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
31
==PAGE:40==
ment of multiple stakeholders and cross-sectional collaboration. The processes traverse
multiple swimlanes (Appendix D.1.4), indicating the need for effective communication and
coordination between the GP, distribution pharmacy, and packing pharmacy to ensure the
timely and accurate implementation of MDD changes.
6.2
Identified problems
A total of 10 semi-structured interviews were conducted with the purpose of identifying
problems in the workflows associated with automated MDD. The interviewees are listed
in Appendix B and represented the six different stakeholder groups shown in figure 6.2.
Initial versions of the relevant detailed process maps shown in Appendix D were brought
to the interviews and used as boundary objects, ensuring a common starting point for
the conversation. The information gathered in the 10 interviews and the concrete prob-
lems identified in the Muusmann report were documented on post-it notes and structured
using an affinity diagram as shown on figure 6.6. This resulted in the identification of
25 distinct clusters, each representing an underlying issue. Many of the issues mirrored
those outlined by Muusmann, e.g., ”Lack of clear, common, and structured implemen-
tation strategies” and ”GPs lack knowledge and familiarity with MDD”, while others were
new additions, e.g., ”Medicine changes are the most time consuming for GPs” and ”Nurses
want control over medicine administration”. The most important findings are summarised
in the following sections.
Figure 6.6: Affinity diagram based on the Muusmann report and stakeholder inter-
views.
Suitability assessment
Both Muusmann and our interviewees agree that disagreements exist between munici-
palities and GPs regarding which patients are suitable for MDD and when (interview 2;
interview 4). While some municipal health workers find manual dispensing tasks enjoy-
able and want to keep them (interview 8), it appears that municipal nurses are generally
more enthusiastic about initiating patients on MDD compared to GPs. This is mainly due
to different perceptions about when a patient’s medication is considered stable.
32
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:41==
GP workflow
Despite being a bit more hesitant than nurses when it comes to suitability assessment, our
findings indicate that most GPs acknowledge the significant potential of MDD and have in-
creasingly positive attitudes (interview 6; interview 8). The primary issue, however, is that
they have very limited time and energy to both familiarise themselves with and execute
the work processes linked to MDD, which are still new to some (interview 4). Additionally,
the GPs are currently compensated with a one-time fee for initiating a patient on MDD that
does not always align with the workload, which varies from patient to patient and is often
most demanding regarding medication changes, especially post-hospitalisation.
Hospital workflow
The lack of knowledge and familiarity with MDD is even more pronounced among hos-
pital personnel. According to both Muusmann and interviewed hospital personnel, clear
guidelines exist for handling patients on MDD, yet they are seldom adhered to (interview
3). Consequently, MDD is rarely paused upon admission to the hospital, resulting in the old
MDD still being packed at the pharmacy and ultimately wasted due to changes happening
upon discharge. One of the reasons for this, identified in Muusmann and confirmed in our
interviews, is technical challenges with the hospital IT system, Sundhedsplatformen, and
its integration with FMK.
Packing pharmacy workflow
Similarly to Muusmann, we identified price fluctuations and stock-outs as being the two
biggest challenges for the packing pharmacies. Since medication prices change every
14th day in Denmark, the packing pharmacy needs to replace medication in the pack-
ing machines leading to waste. Furthermore, according to the owner of Glostrup Pack-
ing Pharmacy, stock-outs happen often and initiate a notable communication flow, going
from the packing pharmacy via the distribution pharmacy to the GP for approval of sub-
stitute medication. This inefficiency is caused by the pharmacies restricted permission
to change medication.
Communication between stakeholder
From both Muusmann and the interviews, it became clear that MDD requires a lot of com-
munication between the different stakeholders and that this is not always efficient. For
example, both GPs and municipal nurses have experienced difficulties in getting hold of
distribution pharmacies, e.g. in relation to acute medication changes (interview 7; inter-
view 8). In general, a lot of coordination via both online ”correspondence messages” and
phone calls has to take place between the different stakeholders, especially regarding
acute changes in medication, which seems inefficient.
Division of responsibilities
The last findings concerned the division of MDD-related tasks and responsibilities among
the different stakeholders. In relation to hospitalisation of patients on MDD, we identified a
disagreement between hospital personnel and GPs regarding who should re-activate the
MDD card upon discharge and who has the final responsibility if MDD orders are made
by a physician other than the one issuing the actual medication prescription (interview
7). Another issue with MDD prescriptions arises when administration times set by GPs
clash with the nursing staff’s workflow, resulting in additional work to register deviations.
Consequently, the interviewed nursing staff expressed a desire for independent control
over MDD administration times for their patients, which is currently out of their scope
(interview 2).
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
33
==PAGE:42==
6.3
Hotspots analysis
In addition to the affinity diagram, a modified hotspots analysis was carried out to iden-
tify critical process steps in the three simplified process flows presented in figures 6.3,
6.4, and 6.5, serving as potential areas for intervention. The coding and subsequent cate-
gorisation of data from the Muusmann report and our interviews indicated that a majority
of statements were negative, highlighting challenges or issues within the MDD process,
with fewer statements being neutral or positive. Examples of negative, neutral, and posi-
tive statements include:
• Negative statement regarding hospital admission: ”Most hospital doctors forget
to pause MDD medication, which results in the medication still being packed and
wasted”
• Neutral statement regarding MDD eligibility assessment: ”Incentives for MDD are
different for all stakeholders”
• Positive statement regarding medication administration: ”MDD gives better compli-
ance for patients”.
Mapping the individual statements to the process steps as shown in figures 6.7, 6.8, and
6.9 (and included in Appendices C.1, C.2, and C.3), revealed differences in the stakehold-
ers’ attitude towards the different processes. Overall, the majority of information collected
pertained to the processes associated with the initiation of MDD and changes in medica-
tion. These were also the focal points of the work for most of our interviewees. Although
the latter three steps are the same for both initiating and changing MDD, with mixed at-
titudes towards MDD, figures 6.7 and 6.9 indicate that the interviewees face more chal-
lenges and issues when making changes to MDD than when starting it.
Less information was available regarding the hospitalisation process, mainly due to the
limited representation of interviewees from the hospital stakeholder group and the sparse
coverage of hospitalisation in the Muusmann report. However, all information gathered
about the hospitalisation process highlighted issues in the flow. These issues were pri-
marily linked to the initial and final interactions between the patient and the hospital staff,
which are the critical moments when hospital personnel should consider MDD according
to the guidelines (KL & Praktiserende Lægers Organisation, 2023; Region Hovedstaden,
2019; Region Sjællands Dokumentportal, 2023).
Figure 6.7: Hotspots analysis for the MDD initiation process
34
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:43==
Figure 6.8: Hotspots analysis for the hospitalisation process
Figure 6.9: Hotspots analysis for the medication change process
By visually comparing the three overall process flows and incorporating feedback from
both Muusmann and interviewed stakeholders, it became clear that the hospitalisation
process and the medication change process were the most challenging and problematic
areas. Therefore, we chose to continue focusing on these two areas and diving further into
them to identify exactly where obstacles and inefficiencies occur in the current workflows.
6.4
Areas of intervention
Based on our interviews with the different stakeholders and the additional information
and guidelines that they provided, we created final detailed versions of the process maps
associated with hospitalisation and medication changes, which can be found in Appendix
D.2. By reading through each of the post-it notes for the relevant process and comparing
these to the new process maps, we could identify which detailed process steps that the
stakeholders found the most challenging. Our findings are summarised in the following
two sections.
6.4.1
Hospitalisation
As stated, the hospitalisation process was one of the processes associated with the most
challenges and frustrations by the interviewed stakeholders. Based on their input, we
reviewed the initial version of the process map and made a new one which is included in
Appendix D.2.1. The main differences compared to the initial version are the following:
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
35
==PAGE:44==
• According to the interviewed stakeholders, patients do not bring their MDD medica-
tion to the hospital, and if they do, it is not used (interview 3).
• According to the MDD guidelines for hospital personnel, the MDD card should be
paused upon admission unless the patient is to undergo diagnostic procedures, mi-
nor surgical procedures, or other short-term hospitalisation where no changes to
MDD prescriptions are planned (Region Sjællands Dokumentportal, 2023).
• According to the guidelines, it is the responsibility of the hospital personnel to inform
the municipality, i.e., the nursing home or home nurse, about any changes to MDD
medication or any need for administration assistance.
To verify the detailed process map, we arranged a meeting with two nurses at Bispeb-
jerg Hospital who are currently leading a pilot project about the retention of patients on
MDD during hospitalisation. They confirmed that the detailed process map aligns with the
workflow recommended in the MDD guidelines and used by most hospital departments.
However, they noted that this workflow differs significantly from the one used in the pilot
project, which is currently being implemented in an increasing number of departments
at Bispebjerg Hospital. The main difference is that the doctors participating in the pilot
project are directed to consider MDD only at the time of discharge from the hospital, rather
than upon admission as recommended by the guidelines. We will provide a detailed de-
scription and discussion of the workflow used in the pilot project later. For now, we will
focus on the verified process map that outlines the most common workflow.
When analysing the post-it notes from figure 6.8 and mapping them to the detailed pro-
cess map in Appendix D.2.1, it becomes evident that the majority of the issues reported
by stakeholders and Muusmann arise in connection with specific process steps. These
process steps are marked with alert signs in the process map as shown in figure 6.10.
Figure 6.10: Detailed process map for the hospitalisation process with an alert sign
marking steps that are considered challenging by stakeholders.
36
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:45==
Putting MDD on hold upon hospitalisation
The first step where issues arise is when the MDD card is put on hold for patients ex-
pected to be hospitalised for several days or have changes to their MDD medication. Ac-
cording to the interviewees, many doctors overlook that patients are on MDD, and as a
result, they fail to adhere to the guidelines and pause MDD upon admission (interview
3; interview 7). After this point, MDD is not immediately visible to the remaining hospital
staff. Consequently, they often do not discover that the patient is on MDD until the patient
is discharged from the hospital. As a result, the MDD packing process continues at the
packing pharmacy, leading to a potentially big waste of medication. Raising awareness
among doctors about this issue is reported as challenging, as their main focus lies on
patient cures rather than MDD. Additionally, the primary benefits of MDD are perceived to
be for the municipalities, which relegates it to a secondary concern for many physicians
(interview 3).
Managing MDD upon discharge
The second step associated with challenges is managing MDD upon a patient’s discharge
from the hospital. If the hospital doctor has put the MDD card on hold, it is their respon-
sibility to assess whether the patient’s medication is stable or not and subsequently to
reactivate the MDD card or make ordinary prescriptions (MedCom, n.d.-a). However, both
Muusmann and our intervieews have expressed that it is common for the hospital doctor
to put the MDD card on hold without reactivating it, or to entirely delete MDD prescriptions.
This results in a lot of extra work for the GPs and potentially compromises patient safety
(Muusmann & Danske Regioner, 2023; Pharmakon & Dansk Selskab for Patientsikkerhed,
2012)(interview 7). There can be many different reasons for leaving the MDD card on hold
or deleting MDD prescriptions, including the patient being terminal, having had a tube es-
tablished, or needing to continue in an outpatient course where many medication changes
are expected over a short period. However, the interviewees have also mentioned difficul-
ties, inexperience, or unwillingness to handle MDD in the hospital IT system as common
reasons. Furthermore, many hospital departments focus a lot on deprescribing, i.e., dis-
continuing medications to reduce potentially inappropriate polypharmacy (Kaas Olden-
burg et al., 2022). According to the interviewed GPs, this can be a challenge, since they
generally know the patients better and find much of the MDD medication necessary, lead-
ing to extra work with redoing discontinued prescriptions after hospitalisation (interview
4; interview 6).
Extensive stakeholder contact during discharge
Lastly, time is expressed to be a barrier in connection with discharge, as the doctor has to
inform both GP and municipality about changes affecting MDD and call the distribution
pharmacy to order supplement or emergency MDD rolls. As previously mentioned, sev-
eral stakeholders have experienced that distribution pharmacies can be very difficult to
get hold of, resulting in a lot of non-value adding waiting time. In one of our interviews it
was also mentioned that hospital personnel in some cases call the distribution pharmacy
to ensure that changes made to the MDD medication are effected (interview 3). How-
ever, according to the MDD pilot project leaders at Bispebjerg, changes are automatically
synchronised and hence received by the other stakeholders when MDD prescriptions are
updated, deleted, or added. Thus, the challenges may instead be caused by a lack of
knowledge about or trust in the IT systems.
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
37
==PAGE:46==
6.4.2
Changes to medication
The second process associated with the most challenges was related to making changes
to medication. This became clear based on the frustrations expressed by the intervie-
wees, typically affecting the physicians. Figure 6.11, an extract from the hotspots anal-
ysis in section 6.3, highlights some of these frustrations experiences by the healthcare
personnel interviewed, where the prominent common factor is that making changes to
MDD prescriptions is a time consuming process.
Figure 6.11: An extract from the hotspots analysis, illustrating frustrations related to
medication changes.
A comprehensive nationwide survey conducted in 2022 among general practitioners in
Denmark revealed that 48% of the GPs met the criteria for a moderate burnout, while 14%
met the criteria for severe burnout. This concerning trend, illustrated in 6.12, appears to
be on the rising. The burnouts are notably associated with long working hours, which
lead to conflicts between professional and personal life, and a perception of not being
able to deliver the desired quality of care (Pedersen & Vedsted, 2023). These factors
may contribute to the observed lack of motivation and reluctance among GPs, particularly
towards aspects of the system that demand increased working hours and more time per
patient.
38
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:47==
Figure 6.12: The development of burnouts among GPs in Denmark. Source: Pedersen
and Vedsted, 2023
Distribution of responsibilities upon discharge
Based on our current understanding, the most challenging aspect of making changes to
MDD prescriptions arises in connection with hospitalisation. Upon discharge, hospital
physicians can handle the MDD card in one of three ways, each of which influences the
complexity and time required for GPs to make subsequent changes to the patient’s MDD
prescription, potentially unnecessarily increasing the workload. These scenarios have
been described by Muusmann (Muusmann & Danske Regioner, 2023), and corroborated
by our interviewees.
The first scenario involves placing the MDD card on hold. If the MDD guidelines have
been adhered to, this would already be in effect upon admission. After discharge, it is the
responsibility of the GP to determine whether to reactivate it.
The second scenario occurs when all existing MDD prescriptions are deleted, resulting
in the most time-consuming follow-up tasks for GPs. Should this situation arise, and the
MDD service is decided to be reinstated at a later date, all ordinary prescriptions issued by
the hospital will need to be remade as MDD prescriptions, a process as labour-intensive
as the initial setup of the MDD service (Muusmann & Danske Regioner, 2023).
The final scenario involves taking no action regarding the MDD prescriptions – they are
neither paused nor terminated. In all three scenarios, hospital physicians issue ordinary
prescriptions and inform the GP of any changes through the epicrisis. To the best of our
knowledge, hospital physicians do not currently create MDD prescriptions nor reactivate
MDD cards that have been put on hold; this responsibility primarily falls to the GP.
Assessing the urgency of changes
Another critical task demanding the attention of the GPs is evaluating the urgency of the
necessary change. These changes can either be acute, requiring immediate action, or
non-urgent, that can wait until the next delivery of MDD rolls. For non-urgent changes, the
GP updates the EPJ system, which automatically transfers the information to FMK, mak-
ing the changes visible to the distribution pharmacy and municipal nurse. The changes
are then effectuated from the next delivery of MDD rolls. According to a two-month re-
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
39
==PAGE:48==
view from Lægeklinikken Frederikshavn, working extensively with MDD, 84% of prescrip-
tion changes can wait until the next MDD roll (Gaardbo et al., 2023). This can take from
6-18 days, as illustrated in figure 6.13, depending on when the change is made in relation
to FMK’s deadline and the patient’s associated distribution pharmacy.
Figure 6.13: Overview of the MDD order and change processes.
However, these findings contradict the account of one interviewee, who stated that changes
seldom tolerate such delays and often require immediate action (Interview 6). In these cir-
cumstances, the GP can order either an emergency roll, which replaces the MDD roll, or
a supplementary roll, containing the additional required medication to complement the
MDD roll (Apotekerforeningen, 2022). The latter are generally preferred as it minimises
medication waste (interview 8). The process is initiated by the GP contacting the distri-
bution pharmacy via phone or correspondence message to inform them of the changes.
Orders placed before 12:00 can be delivered the next day (MedCom, n.d.-a).
Despite guidelines encouraging their use, emergency and supplement rolls are currently
seldom used in practice (interview 8; interview 9). This limited usage may be due to chal-
lenges in communication and the availability of distribution pharmacies. GPs often face
difficulties reaching the responsible pharmacists, which can delay the implementation of
changes. Additionally, some medications are not approved for MDD rolls and must be
dispensed manually, outside of the supplement roll system.
Frustrations and resistance among GPs
Several interviewees expressed that not all GPs are equally willing to work with MDD, some
due to frustrations with the IT systems (interview 2; interview 6). To gain a deeper under-
standing of this, a process map was developed, to outline all steps involved in making
changes within the most widely used EPJ system among GPs, EG Clinea, illustrated in fig-
ure 6.14. The information is based on instructional videos published by Medcom, which
are designed to guide GPs on managing MDD prescriptions across various journal sys-
tems (Medcom, n.d.). A visual inspection of the map reveals no immediate redundancies,
bottlenecks, or misalignment, indicating no significant challenges in the process. Given
that the videos are developed as helping guidelines to illustrate the simplicity of the pro-
cess, this absence of issues is somewhat anticipated. However, it could also indicate that
the frustrations experienced by GPs might stem from a lack of familiarity with the system,
as previously identified.
40
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:49==
Figure 6.14: Detailed process map for the medication change process in EG Clinea.
In conclusion, for general practitioners already burdened with heavy workloads, it is un-
derstandable that a system requiring additional working hours and the implementation of
new work processes can lead to frustration and scepticism. It is our perception that the
root cause of this increased time commitment cannot be attributed to a single factor, but
rather arises from a combination of elements, including inefficient or deficient communi-
cation, lack of standardised workflows, and unfamiliarity with the system.
6.5
Case example: Bispebjerg Hospital
As previously mentioned, a pilot project is currently being undertaken at Bispebjerg Hos-
pital in Copenhagen. The project is run by two nursing consultants who are also a part of
a cross-functional working group with representatives from the pharmacy, general prac-
tice, hospital and collaborating municipalities. The goal of the project is to increase the
retention of patients on MDD during hospitalisation. The project began as a pilot trial in
three different departments of the hospital and is now gradually being rolled out to other
departments.
Figure 6.15 shows the activities managed by the project team during the project period.
The first activity when rolling out the project on a new department is education of the de-
partment staff, including nurses and doctors. At least two training sessions of 30-60 min-
utes each are offered to each professional group. Furthermore, the project team closely
manages new admissions and upcoming discharges from the department to help the clin-
ical staff adhere to the new guidelines. They also manage a hotline every day to support
the clinical department staff in handling MDD medication correctly according to the new
guidelines when patients are to be discharged from the hospital. Lastly, a member of the
project group is often present at discharge to support the clinical staff in making the right
decisions about the patient’s MDD medication.
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.15: Overview of the activities managed by the MDD project team at Bispeb-
jerg Hospital.
As noted earlier, the primary distinction between the MDD guidelines proposed by the
project and those currently employed in the majority of other hospital departments lies in
the project’s recommendation to continue MDD upon a patient’s admission to the hospital,
rather than putting it on hold. The main reason for this is that hospital stays typically last
only a few days, and that the minimal medical waste incurred by continuing MDD is less
troublesome than the effort required to pause and then reactivate the MDD card, and to
coordinate with the packing pharmacy (interview 11). Thus, instead of putting the MDD
card on hold, the doctors are directed to only consider MDD upon discharge. However,
they still need to be aware that patients are on MDD during the hospital stay.
As previously mentioned, one of the problems identified in our stakeholder interviews is
that many doctors overlook that newly admitted patients are on MDD (interview 3). This
finding was confirmed by the project group at Bispebjerg. According to them, it is normally
only the admitting doctor who can see that a patient is on MDD, and unless they notice and
document it in the patient journal, other doctors cannot see it. To address this issue, the
departments involved in the pilot project have gotten a smart list integrated into Sundhed-
splatformen which retracts information from FMK and visually highlights which patients
are on MDD. This has resulted in many more doctors now discovering that patients are on
MDD and being aware of this in connection with discharging the patients (interview 11).
In addition to the smart list, the project team has developed an MDD guidance poster,
which is available in a printed format in the project departments and in an online version
in Sundhedsplatformen. The purpose of the guide is to provide an overview of the tasks
associated with the different types of MDD changes and the distribution of responsibilities
between the different stakeholders.
So far, the pilot project’s initiatives seem to have had a significant positive impact on doc-
tors’ awareness of MDD and their willingness to keep patients on MDD. Figure 6.16 shows
an overview of the patients with MDD who were discharged from the project departments
in the period from October 2023 to May 2024. It is clear that the majority of the patients
are retained on MDD upon discharge, either without changes to their old MDD medication
or with acute changes implemented before the next roll. In the latter case, changes are pri-
marily handled in supplement rolls or by removal of pills from the current roll. Emergency
rolls are only used in case of logistical problems, where the patient is going to a rehabilita-
tion centre located too far from their regular distribution pharmacy. So far, these account
for 4 out of 174 patients. This logistical problem has been solved in the working group by
sending out taxis to pick up the MDD rolls at the regular distribution pharmacy.
42
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.16: Status overview of MDD patients discharged from the project depart-
ments at Bispebjerg from October 2023 to May 2024. Provided by the project team.
The preliminary results also shows that only 24 out of 174, i.e. 14% of the MDD patients,
have had their MDD cards put on hold. In contrast to the current official guidelines, the
doctors on the project departments do not put MDD on hold unless they have a very good
reason to do so, e.g. if the patient has undergone hip replacement surgery, where many
medication changes are expected shortly after hospitalisation. Consequently, if the MDD
card is put on hold, it is never reactivated. In those cases where the MDD card is put on
hold, it is often the project team who identifies the patients and suggests pausing their
MDD card to the responsible doctor.
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
43
==PAGE:52==
7
Discussion
The results presented above point to a number of issues with the current MDD processes
and the collaboration around them. First, some of the most critical challenges seem to
be in relation to hospitalisation, often placing additional burdens on already time- and
resource-constrained GPs, leading to frustration and scepticism. Second, uncertainty and
disagreement about the distribution of responsibilities between the different stakehold-
ers have been identified as an issue, primarily in relation to hospital discharge. Third,
the results highlight inefficiencies in the communication between different stakeholder
groups, particularly concerning medication changes. However, our findings also indicate
that there are solutions to these problems, such as the new MDD procedures implemented
at Bispebjerg Hospital. Nevertheless, such possible improvements require organisational
change, which is often easier said than done, especially in healthcare systems.
7.0.1
The 4 worlds of healthcare organisations
In order to execute an organisational change, there is a need for understanding the or-
ganisation itself. According to Glouberman and Mintzberg, the healthcare systems are
some of the most complex systems known to contemporary society. Hospitals, in par-
ticular, are considered to be extraordinarily complicated organisations. To address the
issues, the integrative framework shown in figure 7.1 has been designed to help sort out
the complexity.
Figure 7.1: The four aspects of a healthcare system. Source: Glouberman and
Mintzberg, 2001.
Glouberman and Mintzberg propose that there are four distinct ”worlds” of healthcare –
44
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:53==
community, control, cure and care – each with their own mindset, activities, and organisa-
tion (Glouberman & Mintzberg, 2001). These ”worlds” are distinguished by their direction
of management, i.e., down focusing on the treatment patients, up towards the higher man-
agement levels, in to those controlled by the organisation, and out to those involved but
technically independent of the organisation (Glouberman & Mintzberg, 2001).
According to Glouberman and Mintzberg, the main problems stemming from the four
unreconciled ”worlds” of healthcare include lack of coordination and integration among
healthcare professionals, lack of comprehensive patient care, fragmented and inefficient
resource allocation, and power struggles and coalitions (Glouberman & Mintzberg, 2001).
For instance, conflicts between GPs and hospital doctors can arise from their different
perspectives on treatment, where hospital doctors focus on acute cure whilst GPs focus
on more continuous coordinated care. Thus, the four ”worlds” presented in the frame-
work can be understood as four distinct professional identities, which, as long as they are
disconnected, promotes conflicts and inhibits fundamental changes (Jacobsson et al.,
2022).
7.1
1. Initiative: Improve the cross-sectional cooperation
The first initiative aims to address the inefficiencies identified in the collaboration between
these distinct professional identities. A framework is used to analyse the existing collabo-
ration between the stakeholders, and a number of smaller initiatives are suggested based
on the findings.
7.1.1
A diagnostic of the cross-sectional collaboration
The framework used to analyse the collaboration is the one presented in section 4.4, which
analyses collaboration in terms of the four dimensions: Shared goals and vision, Inter-
nalisation, Formalisation, and Governance, and their associated indicators (Institute for
Healthcare Improvement, n.d.-a).
Shared goals and vision
”Identifying and sharing common goals is an essential point of departure for a collabora-
tive undertaking” (D’Amour et al., 2008). In the context of disseminating the MDD system
in Denmark, two overarching goals have been identified: addressing labour shortages in
the healthcare system and improving patient safety and quality of care. While these goals
are shared by all stakeholders, they represent a partial convergence of interests, as dif-
ferent groups may prioritise these objectives differently based on their specific roles and
responsibilities.
As previously described, the labour shortage in nursing staff currently experienced by Dan-
ish municipalities is only expected to worsen in the coming years (Muusmann & Danske
Regioner, 2023). MDD is seen as a potential means to mitigate these shortages by reduc-
ing the time and effort required by healthcare professionals for medication management.
However, due to the different allegiances within the healthcare system, the goal of ad-
dressing labour shortage highlights an asymmetry of interests among the stakeholders.
As the primary providers of home care services, municipalities and nurses have a partic-
ularly vested interest in adopting these systems and practices. Enhancing the use of the
MDD system has the potential to reduce the time and energy they devote to medication
management, thereby freeing up valuable human resources for other critical care tasks.
Conversely, physicians are less directly affected by this issue and will not benefit to the
same extent as nurses, making it a less significant motivational factor and goal for them
compared to nurses.
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
45
==PAGE:54==
The second key goal is to enhance patient safety and support the quality of integrated pa-
tient care. By ensuring accurate and timely dispensing of medications, the system aims
to reduce medication errors and improve adherence, thereby improving overall health out-
comes. According to D’Amour et al., 2008, promoting patient-centred care is the goal
most likely to unite stakeholders in healthcare. This is confirmed by the project teams at
Bispebjerg, who agreed that improving patient care and safety is a stronger motivating
factor for changing behaviour than helping municipalities save resources (interview 11).
Internalisation
Regarding the internalisation dimension, our analyses point to a lack of mutual acquain-
tanceship, both personally and professionally, between the different stakeholder groups,
which negatively affects the mutual trust between them. For instance, some municipal
nurses seem to underestimate the complexity of GPs’ workload associated with MDD,
stating that ”they just have to press one or two buttons” (interview 2). However, the in-
terviewed GPs report that the tasks are far more complex, particularly in connection with
the initiation of MDD. Among other things, they have to review the patient’s medication
list for potential drug interactions whenever there are changes in medication, which is a
time-consuming process requiring more than ”just a click or two”.
Furthermore, the GPs requirement for payment for individual tasks, highlighted in several
interviews with other stakeholders, seems to add to the element self-interest in the trust
equation. Such perceptions appear to negatively impact some stakeholders’ trust in the
GPs commitment to the collaboration around MDD. This scepticism towards GPs may
be a result of the other stakeholders’ lack of understanding and recognition that GPs, as
private business owners, are not in a position to perform tasks without compensation
(interview 6). This represents limited professional acquaintanceship.
Additional challenges are also observed in relation to the trust indicator. For example, both
GPs, nursing homes, and hospitals have expressed that some distribution pharmacies
are unreliable with respect to their availability. Since reliability is an important factor of
trust, this is a barrier for the various stakeholders’ collaboration with these distribution
pharmacies (Maister et al., 2001).
In general, mutual acquaintanceship between healthcare professionals is a challenge due
to the nature of the healthcare system. The system’s complexity and the large size of each
stakeholder group limit opportunities for joint activities or training activities that could fos-
ter personal and professional acquaintanceship and sense of belonging. This challenge
have been addressed by introducing the regional health clusters, which include munic-
ipalities, hospitals, and general practise (Kommunernes Landsforening, n.d.). However,
these meetings typically occur only twice a year and involve only a few individuals from
each stakeholder group, excluding pharmacies, which are a central stakeholder in the MDD
system.
Based on the findings from Muusmann and our own work, it can be argued that the differ-
ent healthcare professionals involved in the MDD process have not fully internalised their
roles as members of a cross-functional team. This impedes the mutual trust and effective
collaboration across different professions.
Formalisation
With respect to the dimension of formalisation, MDD was introduced as an offer to pa-
tients without any inter-organisational agreements outlining the expectations and respon-
sibilities of the different stakeholders involved in the process. Consequently, the various
46
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:55==
stakeholders can largely decide for themselves whether to work with MDD. As a result,
the resistance to MDD among a few GPs and distribution pharmacies is strong enough
that they completely refuse to work with MDD (interview 2; interview 10).
However, recent efforts have been made to formalise the roles and responsibilities related
to MDD. For instance, Sundhedsklynge byen has developed a one-pager specifying the re-
sponsibilities of hospital doctors, pharmacies, municipalitites, and hospital nursing staff
in relation to medication changes upon hospital discharge. This one-pager has been dis-
tributed at the hospital departments included in the pilot project at Bispebjerg to support
their work with MDD. According to D’Amour et al., clearly understanding both your own
responsibilities and what to expect from others is an important factor for effective collab-
oration within the healthcare system. The one-pager can potentially serve as a valuable
tool to enhance this understanding among the different stakeholders. Likewise, it would
be beneficial to develop and distribute a similar simple overview of the MDD initiation and
medication change processes to relevant stakeholders.
With respect to the indicator Information exchange, the Danish healthcare system is, as
previously mentioned, ”one of the most digitised healthcare services in the world” (Sund-
hedsdatastyrelsen, 2021). One of the solutions that strengthens the national information
infrastructure is FMK. The 2020 update to support MDD ensured that MDD can be eas-
ily handled in FMK and that changes to MDD medication are immediately available to all
stakeholders involved in the treatment of the patient. This eases the handling of MDD,
e.g., compared to the system in Norway, where MDD prescriptions are handled on paper
rather than electronically (Josendal & Bergmo, 2021).
Governance
With respect to the dimension of governance, there are four indicators of collaboration:
centrality, local leadership, support for innovation and connectivity.
In the context of MDD implementation in Denmark, Centrality refers to key central authori-
ties such as KL, Danske Regioner, Apotekerforeningen, and Styrelsen for Patientsikkerhed.
These entities play a strategic and political role, providing clear direction and fostering col-
laborative processes and structures. Section 3.1.1 highlights their current influential role
in the MDD system’s implementation, positioning them as a driving force. The Muusmann
report, ordered by these authorities, resulted in a detailed cross-sectional implementation
plan with a strategic direction, currently led by Medcom. This underscores the crucial role
of central authorities today. However, it raises the question of how the situation might
have differed if such governance had been in place from the service’s inception in 2001.
Local leadership is a key factor in the governance of the MDD system, especially from mu-
nicipal healthcare services and general practitioners. Effective local leadership means
advocating for the system, managing resources well, and making sure everyone follows
established protocols (D’Amour et al., 2008). However, the effectiveness of local leader-
ship varies widely across the current system. There are examples of excellent proactive
leaders in both nursing homes, clinics, and hospitals, who make a substantial positive im-
pact. The project team at Bispebjerg is an example of this. On the other hand, there are
also situations where challenges with the MDD system are left for individuals to handle
on their own, underscoring a lack of effective local leadership in those areas (interview 1;
interview 4).
Collaboration in healthcare means taking on new activities and dividing responsibilities
differently among stakeholders and organisations. This necessitates changes in current
practices and requires genuine innovations that must be developed and implemented.
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
47
==PAGE:56==
Both internal and external expertise within the organisation should be leveraged. This
is particularly true for the MDD system, which needs ongoing support and resources for
continuous improvement. Investments in technology, training, and infrastructure are es-
sential to keep the system efficient and responsive to the needs of healthcare providers
and patients. Unfortunately, it is our perception that there is currently insufficient surplus
to prioritise these factors in the Danish healthcare system. For instance, physicians are
not given training to ease the transition to new systems (interview 3), and many criticise
the functionalities and user-friendliness of the IT systems (interview 11). This issue is
evident in what Bispebjerg identify as the biggest challenges faced by their pilot project,
problems related to Sundhedsplatformen, which highlight the urgent need for a greater
focus on innovation.
The final aspect of the governance dimension is connectivity. Successful collaboration
requires spaces for discussion and building bonds between stakeholders (D’Amour et al.,
2008). This is particularly challenging in the healthcare sector, where professionals are
primarily focused on patient care and may struggle to find the extra time required for in-
teraction with colleagues. However, there is somewhat focus on it, like for example the
cluster collaborations, which serve as medical forums where general practitioners can
meet to share knowledge, experiences, and focus on quality development. These clus-
ters enhance connectivity among stakeholders by providing regular opportunities for in-
teraction and communication. This continuous engagement ensures that all stakehold-
ers stay informed about the latest developments and challenges in the MDD system. It
also helps build strong professional relationships and trust among participants, which is
crucial for effective collaboration. Although these clusters only meet a few times a year
(KiAP, 2024b), they are an important measure to address the need for connectivity and
ensure successful collaboration.
7.1.2
Levels of indicators of collaboration
Based on the four-dimensional analysis of the stakeholder collaboration and the guiding
descriptions of the three indicator achievement levels presented in figure 4.5, section 4.4,
a grade between one and three has been allocated for each indicator:
Dimension
Indicators
Level
SHARED GOALS & VISIONS
Goals
3
Client-centered organisation vs. other
allegiances
2
INTERNALISATION
Mutual acquaintanceship
1
Trust
2
GOVERNANCE
Centrality
3
Leadership
2
Support for innovation
1
Connectivity
2
FORMALISATION
Formalisation tools
2
Information exchange
3
Table 7.1: The levels
48
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:57==
7.1.3
Interventions
By using the D’Amours framework to analyse the collaboration between the different stake-
holders involved in the MDD process, we obtain the results listed in table 7.1. While some
aspects of the collaboration works well, e.g., the common goal to free up human resources
and enhance patient safety and the efficient information exchange via FMK, other aspects
indicate gaps between the current situation and optimal collaboration processes. Partic-
ularly, the mutual acquaintanceship between the different stakeholder and the support
for innovation hold potential to be improved. The following sections investigates ways to
enhance these two indicators and suggest initiatives to improve the collaboration around
MDD.
7.1.4
Mutual acquaintanceship
The first challenge identified with the cross-sectional collaboration is related to the lack of
mutual acquaintanceship, both personally and professionally. Three initiatives have been
identified to address this problem. These are shown in figure 7.2 and elaborated in the
sections below.
Figure 7.2: Initiatives to enhance mutual acquaintanceship between healthcare profes-
sionals.
Empowering health clusters
As previously described, the use of MDD is much more widespread in Norway, Sweden,
and Netherlands compared to Denmark (Muusmann & Danske Regioner, 2023). One pos-
sible explanation for this is related to the different structures of the healthcare systems.
Where the Danish healthcare system is divided into professional, organisational, and ge-
ographical silos, our neighbouring countries have invested more in interprofessional col-
laborations (Boston Consulting Group & Sundhedsstrukturkommisionen, 2023).
In Sweden and in parts of the Netherlands, they have established ”health houses” where
GPs, nurses and therapists work together under the same roof. This concept serves to
enhance the interprofessional collaboration and allow for easier access to primary health-
care services. In Norway, the GPs have been anchored in the municipalities since the
1980’s. Additionally, partnerships between hospitals and municipalities, known as ”helse-
fellesskaper”, have been established to support the planning and development of coordi-
nated health services (Boston Consulting Group & Sundhedsstrukturkommisionen, 2023).
As previously mentioned, Denmark established ”sundhedsklynger” similar to Norway’s
”helsefellesskaper” in 2022. These clusters bring together municipalities, GPs, and hospi-
tals, fostering integrated interprofessional collaborations. Such collaborations have been
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
49
==PAGE:58==
found to improve mutual acquaintanceship, communication among healthcare profes-
sionals, and understanding of individual roles within the system (Karam et al., 2017; Toh
et al., 2017).
The pilot project at Bispebjerg exemplifies a successful intervention emerging from one of
the Danish health clusters, ”Sundhedsklynge byen”, showcasing their potential. However,
translating the concept of health clusters into practical work requires adequate funding.
Although the health clusters received initial funding of 80 mio DKK in total, the Danish Cen-
ter for Social Science Research, VIVE, indicated that this amount is insufficient to sustain
their operations (Bech & Kjellberg, 2022).
Therefore, one way to enhance the interprofessional collaboration, strengthen mutual ac-
quaintanceship, and foster more innovative projects is by increasing investment in the
health clusters. Additionally, incorporating pharmacists into these interprofessional col-
laborations could enhance the other stakeholders’ understanding of their role and contri-
bution, particularly regarding the dissemination of MDD. This approach has been shown
to improve health outcomes in other areas such as diabetes and osteoporosis (Toh et al.,
2017).
Interprofessional education
Another way to improve the professional acquaintanceship between the different stake-
holders is to increase emphasis on interprofessional education, which has been identi-
fied as a means to advance professional practice and enhance the quality of services
provided (Hammick et al., 2007). By educating healthcare professionals together across
different disciplines, they can learn to collaborate more efficiently, exchange knowledge,
and improve personal and professional acquaintanceship (Toh et al., 2017). Additionally,
hands-on workshops and simulation exercises can help them understand each other’s
workflows and competencies, thereby avoiding conflicts such as the disagreement about
GPs’ workload, previously mentioned.
However, given the immense pressure they face, many healthcare professionals struggle
to find time for workshops, training and developing acquaintanceship (interview 4). As a
result, low attendance is a common problem. This is for instance the case for MedCom’s
online webinars for GPs which often have few attendees (interview 5). Other studies have
highlighted attendance issues in interprofessional meetings related to cancer care, mainly
due to practical and logistical barriers (Fleissig et al., 2006; Pype et al., 2017). To address
these, they recommend allocating sufficient, protected time, providing adequate funding
for staff time, and using video conferences – the latter despite some concern about loss
of interprofessional contact otherwise enabled by physical meetings (Pype et al., 2017).
These insights indicate that mutual acquaintanceship could be enhanced through inter-
professional education sessions where healthcare professionals gain knowledge of their
own and the other stakeholders’ responsibilities in relation to MDD. Such education ses-
sions should ideally be held in person to enhance personal acquaintanceship, or alterna-
tively virtually to accommodate logistical problems and lack of resources. Additionally,
adequate, protected time should be set aside to ensure a high attendance.
Fewer MDD responsibles
Another way to increase mutual acquaintanceship stems from the problem of ”too many
cooks spoil the broth”, pointed out in one of our interviews (interview 3). A solution to this
problem could be to reduce the number of cooks by widening their areas of responsibility;
in other words, let the responsibility for handling MDD rest on fewer healthcare profession-
als (Bodenheimer & Sinsky, 2014). Such a setup has been implemented in Lægeklinikken
50
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:59==
Frederikshavn, where a single MDD responsible pharmacologist handles everything re-
lated to MDD, including contact with patient, pharmacy and municipality (Gaardbo et al.,
2023).
There are multiple benefits to this. First, pharmacologists are acquainted with the work
processes at the pharmacy due to their academic background, enhancing the professional
acquaintanceship with the pharmacies. Second, the solutions saves time and frees up
resources that can be allocated to other tasks. A time report from the clinic indicated
that the MDD-responsible pharmacologist spends an average of three hours per month
managing MDD – 40% on MDD initiation and 60% on maintenance of MDD (Gaardbo et
al., 2023). Thus, in theory the MDD-responsible pharmacologist could work for multiple
different GP clinics at the same time, ideally within the same hospital catchment area
to enhance the mutual acquaintanceship and collaboration between the pharmacologist
and hospital personnel.
An alternative to the setup seen in Lægeklinikken Frederikshavn could be to decouple the
part concerning packaging from the prescription, allowing pharmacies, in collaboration
with municipalities, to decide whether a patient should have their medication in ordinary
packages or MDD rolls. Shifting MDD-related tasks from GPs to other stakeholders exem-
plifies ”expanding roles allowing nurses and medical assistants to assume responsibility
for preventive care and chronic health care coaching under physician-written standing or-
ders” (Bodenheimer & Sinsky, 2014). This approach has been identified as a means to
reduce the workload and improve the work life of healthcare clinicians.
7.1.5
Support for innovation
The second challenge identified with the cross-sectional collaboration is the lack of sup-
port for innovation. Innovation in the context of healthcare is crucial for ensuring long-
term viability and adaptability given the ever-changing work requirements and evolving
patient needs (Kimble & Massoud, 2017). It is about providing the necessary training, re-
sources, and infrastructure that enable healthcare professionals to engage in continuous
learning and improvement. It involves creating an environment where innovative ideas
can be generated, tested, and implemented, thereby improving the overall quality and ef-
ficiency of healthcare services (Schweitzer et al., 2015).
To address this, an initiative is identified, suggesting the use of employee-driven inno-
vation, grounded in lean thinking, as a manner to enhance the support for innovation.
As described in section 4.1, lean thinking is a commonly acknowledged strategy for im-
proving the efficiency and effectiveness of healthcare systems (Brandão de Souza & Pidd,
2011). Employee-driven innovation, is a steadily growing research field, where conceiving,
implementing, and creating value from ideas do not rest with a limited team of experts.
Instead, it relies on those stakeholders encountered with the service on a daily basis, such
as physicians, nurses, and pharmacists. Employees’ potential to contribute to innovation
at the workplace is something that has often been overlooked in the past, but is increas-
ingly recognised by contemporary organisations (Samuelson et al., 2024).
Case example: A primary care centre in Sweden practising employee-driven innovation
The idea behind the initiative takes inspiration from a recent study at a primary care centre
in Sweden with significant positive outcomes of employee-driven innovation (Samuelson
et al., 2024). The centre was struggling to recruit and retain competent healthcare pro-
fessionals, which lead to a demanding work environment. In 2016, as a manner to try to
reverse this trend, they initiated a continuous and structured employee-driven innovation
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
51
==PAGE:60==
work based on lean thinking. The employees were encouraged to identify ideas, prob-
lems, ideas, or improvement suggestions during their daily work and bring them to weekly
interprofessional one-hour sessions. A lean board was used as a visual tool to organise
and manage the innovation categorising tasks into columns such as suggested improve-
ments, ongoing activities, and completed tasks (figure 7.3).
Figure 7.3: The lean board used by the primary care centre as a tool to manage and
organise their innovation work. Source: Samuelson et al., 2024
The innovation work led to several positive outcomes. The process significantly improved
team spirit and reduced hierarchical barriers, fostering better collaboration and respect
among different professional groups. Cross-sectional collaboration became a corner-
stone, with employees from various disciplines working together effectively. This collab-
orative approach enabled employees to develop a creative and solution-oriented mindset,
enhancing their ability to handle unexpected challenges, such as the COVID-19 pandemic.
Additionally, the new work routines improved care efficiency and quality, resulting in bet-
ter patient outcomes and a more satisfying work environment. As stated by one of the
employees: ”After a while we saw for example how much time we saved by coming up
with better was of working. And time is something we need more of.” (Samuelson et al.,
2024). Overall, the structured approach to employee-driven innovation empowered em-
ployees and cultivated a culture of continuous improvement and adaptability within the
primary care centre.
Incremental changes rooted in Lean healthcare
With its emphasis on continuous improvement of the system, the employee-driven inno-
vation work at the primary care centre is grounded in lean thinking. Through “small im-
provements in working methods”, the clinic has managed to reduce the amount of non-
value adding activities, leading to improved care and increased efficiency (Samuelson et
al., 2024). This aligns with several other studies that show how lean strategies, such as
52
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:61==
Kaizen – a lean strategy promoting small improvements to make rapid changes (Minh &
Quyen, 2022) – can significantly enhance healthcare processes, resource utilisation, and
patient care (Brandão de Souza & Pidd, 2011; Torabi et al., 2018).
The positive outcomes of the innovation efforts can be attributed to the presence of the
three key success factors for implementing lean healthcare, as described in section 4.1:
team leadership, transformational leadership, and workforce flexibility. The clinic employs
a combination of a bottom-up and top-down approach, with employees responsible for
generating new ideas and solving problems, while a dedicated manager oversees the
organisation of the innovation processes and collaboration structures. Additionally, in-
creased resource allocation and focus on continuous system improvements strengthen
the employees’ ability to acquire new knowledge, develop skills, and adapt to changes,
thereby enhancing workforce flexibility.
Improvements in healthcare systems can be categorised as incremental or radical (Snyder
et al., 2016), where incremental changes address existing customer needs using existing
technology and radical changes bring completely new offerings to the table (Gallouj & We-
instein, 1997; Janeiro et al., 2013). The implementation of Lean management in a medical
clinic, as seen in the case example from Sweden, is an example of a radical change leading
to “the creation of cumulative incremental improvements” (Samuelsson et al., 2019).
According to Langley et al., improvements – both radical and incremental – to parts of
or entire systems can be categorised as fundamental changes, in contrast to reactive
changes aiming at bringing an deviating system back norm (Langley et al., 2009). Funda-
mental changes are essential for improving a system and can be approached using five
different methods, including Logical system thinking, Bench marking, Technology utilisa-
tion, Creative thinking, and Change concepts. Many of these were recognised in the case
example from Sweden, where interprofessional meetings were used to gain a better un-
derstanding and logical thinking of the entire care chain, and technology was utilised to
enhance system performance. Although some employees embraced the creative mindset
fostered by employee-driven innovation, others ”were not used to prioritising innovative
and creative work at the expense of clinical work” (Samuelson et al., 2024). This aligns
with previously mentioned findings, indicating that healthcare professionals tend to make
rapid, experience-based decisions – reactive changes – rather than addressing the root
cause of obstacles using a data-driven, evidence-based approach (Ben-Tovim et al., 2008;
Brandão de Souza & Pidd, 2011).
The case example from the primary care centre in Sweden highlights notable parallels with
the challenges faced by the MDD system, such as a growing shortage of healthcare per-
sonnel, overworked employees resulting in a demanding work environment, and inefficient
workflows. However, it also illustrates how these barriers can be effectively mitigated
by creating an environment where the employees are given protected time for focused,
bottom-up collaborative work, which has gradually fostered improved cross-sectional col-
laboration within the centre. Building on this reflection, we propose a similar approach to
address the barriers faced with MDD, grounded in team leadership, transformational lead-
ership and workforce flexibility (van Rossum et al., 2016).
Team leadership
Studies indicate that changes initiated by healthcare professionals themselves are con-
sidered the easiest and rarely encounter resistance (Nilsen et al., 2020). However, the
hierarchical structure of the healthcare system poses significant challenges, as there is
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
53
==PAGE:62==
often a considerable gap between frontline practitioners and decision-makers. This gap is
exemplified by the distance between a general practitioner and national health authorities,
such as Sundhedsstyrelsen, or the software developers responsible for updating systems
like Sundhedsplatformen. To address this issue, we advocate for a stronger emphasis on
employee-driven innovation, empowering healthcare professionals to identify problems
and potential improvements to the current systems themselves. This bottom-up approach
involves stakeholder groups working together through interprofessional engagement to
develop solutions to identified problems under shared, ”dynamic” leadership (van Rossum
et al., 2016). This strategy has been shown to enhance mutual understanding of the di-
verse challenges and work environments faced by different professions, thereby improv-
ing cross-sectional collaboration (Samuelson et al., 2024).
However, implementation of employee-driven innovation requires formation of interpro-
fessional teams. Regarding MDD, this can be challenging because the various stakehold-
ers are dispersed across multiple locations, such as hospitals, pharmacies, clinics, and
nursing homes. This contrasts with a primary care centre, like the one in the case example,
where all personnel are co-located. One strategy to overcome this, as supported by Lan-
gley et al., is to leverage existing structures, such as the cross-sectional health clusters,
that include municipalities, general practitioners, and hospitals, to serve as venues for the
innovative work. We therefore suggest implementing regular workshops for interprofes-
sional teams consisting of the existing health clusters, pharmacists and other stakeholder
group considered relevant. For instance, it could be beneficial to include someone from
the IT department to address challenges encountered with the various IT systems (inter-
view 7; interview 11).
It is important to bear in mind that the existing health clusters represent only a fraction
of each stakeholder group, who can be considered as team leaders. Therefore, to fully
realise the potential of employee-driven innovation, it is essential to ensure that all voices
can be heard and valued. This can for instance be achieved by establishing robust feed-
back systems. To motivate active contributions via such systems, it is crucial to create
an environment where stakeholders feel that change and innovation are genuinely achiev-
able. This involves ensuring that their experiences, challenges, and ideas for improvement
are taken seriously and acted upon.
Transformational leaderhip
Besides fostering bottom-up engagement, the successful implementation of lean health-
care relies on transformational leadership to mobilise employees, create governance struc-
tures that span departmental boundaries, and enhance the organisation’s capacity for
change (van Rossum et al., 2016). A good transformational leadership style should fa-
cilitate impactful transformations, such as the implementation of lean healthcare (van
Rossum et al., 2016). However, it can be argued that the leadership of MDD systems,
represented by the state, regions, and municipalities, are not necessarily the best to fa-
cilitate such fundamental changes. As previously mentioned, these type of changes are
best developed through logical systems thinking, creative thinking, and the use of change
concepts, among others (Langley et al., 2009). This requires some experience. Therefore,
we argue that it would be beneficial to include experts within exactly these areas in the
process of understanding complex cross-departmental problems and developing change
solutions to these. Such experts could include external lean experts with experience from
either the healthcare sector or other sectors, public or private, as external facilitators can
play an essential role in healthcare organisational change efforts (Alagoz et al., 2018).
The potential of including such experts for implementing lean in healthcare organisa-
54
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:63==
tions has been highlighted in focus group interviews with 13 experienced lean experts
(Antierens et al., 2019). Despite a relatively small number of participants, the study con-
cluded that lean experts can offer a unique perspective on healthcare improvements and
that lean experts without a health degree have a broader view on the management sys-
tem (Antierens et al., 2019). Additionally, the authors state that ”It may also be useful
for managers to involve several Lean experts, all with complementary perspectives and
backgrounds.”
It is still uncertain whether this unique perspective on lean healthcare offered by external
experts leads to a smoother change process and better outcomes. Whereas one study
found that ”external expert change agents were not believed to promote lean” (M. I. Har-
rison et al., 2016), another study supported the findings of Antierens et al., concluding
that dedication of resources and lean experts, among other factors, affect organisation-
wide lean initiatives (M. I. Harrison et al., 2016). Nevertheless, since the importance of
purposeful and inspiring leadership for a change process is firmly established (Kotter In-
ternational, 2020; Langley et al., 2009; van Rossum et al., 2016), we argue that using a
leader who knows about the complex healthcare system and is experienced in logical
and creative thinking can facilitate the implementation of MDD with impact. Such a facil-
itator could contribute with the ”Expertise that fosters introduction of collaboration and
innovation”, which according to D’Amour et al. is what characterises a system with the
highest level of support for innovation (D’Amour et al., 2008).
Workforce flexibility
The last success factor for implementing lean healthcare is workforce flexibility, which,
alongside with leadership, is suggested to be ”part of an organization’s change capacity as
crucial success factor for a sustainable transformation to lean healthcare” (van Rossum
et al., 2016).
Bhattacharya et al. describes human resource or workforce flexibility in terms of three
components: skill, behaviour, and practise flexibility (Bhattacharya et al., 2005). In other
industries, human resource flexibility have been found to enhance organisational innova-
tion (Do et al., 2016; Luu, 2021; Ngo & Loi, 2008).
The first term, skill flexibility, can be achieved either through a few employees with broad
skills that are applicable to changing needs, or through a large number of specialist em-
ployees that altogether cover a wide range of needs. It can be argued that the stakehold-
ers involved in the MDD process are all specialists within their own field. Having this high
concentration of specialists can make the system vulnerable. In connection with MDD, an
example of this, mentioned by Muusmann and our interviewees, is that it can be difficult
for GPs and nursing staff to get in touch with the MDD-responsible employee at the dis-
tribution pharmacy (Muusmann & Danske Regioner, 2023)(interview 7; interview 8). This
can either be because they are busy or not at work. Thus, according to Bhattacharya et al.,
to gain a wide range of skills contribution to flexibility, the distribution pharmacies should
either have more trained MDD-experts or ensure that employees acquire a broader set of
skills so that they can assist with MDD-related tasks.
The second term, behaviour flexibility, refers to the employees’ motivation to adopt non-
routine behaviour. Organisational cultures that support this type of behaviour have been
found to perform better than those that do not (Kotter & Heskett, 1992). This is supported
by the case example from the Swedish primary care centre, where employees felt em-
powered by an innovation-supportive culture, which boosted their motivation to change
(Samuelson et al., 2024). Thus, once again, we argue that implementation of employee-
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
55
==PAGE:64==
driven innovation through interprofessional collaboration can create the foundation for
an innovative environment, where employee empowerment and freedom to act and react
upon inefficiencies can positively influence employees’ behaviour flexibility.
The third component, practice flexibility, refers to the degree and speed with which the
organisation can modify and apply its strategies, policies, and activities to changing cir-
cumstances. Highly adaptable practices can enhance behaviour flexibility (Bhattacharya
et al., 2005). On the other hand, inflexible practices, such as fixed employee compensation
plans, which have become institutionalised, can inhibit behaviour flexibility. In connec-
tion with MDD, as previously mentioned, the GPs receive a fixed honorarium for starting a
patient on MDD. However, because some patients are more likely than others to be hos-
pitalised or experience changes to their MDD medication, the workload associated with
managing MDD varies from patient to patient. Consequently, the dissemination of MDD
will likely require greater efforts in areas where the average health condition of the pop-
ulation is low, placing additional burdens on the GPs (Kleist, 2023). In line with Bridges
first phase, Endings, it is important to acknowledge such ”losses” of changing from cur-
rent practices to new ones, and compensate for these to support the transition (Bridges &
Bridges, 2017). Therefore, we argue that changing the honorarium from a one-time initia-
tion fee to a contact-based fee could be a way of compensating for the additional ”losses”
in areas characterised by poor health conditions, thereby increasing motivation for GPs
to initiate and manage MDD.
7.1.6
Summary
D’Amour’s Model for Collaboration highlights four dimensions relevant for the effective
collaboration between stakeholders. In the context of MDD, lack of mutual acquaintance-
ship across professions and missing support for innovation are identified as main barriers
to interprofessional collaboration. A number of proposals are made to enhance these di-
mensions:
• Empower existing health clusters and introducing employee-driven innovation
• Introduce interprofessional education
• Have fewer stakeholders being responsible for a larger part of the MDD process
• Include lean experts to facilitate the MDD implementation process
• Enhance flexibility of current practices and workforce skills
These serve as concrete proposals for initiatives that could potentially improve mutual ac-
quaintanceship and support for innovation, ultimately leading to enhances collaboration
between the different stakeholder groups involved in the MDD process.
7.2
2. Initiative: Increase the focus on transition management
As already mentioned, changes in healthcare organisations are intricate. Due to their com-
plex and multifaceted culture, illustrated in figure 7.4, these changes require management
on multiple levels, where readiness for change needs to be assessed both within the or-
ganisation and among its key stakeholders (Dulaney & Stanley, 2005).
56
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:65==
Figure 7.4: A picture illustrating the complexity of the workflows in healthcare organi-
sations. Ref: (Higgins, 2023)
Understanding the barriers and challenges associated with the implementation of the
MDD service in Denmark is a complex endeavour. No single predominant issue can be
resolved to significantly improve the system. Instead, multiple barriers are encountered
at various stages of the process, both in hospitals and clinics. Section 6.4.2 identified
several of these challenges, such as confusion regarding workflows and responsibilities,
resistance and lack of motivation to use the service, and the time-consuming nature of the
process steps involved – challenges that have arisen due to the need for implementing
changes and adapting to these. Bridges argues that ”Change of any sort – even though
they may be justified in economic or technological terms – finally succeed or fail based
on whether the people affected do things differently” (Bridges & Bridges, 2017). In other
words, without a successful transition, there can be no successful implementation of
change.
Following this argument, the success or failure of the MDD service implementation in
Denmark encompasses two dimensions. Firs, the change, which involves the new tech-
nology that replaces manual medication dispensing to reduce errors and free up human
resources. Second, the transition, referring to the psychological processes that health-
care personnel undergo as a consequence of the implementation. Bridges’ emphasis on
transition as essential for change suggests that the full implementation of MDD requires
supporting stakeholders through the three stages of transition: the ending, the neutral
zone, and the new beginning 4.3.2.
Based on this, we suggest addressing current barriers with MDD by enhancing the focus
on managing stakeholder transitions, especially those experiencing the greatest losses
due to the changes. Considering the reduced direct benefits and the additional time re-
quired for new work processes compared to the old ones (Muusmann & Danske Regioner,
2023), it can be argued that physicians are the ones experiencing the greatest sacrifices.
Thus, the following paragraphs will analyse the internal, psychological processes that
physicians undergo due to the changes in work procedures introduced with MDD. The
aim is to identify potential root causes of the challenges arising from the ending to the
new beginning, grounded in Bridges theory. Furthermore, five initiatives are proposed to
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
57
==PAGE:66==
address these.
7.2.1
The first phase – The ending
”Before you can begin something new, you have to end what used to be. Before
you can learn a new way of doing things, you have to unlearn the old way. Before
you can become a different kind of person, you must let go of your old identity.
Beginnings depend on endings. The problem is, people don’t like endings.”
– William Bridges
With benefits such as enhanced patient safety, fewer medication errors, reduced medica-
tion costs, and the freeing up of resources, it might seem difficult to understand why MDD
has been met with resistance from some corners. This resistance has primarily come
from physicians, who criticise the system for its time-consuming nature, long processing
times, confusing workflows, and difficulties in communicating with relevant stakeholders
(Gaardbo et al., 2023; KiAP, 2024a; Muusmann & Danske Regioner, 2023). However, ac-
cording to Bridges’ reasoning, this resistance might be somewhat anticipated. Bridges
suggests that the primary focus when implementing a service like MDD should not be on
the benefits it offers, but rather on who stand to lose by adopting it. In this case, it is per-
ceived to be the physicians, as they seem to endure the greatest losses with the smallest
rewards. Bridges posits that resistance to change does not arise from the change itself
but from the endings and losses it entails (Bridges & Bridges, 2017).
When MDD was first introduced in Denmark, it is our impression that there was little fo-
cus on helping physicians with the transition to the new system. Creating new workflows,
routines and learning the new IT functions has been to a large degree left up to the indi-
viduals themselves (interview 3). During such a learning period, many physicians might
be left with a feeling of having lost previous expertise, feeling incompetent or inefficient.
They experience a loss and mourn a former comfort zone. Looking to Bridges, to avoid the
journey of leaving old habits behind becoming confusing and unsettling, the physicians
should be supported, rather than left to themselves. Their feelings of loss needs to be
acknowledged and discussed if necessary. Additionally, to dispel fear of the unknown,
the purpose, benefits, and impact of the change need to be clearly communicated.
1st Initiative: Appoint a transition manager to help the GPs ”let go of the old way”
The first initiative to address this resistance is to appoint someone who can create aware-
ness of and handle the internal processes related to the adoption of MDD. We will refer
to a such person as a ”transition manager”. This role can be filled by either a single in-
dividual or a dedicated team, whose main task is to provide physicians with support and
guidance throughout the transition process. The so-called ”ildsjæle” – individuals who
are extremely passionate, enthusiastic, and dedicated to increase the use of MDD in Den-
mark – is an example of how this role can be filled by a single individual. Their energy and
solution-oriented mindset both inspire and support the physicians during the transition,
and have several times been referred to as the main reason behind effective workflows
and positive attituted towards MDD (interview 2; interview 11). However, not all health
institutions are fortunate enough to have such individuals. This could be a part of the ex-
planation for the differences in the dissemination of MDD across Danish municipalities,
illustrated in figure 3.0.2 (Kleist, 2023).
A dedicated group can also fulfil the transition manager role, as seen in the Bispebjerg
pilot project. In this case, the team consists of two nursing consultants who manage
58
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:67==
the project and provide daily support and guidance. The key difference between these
examples is that the nursing consultants are specifically hired for this role, whereas the
”ildsjæle” are driven by personal motivation. Regardless of their underlying motivation,
both scenarios illustrate the value of having dedicated personnel to manage the transi-
tion. An individual or team whose tasks are to clearly communicate the motives behind
the change, provide support and guidance, and acknowledge losses is a function we ar-
gue that many clinics and hospitals could benefit from.
7.2.2
The second phase – The neutral zone
The second phase represents a stage in the transition where the old ways have ended,
but the new systems are not yet fully operational – the neutral zone. It is characterised
by ambiguity and often leads to stakeholder polarisation where some individuals may
long for the past, while others feel excited about the future. A common consequence
of such polarisation is the undermining of consensus and increased discord (Bridges &
Bridges, 2017). During the neutral zone, people often experience heightened anxiety and
declining motivation. Energy that could be used for productive work is instead spent on
coping mechanisms. At best, this results in reduced productivity; at worst, it can lead to an
increase in medical and disability claims, all of which are elements that can be recognised
partly or fully in the current danish healthcare system.
As previously mentioned, almost half of GPs experience burnout (Pedersen & Vedsted,
2023). This is not to imply that the implementation of the MDD system is a cause for
the decreasing work satisfaction among GPs, but rather to raise awareness of the physi-
cians’ vulnerability to transition and their current state. The neutral zone represents a
phase where individuals are overwhelmed, and systems are in flux – a situation that many
physicians understandably prefer to avoid.
Bridges believes that the uncertainties of the neutral zone are inevitable, but they need to
be managed effectively to maintain structure and resilience. If left unmanaged, this con-
fusion can turn into a lasting problem. However, with the right management, this turbulent
period will only be temporary.
2nd Initiative: Implement the service in blocks through pilot programs
One way to manage the neutral zone, addressing the problem of confusion regarding pro-
cedures and responsibilities, is to implement the service in blocks, through pilot programs,
as suggested by the Model for Improvement (Bridges & Bridges, 2017). The gradual intro-
duction of changes allows time to adjust and make necessary improvements based on
feedback, thus, protecting the stakeholders from being overwhelmed with the change.
Pilot programs are essentially small-scale feasibility studies that evaluate different el-
ements of the planned methods before a larger, more comprehensive implementation
(Arain et al., 2010). In clinical and public health interventions, pilot studies play a crucial
role in identifying areas for improvement, assessing the feasibility of trial methods, and
testing initial effects (Eldridge et al., 2016). In the context of implementation research,
these pilot studies similarly help develop and refine strategies, optimise research meth-
ods, and conduct preliminary evaluations of implementation tactics (Pearson et al., 2020).
When successful, pilot programs can serve as valuable case studies to promote wider
adoption and smoother implementation.
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
59
==PAGE:68==
3rd Initiative: Create clear workflow guidelines and establish support teams
Another approach to manage uncertainties and confusion is to develop clear workflow
guidelines and establish support systems. While the neutral zone is often chaotic, it also
presents an opportunity for creativity and the development of improved work processes.
This period should be leveraged to re-engineer current workflows and integrate additional
services more efficiently. ”To deal successfully with transition, you need to determine
precisely what changes in their existing behaviour and attitudes people will have to make”
(Bridges & Bridges, 2017).
These guidelines should be prominently displayed to ensure they are easily accessible
to healthcare personnel. In cases where guidelines alone are insufficient, establishing
dedicated support teams can provide the advanced assistance needed to resolve more
complex issues. This approach has been notably successful at Bispebjerg, where the two
nursing consultants are available on a daily basis to offer immediate assistance to any-
one in need.
7.2.3
The third phase – The new beginning
The third phase, the new beginning, is marked by a release of new energy in a new direction.
A fundamental part of Bridges theory is that a new beginning cannot be forced. Individuals
will only emerge in a new beginning when they are ready to assume their new identity,
and their heart and mind tell them that it is time (Campbell, 2008). However, it can be
encouraged, by providing what Bridges refer to as the Four P’s: the purpose, a picture, the
plan and a part to play (Bridges & Bridges, 2017).
Figure 7.5: The four Ps that according to Bridges people need to make a new begin-
ning.
First, the basic purpose behind the desired outcome should be explained. People need
to comprehend the rationale behind the MDD service before they can truly engage, con-
tribute and adopt the system. Second, a picture of what what life will be like in the new
beginning should be created. One of the unique characteristics of human beings is how
big a part of their motivation comes from the pictures they carry in their minds (Camp-
bell, 2008). The ”picture” represents a clear, tangible vision of the future state where the
changes have been successfully implemented. For the GPs, such a picture would illus-
trate how the MDD system ensures accurate medication management, reducing errors
60
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:69==
and adverse drug reactions. How the physicians will have instant access to comprehen-
sive patient medication records, enabling them to make well-informed decisions swiftly.
This increased focus on safety will not only protect patients but also foster a sense of
trust and confidence in the healthcare system itself.
Third, there should be a plan as to how to phase in the service, oriented towards the pro-
cess the physicians will have to go through. For example, there should be a plan for when
they will receive training or be provided with relevant information. Finally, people need to
know their part to play, in other words, a tangible way to contribute and participate. Confu-
sion regarding responsibilities and work processes are two reoccurring barriers identified
with the MDD system, highlighting the importance of clearly communicating the stake-
holders’ ”part to play”.
In summary, the overarching challenge to address in the third stage of transition is that
of sustaining momentum; how to maintain motivation and engagement of healthcare
providers. The following two initiatives are suggestions as to how this might be addressed.
4th Initiative: Regular meetings, monitoring and feedback sessions
One way to support the task of sustaining momentum, as suggested by Bridges and
Bridges, is by establishing regular team meetings. Whether formal or informal, these have
proven to be important for both job performance as well as well-being at work, fostering
a sense of support and belonging (Persson et al., 2021). Regular meetings create a col-
laborative environment where the healthcare personnel can exchange feedback and stay
informed on relevant developments. They provide an opportunity to discuss the four Ps,
ensuring everyone is aligned and understands the underlying principles.
Figure 7.6: Weekly meetings can provide a sense of connectedness that. Source:
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS), 2024
The meetings in the GP clusters mentioned in section 3.2 serve as an example of such col-
laborative communities. The GP cluster material provided by KiAP encourage GPs, phar-
macists, and municipalities to meet and share knowledge, experiences, and feedback. By
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
61
==PAGE:70==
involving all stakeholders in these meetings, a dialogue is fostered about potential im-
provements to the collaboration around MDD (KiAP, 2024a). However, while the concept
of these meetings aligns with Bridges’ suggestions as to how to sustain momentum in
transition, their frequency does not. Bridges advocates meetings on a daily, weekly, or bi-
weekly basis, depending on the organisation’s specific needs (Bridges & Bridges, 2017),
whereas the GP cluster meetings are currently held two to four times a year. Given the time
constraints and geographical dispersion of stakeholders across various hospitals, clinics,
and nursing homes, it can be argued that daily or weekly meetings might be both unre-
alistic and unnecessary. Nonetheless, the significant gap between Bridges’ suggested
frequency of meetings and current practices indicates that increasing the frequency of
GP cluster meetings could potentially help maintain the motivation and engagement of
healthcare providers.
Furthermore, as previously mentioned, the work processes related to MDD are to some
extent associated with uncertainties related to work processes, responsibilities and key
concepts. Consequently, this has led to inconsistencies and ambiguities related to certain
work routines. Regular meetings could potentially address and clarify such topics, such
as what is considered an urgent change.
Studies indicate a tendency to overestimate the urgency of changes, leading to inefficien-
cies (Gaardbo et al., 2023; Mertens et al., 2019a). In a Dutch study from 2019, Mertens
et al. found that 53% of medication changes for MDD patients were categorised as acute.
However, follow-up evaluations revealed that 27% of these could have been deferred un-
til the next MDD delivery. In contrast, Gaardbo et al. describes a more efficient approach
used at the medical clinic, Lægeklinikken Frederikshavn, mentioned in section 6.4.2. Since
opening in 2018, the clinic has prioritised MDD, creating a highly knowledgeable and well-
organised healthcare team. Over a two-month period, 84% of the prescription changes
for the clinic’s MDD patients were classified as non-acute and scheduled for the next roll
delivery. This is a marked improvement compared to the Dutch figure of 47%. Regular
meetings could disseminate these insights to a broader group of stakeholders, thereby
enhancing current practices through shared learning.
5th Initiative: Reward effective adoption and integration
”Good transition leaders automatically think of rewarding new behaviour and at-
titudes. You need to remember that when people are trying out new behaviours
that do not feel normal or natural, rewards can be disproportionately effective.”
– William Bridges
The honorarium of 450 DKK introduced in 2021, given to GPs when a patient is put on
MDD, is an example of a reward system. An increase in the use of MDD was observed
the following years (Kleist, 2023), but whether this was due to the changes in FMK with
updated features supporting MDD, the honorarium itself, or a combination of both is un-
certain.
Poorly planned rewards have limited impact on motivation (Gilley et al., 2009). Conversely,
well-structured rewards can accelerate adoption rates, increase engagement and boost
willingness to use the system (Bridges & Bridges, 2017). Interviews with physicians re-
veal that the current honorarium has not been a strong motivator for them to use the
MDD system (interview 4; interview 6). This suggests that the existing reward system has
significant potential for improvement, and alternative measures to incentives the desired
behaviour should be explored.
62
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:71==
One approach is to follow the initiative suggested to address enhance the workforce flex-
ibility, in section 7.1.5, proposing changing the honorarium from a one-time initiation fee
to a contact-based fee, thereby encouraging ongoing patient management, not just initial
enrolment. Alternatively, non-monetary rewards, based on physicians feedback, could be
considered.
7.2.4
Summary
William Bridges’ theory highlights the importance of the psychological and emotional as-
pects of transition. In the context of the barriers and challenges faced by the MDD service
in Denmark, this theory can provide a deeper understanding of the underlying root causes
and offer perspectives on how to address these obstacles. Five initiatives are proposed
in this section:
1. Allocate a transition manager to help the GPs let go of the old way.
2. Implement the service in blocks through pilot programs.
3. Create clear workflow guidelines and establish support teams.
4. Establish regular meetings, monitoring and feedback sessions.
5. Reward effective adoption and integration.
They serve as suggestions for how increased attention to transition management might
improve the current barriers experienced by physicians in relation to MDD – an approach
that, to our knowledge, has not yet been applied in this specific context.
7.3
3. Initiativ: Continuing rather than pausing MDD
The last initiative focuses on the problems with hospital personnel not following exist-
ing guidelines for how to handle MDD when patients are admitted to the hospital, subse-
quently leading to inconsistency in the handling of MDD upon discharge. In ”Sundhed-
sklynge byen” they seem to have come up with a good solution for this, described in sec-
tion 6.5, which is currently being tested in the pilot project at Bispebjerg. Thus, the second
part of this initiative will focus on how to scale up such an intervention to other depart-
ments and hospitals around the country.
Medical waste
One of the main problems addressed in section 6.4.1 is that hospital doctors do not put
MDD cards on hold upon hospitalisation, despite it being directed by the existing guide-
lines for hospitals. According to our interviewees, one of the main reason for putting MDD
on hold upon admission to the hospital is to reduce medical waste (interview 3; interview
10). There are two aspects to this: a sustainability aspect and an economic aspect.
First, medical waste is considered dangerous waste and should be handled with care
(Danmarks Apotekerforening, 2021). If not disposed of properly, medical waste can harm
the environment and pose a safety risk to humans and animals. Yet, a large survey per-
formed by YouGov for Apotekerforeningen revealed that 4 out of 10 Danes are not aware
that medication waste should be returned to the pharmacies and not be thrown in the reg-
ular trash or flushed down the toilet (Hoffmann, 2021). Consequently, a large proportion
of medical waste ends up in the wrong place, potentially harming the environment.
Second, medical waste is very costly both for the individual users but also for society. Last
year, Danish pharmacies received returned medical waste for a value of 410 million DKK,
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
63
==PAGE:72==
of which 57% had not yet expired and 21% was still in unopened packages (Danmarks
Apotekerforening, 2023). This number does not account for medication improperly dis-
carded by private individuals or destroyed by wholesalers, the industry, and hospital phar-
macies. Thus, the actual value of medical waste is presumed to be significantly higher.
Despite this, it is debatable whether pausing the MDD card during hospitalisation actu-
ally reduces medical waste more effectively than keeping patients on MDD. According
to several of our interviewees, reactivation of paused MDD cards almost never happens
(interview 3; interview 7; interview 11). Consequently, the hospital doctor has to create
ordinary prescriptions on the MDD medications, since most of these will have to be con-
tinued after hospitalisation. This is likely to produce more medical waste compared to
continuing MDD, as many discarded medication boxes are either unopened or still con-
tain 75-100% of their original contents (Danmarks Apotekerforening, 2023; Ministeriet for
Sundhed og Forebyggelse, 2009).
Patient safety
In addition to reducing medical waste, putting MDD on hold has been linked to a reduction
in the safety risk associated with hospitalising patients on MDD (Freil, 2017; Pharmakon
& Dansk Selskab for Patientsikkerhed, 2012). This safety risk is attributed to the hos-
pital personnel’s general lack of awareness of MDD, which can lead to issues such as
duplicate prescriptions, resulting in the patient having too much medication, or failure to
reactivate a paused MDD card, resulting in the patient suddenly missing their medication
(Freil, 2017)(interview 3). However, according to our interviewees, the standard proce-
dure to put MDD on hold upon admission is not always followed (interview 3; interview
11). Thus, one could argue that the inconsistency with respect to following the guidelines
instead increases the risk of errors and thus, the safety risk. Additionally, the standard
procedure likely results in some patients having their MDD medication unnecessarily put
on hold or discontinued after hospitalisation, resulting in an increased safety risk, because
the alternative – manually dispensed medication – has an error rate 20,000 times higher
than MDD (Muusmann & Danske Regioner, 2023).
Figure 7.7: Comparison of MDD and ordinary prescribed medication with regard to
medication waste and patient safety.
64
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:73==
The Bispebjerg approach
In contrast to the existing MDD guidelines for hospitals, the pilot project at Bispebjerg
aims to keep as many patients as possible on MDD during hospitalisation to support its
wider implementation. This approach is enabled by a recent statement from Styrelsen for
Patientsikkerhed, which confirms that it is safe to manually remove individual pills from
the MDD unit bags (Styrelsen for Patientsikkerhed, 2023). This eliminates the need to
discard the entire MDD roll if a single drug is discontinued, thereby significantly reducing
medical waste. Moreover, the project team has become aware that pharmacies can de-
liver supplementary rolls within 24 hours (interview 11). Since hospitals almost always
add or discontinue medications upon discharge, these two changes have made it much
easier to continue MDD, which would otherwise have been put on hold upon a patient’s
discharge.
7.3.1
Explaining successful change using the Model for Improvement
To develop, organise and evaluate the improvement activities implemented at the project
departments at Bispebjerg, the project team has made use of the Model for Improvement
(see figure 4.3). This model focuses on testing and refining potential improvements on a
smaller scale before gradually expanding the process changes (Langley et al., 2009). This
aligns very well with the project group’s overall approach to the implementation project as
a learning journey. They focus on implementing the new MDD work procedure in one de-
partment at a time to ensure they can be fully present during each implementation and be
able to identify and resolve issues as they arise. This method reduces the risk of initiating
changes that do not result in improvements.
What are we trying to accomplish?
The model’s first questions refers to the goal of the project, which should ultimately be
a SMART goal, meaning that it should be Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant, and
Time-bound (Doran, 1981). The goal of the MDD pilot project at Bispebjerg is to retain
more patients on MDD during and after hospitalisation in nine different hospital depart-
ments from May 2023 to December 2024. This goal is Specific – focusing on patients
on MDD admitted to one of the departments in scope; Attainable – doable by the hospital
staff with the help from the project team; Relevant – there is evidence that MDD increases
patient safety and saves time; and Time-bound – within a well-defined project period. The
only thing missing is a clear statement of how many more patients should be retained on
MDD, i.e., how the change should be measured. This is assesses in the next question.
How will we know that a change is an improvement?
The second question pertains to measurements. In this context, the pilot project lacks
baseline data necessary to determine the project’s effect on the number of patients re-
tained on MDD and the number of MDD cards put on hold. Ideally, they should have had
this data to be able to see, if the changes that they have implemented are successful in
keeping patients on MDD after hospitalisation. However, summary data on MDD was not
recorded prior to the pilot project and cannot be retrieved from Sundhedsplatformen (in-
terview 11). Nevertheless, as the previous guidelines used at the hospital directed doctors
put MDD cards on hold upon admission, contrary to the pilot project, it can be assumed
that the status overview of discharged patients presented in figure 6.16 looks significantly
different from the original picture.
Because retrieval of baseline data is not possible, the project team instead monitors change
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
65
==PAGE:74==
by closely following all patients on MDD in the project departments. They do not record
any patient sensitive data, but validates that the right decisions are made regarding the
patients’ MDD medication and makes summary statistics according to the categories in-
cluded in figure 6.16.
What change can we make that will result in improvement?
The third question focuses on the proposed change initiatives. This list covers the mate-
rials and services provided by the project group, including:
• Education sessions tailored towards the individual professional groups
• Daily reviews of the pilot departments’ patients to identify those on MDD who are
newly admitted or about to be discharged
• Daily rounds in the pilot departments to support decision-making regarding MDD
• A project hotline managed by the project team and open every day from 8-16
• A roles and responsibilities charter illustrating the new work processes in a simple
way
• A competition organised within the project department to motivate doctors to iden-
tify patients on MDD
As mentioned, these change ideas are currently tested and implemented at 1-2 depart-
ments at a time. By doing it this way, the project team is able to be fully present an support
the clinical personnel, which is important especially in the initial implementation phase.
This strategy is likely an important contribution factor to the successful implementation
of the new work processes.
PDSA-cycles
The PDSA-cycle are used to test and refine the change ideas listed above and turn these
into action. The documentation we have received on the project is limited, but it does in-
clude an implementation plan for the nine departments involved in the project. The grad-
ual inclusion of departments can be seen as individual implementation steps illustrated
by the top layer of PDSA-cycles in figure 7.8. Here, the overall change process is tested
and refined over and over again for every new department included in the project. Each
of these implementation phases can be divided into smaller steps, illustrated by smaller
PDSA-cycles which represent the testing and refinement of the listed change ideas within
one department. As mentioned in section 7.2, implementing changes in smaller blocks
within one department can help reduce resistance and clarify procedures and responsi-
bilities among employees.
One example of an activity that has been enhanced through practical testing and refine-
ment is the ”Daily reviews of the pilot departments’ patients to identify those on MDD
who are newly admitted or about to be discharged”. The project team started out by man-
ually looking up all patients admitted to the pilot departments to check if they were on
MDD. However, after having done this for a while, they came up with a better solution. As
previously mentioned, they now have a function in Sundhedsplatformen where they can
immediately see which patients are on MDD, thus making identification of relevant patient
and data collection significantly easier.
Thus, by using the Model for Improvement, the project team at Bispebjerg has been able
to test and implement the pilot project bit by bit in one department at a time, thereby being
66
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:75==
Figure 7.8: A refined version of the model for Improvement, where the PDSA-cycles are
organised into different layers. Adapted from figure in (Reinertsen et al., 2008).
able to identify issues and mitigate these as they arise. This implementation strategy can
explain the preliminary success of the ongoing pilot project.
7.3.2
Explaining successful change using Kotter’s 8-step model
Another model that can be used to explain the success of the pilot project is Kotter’s 8
steps change management model. This model is easy to follow and apply in a health-
care environment (Small et al., 2016). Furthermore, it is specifically relevant for the pilot
project due to its adaptability to the organisational structure and its capacity to incorpo-
rate various staff responses to change (Kotter, 2012).
Step 1: Create a sense of urgency
Urgency is defined as the capacity to perceive immediate issues as potential opportuni-
ties (Small et al., 2016). The sense of urgency surrounding MDD and initially giving rise
to the pilot project originated from the cross-functional health cluster ”Sundhedsklynge
Byen”. Even though MDD often ranks low on the priority list for hospital personnel (inter-
view 3), the cross-functional clusters seem to have highlighted the need for immediate
collaboration between stakeholders to disseminate the use MDD with the purpose of as-
sessing emerging recruitment challenges in the healthcare system and improving patient
safety.
Step 2: Form a guiding coalition
The guiding coalition in the pilot project is the project team consists of two highly dedi-
cated nursing consultants and a chief physician. The nursing consultants both have clin-
ical experience, meaning that they ”speak the same language” as the hospital staff, as
well as experience with implementation projects within the healthcare system. The rep-
resentation of different professional layers within the hospital and different levels of ex-
periences, gives the group the expertise, credibility and position power that, according to
Kotter, is essential to deliver transformational change (Kotter, 2012).
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
67
==PAGE:76==
Step 3: Create a vision
Based on his 10 years’ observations of more than 100 companies coping with change,
Kotter found that failed change was associated with an abundance of plans, directives,
and programs, but a lack of vision (Noble et al., 2011). He stated that if a vision can-
not be communicated and understood within five minutes, it is not complete. The vision
of the pilot project, developed in ”Sundhedsklynge Byen”, fulfils this requirement, as is it
simple and clear: Improve patient safety and help the municipalities save time by retain-
ing patients on MDD during and after hospitalisation. With this strategic vision in mind,
the project group has focused on developing coordinated activities, including testing and
refining the change initiatives in practice rather than having a lot of detailed plans and
bureaucracy, in line with Kotter’s theory.
Figure 7.9: The preliminary success of the ongoing pilot project at Bispebjerg ex-
plained using Kotter’s 8-step change model.
Step 4: Communicate the vision
The vision of the pilot project is communicated on two different levels: to the different
stakeholders involved in the MDD process, and to the staff in the individual pilot depart-
ments. First, to succeed with the change it must be understood and agreed upon by all col-
laborating stakeholders, including the hospital, municipality, GPs and local pharmacies.
For this purpose, the ”Sundhedsklynge Byen” serves as the collaborative where experience
and knowledge is spread to different local professional groups. Besides discussions in
the collaborative, the vision is communicated to other hospitals on theme days, where the
project group presents their approach and preliminary findings. Second, education ses-
sion prior to the inclusion of a department in the project, ensures that the vision is spread
to the people who have to carry out the change in practice.
68
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:77==
Step 5: Empower others to act on the vision
Education sessions have been established to activate the staff at the pilot departments
and equip them with the skills and knowledge necessary to carry out the change. Fur-
thermore, the staff has been empowered by establishing a hotline where they can share
experienced issues and get immediate support. Allowing the participants to give imme-
diate feedback, pinpoint issues, and come with suggestions for how to solve these gives
them a sense of control over the change process (Kotter, 2012). Additionally, it serves as
a tool to quickly remove barriers related to skills and knowledge, and to make the change
seem easy and doable to the participants.
Step 6: Create quick wins
On department level, this transformation is not very complex and can be implemented
within a few months. Consequently, the need to focus on short-term wins is limited. How-
ever, we do see examples of smaller wins leading to performance improvements, such as
the new column in Sundhedsplatformen that visually indicates the patient’s MDD status
and helps the doctors to independently manage patients on MDD.
On a higher level, the vision to retain patients on MDD during and after hospitalisation
is, however, a more complex task involving other stakeholders including distribution and
packing pharmacies. In this context, the gradual roll-out of the project can be viewed as a
series of short-term wins, that approximately every second months reassures the working
group and the hospital staff that the project is paying off.
Step 7: Build on the change
As stated by Kotter, the new work processes are fragile and must be supported in order
to be maintained (Kotter International, 2020). The availability and support of the project
group helps maintain and reinforce the changes within the different departments. Further-
more, continuous education of new staff can help ensure that the vision is maintained and
that the practical steps of the new work processes sink deeper into the work culture. As
this happens, the individual departments can rely on internal knowledge and experience
sharing rather than external assistance, ultimately becoming self-driving.
Step 8: Institutionalise the change
Since the pilot project is still in its implementation phase, the changes have not yet been
fully anchored in the organisation. However, having a strategy for this is crucial to pre-
vent the new behaviour from deteriorating once the initial pressure for change diminishes.
Such a strategy could include further initiatives to increase the focus on and use of MDD
on hospitals, e.g., by having more patients bring and use their MDD medication during the
hospital stays, as they do in Norway (Hjelle, 2015), or by MDD packing machines located
at the hospitals, as they have some places in Netherlands (Rechel, 2018), to strengthen
the MDD supplement and emergency functions.
The implementation of modified MDD work processes in the pilot departments at Bispeb-
jerg Hospital aligns with steps 1-7 of Kotter’s change model, while step 8 is still pending.
Utilising this model to take a bird’s-eye view of the project helps explain the factors that
have laid the foundation for the successful process changes thus far. It confirms that
the change has been led by an appropriate team, that the project’s purpose has been un-
derstood by personnel in the pilot departments, and that the project has been managed
to consolidate the new work processes. Additionally, it highlights the importance of not
declaring victory too soon, but rather recognising that changes, once implemented, must
be nurtured to become fully integrated into the organisation’s culture.
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
69
==PAGE:78==
The national goal is to increase the use of MDD, and since the pilot project appears to have
removed one of the barriers to the dissemination of MDD, similar changes will likely be
implemented in other hospitals in the near future. To succeed with this, a solid scale-up
strategy should be developed, incorporating the experiences and insights from the pilot
project.
7.3.3
Initiatives for scaling-up change
Within healthcare, scaling up can be defined as the process of ”expanding the use of
proven health interventions to benefit more people and support large-scale policy and
program development” (Simmons et al., 2007). This is not a straightforward task. Of-
ten, the strategic planning for expanding pilot-tested interventions is neglected, and even
when interest exists, the necessary experience, know-how, and resources are often lack-
ing (World Health Organization, 2010). Thus, a structured approach for scaling up health-
care interventions is needed. Several different frameworks have been developed to guide
this process (Adamou et al., 2014; Barker et al., 2016; Damschroder et al., 2009; Glasgow
et al., 1999; World Health Organization, 2010, 2011). Combining elements from these
frameworks can provide a comprehensive approach for scaling up a healthcare interven-
tion from the pilot phase to a larger national implementation. Overall, we have identified
five phases relevant for the scale-up of the MDD pilot project, as illustrated in figure 7.10.
Figure 7.10: Five steps for scaling up the pilot project at Bispebjerg.
70
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:79==
1. Assess feasibility
First, the scalability of the intervention, in this case the pilot project, should be as-
sessed (NSW Ministry of Health, 2014; World Health Organization, 2010). Rogers
proposed five attributes to assess whether an intervention is worth spreading (Rogers,
1995). These include relative advantage over status quo, compatibility with existing
values, norms, and facilities, simplicity with regard to installation, testability on a
smaller scale, and observability of the intervention in practice (Langley et al., 2009).
Although the pilot project has demonstrated its success in meeting these attributes
at Bispebjerg, there is no guarantee that it will achieve the same results in other
departments or hospitals. This depends on how well it aligns with the context of
the new environment or setting, especially in terms of financial and human support
(NSW Ministry of Health, 2014; World Health Organization, 2011). Due to local differ-
ences in organisational structure, culture and resources, interventions rarely remain
unchanged. Therefore, the adaptability of the intervention is also an important part
of the feasibility assessment (NSW Ministry of Health, 2014). This involves assess-
ing which core elements of the intervention are essential to maintain its effective-
ness and fulfilment of the five attributes.
2. Plan and prepare
The next step identified is the development of a scaling up plan. This includes es-
timating financial, technical, and human resources required for scaling up, as well
as making a strategy for how to engage stakeholders (Barker et al., 2016). The plan
should be tailored to the new environment or setting, which will influence the adop-
tion of the intervention (Langley et al., 2009).
According to Barker et al., there are a number of support systems that should be
taken into account when planning the scaling up of an intervention (Barker et al.,
2016). These include training programs to enhance human capability for scaling up,
communication systems to facilitate knowledge transfer, and data collection and re-
porting systems to track key processes and outcomes and support decision making
throughout the scale-up process (Milat et al., 2015).
Regarding the pilot project at Bispebjerg, they have developed a training program
which is continuously used to train new employees in the project departments (in-
terview 11). This program can be reused when scaling up the intervention with some
modifications, such as ensuring compatibility with the different EPJ-system used in
Jutland. The PDSA cycle offers an iterative way of testing such modifications and
building on the learning in a structured way (Langley et al., 2009).
The communication system used in the pilot project is centred around the hotline
which is managed by the project team. This is a very resource-heavy system, requir-
ing at least one team member to be available from 8 AM to 4 PM every day. When
planning the scale-up, alternative feedback systems should be considered to reduce
dependency on human resources. Additionally, the data collection currently relies
on human effort and should ideally be automated.
Another aspect to consider during the plan and prepare phase is the finances. The
pilot project at Bispebjerg was made possible by a 600,000 DKK investment, which
funded the dedicated project team that have ensured successful implementation
across several departments (interview 11). If significant financial and human re-
sources are lacking in the new location, a plan should be carried out for how these
can be mobilised, ideally through existing channels (Langley et al., 2009; World
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
71
==PAGE:80==
Health Organization, 2010).
3. Implement gradually
To guarantee the effectiveness of the intervention on a larger scale, it should be
tested in a broader range of settings before full scale implementation (Barker et al.,
2016). With regard to scaling up the pilot project, one important consideration is
that the organisational structure varies across the Danish hospitals (interview 11).
For example, Rigshospitalet is organised into centres instead of departments and
hospitals in Jutland use a different IT system from the one used on Zealand (Danske
Regioner, 2022). Thus, the pilot project setup should be tested in various regional
settings to ensure that it works effectively or has been adapted to fit all contexts
expected at full scale (World Health Organization, 2011).
It is also relevant to consider different levels of motivation and openness towards
the change. In line with Rogers theory about diffusion of innovations, not all GPs
and distribution pharmacies have been equally willing to adopt MDD and related
work processes (interview 2; interview 10). This is likely also the case for the dif-
ferent hospitals and hospital departments that have to adopt new work processes
associated with MDD. Thus, if the pilot project is to be spread nationally, it can be
beneficial to invest in the early adopters first, as they can be powerful advocates for
the intervention to their peers (Barker et al., 2016; Rogers, 1995).
Once well-tested in various diverse settings, focus should be on rapidly spreading it
to the rest of the locations in scope (Barker et al., 2016). This rarely goes as planned
and therefore, good feedback systems should be in place to support the adopters
(Langley et al., 2009).
4. Evaluate and adapt
To assess whether the implementation of the intervention is progressing as planned,
ensure continuous learning, and adapt the intervention to sociocultural and institu-
tional settings, it is necessary to collect data (World Health Organization, 2010).
This data should be accurate, complete, and timely, and be shared with employees
in the department to keep them updated about the scale-up process (Barker et al.,
2016). Furthermore, it should be linked to decision making throughout the process
of scaling up the intervention (Milat et al., 2015).
As previously mentioned, the pilot project at Bispebjerg is suffering from a lack of
baseline data necessary for assessing the quantitative impact of the intervention.
Before scaling up the project to more hospital departments, it would be valuable
to collect baseline data from these departments. Ideally, this requires updating the
hospital EPJ systems to automatically detect when a patient with MDD is admitted
to or discharged from a department, and what happens with the patient’s MDD after
hospitalisation.
5. Institutionalise and sustain
The perhaps biggest challenge of implementing new interventions is to maintain
the changes over time and incorporate them into routine clinical practice (Glasgow
et al., 1999). According to WHO’s nine-step guide for scaling up interventions, a
sustainable intervention requires both vertical and horizontal scaling up, i.e., insti-
tutionalisation of the intervention at a national or sub-national level combined with
replication of the innovation in multiple geographical sites (World Health Organiza-
tion, 2010). Similarly to Rogers diffusion model, they highlight the potential benefits
of initiating implementation in areas where the organisational capacity is strongest.
72
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:81==
Other factors that help ensuring that the intervention becomes sustainable include
leadership commitment, ongoing learning systems, inspection systems to ensure
achievement of desired outcomes, robust and transparent feedback systems, and
formal capacity-building programs (Barker et al., 2016).
7.4
Limitations
The analysis presented in this report is subject to certain limitations that should be ac-
knowledged to understand the potential constraints on the findings.
Firstly, a significant portion of the data used in this analysis is derived from qualitative data
collected through semi-structured interviews. Existing literature suggests that data satu-
ration can often be achieved within nine to 17 interviews (Vasileiou et al., 2018), indicating
that the 11 interviews conducted for this analysis may provide a robust foundation. Ad-
ditionally, semi-structured interviews typically require fewer participants than structured
surveys due to the generation of more detailed data (Hurst, 2023). However, achiev-
ing data saturation frequently necessitates a homogeneous study population, which was
not applicable in this case, due to the many stakeholders involved with MDD. Given the
time constraints, a prioritisation was necessary. To ensure a comprehensive and holis-
tic understanding of the system, the study prioritised the inclusion of representatives
from all stakeholder groups over having multiple representatives from the same group.
As a consequence, the data foundation is somewhat limited in capturing the full spec-
trum of attitudes within each stakeholder group. For instance, while interviewees con-
sistently reported resistance and dissatisfaction among GPs towards MDD, the absence
of direct interviews with dissenting GPs restricted a nuanced understanding of their spe-
cific concerns and frustrations. This limitation suggests that the analysis may be prone
to certain biases and generalisations due to the limited representation within each stake-
holder group. Future studies should aim to conduct a greater number of interviews across
each stakeholder group to generate a more comprehensive and nuanced understanding,
thereby reducing biases and assumptions.
Secondly, the interviewed stakeholders pertinent to healthcare practices in neighbouring
geographical areas (Brøndby, København and Gentofte) where the number of patients re-
ceiving MDD is either at or above the national average (figure 3.3). As explained in section
3.0.2, one of the main reasons for believing that the potential of MDD has not been fully
realised is the variation among municipalities. By not including stakeholders from munic-
ipalities with a low utilisation rate of the service, which may indicate greater resistance
to the system than those with higher utilisation rates, potentially omits critical perspec-
tives on the barriers currently being faced. Thus, further studies should include healthcare
personnel from a wider variety of municipalities, to ensure valuable information is not ex-
cluded.
Lastly, conducting research within the healthcare sector presents unique challenges, par-
ticularly in engaging busy healthcare professionals. Healthcare personnel often have de-
manding schedules, making them difficult to reach and interview comprehensively. As
a consequence, qualitative data collection in healthcare settings often faces challenges
related to the availability of staff, time constraints, and the urgent nature of their work
(McGuckin et al., 2022). This challenge significantly impacted the data collection pro-
cess, as gaining an in-depth understanding of the work processes and barriers experi-
enced by healthcare personnel was a fundamental necessity for the analysis. This has
led to certain knowledge gaps, such as limited understanding of processes at distribution
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
73
==PAGE:82==
pharmacies, explaining the varying processing times for implementing changes to med-
ication, described in section 6.4.2. Additionally, similar to Muusmann, we were unable
to gather data on the processing times. Due to these challenges in acquiring data, this
report does not include quantitative calculations.
74
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:83==
8
Conclusion
This study explores the potential of MDD to address the challenges faced by the Danish
healthcare system, particularly in light of an ageing population and a diminishing work-
force. Recent analyses reveal significant variations in service provision across Danish
municipalities, indicating that MDD’s full potential remains untapped. To investigate this,
a comprehensive literature review and semi-structured interviews with key stakeholders
were conducted, aiming to thoroughly understand the processes involved and identify
barriers hindering the full realisation of the service’s potential.
The introduction of MDD in Denmark in 2001 marked the beginning of an initiative to en-
hance patient safety and optimise healthcare resources. However, as this report con-
tends, implementing changes within the healthcare system is a complex task that must be
managed at multiple levels. Several barriers have been identified in relation to the dissem-
ination of MDD, including issues with adherence to guidelines, extensive communication
flows, unclear division of responsibilities, and a lack of interprofessional collaboration.
For MDD to effectively enhance efficiency and safety within healthcare, it requires well-
established work processes and a workforce willing to adapt to change. The findings pre-
sented in this report suggest that lean and change management tools can be instrumental
in overcoming current barriers. Specifically, this study proposes three key initiatives: im-
proving cross-sectional collaboration, enhancing the focus on transition management to
address psychological and emotional barriers to change, and developing a strategy for
scaling up an intervention promoting MDD in hospitals. These initiatives are grounded in
state-of-the-art literature, drawing on theoretical frameworks or case examples with suc-
cessful outcomes.
However, it must be acknowledged that the majority of these initiatives require resources
and, more importantly, time, which is currently one of the most prominent deficiencies
and challenges in the Danish healthcare system. Reflecting on this, the proposed initia-
tives to address current barriers, such as the establishment of regular meetings, fostering
employee-driven innovation, and promoting interprofessional education, might encounter
challenges that demand dedicated, protected time and effective management.
In conclusion, this research contributes to the existing body of knowledge on MDD by of-
fering new theoretical perspectives and practical suggestions for its implementation in
the Danish healthcare system. By leveraging lean and change management tools, the
proposed strategies aim to enhance efficiency and patient safety, ultimately addressing
the demographic challenges facing Denmark’s healthcare sector. Given the complexity
of the changes associated with MDD, these initiatives are not definitive solutions to the
identified barriers but rather strategic suggestions to overcome them. Ultimately, the full
realisation of MDD’s potential relies on employees willingness to change, effective facilita-
tion of transitions, and cross-sectional collaboration to overcome both present and future
challenges.
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
75
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
Adamou, B., Curran, J., Wilson, L., Dagadu, N. A., Jennings, V., Lundgren, R., Kiesel, R., &
Hardee, K. (2014). Guide for Monitoring Scale-up of Health Practices and Inter-
ventions — MEASURE Evaluation. https://www.measureevaluation.org/resources/
publications/ms13-64.html
Alagoz, E., Chih, M. Y., Hitchcock, M., Brown, R., & Quanbeck, A. (2018). The use of exter-
nal change agents to promote quality improvement and organizational change in
healthcare organizations: A systematic review. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-
018-2856-9
Antierens, A., Beeckman, D., Verhaeghe, S., & Van Hecke, A. (2019). Wanted in health care:
Lean experts with a broad perspective. Journal of Nursing Management, 27(6),
1332–1336. https://doi.org/10.1111/JONM.12784
Apotekerforeningen. (2022). Dosispakket medicin.
Appelbaum, S. H., Habashy, S., Malo, J., & Shafiq, H. (2012). Back to the future: revisit-
ing Kotter’s 1996 change model. Journal of Management Development, 31(8), 764.
https://doi.org/10.1108/02621711211253231/full/html
Appelbaum, S. H., & Wohl, L. (2000). Transformation or change: some prescriptions for
health care organizations. An International Journal, 10(5), 279–298. https://doi.
org/10.1108/09604520010345768/full/html
Arain, M., Campbell, M. J., Cooper, C. L., & Lancaster, G. A. (2010). What is a pilot or feasibil-
ity study? A review of current practice and editorial policy. BMC Medical Research
Methodology, 10. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2288-10-67
Aremu, T. O., Oluwole, O. E., Adeyinka, K. O., & Schommer, J. C. (2022). Medication Adher-
ence and Compliance: Recipe for Improving Patient Outcomes. Pharmacy, 10(5),
106. https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmacy10050106
Armenakis, A. A., & Bedeian, A. G. (1999). Organizational Change: A Review of Theory and
Research in the 1990s (tech. rep.).
Armour, M. A., & Tovell, D. (2015). Transitions. Success strategies from women in stem:
A portable mentor (pp. 413–441). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
397181-4.00013-X
Aziz, A. M. (2017). A change management approach to improving safety and preventing
needle stick injuries. Journal of Infection Prevention, 18(5), 257–262. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1757177416687829
Bardage, C., Ekedahl, A., & Ring, L. (2014). Health care professionals’ perspectives on au-
tomated multi-dose drug dispensing. Pharmacy Practice. https://doi.org/10.4321/
s1886-36552014000400005
Barker, P. M., Reid, A., & Schall, M. W. (2016). A framework for scaling up health interven-
tions: Lessons from large-scale improvement initiatives in Africa. Implementation
Science, 11(1), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1186/S13012-016-0374-X/TABLES/2
Barthel, M., Fava, J. A., Harnanan, C. A., Strothmann, P., Khan, S., Miller, S., Barthel, M.,
Fava, J. A., & Khan, S. (2015). Hotspots Analysis: Providing the Focus for Action,
149–167. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-017-7221-1{\_}12
Baslyman, M., Amyot, D., & Alshalahi, Y. (2019). Lean healthcare processes: Effective tech-
nology integration and comprehensive decision support using requirements en-
gineering methods. Proceedings - 2019 IEEE/ACM 1st International Workshop on
Software Engineering for Healthcare, SEH 2019, 37–44. https://doi.org/10.1109/
SEH.2019.00014
76
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:85==
Bech, M., & Kjellberg, J. (2022). Økonomiske incitamenter er afgørende for succes. https:
//www.vive.dk/da/nyheder-og-debat/okonomiske-incitamenter-er-afgoerende-for-
succes-qz5eqnz8/
Ben-Tovim, D. I., Bassham, J. E., Bennett, D. M., Dougherty, M. L., Martin, M. A., O’Neill,
S. J., Sincock, J. L., & Szwarcbord, M. G. (2008). Redesigning care at the Flinders
Medical Centre: clinical process redesign using ”lean thinking”. The Medical journal
of Australia, 188(6 Suppl). https://doi.org/10.5694/j.1326-5377.2008.tb01671.x
Berwick, D. M. (1996). A primer on leading the improvement of systems. British Medical
Journal, 312(7031), 619–622. https://doi.org/10.1136/BMJ.312.7031.619
Bharsakade, R. S., Acharya, P., Ganapathy, L., & Tiwari, M. K. (2021). A lean approach to
healthcare management using multi criteria decision making. OPSEARCH, 58(3),
610–635. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12597-020-00490-5
Bhattacharya, M., Gibson, D. E., & Doty, D. H. (2005). The effects of flexibility in employee
skills, employee behaviors, and human resource practices on firm performance.
Journal of Management, 31(4), 622–640. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206304272347
Bobrova, V., Heinämäki, J., Honkanen, O., Desselle, S., Airaksinen, M., & Volmer, D. (2019).
Older adults using multi-dose dispensing exposed to risks of potentially inappro-
priate medications. Research in Social and Administrative Pharmacy, 15(9), 1102–
1106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sapharm.2018.11.007
Bodenheimer, T., & Sinsky, C. (2014). From triple to Quadruple Aim: Care of the patient
requires care of the provider. Annals of Family Medicine, 12(6), 573–576. https:
//doi.org/10.1370/AFM.1713
Boston Consulting Group, & Sundhedsstrukturkommisionen. (2023). Sundhedsvaesenets
organisering mv. i udvalgte lande (tech. rep.).
Boudallaa, I., Elkachradi, R., & Kadouri, A. (2023). Change management in hospitals: a way
to learn from climate change. E3S Web of Conferences, 412. https://doi.org/10.
1051/e3sconf/202341201058
Brandão de Souza, L., & Pidd, M. (2011). Exploring the barriers to lean health care imple-
mentation. Public Money and Management, 31(1), 59–66. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09540962.2011.545548
Bridges, W., & Bridges, S. (2017). Managing Transitions: Making the most of change (4th
edition). Nicholas Brealey Publishing.
Campbell, R. J. (2008). Change management in health care. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.
HCM.0000285028.79762.a1
Charles, L., Kumar, E., Elghol, E., Dobbs, B., Tian, P. G. J., & Babenko, O. (2022). Poten-
tially Inappropriate Medication Use in the Elderly. Canadian Journal on Aging, 41(2),
176–183. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980821000234
Columbia School of Public Health. (n.d.). Hot Spot Spatial Analysis. https://www.publichealth.
columbia.edu/research/population-health-methods/hot-spot-spatial-analysis
Committee on Quality of Health Care in America. (2001). Crossing the Quality Chasm: A
New Health System for the 21st Century. National Academies Press. https://doi.
org/10.17226/10027
Cramer, J. A., Roy, A., Burrell, A., Fairchild, C. J., Fuldeore, M. J., Ollendorf, D. A., & Wong,
P. K. (2008). Medication Compliance and Persistence: Terminology and Defini-
tions. Value in Health, 11(1), 44–47. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1524-4733.2007.
00213.x
D’Amour, D., Ferrada-Videla, M., San Martin Rodriguez, L., & Beaulieu, M. D. (2005). The
conceptual basis for interprofessional collaboration: Core concepts and theoreti-
cal frameworks. https://doi.org/10.1080/13561820500082529
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
77
==PAGE:86==
D’Amour, D., Goulet, L., Labadie, J. F., Martín-Rodriguez, L. S., & Pineault, R. (2008). A model
and typology of collaboration between professionals in healthcare organizations.
BMC Health Services Research, 8. https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-8-188
D’Amour, D., Sicotte, C., & Lévy, R. (1999). L’action collective au sein d’équipes interprofes-
sionnelles dans les services de santé. Sciences Sociales et Sante, 17(3), 59–92.
https://doi.org/10.3406/SOSAN.1999.1468
Damschroder, L. J., Aron, D. C., Keith, R. E., Kirsh, S. R., Alexander, J. A., & Lowery, J. C.
(2009). Fostering implementation of health services research findings into prac-
tice: A consolidated framework for advancing implementation science. Implemen-
tation Science, 4(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-4-50
D’Andreamatteo, A., Ianni, L., Lega, F., & Sargiacomo, M. (2015). Lean in healthcare: A
comprehensive review. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthpol.2015.02.002
Danmarks Apotekerforening. (2021). Medicinrester kan skade miljø og mennesker. https:
//via.ritzau.dk/pressemeddelelse/13631318/medicinrester- kan- skade- miljo- og-
mennesker?publisherId=13559461
Danmarks Apotekerforening. (2023). Vi smider medicin ud for over 400 mio. kr. https :
//www.apotekerforeningen.dk/presse/pressemeddelelser/2023/stop-medicinspild-
410-mio
Dansk Selskab for Patientsikkerhed. (n.d.). Forbedringsmodellen – en fælles ramme for
arbejdet med kvalitet og patientsikkerhed. https : / / patientsikkerhed . dk / viden /
forbedringsmetoder/forbedringsmodellen/
Danske Regioner. (2022). Brief-Elektronisk patientjournal. www.regioner.dk
Do, B. R., Yeh, P. W., & Madsen, J. (2016). Exploring the relationship among human resource
flexibility, organizational innovation and adaptability culture. Chinese Management
Studies, 10(4), 657–674. https://doi.org/10.1108/CMS-01-2016-0022
Doran, G. T. (1981). There’s a S.M.A.R.T. way to write management’s goals and objec-
tives. Management Review, 70(11), 35–36. https://community.mis.temple.edu/
mis0855002fall2015/files/2015/10/S.M.A.R.T-Way-Management-Review.pdf
Dulaney, P., & Stanley, K. M. (2005). Accomplishing change in treatment strategies. Jour-
nal of Addictions Nursing, 16(4), 163–167. https://doi.org/10.1080/10884600500328205
Eldridge, S. M., Lancaster, G. A., Campbell, M. J., Thabane, L., Hopewell, S., Coleman, C. L.,
& Bond, C. M. (2016). Defining feasibility and pilot studies in preparation for ran-
domised controlled trials: Development of a conceptual framework. PLoS ONE,
11(3). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0150205
Errida, A., & Lotfi, B. (2021). The determinants of organizational change management suc-
cess: Literature review and case study. International Journal of Engineering Busi-
ness Management, 13. https://doi.org/10.1177/18479790211016273
Fenton, E. M. (2007). Visualising Strategic Change:. The Role and Impact of Process Maps
as Boundary Objects in Reorganisation. European Management Journal, 25(2), 104–
117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.emj.2007.02.003
Finansministeriet. (2023). Økonomisk Analyse - Rekruttering af velfærdsmedarbejdere nu
og i fremtiden.
Fleissig, A., Jenkins, V., Catt, S., & Fallowfi, L. (2006). Multidisciplinary teams in cancer
care: are they eff ective in the UK? https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(06)70940-8
Freil, M. (2017). Høringssvar vedr. bekendtgørelse om recepter og dosisdispensering af
lægemidler.
Gaardbo, P., Væver, T. J., Clausen, S. S., Bülow, C., & Ravn, L. (2023). Dosisdispensering.
Månedsskrift for almen praksis.
78
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:87==
Gadatsch, A. (2023). Modeling and Analysis of Processes. Business process management
(pp. 101–173). Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
658-41584-6{\_}5
Gallouj, F., & Weinstein, O. (1997). Innovation in services. Research Policy, 26(4-5), 537–
556. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7333(97)00030-9
Gardiner, D., & Reefke, H. (2019). Applying lean thinking to operations. Operations Manage-
ment for Business Excellence, 148–188. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780367135997-5
Gilley, A., McMillan, H. S., & Gilley, J. W. (2009). Organizational change and characteris-
tics of leadership effectiveness. Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies,
16(1), 38–47. https://doi.org/10.1177/1548051809334191
Glasgow, R. E., Vogt, T. M., Boles, S. M., & Glasgow, E. (1999). Evaluating the Public Health
Impact of Health Promotion Interventions: The RE-AIM Framework. 89(9). www.ori.
Glouberman, S., & Mintzberg, H. (2001). Managing the care of health and the cure of dis-
ease - Part I: Differentiation. https://doi.org/10.1097/00004010-200101000-00006
Graham, J. R., Woodmass, K., Bailey, Q., Li, E. P., & Lomness, A. (2022). Organizational
Change in Human Service Organizations: A Review and Content Analysis. Human
Service Organizations Management, Leadership and Governance, 46(1), 36–55. https:
//doi.org/10.1080/23303131.2021.1967245
Halvorsen, K. H., Granas, A. G., Engeland, A., & Ruths, S. (2012). Prescribing quality for older
people in norwegian nursing homes and home nursing services using multidose
dispensed drugs. Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety, 21(9), 929–936. https:
//doi.org/10.1002/pds.2232
Hammick, M., Freeth, D., Koppel, I., Reeves, S., & Barr, H. (2007). A best evidence systematic
review of interprofessional education: BEME Guide no. 9. Medical Teacher, 29(8),
735–751. https://doi.org/10.1080/01421590701682576
Harrison, M. I., Paez, K., Carman, K. L., Stephens, J., Smeeding, L., Devers, K. J., & Garfinkel,
S. (2016). Effects of organizational context on Lean implementation in five hospi-
tal systems. Health Care Management Review, 41(2), 127–144. https://doi.org/10.
1097/HMR.0000000000000049
Harrison, R., Fischer, S., Walpola, R. L., Chauhan, A., Babalola, T., Mears, S., & Le-Dao, H.
(2021). Where do models for change management, improvement and implementa-
tion meet? A systematic review of the applications of change management mod-
els in healthcare. https://doi.org/10.2147/JHL.S289176
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS). (2024). Digital health
integration: Economic Pathways Explored by DHAGE Advisory Group. https : / /
www.himss.org/news/digital-health-integration-economic-pathways-explored-dhage-
advisory-group
Helmold, M., Küçük Yılmaz, A., Flouris, T., Winner, T., Cvetkoska, V., & Dathe, T. (2022). 5S
Concept: Muda (￿￿), Muri (￿￿) and Mura (￿). Lean management, kaizen, kata and
keiretsu (pp. 85–101). https://link.springer.com/bookseries/10101
Higgins, A. (2023). How hospital patient flow management software platforms can im-
prove patient care and staff productivity. https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/how-
hospital-patient-flow-management-software-can-improve-higgins/
Hjelle, K. (2015). Multidose – Status og veien videre (tech. rep.). Helsedirektoratet. Oslo.
Hoffmann, M. W. (2021). Kunden skal selv sortere medicinaffald. Farmaci.
Hurst, A. (2023). Introduction to qualitative research methods (tech. rep.).
Institute for Healthcare Improvement. (n.d.-a). How to Improve: Model for Improvement.
https://www.ihi.org/resources/how-to-improve
Institute for Healthcare Improvement. (n.d.-b). Model for Improvement: Setting Aims. https:
//www.ihi.org/resources/how-to-improve/model-for-improvement-setting-aims
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
79
==PAGE:88==
Jacobsson, M., Härgestam, M., Bååthe, F., & Hagqvist, E. (2022). Organizational logics
in time of crises: How physicians narrate the healthcare response to the Covid-
19 pandemic in Swedish hospitals. BMC Health Services Research, 22(1). https:
//doi.org/10.1186/s12913-022-08094-z
Janeiro, P., Proença, I., & Gonçalves, V. d. C. (2013). Open innovation: Factors explain-
ing universities as service firm innovation sources. Journal of Business Research,
66(10), 2017–2023. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JBUSRES.2013.02.027
Josendal, A. V., & Bergmo, T. S. (2021). From Paper to E-Prescribing of Multidose Drug Dis-
pensing: A Qualitative Study of Workflow in a Community Care Setting. Pharmacy,
9(1), 41. https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmacy9010041
Josendal, A. V., Bergmo, T. S., & Granas, A. G. (2020). Potentially inappropriate prescribing
to older patients receiving multidose drug dispensing. BMC Geriatrics, 20(1). https:
//doi.org/10.1186/s12877-020-01665-x
Josendal, A. V., Bergmo, T. S., & Granås, A. G. (2022). Multidose Drug Dispensing in Primary
Care: A Review of the Literature. Medication safety in municipal health and care
services (pp. 321–348). Cappelen Damm Akademisk/NOASP. https://doi.org/10.
23865/noasp.172.ch15
Kaas Oldenburg, L. I., Dalin, D., Drastrup, A. M., & Vermehren, C. (2022). Deprescribing:
What is the gold standard? Themes that characterized the discussions at the first
Danish symposium on evidence-based deprescribing. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rcsop.2022.100102
Karam, M., Tricas-Sauras, S., Darras, E., & Macq, J. (2017). Interprofessional collabora-
tion between general physicians and emergency department teams in belgium: A
qualitative study. International Journal of Integrated Care, 17(4). https://doi.org/
10.5334/IJIC.2520
KiAP. (n.d.). About KiAP - Quality Development in General Practice in Denmark. https://
kiap.dk/kiap/om/about.php
KiAP. (2024a). Dosisdispensering i Almen Praksis (tech. rep.). https://www.kiap.dk/kiap/
klynge/klyngekoordinator/klyngepakker/klyngepakke.php?id=Nk9fsNjhsTxGsOymWUWLEt7iplyj7AqscEDq
3D
KiAP. (2024b). Om klyngerne. https://kiap.dk/kiap/klynge/om/om.php
Kimble, L., & Massoud, M. R. (2017). What do we mean by innovation in healthcare? (Tech.
rep.). http://www.merriam-webster.com/
KL, & Praktiserende Lægers Organisation. (2023). Quickguide om dosispakket medicin
(tech. rep.). www.laeger.dk/dosispakketmedicin
Kleist, B. H. (2023). Udvikling i brug af dosispakket medicin.
Kommunernes Landsforening. (n.d.). Hvad er sundhedsklynger? https : / / www . kl . dk /
sundhed - og - aeldre / sundhedsreform - og - sundhedsklynger / sundhedsklynger / hvad -
er-sundhedsklynger
Kotter, J. P. (2012). Leading Change. Harvard Business School Press.
Kotter, J. P., & Heskett, J. L. (1992). Corporate culture and performance, 214.
Kotter, J. P., & Schlesinger, L. A. (2008). Choosing Strategies for Change. Harvard Business
Review.
Kotter International. (2020). The 8-Step Process for Accelerating Change (tech. rep.).
Kwint, H.-F., Stolk, G., Faber, A., Gussekloo, J., & Bouvy, M. L. (2013). Medication adherence
and knowledge of older patients with and without multidose drug dispensing. Age
and Ageing, 42(5), 620–626. https://doi.org/10.1093/ageing/aft083
Lægeforeningen. (2023). Arbejdskraftanalyse 2023 (tech. rep.). https://laeger.dk/media/
lbcpebgy/arbejdskraftanalyse2023_28-03-2023.pdf
80
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:89==
Langley, G. J., Moen, R., Nolan, K. M., Nolan, T. W., Norman, C. L., & Provost, L. P. (2009).
The Improvement Guide: A Practical Approach to Enhancing Organizational Perfor-
mance (2nd ed.). https://books.google.com/books/about/The_Improvement_Guide.
html?hl=da&id=kE4aEnZgBO8C
Le-Dao, H., Chauhan, A., Walpola, R., Fischer, S., Schwarz, G., Minbashian, A., Munro, A.,
D’arcy, E., Allan, J., & Harrison, R. (2020). Managing complex healthcare change: A
qualitative exploration of current practice in New South Wales, Australia. Journal
of Healthcare Leadership, 12, 143–151. https://doi.org/10.2147/JHL.S274958
Leite, H., Bateman, N., & Radnor, Z. (2020). Beyond the ostensible: an exploration of bar-
riers to lean implementation and sustainability in healthcare. Production Planning
and Control, 31(1), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2019.1623426
Leite, H., Williams, S., Radnor, Z., & Bateman, N. (2024). Emergent barriers to the lean
healthcare journey: baronies, tribalism and scepticism. Production Planning and
Control, 35(2), 115–132. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2022.2054386
Luu, T. T. (2021). Can human resource flexibility disentangle innovative work behavior
among hospitality employees? The roles of harmonious passion and regulatory
foci. International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 33(12), 4258–
4285. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJCHM-02-2021-0276/FULL/HTML
Madsen, M. H., Klausen, M. B., Kousgaard, M. B., Fredslund, E. K., Bundgaard, M., Jarbøl,
D. E., Kjellberg, J., Kjellberg, P. K., & Søndergaard, J. (2022). Kvalitetsklynger i almen
praksis. https://www.vive.dk/da/udgivelser/kvalitetsklynger- i- almen- praksis-
lxmjr5xd/
Maister, D. H., Green, C. H., & Galford, R. M. (2001). The trusted advisor (20th ed.). https:
//www.saxo.com/dk/trusted-advisor-20th-anniversary-edition_charles-h-green-
david-h-maister-robert-m-galford_epub_9780743205443
Mann, L. (2005). From ”silos” to seamless healthcare: bringing hospitals and GPs back
together again. The Medical journal of Australia, 182(1), 34–37. https://doi.org/10.
5694/J.1326-5377.2005.TB06552.X
Masnoon, N., Shakib, S., Kalisch-Ellett, L., & Caughey, G. E. (2017). What is polypharmacy?
A systematic review of definitions. BMC Geriatrics, 17(1), 230. https://doi.org/10.
1186/s12877-017-0621-2
McGuckin, T., Crick, K., Myroniuk, T. W., Setchell, B., Yeung, R. O., & Campbell-Scherer, D.
(2022). Understanding challenges of using routinely collected health data to ad-
dress clinical care gaps: A case study in Alberta, Canada. BMJ Open Quality, 11(1).
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjoq-2021-001491
MedCom. (n.d.-a). FAQ om dosisdispensering. https://medcom.dk/statistik-dosispakket-
medicin-faq-om-dosisdispensering/
MedCom. (n.d.-b). Godkendte systemer. https : / / medcom . dk / standarder / godkendte -
systemer/
Medcom. (n.d.). Vejledning til dosisdispensering fra lægesystemer. https://medcom.dk/
vejledninger-til-dosisdispensering-fra-laegesystemer/
Medcom. (2023). Vejledning til opstart af dosispakket medicin hos borgere.
Mertens, B. J., Kwint, H. F., van Marum, R. J., & Bouvy, M. L. (2018). Are multidose drug dis-
pensing systems initiated for the appropriate patients? European Journal of Clini-
cal Pharmacology, 74(9), 1159–1164. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00228-018-2478-5
Mertens, B. J., Kwint, H. F., van Marum, R. J., & Bouvy, M. L. (2019a). Immediate or deferred
adjustment of drug regimens in multidose drug dispensing systems. Research in
Social and Administrative Pharmacy, 15(3), 303–309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
sapharm.2018.05.008
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
81
==PAGE:90==
Mertens, B. J., Kwint, H. F., van Marum, R. J., & Bouvy, M. L. (2019b). Patients’ experiences
with multidose drug dispensing: a cross sectional study. International Journal of
Clinical Pharmacy, 41(1), 104–112. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11096-018-0749-y
Mertz, L., Mertz, L., Tornbjerg, K., Tornbjerg, K., Nøhr, C., & Nøhr, C. (2021). User Percep-
tion of Automated Dose Dispensed Medicine in Home Care: A Scoping Review.
Healthcare. https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare9101381
Milat, A. J., Bauman, A., & Redman, S. (2015). Narrative review of models and success
factors for scaling up public health interventions. Implementation Science. https:
//doi.org/10.1186/s13012-015-0301-6
Miller, K. (2020). 5 critical steps in the change management process. https://online.hbs.
edu/blog/post/change-management-process
Minh, N., & Quyen, N. (2022). Human resources quality improvement from the perspec-
tive of Kaizen practices. Management, 26(1), 144–163. https://doi.org/10.2478/
manment-2019-0088
Ministeriet for Sundhed og Forebyggelse. (2009). Medicinspild i Danmark (tech. rep.). https:
//www.ft.dk/samling/20081/almdel/suu/bilag/492/693212.pdf
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, & COWI. (2022). The Organisation of Danish Healthcare (tech.
rep.).
Ministry of Health. (2017). Healthcare in Denmark - An overview (tech. rep.). Ministry of
Health.
Muusmann, & Danske Regioner. (2023). Dosispakket medicin - en analyse (tech. rep.).
https://www.kl.dk/media/iwnam2yi/dosispakket-medicin-hovedrapport.pdf
Naderi, S. H., Bestwick, J. P., & Wald, D. S. (2012). Adherence to drugs that prevent cardio-
vascular disease: Meta-analysis on 376,162 patients. American Journal of Medicine,
125(9), 882–887. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2011.12.013
Ngo, H. Y., & Loi, R. (2008). Human resource flexibility, organizational culture and firm per-
formance: an investigation of multinational firms in Hong Kong. The International
Journal of Human Resource Management, 19(9), 1654–1666. https://doi.org/10.
1080/09585190802295082
Nielsen, T. L. (2024). Apoteket er klar til at opskalere – dosisrullen er nemlig kommet for
at blive.
Nilsen, P., Seing, I., Ericsson, C., Birken, S. A., & Schildmeijer, K. (2020). Characteristics
of successful changes in health care organizations: an interview study with physi-
cians, registered nurses and assistant nurses. BMC Health Services Research, 20(1).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-020-4999-8
Noble, D. J., Lemer, C., & Stanton, E. (2011). What has change management in industry
got to do with improving patient safety? Postgraduate Medical Journal, 87(1027),
345–348. https://doi.org/10.1136/PGMJ.2010.097923
NSW Ministry of Health. (2014). Increasing the Scale of Population Health Interventions:
A Guide (tech. rep.). https://www.health.nsw.gov.au/research/Pages/scalability-
guide.aspx
Otieno, M. A. (2023). Affinity Research Approach, 21–28. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
031-04394-9{\_}4
Pearson, N., Naylor, P. J., Ashe, M. C., Fernandez, M., Yoong, S. L., & Wolfenden, L. (2020).
Guidance for conducting feasibility and pilot studies for implementation trials. Pi-
lot and Feasibility Studies, 6(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40814-020-00634-w
Pedersen, A. F., & Vedsted, P. (2023). Alment praktiserende laegers psykiske arbejdsmiljø
og jobtilfredshed 2023 (tech. rep.).
82
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:91==
Persson, S. S., Blomqvist, K., & Lindström, P. N. (2021). Meetings are an important prereq-
uisite for flourishing workplace relationships. International Journal of Environmen-
tal Research and Public Health, 18(15). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18158092
Pharmakon, & Dansk Selskab for Patientsikkerhed. (2012). En best practice-model for
sikker dosisdispensering. Phamakon Publikationer. www.patientsikkerhed.dk.
Pomare, C., Churruca, K., Long, J. C., Ellis, L. A., & Braithwaite, J. (2019). Organisational
change in hospitals: A qualitative case-study of staff perspectives. https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12913-019-4704-y
Praktiserende Lægers Organisation. (n.d.). Systemhusene og PLSP. https://laeger.dk/
foreninger/plo/digital-praksis/systemhusene-og-plsp#hvilkelgepraksissystemerfindesder
Pype, P., Mertens, F., Belche, J., Duchesnes, C., Kohn, L., Sercu, M., & Deveugele, M. (2017).
Experiences of hospital-based multidisciplinary team meetings in oncology: An in-
terview study among participating general practitioners. European Journal of Gen-
eral Practice, 23(1), 156–164. https://doi.org/10.1080/13814788.2017.1323081
Rechel, B. (2018). Hub-and-spoke Dispensing Models for Community Pharmacies in Eu-
rope. Eurohealth Observer, 24(4).
Region Hovedstaden. (2019). Dosisdispensering - indikationer og arbejdsgange (tech. rep.).
https://www.regionh.dk/Sundhedsaftale/Vaerktoejskasse/Documents/Dosisdispensering%
20Indikationer%20og%20arbejdsgange%20april%202019.pdf
Region Sjællands Dokumentportal. (2023). Dosisdispensering V9. https://dok.regionsjaelland.
dk/view.aspx?DokID=477461
Reinertsen, J. L., Bisognano, M., & Pugh, M. D. (2008). Seven Leadership Leverage Points
For Organization-Level Improvement in Health Care (2nd ed.). Institute for Health-
care Improvement. www.ihi.org
Retsinformation. (2024). Bekendtgørelse om recepter og dosisdispensering af lægemidler
(tech. rep.). https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2023/1703
Reuther, L. Ø., Lysen, C., Faxholm, M., Salomon, L., & Hendriksen, C. (2011). Multi-dose
drug dispensing is a challenge across the primary-secondary care interface. Dan-
ish Medical Bulletin.
Robusthedskommissionen. (2023). Robusthedskommissionens anbefalinger. www.sum.
dk
Rogers, E. M. (1995). Difussion of Innovations (4th ed.). The Free Press.
Sabaté, E., & World Health Organization. (2003). Adherence to long-term therapies evidence
for action. World Health Organization.
Samuelson, S., Pennbrant, S., Svensson, A., & Svenningsson, I. (2024). Standing together
at the helm – how employees experience employee-driven innovation in primary
care. BMC Health Services Research, 24(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-024-
11090-0
Samuelsson, P., Witell, L., Gottfridsson, P., & Elg, M. (2019). Incremental and Radical Ser-
vice Innovation in Healthcare, 619–638. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98512-
1{\_}27
Schweitzer, F., Rau, C., Gassmann, O., & Van Den Hende, E. (2015). Technologically Re-
flective Individuals as Enablers of Social Innovation. Journal of Product Innovation
Management, 32(6), 847–860. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12269
Silver, S. A., Harel, Z., McQuillan, R., Weizman, A. V., Thomas, A., Chertow, G. M., Nesrallah,
G., Bell, C. M., & Chan, C. T. (2016). How to begin a quality improvement project.
Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology, 11(5), 893–900. https://
doi.org/10.2215/CJN.11491015
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
83
==PAGE:92==
Simmons, R. ( S., Fajans, P., Ghiron, L., World Health Organization., & ExpandNet. (2007).
Scaling up health service delivery : from pilot innovations to policies and programmes,
183.
Sinnemäki, J., Airaksinen, M., Valaste, M., & Saastamoinen, L. K. (2017). Impact of the auto-
mated dose dispensing with medication review on geriatric primary care patients
drug use in Finland: a nationwide cohort study with matched controls. Scandina-
vian Journal of Primary Health Care, 35(4), 379–386. https://doi.org/10.1080/
02813432.2017.1398933
Sinnemäki, J., Saastamoinen, L. K., Hannula, S., Peura, S., & Airaksinen, M. (2014). Start-
ing an automated dose dispensing service provided by community pharmacies in
Finland. International Journal of Clinical Pharmacy, 36(2), 345–351. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11096-013-9899-0
Sinnemäki, J., Sihvo, S., Isojärvi, J., Blom, M., Airaksinen, M., & Mäntylä, A. (2013). Au-
tomated dose dispensing service for primary healthcare patients: a systematic
review. https://doi.org/10.1186/2046-4053-2-1
Sjöberg, C., Edward, C., Fastbom, J., Johnell, K., Landahl, S., Narbro, K., & Wallerstedt, S. M.
(2011). Association between multi-dose drug dispensing and quality of drug treat-
ment - A register-based study. PLoS ONE, 6(10). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0026574
Small, A., Gist, D., Souza, D., Dalton, J., Magny-Normilus, C., & David, D. (2016). Using Kot-
ter’s change model for implementing bedside handoff. Journal of Nursing Care
Quality, 31(4), 304–309. https://doi.org/10.1097/NCQ.0000000000000212
Snyder, H., Witell, L., Gustafsson, A., Fombelle, P., & Kristensson, P. (2016). Identifying cat-
egories of service innovation: A review and synthesis of the literature. Journal of
Business Research, 69(7), 2401–2408. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JBUSRES.2016.
01.009
Statens beredning för medicinsk utvärdering. (2009). Äldres läkemedelsanvändning : hur
kan den förbättras? : en systematisk litteraturöversikt. Statens beredning för medicinsk
utvärdering.
Stobierski, T. (2020). Organizational change management: What it is and why it is impor-
tant. https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/organizational-change-management
Styrelsen for Patientsikkerhed. (2023). Notat vedr. ønsker til ændrede krav til dosispakket
medicin. https://stps.dk/Media/638278600561013081/Notat%20om%20%C3%
A6ndrede%20krav%20til%20h%C3%A5ndtering%20af%20dosispakket%20medicin%
20Juni%202023.pdf
Sundhedsdatastyrelsen. (2021). Digital health solutions. https://sundhedsdatastyrelsen.
dk/da/english/digital_health_solutions
Sunhedsdatastyrelsen. (2023). Brugen af dosispakket medicin stiger igen (tech. rep.).
Tamura, B. K., Bell, C. L., Inaba, M., & Masaki, K. H. (2012). Outcomes of Polypharmacy
in Nursing Home Residents. Clinics in Geriatric Medicine, 28(2), 217–236. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cger.2012.01.005
Toh, L. S., Lai, P. S., Othman, S., Wong, K. T., Low, B. Y., & Anderson, C. (2017). An analysis of
inter-professional collaboration in osteoporosis screening at a primary care level
using the D’Amour model. Research in Social and Administrative Pharmacy, 13(6),
1142–1150. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SAPHARM.2016.10.004
Torabi, S. A., Pour, S. H., & Shamsi G., N. (2018). Lean healthcare. International series in
operations research and management science (pp. 543–568). Springer New York
LLC. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-65455-3{\_}21
Vallius, S., Taipale, H., Koponen, M., Tolppanen, A.-M., Tanskanen, A., Hartikainen, S., &
Tiihonen, M. (2022). Automated multi-dose dispensing in persons with and without
84
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:93==
Alzheimer’s disease—impacts on pharmacotherapy. European Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology, 78(3), 513–521. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00228-021-03258-y
van Rein, N., de Geus, K. S., Cannegieter, S. C., Reitsma, P. H., van der Meer, F. J., & Lijfering,
W. M. (2018). Multi-dose drug dispensing as a tool to improve medication adher-
ence: A study in patients using vitamin K antagonists. Pharmacoepidemiology and
Drug Safety, 27(1), 46–51. https://doi.org/10.1002/pds.4346
van Rossum, L., Aij, K. H., Simons, F. E., van der Eng, N., & ten Have, W. D. (2016). Lean
healthcare from a change management perspective: The role of leadership and
workforce flexibility in an operating theatre. Journal of Health Organization and
Management, 30(3), 475–493. https://doi.org/10.1108/JHOM-06-2014-0090
Varghese, D., Ishida, C., & Haseer Koya, H. (2024). Polypharmacy.
Vasileiou, K., Barnett, J., Thorpe, S., & Young, T. (2018). Characterising and justifying sam-
ple size sufficiency in interview-based studies: Systematic analysis of qualitative
health research over a 15-year period. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 18(1).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12874-018-0594-7
von Buedingen, F., Hammer, M. S., Meid, A. D., Müller, W. E., Gerlach, F. M., & Muth, C.
(2018). Changes in prescribed medicines in older patients with multimorbidity and
polypharmacy in general practice. BMC Family Practice, 19(1), 131. https://doi.org/
10.1186/s12875-018-0825-3
Wallerstedt, S. M., Fastbom, J., Johnell, K., Sjöberg, C., Landahl, S., & Sundström, A. (2013).
Drug Treatment in Older People before and after the Transition to a Multi-Dose
Drug Dispensing System-A Longitudinal Analysis. PLoS ONE, 8(6). https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0067088
Watanabe, K., & Suzuki, T. (2014). Medication Adherence. Encyclopedia of psychopharma-
cology (pp. 1–5). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-
27772-6{\_}7007-1
Whelan-Berry, K. S., & Somerville, K. A. (2010). Linking change drivers and the organiza-
tional change process: A review and synthesis. Journal of Change Management,
10(2), 175–193. https://doi.org/10.1080/14697011003795651
William Bridges Associates. (2024). Bridges Transition Model. https://wmbridges.com/
about/what-is-transition/
Wilson, C. (2014). Semi-Structured Interviews. Interview Techniques for UX Practitioners,
23–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-410393-1.00002-8
World Health Organization. (2010). Nine steps for developing a scaling-up strategy.
World Health Organization. (2011). Beginning with the end in mind: Planning pilot projects
and other programmatic research for successful scaling up. www.who.int
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
85
==PAGE:94==
A
Muusmann’s 19 recommendations
Figure A.1: Muusmann’s recommendations for the dissemination of MDD. Source:
Muusmann and Danske Regioner, 2023.
86
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:95==
B
Stakeholder interviews
B.1
Summary of interviews
No.
Job title
Workplace
Date
1, 2
Developmental nurse
Brøndby kommune
19.12.23, 01.03.24
3
Clinical pharmacologist
Hvidovre Hospital
26.02.2024
4
General practitioner and
Medical director
GP clinic in Hvidovre and
KiAP
04.03.2024
5
MDD implementation project
manager, FMK consultant
MedCom
07.03.2024
6
General practitioner
GP clinic in Gentofte
11.03.2024
7
Social and health care
assistant, GP assistant
GP clinic in Gentofte
11.03.2024
8
Nurse
Gildhøjhjemmet
14.03.2024
9
Social and health care
assistant
Gildhøjhjemmet
14.03.2024
10
Pharmacist and pharmacy
owner
Glostrup Apotek
20.03.2024
11
Pilot project managers and
nursing consultants (2)
Bispebjerg Hospital
15.04.2024
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
87
==PAGE:96==
B.2
Generic interview guide (in Danish)
Kategori
Spørgsmål (Instruktioner)
Generelle spørgsmål
• Hvad er din arbejdstittel (hvilken kommune?) og dine
primære arbejdsopgaver?
• Hvor ofte og i hvilke sammenhænge har du med dosis-
pakket medicin at gøre?
– Er det hver dag, 2-3 gange/uge, én gang/md., én
gang/md.?
• Hvad er dine konkrete arbejdsopgaver i forbindelse med
dosispakket medicin?
• Oplever du dosispakket medicin som noget der skaber
værdi?
– Hvis ja, hvordan? Hvis nej, hvorfor ikke?
• Oplever du nogle udfordringer i dit arbejde med dosis-
pakket medicin
– Hvilke? Hvor i arbejdsflowet opstår disse udfor-
dringer?
– (Bed vedkommende om at udpege på process map’et,
hvor udfordringerne opstår.)
“Vi har udarbejdet en oversigt over de forskellige aktørers
arbejdsopgaver, som vi godt kunne tænke os at gennemgå
med dig og få dine input til.”
– (Gennemgå process map med fokus på den relevante
aktørgruppe.)
“Er der nogle arbejdsopgaver, der mangler eller som ikke er
aktuelle for dig? Hvilke?”
Kommunikation og
samarbejde
• Samarbejder du med andre faggrupper omkring dosis-
pakket medicin?
• Hvordan oplever du kommunikationen mellem de forskel-
lige faggrupper i sundhedsvæsenet? Er der nogle udfor-
dringer og hvornår/med hvilke faggrupper opstår disse?
• Er der nogle faggrupper, der er nemmere at samarbejde
med end andre?
• Har du kendskab til, hvordan man håndterer dosispakket
medicin i andre/forskellige kommuner? Hvis ja, er der
forskelle, som skaber udfordringer for dit arbejde? Hvilke?
Medicinændringer
• Hvordan foregår kommunikationen og samarbejdet
omkring medicinændringer? Beskriv processen.
• Opleves medicinændringer mere krævende med dosis-
pakket medicin? Hvis ja, hvorfor?
88
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:97==
Kategori
Spørgsmål (Instruktioner)
MDD egnethed
• Ifølge dig, hvilke kriterier burde anvendes for at afgøre
om en borger/patient er egnet til at modtage dosispakket
medicin?
– Hvordan definerer man “stabilt medicineret”?
Økonomi og motivation
• Hvem synes du burde gennemføre en egnethedsvurdering?
(farmakonomer, sygeplejersker, læger, etc.)
• Oplever du, at økonomi en afgørende faktor for om en
borger bliver sat på dosispakket medicin?
• Hvad vil potentielt kunne øge din motivation for at udbrede
anvendelsen af dosispakket medicin?
• Har du nogle umiddelbare tanker om hvad der kan
forbedres med arbejdsprocesserne omkring dosispakket
medicin?
Aktørspecifikke spørgsmål
Aktør
Spørgsmål
Læge
• Har du på noget tidspunkt været til en workshop eller fået anden
form for oplæring mhp. ordination af dosispakket medicin?
• Oplever du ordination af dosispakket medicin som mere udfor-
drende/besværligt? Hvis ja, hvorfor?
• Hvilket lægepraksissystem arbejder du med?
• Ville en højere løn/et honorar have en påvirkning på din motiva-
tion til at anvende dosispakket medicin?
Sygeplejerske
• Har du oplevet fysiske smerter/arbejdsskader som følge af
manuel dispensering af medicin?
• Hvilket forhold har du til manuel dispensering af medicin? Er det
noget du værdsætter som en del af din arbejdsdag, eller noget
du gerne kunne være foruden?
Borger/patient
• På hvilken måde har overgangen til dosispakket medicin haft en
indflydelse på din hverdag?
• Hvad fungerer godt, og hvad fungerer mindre godt?
• Oplever du nogen forskel mhp. de kommunale sundhedsmedar-
bejders kontrol/tilsyn af din medicinering?
Kommune
• Hvad tror du er årsagen til at dosisdispensering af medicin bliver
udført på forskellige måder i forskellige kommuner? Tænker du
det er et problem?
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
89
==PAGE:98==
C
Hotspots analysis
C.1
Initiation of MDD
90
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:99==
C.2
Hospitalisation
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
91
==PAGE:100==
C.3
Medication changes
92
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
==PAGE:101==
D
Process maps
D.1
Initial process maps
D.1.1
Manual dispensing
93
==PAGE:102==
D.1.2
Initiation of MDD
94
==PAGE:103==
D.1.3
Hospitalisation
95
==PAGE:104==
D.1.4
Changes to medication
96
==PAGE:105==
D.2
Post-interview process maps
D.2.1
Hospitalisation
97
==PAGE:106==
D.2.2
Pilot project at Bispebjerg
98
==PAGE:107==
Multidose drug dispensing (MDD)
99
==PAGE:108==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
