==PAGE:1==
Ship Crew Scheduling
and Pairing
A metaheuristic approach
Teresa Christine Goldenits, s222604
M.Sc. Thesis
June 2024
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
Title:
Ship Crew Scheduling and Pairing
Type:
M.Sc. Thesis
Scope:
30.0 ECTS
Date:
June 2024
Study program:
Business Analytics
Author:
Teresa Christine Goldenits, s222604
Supervisor:
David Pisinger
University:
Technical University of Denmark
Department:
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Division:
Management Science Division
Address:
Bygning 358, DTU
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The ship crew scheduling problem aims at finding optimal sequences
of tasks on a set of vessels (crew pairing) as well as assigning crew
members to these tasks (crew assignment). In the present thesis, an
integrated approach for solving this problem for the liner shipping
industry is proposed, i.e. the schedule including the crew member
assignment is created in a single step. Apart from providing an ex-
tensive literature review and problem description, a MIP model is
presented which specifies the problem mathematically. Due to the
computational complexity of the problem, a metaheuristic proce-
dure has been chosen in this thesis as the solution method for it.
More specifically, a GRASP algorithm with advanced reactivity fea-
tures is designed and implemented. Computational experiments on
various realistic instances show considerable improvements in solu-
tion quality compared to the greedy procedure which is given as a
baseline.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Management (Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark; Department of Technology, Management and Eco-
nomics; Management Science Division) in fulfilment of the require-
ments for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering degree in
Business Analytics. It was written in the period from January 22,
2024 to June 22, 2024 with a scope of 30.0 ECTS, and was supervised
by David Pisinger.
The thesis addresses the ship crew scheduling problem, which con-
sists of crew pairing and assignment. First, a review on existing lit-
erature on the topic is given, and, thereafter, the problem is specified
both verbally and as a mathematical model. The main contribution
of the thesis is the proposal of a reactive GRASP algorithm for the
ship crew scheduling problem. Various computational experiments
presented in the thesis show competitive results.
Kgs. Lyngby, June 2024
Teresa Christine Goldenits, s222604
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor David Pisinger for his excellent
supervision. He has helped me with all my questions and was al-
ways ready for a meeting, where he provided in-depth support and
feedback – and of course a lot of nice talks about Apfelstrudel.
Furthermore, it was very helpful for me that I could ask my col-
leagues at Qampo about my thesis at any time, and especially in
the beginning of the project, Shyam provided valuable help to me
in laying out the scope of the project.
Finally, I want to thank my boyfriend Johann-Sebastian for his con-
tinuous support and inspiration not only during the thesis period,
but throughout my whole master’s program. Moreover, my family
and my friends have been very important companions during this
journey, for which I am incredibly thankful.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
List of Tables
vi
List of Figures
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Crew scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Introduction to Metaheuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.1
General procedure of metaheuristics . . . . . .
20
2.2.2
GRASP algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Problem Specification
23
3.1
Problem instance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Rules to be satisfied . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.1
Hard rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.2
Soft rules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Mathematical formulation
29
4.1
Sets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.1
Global parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.2
Parameters specific to each crew member . . .
32
4.2.3
Penalty parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Decision variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
MIP model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
v
4.4.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4.2
Constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4.3
Possible extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Baseline Greedy Heuristic
43
5.1
Background behind current algorithm . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Procedure of Baseline Greedy . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Pseudocode for Baseline Greedy . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
GRASP Algorithm
48
6.1
Reasons for choosing GRASP
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.2
Procedure of generic GRASP
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.3
Modifications to generic GRASP
. . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.3.1
Main GRASP procedure . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.3.2
Greedy randomized construction . . . . . . . .
55
6.3.3
Local search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.4
Main differences between GRASP and Baseline Greedy 59
6.4.1
Advantages and disadvantages of considering
the whole planning period at once . . . . . . .
60
6.4.2
Reasons behind (not) computing cost of un-
manned days within algorithm . . . . . . . . .
61
6.5
Enhancement of generic GRASP by integrating ALNS
elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7
Computational Experiments
64
7.1
Test strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.2
Test set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.2.1
Technical specifications on implementation and
tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.2.2
Instances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.2.3
Parameter setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.3
Performance comparison between GRASP and Base-
line Greedy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7.3.1
Solution quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7.3.2
Computation times and iteration numbers . .
80
7.3.3
Conclusion on algorithm performance . . . . .
82
7.4
Internal analysis of GRASP behavior . . . . . . . . .
83
7.4.1
Behavior of reactive parameters . . . . . . . .
83
7.4.2
Influence of parameter reactivity on solution
quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
7.4.3
Influence of early planning prioritization on
solution quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
7.4.4
Conclusion on internal behavior . . . . . . . .
90
7.5
Relation between instance size and computation time
90
7.5.1
Greedy randomized construction time . . . . .
91
7.5.2
GRASP total time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
7.5.3
GRASP iteration time . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
7.5.4
Conclusion on computation time . . . . . . . .
95
7.6
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
7.6.1
Increasing instance size . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
7.6.2
Increasing crew member / vessel ratio . . . . .
96
7.6.3
Conclusion on sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
8
Conclusion and Future Work
100
8.1
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
8.2
Possible future improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
References
103
A Linearized MIP constraints
111
B Additional plots and tables
114
B.1 Reactive parameter evolution for Instances 2 to 4
. . 114
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
6.1
Structural comparison between GRASP and Baseline
Greedy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.1
Overview of given instances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.2
Given penalty values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.3
Chosen parameter values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7.4
Comparison between solution values of GRASP and
Baseline Greedy for Instance 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.5
Comparison between solution values of GRASP and
Baseline Greedy for Instance 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7.6
Comparison between solution values of GRASP and
Baseline Greedy for Instance 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
7.7
Comparison between solution values of GRASP and
Baseline Greedy for Instance 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7.8
Comparison between computation times and itera-
tion numbers of GRASP and Baseline Greedy for all
instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7.9
Final p-values for reactive parameters . . . . . . . . .
85
7.10 Comparison between solution quality of GRASP with-
out and with reactivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
7.11 Comparison between solution quality of GRASP with-
out and with early planning prioritization
. . . . . .
89
==PAGE:10==
List of Figures
1.1
Exemplary crew schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
7.1
Instance 1: Hires and cost evolution in GRASP in
comparison to Baseline Greedy
. . . . . . . . . . . .
73
7.2
Instance 2: Hires and cost evolution in GRASP in
comparison to Baseline Greedy
. . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7.3
Instance 3: Hires and cost evolution in GRASP in
comparison to Baseline Greedy
. . . . . . . . . . . .
77
7.4
Instance 4: Hires and cost evolution in GRASP in
comparison to Baseline Greedy
. . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7.5
Instance 1: Evolution of reactive parameters and their
p-values
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
7.6
Relation between LS destroy percentage and number
of LS iterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
7.7
Development of average computation time for greedy
randomized construction (blue) and total computa-
tion time for Baseline Greedy (orange) for instances
of increasing size
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
7.8
Development of total computation time for GRASP
(blue) and number of performed GRASP iterations
(orange) for instances of increasing size . . . . . . . .
93
7.9
Development of average time per GRASP iteration
(blue) and average number of local search iterations
(orange) for instances of increasing size . . . . . . . .
94
7.10 Relative improvement in total cost (blue) and ab-
solute improvement in hires (orange) from Baseline
Greedy to GRASP solution for instances of increas-
ing size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
7.11 Total cost (blue and cyan) and number of hires (or-
ange and pink) in the solutions of GRASP and Base-
line Greedy for instances with increasing crew mem-
ber / vessel ratio (based on Instance 3) . . . . . . . .
97
==PAGE:11==
LIST OF FIGURES
ix
7.12 Relative improvement in total cost (blue) and ab-
solute improvement in hires (orange) from Baseline
Greedy to GRASP solution for instances with increas-
ing crew member / vessel ratio (based on Instance 3)
98
B.1 Instance 2: Evolution of reactive parameters and their
p-values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
B.2 Instance 3: Evolution of reactive parameters and their
p-values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
B.3 Instance 4: Evolution of reactive parameters and their
p-values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
With the growing demand for the world-wide transportation of goods,
the shipping industry has become an important field regarding the
optimization of its services in order to ensure smooth and cost-
efficient operations.
Therefore, in the past decades, the optimal
planning of ship routes has been intensively studied in the Oper-
ations Research literature.
However, the scheduling of the crew
members1 working on the vessels has, so far, received only minor
attention, and many shipping companies still perform their crew
planning manually. Due to the high complexity of the problem, this
can be an extremely difficult task, which demands many working
hours while often leading to solutions that are far from the opti-
mum, which, in turn, causes unnecessarily high costs and a lowered
crew satisfaction. Therefore, the advancement of automated crew
planning is crucial.
In this thesis, the ship crew scheduling problem for the liner ship-
ping industry is studied, whose aim is to find an optimal schedule
of tasks on a set of vessels as well assigning crew members to these
tasks. In the context of the liner shipping industry, a task usually
means the covering of a specific rank on a vessel for a certain period
of time. The number of crew members needed of a certain rank is
defined in the manning requirements for the respective type of ves-
sel. When planning the assignments, a number of hard rules have
to be satisfied, as, for example, skill and experience requirements
1Crew members will be referred to in the masculine form in this thesis, since the large
majority of ship crew members in real-life applications is male, and the masculine form is
considered as including all genders in the following.
The purpose of this convention is to
increase the clarity of specifications on the problem and algorithm.
==PAGE:13==
2
Introduction
as well as the minimum and maximum duration of onboard periods
of a crew member and subsequent resting times. The objective of
the problem considered in this thesis is composed of two separate
parts: Both the number of newly hired crew members and the viola-
tions of several soft rules (represented by penalty terms) have to be
minimized. Examples for soft rules are budget requirements, fleet
affiliation of crew members and soft limits on assignment lengths.
Figure 1.1: Exemplary crew schedule
In Figure 1.1, an example of a ship crew schedule is displayed. There
are two vessels, Vessel 1 and Vessel 2, for which crew member assign-
ments have to be planned. Vessel 1 is of a vessel type whose manning
requirements prescribe that there have to be two crew members of
Rank 1 and one crew member of Rank 2 working on the vessel at all
times. On Vessel 2, there should be one of Rank 1 and two of Rank
2. Furthermore, the problem instance in this case contains ten crew
members (CM 1 to CM 10) who are available for working on the
vessels. At the start of the planning period, there are ongoing as-
signments on each vessel for each rank (see the bars with solid lines),
which have been planned beforehand (in a preceding crew schedul-
ing process). The starting dates of these assignments are fixed. This
means that the crew members indicated for these assignments are
covering the respective rank at the start of the planning period, and
==PAGE:14==
3
are considered as onboard crew members, while the ones who are
not involved in such an ongoing assignment are on leave and have a
specific date from which they are available for work again. During
the crew scheduling process, the goal is to fill the whole planning
period with such assignments of crew members to ranks on vessels
(see the bars with dashed lines). In this example, crew members
CM 1 to CM 5 are of Rank 1, and CM 6 to CM 10 are of Rank 2,
which means they can only be assigned to positions for their respec-
tive rank. Furthermore, resting periods have to be respected, i.e. a
crew member cannot work in two assignments which lie too close to
each other, but he needs to rest in-between, for a duration which
depends on the length of the preceding assignment. In the example
shown here, we assume that on Vessel 1, the skill requirements for
Rank 2 are very high, and crew member CM 6 is the only one who
fulfills them. Therefore, he is assigned to this position twice, with a
resting period in-between. But during this resting period, no other
crew member is available, and, therefore, a crew member of Rank
2 with enough skills has to be newly hired (CM HIRED 2). For
Vessel 2 and Rank 1, a similar situation occurs and another crew
member (CM HIRED 1) is hired. Once, for each vessel and rank,
the last assignment ends after the end of the planning period, the
crew schedule is complete.
For solving the crew scheduling problem in this thesis, a so-called
integrated approach has been chosen, which means that the plan-
ning (or pairing) of the tasks (i.e. the covering of a rank on a vessel
from a certain start to an end date) and the assignment of crew
members to these tasks are done in one single step instead of per-
forming these phases sequentially. This usually leads to better so-
lutions while increasing the complexity of the problem. Therefore,
it has been decided to develop a metaheuristic algorithm as a so-
lution method, since exact methods would in many cases not be
applicable to larger instances. The specific procedure designed and
implemented in this project is a GRASP algorithm (Greedy Ran-
domized Adaptive Search Procedure; see [FR89], [RR16]), which is
enhanced by defining certain parameters in a reactive way, i.e. en-
abling the algorithm to adapt them based on the preceding success
of their possible values.
==PAGE:15==
4
Introduction
The goal of the thesis is to improve the solution quality compared
to the algorithm designed and currently used by the Danish deci-
sion science company Qampo. This algorithm uses a purely greedy
approach, which makes it very fast, but it does not explore the
solution space in the way of which a metaheuristic algorithm is ca-
pable. Apart from describing the structural differences between the
two algorithms, extensive computational experiments on realistic in-
stances have been conducted in order to compare their performance
and behavior. As we will see, the GRASP algorithm designed in this
project is able to provide considerable improvements with regard to
the solution quality.
The thesis is structured in the following way: Firstly, in Chapter 2,
a broad review on existing literature is given. Here, different appli-
cations of crew scheduling are considered (with a focus on ship crew
scheduling) and an overview of methodology commonly used for the
problem is presented. Furthermore, there is an introduction to the
concept of metaheuristics as well as the GRASP algorithm in par-
ticular. Chapter 3 describes the problem considered in this thesis:
Instance attributes, the solution format, hard and soft rules as well
as the objectives of the problem are given. Thereafter, Chapter 4
shows the problem as a mathematical formulation in order to provide
further clarification and to propose a MIP (Mixed Integer Program-
ming) model which can be useful for further studies of the problem
or for solution validation purposes. In Chapter 5, Qampo’s greedy
heuristic (which will be denoted as Baseline Greedy) is described in
detail, both verbally and in the format of a pseudocode. This enables
a thorough comparison between this procedure and the GRASP al-
gorithm designed in the present thesis in the following Chapter 6.
Furthermore, in that chapter, a pseudocode for the generic GRASP
algorithm is given, and the specific modifications made to it in this
thesis are described in detail, including the parameter reactivity. As
mentioned before, a wide variety of computational experiments has
been performed in order to be able to compare the algorithms re-
garding their behavior and the quality of the solutions provided by
them. The results of these experiments are presented in Chapter 7.
Finally, Chapter 8 gives a conclusion on the work presented in the
thesis as well as possible future improvements.
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
In this chapter, an overview of the literature relating to ship crew
scheduling and the method used in this project will be given. At
first, we will study the concept of crew scheduling in general in
Section 2.1. Different applications of crew scheduling (with a focus
on ship crew scheduling) as well as the methodology commonly used
for it will be reviewed. Furthermore, besides considering the context
of crew scheduling, there will be a section about the general concept
of metaheuristics (see Section 2.2), with a focus on the GRASP
algorithm, which will be used in this project.
2.1
Crew scheduling
In its general form, according to [MBRB99], the crew scheduling
problem aims at scheduling crew members to cover a sequence of
tasks (duties), while satisfying a given set of constraints and min-
imizing/maximizing a given objective. The objective and the con-
straints can differ considerably between different applications. Usu-
ally, in the context of crew scheduling, the duties are related to
transportation, in a sense that the tasks are performed at various
locations in a transportation network. Furthermore, the crew mem-
bers are normally considered as being located at a depot, from where
they start their sequence of tasks and to which they have to return
afterwards.
As pointed out in [LSAvdM18], crew scheduling problems usually in-
volve a large number of (binary) decision variables as well as many
==PAGE:17==
6
Literature Review
complex constraints necessary for describing the problem.
This
makes them very hard to solve (usually NP-hard), and it is of-
ten challenging to find even a feasible solution. Due to this char-
acteristic, it is crucial to study the problem in detail and explore
advanced solution methods in order to be able to find optimal or
close-to-optimal crew schedules.
2.1.1
Applications
The topic of crew scheduling is widely spread over various parts of
the transportation industry, such as the shipping, aviation, railway
and bus sectors. Furthermore, it is closely related to the general
workforce scheduling problem, which is used even more widely, e.g.
in production or service companies. A broad overview of different
applications of personnel scheduling is given in [VdBBDB+13], which
also contains a multitude of references to literature on this topic.
Since ship crew scheduling is the topic of this project, we will focus
on this application. However, it has to be stated that in the liter-
ature, by far the most studied application is airline crew schedul-
ing. Therefore, this subject will also be considered in some detail,
since the corresponding literature provides many insights that can
be transferred to ship crew scheduling, since all crew scheduling
segments are, to some degree, related to each other. Furthermore,
we will give a brief overview on railway, bus and general workforce
scheduling in the following.
2.1.1.1
Ship crew scheduling
In [LSAvdM18], some of the key differences between ship crew schedul-
ing and other applications of crew scheduling are discussed: Firstly,
the planning horizon is usually significantly longer in the shipping
industry, amounting to several months (since the onboard times of
crew members often last several weeks), and the planning is nor-
mally done months before the period starts (in order to be able to
==PAGE:18==
2.1 Crew scheduling
7
organize transportation of crew members to ports). In contrast to
that, planning in the aviation sector is normally done on a monthly
basis, and in the bus sector even on a daily or weekly basis. Fur-
thermore, the ports where crew members board ships often lie far
from their home, which is why the transportation to and from these
ports has to be considered additionally to the actual onboard du-
ties. A third point is that experience and skill requirements play a
more important role in the shipping sector than in the others, since
there is a considerable number of different tasks on a vessel, which
all require different skills and experience levels.
A paper which considers a similar problem to the one that will be
studied in this project is [SRG18]. Here, the liner shipping crew
scheduling problem is studied. Liner shipping, in contrast to tramp
shipping, follows fixed routes and schedules. In most liner shipping
companies, the crew planning is still performed manually, which
makes it a very time-consuming task that often yields solutions far
from the optimum. One of the reasons why ship crew scheduling
has, so far, not received much attention is that crew costs in liner
shipping are a minor cost in comparison to fuel, vessel and terminal
handling costs. However, the demand for officers is expected to grow,
which could lead to under-coverage, increased wages and reduced
availability, and which renders improved ship crew planning crucial.
The problem considered in [SRG18], which is formulated as a MIP
(Mixed Integer Programming) model, is based on the general crew
scheduling problem described above, with the following specifics:
The target of the problem is to generate a set of crew rosters for
each vessel, where a crew roster is defined as a sequence of duties.
In generating this schedule, it aims at minimizing transportation
cost (= airfare costs + non-airfare costs such as hotel, ground travel
costs etc.) from the home airport of the respective crew member
to the port where he boards a vessel, and from the port where he
disembarks back to his home.
Furthermore, an extension is pre-
sented which adds the total salary cost to the objective and thereby
minimizes the number of crew members planned. The constraints
are composed of safe sailing regulations (e.g. experience, manning
and handover requirements per rank and vessel) and labor laws (e.g.
==PAGE:19==
8
Literature Review
prescribed resting periods which have an influence on the temporal
availability of crew members), and model the boarding and dispatch-
ing as well as the onboard and off-board duration of crew members.
Boarding and dispatching can only happen when the vessel visits
a port – these port calls are modeled as discrete time points. On
each vessel, during the whole planning period, each rank (or crew
role) has to be covered by as many crew members as specified in
the manning requirements. A duty of a crew member consists of
boarding a vessel, then spending an onboard period on the vessel
(i.e. covering a rank for a certain amount of time), then dispatching
from the vessel and spending a resting period whose length depends
on the length of the preceding onboard period.
A similar problem is considered in [MC21]. However, the (very sim-
ple) MIP model presented in this paper has a different objective
function: The aim is to minimize the sum of penalty values, which
are defined for each combination of crew members assigned to each
vessel, and are based on several soft rules. This objective is more
similar to the one considered in this thesis, since the problem given
here is also based on soft rule violation penalties rather than trans-
port costs.
Apart from liner shipping, ship crew scheduling has also been stud-
ied in the context of offshore supply vessels, in [LSAvdM18]. This
type of vessel is used for providing supply services to offshore fa-
cilities such as wind farms or offshore oil rigs, for example by de-
livering equipment or performing maintenance work. In the basic
MIP model proposed in this paper, the objective is to minimize the
sum of the total cost of assigning crew members to tasks (based on
several penalties) and the cost for fixed crew salaries. Furthermore,
it proposes a so-called “recovery-type” formulation, which takes an
existing schedule as well as some new information on vessel require-
ments or crew availability as an input and tries to adapt the sched-
ule to this new information while minimizing the cost of the changes
made to the schedule.
Another sector of the shipping industry that can be considered with
respect to crew scheduling is the cruise industry, which is discussed
==PAGE:20==
2.1 Crew scheduling
9
in [GDMP13]. A characteristic of the cruise sector is that there is
usually a large number of crew members onboard every ship (around
1500) and they are working in many different job classifications (of-
ten over 100). Within these job classifications, crew members are
assumed to be a homogeneous group regarding their experience and
skills. For solving the crew scheduling problem for cruise vessels,
the paper proposes a two-stage decision strategy which first deter-
mines how many crew members are needed, and then creates an
optimal crew schedule. Each of these stages is formulated as a sep-
arate MIP model, and the problem is solved separately for each job
classification, since they are independent from each other.
In [LW09], crew scheduling for military vessels is studied. Here, a
MIP model is presented which combines the scheduling of tasks and
the assignment of specific crew members to these tasks. The ap-
proach is based on a resource constrained project scheduling model.
For efficiently solving the problem, a hybrid decomposition approach
is used, which will be described in Section 2.1.2, were we will discuss
solution methods.
Finally, [Riz22] and [RH18] also study ship crew scheduling, but
with a different focus: Instead of considering the assignment of crew
members to ships, the tasks performed onboard a ship are scheduled,
i.e. the shifts of crew members during their journey on the ship on
an hourly basis, while taking resting hour regulations into account.
Such as in the other papers mentioned before, a MIP model is pre-
sented, and [Riz22] additionally gives techniques for improving the
solving performance, such as pre-processing and parameter tuning.
2.1.1.2
Airline crew scheduling
Airline crew scheduling is the most studied application of crew
scheduling, which is mainly because of the high potential for cost
savings and ticket price reductions in this sector. In fact, crew costs
are a substantial part (the second largest after fuel costs) of the total
costs in the airline industry, since the crew salaries tend to be much
==PAGE:21==
10
Literature Review
higher than in other transportation sectors ([KSS17] and [BCJ+03]).
Furthermore, airline crew scheduling poses considerable challenges
with regard to manual planning, since the individual fragments of
the schedule are often much shorter than those in other applications,
which leads to many different possible combinations.
In [KSS17] and [BCJ+03], the airline crew scheduling problem and
solution methods for it are extensively studied. One of the differ-
ences between airline and ship crew scheduling is that, in the context
of airlines, each crew member is associated to a so-called base (usu-
ally a large airport), at which every sequence of tasks that this crew
member covers starts and ends. Such a sequence is also called a
pairing: It consists of duties (i.e. consecutive sequences of nonstop
flight segments (air legs) or relocations (deadheads)) and layovers
(i.e. resting periods between duties). A pairing is usually seen as
anonymous – it is defined without tailoring it to a specific crew
member. Finally, a schedule is a sequence of pairings and time off
in-between pairings, which covers a given planning period (usually
one month).
On the whole, the planning procedure of airlines normally follows
four steps: First of all, the flights themselves are scheduled, with
the objective of maximizing the expected profit. After this, the fleet
assignment follows, where specific aircraft types are assigned to the
flights and, as a next step, individual aircraft are assigned to them,
while ensuring time for maintenance. Only in the last phase, the
crew schedules are generated, covering all positions on all air legs
and satisfying the given constraints. The crew scheduling is often
performed separately by crew category and aircraft type, since they
are, in many cases, independent from each other.
The process of crew scheduling itself normally consists of the fol-
lowing steps in the context of airline planning: In the crew pairing
step, a set of feasible pairings is found such that all scheduled air
legs are covered exactly once, all the constraints are satisfied and
the cost is minimized. As already mentioned, these crew pairings
are anonymous. Then, in the crew assignment step, complete sched-
ules over the whole planning period are constructed and assigned to
==PAGE:22==
2.1 Crew scheduling
11
individual crew members. The crew assignment can be done in two
different ways: Either the schedules are constructed anonymously
and then announced to the crew members, who can place bids on
them, based on which the schedules are assigned. Or, as another
option, personalized schedules are created based on the preferences,
needs and pre-assigned activities such as training sessions of the
crew members, trying to maximize the crew satisfaction.
There are two different ways of approaching the crew scheduling:
Either it is done in a sequential way (i.e. first finding crew pairings
and then assigning the crew) or in an integrated way (i.e. solving
the crew pairing and assignment problems simultaneously). From a
theoretical point of view, the latter approach should be preferred,
since the first approach does not guarantee a globally optimal solu-
tion even if the two steps are solved in an exact way. However, the
size and complexity of the problem grows significantly when follow-
ing the integrated approach, which makes it more difficult to find
close-to-optimal solutions.
A separate aspect in airline planning is the airline recovery proce-
dure.
Due to unplanned events, there can be disruptions, which
occur frequently in practice: In this case, the previously created
flight and crew plans have to be adapted to the imposed changes.
The crew recovery problem is studied, for instance, in [SZ05].
In [DD18], a broad overview of further literature on the airline crew
scheduling problem is given.
2.1.1.3
Railway crew scheduling
The crew scheduling problem for the freight railway industry, as
described in [Jü12], is very similar to the airline crew scheduling
problem: Also here, each crew member belongs to a certain base (or
home depot), and the duties are defined in a similar way: They are
a sequence of so-called trips (i.e. direct travels of the freight train on
which the crew member is working), deadheads (i.e. crew member
relocations), walking between locations in a station, breaks etc.
==PAGE:23==
12
Literature Review
The crew is scheduled after the timetable has been constructed and
the vehicles assigned. In the crew scheduling step, in some com-
panies first gross duties are generated, which are based on approx-
imate information, such as average walking times between tracks.
After that, the duties are refined by including more precise regional
information. Then, in a separate step called crew rostering, the du-
ties are clustered into rosters which are assigned to individual crew
members.
Similarly to other industry sectors, the crew schedules are usually
created several weeks before their execution, in order to allow for
various practical matters such as the approval of the schedules by
authorities. The planning period itself normally lasts for one week,
i.e. shorter than both for ship and airline crew scheduling, and there
is usually at most one duty per day and crew member. In perform-
ing the railway crew scheduling, the target is to cover all trips by
a set of feasible duties with minimum cost, while not exceeding the
maximum number of crew members per home depot and respecting
a number of constraints. Typical constraints are maximum work-
ing/driving times, minimum break time regulations and necessary
hotel stays. Another requirement for rail crew scheduling is that
duties should be robust with respect to delays, in order not to prop-
agate them between consecutive trips.
In [BGG+07], the rail crew scheduling problem for passenger trains
is considered, which is very similar to the one for freight trains, while
[VA15] proposes a model for general rail crew scheduling.
2.1.1.4
Bus crew scheduling
The crew scheduling in the bus industry, as for example described
in [Xie15], is, again, very similar to the airline and the rail crew
scheduling, except for the specific rules and regulations given in the
sector, which have an influence on the constraints. Generally, in the
context of the bus industry, there are two different types of crew ros-
tering: On the one hand, there is an option called cyclic rostering,
==PAGE:24==
2.1 Crew scheduling
13
where as many sequences of duties (spanning one week) are defined
as there are bus drivers of the qualification class considered. Now,
the schedule for each of these crew members starts with another
duty sequence in this list, and the sequences are rotated among the
crew members over the following weeks.
Hence, in each week of
the planning period (which lasts as many weeks as there are crew
members in the group), all the different duty sequences are covered,
and there is fairness among the crew members, since every one cov-
ers every sequence in one of the weeks. However, this approach is
usually not flexible enough for practical application, since it can-
not easily respond to absences, changes in traffic or crew members
being added to a group.
Therefore, the other option, non-cyclic
rostering, is preferred in most of the cases. Here, one individual
roster per crew member is created which spans the whole planning
period, analogously to how it has been described for airline crew
scheduling.
However, also when performing non-cyclic rostering,
the fairness among drivers is an important objective, additionally
to minimizing the number of unassigned duties and the amount of
overtime, as well as respecting preferences of drivers.
While, as in the other applications studied before, the assignment
of vehicles to the timetable of trips is usually performed before as-
signing the crew (sequential approach), also the integrated approach
has been studied in the literature, e.g. in [SS23] and [PLL20], the
latter giving a broad overview on existing literature on the topic,
and both focusing on electric busses. When using the integrated ap-
proach, the vehicle and crew scheduling are performed in one single
step (using an all-embracing model).
2.1.1.5
Other crew scheduling applications and workforce scheduling
As already mentioned, the crew scheduling problem has many simi-
larities to workforce scheduling (e.g. in production or service compa-
nies). [DBVDBBD15] gives an overview of literature regarding the
workforce planning incorporating skills, which are, likewise, usually
an important constraint in the crew scheduling.
==PAGE:25==
14
Literature Review
In [LSZ23], the pickup-and-delivery problem with time windows is
studied, which is usually considered as a pure vehicle routing prob-
lem. However, in this paper, the vehicle routing is combined with
crew scheduling, i.e. the assignment of drivers to the pickup-and-
delivery vehicles.
The problem of home services is studied in [NOBGN16]. Here, a
set of customers has to be visited at their home locations, and for
each of them, a set of services has to be performed by a specialized
worker, respecting the schedule of the customers.
This problem
is considered as a combination between a timetabling and a crew
scheduling problem.
2.1.2
Methods
After having studied the different applications of crew scheduling
from a managerial point of view, we will now review the (math-
ematical and algorithmic) methodology used for solving the crew
scheduling problem. The most frequently used models in the con-
text of crew scheduling are set covering (SCP) and set partitioning
problems (SPP), which are supplemented by additional constraints
dependent on the specific application. Since these models are usu-
ally large-scale MIP models (with a large number of variables and
constraints) which are very hard to solve, they require advanced
solution methods, such as branch-and-price or metaheuristics. In
the following, various approaches used in the literature will be re-
viewed. The papers cited here are treating different applications of
crew scheduling (most of them airline crew scheduling, since there is
the most literature about this sector), but they are all relevant for
crew scheduling in general, and therefore also ship crew scheduling,
due to the similarities already pointed out in the previous sections.
==PAGE:26==
2.1 Crew scheduling
15
2.1.2.1
Column generation
In [SRG18], first a compact MIP model for the ship crew scheduling
problem is presented, which is then reformulated to a set covering
model. This leads to a reduction in the solution space, since the lat-
ter formulation models whole duties (i.e. boarding, onboard period,
dispatching and rest period of a crew member) instead of considering
all activities separately. To solve this model, a column generation
heuristic is applied: Firstly, an initial solution is computed using
a greedy heuristic. Then, the restricted master problem (RMP) is
defined as a relaxed version of the set covering model, which initially
only contains the duties from the initial solution. The subproblem
(SP) gradually selects feasible duties to insert them into the RMP
based on their reduced cost. When no duties with negative reduced
cost can be found anymore, then the current RMP is solved as a
MIP model.
A similar model for the personalized pilot assignment problem in
the airline sector is proposed by [KSS17]: The problem is formulated
as a set covering model with the objective of minimizing the crew
cost, maximizing the number of covered air legs and maximizing
the number of fulfilled air leg and vacation preferences of the crew
members. Furthermore, it is ensured by the constraints that each
pairing is covered exactly once, that each crew member is assigned
at least one schedule, and that a minimum number of constraints
is satisfied. The model is solved by a branch-and-price approach,
i.e. column generation embedded in a branch-and-bound scheme.
As above, the RMP is defined as the relaxation of the MIP model.
However, in this case, there is one subproblem per crew member,
which is defined on a directed acyclic space-time network on which
the possible pairings and the preferences are marked. The target is
to find schedules with negative reduced costs, which is achieved by
applying a multi-label shortest path algorithm on the constructed
network.
Similar approaches as in [KSS17] are used in several other papers:
[AN13] applies a column generation approach on a space-time net-
==PAGE:27==
16
Literature Review
work, [PM20] models the subproblem in the column generation as
a resource constrained shortest path problem, and [BGG+07] uses
a column generation approach combining resource constraints, k-
shortest path enumeration and label merging techniques.
Furthermore, there are several papers using multi-commodity flow
networks as a basis for their model, such as, for instance, [SZ05],
which models the workforce scheduling problem in this way and
solves it using an exact branch-and-price procedure.
In [Jü12], a divide-and-price algorithm for railway crew scheduling is
proposed: In a first step, the set of trips is decomposed into regional
subsets (where one trip can be assigned to multiple regions, but
has only one primary region). Then, alternately, one column gen-
eration step is performed on all the separate regions, and a pricing
update phase is executed where communication between the regions
is established and trips can be switched to another primary region.
2.1.2.2
Metaheuristics
Apart from column generation techniques, another approach that is
quite common for crew scheduling applications is to employ meta-
heuristics (for a definition, see Section 2.2).
The GRASP (Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Procedure) al-
gorithm, which will be used in this thesis, has previously been ap-
plied in [NOBGN16], for solving a multi-activity combined time-
tabling and crew scheduling problem. Furthermore, [LSZ23] uses
GRASP for the crew scheduling part of the pickup-and-delivery
problem with time windows, and includes a perturbation procedure
which allows to reuse already found feasible solutions.
In [AFE+13], a review of different population-based metaheuris-
tics applied in the literature is given. Furthermore, a new parti-
cle swarm optimization algorithm which is hybridized with a local
search heuristic is presented in the paper.
==PAGE:28==
2.1 Crew scheduling
17
Another metaheuristic algorithm which has been applied for crew
scheduling in the literature is ALNS (Adaptive Large Neighborhood
Search): [SS23] uses a three-step version of the algorithm for solving
the integrated vehicle and crew scheduling problem in the bus sector.
2.1.2.3
Graph algorithms
A graph algorithm frequently used for crew scheduling is the Depth-
First Search (DFS) procedure.
In [ASEP18], an enhancement of
this algorithm is presented and applied to a space-time network
representing an airline crew scheduling problem.
In [HTK20], a graph coloring approach is applied: First, a so-called
conflict graph is constructed, in which vertices represent shifts, and
an edge between two vertices means that the two shifts are not
allowed to be performed by the same employee. Then, by using a
greedy heuristic, an initial graph coloring is found, where each color
corresponds to one worker. Since a graph coloring is defined in a way
that neighboring vertices cannot receive the same color, this results
in a feasible schedule. As a final step, a Tabu Search algorithm is
applied in order to improve the initial solution.
As mentioned before, many papers use a multi-commodity flow net-
work to model the crew scheduling problem. For instance, [Xie15]
constructs a network for bus crew scheduling, where each layer (i.e.
subset of nodes) represents one day, each node being a valid ac-
tivity on that day (e.g. shift (early, midday or late), standby time,
day off etc.), and the arcs represent all possible sequences between
them. On this network, a multi-commodity flow problem (where
each driver is a commodity) is then solved in order to find an opti-
mal schedule.
==PAGE:29==
18
Literature Review
2.1.2.4
Hybrid algorithms
Among the many hybrid approaches to crew scheduling, there are
several procedures which combine metaheuristics with exact meth-
ods: In [EHMÖ15] an LNS (Large Neighborhood Search) meta-
heuristic is presented which integrates a branch-and-bound proce-
dure for finding minimum-cost pairings covering a given air leg.
[Guo05] combines an exact method based on column generation with
a genetic algorithm, and applies it for finding recovery solutions for
the airline crew scheduling problem. [KS02] considers the generation
of pairings and their selection separately: For the generation step, it
uses depth first search, while the selection of pairings is performed
by solving a set covering formulation using a genetic algorithm.
Another approach is presented in [SDES12], which considers the in-
tegrated crew pairing and assignment problem in the airline sector:
Here, a combination of column generation and dynamic constraint
aggregation (DCA) is used. DCA aggregates groups of constraints
into clusters and only keeps one representative constraint per cluster.
This aggregation into clusters can change between column genera-
tion iterations, which makes it a dynamic method and guarantees
its exactness.
In [VA15], a space-time network is created where each node rep-
resents an event (e.g. departure/arrival, initial crew position and
availability) and is defined by location and time, and the arcs de-
note possible connections between these events (e.g. train rides, rest-
ing periods or crew supply). For solving the multi-commodity flow
problem arising with this network, two different methods are pro-
posed: a successive constraint generation procedure (where violated
constraints out of a large family of constraints are added to the
model in an iterative way instead of adding all of them from the
start), and a quadratic cost-perturbation approach (which pertur-
bates the costs of arcs in a systematic way in order to avoid adding
the above-mentioned family of constraints).
==PAGE:30==
2.2 Introduction to Metaheuristics
19
Furthermore, there are approaches combining the concept of Con-
straint Programming (CP) with metaheuristics: [LW09] uses CP
together with Tabu Search, while [CRCM08] combines it with Ant
Colony Optimization.
For the crew recovery problem, i.e. the re-scheduling necessary in
case of disruptions, [MS07] proposes a combination of depth first
search, column generation and shortest-path algorithms.
2.1.2.5
Further literature on solution methods
Extensive literature reviews presenting numerous solution methods
for the crew scheduling problem are, for example, given in [DD18],
[WSSY21] and [BCJ+03]. While all three of these papers mainly fo-
cus on airline crew scheduling, many of the presented methods can
be applied to crew scheduling in general with only minor adapta-
tions.
All the solution methods presented so far were based on determin-
istic models, which will be the focus of this thesis. For a study of
crew scheduling under uncertainty, we refer to [SJKN05], where a
stochastic model is presented which is based on the expected costs
of schedules.
2.2
Introduction to Metaheuristics
The method which will be used in this thesis for solving the ship
crew scheduling problem is the metaheuristic GRASP. Therefore,
the following sections are dedicated to giving an introduction to
both metaheuristics in general and the specific method of GRASP
as well as providing relevant literature concerning these subjects.
==PAGE:31==
20
Literature Review
2.2.1
General procedure of metaheuristics
Overall, as described in [BK14], the process of optimization can be
described as the search for the best (optimal) solution among all
feasible ones in the solution space.
In this context, it is impor-
tant to differentiate between a local and a global optimum: At a
local optimum, all solutions in the direct neighborhood of the cur-
rently considered solution are worse, whereas at a global optimum,
all other solutions in the whole solution space are worse. In order
to find a (local or, in the best case, global) optimum, frequently
applied means are heuristics, especially if the problem is large and
complex and can, therefore, not be solved in reasonable time using
exact methods (such as mathematical programming): A heuristic
is a method which tries to find good solutions within a reasonable
computation time, but cannot guarantee optimality. Heuristics can
generally be divided into two sub-classes: Constructive heuristics
consist of building a solution from scratch, often in a greedy way,
whereas local search heuristics explore the neighborhood of a solu-
tion by making (small) alterations to the currently considered solu-
tion based on an initially defined neighborhood function.
The step towards a neighboring solution can be made following two
different strategies (see [HS05, pp. 63f.]): Using a best improvement
approach, the whole neighborhood of a solution is explored and the
neighbor with the best cost among all is chosen as the next solu-
tion. In the first improvement approach, the first neighbor which
has a better cost than the current solution is chosen as the next
solution and the neighborhood of the current one is not explored
any further. By iteratively moving on to neighbors, the solution
space is gradually explored. A popular strategy in this context is
the hill climbing approach (see [BK14]), where neighbors are only
accepted as the new current solution if they have a better cost than
the previous one. In that way, the solution is gradually improved.
However, there is a risk of getting stuck at a local optimum (since
by definition, there are no better neighboring solutions around it)
instead of reaching the global optimum. Due to exactly this reason,
the concept of metaheuristics has been introduced: A metaheuris-
==PAGE:32==
2.2 Introduction to Metaheuristics
21
tic is a high-level strategy which guides other heuristics used as a
part of it towards exploring larger areas of the solution space. This
guidance can have two possible forms (or a combination of them):
An intensification strategy leads to exploring regions of the solu-
tion space where good solutions have previously been found more
thoroughly, while diversification means that the heuristic is guided
towards exploring new regions of the space which have not been
visited before.
As described in [SPKP21] and [CDD06], metaheuristics can gener-
ally be divided into two sub-classes: Trajectory-based metaheuristics
move through the solution space by iteratively updating a “search
point” which consists of a single solution. Examples for this class
are GRASP (Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Procedure), SA
(Simulated Annealing), Tabu Search, ILS (Iterated Local Search),
GLS (Guided Local Search), VNS (Variable Neighborhood Search)
and ALNS (Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search). In contrast to
that, population-based algorithms follow an approach where, in each
iteration, a set (or population) of solutions is considered, and the so-
lutions for the next step are generated based on interactions between
these solutions. For this sub-class of metaheuristics, typical exam-
ples are Evolutionary Algorithms, ACO (Ant Colony Optimization)
and PSO (Particle Swarm Optimization).
For a detailed study of both optimization techniques in general and
different advanced methods including metaheuristics, we refer to
[BK14]. Furthermore, [GP19] provides extensive descriptions of a
large set of different types of metaheuristics.
2.2.2
GRASP algorithm
The metaheuristic which will be applied in this thesis for solving the
ship crew scheduling problem is the GRASP algorithm, which stands
for Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Procedure. This algorithm
was first proposed in [FR89], where it was tailored to a computa-
tionally difficult set covering problem. As described in [RR19], the
==PAGE:33==
22
Literature Review
GRASP algorithm is a multi-start metaheuristic, which means that
it restarts from scratch multiple times, while saving the overall best
solution found so far. Each of these iterations consists of two steps:
First, in the construction phase, a feasible solution is generated us-
ing a randomized construction heuristic.
Then, a local search is
performed, starting from this initial solution, in order to obtain cost
improvements. For a more detailed description of the algorithm,
including a pseudocode, see Section 6.2.
Building on the basic version of GRASP, there are several possibili-
ties of more advanced extensions of the algorithm which are studied
in the literature. For example, in the so-called Reactive GRASP, the
parameter used for the randomization is adapted by the algorithm
itself, based on the success of its possible values. This extension
will be used in this thesis; for a more detailed description see Sec-
tion 6.3.1.1 and [RR19]. The latter also describes other variations of
GRASP, such as random plus greedy, sampled greedy construction,
cost perturbations, bias functions as well as different restart strate-
gies. Another advanced method which is presented there, as well as
in [RR14], is path-relinking, which is based on a pool of “elite” solu-
tions that guide the search in the solution space. For more extensive
information on GRASP, we refer to [RR16], which presents an in-
depth study both on the algorithm itself and on various extensions
of it.
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3
Problem Specification
In this chapter, the problem considered in this project is described
in detail, so as to lay the foundation for the following studies of
solution methods.
In general, the problem given by Qampo is a
liner shipping crew scheduling problem similar to the one discussed
in Section 2.1.1.1.
For a schematic visualization of the problem,
see Figure 1.1 in the Introduction. As described in the context of
airline crew scheduling in Section 2.1.1.2, the scheduling process in-
tegrates two aspects: Crew pairing denotes the sequencing of duties
(or tasks), while crew assignment is the process of assigning crew
members to the pairings. Differently from many ship crew schedul-
ing problems in the literature, in the problem considered at Qampo
and in this thesis, the transportation of crew members to and from
ports is not considered and, furthermore, it is assumed that a crew
member can board and disembark from a vessel at any time, i.e.
the port locations and arrival times are disregarded. The reason
for this choice is that due to the long planning horizon of usually
one year, the customer (a liner shipping company) does not know
the exact dates of the future port calls at the time when the crew
scheduling is done. Therefore, the replacement dates found by the
crew scheduling are seen as approximate recommendations, which
are slightly corrected in terms of the port call dates once those are
known.
In the following, after the description of the instance attributes, the
format of a solution of the problem will be presented, as well as
all the hard and soft rules which should be satisfied by a feasible
solution. Finally, the objectives of the problem will be introduced.
==PAGE:35==
24
Problem Specification
3.1
Problem instance
An instance of the version of the ship crew scheduling problem con-
sidered in this project consists of the following components:
• A list of crew members which are considered for the plan-
ning period. For each crew member, the following attributes
are specified:
name, rank, fleet, manning office, last vessel
he was/is assigned to, past/ongoing assignments (with speci-
fied due dates), fixed future assignments (with specified due
dates), salary, experience levels of different types, skills, cur-
rent status (onboard/on leave), first availability date, mini-
mum/maximum/hard maximum days in an assignment, and
minimum number of out-of-country days in a specific period.
• A list of vessels which are considered for the planning period.
For each vessel, the following attributes are specified: name,
fleet, sister group, vessel type (which determines the manning
requirements, i.e. how many crew members of each rank have to
be onboard a ship of this type), budget requirements (per rank
or rank group), skill requirements (per rank), and experience
requirements (per rank or rank group).
• A list of ranks which are considered for the planning period.
• A list of rank groups which are considered for the planning
period. A rank group is defined as a pair of two ranks, and
each rank in the instance belongs to exactly one rank group.
The following rank groups are usually considered: Master and
Chief Officer, Chief Engineer and Second Engineer.
• The start date of the planning period.
• The first possible date at which a change in assignments is
allowed to be made.
• The duration of the planning period.
• The penalties for violating the soft rules (see below).
==PAGE:36==
3.2 Solution
25
3.2
Solution
A solution to the problem specified in this chapter consists of a list
of assignments. An assignment itself is defined as an allocation of
a crew member to a vessel in a specific rank and from a certain
start date to an end date. An assignment can either be given as
an input or generated by the algorithm. Furthermore, it can either
be ongoing at the start of the planning period, or it can replace a
preceding assignment.
3.3
Rules to be satisfied
A feasible solution has to satisfy all the following hard rules and
preferably satisfies the soft rules. In the original problem considered
by Qampo, there are several more soft rules and one more hard rule.
However, in this project, we only consider a subset containing the
most important rules, in order not to exceed the scope of the thesis.
In this way, there is more capacity for developing advanced versions
of the algorithm and performing academic studies on it.
3.3.1
Hard rules
The following hard rules have to be fulfilled for all assignments that
are not part of the input.
• Skill requirements: For each assignment, all the mandatory
skill requirements given for the respective vessel and rank must
be covered by a skill of the crew member.
• Maximum duration and number of assignments: For
each crew member and each of the corresponding assignments,
the following rules have to be satisfied:
==PAGE:37==
26
Problem Specification
1. The number of days that each assignment of the crew mem-
ber takes within the planning period has to be at most as
large as the hard maximum days specified for the crew
member.
2. On each day, the crew member can have at most one as-
signment.
• Experience requirements: For each vessel, the following has
to hold: For each day and each experience type (years with
operator, years in rank, years on all type of tankers, years on
type of tanker), the total experience (number of days) of crew
members in assignments of the specified rank (or the two ranks
in the specified rank group) has to be at least as high as the
required days in the respective experience type.
• Sign-off: For each crew member who has been onboard a vessel
from the beginning of the planning period, the sign-off from the
first assignment must be on or after the earliest sign-off date
and before or on the hard latest sign-off date specified for his
onboard assignment.
• Minimum days per assignment: For each crew member,
consider all the corresponding assignments which lie fully within
the planning period. The duration of each of these assignments
must be at least as long as the minimum days per assignment
specified for the crew member.
• Availability: For each crew member and each of the corre-
sponding assignments, the assignment’s starting date must be
on or after the first date on which the crew member is avail-
able. This can be either the specified first availability date or
the first availability date after the previous assignment. The
latter is computed taking into account the following resting
days regulation:
minimum resting days = 5
6 · days in previous assignment
(3.1)
==PAGE:38==
3.3 Rules to be satisfied
27
3.3.2
Soft rules
• For each crew member that has been onboard from the begin-
ning of the planning period, the (soft) latest sign-off date of
his onboard assignment should not be exceeded. For each crew
member, his (soft) limit of maximum days in an assign-
ment should not be exceeded by any assignment that started
after the beginning of the planning period.
• Each vessel has budget requirements for each rank, i.e. the
maximum amount of total monthly salary of all crew members
of a certain rank working on the vessel at the same time. These
budget requirements should not be exceeded at any time.
• The total number of times a crew member is assigned to a vessel
belonging to a fleet that does not match the one specified for
the crew member should be kept as low as possible.
• The number of days a crew member spends in assignments
within the period specified in the out-of-country rule for
this crew member should be at least as large as the minimum
number of out-of-country days specified in the rule.
• For each vessel and at all times, there should be at least as
many crew members of the respective rank on the vessel as
the manning requirement of the corresponding vessel type
specifies. In other words, the total number of man days that are
missing should be kept as low as possible. (This is practically
a hard rule, which is enforced by a very high penalty.)
• The total number of days that crew members start an assign-
ment after their first availability date should be kept as low
as possible. The first availability date can be either the given
one for initially on-leave crew members or the day after the
minimum resting period computed based on the length of the
previous assignment (see equation 3.1).
==PAGE:39==
28
Problem Specification
3.4
Objectives
The problem considered in this thesis has a double-objective, i.e.
there are two separate objectives, where one dominates the other.
The first objective is to minimize the number of crew members that
are newly hired by the algorithm in cases where no replacement
could be found for an assignment. In the algorithm that has been
implemented in this project, this is considered as the main objective,
which dominates the second one described below. The reason for this
is that a newly hired crew member causes a permanent increase in
costs in the future (due to the additional wage).
The second objective of the problem consists of the soft rules de-
scribed above: For each of the soft rules, there is a penalty param-
eter, which is multiplied by the degree of violation of the respective
rule. This degree of violation can, for example, be the number of
days or crew members for which the violation occurs, and depends
on the definition of the rule. The sum of these penalty terms should
be minimized.
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 4
Mathematical formulation
In this section, a mathematical formulation for the version of the
ship crew scheduling problem considered in this project will be pre-
sented. It extends the initial MIP model which Qampo developed
when first approaching the problem (with a limited scope), and is
inspired by the compact MIP formulation proposed in [SRG18] for
a similar problem. Analogously to the approach in the paper, there
is only one MIP model for both the pairing of tasks and the assign-
ment of specific crew members to these tasks, which means that we
follow an integrated approach.
The model shown in this section is not fully linearized and con-
tains certain mathematical notations (such as implications) which
are normally not part of a MIP model. The reason for this is that
the model should mainly serve the purpose of specifying in a clear
mathematical way the nature of the problem, instead of being actu-
ally used as a way of computing a solution. Linearized constraints
(e.g. Big-M constraints) would make it more difficult to understand.
In this context, it has to be pointed out that the model has not
been implemented, since the extensive number of variables and con-
straints would make it impossible to solve even instances of medium
size (in a reasonable time), and also due to other aspects mentioned
in Section 4.4.3. Furthermore, the limited MIP model developed
by Qampo already has issues solving larger instances, from which
it can be concluded that an extension of it will not be applicable
in practice. However, a proposition for a linearization of any non-
linear constraints (i.e. resulting in a MIP model) can be found in
Appendix A. A possible usage of the model (in addition to explana-
tory purposes) is the validation of solutions provided by a heuristic
==PAGE:41==
30
Mathematical formulation
algorithm, by inserting it into the model and checking if all the con-
straints are fulfilled and if the objective gives the same value as the
one computed by the heuristic.
4.1
Sets
• c ∈C: crew members considered for the planning period
• t ∈T: days in the planning period
• r ∈R: ranks considered for the planning period
• v ∈V : vessels considered for the planning period
• g ∈G: rank groups considered for the planning period
• f ∈F: fleets
• s ∈S: sister groups
• b ∈B: budget requirements
• e ∈Et: experience requirements in place on day t
• i ∈I = {years with operator, years in rank, years on all vessel types,
years on current vessel type}: experience types
• p ∈P: vessel types
• c ∈Conboard: crew members that are onboard at the beginning
of the planning period
• c ∈Conleave: crew members that are on leave at the beginning
of the planning period
• c ∈Cavail
t
: crew members who are available on day t
• c ∈Callow
r,v
: crew members who are allowed to cover rank r on
vessel v (according to rank of c, manning requirements, skill
requirements and latest vessel of c)
==PAGE:42==
4.2 Parameters
31
• t ∈T overdue
c
: days which lie after the latest sign-off date and on
or before the hard latest sign-off date of the first assignment of
onboard crew member c
• t ∈T tooearlysignoff
c
: days which lie before the earliest sign-off
date of the first assignment of onboard crew member c
• t ∈T avail
c
: days on which crew member c is available
• t ∈T ooc
c
: days which lie within the out-of-country rule given
for crew member c
• r ∈Rbudreq
b
: ranks which are concerned by budget requirement
b
• r ∈Rexperreq
e
: ranks which are concerned by experience require-
ment e
• v ∈V allow
c,r
: vessels on which crew member c is allowed to cover
rank r (according to rank of c, manning requirements, skill
requirements and latest vessel of c)
• v ∈V fl
f : vessels which belong to fleet group f
• b ∈Bves
v : budget requirements which should be satisfied on
vessel v
• e ∈Etypves
v,i,t
: experience requirements of experience type i that
should be satisfied on vessel v on day t
4.2
Parameters
4.2.1
Global parameters
• tfirst: first day of planning period (assumed to be the same as
the first possible change date for simplicity)
• tlast: last day of planning period
• τ: number of days in planning period
==PAGE:43==
32
Mathematical formulation
• rest = 5
6: ratio of duration of resting period with respect to
duration of previous assignment
• reqbudb: amount of budget specified in budget requirement b
• reqexpere: number of days of experience specified in experience
requirement e
• manreqr,p: manning requirement for rank r on vessels of type p
(i.e. how many crew members of rank r are required on a vessel
of type p)
• vestypv: vessel type of vessel v
4.2.2
Parameters specific to each crew member
• salc,r: monthly salary of crew member c if he covers rank r
• flc: fleet group to which crew member c is assigned
• rankc: rank of crew member c
• experc,i: days of experience of experience type i that crew mem-
ber c holds
• tfirstav
c
: first availability date of on-leave crew member c
• dmin
c
: hard limit of minimum number of days that an onboard
period of a crew member c can take
• dmax
c
: maximum number of days that an onboard period of a
crew member c should take
• dmaxhard
c
: hard limit of maximum number of days that an on-
board period of a crew member c can take
• initdurc: number of days that crew member c has already spent
onboard a vessel on the first day of the planning period
• oocc:
Minimum out-of-country days specified in the out-of-
country rule for crew member c
• fixc,t,r,v: binary parameter indicating if crew member c has a
fixed past or future assignment which requires that he is on-
board vessel v in rank r on day t
==PAGE:44==
4.3 Decision variables
33
4.2.3
Penalty parameters
• penoverdue: penalty for each overdue day of any crew member
(i.e. a day a crew member has been working after the soft limit
of maximum days in an assignment has passed)
• penbudget: penalty for each budget requirement violation (counted
as days, separately for each vessel)
• pennewfleet: penalty for each time a crew member is assigned to
a vessel belonging to a fleet which is not the same as the one
specified for the crew member
• penooc: penalty for each violated out-of-country rule
• penunmanned: penalty for each man day by which the actual
manning lies below the manning requirement
• penavail: penalty for each day that a crew member starts an
assignment after the first date he would be available (either his
given first availability date or the first availability date after
his previous assignment)
4.3
Decision variables
• xc,t,r,v: binary variable indicating if crew member c covers rank
r on vessel v on day t
• yc,t,r,v: binary variable indicating if crew member c starts cov-
ering rank r on vessel v on day t
• zc,t,r,v: binary variable indicating if crew member c stops cov-
ering rank r on vessel v on day t
• ht,r,v: non-negative integer variable for the difference by which
the actual number of crew members falls below the manning
requirement for rank r on vessel v on day t
• ut,b: binary variable indicating if budget variable b is violated
on day t
==PAGE:45==
34
Mathematical formulation
• oc: binary variable indicating if out-of-country rule is violated
for crew member c
• qc,t: integer variable for the number of resting days that crew
member c deserves from day t onwards
• nc,t: binary variable indicating if variable qt,c is negative on
day t (i.e. if crew member c would already be allowed to start
working again on day t, after his deserved resting period)
• lc,t: non-negative integer variable for the number of days up
to day t that crew member c works in the assignment that is
running on day t
• lZ
c,t: non-negative integer variable for the number of days crew
member c works in the assignment that ends on day t
• ac,t: non-negative integer variable for the number of days by
which lZ
c,t exceeds the (soft) maximum duration of an assign-
ment of crew member c on day t
4.4
MIP model
4.4.1
Objective
As described in Section 3.4, the problem considered in this thesis has
two objectives: minimizing the number of newly hired crew members
and minimizing the soft rule violations represented by six penalty
terms. In this MIP model, only the second objective is considered
(see below), due to reasons described in Section 4.4.3.
min
penoverdue · (
X
c∈Conboard
X
t∈T overdue
c
xc,t,rankc,latvesc+
(4.1)
+
X
c∈Conboard
X
t∈T avail
c
\T overdue
c
ac,t +
X
c∈Conleave
X
t∈T avail
c
ac,t)+
(4.2)
==PAGE:46==
4.4 MIP model
35
+ penbudget ·
X
t∈T
X
b∈B
ut,b+
(4.3)
+ pennewfleet ·
X
c∈C
X
t∈T avail
c
X
r∈R
X
f∈F\{flc}
X
v∈V allow
c,r
∩V fl
f
yc,t,r,v+
(4.4)
+ penooc ·
X
c∈C
oc+
(4.5)
+ penunmanned ·
X
t∈T
X
r∈R
X
v∈V
ht,r,v+
(4.6)
+ penavail ·
X
c∈C
X
t∈T avail
c
X
r∈R
X
v∈V allow
c,r
nc,t
(4.7)
4.4.2
Constraints
4.4.2.1
Boarding, onboard days and departure
• Each crew member can cover at most one rank on one vessel
each day.
X
r∈R
X
v∈V allow
c,r
xc,t,r,v ≤1
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
(4.8)
• Each crew member that has been onboard from the beginning
of the planning period has to stay onboard until the earliest
sign-off date of his first assignment.
xc,t,rankc,latvesc = 1
∀c ∈Conboard, t ∈T tooearlysignoff
c
(4.9)
• The fixed past and future assignments must be part of the final
solution.
xc,t,r,v ≥fixc,t,r,v
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
, r ∈R, v ∈V allow
c,r
(4.10)
==PAGE:47==
36
Mathematical formulation
• If a crew member is on leave in the beginning of the planning
period, then he covers a rank on a vessel on his first available
date if and only if he boards that vessel on that day in that
rank.
xc,tfirstav
c
,r,v = yc,tfirstav
c
,r,v
∀c ∈Conleave, r ∈R, v ∈V allow
c,r
(4.11)
• If a crew member is onboard in the beginning of the planning
period, then he covers a new rank on a vessel or a rank on a
new vessel at the start date of the planning period if and only
if he boards that vessel on that day in that rank.
xc,tfirst,r,v = yc,tfirst,r,v
∀r ∈R, v ∈V,
c ∈{c1 ∈Conboard ∩Callow
r,v
: (rankc1 ̸= r ∨latvesc1 ̸= v)}
(4.12)
• If a crew member was not working in a certain assignment on
the previous day, but is working in it on the current day, then
he must have started the assignment on the current day.
xc,t,r,v = 1 ∧xc,t−1,r,v = 0 =⇒yc,t,r,v = 1
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
\ {tfirstav
c
}, r ∈R, v ∈V allow
c,r
(4.13)
• If a crew member is working in a certain assignment on the
current day, but is not working in it anymore on the next day,
then he must have ended the assignment on the current day.
xc,t,r,v = 1 ∧xc,t+1,r,v = 0 =⇒zc,t,r,v = 1
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
\ {tlast}, r ∈R, v ∈V allow
c,r
(4.14)
4.4.2.2
Assignment duration
• The number of days an onboard crew member has been work-
ing in his current assignment at the start date of the planning
==PAGE:48==
4.4 MIP model
37
period is at least as high as the specified number of days that
he has been working until the beginning of the planning period.
lc,1 ≥initdurc
∀c ∈Conboard
(4.15)
• The number of days that a crew member has already been
working in an assignment increases by 1 every day that he stays
in this assignment.
X
v∈V allow
c,r
X
r∈R
zc,t−1,r,v = 0 =⇒lc,t ≥lc,t−1 +
X
v∈V allow
c,r
X
r∈R
xc,t,r,v
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
\ {tfirstav
c
}
(4.16)
• The total duration of an assignment of a crew member which
ends on a certain day has to be at least as long as the time that
the crew member has been working in this assignment so far.
X
v∈V allow
c,r
X
r∈R
zc,t,r,v = 1 =⇒lZ
c,t ≥lc,t
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
(4.17)
• Each assignment of a crew member has to be at most as long as
the hard maximum onboard period duration specified for this
crew member.
lZ
c,t ≤dmaxhard
c
·
X
v∈V allow
c,r
X
r∈R
zc,t,r,v
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
(4.18)
• Each assignment of a crew member has to be at least as long as
the minimum onboard period duration specified for this crew
member.
lZ
c,t ≥dmin
c
·
X
v∈V allow
c,r
X
r∈R
zc,t,r,v
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
(4.19)
==PAGE:49==
38
Mathematical formulation
• Definition of auxiliary variable ac,t (i.e. the number of days by
which lZ
c,t exceeds the (soft) maximum duration of an assign-
ment of crew member c on day t).
dmax
c
−lZ
c,t + ac,t ≥0
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
(4.20)
4.4.2.3
Resting time
• Definition of auxiliary variable nc,t (indicating if crew member
c would already be allowed to start working again on day t,
after his deserved resting period).
qc,t > 0 ⇐⇒nc,t = 0
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
(4.21)
• Each on-leave crew member deserves zero resting days on his
first available date.
qc,tfirstav
c
= 0
∀c ∈Conleave
(4.22)
• If an assignment of a crew member ends at a certain day, then
the number of resting days that the crew member deserves from
that day onwards is the given resting period ratio of the dura-
tion of this assignment.
qc,t ≥rest · lZ
c,t
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
(4.23)
• On each day where a crew member is not working on any ship,
the number of deserved resting days decreases by one.
X
v∈V allow
c,r
X
r∈R
xc,t,r,v = 0 =⇒qc,t ≥qc,t−1 −1
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
\ {tfirstav
c
}
(4.24)
• A crew member is not allowed to work while he still deserves
resting days.
==PAGE:50==
4.4 MIP model
39
qc,t > 0 =⇒
X
v∈V allow
c,r
X
r∈R
xc,t,r,v = 0
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
(4.25)
4.4.2.4
Experience requirements
• On each day, all the experience requirements have to be satis-
fied for each vessel.
X
r∈Rexperreq
e
X
c∈Cavail
t
∩Callow
r,v
experc,i · xc,t,r,v ≥reqexpere
∀t ∈T, v ∈V, i ∈I, e ∈Itypves
v,i,t
(4.26)
4.4.2.5
Budget requirements
• On each day, all the budget requirements must be satisfied,
except in the case of violations (which are penalized in the
objective).
X
r∈Rbudreq
b
X
c∈Cavail
t
∩Callow
r,v
salc,r · xc,t,r,v ≤reqbudb ⇐⇒ut,b = 0
∀t ∈T, v ∈V, b ∈Bves
v
(4.27)
4.4.2.6
Out-of-country rules
• For each crew member, his out-of-country rule has to be sat-
isfied, except in the case of violations (which are penalized in
the objective).
X
t∈T ooc
c
X
r∈R
X
v∈V allow
c,r
xc,t,r,v ≤oocc ⇐⇒oc = 0
∀c ∈C (4.28)
==PAGE:51==
40
Mathematical formulation
4.4.2.7
Manning requirements
• Definition of auxiliary variable ht,r,v (i.e. difference by which
the actual number of crew members falls below the manning
requirement for rank r on vessel v on day t).
ht,r,v ≥manreqr,vestypv −
X
c∈Cavail
t
∩Callow
r,v
xc,t,r,v
∀t ∈T, r ∈R, v ∈V
(4.29)
4.4.2.8
Variable domains
xc,t,r,v ∈{0, 1}
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
, r ∈R, v ∈V allow
r,c
(4.30)
yc,t,r,v ∈{0, 1}
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
, r ∈R, v ∈V allow
r,c
(4.31)
zc,t,r,v ∈{0, 1}
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
, r ∈R, v ∈V allow
r,c
(4.32)
ht,r,v ∈Z+
0
∀t ∈T, r ∈R, v ∈V
(4.33)
ut,b ∈{0, 1}
∀t ∈T, b ∈B
(4.34)
oc ∈{0, 1}
∀c ∈C
(4.35)
qc,t ∈Z
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
(4.36)
==PAGE:52==
4.4 MIP model
41
nc,t ∈{0, 1}
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
(4.37)
lc,t ∈Z+
0
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
(4.38)
lZ
c,t ∈Z+
0
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
(4.39)
ac,t ∈Z+
0
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
(4.40)
4.4.3
Possible extensions
One of the functionalities that the MIP model presented above can-
not provide is the possibility of hiring new crew members in the case
of a lack of sufficiently many or sufficiently skilled/experienced crew
members. While it would theoretically be possible to introduce a set
of “virtual” crew members additionally to the set of existing ones,
it would not be possible to generate crew members tailored to the
specific needs during the optimization. To make this tailoring pos-
sible, it would be necessary to create an all-embracing set of crew
members with all different combinations of skills and experiences
beforehand and give this to the model, which would let it explode.
Otherwise, this could be solved by a post-processing step, but that
does not solve the issue that it is not clear how many of the virtual
crew members should be added in the beginning.
Another issue in relation to the new hires is that in the algorithm
developed in this project, the number of hires is considered as the
dominating objective, i.e. a solution is considered better than an-
other one if it has fewer hires, even if it has a higher cost. This
circumstance would be difficult to integrate into a MIP model. It
could, however, be solved by adding an extremely high penalty for
the number of hires.
==PAGE:53==
42
Mathematical formulation
There is also another feature that has not been included in the
model, because it would have required introducing a number of ad-
ditional variables that would have made it even more computation-
ally difficult to solve: In the full problem (which is solved by the
heuristics presented in the following chapters), the days of experi-
ence that the crew members possess in the various experience types
are time-dependent over the planning period, i.e. the crew members
accumulate experience by performing assignments during the plan-
ning period, which is then taken into account for checking if they
are eligible for later assignments.
An advantage of the model is that it can easily be generalized to
allow for a more holistic version of the problem, which takes into
consideration the geographical locations of the vessels. In fact, as
mentioned before, the problem currently considered by Qampo as-
sumes that crew members can board and depart from vessels at any
point in time, regardless of whether the vessel is at a port at that
time or how far it is from the home location of the crew member. To
include these considerations into the model, an approach similar to
the one used in [SRG18] could be applied: Instead of including every
single day within the planning period into the set T, a set of days
Tv for each vessel v would be created, which only contains the days
where v calls at a port. If these sets are used instead of the currently
used set T, then a boarding of or departure from vessels is only made
possible on these port call days. Furthermore, an additional penalty
term could be included into the objective function, which penalizes
the costs that arise from the relocation (e.g. by airplane) of the crew
members to/from the ports where they board/depart from a vessel.
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 5
Baseline Greedy Heuristic
Before presenting the algorithm which has been developed in this
project, we will first study the existing algorithm that Qampo cur-
rently uses, in order to be able to compare the algorithms in later
chapters. This algorithm uses a purely greedy approach, and will
serve as the benchmark when evaluating the performance of the
newly developed algorithm in Chapter 7. Therefore, it will, in the
following, be called Baseline Greedy. In this chapter, first a brief
overview of the origins of Baseline Greedy will be given, and after-
wards its procedure will be described in detail.
5.1
Background behind current algorithm
Before the company implemented the currently used greedy algo-
rithm, an ALNS algorithm had been used. This algorithm was try-
ing to find replacements for crew members exclusively in the context
of rank groups, i.e. replacements were found for pairs of crew mem-
bers who worked in ranks that belonged to the same rank group.
However, the issue with this approach was that it made the algo-
rithm inflexible in a sense that replacements for single crew members
were not possible.
The Baseline Greedy algorithm remedies these issues and is, there-
fore, more flexible: It still allows for considering the ranks in rank
groups in certain contexts (since there can be budget or experience
requirements defined for pairs of ranks), but it also allows for con-
sidering them separately, especially when finding replacements for
==PAGE:55==
44
Baseline Greedy Heuristic
crew members. Furthermore, the current algorithm gives the pos-
sibility of recruiting new crew members to fill certain positions for
which there are no existing crew members available. However, the
disadvantage of this current algorithm is that it has a lower perfor-
mance in terms of solution quality, since it uses a relatively simple
greedy approach (see the description in the following section).
5.2
Procedure of Baseline Greedy
At first, the algorithm receives a given instance as specified in Chap-
ter 3. For this instance, it tries to replace the currently onboard crew
members (i.e. those involved in assignments that are ongoing at the
start of the planning period) by other existing crew members, and
thereby to generate future assignments for those. Here, the term
“replace” or “replacement” means that the current crew member dis-
embarks from a vessel and another one comes onboard to take over
his position. These replacements are found in the following way: In
the algorithm parameters given in the instance, the number N of
crew members to be replaced in each step is specified. Furthermore,
there is a list of all the currently onboard crew members, which are
sorted in an ascending order by the due date of their current assign-
ment (i.e. starting date of the assignment plus the maximum days in
an assignment of the respective crew member). Now the algorithm
takes the first crew member out of this list (i.e. the one that needs
the earliest replacement) and specifies that this crew member should
be replaced in the current step. Then it iterates through the sorted
list and for each crew member who has the same rank as the first
crew member but has last been on a different vessel than this crew
member and than any other already selected one, it specifies him
also as to be replaced in the current step. If it has found N such
crew members, then it terminates the loop, otherwise it just goes
through the whole sorted list and may not even find N such crew
members. After finishing this loop, we have a list of crew members
to be replaced in the current step, which all have the same rank.
Then, the algorithm finds all the currently available crew members
==PAGE:56==
5.2 Procedure of Baseline Greedy
45
which have this rank. The next step is then to find the best replace-
ments for all the selected crew members which should be replaced.
This is done by creating a weighted bipartite graph: The one set
of vertices represents the crew members to be replaced, and the
other represents the crew members that are eligible to replace them.
The edges represent feasible replacements, while the edge weights
indicate the saving that is obtained by choosing the respective re-
placement. The saving itself is calculated as the total cost (i.e. the
objective based on the penalized violations of soft rules) of the al-
ready planned assignments on the respective vessel minus the total
cost of the assignments on the vessel after the replacement has been
installed. Then the maximum weight bipartite matching is found,
i.e. the combination of replacements providing the highest savings.
Based on these selected replacements, the current instance and crew
are then updated. In the following, this procedure of selecting the N
next crew members to replace and then finding optimal replacements
for them is repeated until all the currently onboard crew members
have been considered.
It could, however, be that for some of the crew members to be re-
placed, no replacement could be found among the currently available
crew members. For these not yet replaced crew members, the algo-
rithm generates replacing assignments using new crew members who
still have to be hired. This is done by either finding and defining a
new recruitment or by upgrading an already generated recruitment.
These “virtual” recruited crew members are then used as replace-
ments for the remaining crew members lacking a replacement, and
the current instance and crew are, again, updated based on these
additional replacements.
Once the above steps are done, all the assignments that were ongoing
at the start of the planning period should have been replaced by a
future assignment (either involving an existing or a newly hired crew
member). Now, the algorithm modifies the instance: It considers
all the future assignments and finds out which of them has to be
replaced the earliest (based on their starting dates and the maximum
days in an assignment of the respective crew member).
Then it
changes the start of the whole planning period to the date which
==PAGE:57==
46
Baseline Greedy Heuristic
lies one week before this earliest necessary replacement. In this way,
we have new “past” assignments, and the involved crew members are
marked as onboard. This means that we are in a situation which
is the same as in the beginning of the procedure, and we can start
again from the point where we find replacements for the onboard
crew members.
This step-wise shifting of the planning period is
called a rolling-horizon approach in the literature.
The algorithm terminates when the shifted starting date of the plan-
ning period reaches a point where it lies after the ending date of the
planning period. In this case, the whole planning period has been
covered and the only future assignments which do not have a re-
placement would only need this replacement at least a week after
the end of the planning period, which is not part of the planning
horizon anymore.
In the end, the found solution is validated based on the hard rules,
and if it is valid, the algorithm has reached a final feasible solution.
5.3
Pseudocode for Baseline Greedy
In Algorithm 5.1, the above verbal description of the procedure of
Baseline Greedy is displayed in the format of a pseudocode, in order
to provide a clearer overview of its steps.
==PAGE:58==
5.3 Pseudocode for Baseline Greedy
47
Algorithm 5.1: BaselineGreedy
Input: Problem instance (crew members, vessels, parameters etc.),
parameter N specifying how many crew members to be
replaced per step
Output: Solution consisting of a list of assignments
1 while start date of planning period is not after end date do
2
R := {crew member c which has to be replaced the earliest} ∪{at
most N −1 crew members (currently all on distinct vessels) of
same rank r as c but currently on different vessel than c}
3
X := ∅
4
while R ̸= ∅do
5
A := {available crew members of rank r}
6
E := {(r, a, s) : r ∈R, a ∈A,
a can feasibly replace r with savings s}
7
G := weighted bipartite graph with vertex set R ∪A and edge
set E
8
Find maximum matching in G, which represents set of best
replacements
9
Update instance and crew based on selected replacements by
adding future assignments
10
X := X ∪{crew members that could not be feasibly replaced by
existing crew members}
11
R := {next N crew members to replace (found as above, but
without taking into account crew members that have already
been considered in previous iterations)}
12
for x ∈X do
13
Replace x by a newly hired crew member (either by updating
hired crew member already used elsewhere or by creating a new
crew member)
14
d := min {due dates of all future assignments} −(buffer of 1 week)
15
Set start of planning period to d
16
Transform future assignments ongoing at d to past assignments
17
Set crew members involved in an assignment at d as onboard, and
all others as on leave
18 S := {all past and future assignments which lie (partly) within the
original planning period}
19 return S
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
GRASP Algorithm
In this chapter, the metaheuristic algorithm designed and imple-
mented in this project will be presented. It is largely based on the
concept of GRASP, or, more precisely, reactive GRASP, but has
some additional integrated features which have been designed based
on the experiments conducted in the course of this project. In the
following, for simplicity, this algorithm will be called GRASP, while
the greedy heuristic from Qampo will be denoted as Baseline Greedy,
as already defined in the previous chapter.
6.1
Reasons for choosing GRASP
The GRASP algorithm has been chosen as the method for approach-
ing the ship crew scheduling problem, since the problem considered
in this project has a strongly sequential nature.
In other words,
solving this problem is based on sequentially finding replacements
for assignments, since they have to be tailored to the specific place-
ment (due to requirements on the vessels and availability of the crew
members). Therefore, it is not possible to, for example, shuffle as-
signments on vessels or between vessels, or to perform many other
common types of local search. But since the local search procedure
composes the center of many metaheuristic algorithms, an algorithm
had to be found which, on the one hand, performs many restarts in-
stead of one long local search procedure, and which, on the other
hand, has a strong focus on the greedy construction. And for these
two requirements, the GRASP algorithm poses the optimal choice,
==PAGE:60==
6.2 Procedure of generic GRASP
49
since its generic structure directly reflects these features, as can be
seen from Section 6.2.
6.2
Procedure of generic GRASP
As already described in Section 2.2.2, the basic concept of GRASP
is to, in every iteration, construct an initial solution using a greedy
construction algorithm with randomization elements, and afterwards
apply a local search method on this solution. The final solution is
then chosen as the best solution found in any GRASP iteration.
An overview of the procedure of the generic GRASP algorithm is
shown in Algorithms 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3. These pseudocodes are based
on those presented in [RR14].
Algorithm 6.1: GenericGRASP
Input: Problem instance (crew members, vessels, parameters etc.),
randomization parameter α
Output: Solution consisting of a list of assignments
1 S∗:= ∅
2 while termination criterion not satisfied do
3
S := GreedyRandomizedConstruction(α)
4
S := LocalSearch(S)
5
if f(S) < f(S∗) then
6
S∗:= S
7 return S∗
The greedy randomized construction algorithm uses a so-called can-
didate list (CL), which contains all elements that could possibly be
added to the solution in the next iteration of the construction. After
initializing this list, the procedure iterates over the following steps
until the CL is empty: In order to find the next element that should
be added to the solution, first a restricted candidate list (RCL) is
created. This is done by selecting those elements of the CL whose
incremental cost (i.e. the cost by which the total solution cost would
be increased by adding this element) lies in the lowest (α · 100) %
of the cost range of all elements in the CL. Then, an element of the
==PAGE:61==
50
GRASP Algorithm
RCL is selected at random and added to the solution. Finally, the
CL is updated based on the new solution, and the next iteration
starts if CL has not become empty by the update. In this way, a
complete solution is constructed in a way that is similar to a greedy
algorithm, with the difference that not always the best, but only one
of the best next elements is chosen.
Algorithm 6.2: GreedyRandomizedConstruction
Input: Randomization parameter α
Output: Solution consisting of a list of assignments
1 S := ∅
2 Initialize candidate list CL
3 while CL ̸= ∅do
4
cmin := min{c(a) : a ∈CL}
5
cmax := max{c(a) : a ∈CL}
6
RCL := {a ∈CL : c(a) ≤cmin + α(cmax −cmin)}
7
a∗:= random element of RCL
8
S := S ∪{a∗}
9
Update CL
10 return S
Algorithm 6.3: LocalSearch
Input: Initial solution S consisting of a list of assignments
Output: Solution consisting of a list of assignments
1 while termination criterion not satisfied do
2
Select S′ ∈N(S)
3
if f(S′) < f(S) then
4
S := S′
5 return S
The local search procedure, in its generic form, is based on the
following structure: It starts from a given initial solution S, which,
in the case of GRASP, is the output of the construction algorithm.
Then, in each iteration, until a specified termination criterion is
satisfied, a new solution S′ is selected out of the neighborhood N(S)
of the given solution. If this new solution S′ has a lower cost than the
current one (S), then S′ is used as the next current solution S. After
the procedure has terminated, the current solution is returned. The
==PAGE:62==
6.3 Modifications to generic GRASP
51
definition of the neighborhood N(S) and the strategy in selecting an
element from it strongly depends on the specific problem on which
the algorithm is applied, and the nature of its solution space.
6.3
Modifications to generic GRASP
The GRASP algorithm designed in this project generally follows the
basic structure presented in the previous section, but there are some
modifications which have been made in order to make the algorithm
suitable for the considered ship crew scheduling problem and to
make it more adaptive to different instances. Furthermore, some of
the steps shown in the above pseudocodes were written in a very
generic way, and need to be specified in detail as to how they were
implemented in the designed algorithm. Therefore, in this section,
these modifications and specifications will be presented, divided into
parts according to the three Algorithms 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3.
6.3.1
Main GRASP procedure
In the literature, the termination criterion in line 2 of Algorithm 6.1
is often chosen as a specific number of iterations performed. How-
ever, in this project, a maximum total computation time has been
decided upon as the main termination criterion.
The reason for
this is that a metaheurisic algorithm generally performs better the
more time it has at its disposal, since there is always a chance to
find a still better solution at a later point in time. Therefore, the
algorithm is allowed the maximum feasible computation time. In
cases where the algorithm does not find any improved solution in a
large number of consecutive iterations, it is dubious if it will still be
able to find a better solution until the maximum time has passed.
Therefore, a maximum number of iterations without improvement
has been introduced as a secondary termination criterion.
==PAGE:63==
52
GRASP Algorithm
Another specification that has to be made regarding the generic
GRASP is the objective function f. In the case of the ship crew
scheduling problem, we have a double-objective, as described in Sec-
tion 3.4: The dominating objective is to minimize the number of
newly hired crew members, and as a secondary objective, the cost
composed of the penalty terms representing the soft rules should also
be minimized. Therefore, in line 5 of the procedure, the modified
condition for accepting a new best solution is that the current solu-
tion either has a lower number of hires or a lower cost together with
an equal number of hires compared to the currently best solution.
In the end of the procedure, after the loop is terminated but before
returning the best solution, a post-processing step for the newly
hired crew members has been added: As will be described in Sec-
tion 6.3.2, during the algorithm, “perfect” crew members which ful-
fill all possible availability, experience and skill requirements on all
vessels are hired. However, in the solution that the algorithm re-
turns, it would be interesting to see which properties are actually
necessary for the respective crew member, so that the hiring pro-
cess is facilitated. This is the reason for adding the post-processing
procedure, which looks at all the assignments that have been gen-
erated for a hired crew member and, based on those, updates the
crew member by computing the latest possible first availability date
and the minimum necessary experience and skills.
An important modification which has been made to the GRASP
algorithm and which concerns all parts of it is the transformation
towards a so-called Reactive GRASP procedure, which has, among
other places, been discussed in [RR19, p. 178]. In general terms,
this means that certain parameters are not fixed to a certain value,
but they are defined as a list of possible values, from which the
algorithm randomly selects one in each iteration, following a proba-
bility weighting which is continuously updated based on the success
of the algorithm while using the respective values. In this way, it
is possible for the algorithm to adapt to the instance on which it is
applied, and to the parameter values suitable for it. In the high-level
procedure of GRASP, this means the following changes: Before the
start of the GRASP loop, i.e. before line 2, the reactive parame-
==PAGE:64==
6.3 Modifications to generic GRASP
53
ters are initialized by defining their possible values and the selection
probabilities of those. Furthermore, at the start of each GRASP it-
eration, the value selection described above has to be performed for
each reactive parameter. And finally, in the end of each iteration,
the probabilities are updated as explained below. This update is
done whenever a valid solution has been found, and not only if this
solution is a new best solution. The details of this implementation
will be presented below, in Section 6.3.1.1.
6.3.1.1
Reactive adaptation of parameters
The parameters which have been defined as reactive in the algo-
rithm designed in this project are the maximum RCL size and the
local search destroy percentage (for their definition and usage, see
Sections 6.3.2 and 6.3.3). The way in which the values for these
parameters are chosen is largely based on the reactive GRASP pro-
cedure described in [RR19, p. 178]. However, there are two main
differences: In the original reactive GRASP procedure, it is the
parameter α which is reactively adapted, whereas in the GRASP
design created here, two other parameters are defined in this way.
Furthermore, a challenge posed by the ship crew scheduling prob-
lem is that we have a double-objective: the number of hires and the
cost composed by the different penalty terms. Therefore, a slight
adaptation of the computation of the probabilities in the reactive
GRASP had to be made.
For the reactive implementation of one parameter, the following
variables have to be defined and kept updated throughout the al-
gorithm (one set of these variables for each reactively defined pa-
rameter): Firstly, we define I = {1, ..., n} as the index set which
contains one index for each possible value of the reactive parame-
ter. The vector (Ni)i∈I contains the number of GRASP iterations
in which each parameter value i has so far been chosen by the al-
gorithm. Furthermore, in the version of reactive GRASP presented
in the literature, there is a vector (Ai)i∈I which denotes the average
objective value obtained while using value i. However, since the ship
==PAGE:65==
54
GRASP Algorithm
crew scheduling problem considered here has a double-objective, we
define vectors (Acost
i
)i∈I and (Ahires
i
)i∈I instead, one for the average
cost (i.e. the sum of the penalty terms) and one for the average num-
ber of hires. Furthermore, we define vectors (qcost
i
)i∈I and (qhires
i
)i∈I,
which are computed as the cost/hires of the overall best solution di-
vided by the average cost/hires of solutions found with parameter
value i. And finally, the weights (or p-values) for selecting a certain
value for the reactive parameter in the beginning of each GRASP
iteration are denoted as (pi)i∈I. In the literature, they are defined
as the ratio between the q-value for value i divided by the sum of all
q-values. However, in our case, we have two different q-values, one
vector for the cost and one for the number of hires. The approach
which has, therefore, been chosen is to also compute two separate
p-values (in the way described above) and then take the average of
those as the final p-value.
Before the GRASP loop starts, the variables described above are
initialized as follows (again, once for each reactively defined param-
eter): (Ni)i∈I, (Acost
i
)i∈I and (Ahires
i
)i∈I are initialized as vectors of
0, while the q-values are defined as vectors of 1. The p-values are
initially uniformly distributed, which corresponds to setting q-values
which are all equal to 1 into the formula for computing the p-values.
Furthermore, the lists of possible values for each reactive parameter
are defined.
In the beginning of each GRASP iteration, a value for both the max-
imum RCL size and the local search destroy percentage is randomly
sampled from their respective list of possible values. This is done
by sampling from a discrete probability distribution with weights
defined as the p-values for the respective parameter.
Finally, in the end of each GRASP iteration, the p-values (as well as
the variables on which they are based) are updated for each reactive
parameter, as shown in Algorithm 6.4. Here, it has to be noted that
the p-values are update for each possible value index, whereas all the
other vectors (which are the basis for computing the p-values) are
only updated for the value chosen in the current GRASP iteration.
This means that the effects of newly found solutions are protracted
==PAGE:66==
6.3 Modifications to generic GRASP
55
over the following iterations (until the other parameter values have
also been chosen again).
Algorithm 6.4: UpdatePValues
Input: Index i of chosen value, current solution S, best solution S∗,
current values of (Ni)i∈I, (Acost
i
)i∈I, (Ahires
i
)i∈I and (qi)i∈I
1 Ni := Ni + 1
2 Acost
i
:= Acost
i
+ (cost(S) −Acost
i
)/Ni
3 Ahires
i
:= Ahires
i
+ (hires(S) −Ahires
i
)/Ni
4 qcost
i
:= cost(S∗)/Acost
i
5 if Ahires
i
̸= 0 then
6
qhires
i
:= hires(S∗)/Ahires
i
7 else
8
qhires
i
:= 1
9 pcost := vector(n)
10 phires := vector(n)
11 for j ∈I do
12
pcost
j
:= qcost
j
/ P
k∈I qcost
k
13
phires
j
:= qhires
j
/ P
k∈I qhires
k
14
pj := (pcost
j
+ phires
j
)/2
6.3.2
Greedy randomized construction
Regarding the greedy randomized construction procedure (see Al-
gorithm 6.2), it has to be specified how the candidate list (CL)
is defined in the context of the ship crew scheduling problem. As
mentioned before, the algorithm focuses on finding optimal replace-
ments for assignments that have already been planned. Therefore,
it is natural that the CL should contain possible replacements (i.e.
assignments replacing previous assignments) for already planned as-
signments.
When initializing the CL at the start of the construction proce-
dure (line 2), the already planned assignments consist exactly of the
input assignments which have been given in the respective problem
instance. For each of these assignments, all feasible replacements are
==PAGE:67==
56
GRASP Algorithm
computed and added to the CL. This is done by iterating through all
crew members which have the same rank as the assignment to be re-
placed, and for each of them firstly checking if the skill requirements
of the vessel on which the replacement would take place are satisfied
by the crew member (if not, this crew member cannot be used as
a replacement) and then trying to compute the date on which the
replacing assignment would start. The first step towards calculating
this date is to compute the earliest, preferred and latest ending date
of the assignment to be replaced. These dates are initially equal
to the start date of the assignment plus the minimum, maximum
and hard maximum days (minus one) of the replaced crew member,
but could be corrected towards an earlier date if there is a conflict
with an assignment of the replaced crew member which is already
planned for a later date (on another vessel). The earliest, preferred
and latest start date of the replacing assignment are, respectively,
one day after these dates. However, in many cases, the replacement
date has to be corrected in order not to violate any hard rules: The
first date on which the replacing crew member is available is com-
puted based on his given availability date (if he has been on leave
at the start of the planning period), and also based on his previous
assignments. Furthermore, the starting date of the replacement has
to be corrected for conflicts with any future assignments of the crew
member. And in addition to these two factors, also the first date
on which the experience requirements are satisfied has to be taken
into account. If the preferred replacement date, after correcting it
for the above-mentioned factors, still lies within the range between
the earliest and latest replacement date, an assignment is generated
starting on this date, and added as a candidate to the CL. This is
repeated for all crew members of the right rank. In cases where no
feasible replacement can be found for an assignment, a new “perfect”
crew member (possessing all skills and experience required for any
vessel) is hired and added to the instance (so that he is available for
the further planning of assignments) and a replacement is created
involving this crew member.
The central element of the greedy randomized construction proce-
dure is the restricted candidate list (RCL). The generic way of com-
puting this list is shown in lines 4 to 6 in Algorithm 6.2. In the
==PAGE:68==
6.3 Modifications to generic GRASP
57
design created in this project, this formula is still used, but there
are additional criteria for candidates to enter the RCL list. First of
all, we have to, again, consider the double-objective present in this
problem. To do this, the replacements in the CL are divided into
those involving an existing crew member or a hired crew member
that has already been involved in another assignment, and those
involving a hired crew member that has not been involved in any
other assignment yet. If the first set of crew members is not empty,
then we are only using this set as a basis for calculating the RCL.
Only if this first set is empty, then the set of replacements with
newly hired crew members is used as a basis. Once the set of re-
placements to be considered has been chosen, the incremental cost
of each of the replacements in this set is computed as follows: The
total cost of the assignments on the respective vessel (i.e. the one
where the replacement takes place) before adding the replacement is
subtracted from the total cost of the assignments after adding the
replacement to the vessel. This cost is computed almost in the same
way as the cost of a solution, but with two exceptions: The cost for
unmanned days is not taken into account, while a penalty for late
planning is added as an extra penalty term. The reasons for these
cost modifications are explained in Sections 6.4.1 and 6.4.2. Then,
as in the generic GRASP procedure, the minimum and maximum
costs are found and the RCL is computed based on the parameter
α. However, as will be explained in more detail in Section 7.2.3,
experiments have shown that even for α values considerably smaller
than what is usual in the literature, there are still too many elements
in the RCL for the algorithm to handle the arising amount of ran-
domization. Therefore, a cap on the absolute number of elements in
the RCL has been introduced. This maximum RCL size l is defined
in a reactive way as described in Section 6.3.1.1 and is applied in
the following way: If, after taking only the replacements with costs
in the best (α · 100)% of the cost range, there are still more than l
elements left, these elements are sorted in ascending order by their
cost and only the l first elements are chosen for the RCL.
At the end of each construction iteration, the CL is updated based
on the replacement which has been chosen at random from the RCL
and which has been added to the solution in this iteration (see line 9
==PAGE:69==
58
GRASP Algorithm
of Algorithm 6.2).
This is done by removing from the CL both
the chosen assignment and all the replacements that either became
impossible or have to be changed due to adding this assignment to
the solution. In turn, the algorithm adds to the CL all the possible
replacements (either with existing or newly hired crew members)
for the chosen assignment, all recomputed changed replacements as
well as replacements involving new hires for assignments that lost
all their possible replacements.
6.3.3
Local search
In the local search procedure (see Algorithm 6.3), the termination
criterion is chosen as a maximum total number of iterations, as in
most cases in the literature, but again with an additional criterion
limiting the number of iterations without improvements, in order
not to reside too long in the local search when most likely no im-
provement can be found anymore.
As already mentioned in Section 6.1, the sequential nature of the
problem rules out many options of neighborhood designs for the lo-
cal search. Therefore, the neighbor selection performed in line 2
strongly depends on the construction algorithm itself in the chosen
design: At first, the vessels are sorted in descending order by the
number of hired crew members involved in assignments on them,
and, as a secondary condition, by the total cost of the assignments
planned on them. Then, the first (d · 100)% of the vessels are cho-
sen and on those, all the generated assignments are removed (“de-
stroyed”). Here, the parameter d is the local search destroy percent-
age, which is defined in a reactive way as described in Section 6.3.1.1.
After this destroy-procedure has taken place, the greedy randomized
construction algorithm is applied using the resulting partial solution
as an input (with α set to 0 to make it a greedy procedure except
for the randomness in choosing one out of the best assignments with
the same cost). In this way, a neighboring solution has been found
and can be compared to the currently best solution.
==PAGE:70==
6.4 Main differences between GRASP and Baseline Greedy
59
6.4
Main differences between GRASP and Base-
line Greedy
In this section, the main differences between the approach of the
GRASP algorithm designed in this project and the Baseline Greedy
algorithm are presented. For an overview of the most important
changes, see Table 6.1. The first two points, about applying random-
ization and a local search method, as well as the last point, which
compares the approaches for choosing the next replacement(s), have
already been discussed in the previous sections. However, the way
of looking at the time horizon as well as the consideration of the
cost of unmanned days still have to be studied in more detail, in
order to explain the motives for choosing the different approaches.
This will be done in Sections 6.4.1 and 6.4.2.
GRASP
Baseline Greedy
Uses randomization for greedy con-
struction
Uses a purely greedy approach
Applies a local search method
Does not contain any local search
method
Considers whole planning period at
once, but prioritizes earlier planning
by additional penalty
Uses rolling-horizon approach
Does not compute cost of unmanned
days within algorithm
Computes cost of unmanned days
when calculating cost before replace-
ment is added and does not compute
it when calculating cost after replace-
ment is added
Adds replacements to solution one by
one
Chooses N next replacements based
on a maximum matching method
Table 6.1: Structural comparison between GRASP and Baseline Greedy
==PAGE:71==
60
GRASP Algorithm
6.4.1
Advantages and disadvantages of considering the
whole planning period at once
As described before, the GRASP algorithm designed in this project
is looking at the planning period as a whole, in contrast to the
Baseline Greedy algorithm, which follows a rolling-horizon approach.
This altered approach bears considerable advantages with it, the
most important of which being that the algorithm is generally more
flexible in when to plan assignments. In fact, it would be possible to
fill up one vessel until the end of the period, while not planning any
assignments yet on another vessel. Furthermore, this means that the
algorithm is capable to consider an assignment that is planned for a
crew member in the future when planning an earlier assignment for
this crew member (w.r.t. conflicts in availability). By integrating
this feature into the algorithm, the range of possible local search
methods is considerably increased: For example, running the algo-
rithm on an initial partial solution where some of the vessels are
fully planned and some do not have any generated assignments yet
(as it is done in the local search implemented in this project) is only
possible if the algorithm is capable to consider planned assignments
of crew members that lie after the date where it tries to generate an
assignment for this crew member.
However, there are also some disadvantages in considering the whole
planning period at once. One point is that the accumulated expe-
rience of a crew member might be underestimated in some cases,
if there will, later in the algorithm, be another earlier assignment
created which would in fact increase his experience. Furthermore,
a critical point that has been noticed in preliminary experiments is
that it might happen that the algorithm plans an assignment for a
crew member in the middle of the planning period, which results
in this crew member only getting one single assignment, but if this
crew member would be critical for an earlier replacement, then a
crew member has to be hired. Hence, it has been observed that this
approach can lead to higher numbers of hires.
==PAGE:72==
6.4 Main differences between GRASP and Baseline Greedy
61
However, the above disadvantages are mitigated by the prioritization
of early planning, which is implemented in the form of an additional
penalty for the number of days between the start of the planning
period and the start date of the replacement (as already mentioned
in Section 6.3.2). This leads to a more conservative approach of
the algorithm with respect to planning ahead on some of the vessels
compared to others and thereby lessens the above-described nega-
tive effects, but still does not affect the increased flexibility. For
clarity, it has to be remarked here that this prioritization does not
mean that the replacement dates will be shifted towards the earliest
sign-off date of the replaced assignment, but they will still be pre-
computed and, thus, preferably lie on the day after the due date.
The prioritization is only used for choosing between replacements,
which have already been fixed to a date.
6.4.2
Reasons behind (not) computing cost of unmanned
days within algorithm
In our implementation of GRASP, the cost for the unmanned days
is not computed within the algorithm (only in the end, when cal-
culating the objective), because due to the design of the algorithm,
it is impossible to obtain gaps between the assignments.
Hence,
the only unmanned days lie after the chain of already planned as-
signments. But if we try to minimize these days, it means that we
get longer, and overdue assignments, because the unmanned penalty
is usually higher than the overdue penalty. And since, in the final
solution, these unmanned days are no longer present, we end up hav-
ing very high overdue costs, without having contributed to avoiding
unmanned days, because they would not have been present anyway.
In the Baseline Greedy algorithm, the situation is different, since an
additional hard rule, the joining requirements, is considered there.
The joining requirements specify the minimum number of days be-
tween two crew members of two given ranks joining the same vessel.
In the case of this hard rule, it is indeed necessary to allow for gap
creation, because it can occur that they are otherwise unsatisfiable,
==PAGE:73==
62
GRASP Algorithm
even for newly hired crew members. Therefore, the Baseline Greedy
does compute the unmanned days within the algorithm, however in
a special way: When calculating the cost before adding a new re-
placement, the unmanned days penalty is added, whereas in the cost
after adding the replacement, it is not added. This means that the
savings obtained by subtracting these two costs are higher, the more
unmanned days there were before adding the replacement. However,
this only leads to prioritizing replacements for earlier assignments
(or on vessels with fewer already existing gaps), but does not fulfill
its purpose of calculating the cost of the actual gap arising from the
new replacement.
Therefore, when wanting to consider the cost of the unmanned days
within the algorithm, an approach would have to be found where
only the unmanned days between the assignments, but not after
the last assignment in a chain of replacing assignments are taken
into account for the cost calculation. This could, for example, be
achieved by using several lists containing a chain of replacements
(one list for each required manning) and only calculating the days
in-between the list elements.
6.5
Enhancement of generic GRASP by inte-
grating ALNS elements
In general, GRASP and ALNS (Adaptive Large Neighborhood Sear-
ch) are two metaheuristics which are very different from each other,
since GRASP uses a randomized restart approach, while ALNS per-
forms one long local search during which it switches between differ-
ent neighborhoods by choosing different destroy and repair methods
in an adaptive way.
However, the GRASP algorithm designed in this project was en-
hanced by using some elements that are normally characteristic for
ALNS. First of all, the local search method uses a destroy-repair ap-
proach, such as it is also used in ALNS. Furthermore, by using a list
==PAGE:74==
6.5 Enhancement of generic GRASP by integrating ALNS elements
63
of possible destroy percentage parameter values, we practically get
several “different” destroy methods. And by making the choice of
the destroy percentage parameter reactive, we get the adaptiveness
characteristic for ALNS. Hence, in conclusion, the GRASP design
in this project could be interpreted as a modified ALNS algorithm
which uses restarts and where the adaptive parameters are updated
on the top-level (i.e. in each restart iteration) instead of inside the
local search.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 7
Computational Experiments
After having studied the structural characteristics of the designed
algorithm in the previous chapter, we will now proceed by analyzing
the behavior and results that its implementation shows on various
instances of different sizes, as well as comparing them to those of
the Baseline Greedy algorithm.
7.1
Test strategy
The strategy used for conducting the computational experiments
is composed of several steps, of which this section will give a brief
overview as well as references to the respective parts of the chapter
which discuss them in more detail.
First of all, the designed GRASP algorithm presented in the pre-
vious chapter has been implemented, where during this phase the
design and performance was continually improved. The technical
specifications of this implementation as well as the set-up of the
testing environment are given in Section 7.2.1.
Already during the implementation phase, the algorithm has been
tested on several instances provided by the company, and many
of the final experiments presented in this report were run on the
current version of these instances. Additionally, synthetic instances
were created for more extensive testing and analyses. An overview
of the used instances can be found in Section 7.2.2.
==PAGE:76==
7.2 Test set-up
65
Another important point in approaching an optimization problem is
the choice of parameters. These were partly given by the company,
but the majority of them was determined by conducting preliminary
experiments, as described in Section 7.2.3.
In order to obtain valuable results on the performance and behavior
of the algorithm as well as to get deeper insights into the problem
itself, a number of different computational experiments have been
conducted. In the following, they are structured into four parts: In
Section 7.3, the performance of GRASP and Baseline Greedy will
be compared, both regarding the solution quality and the compu-
tation times. In a next step, the internal behavior of the GRASP
algorithm itself will be studied in detail in Section 7.4. Here, for ex-
ample the evolution of the reactive parameter probabilities as well
as the influence of the prioritization of early planning will be ana-
lyzed. Section 7.5 will be concerned with the development of the
computation time of GRASP with growing instance size. To sim-
ulate this growth in size, synthetically generated instances will be
used. Finally, in Section 7.6, a sensitivity analysis will be performed
to study the influence of changed inputs on the performance of the
algorithm.
7.2
Test set-up
In this section, details will be given about the set-up of the tests
whose results will be presented in the following sections. In its three
sub-sections, we will discuss the technical specifications, an overview
of the used instances as well as the parameter values.
7.2.1
Technical specifications on implementation and tests
The implementation of GRASP has been done in Java, and inde-
pendently from the existing Java implementation of Baseline Greedy.
The only exceptions are data structures, data readers and the solu-
==PAGE:77==
66
Computational Experiments
tion validation, which are reused from the Baseline Greedy imple-
mentation in order to be able to focus on the core targets of this
project and, moreover, to facilitate the adoption of the new algo-
rithm in the company.
All the computational experiments (both for GRASP and Baseline
Greedy) have been run in the Intellij IDEA 2022.3.3 (Community
Edition) environment on a MacBook Air 13-inch, 2020, with an
Apple M1 chip, 16 GB RAM and macOS Sonoma 14.4 installed.
The Java version used was Oracle OpenJDK version 17.0.7.
The version of the Baseline Greedy algorithm with which the tests
for performance comparison were run is 2.0.36.
7.2.2
Instances
Most of the experiments presented in the following have been run on
four instances provided by the company, which are close to real-life
data for the ship crew scheduling problem. In Table 7.1, an overview
of these instances is displayed. The numbering of the instances cor-
responds to the growing size (i.e. the number of vessels for which
assignments have to be planned). The table also shows the number
of crew members available for the planning as well as the ratio be-
tween the number of crew members and vessels, which will play a
role in the analysis of the results.
Instance
No. of vessels
No. of crew members
Ratio cm/v
Instance 1
16
201
12.56
Instance 2
17
134
7.88
Instance 3
26
218
8.38
Instance 4
47
461
9.81
Table 7.1: Overview of given instances
In addition to these given instances, a number of synthetic instances
were generated in order to have a larger foundation for the result
analysis. These were constructed by taking an existing instance as
a basis, and then randomly sampling vessels (including their input
==PAGE:78==
7.2 Test set-up
67
assignments) and crew members from it, copying them and assign-
ing new (unique) IDs to them, and then adding them again to the
instance. In this way, arbitrarily large instances can be generated.
For each of the instances (both given and synthetic ones), the length
of the planning period amounts to one year, and the minimum, max-
imum and hard maximum days of a crew member in an assignment
are set to 90, 150 and 180, respectively, for all crew members. Since
the preferred length of an assignment is considered to be the (soft)
maximum days, this means that there are usually three to four as-
signments planned per vessel, rank and required manning.
7.2.3
Parameter setting
In Table 7.2, the values of the penalties which define the cost part of
the objective of the problem are displayed. These values were given
by the company, since they are also used in practice, and are based
on customer preferences.
Penalty
Value
Overdue penalty
10000
Violated budget penalty
1
New fleet penalty
100000
Missed out-of-country (OOC) penalty
10
Unmanned penalty
150000
Exceeded availability penalty
1
Table 7.2: Given penalty values
On the other hand, there is also a number of parameters which have
been chosen in the course of preliminary tests of the implemented
GRASP algorithm. The values of these are listed in Table 7.3.
The late planning penalty is chosen as 1.5 times the highest penalty
for any soft rule violation (except the unmanned penalty, which is
not considered during the solving process), in order to give it a higher
priority than the other rules. This penalty has been introduced due
==PAGE:79==
68
Computational Experiments
to the reasons explained in Section 6.4.1 and is only used within the
algorithm but not for the final objective.
Parameter
Value
Late planning penalty
150000
Randomization parameter α
0.01
Reactive maximum RCL length
∈[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
Reactive local search (LS) destroy percentage
∈[0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9]
Maximum GRASP computation time (h)
1
Maximum GRASP iterations without improvement
30
Maximum LS iterations
50
Maximum LS iterations without improvement
3
Table 7.3: Chosen parameter values
When testing the algorithm on the given instances shown in Ta-
ble 7.1, it became evident that all the instances were very sensitive
to randomization, in a way that the solution of the greedy random-
ized construction showed a considerable decrease in quality, espe-
cially with respect to the number of hires, when the size of the RCL
exceeded just a few elements, and the local search method was not
able to decrease the cost of these solutions by an acceptable degree.
Therefore, it was chosen to mainly base the RCL size on an absolute
maximum length, instead of solely using the relative parameter α
for it, like it is done in most cases in the literature. However, the
parameter α is still used in the algorithm, but only for special cases:
Suppose we fix the length of the RCL to, e.g., five elements. In some
cases, it might happen, that we have a replacement in the CL with
a very low cost, while all other elements of the CL have a consider-
ably higher cost. In this case, we would not want to force the RCL
to contain exactly five elements, even if four of them would have a
clearly negative influence on the solution quality. Therefore, an α
value of 0.01 (i.e. 1 %) is used as the primary condition for choosing
the RCL elements, and only if the RCL then exceeds the absolute
maximum RCL length (which it does by a considerable number of
elements in many cases), it is capped by the absolute maximum
length (after sorting it by replacement cost).
==PAGE:80==
7.2 Test set-up
69
The maximum RCL length itself has been defined in a reactive way,
as already described in Section 6.3. This allows the algorithm to
adapt to the amount of randomization that is suitable for the cur-
rently solved instance as well as to have some variation in the amount
of randomization. As shown in the table, the possible values of the
maximum RCL length range from 1 (i.e. completely greedy) to 5.
These values were found as a suitable range, since, as mentioned
before, for larger RCL sizes the local search was often not able to
sufficiently improve the initially constructed solution.
In the same way as the RCL length, also the destroy percentage
for the local search, i.e. the amount of vessels whose assignments
are removed in the destroy phase of the local search, is reactively
defined. Here, the possible (relative) values are 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7 and
0.9, in order to obtain a large variety in the local search strategy.
The values 0 and 1 are excluded, because with a destroy percentage
of 0 %, the local search would never make any changes, while with
a percentage of 100 %, every local search iteration would in reality
be a new iteration of greedy randomized construction.
The last four parameters displayed in the table are the termination
criteria, both for the GRASP algorithm as a whole and for the local
search procedure. The maximum acceptable computation time for
the algorithm is one hour, which is why this is imposed as the main
termination criterion for GRASP. However, in cases where the algo-
rithm is not able to improve the solution quality in many iterations,
it is not reasonable to still keep running the algorithm until one hour
has passed. Therefore, an additional termination criterion has been
introduced, which specifies that after 30 GRASP iterations without
improvement, the algorithm should stop. For the local search pro-
cedure, this number of iterations without improvement has been set
to a much lower value, specifically to three iterations. Intuitively,
one might think that it should already terminate after one iteration
without improvement, since the local search procedure would, in the
next iteration, just remove assignments from the exact same vessels
and then recompute them greedily (due to setting α = 0). However,
even if α is set to 0, there is some degree of randomness involved, in
the cases where there are several replacements with the same low-
==PAGE:81==
70
Computational Experiments
est cost in the CL. This is why the local search procedure can still
give different results in every iteration, even if it is run on the same
starting solution. For the maximum total number of local search
iterations, a value of 50 has been chosen. Based on experience from
the preliminary tests, the local search procedure seldomly reaches
iteration numbers of over 15 before terminating (due to the max-
imum iterations without improvement), which is why the success
of the local search procedure should not be hindered by this limit,
which should mainly serve to prevent infinite (or unreasonably long)
loops in extreme cases.
7.3
Performance comparison between GRASP
and Baseline Greedy
In this section, the performance of GRASP and Baseline Greedy
will be compared, both with respect to the solution quality and the
computation times.
7.3.1
Solution quality
In this section, the goal is to compare the quality of solutions that
the GRASP algorithm provides to those returned by the Baseline
Greedy procedure for the instances described in Table 7.1. Here,
the solution quality is composed of the number of newly hired crew
members that the algorithm suggests (this is the dominating objec-
tive) as well as the total cost of the solution, which is composed by
the different penalty terms (cost components). The penalties are
only computed for the assignments generated by the algorithm, and
not for the input assignments, since they are the same in the output
of both algorithms, and it is more reasonable to only consider the
actual work that the respective algorithm does. The only excep-
tion from this are the overdue costs, which are also calculated for
the latest input assignments of each rank on each vessel, since the
==PAGE:82==
7.3 Performance comparison between GRASP and Baseline Greedy
71
ending date of the assignments is determined by the replacements
calculated by the algorithm.
For each of the instances, there is one table and three plots describ-
ing the results. The tables show the hires and cost values of the
final solutions obtained by GRASP and Baseline Greedy as well as
the absolute difference in the number of hires and the percentage
difference in the cost. For computing the relative difference in cost,
Formula 7.1 has been used. Based on this formula, it has to be re-
marked that the more negative the value of the improvement is, the
better the GRASP solution cost is compared to Baseline Greedy.
The same formula is used throughout the chapter, and, hence, more
negative improvement values are always to be preferred.
cost difference =
GRASP cost
Baseline Greedy cost −1
(7.1)
In the plots, the values of the number of hires (a), the total cost
(b) and the cost components (c) are shown for each solution yielded
by the greedy randomized construction (marked with a dot), and,
in-between these, the values for each improved solution in the local
search. This means that a “step” on the x-axis can either represent
a GRASP iteration or a local search iteration with improvement.
The evolution of these GRASP solution values is represented by the
blue line in the first two plots and by the continuous color-coded
lines in the third plot. The green line in the first two plots track the
currently best solution in GRASP. In the first plot, this will always
correspond to the current minimum number of hires, but in the
second plot, it is possible that the green line lies above the current
minimum cost: Since the number of hires is considered as the main
objective, a solution is considered as the new best solution if the
number of hires is lower compared to the previously best solution,
even if the cost is higher. And since the green line in the plots tracks
the currently best solution, it can increase in plot (b) in cases where
the number of hires decreases. The red line in the first two plots
and the dashed lines in plot (c) represent the values given by the
Baseline Greedy algorithm, and thereby serve as a benchmark.
==PAGE:83==
72
Computational Experiments
7.3.1.1
Instance 1
For Instance 1, which is the smallest of the instances considered here,
with only 16 vessels, Figure 7.1a shows that in each iteration of the
GRASP algorithm and its local search, the number of hires lies be-
low the one in the Baseline Greedy solution, by one crew member.
By the definition of the objective chosen in this project, this already
shows that the solution provided GRASP is better. However, also
the cost of the solution shows a considerable improvement with re-
gard to the Baseline Greedy solution (see Figure 7.1b): In each of
the GRASP iterations, the cost is already below half of the cost of
Baseline Greedy after the greedy randomized construction is run.
Furthermore, the cost of the best solution is gradually decreased
over the iterations until it reaches a value which is 95.72 % lower
than the cost of the Baseline Greedy solution, as can also be seen
from Table 7.4. After that, GRASP does not find any better solution
in the next 30 GRASP iterations, which means that it terminates
due to the criterion of maximum iterations without improvement.
Metric
GRASP
Baseline Greedy
Improvement
Hires
6
7
-1
Total cost
107034
2503021
-95.72 %
Overdue cost
0
2490000
-100.00 %
Violated budget cost
362
442
-18.10 %
New fleet cost
100000
0
+Inf %
Missed OOC cost
0
0
±0.00 %
Unmanned cost
0
0
±0.00 %
Exceeded availability cost
6672
12579
-46.96 %
Table 7.4: Comparison between solution values of GRASP and Baseline Greedy
for Instance 1
From Figure 7.1c, it can be seen that the overdue cost constitutes
by far the biggest cost component of the Baseline Greedy solution,
whereas throughout the GRASP iterations, this cost is always at
least 80 % lower, and in the final best solution, it is even equal to
0. This considerable improvement in the overdue cost is due to the
changed cost calculation approach described in Section 6.4.2. The
new fleet cost, which is 0 in the Baseline Greedy solution, shows
==PAGE:84==
7.3 Performance comparison between GRASP and Baseline Greedy
73
some fluctuations throughout the GRASP iterations, and takes a
value of 100000 (which corresponds to 1 assignment with a fleet
mismatch) in the final solution. However, this is by far outweighed
by the significant decrease in the overdue cost and the decrease in
hires, which means that GRASP shows a considerable improvement
in the solution quality for this instance.
(a) Number of hires
(b) Total solution cost
(c) Solution cost components
Figure 7.1: Instance 1: Hires and cost evolution in GRASP in comparison to
Baseline Greedy
==PAGE:85==
74
Computational Experiments
7.3.1.2
Instance 2
For Instance 2, we observe a higher fluctuation of the numbers of
hires in the solutions found throughout the GRASP algorithm (see
Figure 7.2a).
However, in the finally best solution, a value of 3
hires is reached, which constitutes a considerable improvement with
respect to the value of 5 hires that Baseline Greedy finds. How-
ever, this stepwise decrease in the number of hires at the same time
leads to an increase in the solution cost composed by the penalty
terms, as can be seen from Figure 7.2b. This is plausible, since,
if fewer virtual crew members with “perfect” features are added,
there might be higher penalties arising from using the existing ones
instead. Figure 7.2 shows that one cost component which is signif-
icantly influenced by this effect is the overdue cost, which peaks at
the iteration where the final solution is found. Furthermore, this
figure, such as Table 7.5, shows that the new fleet cost is consider-
ably higher for the GRASP solution than for the Baseline Greedy
solution in most iterations, and even twice as high in the final solu-
tion. However, on the whole, the final GRASP solution still has a
slightly lower cost (by 4.23 %) than the Baseline Greedy solution,
which, in addition to the already mentioned considerable decrease
in the number of hires, makes the GRASP solution the preferable
one regarding the solution quality.
Metric
GRASP
Baseline Greedy
Improvement
Hires
3
5
-2
Total cost
7264525
7585162
-4.23 %
Overdue cost
3860000
5880000
-34.35 %
Violated budget cost
0
0
±0.00 %
New fleet cost
3400000
1700000
+100 %
Missed OOC cost
0
0
±0.00 %
Unmanned cost
0
0
±0.00 %
Exceeded availability cost
4525
5162
-12.34 %
Table 7.5: Comparison between solution values of GRASP and Baseline Greedy
for Instance 2
==PAGE:86==
7.3 Performance comparison between GRASP and Baseline Greedy
75
(a) Number of hires
(b) Total solution cost
(c) Solution cost components
Figure 7.2: Instance 2: Hires and cost evolution in GRASP in comparison to
Baseline Greedy
==PAGE:87==
76
Computational Experiments
7.3.1.3
Instance 3
Instance 3 shows a different behavior regarding the hires than the
first two instances, as we can see from Figure 7.3a: The number of
hires in the GRASP solutions is higher than the one in the Baseline
Greedy solution by 1 or 2 in most iterations. Only in four iterations,
the number of hires reaches the same level as Baseline Greedy does.
As also observed for Instance 2, when the number of hires gets to
this lower level, we get a new best solution with a higher penalty cost
(Figure 7.3b). However, this cost is decreased in a later iteration, so
that the final solution has a total cost which is about 19 % lower than
the one of the Baseline Greedy solution (see Table 7.6). Regarding
the cost components, we can see from Figure 7.3 as well as from the
table that, as for the other instances, the overdue cost is decreased
while the new fleet cost is increased compared to Baseline Greedy.
Looking at the plots, it has to be observed that every single data
point is marked by a dot, which means that there are no success-
ful local search iterations throughout the GRASP iterations, and
the found solutions are solely the solutions returned by the greedy
randomized construction procedure (see also Section 7.3.2). This
could be an explanation for the above-mentioned fact that Instance
3 shows a worse solution quality regarding the combination of hires
and cost than the other instances.
Metric
GRASP
Baseline Greedy
Improvement
Hires
3
3
±0
Total cost
4906536
6068386
-19.15 %
Overdue cost
2500000
5360000
-53.36 %
Violated budget cost
0
0
±0.00 %
New fleet cost
2400000
700000
+242.86 %
Missed OOC cost
0
0
±0.00 %
Unmanned cost
0
0
±0.00 %
Exceeded availability cost
6536
8386
-22.06 %
Table 7.6: Comparison between solution values of GRASP and Baseline Greedy
for Instance 3
==PAGE:88==
7.3 Performance comparison between GRASP and Baseline Greedy
77
(a) Number of hires
(b) Total solution cost
(c) Solution cost components
Figure 7.3: Instance 3: Hires and cost evolution in GRASP in comparison to
Baseline Greedy
==PAGE:89==
78
Computational Experiments
7.3.1.4
Instance 4
Regarding Instance 4, Figure 7.4a shows that in every iteration, the
GRASP solution contains 0 newly hired crew members, whereas the
Baseline Greedy hires 1 crew member.
And also the cost shows
significant improvements (see Figure 7.4b): As also observed for In-
stance 1, all the solutions found throughout the iterations have at
most half of the cost of the Baseline Greedy solution, and the final
solution even shows a cost improvement of 80.11 % (see Table 7.7).
Here, it has to be observed that already after two GRASP iterations
(i.e. greedy randomized construction plus local search), a good so-
lution is found which is only very slightly improved until the end of
the computation.
Regarding the cost components, the most significant improvement
is made in the overdue cost (more than 99 %), and also the new
fleet cost, which was worse than the Baseline Greedy value in all the
other instances, shows an improvement of over 50 %. This can also
be observed in Figure 7.4c, where we see that the new fleet cost is
lower than the one of the Baseline Greedy solution in almost all the
GRASP iterations.
Metric
GRASP
Baseline Greedy
Improvement
Hires
0
1
-1
Total cost
1436652
7222537
-80.11 %
Overdue cost
20000
4090000
-99.51 %
Violated budget cost
2029
2064
-1.70 %
New fleet cost
1400000
3100000
-54.84 %
Missed OOC cost
2240
2800
-20.00 %
Unmanned cost
0
0
±0.00 %
Exceeded availability cost
12383
27673
-55.25 %
Table 7.7: Comparison between solution values of GRASP and Baseline Greedy
for Instance 4
==PAGE:90==
7.3 Performance comparison between GRASP and Baseline Greedy
79
(a) Number of hires
(b) Total solution cost
(c) Solution cost components
Figure 7.4: Instance 4: Hires and cost evolution in GRASP in comparison to
Baseline Greedy
==PAGE:91==
80
Computational Experiments
7.3.2
Computation times and iteration numbers
Besides looking at the solution quality, it is also important to com-
pare the computation times that the two algorithms need to obtain
these solutions. However, since the Baseline Greedy algorithm uses a
purely greedy approach, it cannot be expected that a metaheuristic
algorithm like GRASP, which is based on performing as many iter-
ations as possible and also running a local search in each iteration,
has a comparable computation time. Furthermore, the ship crew
scheduling problem is typically used for long-term tactical planning
with a relatively long planning horizon (in this case one year). This
means that it is not as time-critical as other planning problems, and,
hence, a computation time of up to one hour is still feasible and does
not pose any issue.
Indeed, the Baseline Greedy algorithm only needs between 1.5 and
5.6 seconds for each of the instances studied here, as can be seen from
Table 7.8. In contrast to that, GRASP needs 360 seconds for the
first instance, about 200 for the second, 600 for Instance 3, and the
full maximum of one hour for Instance 4. The latter fact means that
when solving Instance 4, the algorithm never reached 30 iterations
without improvement. In fact, as can be seen from the table, the to-
tal number of GRASP iterations performed on Instance 4 lies at only
32. However, it has been tried to increase the time limit for Instance
4 to 10 hours, and even then, the algorithm terminated soon after
one hour had passed, since the 30 iterations without improvement
were reached, and the final best solution was found within the first
hour. Even if the number of iterations performed in one hour for In-
stance 4 is much lower than that for the other instances (about 70 to
85), those finish much earlier. This is due to the fact that Instance
4 is, with 47 vessels, considerably larger than the others, the second
largest (Instance 3) containing 26 vessels, Instance 2 containing 17
and Instance 1 only 16 vessels. And the size of an instance clearly
has an influence on the computation time per iteration, since the
construction algorithm is more time-consuming, the more vessels it
has to fill with assignments and the larger the solution space is.
This can also be seen from the average times per GRASP iteration,
==PAGE:92==
7.3 Performance comparison between GRASP and Baseline Greedy
81
per greedy randomized construction and per local search iteration
reported in the table, which are all much longer for Instance 4 than
for the other instances. In comparison to the Baseline Greedy, the
average time for the greedy randomized construction is faster for
Instances 1 and 2, but for Instances 3 and especially 4, it is slower.
A more extensive study on the dependency between the instance
size and the computation times and number of iterations will be
performed in Section 7.5, where synthetic instances will be used in
addition to the ones studied here.
Metric
Inst. 1
Inst. 2
Inst. 3
Inst. 4
Number of vessels
16
17
26
47
Number of crew members
201
134
218
461
Crew member / vessel ratio
12.56
7.88
8.38
9.81
GRASP total computation time (s)
361.37
211.35
592.51
3640.01
Average time per GRASP iteration (s)
4.88
3.11
6.89
113.75
Average time per g. r. construction (s)
1.62
1.36
3.24
39.35
Average time per LS iteration (s)
0.74
0.47
1.21
17.12
Number of GRASP iterations
74.00
68.00
86.00
32.00
Average number of LS iterations
4.42
3.71
3.00
4.34
Baseline Greedy computation time (s)
1.92
1.49
2.12
5.59
Table 7.8: Comparison between computation times and iteration numbers of
GRASP and Baseline Greedy for all instances
The reason why Instances 1 to 3 do not use the full available time of 1
hour is that, while solving them, the algorithm did not find a better
solution in 30 iterations after the previous best solution has been
found. For example, we can conclude that for Instance 1, the best
solution was found in iteration 44, after which the algorithm could
not make any further improvements and, therefore, terminated in
iteration 74. Regarding computation times for these three instances,
it is notable that Instance 2 has considerably lower average times
than Instance 1, even if it has one more vessel. This can be explained
by the fact that the ratio between the number of crew members and
the number of vessels is much lower for Instance 2 (7.88) than for
Instance 1 (12.56), which, in this case where the number of vessels lie
so close together, even means that Instance 2 contains considerably
less crew members (134) than Instance 1 (201). This results in a
==PAGE:93==
82
Computational Experiments
larger solution space and therefore longer candidate lists to examine
in Instance 1, which in turn means longer computation times per
iteration. The influence of the crew member / vessel ratio will be
studied in more detail in Section 7.6.2.
Another aspect that is reported in Table 7.8 is the average number
of local search iterations performed in any GRASP iteration. This
value can take a minimum of 3.0, because if the local search simply
does not find any improving solution, it terminates after 3 iterations,
since this is the defined parameter value for the maximum allowed
local search iterations without improvement. From the table, it can
be seen that for Instance 3 the average number equals exactly this
minimum value, which means that the local search never finds any
improvement (as already discussed in the previous section). The
highest average number of local search iterations can be seen for
Instance 1 with a value of 4.42, closely followed by Instance 4 with
4.34. These numbers are still quite low, but this does not mean that
the number of local search iterations always lies in this range, since
it is, apart from the randomness, also dependent on the reactive
destroy percentage parameter, as will be studied in Section 7.4.1.
7.3.3
Conclusion on algorithm performance
From the performance comparisons between GRASP and Baseline
Greedy which have been conducted in the previous sections, the
conclusion arises that GRASP outperforms Baseline Greedy on all
four considered instances with respect to the double-objective of
hires and costs. An especially drastic improvement in the solution
quality is observed for Instance 1, which is the one with the lowest
number of vessels and, at the same time, the highest ratio between
the number of crew members and vessels. Regarding the different
cost components (i.e. the penalty terms in the objective), the cost
for crew members being assigned to new fleets is the only one where
an increase can be observed towards the GRASP solution in some
of the instances, while all other components are decreased in every
instance.
==PAGE:94==
7.4 Internal analysis of GRASP behavior
83
These solution quality improvements must be seen in the light of
significantly higher computation times needed by the GRASP algo-
rithm. However, this increase in time is plausible and rather un-
critical, due to the fact that GRASP is a metaheuristic and ship
crew scheduling is usually done on a tactical level. This makes the
GRASP algorithm the overall preferable choice.
7.4
Internal analysis of GRASP behavior
In this section, the behavior of the GRASP algorithm will be studied
on an internal level, i.e. not in comparison with Baseline Greedy.
Firstly, the behavior and influence of the reactive parameters will be
examined, and, thereafter, there will be a study about the influence
of the prioritization of early planning.
7.4.1
Behavior of reactive parameters
At first, we take a closer look at the behavior of the reactive pa-
rameters, i.e. the maximum number of elements in the RCL and the
destroy percentage in the local search.
Figure 7.5 shows the development of the values (Figures 7.5a and
7.5b) as well as the p-values (Figures 7.5c and 7.5d) of both reactive
parameters for each instance in the course of the GRASP iterations
for Instance 1. As explained in Section 6.3.1.1, the p-value is the
probability for the respective parameter value to be chosen in the
next iteration, and it depends on the success of the algorithm when
using this value. To understand the reasons for the changes in the
p-values, we compare this figure to the cost evolution seen in the
previous section (Figure 7.1). There, we see that in GRASP iteration
29, there is a significant decrease in cost. Figures 7.5a and 7.5b show
that in iteration 29, the max RCL length was set to the value of 4 and
the local search destroy percentage to 0.9. Now from Figures 7.5c
and 7.5d, we see that the p-values for these parameter values drop
==PAGE:95==
84
Computational Experiments
(a) Evolution of maximum RCL length
(b) Evolution of LS destroy percentage
(c) p-values for maximum RCL length
(d) p-values for LS destroy percentage
Figure 7.5: Instance 1: Evolution of reactive parameters and their p-values
in iteration 29, which at first seems like the opposite of the expected
effect. However, it has to be taken into account how the p-values are
updated: In an iteration where a specific parameter value is chosen,
only the q-value for this value is updated, and not those of the others.
In iteration 29, the cost of the best solution drops, which means
that the ratio between this cost and the average solution cost for
the specific parameter value is also lowered (except if the parameter
value was never chosen before, which is not the case here). Since the
p-values of all other parameters are still calculated based on their
non-updated q-values, they experience a raise, while the parameter
value with the updated q-value experiences a lowering in the p-value.
However, this effect is mitigated over the following iterations, where
other parameter values are chosen and accordingly updated. This
can be seen by the gradual rise of the curve for maximum RCL length
4 and destroy percentage 0.9 in the iterations after 29. A similar
effect can be observed at iteration 4 (with parameter values of 3 and
0.7) and iteration 44 (with parameter values of 2 and 0.9). Towards
the end, the curves get flattened out, because there is no new best
==PAGE:96==
7.4 Internal analysis of GRASP behavior
85
solution and there is already a significant number of solution costs
calculated into the averages, which means that they do not fluctuate
as much as in the beginning. For the maximum RCL length, the
values 2 and 3 finally have the highest p-value, followed by 4, while
for the destroy percentage it is the value 0.9, followed by 0.7. This
corresponds to the parameter values mentioned above, which were
used when finding new best solutions.
Figures showing the reactive parameter evolution (like Figure 7.5)
for Instances 2 to 4 can be found in Appendix B.1.
Parameter value
Inst. 1
Inst. 2
Inst. 3
Inst. 4
Max RCL length = 1
0.1951
0.2170
0.2126
0.2226
Max RCL length = 2
0.2203
0.2092
0.2068
0.2072
Max RCL length = 3
0.2211
0.1941
0.2027
0.1873
Max RCL length = 4
0.2024
0.1951
0.1953
0.1896
Max RCL length = 5
0.1610
0.1846
0.1825
0.1933
LS destroy percentage = 0.1
0.1754
0.2021
0.1980
0.1880
LS destroy percentage = 0.3
0.1809
0.2006
0.1992
0.1986
LS destroy percentage = 0.5
0.2038
0.2046
0.1997
0.1882
LS destroy percentage = 0.7
0.2134
0.1988
0.2021
0.2069
LS destroy percentage = 0.9
0.2265
0.1939
0.2010
0.2183
Table 7.9: Final p-values for reactive parameters
In order to be able to evaluate if there are any reactive parameter
values which were especially successful throughout the instances,
Table 7.9 shows the p-values for the two reactive parameters in the
final GRASP iteration for all four instances. Here, it can be seen
that for Instance 1, a maximum RCL length of 3 yielded the best
solutions, whereas in Instances 2 to 3, it was a value of 1, i.e. a
purely greedy construction plus local search. The value with the
worst performance was 5 for the first three instances, and 3 for
Instance 4. This relatively poor performance of RCLs of size 5 also
underlines that this problem is relatively sensitive to randomization
and that it was necessary to cap the length of the RCL.
Regarding the local search destroy percentage, for Instances 1 and
4 a value of 0.9 showed the most success, while for Instance 2 it
was 0.5 and for Instance 3 it was 0.7. Furthermore, in all instances
==PAGE:97==
86
Computational Experiments
except Instance 2 (where it was 0.3), the lowest destroy percentage of
0.1 yielded the worst performance. This indicates that the algorithm
tends to be more successful if more assignments are removed and the
greedy construction hence has to repair larger parts of the solution.
However, this in turn also means that the local search iterations
take a longer time, since the greedy construction is run almost from
scratch if the assignments are removed from 90 % of the vessels.
(a) Instance 1
(b) Instance 2
(c) Instance 3
(d) Instance 4
Figure 7.6: Relation between LS destroy percentage and number of LS iterations
In addition to the effect of the value of the destroy parameter on the
time that one local search iteration takes, it also has an influence
on the number of iterations performed, as Figure 7.6 displays. Each
sub-figure shows this relation for one of the instances, where each
point represents one occurrence of the number of local search iter-
ations shown on the y-axis if the destroy percentage was set to the
respective value on the x-axis. The darker a point is, the more oc-
currences were measured for this value combination. For Instances
1 and 4, this figure clearly shows that the number of performed local
search iterations grows with an increasing value of the destroy per-
centage. This is plausible, since a larger solution space is explored if
==PAGE:98==
7.4 Internal analysis of GRASP behavior
87
more assignments are recomputed. Furthermore, this explains why
higher values of the destroy percentage are shown by Table 7.9 to
be more successful regarding the solution quality. Instances 2 and
3 seem to be relatively indifferent to the value of the destroy per-
centage, and generally show lower local search iteration numbers.
For Instance 3, as already discussed before, the algorithm even al-
ways terminates after the minimum possible number of iterations
without making any improvements to the solution. This behavior
for Instance 2 and 3 can possibly be explained by their low crew
member / vessel ratio, which diminishes the solution space (see also
Section 7.6.2).
7.4.2
Influence of parameter reactivity on solution quality
An interesting question to study with respect to the choice of pa-
rameters for the algorithm is whether the parameter reactivity ac-
tually has a positive effect on the solution quality, or if it would
have been better to assign fixed values to all parameters. In order
to be able to make conclusions about this, an experiment has been
conducted where, instead of defining the maximum RCL size and
the local search destroy percentage in a reactive way, they are fixed
to the mean of the original list of possible values. More specifically,
the maximum RCL size is set to 3, while the destroy percentage is
set to 0.5. When running GRASP using these parameter values, it
yields the results shown in Table 7.10.
Here, we can clearly see that removing the reactivity has a strongly
negative effect on the solution quality for Instance 1, since the new
solution cost is almost three times as high as the cost when using
reactivity. For Instance 2, the cost is decreased when removing the
reactivity, but, on the other hand, there is one more newly hired crew
member, which still makes the solution given by the algorithm with
reactivity preferable. And also for Instance 3, the original solution
is better due to a slightly lower cost. The only Instance where the
algorithm without reactivity shows a better result than the one with
reactivity is Instance 4: Here, the cost is decreased by about 13 %.
==PAGE:99==
88
Computational Experiments
However, this effect can be influenced by randomness (the same can
be said about Instance 3). Hence, we conclude that for Instances
3 and 4, the necessity of using reactivity is not as high as for the
other instances. However, due to the significantly positive effects of
the reactivity seen in Instances 1 and 2, it becomes clear that the
parameters should indeed be defined reactively, in order to allow the
algorithm to adapt to different instances.
Instance
Metric
GRASP
w/o reac.
GRASP
GRASP
w/o reac.
vs. GRASP
Instance 1
Hires
6
6
±0
Total cost
316549
107034
+195.75 %
Instance 2
Hires
4
3
+1
Total cost
4824829
7264525
-33.58 %
Instance 3
Hires
3
3
±0
Total cost
5086882
4906536
+3.68 %
Instance 4
Hires
0
0
±0
Total cost
1248712
1436652
-13.08 %
Table 7.10: Comparison between solution quality of GRASP without and with
reactivity
7.4.3
Influence of early planning prioritization on solution
quality
As discussed in Section 6.4.1, an early planning prioritization has
been introduced in order to mitigate negative effects of considering
the whole planning period at once. This prioritization consists of
penalizing the number of days an assignment starts after the first
day of the planning period, and is only considered in the solution
cost within the algorithm, but not in the final solution cost.
In
Table 7.11, the results of a study are summarized, where the GRASP
algorithm was run on all four instances without integrating this
early planning prioritization, and they are compared to the results
of the full GRASP already presented in previous sections.
From
the table, it can be seen that the additional penalty has almost
no effect on the solution quality for Instance 1, whereas on all the
==PAGE:100==
7.4 Internal analysis of GRASP behavior
89
other instances it has a significant effect: On Instances 2, 3 and
4, the number of hires is considerably increased, so that it even
exceeds the one that the Baseline Greedy yields (compare the tables
in Section 7.3.1). The highest effect is observed for Instance 4, for
which the number is almost quadrupled. Even though the total costs
are decreased for these instances, the solutions given by GRASP
without prioritization are not desirable, due to the increase in the
number of hires, which, as already mentioned, dominates the cost.
The reason for the different extent of the effect of the early planning
prioritization on the different instances can be found in the crew
member / vessel ratio of the instances (see Table 7.1). The lower
the ratio, the higher the necessity of prioritizing early planning. This
is plausible due to the observations discussed in Section 6.4.1: The
prioritization is necessary in cases where crew members are planned
in the middle of the planning period and are then not available any-
more for any other assignments. However, if the number of crew
members available per vessel is high enough, then this effect is not
as important, because there are sufficiently many crew members
such that some of them can have only one assignment without cre-
ating the necessity for hiring new crew members. The effect of the
crew member / vessel ratio on the solution quality will be discussed
further in Section 7.6.2.
Instance
Metric
GRASP
w/o prio.
GRASP
GRASP
w/o prio.
vs. GRASP
Instance 1
Hires
6
6
±0
Total cost
107333
107034
+0.28 %
Instance 2
Hires
11
3
+8
Total cost
1215459
7264525
-83.27 %
Instance 3
Hires
8
3
+5
Total cost
1867407
4906536
-61.94 %
Instance 4
Hires
2
0
+2
Total cost
0
1436652
-100.00 %
Table 7.11: Comparison between solution quality of GRASP without and with
early planning prioritization
==PAGE:101==
90
Computational Experiments
7.4.4
Conclusion on internal behavior
As verified in Section 7.4.1, the adaptation of the reactive para-
meters in the course of the computation of GRASP is performed in
a way that is well-explainable by the underlying theory and indeed
reflects the success of the respective parameter values. For most
of the instances, it is observed from the final p-values that smaller
maximum RCL sizes and larger local search destroy percentages are
preferred. Regarding the influence of the destroy percentage on the
number of performed local search iterations, it can be said that for
two of the instances, the iteration number grows with an increasing
percentage, while for the other two, there is no visible relation.
From Section 7.4.2, we conclude that for most of the instances, the
reactivity of the maximum RCL size and the local search destroy
percentage indeed has a positive influence on the solution quality.
In fact, running an experiment without reactivity showed that the
algorithm gave significantly worse results on most instances when
using this configuration.
A similar effect was shown in Section 7.4.3 for the case of not using
the early planning prioritization: In the corresponding experiments,
most of the instances showed a considerable increase in the number
of hires when removing this prioritization, which means that it is
indeed crucial for the success of the algorithm.
7.5
Relation between instance size and compu-
tation time
In this section, the goal is to understand the relation between the
instance size and the computation time (both total and of parts
of the algorithm) as well as iteration numbers.
To perform the
underlying experiments, additional synthetic instances were created
as described in Section 7.2.2: From each of the four given instances,
six instances were created by gradually adding two more vessels,
==PAGE:102==
7.5 Relation between instance size and computation time
91
while keeping the crew member / vessel ration the same (i.e. an
appropriate number of crew members was added). The figures in
this section all contain four plots, one for each instance, comparing
it to its augmented versions.
7.5.1
Greedy randomized construction time
In Figure 7.7, the average time needed to perform the greedy ran-
domized construction within a GRASP iteration is compared be-
tween the instances of different sizes, and additionally, the total
time that Baseline Greedy needs to solve the instances is plotted.
This is an interesting comparison, since the greedy randomized con-
struction could also be used by itself as a greedy heuristic (when α
is set to 0).
(a) Instance 1 (orig. 16 vessels)
(b) Instance 2 (orig. 17 vessels)
(c) Instance 3 (orig. 26 vessels)
(d) Instance 4 (orig. 47 vessels)
Figure 7.7: Development of average computation time for greedy randomized
construction (blue) and total computation time for Baseline Greedy
(orange) for instances of increasing size
==PAGE:103==
92
Computational Experiments
From all four sub-figures, we can conclude that the computation
time that the greedy randomized construction needs grows linearly
with an increasing number of vessels in the respective instance. On
the contrary, for the Baseline Greedy algorithm, there is no notable
increase in computation time for an increased instance size; the time
stays approximately constant.
Furthermore, it can be seen that
for the base versions of Instances 1 and 2, the greedy randomized
construction is faster than the Baseline Greedy, whereas in all the
other instances, the Baseline Greedy is faster. The reason for this
different behavior is that in the greedy randomized construction
procedure, a candidate list is considered, which has to be updated
in every iteration, and this takes considerably more time the more
vessels the instance contains. The Baseline Greedy, however, never
looks at a complete set of possible replacements, but simply greedily
looks at the next few possible replacements. One remark that has
to be made regarding Figure 7.7a is about the missing data point
for the Baseline Greedy algorithm: The reason for this is that in
the original Instance 1, there is an uncleanness in the data, where
a crew member has a latest past assignment for which a vessel ID
is specified, but there is no vessel with this ID in the vessel set in
the instance. This causes the Baseline Greedy algorithm to fail on
this instance (or instances based on it) in special cases. Therefore,
also in later plots using Instance 1 with 12 vessels added, the data
involving the Baseline Greedy algorithm are missing.
7.5.2
GRASP total time
Figure 7.8 displays the total time needed by GRASP to solve the
different instances, alongside with the number of GRASP iterations
performed. These two metrics always have to be considered in a
combined way, because the total time of GRASP is strongly depen-
dent on the number of iterations, and since there is no fixed limit on
the number of iterations, the total time can fluctuate significantly in
reaction to this number. For Instances 1 to 3 and their augmented
versions, we see from Figures 7.8a to 7.8c that they terminate before
the hard time limit of one hour, which means that they terminate
==PAGE:104==
7.5 Relation between instance size and computation time
93
because the maximum number of iterations without improvement
has been reached. Here, we see that the general trend of the total
computation times is upwards (because of the increased time for
greedy randomized construction seen above, and therefore also an
increased time per local search iteration). However, there are sig-
nificant outliers from this trend, which are synchronized with the
number of GRASP iterations performed: If there is a peak in the
number of iterations, then also the total computation time shows
an outlier upwards from the trend, and vice versa. In Figure 7.8d,
it can be seen that both the original version of Instance 4 and its
augmented versions use the full time limit of one hour, which is why
no trend in the computation time itself can be read from the data.
However, we can observe that there is a general downwards trend in
the number of iterations, which is plausible, since because the algo-
rithm is slower for larger instances, it can perform fewer iterations
in the same computation time.
(a) Instance 1 (orig. 16 vessels)
(b) Instance 2 (orig. 17 vessels)
(c) Instance 3 (orig. 26 vessels)
(d) Instance 4 (orig. 47 vessels)
Figure 7.8: Development of total computation time for GRASP (blue) and num-
ber of performed GRASP iterations (orange) for instances of increas-
ing size
==PAGE:105==
94
Computational Experiments
7.5.3
GRASP iteration time
Furthermore, it is interesting to compare the average time for a sin-
gle GRASP iteration for different instance sizes (see Figure 7.9).
Again, this is strongly connected to another metric: The higher the
average number of performed local search iterations is, the higher
also the total time of a GRASP iteration will be, independently from
the direct effects of the increased number of vessels on the compu-
tation time. Indeed, such as for the plots analyzed above, we again
see that there is a general upwards trend in the time per GRASP it-
eration with increasing instance size, with occasional peaks that are
in line with peaks in the average number of local search iterations.
(a) Instance 1 (orig. 16 vessels)
(b) Instance 2 (orig. 17 vessels)
(c) Instance 3 (orig. 26 vessels)
(d) Instance 4 (orig. 47 vessels)
Figure 7.9: Development of average time per GRASP iteration (blue) and av-
erage number of local search iterations (orange) for instances of in-
creasing size
==PAGE:106==
7.6 Sensitivity analysis
95
7.5.4
Conclusion on computation time
From the above experiment results, it can be concluded that the
average computation time for the greedy randomized construction
grows approximately linearly with increasing instance size, whereas
the total computation time for the Baseline Greedy is not signifi-
cantly influenced by a gradual increase in size. The total computa-
tion time for GRASP generally shows an upwards trend with grow-
ing instance size (unless it reaches the maximum allowed time), but
is, additionally, strongly dependent on the number of GRASP itera-
tions performed. In cases where the computation time is continually
at the maximum, a decrease in the number of performed iterations
is observed. This can be explained by the fact that the duration per
GRASP iteration increases for a growing instance size. However,
this trend is, additionally, influenced by the average number of local
search iterations.
7.6
Sensitivity analysis
In this section, a sensitivity analysis will be performed with respect
to various changes in the input, i.e. it will be observed how the algo-
rithm reacts to these changes, especially with regard to the solution
quality.
7.6.1
Increasing instance size
At first, we will consider the same instances as in Section 7.5, where
the number of vessels in the given instances were gradually increased
while keeping the crew member / vessel ratio at the same level.
However, we will not look at the running times, as in the previous
section, but instead at the quality of the provided solutions.
In Figure 7.10, the improvement of cost and hires in the GRASP
solution with respect to the Baseline Greedy solution is plotted for
==PAGE:107==
96
Computational Experiments
all the instances. Here, it can be seen that the improvements that
the GRASP algorithm yields stay relatively stable with increased
instance size for Instances 1, 2 and 4. Only for Instance 3 (see Fig-
ure 7.10c), there are some significant fluctuations in the difference
between the number of hires that the the GRASP solution contains
compared to the Baseline Greedy solution. This is possibly due to
the relatively small solution space for Instance 3 that has already
been discussed in previous sections, which could make the nature of
the synthetically enlarged instances very dependent on which spe-
cific vessels and crew members have been randomly sampled and
re-added.
(a) Instance 1 (orig. 16 vessels)
(b) Instance 2 (orig. 17 vessels)
(c) Instance 3 (orig. 26 vessels)
(d) Instance 4 (orig. 47 vessels)
Figure 7.10: Relative improvement in total cost (blue) and absolute improve-
ment in hires (orange) from Baseline Greedy to GRASP solution
for instances of increasing size
7.6.2
Increasing crew member / vessel ratio
While the crew member / vessel ratio in the previous section was
kept at the same level when increasing the instance size in the pre-
vious section, the approach used in this section is contrary to that:
==PAGE:108==
7.6 Sensitivity analysis
97
Here, the number of vessels is kept the same, but the ratio between
the number of crew members and the number of vessels in the in-
stance is gradually increased. This has been done taking Instance 3
as a basis, since its original ratio was relatively low (8.38) and it has
already been conjectured in previous sections that this is one of the
reasons for the lower solution quality that GRASP gives for this in-
stance compared to the others. Therefore, additional instances have
been created from Instance 4 by adding a suitable amount of crew
members to reach ratios in increasing levels at steps of 0.5. Then
both the GRASP and the Baseline Greedy algorithm have been run
on these instances in order to prove that there is indeed a relation
between the solution quality and the number of crew members per
vessel.
Figure 7.11: Total cost (blue and cyan) and number of hires (orange and pink)
in the solutions of GRASP and Baseline Greedy for instances with
increasing crew member / vessel ratio (based on Instance 3)
At first, we will study and compare the absolute costs and numbers
of hires that the two algorithms yield on the different instances.
From Figure 7.11, we see that the number of hires drops signifi-
cantly for both GRASP and Baseline Greedy at the transition from
the original instance to the one with a ratio of 9.0, after which it
stays at a level of 0 hires. Regarding the costs, we also observe an
interesting development: For both GRASP and Baseline Greedy, the
costs decrease considerably the more the ratio grows (which shows
that the initial conjecture was true), and the corresponding curves
in the graph have almost the same shape, but the one for GRASP
always lies about 1 mio. below the one for Baseline Greedy. From
==PAGE:109==
98
Computational Experiments
a ratio of 11.0 and onwards, the cost provided by GRASP lies at
almost 0, whereas the curve for Baseline Greedy still stays shifted
up in parallel.
This observation leads us directly to the development of the rela-
tive cost improvement shown in Figure 7.12: While the absolute
difference in costs stays about the same across the instances, this,
in combination with the general downwards trend, also means that
the relative difference grows smaller and smaller. Starting from the
above-mentioned instance with ratio 11.0, the cost improvement
from Baseline Greedy to GRASP reaches almost -100 %, while it
was only about -20 % in the original instance. The improvement in
hires stays constant, which correspond to what has been seen in the
previous figure.
On the whole, it can be concluded that, as expected from the results
in earlier sections, the crew member / vessel ratio indeed has a major
effect on the solution quality, both with respect to absolute values
and with respect to the room for improvement that GRASP has/uses
with respect to the Baseline Greedy solutions.
Figure 7.12: Relative improvement in total cost (blue) and absolute improve-
ment in hires (orange) from Baseline Greedy to GRASP solution
for instances with increasing crew member / vessel ratio (based on
Instance 3)
==PAGE:110==
7.6 Sensitivity analysis
99
7.6.3
Conclusion on sensitivity
From the experiments presented above, we conclude that an increase
in the size of the instance (i.e. increasing the number of vessels
while leaving the crew member / vessel ratio at the same level) does
not have any significant influence on the relative improvement in
solution quality that GRASP provides in comparison to Baseline
Greedy. This is an argument for the stability of the algorithm.
Furthermore, when gradually increasing the ratio between the crew
member and the vessel number while leaving the number of vessels
the same, it can be seen that both GRASP and Baseline Greedy
show an improvement in the solution quality, while the relative dif-
ference between the costs provided by the two algorithms grows
significantly with an increasing ratio, until it eventually reaches an
improvement of almost 100 % which GRASP provides compared to
Baseline Greedy. This means that the preference for the GRASP al-
gorithm over the Baseline Greedy algorithm becomes stronger, the
higher the crew member / vessel ratio is for an instance.
==PAGE:111==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion and Future Work
In this chapter, we will give a conclusion on the theory and results
presented in foregoing chapters. Furthermore, possible future im-
provements that could be made to the algorithm designed in this
project will be proposed.
8.1
Conclusion
As stated in the beginning, the goal of this thesis is to find a so-
lution method for the ship crew scheduling problem which provides
improvements in the solution quality compared to the results ob-
tained by the greedy algorithm (Baseline Greedy) implemented by
the decision science company Qampo.
In order to approach this target, first a large pool of existing lite-
rature on the subject has been reviewed. Furthermore, the problem
has been described both verbally and as a mathematical model. This
MIP model can be applied for validation purposes, but is too com-
plex (concerning the number of decision variables and constraints) to
be applied for solving real-life instances. Therefore, a metaheuris-
tic algorithm has been developed which is based on the reactive
GRASP framework. A number of structural differences between the
Baseline Greedy procedure and this algorithm have been pointed
out, the most important of which being that Baseline Greedy uses
a purely greedy approach, while the designed GRASP algorithm ex-
plores the solution space in a systematic way which is characteristic
for a metaheuristic, and integrates reactivity features which make
==PAGE:112==
8.1 Conclusion
101
it adaptive to the success of certain parameter values. In contrast
to the reactive GRASP design commonly used in the literature, the
algorithm presented in this thesis contains two instead of just one
reactive parameters, namely the maximum size of the Restricted
Candidate List and the percentage of vessels on which all assign-
ments are removed in the local search procedure.
The GRASP algorithm has been implemented and tested on four
instances given by Qampo as well as further instances generated by
modifying the given ones, which are all close to real-life data. These
computational experiments have delivered valuable results used for
developing a better understanding of the behavior of the algorithm
and comparing its performance to the one of Baseline Greedy. As
pointed out in Section 7.3.3, the GRASP algorithm shows consider-
able improvements in the solution quality on all four given instances,
with cost decreases of up to 95 %. On the other hand, the computa-
tion time needed by GRASP is significantly higher than for Baseline
Greedy (between a few minutes and an imposed maximum of one
hour for GRASP, compared to a few seconds for Baseline Greedy).
However, this is plausible, since the GRASP algorithm is a meta-
heuristic, which is able to explore the larger parts of the solution
space the more time it has at its disposal. Furthermore, ship crew
scheduling is usually done in a tactical context, with a planning
period of one year in this case, which means that it is not a very
time-critical problem.
As described in Section 7.5.4, the average
time of the construction phase of GRASP grows approximately lin-
early with an increasing instance size, while Baseline Greedy does
not experience a significant effect on the computation time in this
case. For GRASP, also the total time and the time per iteration show
an upwards trend with growing instance size, but they are strongly
influenced by the number of GRASP iterations and the number of
local search iterations, respectively. Regarding the parameter re-
activity implementation mentioned before, it has been shown that
it behaves as intended, and according to the experiment results, it
leads to significant cost improvements compared to a GRASP algo-
rithm with fixed parameter values (see Section 7.4.4).
==PAGE:113==
102
Conclusion and Future Work
Another aspect which has been discovered in this thesis is the in-
fluence of the ratio between the number of crew members and the
number of vessels in the instance. As discussed in Section 7.6.3,
while the algorithm performance stays relatively stable when in-
creasing the instance size but leaving this ratio at the same level,
there is a different trend when gradually increasing the crew mem-
ber / vessel ratio: The higher the ratio, the more significant the
improvement that the GRASP algorithm obtains with respect to
Baseline Greedy. This can be explained by the fact that a higher
number of crew members available for planning leads to a greater
solution space and, therefore, more room for improvement which is
at the disposal of the GRASP algorithm.
On the whole, it can be concluded that the GRASP algorithm is
preferable to the Baseline Greedy algorithm on all the considered
instances, which makes it well applicable in practice, and which
means that the goal of the thesis has been fulfilled.
8.2
Possible future improvements
One important point to consider when thinking about future im-
provements is that, as described in Section 3.3, there are a few rules
which Qampo considers in its problem, while they were left out in
this thesis. The reasons for this exclusion are that those rules do not
belong to the most important ones and/or are rather rarely used,
and that the focus should be laid on the conceptual design of the
algorithm.
The missing soft rules, such as optional skill require-
ments and vessel or sister group changes, are relatively easy to add,
by computing additional penalties in the objective function. The
one hard rule which has been left out concerns the so-called joining
requirements, which define how many days should lie in-between the
joining dates of any two crew members of the two specified ranks
on the vessel for which the requirements are set. This rule is a bit
more difficult to add, since it is a constraint instead of an objective
penalty, and constraints have to be integrated into the internal com-
==PAGE:114==
103
putations of a metaheuristic. Nevertheless, it is definitely possible
to add checks for this rule in the method computing the replacement
date, which is called when updating the Candidate List. Addition-
ally, as described in Section 6.4.2, in the case of unsatisfiable joining
requirements, gaps between assignments can arise, which makes it
necessary to compute the cost for unmanned days also within the
algorithm, but only in-between assignments.
Another feature that could be added to the algorithm is the possi-
bility of promotions, i.e. the change of a crew member from one rank
to a higher one in the course of the planning period. This option is
currently not yet implemented at Qampo, but there are plans for it.
Furthermore, as stated in Sections 2.1.1.1 and 4.4.3, the existing lit-
erature on ship crew scheduling usually takes into account the port
locations and arrival times at these ports, because the boarding and
disembarking of crew members is, in reality, only possible at these
points. This is currently not demanded by Qampo’s customers, but
it could be relatively easily integrated into the algorithm by not con-
sidering every day as a possible replacement date, but instead using
a list of discrete time points. Moreover, to make the objective value
more realistic, the travel costs for the transportation of crew mem-
bers between their home locations and the respective ports could be
integrated as an additional penalty.
Regarding the methodology, other advanced GRASP methods apart
from the reactivity could be integrated in order to achieve further
enhancements: For example, path-relinking or other extensions men-
tioned in Section 2.2.2 could be added. Furthermore, hybridizations
can be considered, as it is often done in the literature. One possi-
bility could be to integrate a matching algorithm (similarly to how
it is done in Baseline Greedy) or another graph-based method.
==PAGE:115==
References
[AFE+13]
A. Azadeh, M. Hosseinabadi Farahani, H. Eivazy,
S. Nazari-Shirkouhi, and G. Asadipour. A hybrid
meta-heuristic algorithm for optimization of crew
scheduling. Applied Soft Computing, 13(1):158–164,
January 2013.
[AN13]
Laurent Alfandari and Anass Nagih. Airline Crew
Pairing Optimization. In Vangelis Th. Paschos, ed-
itor, Applications of Combinatorial Optimization,
pages 1–22. Wiley, 1 edition, February 2013.
[ASEP18]
Divyam Aggarwal, Dhish Kumar Saxena, Michael
Emmerich, and Saaju Paulose.
On Large-Scale
Airline Crew Pairing Generation.
In 2018 IEEE
Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence
(SSCI), pages 593–600, Bangalore, India, Novem-
ber 2018. IEEE.
[BCJ+03]
Cynthia Barnhart, Amy M. Cohn, Ellis L. John-
son, Diego Klabjan, George L. Nemhauser, and
Pamela H. Vance. Airline Crew Scheduling. In Ran-
dolph W. Hall, editor, Handbook of Transportation
Science, volume 56, pages 517–560. Kluwer Aca-
demic Publishers, Boston, 2003.
[BGG+07]
Lennart
Bengtsson,
Rastislav
Galia,
Tomas
Gustafsson, Curt Hjorring, and Niklas Kohl. Rail-
way Crew Pairing Optimization. In Frank Geraets,
Leo Kroon, Anita Schoebel, Dorothea Wagner,
and Christos D. Zaroliagis, editors, Algorithmic
Methods for Railway Optimization, volume 4359,
pages 126–144. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2007.
==PAGE:116==
REFERENCES
105
[BK14]
Edmund K. Burke and Graham Kendall,
edi-
tors. Search Methodologies: Introductory Tutorials
in Optimization and Decision Support Techniques.
Springer US, Boston, MA, 2014.
[CDD06]
Sergio Consoli and K Darby-Dowman. Combina-
torial Optimization And Metaheuristics. Technical
report, School of Information Systems, Computing
and Mathematics, Brunel University, January 2006.
[CRCM08]
Broderick Crawford, Nibaldo Rodríguez, Carlos
Castro, and Eric Monfroy.
Hybrid Approach to
Crew Pairing Optimization. In 2008 Third Interna-
tional Conference on Convergence and Hybrid In-
formation Technology, pages 869–874, Busan, Ko-
rea, November 2008. IEEE.
[DBVDBBD15] Philippe De Bruecker, Jorne Van Den Bergh, Jeroen
Beliën, and Erik Demeulemeester. Workforce plan-
ning incorporating skills: State of the art. European
Journal of Operational Research, 243(1):1–16, May
2015.
[DD18]
Muhammet Deveci and Nihan Çetin Demirel.
A
survey of the literature on airline crew scheduling.
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence,
74:54–69, September 2018.
[EHMÖ15]
Güneş Erdoğan, Mohamed Haouari, Melda Örmeci
Matoglu, and Okan Örsan Özener. Solving a large-
scale crew pairing problem. Journal of the Opera-
tional Research Society, 66(10):1742–1754, October
2015.
[FR89]
Thomas A Feo and Mauricio G. C Resende.
A
probabilistic heuristic for a computationally diffi-
cult set covering problem. Operations Research Let-
ters, 8(2):67–71, April 1989.
[GDMP13]
Ronald E. Giachetti,
Purush Damodaran,
Sid
Mestry, and Claudia Prada.
Optimization-based
==PAGE:117==
106
REFERENCES
decision support system for crew scheduling in the
cruise industry. Computers & Industrial Engineer-
ing, 64(1):500–510, January 2013.
[GP19]
Michel Gendreau and Jean-Yves Potvin, editors.
Handbook of Metaheuristics, volume 272 of Inter-
national Series in Operations Research & Manage-
ment Science.
Springer International Publishing,
Cham, 2019.
[Guo05]
Yufeng Guo.
A Decision Support Framework for
the Airline Crew Schedule Disruption Management
with Strategy Mapping.
In Hein Fleuren, Dick
Den Hertog, and Peter Kort, editors, Operations
Research Proceedings 2004, volume 2004, pages
158–165. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Hei-
delberg, 2005.
[HS05]
Holger H. Hoos and Thomas Stützle,
editors.
Stochastic Local Search.
The Morgan Kaufmann
Series in Artificial Intelligence. Morgan Kaufmann,
San Francisco, January 2005.
[HTK20]
László Hajdu, Attila Tóth, and Miklós Krész.
Graph Coloring based Heuristic for Crew Roster-
ing. Acta Cybernetica, 24(4):643–661, August 2020.
[Jü12]
Silke Jütte. Large-Scale Crew Scheduling: Models,
Methods, and Applications in the Railway Industry.
Edition KWV. Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden :
Imprint: Springer Gabler, Wiesbaden, 1st ed. 2012
edition, 2012.
[KS02]
Harry Kornilakis and Panagiotis Stamatopoulos.
Crew Pairing Optimization with Genetic Algo-
rithms. In G. Goos, J. Hartmanis, J. Van Leeuwen,
Ioannis P. Vlahavas, and Constantine D. Spyropou-
los, editors, Methods and Applications of Artificial
Intelligence, volume 2308, pages 109–120. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2002.
==PAGE:118==
REFERENCES
107
[KSS17]
Atoosa Kasirzadeh, Mohammed Saddoune, and
François Soumis. Airline crew scheduling: models,
algorithms, and data sets. EURO Journal on Trans-
portation and Logistics, 6(2):111–137, June 2017.
[LSAvdM18]
Alex Leggate, Seda Sucu, Kerem Akartunalı, and
Robert van der Meer. Modelling crew scheduling in
offshore supply vessels. Journal of the Operational
Research Society, 69(6):959–970, June 2018.
[LSZ23]
Mauro Lucci, Daniel Severín, and Paula Zabala. A
metaheuristic for crew scheduling in a pickup-and-
delivery problem with time windows. International
Transactions in Operational Research, 30(2):970–
1001, 2023.
[LW09]
Haitao Li and Keith Womer. A Decomposition Ap-
proach for Shipboard Manpower Scheduling. Mili-
tary Operations Research, 14(3):67–90, 2009.
[MBRB99]
A. Mingozzi, M. A. Boschetti, S. Ricciardelli, and
L. Bianco.
A Set Partitioning Approach to the
Crew Scheduling Problem.
Operations Research,
47(6):873–888, December 1999.
[MC21]
Panagiotis Mamatsis and Spiros Chountasis. An op-
timisation model for the crew scheduling problem.
International Journal of Decision Support Systems,
4:293, January 2021.
[MS07]
Claude P. Medard and Nidhi Sawhney. Airline crew
scheduling from planning to operations. European
Journal of Operational Research, 183(3):1013–1027,
December 2007.
[NOBGN16]
Diego Novoa, Camilo Olarte, David Barrera, and
Eliana María González-Neira. A GRASP-based ap-
proach to the multi activity combined timetabling
and crew scheduling problem considering a hetero-
geneous workforce.
International Journal of In-
==PAGE:119==
108
REFERENCES
dustrial Engineering Computations, pages 597–606,
2016.
[PLL20]
Shyam S G Perumal, Richard M Lusby, and Jesper
Larsen. A review of integrated approaches for opti-
mizing electric vehicle and crew schedules. Techni-
cal report, Technical University of Denmark, 2020.
[PM20]
Axel Parmentier and Frédéric Meunier.
Aircraft
routing and crew pairing: Updated algorithms at
Air France. Omega, 93:102073, June 2020.
[RH18]
Anisa Rizvanolli and Carl Georg Heise.
Efficient
Ship Crew Scheduling Complying with Resting
Hours Regulations. In Andreas Fink, Armin Fügen-
schuh, and Martin Josef Geiger, editors, Operations
Research Proceedings 2016, pages 535–541. Springer
International Publishing, Cham, 2018.
[Riz22]
Anisa Rizvanolli. The Ship Crew Scheduling Prob-
lem with Rest Hours Constraints. Fraunhofer Ver-
lag, 2022.
[RR14]
Mauricio G. C. Resende and Celso C. Ribeiro.
GRASP: Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Pro-
cedures. In Edmund K. Burke and Graham Kendall,
editors, Search Methodologies: Introductory Tuto-
rials in Optimization and Decision Support Tech-
niques, pages 287–312. Springer US, Boston, MA,
2014.
[RR16]
Mauricio G.C. Resende and Celso C. Ribeiro. Opti-
mization by GRASP: Greedy Randomized Adaptive
Search Procedures. Springer, New York, NY, 2016.
[RR19]
Mauricio G. C. Resende and Celso C. Ribeiro.
Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Procedures:
Advances and Extensions. In Michel Gendreau and
Jean-Yves Potvin, editors, Handbook of Metaheuris-
tics, International Series in Operations Research &
==PAGE:120==
REFERENCES
109
Management Science, pages 169–220. Springer In-
ternational Publishing, Cham, 2019.
[SDES12]
Mohammed Saddoune, Guy Desaulniers, Issmail
Elhallaoui, and François Soumis. Integrated Airline
Crew Pairing and Crew Assignment by Dynamic
Constraint Aggregation.
Transportation Science,
46(1):39–55, February 2012.
[SJKN05]
Andrew J. Schaefer, Ellis L. Johnson, Anton J.
Kleywegt, and George L. Nemhauser. Airline Crew
Scheduling Under Uncertainty. Transportation Sci-
ence, 39(3):340–348, August 2005.
[SPKP21]
Dimitris Souravlias, Konstantinos E. Parsopoulos,
Ilias S. Kotsireas, and Panos M. Pardalos. Meta-
heuristic Optimization Algorithms.
In Dimitris
Souravlias, Konstantinos E. Parsopoulos, Ilias S.
Kotsireas, and Panos M. Pardalos, editors, Al-
gorithm Portfolios:
Advances, Applications, and
Challenges, SpringerBriefs in Optimization, pages
1–11. Springer International Publishing, Cham,
2021.
[SRG18]
Valerio Maria Sereno, Line Blander Reinhardt, and
Stefan Guericke. Exact Methods and Heuristics for
the Liner Shipping Crew Scheduling Problem. In
Raffaele Cerulli, Andrea Raiconi, and Stefan Voß,
editors, Computational Logistics, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 363–378, Cham, 2018.
Springer International Publishing.
[SS23]
Hubert Maximilian Sistig and Dirk Uwe Sauer.
Metaheuristic for the integrated electric vehicle
and crew scheduling problem.
Applied Energy,
339:120915, June 2023.
[SZ05]
Christoph Stark and Jürgen Zimmermann.
An
Exact Branch-and-Price Algorithm for Workforce
Scheduling. In Hein Fleuren, Dick Den Hertog, and
==PAGE:121==
110
REFERENCES
Peter Kort, editors, Operations Research Proceed-
ings 2004, volume 2004, pages 207–212. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005.
[VA15]
Balachandran
Vaidyanathan
and
Ravindra
K.
Ahuja.
Crew Scheduling Problem.
In Bruce W.
Patty, editor, Handbook of Operations Research Ap-
plications at Railroads, volume 222, pages 163–175.
Springer US, Boston, MA, 2015.
[VdBBDB+13]
Jorne Van den Bergh, Jeroen Beliën, Philippe
De Bruecker, Erik Demeulemeester, and Liesje
De Boeck. Personnel scheduling: A literature re-
view. European Journal of Operational Research,
226(3):367–385, May 2013.
[WSSY21]
Xin Wen, Xuting Sun, Yige Sun, and Xiaohang
Yue.
Airline crew scheduling: Models and algo-
rithms. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics
and Transportation Review, 149:102304, May 2021.
[Xie15]
Lin Xie.
Decision Support for Crew Rostering
in Public Transit:
Web-Based Optimization Sys-
tem for Cyclic and Non-Cyclic Rostering. Springer
Fachmedien Wiesbaden, Wiesbaden, 2015.
==PAGE:122==
APPENDIX A
Linearized MIP constraints
• Linearization of constraint 4.13: If a crew member was
not working in a certain assignment on the previous day, but
is working in it on the current day, then he must have started
the assignment on the current day.
xc,t,r,v −xc,t−1,r,v −yc,t,r,v ≤0
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
\ {tfirstav
c
}, r ∈R, v ∈V allow
c,r
(A.1)
• Linearization of constraint 4.14: If a crew member is work-
ing in a certain assignment on the current day, but is not work-
ing in it anymore on the next day, then he must have ended
the assignment on the current day.
xc,t,r,v −xc,t+1,r,v −zc,t,r,v ≤0
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
\ {tlast}, r ∈R, v ∈V allow
c,r
(A.2)
• Linearization of constraint 4.16: The number of days that
a crew member has already been working in an assignment
increases by 1 every day that he stays in this assignment.
lc,t ≥lc,t−1 +
X
v∈V allow
c,r
X
r∈R
xc,t,r,v −dmaxhard
c
·
X
v∈V allow
c,r
X
r∈R
zc,t−1,r,v
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
\ {tfirstav
c
}
(A.3)
==PAGE:123==
112
Linearized MIP constraints
• Linearization of constraint 4.17: The total duration of an
assignment of a crew member which ends on a certain day has
to be at least as long as the time that the crew member has
been working in this assignment so far.
lZ
c,t ≥lc,t−dmaxhard
c
·(1−
X
v∈V allow
c,r
X
r∈R
zc,t,r,v)
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
(A.4)
• Linearization of constraint 4.21: Definition of auxiliary
variable nc,t (indicating if crew member c would already be al-
lowed to start working again on day t, after his deserved resting
period). Big-M: M1 := τ.
qc,t −1 ≥−M1 · nc,t
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
(A.5)
• Linearization of constraint 4.24: On each day where a crew
member is not working on any ship, the number of deserved
resting days decreases by one.
qc,t ≥qc,t−1 −(1 −
X
v∈V allow
c,r
X
r∈R
xc,t,r,v)
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
\ {tfirstav
c
}
(A.6)
• Linearization of constraint 4.25: A crew member is not
allowed to work while he still deserves resting days. Big-M:
M2 := rest · dmaxhard
c
.
qc,t ≤M2·(1−
X
v∈V allow
c,r
X
r∈R
xc,t,r,v)
∀c ∈C, t ∈T avail
c
(A.7)
• Linearization of constraint 4.27: On each day, all the bud-
get requirements must be satisfied, except in the case of vio-
lations (which are penalized in the objective). Big-M: M3 :=
maxc∈C,r∈R salc,r · |C|.
==PAGE:124==
113
X
r∈Rbudreq
b
X
c∈Cavail
t
∩Callow
r,v
salc,r · xc,t,r,v −M3 · ut,b ≤reqbudb
∀t ∈T, v ∈V, b ∈Bves
v
(A.8)
• Linearization of constraint 4.28: For each crew member,
his out-of-country rule has to be satisfied, except in the case
of violations (which are penalized in the objective).
Big-M:
M1 := τ.
X
t∈T ooc
c
X
r∈R
X
v∈V allow
c,r
xc,t,r,v −M1 · oc ≤oocc
∀c ∈C
(A.9)
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX B
Additional plots and tables
B.1
Reactive parameter evolution for Instances
2 to 4
(a) Evolution of maximum RCL length
(b) Evolution of LS destroy percentage
(c) p-values for maximum RCL length
(d) p-values for LS destroy percentage
Figure B.1: Instance 2: Evolution of reactive parameters and their p-values
==PAGE:126==
Reactive parameter evolution for Instances 2 to 4
115
(a) Evolution of maximum RCL length
(b) Evolution of LS destroy percentage
(c) p-values for maximum RCL length
(d) p-values for LS destroy percentage
Figure B.2: Instance 3: Evolution of reactive parameters and their p-values
(a) Evolution of maximum RCL length
(b) Evolution of LS destroy percentage
(c) p-values for maximum RCL length
(d) p-values for LS destroy percentage
Figure B.3: Instance 4: Evolution of reactive parameters and their p-values
