==PAGE:1==
TiSi2 for CMUTs
Titanium silicide for single-LOCOS Capacitive Mi-
cromachined Ultrasonic Transducers
Master Thesis
By
Supervised by
Peter Dalsgaard Nicolaisen
Kitty Steenberg, PhD,
Rune Sixten Grass, PhD, &
Prof. Erik Vilain Thomsen
DTU Health Technology
Department of Health Technology
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
22nd of June 2024
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
TiSi2 for CMUTs
Titanium silicide for single-LOCOS Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducers
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Peter Dalsgaard Nicolaisen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Cover photo by the author;
A topographic scan of a fabricated
TiSi2 C54 test element in a LOCOS-defined cavity. Size: 5 µm×16 µm×
0.38 µm.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared over five months at the Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems Ap-
plied Sensors Group, Section of UltraSound and Biomechanics, Department of Health
Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment of the de-
gree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
The reader is assumed to have basic knowledge of semiconductor fabrication technology.
Peter Dalsgaard Nicolaisen - s183758
MSc Biomedical Engineering
ii
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Medical ultrasound imaging is a highly established engineering area; however, it mostly
focuses on linear arrays, which produce conventional 2D images. This modality is typically
used for cheap, real-time, low-resolution abdomen imaging. Ultrasound is considered the
safest medical imaging modality, although some concerns have been raised concerning
neonatal imaging. The safety of ultrasound makes it an interesting candidate for further
development. Some research has been made into higher-resolution ultrasound probes
and 3D imaging techniques. The SURE project aims to develop an ultrasound transducer
capable of super-resolution 3D imaging of erythrocytes in real-time. This thesis aims to
solve some of the associated challenges.
One method of creating 3D images with an ultrasound probe uses the crossed-electrode
design, also called the Row Column Addressed (RCA) array. This design method reduces
the number of individual elements in an array from N2 to 2N by overlapping two linear
arrays to create the same number of sub-elements (overlaps). Each sub-element contains
several Capacitative Micromachined Ultrasound Transducer (CMUT)s, which may emit
and receive ultrasound signals. This design requires very long, thin and narrow bottom
electrodes, which raises an issue: Signal strength (pressure) is lost toward the end of
the element due to the element effectively being an RC-delay line. A requirement of 99%
remaining signal strength is set to ensure proper imaging conditions. This requirement is
translated to electrical terms as ωRC > 0.35, i.e. the transducer angular centre frequency
times the element resistance times the element capacitance should be above 0.35. The
main parameter to tweak is the element resistance which may be improved by electrode
design and material.
This thesis aims to investigate the viability of using TiSi2 in its low resistivity C54 phase as
a bottom electrode and thus reduce the ωRC-product. This includes experimentation re-
garding optimal fabrication parameters to form TiSi –
2 C54 concerning low resistivity, high
sample uniformity, selective silicide formation and good reproducibility. Furthermore, a
proof-of-concept fabrication scheme of a linear and RCA array is presented and fabri-
cated, using the LOCal Oxidation of Silicon (LOCOS)-process to define array cavities and
the Self ALigned salICIDE (SALICIDE) method to structure TiSi2 bottom electrodes.
It has been demonstrated that TiSi2 can be formed in its low resistivity phase, with high
reproducibility and good wafer uniformity. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that
non-selective silicide formation on silicon dioxide can be removed without altering the
fabrication process. Lastly, this silicide can maintain low resistivity after fusion bonding,
which is annealed at the high end of the silicide thermal stability range.
It has been proven that silicide electrodes can be manufactured in LOCOS-defined cav-
ities and subsequently fusion bonded to a Poly-Silicon On Insulator (PSOI) top wafer.
The samples fabricated in this project have shown the viability of using TiSi2 electrodes in
RCA CMUT arrays. However, further process development and array design are needed
to optimise the fabricated arrays.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to thank my supervisor, Professor Erik V. Thomsen, for giving me the
opportunity to participate in this project and for his great guidance and support throughout
its duration. You have been a great source of knowledge and positivity. Working on this
project in a state-of-the-art laboratory with you has been a pleasure.
I would also like to thank my co-supervisors, PhD Kitty Steenberg and PhD Rune S. Grass.
You have been very kind, patient, and helpful during this and earlier projects. Your exper-
tise and vast practical experience have been crucial to the success of this project. Thanks
to Sebastian Stangegaard, my fellow MSC student, for the many long days spent side-
by-side working on our individual projects and for all you have helped me. Furthermore,
thank you to all members of the MEMS sensors group for creating a fantastic place to work,
learn, and discuss everything from capacitors to cars and moving to micro-fabrication.
I also want to thank the DTU Nanolab staff, whose cleanroom facilities have been the
basis for all my experiments. Thank you for sharing so much processing and fabrication
knowledge and experience with me, for your patience, and for answering every question
I’ve had. A special thanks to the thin film group, who have helped me with rapid thermal
processing of my samples and created heaps of PID tables for my various experiments.
Thanks to my close friends and family for their unwavering support, particularly for getting
me out of the lab to enjoy the fresh air and occasional good weather. Last, but not least,
a great thanks to my girlfriend, Kamille, for her support of me. You have always been kind
and supportive, even when struggling with your own thesis.
iv
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Medical Imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Conventional Ultrasonic Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
3D Ultrasound
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
CMUT Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
The ωRC issue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.6
Silicide Electrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
1.7
Thesis summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2
Theory
23
2.1
CMUT cell & array design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.2
Mask design & Layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
2.3
CMUT Fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3
Process development
41
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
3.2
General annealing parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
3.3
2nd Annealing process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
4
Fabrication process
67
4.1
Bottom wafer: LOCOS with SALICIDE electrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
4.2
Top wafer: PSOI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
4.3
Bonded wafers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
5
Discussion
87
5.1
Preparatory annealing experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
5.2
Chip fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
5.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
Bibliography
97
Acronyms
103
Glossary
105
A Process flow
107
A.1 Substrate list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
A.2 1xLOCOS CMUT with TiSi2 electrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
A.3 Figures for process flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
B EDX rapports
131
B.1 Before RCA1-cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
B.2 After RCA1-cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
TiSi2 for CMUTs
v
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
C ATHENA Simulation code
141
vi
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Medical Imaging
Medical imaging includes a range of tools for medical diagnostics to peer into the bodies of
patients, which, in most cases, are entirely non-invasive. The most common of these tools
are Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), radiography (X-ray), Positron Emission Tomogra-
phy (PET), computed tomography (CT) and UltraSound (US). These imaging modalities
each have their strengths and weaknesses; as such, they are often used in conjunction
with one another and unlisted niche modalities. These tools provide helpful and often
life-saving information for medical professionals. Therefore, patients must have access
to reliable, high-quality and readily available imaging techniques [1].
PET, MRI and CT imaging requires large, complex and expensive equipment. This leads
to a lack of equipment availability as hospitals acquire fewer machines. Depending on the
local economy and size of the facility, the equipment may not be present at all. This will
inevitably lead to longer waiting times. Equipment availability also limits the opportunity
for pre-emptive screenings for various diseases, including cancer, where the survival rate
is dramatically dependent on early detection [2]. This is not a prevalent issue in medical
ultrasound, as the equipment is cheaper to manufacture and operate, takes up less space,
is portable and easier to operate.
PET, MRI and CT provide high-resolution, full-body scans of patients, which are highly
useful during diagnosis, e.g. to locate a tumour, a foreign body or to search for metastasis.
This is a current issue of medical ultrasound, which has limited penetration depth, limited
field-of-view and conventionally only images in 2D. Furthermore, very low or high-density
objects are challenging to image, as their boundaries are highly reflective and do not
allow for much transmittance of ultrasonic waves. Therefore, lungs and bones will act as
obstacles in US [1].
All medical imaging techniques involve some level of patient risk, which is usually rela-
tively low and primarily comes from radiation, magnetism, and contrast agents. CT will ex-
pose patients with a small amount of radiation exposure ranging from 2 to 16 mSv, which
is mainly an issue when several scans are required. MRI will produce strong magnetic
fields, which disables patients with specific implanted devices or prosthetics from being
imaged. An injection of contrast liquid is necessary for certain medical images, such
as intravenous contrast to enhance blood veins in angiography or ingested contrast for
imaging the digestive tract. These contrast agents can cause several side effects such
as allergic reactions, contrast-induced nephrotoxicity, nephrogenic systemic fibrosis and
a wide variety of minor side effects [3, 4]. Medical ultrasound is considered mostly harm-
less by medical authorities [5], although there is some suspicion of health-related risks to
embryos at prenatal scanning [6, 7, 8]. These concerns have been addressed by intro-
ducing two safety indices: Thermal Index (TI) and Mechanical Index (MI), both related to
the transducer’s output power. TI is a descriptor of the temperature increase in the imaged
region, some recommended limits are presented in Tab. 1.1. MI describes the mechani-
cal effects in tissue of the pressure variations from the ultrasonic pulses. The principle As
Low As Reasonably Possible (ALARA) regarding exposure to ultrasonic waves has also
been introduced to avoid potential harm [9].
TiSi2 for CMUTs
1
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.2
Conventional Ultrasonic Systems
Ultrasonic imaging is a cheap, safe, non-invasive and easy method of imaging the human
body. The technology has been used commonly in medicine since the 1970s, when 2D
real-time imaging became possible [1]. Ultrasound transducers generally utilise an elec-
tric bias to generate a mechanical movement using piezomaterials. These piezoceramic
materials will expand when a bias is applied across the crystal. When an alternating bias
is applied, the piezomaterial will contract and expand at the frequency of the bias. The
piezomaterials are reciprocal, meaning that a small bias can be recorded when a force is
applied to the crystal. This is used to transmit and receive ultrasonic pulses in the MHz
range.
The most commonly used material is Lead Zirconate Titanate (PZT) (Pb[ZrxTi1–x]O3). This
material gained popularity as it has a strong piezoelectric effect and can be grown in var-
ious sizes and shapes. Despite the many qualities of the material, alternative materials
and technologies are sought after due to the toxicity of PZT. PZT ceramics are labelled
with GHS07 (low-level toxicity), GHS08 (health hazard) and GHS09 (environmental haz-
ard) in the Globally Harmonized System (GHS). As such, the material should be used
with care, and usage should be minimised [11, 12]. These transducers often consist of a
linear array of many individually diced PZT crystals, which can each transmit and receive
independently. A linear array enables for 2 Dimensional (2D)-imaging in the (X,Z)-plane,
X being along the element array and Z being the axis perpendicular to the array into the
patient.
An ultrasound system will generate a short ultrasonic pulse in a normal pulse-echo imag-
ing mode. This signal is generated from a digital controller, beamformed, converted from
digital to analogue, amplified and then applied to the piezomaterial in the transducer. The
piezo-elements will rapidly vibrate and thus generate a pulse. Such a system is presented
in Fig. 1.1
The pulse will then scatter, reflect, refract and absorb as it traverses the body. The latter
does not generate a signal but will lead to tissue heating and signal attenuation. This may
be compensated for during signal processing. Reflection and refraction occur at plane
interfaces between two media of different acoustic impedance. At such an interface, the
propagating wave will reflect at an angle opposite to the incoming angle, as illustrated
in Fig. 1.2, [1]. The wave will transmit partially through the interface and refract due to
different sound speeds in the media, thus changing the propagation angle, which Snell’s
law may determine. Scattering occurs when a small structure (< λ) in the tissue with
different acoustic impedance is struck by an incident ultrasonic wave (Fig. 1.2) [1, 13,
14]. Scattering is an essential physical effect for ultrasonic imaging, as the most anal-
ysed signal is from back-scattering. The body can be represented as a large number of
point scatterers with different concentrations and acoustic impedance. These scatterers
will generate echoes, which are recorded by the transducer. The analogue recording is
then amplified, digitised, beamformed, summed and logarithmically compressed before
generating a 2D US image. [13, 1].
Table 1.1: Recommended maximum scan duration for increasing TI-values during obstet-
ric, trans-cranial, and spinal neonatal scans. The recommendation is from British Medical
Ultrasound Society (BMUS) [10].
TI
0.7<
1.0<
1.5<
2.0<
2.5<
3.0<
t (rec)
60min
30min
15min
4min
1min
Not recommended
2
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.1: A typical ultrasound system for acquiring B-mode images and its correspond-
ing block diagram. A digital controller controls the device operation, first a digital transmis-
sion signal is sent towards the probe. On the way to the probe, the signal is beamformed,
converted to an analogue signal and amplified. This signal causes the piezoelectric ele-
ments to vibrate and generate an ultrasonic pulse. This pulse is sent into the tissue and
will reflect on blood vessels, erythrocytes and other bodily structures whose echo will par-
tially return to the transducer, which is now in receive mode. This signal is recorded as
an analogue signal, amplified, converted to digital, beamformed, time-gain compensated
(TGC) and then further processed into a real-time image. Drawing made using BioRen-
der.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
3
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.2: Physical phenomena concerning ultrasound propagating in tissue. Attenua-
tion: Is the signal loss during propagation due to several interactions, including refraction,
reflection, scattering and absorption. Different organs will have general values for atten-
uation (e.g. attenuation in a kidney is 0.94
dB
MHz·cm), which may be used to compensate
for loss of signal in post-processing. Scattering: Small structures with different acoustic
impedance than the surrounding tissue, when struck by an incoming pulse, will reflect in
all directions. Reflection: occurs when an ultrasonic pulse reaches a smooth interface
between two media, at such an interface some signal will reflect and some will trans-
mit depending on the acoustic impedance of the two media. Refraction: The beam will
change direction when some incident signal is transmitted through the interface between
two media with different sound propagation velocities. [1]
1.3
3D Ultrasound
The simplest type of ultrasound scan is an A-mode image, which is a single 1 Dimen-
sional (1D) scan line through the body. This type of scan records the echo at various
depths from the scanned location. The more echo from a certain depth, the larger the
amplitude (A-mode) displayed on an amplitude-depth graph. These scans offer little volu-
metric information (only depth) but can be useful to scan tissue layers and internal bodily
motions, e.g. heart valve function. These scans may be made with a 0 Dimensional (0D)
ultrasound probe. The A-mode scans may also be utilised in an M-mode scanning, which
consists of numerous A-mode scans displayed side-by-side as lines in an image, where
amplitude is now displayed as an image brightness. These scans determine motion (M-
mode) along the scanned axis. This type of scanning is useful when recording internal
bodily motion, particularly repetitious motion such as heartbeats or heart valve motion [13,
1].
A typical ultrasonic scan is a 2D B-mode image. These consist of many A-mode scans
parallel to one another, thus providing an extra dimension to the scan. The brightness
of a B-mode image indicates the amount of recorded echo from the particular location.
The lines are recorded simultaneously or in rapid succession, as any motion would distort
the image if internal motion occurs during the scan. One method of scanning a B-mode
image is a linear transducer array (1D). Each element can mimic the single-element trans-
ducer from A-mode imaging. This type of probe has the added benefit of being able to
transmit and receive on several elements simultaneously, which offers a larger transmit
power and the possibility for beam focusing. The linear array is often used for abdomen
scans, commonly during pregnancy. Similar to the linear array is the phased array, which
offers a smaller footprint and requires less contact area with the body. This type of probe
uses beam steering to increase the Field of View (FOV) during a scan, which enables
4
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.3: Illustration of four different methods for obtaining 3D ultrasound images. Left:
Linear array is rotated while acquiring 2D images at various angles. Mid-left: Linear
array is rocked back and forth while acquiring 2D images at various angles of incline.
Mid-right: A linear array is swept ”free-hand” while acquiring 2D images and recording
image positions. Right: A 2D array is acquiring 3D images without moving the transducer.
the scanner to map otherwise hard-to-image areas, such as behind the rib cage. Both
systems can rapidly emit pulses in different directions, enabling blood velocity estimation
[13].
The human body and its constituents are three-dimensional, and any 2D images of human
anatomy will only provide information from a cross-sectional slice of the body. While
useful, the scans are missing significant information outside the 2D-plane. This solution
to the issue is volumetric 3 Dimensional (3D) ultrasonic images. Currently, four different
methods exist to create a volumetric ultrasound image [1]. These methods are illustrated
in Fig. 1.3; most of these are based on multiple 2D scans being reconstructed to a 3D
image. One method is to rotate a linear transducer around its centre and acquire scans at
each angle, which is then reconstructed to a 3D-image. Another method utilising the linear
array is to wobble the probe back and forth in a rocking motion while acquiring images
at various angles during the motion. The last method using linear transducers is the so-
called free-hand method. A probe is moved over the patient by hand while continuously
acquiring normal 2D B-mode images. The position of the probe is recorded during the
motion. Given the recorded probe position, the images can be reconstructed to a volume.
The final method for volumetric ultrasound imaging does not rely on linear arrays, but
rather 2D transducer arrays consisting of two perpendicular linear arrays of elements as
illustrated in Fig. 1.4. These arrays can acquire volumetric images without any movement
of the probe.
A possible 2D probe design consists of a repeating number of linear arrays in the per-
pendicular direction, such that the elements are ordered in a 2D array. These transducer
elements will often be square and consist of the same number of rows and columns, N,
and form a N × N-probe. This type of design is referred to as a Fully Populated Matrix
(FPM) probe. In this design, each element will need a connector for external electronics.
This is problematic for matrix arrays of comparable sizes to conventional linear arrays,
which will typically have 128 to 384 elements. For an equivalent linear array with N = 192
elements, the FPM probe would require N2 = 36864 individual connectors between the
array and external electronics. The scaling issue is solved by a change of probe design to
a crossed electrode design (also referred to as a Row-Column Addressed array (RCA)),
TiSi2 for CMUTs
5
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.4: Illustration of an RCA CMUT array (center) and its respective bottom (left)
and top (right) constituents. Note that the bottom electrode sub-elements consist of 2×2
cells, which is common for lower frequency arrays (e.g. 8 MHz) with higher element pitch.
The top elements are far less intricate, as these do not have to fit into the cavities.
such a design is presented in Fig. 1.4, [15]. The probe comprises a linear array of bottom
electrodes and an orthogonal overlapping linear array of top electrodes. Each overlap
between the elements is referred to as a sub-element in this design. The RCA design sig-
nificantly reduces external connections to N +N. Considering a FPM probe, this reduces
a factor N2/2N = N/2. Comparing a 192×192 FPM probe with an 192+192 RCA probe,
this is 36864/384 = 96× fewer connections. The crossed electrode design offers a much
more scale-able design for designing larger 2D ultrasound probes, which is required for
higher resolution probes.
1.3.1
Super Resolution 3D-Imaging
This thesis is a part of the Super resolution Ultrasound Real time imaging of Erythrocytes
(SURE) project [16, 17], whose purpose is to develop a method for imaging and tracking
erythrocytes in 3D at a capillary level. This would enable mapping anatomy, blood flow
and perfusion at high resolution in real-time without using contrast agents. This type
of medical imaging can prove extremely helpful in diagnosing a wide range of chronic
diseases, such as cancer or diabetes, and understanding the related pathophysiology.
Many chronic diseases disturb the blood flow and perfusion locally in vital organs or glands
by reducing, increasing or altering the path. An example of such a case is the diagnosis,
analysis and continued monitoring of cancerous tumours. A tumour is highly dependent
on the blood supply to grow and metastasise. As the tumour grows, it will encourage
angiogenesis, which will cause the growth of additional blood vessels to supply the tumour.
Some types of cancer treatment are focused on inhibiting angiogenesis, that is, to reduce
the development of new blood vessels [18, 19]. This treatment may be combined with
anti-angiogenic therapy to hinder existing blood supply to the tumour [20]. During such
treatments, super-resolution scans of the tumour with blood flow estimation can be a
helpful tool in monitoring tumour progression and related developments.
The project is a collaboration between four parties responsible for probe development,
signal and image processing, animal testing, and clinical trials. Probe development by
MEMS Applied Sensors Group at DTU Health Technology. Signal and image processing
by the Center for Fast Ultrasound Imaging at DTU Health Technology. Animal testing and
clinical trials by the University of Copenhagen and Rigshospitalet. The final goal of the
project is to develop a large-scale RCA 1024 + 1024 CMUT probe, along with external
6
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
electronics and processing software to achieve super-resolution, real-time, 3D-imaging
and blood flow estimation.
1.4
CMUT Technology
Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasound Transducers (CMUTs) are a promising candidate
to manufacture such large-scale RCA arrays. This technology offers a lead-free alterna-
tive using non-hazardous materials instead of PZT materials. They may be manufactured
by conventional semiconductor microfabrication techniques, allowing for many existing
development techniques. Semiconductor manufacturing techniques offer high precision
in manufacturing and small element pitch, which is vital for high-frequency scanning used
in high-resolution imaging.
1.4.1
The CMUT cell
A single CMUT cell is displayed in Fig. 1.5. In all its simplicity, it is a vacuum-filled cavity
enclosed by a flexible top plate. The cell has a fixed bottom electrode either below or at
the bottom of the cavity, while a top electrode is located atop the flexible top plate. The
purpose of the CMUT is to convert an electrical signal into an ultrasonic pulse and convert
an ultrasonic pulse into an electric signal. As a bias is applied to the circuit, the cell will act
as a capacitor and accumulate charge. The opposite charges collecting at each electrode
will be the source of an electrostatic attraction between the electrodes, and the top plate
will be pulled down towards the bottom electrode. If the bias is ended or reduced, the
plate is let go from this force of attraction. As such, it is possible to vibrate the flexible
plate using various applied voltages.
These cells can be fabricated in a wide range of sizes and shapes, in this thesis the
square cell will be the only considered shape. The cells are described by some typical
dimensional parameters, as shown graphically in Fig. 1.5. The most important regarding
cell vibrational frequency are the cell side length, a, the vacuum gap height, g, and the
plate thickness, h. The electrode thickness, t, and the electrode width, w, are essential
parameters regarding the electric functionality of the device.
1.4.2
Current developments in CMUT technology
CMUT technology has been, and still is, an ever-developing field of research with high
research output in the past 20 or so years. This has brought many new discoveries in the
field, and a wide variety of uses into light. The use of CMUT technology is particularly
prominent in sensing with regards to pressure [21, 22], high sensitivity gas detection [21,
23, 24], medical imaging and blood flow estimation [25, 26, 27, 28, 17], medical therapy
[29], and microfluidics [30]. These fields of application have benefited from the wide band-
width of CMUTs, their ease of integration, scalability of fabrication and design flexibility.
Medical ultrasound transducers have long been dominated by probes based on piezo-
electric elements; however, with the rise of super-resolution, 3D imaging and other novel
applications, this technology falls short. CMUT and Piezoelectric Micromachined Ultra-
sound Transducer (pMUT) technologies have enabled the fabrication of extremely small
arrays, ideal for intracardiac echocardiography by mounting the small chip on the end of
a catheter inserted into the cardiac system [31]. A system such as this requires extremely
small elements, made possible only by microfabrication techniques. Both super-resolution
imaging and 3D imaging require large arrays with many small and carefully aligned ele-
ments, making it nearly impossible to dice the piezomaterial in such numbers and sizes.
Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS) are an ideal choice to fabricate new transduc-
ers, hereunder CMUTs. Notable evolutions of medical ultrasound transducers include the
formulation of the crossed-electrode design, allowing 3D imaging with large arrays with-
TiSi2 for CMUTs
7
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.5: A not-to-scale drawing of two simplified CMUT cells, with the bottom electrode
within the cavity. Left: A CMUT cell is characterised by the cell side length, a, the bottom
electrode width, w, the bottom electrode thickness, t, the cavity depth, d, and the vacuum
gap height, g = d −t. Right: Transmit (Tx) and receive (Rx) modes of the CMUT cell,
the outer circuit represents transmit mode, where a constant DC bias is applied to the cell
along with an additional AC bias. The alternating bias will vibrate the flexible top plate,
thus emitting an ultrasonic pulse. The inner circuit represents the receive mode; the same
DC voltage is applied, while any incoming ultrasonic pulses will generate an AC signal by
vibrating the top plate. This signal is recorded, amplified, digitised and processed further.
Drawing made using BioRender.
out an unfeasible amount of wire-bond connections [15]. This method has enabled the
fabrication of large ultrasound 2D arrays [28].
1.4.3
The large CMUT array
The minimal axial resolution of an ultrasonic probe is given by the wavelength, λ, of the
pulse: λ = c0/f, with c0 = 1540 m/s being the average speed of sound in human tissue.
The lateral resolution is frequently given as the Full-Width at Half-Maximum (FWHM) of
the Point Spread Function (PSF). This is the response width from a single strong point
scatterer of infinitesimal size at half the maximum amplitude, which is −6 dB compared to
the maximum. The FWHM depends on key probe design features such as element pitch,
p, element centre frequency, f and element number, N. It may be approximated as:
FWHMxy ≈F#λ = Z
Lλ =
Z
p · N · c0
f ,
(1.1)
where F# is the F-number, which may be calculated from the focal depth, Z, and the
array width, L. The array width may, in turn, be calculated by the element pitch, p, and
the number of elements N. The pitch is the distance between repeating sub-elements,
including cell width, bonding space and element kerf.
When designing an ultrasound array, a pitch of λ/2 is preferential. When not adhering to
this design principle, the periodicity of the array will have a constructive interference effect
on the ultrasonic waves. This effect creates image artefacts referred to as grating lobes.
These will appear to the sides of the actual echo [32, 33].
Considering the example of an 8 MHz RCA 192 + 192 probe, this will result in an axial and
lateral resolution of:
λ = c0
f = 192.5 µm,
(1.2)
8
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
FWHMxy ≈
Z
p · N · c0
f

Z=5 cm
= 521 µm
(1.3)
With an element pitch, p, of:
p = λ
2 = 96.25 µm.
(1.4)
The smaller RCA 192 + 192 8 MHz probe may be considered a stepping stone towards
the RCA 1024 + 1024 15 MHz probe. It is an appropriate transducer size to develop and
optimise fabrication techniques before leaping the larger array, which will take up ap-
proximately 5.3 cm × 5.3 cm of wafer area. This large footprint only allows one chip to fit
on a 4” wafer and, therefore, requires extreme precision and cleanliness during the chip
fabrication.
1.5
The ωRC issue
An additional design challenge concerning large RCA CMUT arrays is that the element
continues to become longer and longer. The element width, however, is still confined by
the λ/2 pitch and cannot be made significantly wider. This leads to increasing resistance
along the elements, which, combined with the increasing capacitance along the element,
leads to an attenuation in an applied signal as it moves along the element electrodes.
This issue applies to both the top and bottom electrodes. However, it is far more relevant
to the bottom electrodes, which must be in the cavities themselves. Due to this constraint,
the design is far more constrictive in terms of connector width and electrode thickness,
which are both highly important regarding electrode resistance. The thermal budget of
the bottom electrode material is also an important consideration, as some later processes
require high temperatures, e.g. fusion bonding. The top electrode is fabricated towards
the end of the process, and as such there are far less requirements for this electrode, it will
not require narrow connectors between cells, the electrode thickness is far less restricted
and the thermal budget of the material is less important.
The CMUT element fits the description of an RC-delay line, which is a line consisting of
alternating resistors and capacitors, as displayed in Fig. 1.6, [34]. The delay line may
be reduced to a single repeating unit cell in which the variable and parasitic capacitance
are lumped together, Cd, as shown in Fig. 1.7. This ”unit cell” is often referred to as a
RC-delay element, this model is well described in literature [35, 36, 37]. The capacitor will
charge as a voltage bias is applied at one end of the unit cell. Until the capacitor is fully
charged, the voltage will be reduced at the input compared to the output. As a result, the
bias will be lower towards the end of the element, which is also the end of the RC-delay
line.
The reduced bias will result in a) a time-delayed pressure output towards the end of the
element and b) a reduced amplitude of the pressure output towards the end of the element.
These issues cannot be eradicated completely, as the capacitors are an inherent part
of the chip. Therefore, a briefly formulated requirement has been determined that the
voltage amplitude at the end of the element should be more than 99%, or rather that the
attenuation should be less than 1% [34]
The delay line may be described by the diffusion model, which results in the partial differ-
ential equation below [36, 37]:
∂u(x, t)
∂t
=
L2
R · C
∂2u(x, t)
∂x2
,
(1.5)
TiSi2 for CMUTs
9
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.6: An RC-delay line along a top element of an RCA CMUT transducer. The de-
lay line is characterised by a string of identical resistors divided by identical capacitors.
Variable capacitors represent cells, and a constant capacitor represents the parasitic ca-
pacitance; these may be added together for simplification purposes, as is done in Fig.
1.7. The same model applies to bottom elements. Created with BioRender, the drawing
is not to scale.
Figure 1.7: Simplified RC-delay unit cell, this figure represents a single sub-element in a
CMUT element. It is characterised by its pitch, ∆x, the total resistance of the sub-element,
Rd, and the total capacitance of the sub-element, Cd.
10
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
where u(x, t) is the voltage distribution along an element for any given time, L is the length
of the element, and C is the capacitance of the element. These values relate to the unit
cell as such:
C = Cd · L
∆x
&
R = Rd · L
∆x,
(1.6)
with Rd and Cd being the resistance and capacitance, respectively, in a unit cell along
the element. Three boundary conditions for the model may be derived logically from
the circuit. The first condition states that the voltage is equal to the input signal at the
beginning of the element before the delay line has begun.
B1:
u(0, t) = U0 · g(ω, t)
(1.7)
where U0 is the amplitude of the applied signal, and g(ω, t) is the excitation function used
to emit a pulse at the angular frequency, ω. The second condition states that the current
distribution at the element’s end concerning the position is zero.
B2:
∂u(x, t)
∂x

x=L
= 0
(1.8)
The third boundary condition dictates that the voltage distribution is zero along the entire
element before any signal has been applied:
B3:
u(x, 0) = 0
(1.9)
This model may be solved analytically for the transfer function in the frequency domain.
The model and boundary conditions are Fourier transformed, which allows the model to
be solved for the transfer function, H(x, ω). The solution is of the form:
U(x, ω) = U0 · G(ω) · H(x, ω),
(1.10)
where G(ω) is the Fourier transformed excitation function. This equation states that the
amplitude of voltage distribution at a given point equals the input signal multiplied by the
transfer function. Therefore, the transfer function may describe attenuation along the
element itself. The transfer function is solved to the following expression:
H(x, ω) = cosh κ · (1 −x
L)
cosh κ
,
(1.11)
where κ2 = i ωRC, which is a dimensionless constant. The transfer function is evaluated
in x = L as the voltage distribution will be lowest at the element’s end. This is where the
< 1% attenuation criterion will be applied.
H(L, ω) =
1
cosh
√
i ωRC
(1.12)
The transfer function will be complex and is therefore deconstructed into an expression
for amplitude and phase angle:
|H(L, ω)| =
1
| cosh
√
i ωRC|
(1.13)
∠H(L, ω) = arctan ℑ{H(L, ω)}
ℜ{H(L, ω)}.
(1.14)
TiSi2 for CMUTs
11
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.8: Remaining amplitude of transfer function, as a function of ωRC-product, the
green area indicates an attenuation of < 1% equivalent to ωRC < 0.35. Whereas the red
area indicates a higher attenuation than 1%. Notably, small increases in ωRC compared
to the set target will not result in large increases in attenuation until ωRC ≈1. After this,
the attenuation rapidly increases.
Figure 1.9: Phase delay of the transfer function as a function of the ωRC-product. The
green area indicates the phase delay, where the amplitude of the transfer function has
attenuated < 1%, and the red area, where it has attenuated more than one per cent. The
limit of 1% results in a phase delay of 0.17rad. For very high ωRC-products, the delay
becomes quite high, even approaching a full period.
12
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
The transfer function amplitude, |H(L, ω)|, and the phase angle, ∠H(L, ω), are plotted
numerically for a wide range of ωRC-values in Fig. 1.8 & 1.9. It should be noted that the
ωRC < 0.35 limit is not a hard limit for an element to emit a sufficiently uniform pressure
but is an estimated limit for a well-functioning element.
It is desirable to minimise the ωRC-product. The angular frequency is considered non-
flexible as it is directly tied up with the operational frequency, ω = 2πf. The capacitance,
C, is also problematic to reduce, as the capacitance is highly tied to the geometry of the
electrodes.
C = ϵ0ϵrA
g
.
(1.15)
As the vacuum permittivity, ϵ0 and the relative permittivity are constant, a reduction would
mean changing the gap height, g, or the electrode area, A. Both of these changes will
affect the operation of the array. For example, narrowing the elements and connectors
will lead to an increase in resistance. Reduction of cell capacitance will also lead to less
emitted pressure.
The resistance, R, is the last parameter left, which is a prime parameter to reduce. For a
rectangular element of length L, with a rectangular cross-section of area t · w, it may be
estimated as such:
R = ρ · L
t · w ,
(1.16)
where ρ is the resistivity. Concerning the bottom electrode, ρ may be lowered by choosing
the right electrode material with low resistivity and good compatibility with the remaining
fabrication process. Electrode thickness, t, may be increased to lower the resistance.
This may prove particularly challenging for composite and high-stress materials. The
cavity-defining method also limits the bottom electrode’s thickness. Lastly, the electrode
width, we, may be increased, the width of the actual bottom electrodes is highly limited by
the cell design, however, the interconnections between electrodes may be altered more
freely. These connections are interesting, as they greatly contribute to the total element
resistance. It is far simpler to reduce the top electrode’s resistance, as this is made to-
wards the end of the fabrication process. This enables a more comprehensive selection
of materials and thicker electrodes; thin interconnects are not required. A schematic of
the top and bottom electrode shapes is displayed in Fig. 1.4.
Some previously attempted solutions include the use of highly doped silicon in combi-
nation with LOCOS for cavity definition by Søren Gjaldbæk, Stine L. Grue and Rune S.
Grass[26, 27]. These electrodes have a relatively high thermal budget, which allows the
use of fusion bonding to attach the top plate. This solution requires very thick electrodes,
as even the highest doped silicon has a somewhat high resistivity, ρd−Si ≈1000 µΩcm.
Such resistivity requires extremely thick bottom electrodes, which were fabricated below
the cavities and required high aspect ratio etching to separate elements. Efforts have
been made to use gold as bottom electrodes in borofloat wafers with etched cavities by
Kitty Steenberg [28]. Gold electrodes have enabled the fabrication of large RCA arrays
(512 + 512) due to its low resistivity, ρAu ≈3.15 µΩcm. Unfortunately, gold has a rather
low thermal budget due to the Au Si eutectic temperature, TE ≈360 ◦C. This has led to
the consideration of TiSi2 as a potential candidate for the bottom electrode material. In
the stable C54 phase it is a low resistivity material, ρTiSi2−C54 ≈13 to 20 µΩcm, with a
fairly high thermal budget.
1.5.1
Electrode Resistance & Capacitance
In this section, an estimate of electrode resistance and capacitance will be made based on
a RCA N +N array. The array will use sub-elements of 2×2 cells, similar to the schematic
TiSi2 for CMUTs
13
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.10: Left: Two unit cells of an RCA array utilising 2 × 2 cell sub elements. A
transducer element is made up of N of such sub-elements. Right: Estimated current
path in a sub-element, the electrode cells may be approximated as two trapezoids with
a shared bottom at the centre of a cell, the respective tops are positioned at the in- and
outlet of the cell by the connectors.
Figure 1.11: Discrete Hanning apodisation scheme at the end of an element, these sec-
tions are designed to reduce ghost echoes in ultrasound imaging and are applied to both
ends of the array. They are of constant size and do not vary depending on transducer
size.
design in Fig. 1.4; this design was fabricated during the thesis and will be explained in
greater detail later in the report. It is important to note that the connectors within a 2 × 2
element differ from those connecting separate sub-elements. The estimation will also
include apodization areas, as these are highly resistive due to their high amount of long,
thin connectors. Several schematics and mask designs will be presented in later sections.
The estimate will consider different electrode materials, thickness and connector width.
First, an expression for the resistance of a square electrode and a connector of arbitrary
length is determined to ease later calculations. The across the square is described as the
resistance of two trapezoids with a shared bottom at the centre of the cell, perpendicular
to the direction of the flow and their respective tops at the in- and outlet of the electrode
by the connectors. This approximation is used, as the current flow does not fully utilise
the corners of the cell but rather seeks a ”shortest path” across the square, as shown in
Fig. 1.10:
Relectrode = ρ
t ·
√welectrode + wcon
welectrode + wcon
· ln welectrode
wcon
,
(1.17)
where welectrode and wcon are the electrode cells’ respective width and the interconnects
between them. The resistance of a connector of arbitrary length, l, is given by:
Rcon = ρ
t ·
l
wcon
.
(1.18)
Element Resistance for an element with N sub-elements is given by the number of cells,
and interconnects between them, a sub element is displayed in Fig. 1.10. The element
is modelled as two lines in parallel connection:
RN−element =

2
N ·
 2 · Relectrode + ρ
t · lint+lext
wcon

−1
,
(1.19)
14
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Table 1.2:
Resistance, capacitance, ωRC-product and attenuation estimates for an
apodization region (as in Fig. 1.11), a RCA 190+190 array element (from Eq. 1.19 & 1.20)
and for a full element with apodization regions. The transducer resonance frequency is
fwater = 8 MHz. An additional example of a 192 linear array with 5 mm long elements is
presented. The connector width for both designs is wcon = 2.5 µm and an electrode side
length is wElectrode = 26 µm.
Gold, Au
Aluminium, Al
Doped Si
TiSi2
C54
ρ = 3.15 µΩcm
ρ = 2.7 µΩcm
ρ = 1000 µΩcm
ρ = 13 µΩcm
Region
Capacitance
Parameter
200 nm
1000 nm
200 nm
1000 nm
20 µm
100 µm
200 nm
1000 nm
Apodization
C = 1.52 pF
R =
69.9 Ω
14.0 Ω
60.0 Ω
12.0 Ω
222 Ω
44.4 Ω
289 Ω
57.7 Ω
190+190
C = 33.8 pF
R =
265 Ω
52.9 Ω
227 Ω
45.4 Ω
840 Ω
168 Ω
1.09 kΩ
218 Ω
w/o Apodization
190+190
C = 36.8 pF
R =
404 Ω
80.9 Ω
347 Ω
69.3 Ω
1.28 kΩ
257 Ω
1.67 kΩ
334 Ω
w/ Apodization
ωRC =
0.749
0.150
0.642
0.128
2.38
0.476
3.09
0.618
Att.
4.38 %
0.187 %
3.27 %
0.137 %
28.5 %
1.83 %
38.3 %
3.04 %
5mm 192 linear
C = 9.09 pF
R =
72.0 Ω
14.4 Ω
61.7 Ω
12.3 Ω
229 Ω
45.7 Ω
297 Ω
59.4 Ω
w/o Apodization
ωRC =
0.0329
0.0066
0.0282
0.0056
0.105
0.021
0.136
0.027
Att.
0.01 %
0 %
0.01 %
0 %
0.09 %
0 %
0.15 %
0.01 %
where lext is the distance of a connector between two separate sub-elements and lint
is the length of an internal connector between two cells in a sub-element. RN−element
is the resistance of an element without apodization. The calculation for the apodization
region is similar, although cumbersome due to the many different-length connectors, and
as such the equation will not be presented, the estimated values for the apodization region
is presented in Tab. 1.2.
Element Capacitance is determined as a common parallel plate capacitor using the bot-
tom electrode area, A, and the effective vacuum gap, geff = g + ϵdi/tdi. The effective
vacuum gap includes a dielectric layer with permittivity, ϵdi, and thickness, tdi.
CN−element = ϵ0 · A
geff
= ϵ0 · N · (4w2
electrode + wcon · (4lint + 2lext))
geff
,
(1.20)
This expression does not include the apodization regions of the elements, the calculation
is similar, but cumbersome due to the intricate geometry, as may be seen in Fig. 1.11.
Table 1.2 displays estimates of the element resistance, capacitance, ωRC-product and
attenuation at the end of an element. These estimates describe a RCA 190+190 array
and a linear 192-element array with 5mm long elements. These designs use an electrode
width of wcon = 2.5 µm and a electrode pad side length of a = 26 µm. The attenuation
shown in the table shows clear, indisputable promise for gold and aluminium as possible
bottom electrodes. However, neither material is suitable for fusion bonding due to low
eutectic temperatures. Doped silicon will survive fusion bonding unscathed but requires
massively thick bottom electrodes. This leaves TiSi2 C54 as a material of interest with
a fairly low resistivity and a high thermal budget. Due to the approximately 4× higher
resistivity than gold or aluminium, thicker bottom electrodes or wider connectors would be
necessary. An attenuation map for varying electrode thickness and connector width for
the two mentioned arrays is presented in Fig. 1.12.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
15
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.12: Attenuation maps varying electrode thickness, t, and connector width, wcon,
for a: Left: RCA 190+190 array. Right: 192 Linear array, with 5mm long elements. Both
maps considers the use of TiSi2 C54 as electrode material, a resonance frequency of
fwater = 8 MHz and a electrode pad side length of a = 26 µm.
1.6
Silicide Electrodes
During the 1970s, metallic silicides became a large area of interest for the Integrated Cir-
cuit (IC) semiconductor industry for Silicon-Metal contacts at drain, source poly-Si gate
regions. As transistors continuously shrank to keep up with Moore’s Law, several prob-
lems arose in the manufacturing process. Aluminium, a commonly used IC conductor
at the time with low resistivity, formed pits in silicon when exposed to annealing with
temperatures as low as T ≈400 ◦C. This effect occurs as Si is soluble in Al at tempera-
tures well below the eutectic point. Silicon will diffuse into the Al and leave behind pits,
which become a significant issue when the pits are large enough to penetrate through
the transistors [38]. Gold, another low-resistivity metal, is also challenging to use as a
Silicon-Metal contact. This is due to two main problems. First, the eutectic temperature
of Si and Au is TE ≈360 ◦C, which disables any heat treatment above this temperature.
Second, Si atoms may diffuse through the gold layer and oxidise at the Au surface at very
low temperatures with O2 in the ambient - even below the eutectic temperature. It may
occur at even lower temperatures if submerged in heated water or during exposure to
water vapours [39, 40].
1.6.1
Metal Silicides
These problems, in part, caused a search for alternative contact materials, herein the in-
terest for metal silicides. There are hundreds of different metal silicides, but CoSi2 and
TiSi2 were initially the most attractive candidates for use as contacts, although later at-
tention shifted to NiSi [41]. The shift occurred as linewidths shrunk to < 1 µm, where the
resistivity of CoSi2 and TiSi2 dramatically rises. Using NiSi, no such effect is observed
[42, 43]. These effects are, however, only problematic in the sub-micron regime and ti-
tanium silicides have been used in 0.25 µm node technology. A brief comparison of the
most commonly used silicides is presented in Tab. 1.3. This table covers the significant
material parameters of the material forming temperature, thermal stability upper limit, and
material resistivity. These are all important in selecting the correct silicide for the pro-
cess. Additionally, the silicon:metal and silicide:metal ratios for forming a film help predict
formed silicide thickness and required pre-cursor material thickness.
A simplified generic process flow of silicide formation consists of the following steps [44]:
16
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Table 1.3: Summary table of material and formation parameters for commonly used stable
phase metal silicides, including meta-stable TiSi2 C49 [42, 44].
Symbol
TiSi2
C49
TiSi
C54
CoSi2
NiSi
Formation temperature
Tf
500-600 ◦C
500-700 ◦C
500-700 ◦C
500-600 ◦C
Resistivity (Thin film)
ρ
80-100 µΩcm
13-20 µΩcm
14-20 µΩcm
14-20 µΩcm
Selective etching solution
(pure metal to silicide)
-
NH4OH:H2O2
(SC-1)
H2SO4:H2O2
(Piranha)
NH4OH:H2O2
(SC-1)
H2SO4:H2O2
(Piranha)
HCl:H2O2
(SC-2)
HNO3:HCL
(Aqua Regia)
Dominant moving species
-
Si
Si
Co
Ni
Silicon consumption ratio
r
Si
Metal
2.27
2.27
3.64
1.83
Silicide thickness ratio
(to metal thickness)
t Silicide
Metal
2.51
2.51
3.52
2.34
Thermal stability
Ts
-
<950 ◦C
900 ◦C
700 ◦C
Eutectic temperature
TE
-
1330 ◦C
1204 ◦C
964 ◦C
Reduction of SiO2 by metal
-
Yes
Yes
No
No
TiSi2 for CMUTs
17
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1. Sample clean is performed to remove general contaminants and native oxide from
silicon. The clean should utilise an HF-based solution and be able to remove organic
contaminants in particular. The wafers are preferably dried in a spin-rinse-dry cycle.
2. Metal deposition is performed immediately after the surface cleaning. The samples
are placed in the deposition chamber, which is then pumped to a high vacuum.
Optionally, an ion clean is made before the metal is deposited - usually by sputtering
at room temperature.
3. Annealing in a traditional furnace or an Rapid Thermal Processing (RTP) system
as soon as possible after deposition.
This generic process will form a thin film of unstructured metal silicide on a silicon sub-
strate. If the film should be structured, which is usually the case, the process will become
more intricate and should include considerations to:
1. Metal and silicon deposition method.
2. Patterning the silicide.
3. What materials are in contact with the metal in areas where no silicidation should
occur? What temperature should be used to reduce this reaction?
4. What anneal ambient should be used to reduce unwanted reactions due to contam-
ination?
5. How to selectively etch remaining unreacted material and unwanted by-products
from the anneal?
Several fabrication schemes of silicides may be utilised to satisfy most or all of these con-
siderations. The most common is the SALICIDE fabrication method [45]. In this method,
either silicon or metal is structured, followed by an initial low-temperature anneal to form
a meta-stable silicide while reducing unwanted reactions with spacer materials. The sili-
cide will nearly only form in areas where both materials are present (this depends on the
underlying material). Then, unreacted material is removed by a selective etch, and the
material is annealed to its final phase at higher temperatures. Patterning is usually done
in one of the following ways: Titanium silicide may be patterned using various schemes,
usually with a deposited silicon layer and a titanium layer on top. Many silicon deposition
methods are prone to contamination by titanium, and silicon deposition is therefore often
done first:
• SALICIDE
– Silicon is patterned, titanium is deposited, and the sample is annealed, selec-
tively etched and annealed a second time.
– Titanium is deposited on top of silicon, titanium is patterned, and the sample is
annealed, selectively etched and annealed a second time.
• Non-SALICIDE
– Both silicon and titanium are patterned. No selective etch is required.
– Patterning is done by dry etching or in HF-based solutions after annealing.
Some different fabrication schemes will be considered later in this chapter using Titanium
Disilicide as an example, as this is the primary silicide of interest during this thesis project.
18
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.6.2
Titanium Silicide
During annealing, titanium disilicide (TiSi2) is formed from a bi-layer of silicon and titanium
in the following order:
Ti(s) + Si(s) −→α −TiSix −→TiSi2 C49 −→TiSi2 C54
(1.21)
During this process, ideal, clean and non-contaminated samples are considered. α−TiSix
is amorphous silicide. TiSi2 C49 and TiSi2 C54 refer to titanium disilicide’s metastable
and stable phase.
Initially, Si and Ti interdiffuse at the material interface during the formation and form the
amorphous silicide phase [46]. This phase is obtained at lower temperatures, and for-
mation is generally slow. The formation is thought to be governed by solid-state amor-
phisation [47]. This amorphous phase is stable to approximately 550 ◦C where a phase
transition into the metastable C49 phase of titanium silicide occurs. Several other crys-
talline silicide phases may also occur, but TiSi2 C49 is the most dominant composite [48].
This phase has a base-centred orthorhombic crystal structure [44, 42]. Crystal growth is
faster in the lateral direction than vertically when annealed at ≈530 ◦C for a prolonged
time or when annealing at higher temperatures. The growth is initially governed by nucle-
ation but is later shifted to diffusion-controlled growth [49]. As the annealing temperature
increases, a polymorphic phase to TiSi2 C54 , there is no change in atomic composition
during this phase change. The crystal structure changes to a face-centered orthorhombic
structure [50]. These crystal structures are very similar, and the significant difference in
resistivity is likely caused by a higher amount of defects in the C49 -phase. The C54 -
phase crystals are thought to grow via a nucleation and growth process, which initiates at
triple-grain junctions and grain boundaries in the C49 structure [44, 51].
Shrinkage of silicide structure dimensions affects the material performance negatively,
more so than might be expected. Resistance of a conductor is given in Eq. 1.16, and is
therefore expected to rise as width and thickness of wires shrink. However, thinner silicide
layers were found to contain more defects than thicker layers and with smaller grain size
[51, 52]. Structure line width is also significant, as thinner lines will provide fewer points
of nucleation and, thus, fewer starting points for silicide crystal growth. This effect causes
thinner silicides to have higher resistance. Some compensation for this effect occurs when
annealing to the C54 -phase, which has larger grains which will rapidly expand along the
lines. These grains are several micrometres across, and the line width effect is mainly
seen below one micrometre [44, 53].
When the SALICIDE process is used by patterning poly-Si, an effect referred to as lateral
silicide encroachment may occur. Due to Si being the dominant diffusing species, some
Si may diffuse into the metal, forming silicide within the metal. This will precipitate after a
selective etch and may contribute to silicide contamination of the surface in areas where
no silicide was meant to be formed.
Undesired reactions during silicidation
Undesired reaction during silicidation stems from three primary sources. 1) Contamination
of samples. 2) Annealing ambient. 3) The sample itself. The former is usually expressed
as oxide, carbon or nitrogen contamination at layer interfaces; it often stems from the
atmosphere and adheres to the samples in thin layers. These can be mostly avoided
using standard cleaning methods but may reappear rapidly. As such, the sample should
be processed directly after cleaning.
During the anneal, the sample is exposed to increased temperatures, which accelerates
reactions such as the oxidation of titanium. Therefore, the wafer should either be kept at
TiSi2 for CMUTs
19
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
a high vacuum or an over-pressure of inert gas. The vacuum system must be capable of
high vacuum, as even small amounts of oxygen or water vapour retards silicidation and
degrade film quality. A concentration of 10 ppm O2 in a nitrogen ambient may increase
resistivity up to 40× compared to a concentration of 0.1 ppm [54]. It is practical to use an
over pressure of process grade inert gasses by keeping a continous flow of gas, this will
continously flush the reactor chamber. Given the overpressure in the chamber, the gas
flow will only be outward. Nitrogen or argon is often used, although nitrogen may react
with titanium and create TiN; this additional anneal product makes it challenging to obtain
specific film thicknesses but is easy to remove in a selective etch.
In the SALICIDE process, the polysilicon may be structured before metal deposition. This
will cause titanium to be in direct contact with the underlying material (usually an insulator
like SiO2 or Si3N4) in all areas where silicidation is not wanted. Undesirable reactions may
occur on both mentioned insulators and are dependent on the used anneal ambient. For
annealing of Ti on SiO2 in Ar-ambient, a layer of TiO and TiSix will form at the interface
due to the reduction of SiO2 [55]. The former may be removed with selectivity to silicide
by H2SO4:H2O2-solutions. The latter, however, can only be removed by sacrificing some
amount of the produced silicide. These reactions occur at temperatures well below 700 ◦C.
The anneal products will be more complex when annealing in nitrogen.
Thermal Stability
Titanium silicide is considered thermally stable to TS ≈950 ◦C, this is far below both the
eutectic temperature and the melting point (Tab. 1.3). Even so, the sheet resistance is
observed to increase when exposed to temperatures 900 ◦C and higher. This is due to
morphological instability at high temperatures, which causes changes in the structure but
not in the atomic composition. The film will agglomerate and form island structures to re-
duce surface energy in the film. Agglomeration may be reduced by introducing impurities
(e.g. Boron) into the silicon used for the silicide film [56, 44]. It may also be reduced by
increasing film thickness.
It may become necessary to take action to improve thermal stability if fusion bonding of
the wafer is needed. The lower temperatures used for fusion bonding narrowly overlap
with the range of thermal stability (900-950 ◦C).
Chemical Stability
Titanium disilicide is stable during exposure to most standard cleaning procedures used
in the semiconductor industry. Most notable are heated solutions of H2So4:H2O2 (usually
referred to as a piranha) and heated solutions of NH4OH:H2O2:H2O (often referred to as
Standard Clean 1 (SC-1) or RCA 1) [44]. The latter will, however, etch slowly in the silicide
film at rates of 9 Å/min when using a mixture of 1 : 1 : 6 heated to 60 ◦C [57].1
Titanium silicide films are soluble in HF-based solutions, although they have an unknown
etch rate.
A TiSi2 fabrication scheme
Using the above information and considerations, a process for fabricating and patterning
200 nm C54 titanium silicide is presented below. A thickness, t = 200 nm, was chosen
for an initial fabrication of arrays, as this thickness is of comparable dimensions with ex-
periments in literature [44]. For a RCA 190+190, this thickness results in ωRC = 3.09 -
far above the 1% criteria. However, this may be improved in subsequent experimental
iterations by optimising silicide formation and increasing electrode width and thickness.
1For reference, the RCA 1 used in the DTU cleanroom is 1 : 1 : 5 and heated to 70 ◦C, this would result in
a higher etch rate, presumably around 1.5 nm/min.
20
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1. Sample cleaning: The sample is RCA standard cleaning process (RCA) cleaned
prior to material deposition.
2. Silicon deposition: A low Boron concentration poly-crystalline silicon is deposited
immediately after cleaning in an LPCVD furnace.
3. Silicon Lithography: The poly-Si is patterned in HNO3:BHF:H2O using a resist
mask patterned using UV-lithography.
4. Sample cleaning: The resist is removed by plasma ashing and a subsequent Pi-
ranha etch.
5. Native oxide etch: The wafers are shortly submerged in BHF to remove native
oxide.
6. Metal deposition: Titanium is deposited using E-beam evaporation in a high vac-
uum.
7. 1st anneal: The wafer is annealed at 550 ◦C for 40 min in order to form TiSi2 C49 .
8. Selective etch: Unreacted titanium is etched in a Piranha solution. This will also
remove TiOx.
9. 2nd Anneal A second anneal is done at 800 ◦C for 5 min to transition C49 into
TiSi2 C54 .
10. Silicide etch: A 10 min RCA 1 is done to clean the sample before continued pro-
cessing and to etch any unwanted silicide which may have formed on SiO2 surfaces.
This will also remove TiN.
1.7
Thesis summary
Chapter 1 - Introduction: The introduction covers the basics of medical imaging focusing
on 3D medical ultrasound. Furthermore, the significant ωRC-issue is explained along with
a description of metal silicides focused on TiSi2.
Chapter 2 - Theory: The chapter is focused on the design of the CMUT cells and ar-
rays, which are applied for a lithographic mask. Last, the theory of key fabrication steps,
oxidation, rapid thermal processing (RTP) and wafer bonding are covered.
Chapter 3 - Process development: This chapter describes a range of experiments
meant to prepare for chip fabrication. These primarily focus on silicide fabrication by
the SALICIDE-method.
Chapter 4 - Fabrication process: The chapter goes through the fabrication of a single-
LOCOS RCA CMUT array with SALICIDE bottom electrodes.
Chapter 5 - Discussion: This chapter reiterates the project while providing thoughts and
interpretation of the obtained results. It is tied off with a final conclusion to the project.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
21
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
22
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:31==
2
Theory
2.1
CMUT cell & array design
For a CMUT to function properly, its physical dimensions must be well thought out in
relation to several operational specifications. This applies to both the individual cells as
well as entire arrays. Design considerations will be dealt with as a free choice or a given
fixed value or interval. A list of these parameters and design choices are listed below.
• CMUT cell layout - Geometrical parameters of the cell: kerf, bonding area, cell
shape.
• Method of fabrication - Characteristic fabrication choices may shape the cells’ de-
sign cells.
• fwater- Cell frequency (centre) while immersed in water.
• p - Sub-element pitch.
• N - Number of elements in array.
• h - Top plate thickness.
• VPull−in - Pull-in voltage.
• geff - Effective vacuum gap.
• ωRC - Voltage attenuation towards end of element.
Some of these parameters have already been described earlier in Sec. 1.4.3 (frequency,
fwater, pitch, p, and number of elements, N) & 1.5 (Voltage attenuation towards end of
an element.). Estimations of the remaining parameters are initially found using analytical
calculations and may be fine-tuned using Finite Element Modelling (FEM) simulations
by COMSOL Multiphysics software [58]. Notably, many of these design parameters and
considerations are closely related and will affect each other. The layout of a sub-element
viewed from the top is given in Fig. 2.1 along with relevant parameters. Fig. 1.5 presents
an equivalent side view. These parameters determine how the arrays function and define
resistance, capacitance, resonance frequency, transducer size and pull-in voltage.
A design using 2×2 square cells in each sub-element was chosen, as the resulting cavities
will be of similar size to a 15 MHz array with one cell per sub-element (considering the λ/2
pitch requirement). The side length of the cavity, wcav, comes at the cost of available
bonding area, i.e. the cavity separation, wCavSep:
p = 2 · wcav + wkerf + 2 · wCavSep
(2.1)
The kerf width is set to 6 µm to ensure proper separation and avoid short circuits between
top elements. The bonding width, which is determined by the cavity separation, should
be at least dCavSep ≥0.62 · h, where h is the plate thickness [26]. This length is set to
wCavSep = 8 µm to ensure a strong bond; this leaves room for two cavities with a side
length of wcav = 37 µm.
The cavities will be defined by the LOCOS process, in which a thermal oxide is grown
selectively by blocking oxygen diffusion with an LPCVD nitride layer. This method leaves a
characteristic birds-beak slope, Fig. 2.2, which gently flattens out toward the centre of the
TiSi2 for CMUTs
23
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.1: Two sub-elements in a RCA array drawn as lithography masks in L-Edit IC.
Red areas indicate the top electrode, the green area is the cavity, and the inner marking
is the bottom electrode. The parameters are: cavity width, wcav = a, cavity width at con-
nectors, wCavCon, electrode width, welectrode, connector width, wcon, top electrode width,
wtop, kerf, wkerf, internal connector length, lint, external connector length, lext, cavity sep-
aration width, wCavSep, and sub-element pitch, p, which is identical in both directions.
cavity. The simulation shows an acceptable flat cavity bottom until 16 µm from the centre,
at which point the bottom has risen less than 2 nm on the slope. This enables a 32 µm
wide bottom electrode given perfect lithographic alignment and no over-etching during
the processing of the LOCOS nitride mask. To ensure ease of processing, an electrode
width of 26 µm was chosen with 2.5 µm wide connectors; this leaves approximately 5.25 µm
for misalignment and under-etching (wCavCon = 13 µm). In later designs, after a proof-
of-concept, these widths should be increased to reduce the ωRC-product. This will, in
particular, reduce the resistance of the connecting elements in the design.
2.1.1
Transducer frequency, pitch and size
The transducer frequency is usually a choice made before the start of a design. The fre-
quency will depend profoundly on the medium in which the probe is used, plate thickness
and materials. The frequency will also be a determining factor in the resolution of the
probe, as described in Sec. 1.4.3. For the transducers designed and fabricated in this
thesis, a target centre frequency of 8 MHz in water is set.
Given the λ/2 pitch requirement [32], an 8 MHz transducer will require a pitch of p =
96.25 µm to suppress grating lobes.
The size of an array directly influences the lateral resolution, as described in Eq. 1.1. The
width of an array, L, is given from the number of sub-elements and the pitch of these ele-
ments. During this thesis, two primary ultrasound arrays are designed: A RCA 190+190
array with a 16 sub-element apodisation region, L = (190+2·16)·96.25 µm ≈2.14 cm, and
a 192 element linear array with 5 mm element height without apodisation, L ≈1.85 cm.
24
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.2: 2 h30 min wet LOCOS oxidation at 1100 ◦C on a 400 nm BOX simulated in
ATHENA DeckBuild with a nitride diffusion barrier, the nitride layer is lifted towards the
edges. The code used for making these figures is found in appendix C.
2.1.2
Plate thickness
The plate thickness, h, is a key determining factor of the transducer frequency. Decid-
ing on the correct plate thickness for a given design is essential to obtain the desired
resonance frequency.
The resonance frequency for a circular plate with a diameter, a, and a thickness, h, may
be described by the Rayleigh-Ritz method as done by Lamb [59]. This method calculates
mechanical energy for the thin vibrating plate clamped above a cavity with a medium on
the opposite side. It may be utilised to estimate the shift in resonance frequency when
the transducer is submerged in water.
fm = f0 ·
1
q
1 + Γ a/2
h
ρm
ρp
,
(2.2)
where fm and f0 are the resonant frequency in the medium and air, respectively. Λ is the
Non-dimensional Added Virtual Mass Incremental factor (NAVMI), which is determined
by Lamb, Γ = 0.6689 [59]. a/2
h is the ratio between plate radius and plate thickness, and
ρm/ρp is the ratio between the given medium and the plate material density. This model
stands for thin vibrating plates where a/2
h lies within [10; 100].
The Rayleigh-Ritz quotient may be used directly to determine the resonance frequency
for a clamped circular plate in the air [26]:
ω0 = 2πf0 = 10.328
s
Y
12(1 −ν2)ρp
·
h
(a/2)2 ,
(2.3)
where Y is Young’s modulus and ν is Poisson’s ratio for the given plate material. These
two equations are combined into an expression which can be solved for a known material
and cell radius. Considering a plate of poly-crystalline silicon with parameters: ρSi =
2330 kg/m3, Y = 148 GPa and ν = 0.177, these values are taken as an average from the
[100] and [110] directions in poly-Si [60]. Now Eq. 2.2 & 2.3 may be solved for a plate
thickness. These equations yields a resonance frequency in air of f0 ≈17 MHz and a plate
thickness h ≈1.5 µm. These values may be used as a starting point for FEM simulations.
These values are similar to, although not identical, a square cell which converts as such:
f0,sq = 0.887f0 [61].
TiSi2 for CMUTs
25
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.1.3
Pull-in voltage & vacuum gap
The pull-in voltage, VPI, is the voltage across the CMUT cell. At this point, the capacitor’s
spring and electrostatic forces allow the top plate to be pulled down onto the electrode
in the cavity. The vacuum gap height, geff and pull-in voltage are two closely related
parameters of the CMUT cell. Typically, the desired pull-in voltage is chosen, then a
suitable gap height for the cell is determined. The pull-in voltage should be higher than the
operating voltage of the transducer, 80%VPI = VOperation. A pull-in voltage of VPI = 160 V
was chosen, as this is compatible with commercially available ultrasound scanners and
has been used before without significant issues.
The relationship between the pull-in voltage, VPI, and the effective vacuum gap, geff, for
a square cell is [60]:
VPI,sq =
s
2.95118 ·
g2
effh3ξs
C0a2
,
(2.4)
where C0 =
ϵ0a2
geff is the capacitance of the cell, and the effective gap height is geff =
g + ϵdi/tdi. h is the plate thickness discussed earlier in this section and the constant
ξs = 385.637 GPa. Solving the equation yields a vacuum gap g = 447 nm, which is a
fairly large gap considering the cell size. It will be used as a starting guess in later FEM
simulations, which will also take the top electrode and dielectric layer into consideration.
To avoid short-circuiting the capacitors if a pull-in occurs, a layer of insulating, dielectric
oxy-nitride (SiOxNy) is deposited on the plate before bonding. The breakdown voltage
of the layer was measured in our own lab by Rune S. Grass to 90 mV/nm and should,
therefore, be at least 180 nm thick to prevent short circuits.
2.1.4
FEM simulation
A FEM simulation developed by the MEMS group in COMSOL was used to fine-tune the
parameters concerning one another. This model includes other factors not discussed
earlier, such as the added plate mass from the oxy-nitride layer and the top electrode;
the model parameters may be found in Tab. 2.1. This model uses the former parameters
as starting guesses, followed by an iterative procedure to find suitable parameters for the
cell. The results of the simulation yield a vacuum gap, g = 160 nm, which is quite realistic
and obtainable using the LOCOS method to define cavities. The model yields a plate
thickness, h = 1.7 µm, which is compatible with current PSOI manufacturing techniques
and well within the ”thin plate” regime. And lastly, a resonance frequency of fwater,sq =
7.45 MHz, this is slightly deviated from the target 8 MHz, although CMUTs have a wide
bandwidth [62], and can easily be operated at the target frequency.
26
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Table 2.1: FEM simulation parameters used to estimate viable options for vacuum gap
height, plate thickness and resonance frequency (marked in bold). These are the final
simulation parameters and results for a 37 µm cell.
Plate radius, a/2
18.5 µm
Plate thickness, h
1.7 µm
Half cell separation, wCavSep/2
4 µm
Cell-Element separation
5 µm
Oxynitride thickness, tdi
180 nm
Vacuum gap height, g
160 nm
Top (Al) electrode thickness, tp
1 µm
Nitride stress (tensile)
1100 MPa
Poly-Si stress (compressive)
160 MPa
Resonance frequency in air (circular), f0,circ
18.9 MHz
Resonance frequency in water (circular), fwater,circ
8.4 MHz
Resonance frequency in water (square), fwater,sq
7.45 MHz
2.2
Mask design & Layout
A set of lithographic masks was developed during this thesis. The work was based on
earlier work by K. Steenberg [28]. An overview of the wafer-level layout is presented in Fig.
2.3. This section will briefly describe the most important arrays and test structures. Micro-
fabrication is time-consuming and expensive, so the map is densely packed to maximise
yield. Furthermore, while developing new processes in micro-fabrication, the yield will
often be much lower than in established processing. Hence, it is beneficial to include
smaller designs, which may have a more significant chance of successful fabrication,
particularly during bonding. No arrays or test structures are placed in the outermost 5 mm
of the wafer, as this area is subject to poor process uniformity and high contamination
from handling.
The set includes four masks for structuring the CMUT arrays in the following order:
1. Cavity
2. Bottom electrode
3. Opening to bottom
4. Top electrode
The RCA 190+190 array is shown in Fig. 2.4, two such arrays are placed on each wafer,
Fig. 2.3. The array is made with horizontal bottom electrodes and vertical top electrodes.
Each overlap between a top element and a bottom element is referred to as a sub-element;
these consist of 2 × 2 cavities with an element pitch of λ/2. Application is made using a
single common top electrode for horizontal elements and a common bottom electrode for
vertical elements. Beyond the array itself, it includes 12 smaller test arrays distributed in
the corners of the arrays with 8×8 cavities; these are often used for measurements during
fabrication to avoid damaging the larger arrays. The mask has alignment marks for dicing
and chip wire bonding in each corner. Another alignment mark is made in the top left
corner to use after chip dicing. Each element is also labelled to ease characterisation. All
TiSi2 for CMUTs
27
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.3: Wafer map using cavity mask drawn in L-edit IC, all arrays within a named
square are identical. The most important arrays and test structures lie within the centre
square; these include two RCA 190+190 arrays with a discrete Hanning apodisation (Fig.
1.11), four Lin192 transducers with 5mm elements, 30 Lin16 elements with 6 × 6-cell
sub-elements and last: 80 test elements for IV-characterisation of the bottom electrode
material. The centre square also indicates the approximate size of a RCA 1024+1024
15 MHz array.
these alignment marks and labels are made in the top electrode mask towards the end of
processing. The contact pads for both the top and bottom electrodes alternate directions
(left-right, top-down) to allow for larger contact pads, which makes wire bonding easier.
The Linear 192 array is shown in Fig. 2.5, four of these arrays can be found on each
wafer, Fig 2.3. This array has one common top electrode and separated bottom elec-
trode elements. The bottom electrodes are 5 mm long so that each element may output
sufficient power. This is proportional to the acoustic output pressure and furthermore en-
ables the acoustical characterisation of single elements. The linear array is made with the
same sub-elements as the RCA 190+190 arrays, identical pitch and similar design. The
main difference is that only one single top electrode is used with a surrounding frame,
and the frame is used for ease of measurement during electrical characterisation after
chip finalisation. It should be sawed off before wire-bonding. The fabricated linear array
28
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
(a) Full RCA 190+190 mask set. With minor test arrays in each corner, the top left circle is for
alignment after chip dicing.
(b) Zoomed view of the left apodization region from the
RCA 190+190 mask set.
Figure 2.4: Full view of a RCA 190+190 array (a), and zoomed view of the left side
apodisation (b).
Cavity mask.
Bottom electrode mask (these are difficult to distin-
guish; they are identical, but the bottom electrode is eroded 5.5 µm from the cavity).
Opening to bottom electrode mask.
Top electrode mask. Bottom electrodes are hori-
zontal. Every odd element number has a contact pad on the left side of the array and
even a contact pad on the right side. The top electrodes are vertical (visible on the right
side of (b)), and their contact pads alternate.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
29
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
has no apodisation. It is uncommon for conventional linear arrays to be apodised.
The resistance test element, which is presented in Fig 2.6, 80 of these elements can
be found on each wafer, Fig. 2.3. These are divided into two regions (NW, SE) of four
horizontal lines of six elements each and a vertical section of 16 test elements. The
primary purpose of these elements is to determine the resistance of the formed silicide;
this may be done by making an I-V measurement and deducing the element’s resistance
from the slope. Following this, the resistance may be estimated using Eq. 1.18 using
measured dimensions from the mask set, given in Fig. 2.6, or measured dimensions
by Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) or Optical Microscope (OM). These test elements
are designed as simple as possible to minimise the risk of failure during processing, so
some characterisation may still be done even though the arrays are lost. The elements
are purposely made with a similar thickness to the connector electrodes in the arrays to
mimic any scaling effects which may occur. Furthermore, they are made 2.5mm so that the
total resistance is in a similar order of magnitude as an array element and that minor film
inconsistencies will be averaged out. One line is roughly equivalent to ≈830R□, making
the sheet and element resistance easy to compare. These elements are not meant to be
characterised further than I-V measurements.
30
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
(a) Full view of Lin192 with common top electrode. Elements are 5mm long.
(b) Zoomed view of the top left corner of Lin192 array. Contact pads for elements
alternate (top-down) for every other element.
(c) Further zoomed view of the top left corner of Lin192 array.
Element pitch is
96.25 µm, sub-elements are identical to the RCA 190+190 array (Fig. 2.4).
Figure 2.5:
Cavity mask.
Bottom electrode mask (these are difficult to distinguish;
they are identical,
but the bottom electrode is eroded 5.5 µm from the cavity).
Opening to bottom electrode mask.
Top electrode mask.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
31
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
(a) Full view of a 2.5mm test element for I-V characterisation to determine the resistivity of bottom
electrode film, along with corresponding label in the top electrode.
(b) Zoomed view of the test element contact pads for estimating resistivity of silicide.
Figure 2.6:
Cavity mask.
Bottom electrode mask (these are difficult to distinguish;
they are identical, but the bottom electrode is 5.5 µm narrower than the cavity).
Opening to bottom electrode mask.
Top electrode mask. The electrode width is 3 µm,
thickness 200 nm and a length of 2513 µm. With these geometrical values, a resistivity
may be estimated given the resistance of the element.
32
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.3
CMUT Fabrication
A vast arsenal of different microfabrication techniques is used to fabricate IC technology.
RCA CMUT arrays are no different, as can be seen in the process flow in Appendix A. Most
used methods in this fabrication process are fairly standard, but three major processing
steps stand out in this fabrication scheme:
• LOCally Oxidation of Silicon LOCOS. Used for defining the cavities.
• Rapid Thermal Processing RTP. Used to react silicon and titanium to form silicide.
• Fusion bonding. To fuse the top plate to the bottom wafer.
These fabrication methods are considered the three main fabrication steps in proving that
titanium silicide can function as a CMUT bottom electrode. These methods are described
in the sections below.
2.3.1
Cavity definition
Cavities may be defined in numerous different ways. The chosen method should meet
these requirements: accuracy in obtaining the desired cavity depth and width, wafer-level
uniformity, maintaining low roughness in bonding areas, and reproducibility.
Considering the need for insulation between electrodes, the choice falls upon SiO2 for
cavity definition. The oxidation of silicon is a well-understood process, and oxidation thick-
ness is straightforward to estimate, given the oxidation type, duration, and temperature.
When these parameters are given, oxidation simulations in ATHENA DeckBuild (example
in Fig. 2.8) can be made to obtain thickness or other parameters. The Deal-Grove model
may also give a decent estimate for oxidation parameters; this may be further improved by
fitting the oxidation parameters to historical data from a furnace to the Deal-Grove model.
The following chemical reaction describes the oxidation of silicon:
Si(s) + O2(g) −→SiO2(s)
(2.5)
This reaction consumes silicon from the surface of the Si substrate and grows a silicon
oxide on the surface. For the oxide to grow O2-atoms diffuse from the surface towards the
Si SiO2 interface. In the meantime, Si-atoms do not diffuse significantly into the silicon
dioxide. As such, the growth of the oxide is at the Si SiO2 interface, [63]. The consumed
silicon from the oxidation will amount to 44 % of the total oxide thickness. This uneven
consumption means the oxidation will grow more out of the wafer surface than into it.
This effect is important when using the LOCOS method, as it will directly affect the cavity
depth.
The thickness, x, of the grown oxide is described by the Deal-Grove model [64] and may
be calculated by the following equation:
x = 1
2
p
A2 + 4B(t + τ) −A

,
(2.6)
where t is the processing time, and τ is a time shift given by equation 2.7 to compensate
for growing on an existing oxide film of thickness, xi:
τ = x2
i + A · xi
B
,
(2.7)
A and B are parameters which depend on the oxidation temperature and whether the
oxidation is wet or dry. For a 1100 ◦C dry oxidation the parameters are A = 0.090 µm
TiSi2 for CMUTs
33
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
and B = 0.027 µm2/h, for a 1100 ◦C wet oxidation the parameters are A = 0.11 µm and
B = 0.510 µm2/h. Due to the further diffusion distance, the oxidation will slow down as the
oxide grows thicker. Hence, wet oxidation is the only viable option, given thicker oxides.
It is practical to use the Deal-Grove model to fit historical oxidation data from a given
furnace to obtain the A and B-parameters for the specific furnace.
In either case, the depth of the cavities in the oxide should account for any process which
may etch the oxide in later steps. One such step is removing native oxide from the poly-Si
for the SALICIDE process.
Etching in SiO2 A thick layer of high-quality thermal oxide is grown on a silicon wafer.
This layer should be as thick as the desired cavity depth plus the thickness of the insu-
lation layer. This results in a total thickness of >1 µm. After the oxidation, a mask is
deposited and structured by UV-lithography, followed by an etch of the oxide in a HF-
based solution. Using this method, obtaining a specific cavity depth is tricky. However,
the deposited electrode thickness may compensate for the uncertainty of the cavity depth
to reach a certain gap height. It is challenging to use silicide electrodes as three sources
of uncertainty may influence the thickness: the poly-Si deposition, the Ti deposition, and
the quality of the anneal. Furthermore, several processing steps to form electrodes will
also etch the bonding area, creating additional challenges.
LOCOS Following initial dry oxidation to create an insulation layer, an Low Pressure
Chemical Vapour Deposition (LPCVD) silicon nitride is structured to cover the cavities,
i.e. a mask of opposite polarity from the previous example. The nitride layer will act as
a diffusion barrier to oxygen and prevent oxidation locally. The oxidation parameters of
the bare areas may be calculated from the Deal-Grove model as a second oxidation. To
calculate a required oxide thickness, one must consider the consumption of silicon per.
nm oxide, the desired electrode thickness and gap height, and oxide loss before and af-
ter the LOCOS during the etching steps. Figure 2.8 gives an example of this fabrication
process. Silicon oxide may be etched slowly in conventional poly-Si etching and rapidly
using BHF, both of which it will be exposed to during processing.
The new starting thickness to be used in calculating the desired oxide thickness is:
τ = tIO1 −tEBL,
(2.8)
where the respective thicknesses are the oxide thickness before LOCOS, τ, the original
thickness of the insulation oxide, tIO1, and the total etched thickness before the LOCOS,
tEBL.
The desired total oxide thickness, tLOCOS, is given by the following equation:
tLOCOS = τ +
1
0.56(t + g + tEBL + tEAL),
(2.9)
where t is the electrode thickness, g is the vacuum gap height, and tEAL is the etched
oxide thickness after LOCOS.
The second oxidation should reach a thickness of tLOCOS from a starting point of τ. The
duration for this oxidation may be plainly calculated from the Deal-Grove model when all
process parameters and device dimensions are known. A model fitting is presented in Fig.
2.7; this fit includes the past 50 log entries from an oxidation furnace using wet oxidation
at 1100 ◦C.
34
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.7: Fit of 50 historical data entries of wet oxidation at 1100 ◦C to the Deal-Grove
model.
2.3.2
Silicide thermal processing
Depending on the chosen method for silicide processing, either one or two thermal an-
nealing process steps are required to form the stable C54-phase. The SALICIDE process
will require two annealing steps due to the need to etch unreacted metal before annealing
at high temperatures to reduce unwanted reactions with spacer materials. These anneals
can be made in either conventional annealing furnaces or by RTP. Each of these methods
has advantages and disadvantages. The process is described in more detail in section
1.6, and will be described in the context of the experimentation later.
Conventional furnaces are a batch process and can often handle between 15 −30 wafers
at a time, making them ideal for mass production. A continuous nitrogen or argon flow
flushes the furnace; several long, coiled heating elements do heating. The furnace tem-
perature is measured in several locations, which is used in feedback to control the heating
elements [63]. However, due to their size and method of heating they typically heat and
cool slowly, this makes processing at high temperatures for short time difficult as the tem-
perature will be near the maximum for a long duration. For an example, a 5 min anneal at
800 ◦C using a heating and cooling rate of 10 ◦C/min, will spend an additional 20 min above
700 ◦C - 4× the processing time. This gives the samples unnecessarily large thermal ex-
posure. Conventional furnace annealing may also provide uneven heating of wafers from
the edge inwards [63]. This will result in highly irregular silicide film formation.
RTP is an umbrella term covering several different methods of annealing systems. Com-
mon for all of them is they heat and cool rapidly, with heating rates for some systems be-
ing more than 1000 ◦C/min and cooling rates of higher than 100 ◦C/min. The systems are
feedback-controlled using either thermopiles, which generate small voltages depending
on the temperature, or an optical pyrometer, which measures the power of the sample’s
grey body radiation. The latter requires no contact with the samples by the sensor but
requires an accurate calibration specific to the sample, carrier, and general setup of the
experiment. Reflectivity and emission may differ given the amount of reflecting surfaces,
surface materials and surface roughness. Even slight errors in calibration PID-tables may
result in significant power oscillations due to misread temperatures fed to the feedback
system. RTP systems will isolate the sample thermally by carrying the sample on thin
quartz holders with poor thermal contact to the sample; this helps achieve high tempera-
TiSi2 for CMUTs
35
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
(a) Nitride mask with slight etch of oxide
due to attack from poly-Si etch.
(b) Slight under etch below nitride mask.
(c) LOCOS bends nitride mask upwards.
(d) Small pointy structures are created
during locos.
(e) Nitride is removed, and the bottom
electrode is formed, slight etch in oxide
during processing.
(f) Pointy structure is transferred into ox-
ide; the tip must be below the bonding sur-
face.
Figure 2.8: ATHENA Deckbuild simulation of LOCOS process (a-f) using a 55 nm nitride
mask, the oxide is exposed for 5 min in a poly-Si etch which etches 6 nm/min in oxide
(a-b). A LOCOS process forms the cavities (c-d). The wafer is submerged for a total of
45 s in BHF, with an etch rate 80 nm/min in oxide and ≈4 min in a poly-Si etch before the
electrode is formed (e-f). The code used for these figures may be found in appendix C.
36
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.9: Left: Schematic drawing of different chamber designs and methods of heating
a sample. Using multiple smaller lamps inside a reflecting reactor chamber (A). A single
strong lamp with a reflecting parabolic background to distribute radiation (B). Sample car-
rying mechanism is not shown, typically a set of quartz pins carry a susceptor or carrier
wafer which the sample is placed on. Right: Some sources of heat non-uniformity, most
expressive at the wafer edge. Different heating rates due to source position (A), heat
loss at edge of wafer (B). Convection in process gas (c). Other sources of non-uniformity
include poor contact with the carrier or contact with the sample holder. Figure borrowed
from Fabrication Engineering at the Micro- and Nanoscale [63]
tures.
There are several sources of temperature non-uniformity in RTP systems (see illustration
in Fig. 2.9):
• Variance in exposure from non-uniform heat sources.
• Heat loss to process gas.
• Heat loss through contact with quartz pins carrying the sample.
• Non-uniform contact between sample and carrier wafer or susceptor.
• Edge losses
The first of these is often mitigated by design of the process chamber and heating section,
often a large number of halogen lamps are placed such that sufficiently uniform heating is
achieved. These lamps are usually placed in individually controlled sections with overlap-
ping to achieve uniform heating. They can also be calibrated individually if uneven heating
is observed between the sections. [63]. The chamber will often be strategically coated
in reflective materials, which may assist in uniform radiation exposure. The strategy for
reducing edge losses also lies in the chamber design, one method is to angle reflective
elements toward the wafer edge, to increase the radiation power in these areas [63]. It
is a good idea to avoid having critical wafer structures toward the edge of the wafer, as
this region is typically used for handling. Many fabrication methods also suffer from poor
performance toward wafer edges.
Heat loss to process gases may be compensated by using a slow, uniform flow of process
gas. As long as the heat loss to this effect is uniform, additional power to the heating
TiSi2 for CMUTs
37
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
lamps may compensate. If the flow is uneven, systematic cooling of the sample in some
locations may occur.
Susceptors are a common way of ensuring good temperature uniformity, this is a specific
type of sample holder made of silicon carbide coated graphite. This susceptor has a high
thermal conductivity and helps even out any temperature irregularities. It is often used
along with a carrier wafer, on top of which the sample is placed. The heat distribution
may be further improved by annealing the sample with the processing surface towards
the carrier [65]. However, this method increases the risk of contamination and accidental
wafer bonding between the sample and the carrier. The former is solved by cleaning the
carrier between usage, or replacing the carrier. The latter may be solved by having the
unpolished side of the carrier wafer face toward the sample. The carrier must be clean
and free of defects. Suppose the susceptor is significantly larger than the sample. In that
case, e.g. a 6” susceptor and a 4” sample, the carrier should have an etched recess to
keep the sample from being moved by the process gas during annealing. Movement of
the wafer will nearly always lead to poor anneal uniformity and possibly to large power
fluctuations in the heating mechanism, which may endanger equipment.
The following will suggest a standard annealing process. Before annealing, the chamber
is baked briefly, during which a process gas flow is introduced. This will bake out any
water vapour and oxygen that may have been set in the chamber. After cooling from the
bake-out, the wafer is placed on the carrier/susceptor in the process chamber. Before
heating, the chamber should be pumped to a high vacuum and then purged with process-
grade gases. This process is repeated until a satisfactory clean process environment is
obtained. After this, the heating is started, and ramping should be sufficiently high such
that the processing time is accurate but low enough that the RTP-the system can control
the temperature well and avoid overshooting. All the while, the process gas, argon, is
still flowing in the chamber to maintain an overpressure; this will prevent atmospheric
gases from entering the chamber; specifically, oxygen contamination is critical to avoid.
The chamber is then kept at a temperature while the annealing takes place, after which
fans outside the chamber cool the chamber. After some level of cooling, process-grade
nitrogen is introduced to cool the sample and chamber. When the sample temperature
is cooled below ≈100 ◦C, it is removed from the chamber. Reducing the temperature
ramp when nearing the target temperature is beneficial when using higher-temperature
annealing.
2.3.3
Wafer bonding
Wafer bonding is a standard fabrication method used in the semiconductor industry, par-
ticularly in fabricating MEMS-sensing devices such as capacitive sensors [66]. Wafer
bonding covers many different methods. In general, for all of these, two wafers are at-
tached, or rather bonded, together. For two wafers to bond, they must both be extremely
clean, which is to say, free of ions, organic material and particles. Usually, an RCA or
piranha clean is used. The samples require a high level of contact in the bonding inter-
face. Hence, they must have a low surface roughness in bonding areas and a low wafer
bow, which should be convex, if anything. These two requirements present each their
challenge in using silicide as electrode material. Silicide has tensile stress in the area of
2 GPa, which may result in a concave wafer bow [67]. Furthermore, silicidation will oc-
cur in a small amount on the oxide surface, increasing surface roughness in the bonding
areas.
The main requirements of a successful bond given silicide electrodes are: Limited ther-
mal exposure, this applies mainly to temperatures in the upper end of the titanium silicide
38
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
thermal stability and for longer exposures. The bond should be strong and uniform, and
the cavities in the arrays should be hermetically sealed to maintain a vacuum in the cavi-
ties. The bond needs a low density of defects, given the size of the arrays even a single
bonding defect can have immense consequences on an array.
Wafer bonding techniques mainly involve either direct wafer bonding or mediated bond-
ing. The latter applies a mediator layer between the bonding surfaces, which will assist
the bonding, for example, eutectic bonding. Titanium may be used in mediated bonding
between silicon and silicon dioxide surfaces1. In this type of wafer bonding, it is likely
that some silicidation occurs in the interface of the wafers. During bonding, the titanium
may reduce SiO2 from both wafer surfaces and form silicide between Ti and Si from both
wafers, thus forming Ti-Si bonds with both surfaces [68]. A titanium silicide bond will
require annealing around 550 ◦C. Given the need for electrically insulated bottom elec-
trodes, this silicide should be disconnected from the electrodes and preferably very thin.
A drawback of this method is that it complicates the electrode formation significantly and
may require an additional photo-lithographic step to ensure disconnection between the
bonding area and electrodes. Mediated wafer bonding techniques may create many chal-
lenges as a material layer is added to the wafer interface, which may severely interfere
with the CMUTs.
Fortunately, there are methods of wafer bonding which do not require any mediator layers.
These are the direct wafer bonding methods: Fusion bonding and anodic bonding. The
latter is mainly used when bonding silicon to borosilicate glass surfaces, which have been
used in other CMUT iterations in our research group. The method utilises a high voltage
over the wafer stack to form covalent bonds at the interface between the wafers. During
this process, the wafers are heated to soften the glass and enable slight conforming to
the silicon surface. Hence, a better bond [66]. The electric field from the applied voltage
will move Na+-ions away from the bond interface and leave a negatively charged oxygen
at the bonding interface, which may react with the silicon surface in covalent bonds, thus
bonding the two wafers.
Fusion bonding may be used to bond silicon to silicon wafers. When both wafers are
covered in oxide or oxynitride, it is hydrophilic fusion bonding. Two silicon wafers are
pushed together at high pressure, after which they are annealed at an elevated temper-
ature (> 900 ◦C) while still in contact. This is schematically displayed in Fig. 2.10. The
initial contact will form a weak bond between free OH groups. The anneal will reinforce
the bond strength by removing water from the bonds, thus forming Si O Si bonds across
the surface. This results in a strong bond between the wafers.
1This was observed during experimentation, although accidentally and at the time impeding to the process
development.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
39
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.10: Schematic illustration of a hydrophilic fusion bonding process, wafers are
pressed together and heated at low temperatures, followed by a high-temperature an-
nealing step (≥900 ◦C). Figure borrowed from Comprehensive Microsystems [66].
40
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:49==
3
Process development
3.1
Introduction
This chapter will describe experiments made in preparation for fabrication attempts of the
actual CMUT chips. These experiments aim to determine the optimal processing param-
eters and verify that titanium disilicide can be fabricated in a LOCOS and fusion bonded
to a PSOI afterwards. First, some experimentation performed by the author before this
project during a bachelor thesis will be described. This work has set the stage for further
experimentation and gave a running start in the laboratory. Second, some general exper-
iments were made to determine the best possible annealing parameters, including wafer
orientation in the reaction chamber, the temperature of the 1st anneal to promote silicide
formation while reducing Ti + SiO2 reactions, the usage of carriers and susceptors to pro-
mote annealing uniformity. Third, a temperature-resistivity curve for the second anneals
attempting to form C54 phase silicide. These curves also guide to minimal formation tem-
perature and maximum stable temperature. During these experiments, the samples were
analysed using the following primary methods:
• AFM To determine the sample’s topography, roughness, and minor structural de-
fects.
– Machine model: Dimension Icon-PT from Bruker
• Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) To check for defects and topographical fea-
tures.
– Machine model: Zeiss Supra 60 VP (with Energy-Dispersive X-ray (EDX))
• X-ray Photo-electron Spectroscopy (XPS) Used for determining atomic compo-
sition of samples, hereunder verifying silicide formation, determining surface and
in-film contamination. Non-uniformities are also investigated under the assumption
of contamination.
– Machine model: XPS-Nexsa by ThermoFisher Scientific
• Stylus profiler Estimation of stress and wafer bow.
– Machine model: KLA-Tencor P17 stylus profiler
• 4-Point probe Determination of sheet resistance, which is used to estimate resis-
tivity. It is also used to determine the non-uniformity of film formation.
– Machine model: RM3000 Test Unit by Jandel Engineering Limited
• Camera Non-uniformity of samples.
3.1.1
Earlier experimentation
Earlier experimentation regarding titanium silicide in this research group has been made
[69]. The focus during these experiments was titanium silicide formation on fused silica
substrates. This endeavour proved challenging due to the formation of cracks in the films.
This defect is attributed to the difference in linear thermal expansion coefficients of fused
silica (0.5×10−6 K−1, [70]) and titanium disilicide (10.9×10−6 K−1, [71]). This difference is
nearly 22×, and seeing as the titanium silicide annealing requires temperatures of 500 −
800 ◦C, high stress will form when the sample is cooled. No cracks in the formed titanium
silicide thin films were observed when made on silicon substrates.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
41
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
Figure 3.1: Pictures of the Nanolab Jipelec. Left: The bottom of the process chamber.
A carrier wafer (not depicted) is placed on top of a 6” susceptor; quartz pins carry the
susceptor. No thermocouple is mounted; a pyrometer measures the sample temperature
from below the sample. Middle: At the top of the process chamber, 18 halogen lamps
distributed in three zones heat the sample. Right: The process chamber, top and bottom.
These experiments were made in conventional furnaces using N2 as a purge gas. This
furnace was used for metal annealing and polymer pyrolysis, with a set of quartz innards
for each type of process. This presented another source of contamination as not all of
the quartz set could be changed, and from the changing process itself. Furnaces were
pump-purged 3× before a temperature ramp of 10 ◦C/min was used to reach a given
temperature. All the while, the furnace was flushed with nitrogen; at the time, this was
the best available gas option, even though nitrogen may react with titanium to form TiN.
Furthermore, annealing in conventional furnaces resulted in poor film uniformity, which is
visible in sheet resistivity measurements and by the naked eye.
Some significant laboratory improvements were made between these experiments and
the experimentation in this master’s. These improvements made new experimentation
in titanium silicide processing possible. First, DTU Nanolab purchased and optimised
a new Rapid Thermal Processing unit (Jipelec JetFirst 200 RTP, see Fig. 3.1). During
the project, this machine was additionally upgraded in hardware and software to achieve
more uniform annealing and higher heating ramps without increasing the temperature
overshoot. The option to use argon gas during annealing was added.
3.1.2
General anneal parameters
During initial experiments, Si-wafers were used, and the silicide film was not structured
during or after processing.
1. Standard RCA-cleaning of all wafers before furnace processing.
2. Thermal oxidation for insulation between the substrate and fabricated film, 1100 ◦C
for 4 h. 266 nm silicon dioxide was measured by ellipsometry.
3. LPCVD deposition of boron doped poly-crystalline silicon using SiH4 and B2H6 gas.
185 nm was measured using ellipsometry in the boat’s centre.
4. Wafers are parked, and subsequent processing was done in direct sequence with
1-2 wafers at a time.
5. Wafer cleaning in piranha, 10 min.
6. Native oxide etch in BHF, 15 s.
7. E-beam evaporation of titanium, 80 nm at 2 Å/s is measured by the processing unit.
8. 1st anneal at low temperature for 40 min, heat ramp at 5 ◦C/s.
42
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
Figure 3.2:
Recorded data during a 650 ◦C 1st anneal with a slow heating ramp of
50 ◦C/min. This process used TC1 in the feedback mechanism to control the heaters; the
pyrometer systematically measured the temperature too low. Argon is used in a pump-
purge cycle at the beginning of the annealing process; in between flushes, the pressure is
reduced to below 6 mBar, which is the lowest the tool can measure. A slight overshoot in
temperature can be seen as the set point is reached. A slight overpressure, ≈1070 mBar,
is kept to ensure that gasses flow only out of the chamber. Cooling will continue after this
timeline by fans outside the process chamber and introducing process-grade nitrogen into
the chamber.
9. Titanium selective etch (to titanium silicide), this is done in a piranha, 10 min. The
solution becomes orange as Ti is etched.
10. 2nd anneal at a higher temperature for 5 min, heat ramp at 5 ◦C/s until 550 ◦C, 2 ◦C/s
until target.
During both annealing steps, the standard process is to anneal the wafer with the surface
towards the carrier. The used susceptor is 6”, and a Double Side Polished (DSP) 6” wafer
with an etched recess is used as a carrier. The recess is a circle centred on the wafer with
a radius of ≈11 cm, slightly higher than a 4” wafer. The recess should prevent the wafer
from sliding in the process chamber once the argon flow is turned on. The recorded data
in such an annealing cycle is presented in Fig 3.2.
Given a silicide thickness of 2.51× the metal thickness and a silicon consumption of 2.27×
the metal thickness, the required metal thickness for a 200 nm titanium silicide is 80 nm and
180 nm poly-Si. A silicide thickness of 200 nm is assumed when estimating film resistivity.
This sequence describes the processing steps for all the following experiments, with minor
variations in each experiment. The differences, if any, will be covered at the beginning
of each section. Details added or altered in the following sections will only apply to the
information in said section.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
43
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
(a) Sample annealed at 650 ◦C surface fac-
ing the carrier.
(b) Sample annealed at 650 ◦C surface fac-
ing the carrier.
(c) Sample annealed at 650 ◦C surface fac-
ing up towards the chamber ambient.
(d) Sample annealed at 650 ◦C surface fac-
ing up towards the chamber ambient.
Figure 3.3: Camera photos of two samples annealed facing the carrier (top row) and two
samples facing up towards the anneal ambient (bottom row).
3.2
General annealing parameters
3.2.1
Wafer Orientation during anneal
It has been suggested that annealing with the processing surface against a carrier wafer
will provide better temperature uniformity across the wafer and, thus, better resistivity uni-
formity [65]. Four wafers are annealed at 650 ◦C, two samples with their surface towards
the carrier and two face up. They are processed using the steps in Sec. 3.1.2, minus the
last step with a second anneal. Photos of each sample after the processing can be seen
in Fig. 3.3. It is unclear from this photo which method provides the best results, as both
options appear wildly non-uniform to the naked eye. The decision was made by testing
the samples with a 4-point probe and by XPS.
The average sheet resistance of those samples annealed face up was 6.6 ± 2.8Ω/□, re-
sulting in an estimated resistivity of 132±56µΩ.cm. While these numbers were somewhat
lower for the samples annealed face down toward the carrier, 1.2±0.1Ω/□which gives an
estimated resistivity of 23.9 ± 2.5µΩ.cm. These parameters were measured at five points
on each wafer: centre, east, north, west, and south.
The film’s electrical quality is far better when annealing face-down due to the improved
resistance uncertainty. However, the resistivity is far closer to that of C54 silicide than
44
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
Figure 3.4: Figure showing the locations of XPS analysis on samples annealed at 650 ◦C.
Top: Annealed face down, locations are referred to as 04_N, 04_C and 04_S from the
top down.Bottom: Annealed face up, locations are referred to as 07_N, 07_C and 07_S
from the top down. XPS graphs are presented in Fig. 3.5.
that of C49, which was intended. This suggests some room for reducing the annealing
temperature of the 1st anneal, which may be beneficial when reducing titanium and silicon
dioxide reactions. It is also noted that the samples annealed face-down have an eye-
like shape diagonally across the sample. This feature is thought to be related to the
sample contact with the carrier. This contact is determined by temperature uniformity and
regarding contaminants in the anneal chamber. Some contamination may also come from
the carrier, given the physical contact between the sample and the carrier.
The samples were further analysed using XPS to investigate the optical variations of
the film regarding sample contamination. Therefore, the measured XPS spectra derived
atomic depth profiles. Each etch cycle was 20 s long using 3 keV monatomic argon ion
bombardment. Thirty etch cycles and spectra were made for each sample. Due to the
nature of the data collection, there is no way of knowing how deep each etch cycle has
etched. Additional attention was made to the following materials while acquiring the spec-
tra: Si, Ti, O, N, Ar, F, and C. These materials are either those deposited intentionally or
suspect contaminants. The atomic profiles for the locations shown in Fig. 3.4 are pre-
sented in Fig. 3.5.
Concerning the sample annealed face-up, Figs. 3.5b, 3.5d and 3.5f. It is visible that
there is elevated oxygen concentration further into the sample. In location 07_N, the
spectra suggest that TiO2 has formed and directly transitioned to silicon with a low titanium
content - too little for silicide formation. A small amount of nitrogen is present, likely from
between the poly-Si and titanium deposition. Location 07_C also has a layer of TiO2. Still,
with some level of silicon present, this layer transitions to a material composition fitting a
titanium-rich silicide although too little titanium concentration for TiSi2. Location 07_S tells
the same story, except for a higher titanium concentration, which indicates the formation
TiSi2 for CMUTs
45
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
of TiSi2. The anneal has gone best inside the centre of the formed blob, where less
oxygen has contaminated the sample. However, the outer parts of the sample contain
large amounts of oxygen and silicide formation is unlikely.
Regarding the sample annealed with the surface toward the carrier, Figs. 3.5a,3.5c, and
3.5e. These samples also show oxygen contamination at the surface but at a far lower
amount than the face-up sample. The XPS analysis in location 04_N suggests that a
titanium-oxide-silicide composite has formed near the surface; moving deeper into the
sample, this transitions to a silicide film with the desired atomic composition. TiSi2 has
approximately 33% Ti and 66% Si. Analysis in location 04_C is similar to the former but has
a thinner oxygen layer. Some oxygen contamination is present further into the sample,
likely from the poly-Si titanium interface. The last location, 04_S, shows a TiO2 layer at
the surface, transitioning to a silicide layer with low titanium content.
It is common in XPS analysis that the first layers (1-2) contain more oxygen, fluoride,
carbon and nitrogen than expected due to atmospheric contamination during storage.
The fluoride is mainly from the wafer storage boxes.
Sub-conclusion: Wafers will be annealed face-down to the carrier, as this reduces oxy-
gen contamination and increases anneal uniformity (regarding resistivity). Furthermore,
the low resistivity of the face-down samples suggests that the annealing temperature could
be lowered below 650 ◦C. This will help in reducing titanium/silicon dioxide reactions. It will
likely also reduce reactions to the ambient anneal atmosphere. However, more investiga-
tion is needed to improve annealing uniformity and minimise contamination of samples.
46
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
(a) Anneal face down, location: 04_N.
(b) Anneal face Up, location: 07_N.
(c) Anneal face down, location: 04_C.
(d) Anneal face up, location: 07_C.
(e) Anneal face down, location: 04_S.
(f) Anneal face down, location: 07_S.
Figure 3.5: XPS derived atomic profiles of samples shown in Fig. 3.4. Common for all of
these spectra is that higher oxygen levels are found at each sample’s surface. It is also
visible that the oxygen concentration increases at a certain depth at the silicide-silicon
dioxide interface.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
47
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
3.2.2
Titanium & silicon dioxide reactions
Considering the first annealing process, the temperature must be high enough to promote
silicidation between poly-Si and titanium. However, it should be low enough to reduce ti-
tanium and silicon dioxide reactions. The latter will be used in the LOCOS to define the
cavities and will also serve as a spacer material during annealing, i.e. in the locations
where the titanium should not react to form silicide. The titanium-silicon dioxide reaction
is said in literature to occur at temperatures below 700 ◦C when annealing in an argon
ambient [44]. This section will describe an experiment designed to determine which an-
nealing temperatures this reaction occurs and is minimised.
Six silicon wafers are oxidised as described in Sec. 3.1.2; however, no silicon layer is
deposited, nor is any native oxide etch done. 80 nm titanium is deposited on the samples
followed by an anneal at 450-700 ◦C in 50 ◦C intervals. Any residual titanium is etched
away in a piranha, which will also etch any TiO2 formed in the anneal but will leave TiSi2
behind. These samples were analysed in XPS to determine at which temperatures the
reaction of silicon dioxide and titanium was most reduced.
The XPS spectra for all samples were gathered by a wide repeating (5×) survey, followed
by a repeating (5×) narrow survey of each of the expected elements; Ti, N, O, Si and C.
This process was done at 12 levels; in between each level, the sample was etched with
a 3 keV argon ion bombardment for 22 s. The XPS spectra from each level were used to
compile an atomic profile for each of the six samples; these are presented in Fig. 3.6.
These profiles show a clear tendency toward less silicidation of titanium on silicon dioxide
when annealing at lower temperatures. However, all the samples contained some levels
of titanium silicide regardless of the temperature at which the anneal was performed. Only
TiSix and TiOy may form at the Ti-SiO2 interface, the latter of which is etched away in the
piranha done before XPS analysis. This is further confirmed by the oxygen concentration
of the samples falling almost oppositely, with the titanium concentration rising in all sam-
ples. The silicon concentration is approximately constant except for the very surface. This
suggests the reduction of silicon dioxide to oxygen and silicon separately; these atoms
can react with titanium to form TiOy and TiSix, respectively, during the annealing process.
It should be noted that the silicide seems to be buried slightly below the surface in all of
the samples. This may be due to the formation of native oxide on the silicide; if this is the
case, it may prove problematic later in the fabrication. Small amounts of water vapour
settled on the sample surface from the atmosphere may also give a false impression of
high oxygen content at the surface.
Titanium silicide growing on silicon dioxide is problematic for two reasons: first, it is con-
ducting and may provide an electrical pathway to short-circuit two separate electrodes;
second, it will increase the roughness in bonding areas. The latter is due to the silicide’s
crystalline growth, which may create small silicide grains at the surface. Thus, the sur-
face roughness of the samples was investigated using AFM. The samples’ roughness and
Rmax can be found in Tab. 3.1. The former is a statistical measure, similar to a standard
deviation, on the measured topographical heights of the sample. The latter is the maxi-
mal difference on the measured surface, which gives insight into the height of potential
silicide grains. The data shows a clear tendency towards higher roughness and larger
Rmax-values when annealing at higher temperatures. This supports the XPS data that
more silicide forms at higher temperature annealing.
Given that the formed silicide layer is sufficiently thin, it may be removed in an RCA 1
wafer clean, which etches titanium silicides at a low rate (approx. 1.5 nm/min for a 1:1:5
NH4OH:H2O2:H2O solution heated to 70 ◦C). For a standard cleaning process of 10 min,
48
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
(a) Ti annealed on SiO2 at 450 ◦C.
(b) Ti annealed on SiO2 at 500 ◦C.
(c) Ti annealed on SiO2 at 550 ◦C.
(d) Ti annealed on SiO2 at 600 ◦C.
(e) Ti annealed on SiO2 at 650 ◦C.
(f) Ti annealed on SiO2 at 700 ◦C.
Figure 3.6: Atomic composition derived from XPS spectra of samples with titanium an-
nealed on silicon dioxide at various temperatures. Significant amounts of silicidation on
silicon dioxide occur at all the tested temperatures, although a steady decrease is seen
moving toward lower temperatures. All the samples appear to be covered in a thin oxide
regardless of annealing temperature. Argon content is most likely from the etching pro-
cess of the XPS with uses argon ion bombardment.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
49
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
Table 3.1: Surface roughness measured by AFM on samples with titanium annealed on
silicon dioxide at various temperatures. An increase in surface roughness can be seen
as the annealing temperature increases, suggesting the formation of silicide crystals at
the surface.
Sample ID
Anneal temp.
Roughness (Rq)
Roughness (Ra)
Rmax
SiO2Titanium 01
450 ◦C
1.28 nm
0.94 nm
28.7 nm
SiO2Titanium 02
500 ◦C
3.57 nm
2.58 nm
34.5 nm
SiO2Titanium 03
550 ◦C
5.84 nm
4.81 nm
44.4 nm
SiO2Titanium 04
600 ◦C
6.36 nm
5.06 nm
54.6 nm
SiO2Titanium 05
650 ◦C
6.93 nm
5.51 nm
57.0 nm
SiO2Titanium 06
700 ◦C
7.05 nm
5.58 nm
59.5 nm
this may etch as much as 15 nm of the silicide formed at the silicon dioxide surface. This
will, however, also etch the formed electrodes, but the sacrifice may be necessary. The
sample annealed at 550 ◦C (SiO2Titanium 03) was cleaned as described, which reduced
the roughness and Rmax significantly. The topographical maps, alongside the extracted
values, are presented in Fig. 3.7 before and after the cleaning process. Cleaning the
wafers in RCA 1 reduces the roughness to values within the realm of possibility regarding
wafer bonding.
(a) Before RCA 1.
Rq
= 5.84 nm, Ra =
4.81 nm, Rmax = 44.4 nm
(b) After RCA 1. Rq = 1.33 nm, Ra = 1.06 nm,
Rmax = 10.2 nm
Figure 3.7: Topographical maps of a sample with titanium annealed on silicon dioxide at
550 ◦C before (left) and after (right) a 10 min clean in an RCA 1. After the wafer cleaning,
a large decrease in wafer roughness and Rmax.
50
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
Table 3.2: Sheet resistance was measured in five different points (Center, North, West,
South (toward major flat) and East)) along with calculated mean resistivity and standard
deviation, assuming a 200 nm silicide film. It is noted that the centre resistivity is con-
sistently lower, likely due to better thermal contact with the carrier. The estimated film
resistivity indicates that C49-phase titanium silicide is formed during annealing at 550 ◦C;
the low resistivity from annealing at 600-650 ◦C is likely due to C54-phase silicide forming.
Sheet resistance, R□, [Ω/□]
¯ρ
ρC
Sample ID
Anneal
temp.
C
N
W
S
E
¯
R□
µΩcm
µΩcm
W240109
INIT_08
550 ◦C
4.11
6.32
6.69
7.33
6.89
6.27
125.4±22.5
82.2
W240109
INIT_09
550 ◦C
4.65
6.43
5.93
6.74
7.55
6.26
125.2±19.2
93.0
W240109
INIT_21
600 ◦C
0.80
1.03
1.40
2.12
1.15
1.30
26.0 ± 9.1
15.9
W240109
INIT_22
600 ◦C
1.00
1.87
1.12
1.27
0.85
1.22
24.4 ± 7.0
20.0
W240109
INIT_04
650 ◦C
0.93
1.24
1.30
1.22
1.24
1.19
23.7 ± 2.6
18.6
W240109
INIT_05
650 ◦C
0.98
1.29
1.25
1.29
1.23
1.21
24.2 ± 2.3
19.7
3.2.3
1st anneal temperature
Titanium silicide is stated to begin formation at temperatures around or above 500 ◦C. This
subsection will describe an experiment, where the 1st anneal temperature is varied in three
levels: 550 ◦C, 600 ◦C and 650 ◦C. These temperatures were selected based on previous
studies conducted in the DTU cleanroom [65] and literature [44]. The temperatures must
be high enough to promote silicidation between poly-Si and titanium; however, they must
be low enough to reduce reactions between silicon dioxide and titanium. The former will
be addressed in this section.
It was shown previously in the chapter that annealing at 650 ◦C would result in the for-
mation of C54-phase titanium silicide (resistivity between 13-20 µΩcm). However, the
purpose of the first annealing process is to form a C49-phase silicide (resistivity between
80-100 µΩcm). Thus, the temperature was lowered until this phase was the dominant sili-
cide. The experiment showed that TiSi2 −C49 was the dominant silicide in the film when
annealing at 550 C, due to the high resistivity, 125.4 ± 22.5µΩcm & 125.2 ± 19.2µΩcm,
respectively. The high uncertainty is mainly due to the non-uniformity of the film from
poor contact with the carrier wafer. The resistivity of the samples annealed at 600 ◦C,
26.0 ± 9.1µΩcm & 24.4 ± 7.0µΩcm respectively, suggested that the dominant silicide is
the C54-phase. However, the high uncertainty indicates that the non-uniformity of the
anneal is high and may also mean this is a mixed-phase silicide film. Annealing at 650 ◦C
yielded estimated resistivities of 23.7 ± 2.6µΩcm & 24.2 ± 2.3µΩcm respectively. These
resistivities indicate that the dominant silicide in the formed film is the C54-phase. The
low uncertainty indicates that the sample was subjected to a fairly uniform heat treatment
despite poor contact with the carrier.
Sub-conclusion: Annealing at 550 ◦C is sufficient for satisfactory a C49 titanium silicide
TiSi2 for CMUTs
51
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
film to form. This is the lowest tested temperature tested concerning silicide formation,
as the films reportedly begin silicidation at a significant rate above 500 ◦C. The resistivity
of the silicide film was estimated at 82-93 µΩcm at the centre of the samples, well within
the listed resistivity of C49-phase titanium silicide. The atomic composition of titanium an-
nealed on silicon dioxide at various temperatures was also obtained. This data showed a
formation of titanium silicide at the SiO2-surface at all attempted temperatures, 450-700 ◦C.
The silicide formation at the silicon dioxide surface dramatically increased at 600 ◦C and
above. The roughness of the sample annealed at 550 ◦C was determined to be too high
for bonding; however, this was solved by a RCA 1 cleaning procedure which etches TiSi2.
3.2.4
XPS analysis of discoloration
As seen in previous sections, sample non-uniformity after the annealing process has been
problematic. These samples show a clear and somewhat systematic discolouration. The
pattern is typically ”eye”-shaped with corners usually placed in SE and NE. A brief XPS
analysis was made to determine the source of the discolouration. Six points of various
colours and distances to the wafer centre were analysed by repeating a broad spectral
survey of the point. After which, the sample was etched for 22 s by the 3 keV argon ion
bombardment of 3 keV argon ions. This was repeated fifteen times at each point to deter-
mine the atomic composition as a function of depth. The sample and the selected analysis
points are shown in Fig. 3.8. The derived atomic profiles from these points are presented
in Fig. 3.9. These profiles show a clear tendency toward TiO2 toward the edges, which
may also explain the poor electrical conductivity of these areas. The amount of titanium
oxide is reduced, moving toward the centre of the sample. The outermost point, P1,
placed in a yellow-green area, shows no significant traces of silicon. Furthermore, the
ratio of titanium to oxygen indicates a layer of titanium oxide. This layer is not penetrated
during the entire etch. A similar result is obtained in P2, placed in a blue-green, with a
slight silicon concentration in all etched layers. In the third point, P3, placed in a blue
area, some titanium-rich silicide is detected in the last few layers, with a rising silicon con-
centration. The brown regions, P4, saw a steady decrease in oxygen depth, although a
significant part was replaced by nitrogen contamination. TiN in the silicide is not quite as
bad as TiO2 but is still avoided due to a significant etch rate in RCA 1. After the nitrogen
concentration reduces, silicon concentration increases significantly towards a Ti:Si ratio
approaching that of silicide (1:2). Moving to the pale-grey area, P5, both nitrogen and
oxygen contamination become more restricted at the surface, diminishes and is replaced
by silicon. The Ti:Si ratio further approaches that of titanium silicide. This tendency is
continued into the grey area, P6. The ratio is likely skewed slightly by a false signal of
argon; argon is used for etching and may be detected in small amounts in some cases.
These discolourations may be used to determine sample quality based on eye-sight.
52
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
Figure 3.8:
Sample used for XPS atomic depth profile analysis, left:
full sample,
right: sample in XPS ultra-high vacuum chamber with marked analysis points in vari-
ous coloured bands surrounding the eye-pattern.
3.2.5
Wafer carrier & susceptor
All experiments described in this section were performed by annealing at 550 ◦C during
the first anneal. Several different wafer-carrying schemes were attempted to obtain the
best possible annealing uniformity. Most of the non-uniformity from the annealing pro-
cess is attributed to poor temperature uniformity across the sample. This is likely due to
poor contact between the wafer and the carrier wafer. The investigated wafer-carrying
schemes were:
• 6” susceptor, 6” DSP carrier wafer with etched recess.
• 6” susceptor, 6” DSP carrier without etched recess.
• 4” susceptor, 4” DSP carrier.
• 4” susceptor, 4” Single Side polished (SSP) carrier.
The use of DSP carriers is due to several reasons. The wafers are thinner, lighter, and
easier to heat rapidly. Both sides of the carrier are polished, meaning better contact be-
tween the susceptor/carrier and the carrier/sample. Furthermore, the RTP system re-
quires Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) calibration1 for each specific setup in the
chamber in regards to sample size, carrier size, susceptor size, and roughness of sur-
faces of any of these. New calibration tables had to be made by Nanolab staff for each
new attempted setup; these were made based on the previously used ones, and as such,
the difference between the current and next setup was kept small.
Some of these options became available only after the upgrade of the RTP system. There-
fore, initial experiments used a 6” susceptor and a 6” carrier wafer with an etched recess.
This setup was commonly used and shared between other users of the system. The pro-
longed use of this carrier wafer may also have deformed it, e.g. adding roughness, parti-
cles and wafer bow. The second setup that was investigated was simply a replacement of
this carrier. A comparison of the two resulting samples is shown in Fig. 3.10. Using a new,
clean, flat wafer carrier improved the uniformity in the resistivity from 101.7±23.0 µΩcm to
97.6±11.7 µΩcm. Both the resulting resistivities are remarkably close to each other. But,
considering the far lower uncertainty of the measurements given the new wafer carrier,
this is a significant improvement. Note that the wafers still have a somewhat noticeable
diagonal ”eye” pattern, which is also present in the resistivity maps. This suggests that
1These calibration tables control the relationship between the measured temperature on the sample and
the power supply for the heating elements.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
53
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
Figure 3.9: Atomic depth profiles in points P1-P6 (Fig. 3.8) starting from the top left and
ending at the bottom right. Points are gradually moved further toward the centre of the
wafer as their index increase. A clear tendency toward TiO2 is seen toward the edges
of the sample with near pure titanium oxide seen in point P1. Around the P4, a large
reduction in the amount of TiO2 is seen, and TiN-levels increase. Furthest toward the
centre, both TiO2 and TiN-levels have reduced and are only significant toward the very
surface. Silicide is present below this surface.
54
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
the naked eye may discern poor electrical film quality. Thus, an inferior sample can eas-
ily be identified and excluded. It is an evident issue that the wafer fused partially to the
carrier; this is likely an accidental mediated wafer bonding. The sample could most likely
bond partially to the carrier because of an excellent contact between them. This brings
some problematic considerations: If the contact is poor, the uniformity of the anneal is
inadequate; if it is too good, it will fuse to the carrier and render the sample unusable.
To improve the cleanliness of the annealing process, a new or newly cleaned carrier wafer
was attempted for each annealing process. First, annealing with a 6” susceptor with a
6” DSP wafer as a carrier without an etched recess. If the samples would often fuse
to the carriers and break them, it would be expensive to use processed carriers. This
attempt was unsuccessful due to the sample sliding on top of the carrier wafer, leading to
considerable power fluctuations in the heating elements once temperatures exceeded ≈
400 ◦C. As such, the process had to be terminated to protect the equipment. No significant
silicidation occurred in the sample. These fluctuations are due to the pyrometer’s inability
to measure accurately after the sample has moved.
Later, the option to use a 4” susceptor was added. A side-by-side comparison of this
and the 6” susceptor can be seen in Fig. 3.11. The difference between these can seem
minuscule, but the edges of the 4” susceptor act as a mechanism for holding the sample
without the need for an etched recess. This enables the use of non-processed carriers,
which can be changed between processes. Despite the risk of the sample fusing, a 4” DSP
carrier was first used. This is to ease the calibration of the new PID tables. Unfortunately,
the samples fused tightly with the carrier wafer. Once again, the contact between the
sample and carrier was too good.
A last attempt was made, using a SSP carrier wafer in the 4” susceptor. The carrier
was placed with the polished side toward the susceptor and the rough side toward the
sample. The samples were placed face-down toward the carrier. This setup obtained
highly uniform results over the wafer without any bonding between the sample and carrier.
The resulting sample is shown in Fig. 3.12.
Sub-conclusion: A 6” susceptor, along with any wafer carrying scheme, results in either
insufficient uniformity of the temperature across the sample or in the complete inability to
properly control the heating lamps in the RTP reactor. Despite the excellent contact be-
tween a polished wafer and the sample, which should result in good annealing uniformity,
this setup carries a high risk of fusing the sample to the carrier. Annealing with a SSP
wafer with the rough side toward the sample has none of these issues and can obtain a
superior anneal uniformity.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
55
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
(a) Annealed using shared 6” wafer carrier.
(b) Annealed using new, clean 6” wafer carrier.
The sample partly fused to the carrier.
(c) Resistivity map of sample annealed using
shared 6” wafer carrier. Resistivity within the
centre circle is 101.7 ± 23.0 µΩcm
(d) Resistivity map of sample annealed using
shared 6” wafer carrier. Measurements were
moved to the closest point outside the frag-
ment (See fig. 3.10b). Resistivity within the
centre circle is 97.6 ± 11.7 µΩcm.
Figure 3.10: Top: Comparison of two wafers annealed using a 6” susceptor with a 6”
wafer carrier with an etched recess. Bottom: Resistivity map of both samples using an
estimated film thickness of 200 nm to calculate resistivity from sheet resistance from 4-
Point-Probe. Measurements are made in each of the red markings. The Interpolation
between measurements is linear. Mean and standard deviation are calculated from mea-
surements within the dashed circle. The replacement of the wafer carrier significantly
improves annealing uniformity. Both wafers were annealed at 550 ◦C.
56
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
Figure 3.11: Left: A 6” susceptor in the open RTP reactor chamber. This susceptor is
used with a 6” carrier wafer either with or without an etched recess. Right: A 4” susceptor
in the open RTP reactor chamber. This susceptor is used with a 4” carrier wafer either
without the need for a recess due to the edges of the susceptor.
Figure 3.12: Sample annealed at 550 ◦C using a 4” susceptor and a 4” SSP carrier wafer
with the rough side toward the sample. A highly uniform film was achieved, with non-
uniformity only toward the edges. The colourful bands which may be seen in Figs. 3.3a,
3.3b and 3.10a, have become very thin and pushed to the very edge.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
57
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
Figure 3.13: Temperature - resistance curve for silicidation of titanium and poly-crystalline
silicon during annealing. Figure borrowed from Silicide Technology for Integrated Cir-
cuits [44]. Point a is an unmixed titanium and poly-Si bilayer. Points d-e is the onset
of metastable C49-phase TiSi2. Points h-j indicate the formation of stable, low resistiv-
ity C54-phase TiSi2. The sample will begin agglomeration at temperatures around 950-
1000 ◦C, and resistance will increase (not shown in figure).
3.3
2nd Annealing process
NB: These experiments were done before the experiment described in Sec. 3.2.5, and as
such, the sample anneal uniformity is quite poor toward the edges; as such, the resistivity
in the centre region is considered most reliable.
All samples described in this section have been made according to the description in
Sec. 3.1.2. During the 2nd anneal, various annealing temperatures were investigated.
The primary purpose is to determine the best possible anneal temperatures regarding
film uniformity, low resistivity, low stress and low surface roughness of the silicide. High
film uniformity and low resistivity ensure low and similar resistance in elements across a
large chip. Not just to reduce the ωRC product but to keep it consistent over a large chip.
Wafer bow and silicide film stress should be reduced to make wafer bonding possible. Low
surface roughness is a secondary priority, but it is suspected that spikes in the electrodes
may disturb the electrical field in the CMUTs. Furthermore, these may not protrude above
the cavities in which they are formed. This would impede wafer bonding. The secondary
purpose was replicating Fig. 3.13 from literature [44], with key details being the onset of
C54-phase silicide formation and the beginning of agglomeration, thus film deterioration.
3.3.1
2nd anneal temperature
Ten samples were fabricated to investigate the optimal annealing temperature for the
second annealing process, following the description in Sec. 3.1.2. These samples were
annealed at 550 ◦C for 40 min for their first anneal to form the C49-phase silicide. Any
residual titanium and titanium oxide were etched in a piranha solution before the second
anneal. The second annealing process was 5 min long, with a temperature ramp of 5 ◦C/s
up to 550 ◦C, after which the ramp was reduced to 2 ◦C/s until the target was met to reduce
any overshoot in temperature.
Eight samples were annealed a second times at temperatures from 650 ◦C-1000 ◦C in
50 ◦C intervals. These samples were characterised using 4-point probe measurements
of sheet resistance before and after annealing to determine film resistivity and uniformity
improvement. The samples were also characterised by AFM measurements of silicide
surface roughness and Rmax. The wafer bow induced by the silicide was determined
using stylus profilometry, which enables the estimation of average film stress.
The resistivities of the films are considered the figure of merit in this experiment. First,
a low-resistivity silicide film is made, at which point the fabrication parameters from the
said film may be tested in an actual chip. Additional measurements are made to guide the
selection of these parameters, but the main importance is the resistivity of the film. The
58
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
Table 3.3: Estimated resistivity (mean and centre, assuming t = 200 nm) of samples
annealed twice at 550C for 40min, followed by a second annealing process at a higher
temperature. Mean resistivity after the first anneal is made from five measurements (C,
N, E, W, S) and as an average between 13 measured points within r < 3 cm from the
wafer centre - illustrated in Fig. 3.15.
1st annealing process
2nd annealing process
Temp.
¯
ρCNESW
ρC
Temp.
¯
ρr<3cm
ρC
Sample ID
◦C
µΩcm
µΩcm
◦C
µΩcm
µΩcm
W240109 INIT_08
550
125.4 ± 22.5
82.2
650
74.6 ± 5.8
71.8
W240109 INIT_09
550
125.2 ± 19.2
93.0
700
18.5 ± 0.8
18.2
W240109 INIT_10
550
123.3 ± 17.1
97.2
750
19.0 ± 0.3
17.5
W240109 INIT_11
550
25.8 ± 4.6
18.1
No 2nd anneal1
W240109 INIT_12
550
118.4 ± 21.5
79.6
850
15.7 ± 0.2
15.7
W240109 INIT_13
550
131.9 ± 28.7
79.4
900
16.8 ± 1.3
17.4
W240109 INIT_14
550
103.0 ± 19.9
75.6
950
17.4 ± 0.2
16.7
W240109 INIT_15
550
160.4 ± 22.1
118.8
1000
30.2 ± 10.4
26.6
W240109 INIT_16
550
195.9 ± 40.1
122.2
No 2nd anneal2
W240109 INIT_17
550
142.7 ± 15.5
115.4
No 2nd anneal2
W240109 INIT_18
550
119.7 ± 25.3
76.4
800
15.1 ± 0.4
15.0
W240109 INIT_19
550
117.2 ± 19.7
94.4
No 2nd anneal3
1. Sample was removed from consideration due to irregular resistivity after the first annealing process.
2. Sample set aside for fusion bond thermal exposure testing.
3. The sample fused to the carrier wafer during the first annealing process and was removed from con-
sideration.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
59
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
Figure 3.14: Resistivity plot for samples annealed at various temperatures, described in
Tab. 3.3, 3.4 and Fig. 3.15. The coloured sections represent the general resistivity values
for C49- and C54-phase silicide, respectively. The curves indicate the estimated resis-
tivity (assuming t = 200 nm) of the formed film at a given temperature. Blue: Indicates
centre resistivity; no uncertainty is used. Black: Indicates average estimated resistivity
measured within 3 cm of the wafer centre, with statistical uncertainty. Shifted 2 ◦C lower
for visibility. Red: Indicates average estimated resistivity measured within 4 cm of the
wafer centre, with statistical uncertainty. Shifted 2 ◦C higher for visibility. The measure-
ment for ρr<4cm for 1000 ◦C, the resistivity was 102.8 ± 514 mΩcm, approximately 1000×
higher than the figure maximum.
measured resistivities of the C49-phase silicide films formed before the second annealing
process were measured (centre) to 75.6-118.8 µΩcm. Some samples are slightly above
the listed resistivity of C49-phase silicide, possibly due to incomplete silicidation or con-
taminants in the film. The C54-phase silicide is obtained at all annealing temperatures
between 700-950 ◦C with optimal temperatures being 800 ◦C and 850 ◦C. These results
may be seen in Tab. 3.3, Figs. 3.14 and 3.15. The resistivities suggest that agglomer-
ation may begin at 1000 ◦C consistent with literature [44]. However, the sample used for
this particular temperature already had a slightly higher resistivity, which may have been
a contributing factor.
Secondary film characteristics were also studied during the fabrication of these samples.
Sample surface topography was measured by AFM, the measurements were 2 × 2 µm
scans with 256 lines taken at 1 Hz. Roughness and Rmax were extracted from these
scans and are presented in Tab. 3.4. These parameters are measured for two reasons.
First, the film may not protrude further up than the height of the vacuum gap; this would
impede the bonding process. It is preferred that any protrusions be as small as possible
so as not to interfere with the vibration of the membrane. Protrusions may also act as
small antennae, which has previously caused short-circuiting in other design iterations.
Wafer bow is measured for two reasons also. First, the bow itself may impede wafer
bonding as this process requires extremely flat samples; a large wafer bow may prevent
bonding. This applies particularly to concave wafer bow, which is induced by a tensile
thin film, of which silicide is one. Secondly, the wafer bow may be used to calculate film
stress. High film stress may lead to film cracking, especially in long, thin wires. Cracks
will unmistakably lead to higher element resistance. It is difficult to estimate at what wafer
bow at which wafers won’t bond anymore and at what film stress an element may deform
60
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
Table 3.4: Measured roughness Ra (centre), Rmax (centre), wafer bow (T: Tensile), and
film stress, from samples annealed a second time to form C54-phase titanium silicide.
Measurements show no clear tendencies concerning any measured film characteristics
regarding the temperature at which the sample was annealed. Film resistivity may be
seen in Tab. 3.3.
Annealing temp.
Measured film qualities
1st
2nd
Ra (C)
Rmax (C)
Wafer bow
Film stress (avg.)
Sample ID
◦C
◦C
nm
nm
µm
GPa
W240109 INIT_08
550
650
12.2
80.4
26.0 (T)
1.41
W240109 INIT_09
550
700
13.1
118.0
17.4 (T)
0.97
W240109 INIT_10
550
750
8.2
87.6
10.0 (T)
0.54
W240109 INIT_18
550
800
12.9
100.0
31.0 (T)
2.09
W240109 INIT_12
550
850
9.7
97.8
34.9 (T)
1.89
W240109 INIT_13
550
900
12.6
96.0
29.0 (T)
1.55
W240109 INIT_14
550
950
8.7
97.0
32.1 (T)
1.69
W240109 INIT_15
550
1000
12.4
104.0
25.0 (T)
1.91
critically. The ultimate test of this is to structure the elements and attempt wafer bonding.
Luckily, as the films are structured to cover less of the sample, they will affect the substrate
less and lead to less wafer bowing.
Sub-conclusion: Samples were annealed at temperatures between 650-1000 ◦C to de-
termine the optimal annealing temperature for the second annealing process. Samples
were characterised primarily using sheet resistance measurements, surface topography
measurements and film stress. The optimal temperature for annealing was found to be
800-850 ◦C. It was chosen to anneal at 800 ◦C for the 2nd annealing process despite some-
what poor results regarding film roughness and stress. The temperature yielded a film
resistivity of ρr<3cm = 15.1 ± 0.4 µΩcm.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
61
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
(a) 2nd anneal: 650 ◦C.
(b) 2nd anneal: 700 ◦C.
(c) 2nd anneal: 750 ◦C.
(d) 2nd anneal: 800 ◦C.
(e) 2nd anneal: 850 ◦C.
(f) 2nd anneal: 900 ◦C.
(g) 2nd anneal: 950 ◦C.
(h) 2nd anneal: 1000 ◦C.
Figure 3.15: Estimated resistivity maps of all samples after a 2nd annealing process, sam-
ple summaries may be found in Tab. 3.3 and 3.4. Avg. resistivity is calculated within the
dashed circle. Red markings indicate measurement points. A linear interpolation was
used between points. Each figure has its own scale. Note the consistent low resistivity
diagonal between NE and SW, with higher resistivities in the edges, particularly in the SE
and NW directions.
62
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
(a) 2nd anneal: 650 ◦C.
(b) 2nd anneal: 700 ◦C.
Figure 3.16: Two examples of defects observed on two different samples. The nature
of (b) suggests some sort of organic contaminant on the surface during the annealing
process.
3.3.2
SEM analysis of silicide film defects and agglomeration
This section is dedicated to the SEM analysis of the samples produced in the previous sec-
tion. This is to determine detrimental defects in the films. One such example is cracks in
the films, which proved a significant challenge during the author’s bachelor thesis project
[69]. Annealing at higher temperatures may also cause agglomeration effects in the sili-
cide film, which would be present as a fluid camouflage-like pattern, as seen in [72].
Agglomeration of silicide films is the formation of islands at the surface to reduce sur-
face energies in the film. This effect increases film resistivity and is reported to onset at
various temperatures depending on film thickness, with thinner films beginning agglomer-
ation at lower temperatures. Agglomeration is expected to start around 900 ◦C. A series
of SEM-scans are presented in Fig. 3.17; this series shows crystalline structures for sam-
ples annealed at 800 ◦C and below (a-d), while samples annealed at 850 ◦C and above
(e-h) appear agglomerated. The samples annealed at 950 ◦C and above are particularly
affected. This confirms the choice of 800 ◦C as the temperature for the 2nd annealing
process.
No cracks were observed at any points on any of the samples, examples in Fig. 3.16.
Other defects, however, were located but in low quantities. Furthermore, the nature of
some of these defects suggests a reaction with organic matter at the surface. However,
the exact nature of these defects was not studied due to their few numbers.
Sub-conclusion: No cracks or systemic defects were observed, with the exception of
agglomeration of the film. This may be avoided by annealing at 800 ◦C, it may reduce the
maximum temperature of the fusion bonding annealing step.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
63
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
(a) 2nd anneal: 650 ◦C.
(b) 2nd anneal: 700 ◦C.
(c) 2nd anneal: 750 ◦C.
(d) 2nd anneal: 800 ◦C.
(e) 2nd anneal: 850 ◦C.
(f) 2nd anneal: 900 ◦C.
(g) 2nd anneal: 950 ◦C.
(h) 2nd anneal: 1000 ◦C.
Figure 3.17: SEM images of samples annealed at various temperatures during their
2nd annealing process. Images were taken using an InLens detector, 5 kV acceleration
voltage, magnification is 100 k×. Samples annealed at temperatures 650-800 ◦C show a
primarily crystalline structure, whereas samples annealed at higher temperatures show
various degrees of agglomeration, which worsens at higher temperatures.
64
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
Table 3.5: Measured sheet resistance in five points before and after fusion bond thermal
exposure tests. An increase of 97% is observed after an exposure at 950 ◦C, and a much
smaller increase is seen after a 900 ◦C exposure. Both of these experiments lasted 70 min
and were performed in a N2 ambient atmosphere.
Sheet resistance Ω/□
Sample ID
C
N
E
S
W
Mean
Increase [%]
W240109 INIT_17
Pre test
1.06
1.09
1.34
1.27
1.42
1.24 ± 0.14
-
70 min 900 ◦C
1.27
1.13
1.47
1.49
1.34
1.34 ± 0.13
8
W240109 INIT_16
Pre test
0.95
1.16
1.13
1.15
1.23
1.12 ± 0.09
-
70 min 950 ◦C
1.23
2.58
2.19
2.91
2.19
2.22 ± 0.56
97
3.3.3
Fusion bond - Thermal exposure test
Before chip fabrication, some samples are tested regarding the thermal exposure associ-
ated with fusion bonding. Fusion bonding was tested by annealing samples at 900 ◦C and
950 ◦C. A C54-phase silicide sample and a fusion bond attempt were included in each
fusion bond annealing process. Silicide sheet resistance before and after the bond was
used to determine the detrimental effects of the fusion bond. This is supposed to emulate
the exposure that the bottom electrodes will receive when fusion bonding to the top plate.
The bonding temperature should be kept at a minimum, given what has been described
in previous chapters concerning silicide thermal stability and agglomeration. However,
most fusion bonding is done at 900 ◦C and above, with higher temperatures associated
with better wafer bonds.
The sheet resistance before and after the fusion bond thermal exposure test is presented
in Tab. 3.5. The sheet resistance increases by 97% after a thermal exposure of 950 ◦C for
70 min, while an increase of only 8% is observed when the sample is exposed to 900 ◦C
for 70 min. Both of these experiments were performed in a nitrogen ambient.
The fusion bond quality is also tested using these parameters. First, two unstructured
silicon wafers are cleaned in an RCA 1 standard cleaning process followed by a piranha
clean for 10 min. These samples are first ”hand-bonded” directly after the cleaning pro-
cess. The wafers are placed surface against the surface and gently pushed together,
moving from the centre towards the edges. This wafer stack is carefully placed in the
wafer bonding tool, machine model: Süss SB6 wafer bonder. The machine pushes the
wafers together with a pressure of 667 mBar at 50 ◦C for 5 min. After this, the samples are
annealed as described previously. The results of this bonding experiment are presented
in Fig. 3.18. Both the samples annealed at 900 ◦C and 950 ◦C managed to fusion bond.
However, the low-temperature bond has a higher reflectivity, which may indicate a weaker
bond. The bond may appear as two surfaces instead of none, the latter being the case
of an ideal bond. An example of a particle can be seen in the reflectivity (southeast, Fig.
3.18); even small particles may result in poor bonding in large areas.
Sub-conclusion: An increase in sheet resistance was observed after fusion bond an-
nealing at both 900 ◦C and 950 ◦C, this may be due to film agglomeration. No difficulty
in Si-Si bonding was observed in either bonding experiment. These results encourage
experimentation at lower temperatures.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
65
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 3. PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
Figure 3.18: PL-maps of fusion bonded Si-Si samples showing reflectivity. Reflectivity is
thought to be indicative of the bond quality. As the samples fuse, two reflective surfaces
disappear, and the total reflectivity of the stack is reduced. More reflectivity is seen in
areas with a poor bond due to more reflective surfaces. The key takeaway from such a
scan is bond uniformity across the sample. Sharp circular lines are measurement artefacts
from the vacuum chuck holding the sample.
66
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:75==
4
Fabrication process
This chapter will explain and describe the fabrication process of a RCA CMUT chip. This
will be described in three parts, starting with the fabrication of the bottom wafer, the cavi-
ties and bottom electrodes are formed on this wafer. Second, the PSOI which holds the
top membrane with a dielectric insulation layer toward the cavity. Last, the bonded stack
the bottom wafer and PSOI are bonded together, and the final processing is done.
The purpose of this fabrication is proof of concept in fabricating a CMUT array using
titanium disilicide for bottom electrodes. Therefore, the final result doesn’t need to be
an ideal RCA CMUT chip. This first-ever attempt at fabricating a 1xLOCOS SALICIDE
RCA CMUT1 is meant to prove the viability of this fabrication scheme. Twelve samples
(wafermap in Fig. 2.3) are made in case any significant defects occur during the fabrica-
tion. Four major hurdles were identified before fabrication, which should be overcome:
LOCOS: Oxidation must be able to provide deeper cavities than earlier attempts since
the electrode must be placed within the cavities themselves. Earlier designs have used
doped silicon below the cavities separated by Deep Reactive Ion Etch (DRIE). Second,
the slopes of the LOCOS must be sufficiently steep so as not to lose too much electrode
or bonding area.
SALICIDE: Poly-silicon must be well-defined by photolithography within the cavities. Fur-
thermore, electrode formation must occur only in the structured areas within the cavities
and not in areas with silicon oxide. The formed silicide must have a low resistivity and high
uniformity as discussed in sections 1.5 and 1.6; given the large sizes of the arrays, even
small areas of non-uniformity can have detrimental effects on the chip. Lastly, high film
stress was observed in preliminary experiments. This stress may result in deformation
when structured in long, thin elements.
PSOI: The production of these is relatively straightforward but requires extreme cleanli-
ness. Variations in equipment performance may easily lead to high sample contamination
levels, which may ruin wafer bonding.
Wafer bonding: This step requires sub-nanometre surface roughness in bonding areas
and as low as possible wafer bow. Silicide may cause both of these issues. Titanium may
reduce silicon dioxide and react with silicon to form silicide grains on the bonding areas,
increasing surface roughness. Furthermore, as mentioned, silicide is a high-stress film
that may cause surface wafer-bow.
An overview schematic of the entire fabrication process is presented in Fig. 4.1, which
refers to fabrication steps in Appendix A. This appendix contains the process flow to fab-
ricate the sample. Figures 4.1 (a-i) describe the fabrication of the bottom wafer, i.e., the
definition of cavities and electrode formation. Figure 4.1 (m-p) describes the fabrication of
a PSOI top wafer, i.e. the top membrane. Figure 4.1 (q-z) describes the fabrication of the
bonded stack, i.e. wafer bonding, stack thinning and top electrode structuring. Appendix
A.3 contains a more comprehensive list of fabrication sketches. These figures are not
drawn to scale and are only meant for guidance in regard to sample processing.
1Single Locally Oxidised Silicon - Self Aligned Silicide - Row Column Addressed - Capacitive Microma-
chined Ultrasound Transducer
TiSi2 for CMUTs
67
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
(a) Step 1.1.
(b) Step 3.3.
(c) Step 4.7.
(d) Step 4.10.
(e) Step 6.1.
(f) Step 6.10.
(g) Step 8.3.
(h) Step 9.7.
(i) Step 10.2.
(j) Step 10.3.
(k) Step 10.4.
(l) Step 10.6.
(m) Step 11.1.
(n) Step 12.4.
(o) Step 13.2.
(p) Step 15.5.
(q) Step 16.5.
(r) Step 17.3.
(s) Step 17.5.
(t) Step 17.6.
(u) Step 18.3.
(v) Step 18.7.
(w) Step 19.1.
(x) Step 20.3.
(y) Step 20.5.
(z) Step 20.7.
Figure 4.1: Fabrication scheme of single LOCOS CMUT with SALICIDE bottom elec-
trodes. Fig. (a-i): Bottom wafer. Fig (m-p): PSOI. Fig. (q-z) Bonded stack.
68
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
4.1
Bottom wafer: LOCOS with SALICIDE electrodes
This section will explain the fabrication process of the bottom wafer. The single LOCOS
process will define the cavities for the CMUT cells. The titanium silicide bottom electrodes
are formed using the SALICIDE method; a self-aligning silicide is formed by structuring
poly-crystalline silicon on top of which an unstructured titanium layer is deposited. When
annealing, silicidation will occur where both reactants are present.
4.1.1
Sample preparation
A silicon substrate is chosen over quartz or borofloat. Silicon is preferred due to earlier
findings by the MEMS Applied Sensors Group, which revealed high stress in titanium
silicide. This was particularly problematic on quartz substrates, where the silicide film
cracked due to high stress[69]. Secondly, it enables the use of the LOCal Oxidation of Sil-
icon as a means of defining cavities for the CMUT cells. Third, silicon is the preferred sub-
strate material in most semiconductor processes. This has resulted in the fact that silicon
has a wide range of process compatibility and is versatile in regard to fabrication methods.
Figure 4.2: Step 2.5, LPCVD
Polycrystalline silicon depo-
sition.
The wafers are somewhat clean from storage, although
some small particles will be present on the surface. These
particles may disrupt the oxidation of silicon locally. There-
fore, the wafers are cleaned using the standard RCA clean-
ing process (RCA 1 and RCA 2), which will remove most
metallic and organic contamination from the wafers [73].
Immediately after cleaning the wafers, they are oxidised
in a dry thermal oxidation furnace (manufactured by Tem-
press) at 1100 ◦C using O2 as a source gas. The silicon ox-
ide is an electrical insulator between the bottom electrode
and the substrate. However, a thicker insulation oxide will
slow the LOCOS oxidation later in the fabrication process.
A target of ≈400 nm is set. Simulation in ATHENA Deck-
Build by S. EDA tools estimates a processing time of 8 h.
This is verified by fitting historical furnace data to the Deal-
Grove model, as described earlier. This method yields a
process time of 8 h11 min. The latter is considered the more
accurate parameter value of the two estimates and is cho-
sen for the process. Measurements of the film using an
optical ellipsometer yielded an oxide thickness of 375 nm.
4.1.2
LOCOS Mask
The LOCOS mask is a silicon nitride layer which prevents
diffusion between the sample and reagent gasses in cer-
tain areas. As such, the growth of silicon oxide is severely
limited below the mask, although less so near the mask
edge. This process is used to define the cavities for the CMUT arrays.
First, 55 nm stoichiometric silicon nitride (Si3N4) is deposited in an LPCVD furnace us-
ing dichlorosilane (SiH2Cl2) and ammonia (NH3) as source gasses. Next, 100 nm poly-
crystalline silicon is deposited in an LPCVD process using silane (SiH4) as a source gas.
Both furnaces are manufactured by Tempress. The specific thickness of these two layers
are not crucial as they are removed later. However, they must both be thick enough to
protect the underlying layer during etching. At this point, the wafer will appear as in Fig.
4.2. The insulation oxide is depicted as the innermost layer in blue, the nitride as a green
layer on top, and the poly-Si as the outermost layer in grey. Both of these deposited layers
TiSi2 for CMUTs
69
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
Figure 4.4: Optical microscope images of a sample. Left: after development of photore-
sist, cavities are measured as 37 µm. Right: After nitride etching, cavities are measured
as 32 µm. The shrinkage is likely due to an over-etch of poly-Si; in later iterations, more
care should be taken not to over-etch.
were measured using an optical ellipsometer, and the nitride thickness is 56 nm, and the
poly-Si thickness is 96 nm.
Figure 4.3:
Step 4.2, Wet
poly etch.
UV-lithography
defines the LOCOS mask
into the poly-Si and later into
the nitride.
Following layer deposition, a 1.5 µm layer of positive pho-
toresist (AZ MiR 701) is spin-coated over the wafer.
This is subsequently exposed using 405 nm UV-light in a
MaskLess Aligner (MLA) (Heidelberg Instruments MLA150
Maskless Aligner). The photoresist is puddle-developed in
a Tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH) solution and
post-exposure baked for 60 s at 110 ◦C. The cavities are
measured as 37 µm on both sides, OM image in Fig. 4.4
(left).
The photoresist is baked once more before wet
etching the poly-Si to increase adhesion during etching.
The poly-Si is etched in nitric acid, Buffered Hydroflu-
oric Acid (BHF) acid diluted in De-Ionised Water (DIW)
(HNO3:BHF:H2O, 20 : 1 : 20), it is done as a slight over-
etch, as the nitride is highly resistant to this etch chemistry.
See Figure 4.3, note that the backside of the wafer is also
etched.
A plasma ashing strips the remaining photoresist before
the pattern is transferred into the silicon nitride. The pat-
tern transfer is done by etching the silicon nitride in boiling
phosphoric acid (H3PO4). Both silicon and silicon oxide are
very stable in phosphoric acid, so there is little chance of
damaging these films [74]. The result is presented in Fig.
4.4. This shows that the slight over-etch was too much and
decreased the cavity size significantly. OM measurements
indicated a cavity width of 32 µm, resulting from an erosion
of 2.5 µm from the mask-width of 37 µm. Given that this is
a proof-of-concept fabrication, the issue is left for a future
iteration. Next, the remaining poly-Si is etched in HNO3:BHF:H2O as in previous steps.
At this step, it is crucial to time and control the etch, as the chemistry will also etch the
70
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
silicon oxide in the cavities, rSiO2 ≈6 nm/min. This will result in an estimated loss of
≈10 −25 nm of silicon oxide. The wafer will accumulate some contamination from these
several chemical baths. It is therefore cleaned first in a sulfuric acid and hydrogen per-
oxide solution (H2SO4:H2O2, 4 : 1), known as a Piranha. Before the LOCOS process,
the wafer is also RCA cleaned, although without submersion in HF, which would etch the
silicon oxide aggressively.
4.1.3
LOCOS process
Figure 4.5:
Step 6.1, LO-
COS process - wet oxida-
tion. After the LOCOS pro-
cess, the oxide thickness will
increase in the uncovered
areas, leading to the defini-
tion of CMUT cavities. NB:
The oxide also grows into
the silicon substrate, which
is not shown in the figure.
The LOCOS process is a critical fabrication step which
requires great care and consideration.
First of all
is the cavity depth,
which is the sum of the vac-
uum gap thickness and the bottom electrode thick-
ness.
The target vacuum gap thickness is g
=
150 nm.
The
titanium
silicide
bottom
electrode
is
tC54−TiSi2
=
200 nm, resulting in a required cavity
depth of 350 nm.
However, a loss of approximately
60 nm of the LOCOS top is anticipated due to pro-
cessing.
As such the cavity depth should be 410 nm
It is important to note that this is the second oxida-
tion on top of an initial oxide which has also been
etched an estimated 20 nm, and the starting thickness
is therefore 355 nm.
Furthermore, approximately 56%
of the oxide thickness contributes to the cavity depth
as the oxide also grows into the silicon substrate.
Given this information, the final oxide thickness should
be approximately 1125 nm.
Due to the high thick-
ness, a wet oxidation at 1100 ◦C is chosen for the pro-
cess.
The oxidation time is estimated by simulation in ATHENA
Deckbuild, yielding a processing time of 2 h40 min.
The
processing time is also estimated using the Deal-Grove
model from equations 2.7 & 2.6. The parameters are recal-
culated from fitting the model to relevant historical furnace
data. These values are used to calculate the time shift, τ,
and the new process time: 2 h57 min. The two methods
yield drastically different process times; the latter is con-
sidered more reliable, as the fit of historical data may in-
clude systematic errors from the furnace.2 Unfortunately,
the first oxidation proved too thin at a thickness of 1040 nm.
Therefore, the process was made in two oxidations with an
RCA clean in between. These oxidations are equivalent to the single oxidation described
above. With an additional oxidation followed by a 35 min oxidation at the same parame-
ters. The cavity depth was measured to 364-371 nm across the samples. This is a fine
depth, considering the 56 nm nitride, which is still inside the cavities. The nitride layer is
not used after the LOCOS process and should be removed to achieve additional cavity
depth.
2Parameters such as pressure and temperature are controlled in a feedback loop from sensors in the
furnace. A sensor may systematically measure a higher temperature or pressure than the actual value, thus
leading the controller to reduce feedback gain.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
71
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
Figure 4.6: Cavities after oxynitride and nitride etch.
Table 4.1: Measured cavity depths in nm during oxynitride etch test in BHF. When the
etch rate becomes consistent, it will only etch silicon dioxide, and the oxynitride will have
been consumed; this is seen after approximately 20 s. Etch rates seem higher due to the
difficulty of making such short etches.
Etch time
Est. SiO2 etch
Loc 1
Loc 2
Loc 3
Mean
Diff.
0 s
0
304.5
303.7
306.7
307.6
305.8
305.4
305.8 ± 1.5
-
10 s
13.3
303.1
302.3
304.0
304.8
304.1
303.4
303.7 ± 0.9
2.1
20 s
26.7
279.0
277.8
280.6
281.9
280.0
279.9
280.0 ± 1.5
23.6
30 s
40.0
254.3
253.1
256.1
256.7
255.2
255.3
255.3 ± 1.4
24.8
40 s
53.3
226.7
225.7
227.7
229.1
228.2
227.5
227.6 ± 1.3
27.7
The wafer will appear as in Fig. 4.5 after the LOCOS process, with defined CMUT cavities.
After the oxidation, the silicon nitride is no longer needed, so it is removed. This proves
a bit more complicated than the initial nitride etch, as the nitride also has been oxidated
slightly during the LOCOS process and formed oxynitride, SiNxOy. This material is not
etched in normal nitride etches but can be etched in BHF, which also etches silicon dioxide
at an etch rate of 80 nm/min. The thickness of the oxynitride, as well as the exact etch
rate, are unknown [75]. A brief experiment was done to determine the required time to
etch the oxidised nitride. A sample was measured by a stylus profiler in two cavities at
three locations. The sample was then etched in BHF for 10 s. This process was repeated
five times. The data is presented in Tab. 4.1. As the BHF does not etch nitride, the
moment there was no more oxynitride left could be identified as the moment where the
measured height difference between cavity and LOCOS top was equivalent to the etched
rate in silicon dioxide. This was observed after 20 s, but the etch time was set to 30 s
to ensure a complete etch, hence 40 nm of the additional required cavity depth. The
remaining nitride was removed in a 40 min submersion in 160 ◦C phosphoric acid. A OM
image of the nitride-free cavities is presented in Fig. 4.6. Four of the now eleven wafers
were measured by stylus profiler before etching, after oxynitride etching and after nitride
etching to determine the cavity depths. These data are presented in Tab. 4.2, after a 30 s
submersion in BHF, the cavities become 15 nm more shallow due to oxide loss. However,
after the nitride etch 20 nm of cavity depth is gained, the final cavity depth is 372 ± 4nm,
which will fit a 150 nm gap and a 200 nm electrode while leaving approximately 20 nm to
be sacrificed when removing native oxide from the SALICIDE poly-Si.
72
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
Table 4.2: Height difference in nm between the bottom of the cavity and top of LOCOS:
After oxidation, after oxynitride etch and after nitride etch. Notice that 15 nm of cavity
depth is lost during the oxynitride etch due to oxide loss. 20 nms depth is gained after the
nitride etch.
Wafer 3
Wafer 6
Wafer 9
Wafer 12
Step
Cav1
Cav2
Cav1
Cav2
Cav1
Cav2
Cav1
Cav2
Mean
diff
After LOCOS
363.6
364.3
366.1
366.4
365.8
365.7
371.9
371.0
366.9 ± 3.0
-
After BHF, 30 s
347.5
348.7
350.3
350.9
350.2
350.3
357.6
357.3
351.6 ± 3.8
15.3
Nitride , 40 min
368.7
369.3
369.4
370.0
371.2
370.4
378.9
379.1
372.1 ± 4.3
−20.5
4.1.4
Bottom electrode - Poly-Si
The bottom electrode material should be chemically and thermally stable and, more im-
portantly, have a low electrical resistivity. The chosen candidate is the stable phase tita-
nium disilicide, TiSi2 C54 . Fabrication parameters of the stable phase silicide were opti-
mised during initial preparatory experiments. The most promising technique of patterning
the material is the SALICIDE method by patterning the poly-Si layer before annealing.
Figure 4.7: Cross section a
top-view sketch of the sam-
ple after structuring poly-Si
for SALICIDE electrodes.
First, the wafers are cleaned thoroughly in a Piranha solu-
tion and then an RCA without submersion in HF-baths. A
layer of 180 nm poly-Si was then deposited in an LPCVD
furnace using the same process parameters as earlier.
The polycrystalline silicon is boron-doped, which should
increase the thermal stability of the film [56]. The layer
thickness was measured on four samples (3, 6, 9 and 12)
to 191 ± 5nm across the samples.
This will result in a
slightly lower gap height. From this point, only three wafers
are processed at a time. Next, a 2 µm layer of positive
photoresist (AZ MiR 701) is spin-coated over the wafer.
This is subsequently exposed in a MLA, developed in a
TMAH-solution and post-exposure baked. The photoresist
is baked once more prior to wet etching to increase ad-
hesion and avoid resist delamination during etching. The
wafers are etched for 4 min in a HNO3:BHF:H2O solution
described earlier. The photoresist is removed by plasma
ashing for 45 min in a 1 kW plasma with 70 mL/min N2 and
400 mL/min O2.
At this point, the cavity depth (top of
LOCOS to top of poly-Si) measured by stylus profiler to
180 nm, suggesting a 190 nm layer of poly-Si. At this point,
the samples will appear as in Fig. 4.7. Following the mea-
surements and plasma ashing, the wafers are considered
to be contaminated with particles and resist residue. This
is unacceptable for the formation of low resistivity and high
uniformity silicide. Therefore, they are cleaned in a 10 min
Piranha solution. This cleaning step is done just before the
next processing step.
4.1.5
Bottom Electrode - Silicidation
Immediately after being cleaned in the previous step, the wafers are dipped in BHF for
15 s to remove native oxide from the poly-Si for the SALICIDE electrodes. Any oxide on
TiSi2 for CMUTs
73
==PAGE:82==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
Figure 4.9: Silicidation of sample 08. Left: 80 nm titanium is deposited on the wafer.
Middle: The wafer has been annealed at 550 ◦C to form TiSi2 −C49 . Right: Titanium
has been etched in a Piranha-solution, the colour gradient is due to the angle of the
camera.
these will impede silicidation and introduce contaminants in the film. This step will eat
approximately 20 nm of oxide from the top of the LOCOS. These samples are rinsed in
DIW and spin-dried. Immediately after drying, the wafers are placed in a vacuum chamber
for titanium deposition; this is done in E-beam Evaporator Temescal from Ferrotec. The
chamber is pumped to 1 × 10−6 Torr, after which 80 nm titanium is deposited at a rate
of 2 Å/s. During deposition, the RTP system is prebaked at 550 ◦C for 10 min to remove
water vapour and contaminants from the chamber. After the deposition, the sample is
placed face down towards the rough side of a SSP carrier wafer on a susceptor. This
setup is described in detail in the preparatory experiments. The anneal is started by
doing three pump-purge cycles using argon to purge. This is followed by a 5 ◦C/s ramp
to 550 ◦C while flushing with 200 sccm argon to keep an overpressure in the chamber.
Figure
4.8:
C54-phase
titanium silicide electrodes
within LOCOS defined cavi-
ties.
After annealing the sample, the remaining titanium is
etched in a piranha solution with high selectivity towards
titanium silicide. This will also remove TiO2. The progres-
sion of the first annealing process to form C49-phase sili-
cide is presented in Fig. 4.9. These steps, from cleaning
after poly-Si structuring to the titanium etch, should be car-
ried out in direct sequence; delays between these steps
risk increasing the film resistivity. This increase is mainly
due to exposure to atmospheric gasses such as N2 and O2.
After the titanium etch, the sample is once more placed in
the RTP-system and annealed for a second time to form
the low resistivity C54 phase silicide. The wafer surface is
oriented toward the rough side of a SSP carrier in a 4” sus-
ceptor. Three pump-purge cycles are done using argon,
followed by a 5 ◦C/s ramp to 550 ◦C hereafter the ramp is
slowed to 2 ◦C/s until the target of 800 ◦C is reached. The
sample is kept at this temperature for 5 min, after which it is
cooled, first in argon, then in process-grade nitrogen. After
this anneal, the sample will appear as sketched in Fig. 4.8.
At this point, the samples are characterised using SEM,
EDX, AFM and I-V measurements to determine the quality
74
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
(a) Test-element electrode pad.
(b) Test-element connector, a slight
narrowing of the electrode due to stitch-
ing during lithography.
(c) Silicide electrode, silicide crystal
grains are visible.
(d) Corner of the electrode pad, crys-
tallisation is visible on the silicon oxide,
suggesting silicide formation.
Figure 4.10: SEM of test-element silicide electrodes. Crystal grains from the silicide are
visible on both the electrode and the oxide in images (c-d). The images show little charging
effects, suggesting a conductive film on the surface for the charge build-up to escape.
of the silicide. As well as investigating silicidation at the titanium-silicon dioxide interface.
First, SEM scans were taken of the sample to further characterise the formed silicide film.
The images are presented in Fig. 4.10c. These images show the formation of silicide
crystal grains on the surface of the silicon dioxide surfaces. These grains are problematic
both due to the increased roughness of bonding areas, but if there is sufficient silicidation
in these areas, the electrodes may become electrically connected. Prior to bonding, the
samples must be cleaned in RCA 1, which etch silicide at a sufficient rate to clear up most
of the silicide formed on the oxide, without removing a large amount of the electrodes.
Second, the sample is analysed by AFM scanning of an electrode within a cavity. This
scan provides information on silicide roughness, Rmax, electrode thickness, width, cavity
depth, gap height etc. These values are presented alongside the scan itself in Fig. 4.11.
These parameter values should be used with some care; for instance, the average elec-
trode width, w = 3.1 µm, is lower than the measured electrode width due to the electrode
assuming a trapeze-shaped cross-section. Furthermore, the electrode may seem artifi-
cially thicker due to BHF attacking the surrounding oxide. In these cases, the poly-silicon
will have shielded the oxide directly below and created a shallow mesa on top of which the
silicide is formed. For now, an electrode thickness of t = 200 nm is assumed; this thick-
TiSi2 for CMUTs
75
==PAGE:84==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
Figure 4.11: Top: 2D-representation of an AFM scan of a testing element, shown in 3D on
the front page. Bottom: Horizontal lines on top scan used for measuring key parameters
of the electrode. Note the lobes protruding near the edges of the cavity; if these become
too prominent, they may hinder wafer bonding. 1: Height difference from top to side-
lobes, 25-30 nm. 2: Maximal possible electrode width in fabricated cavities, 6.2 µm. 3:
Electrode height, 233 nm. 4: Electrode maximum width, 3.4 µm. 5: Gap height, 121 nm.
Other extracted parameters: Oxide roughness, Ra = 3.2 nm, Rmax = 28.5 nm. Silicide
roughness, Ra = 11.1 nm, Rmax = 89.2 nm. The scan was made prior to RCA 1 cleaning.
ness is derived from the deposited material thicknesses and assumes an ideally formed
silicide. The resistance of a L = 2.513 mm long test element with these parameters is
given from:
R = ρ · L
w · t ⇔ρ = R · w · t
L
(4.1)
The electrode resistivity was measured both before and after an RCA 1-cleaning proce-
dure, before cleaning the resistance, R, is 1.40 kΩ. After the cleaning, some of the silicide
is etched, and the resistance is reduced to 1.29±0.02kΩ- equivalent to the loss of roughly
15 nm silicide. This will result in an etch rate of ≈1.5 nm/min, in somewhat agreement
with literature [57]. The resistance of the test elements is highly uniform across the wafer;
measurements are in Fig. 4.12. This test-element resistance and measured dimensions
give a silicide resistivity of 29.4 ± 1.9µΩcm. This is a decent result, but unfortunately,
significantly higher than the text-book values for silicide, 13-20 µΩcm. This may be due
to several effects; first of all, the thickness is highly uncertain at the time due. Addition-
ally, the silicide may be contaminated with nitrogen and oxygen, the latter of which has a
high effect on the film resistivity and is likely present in some amount, as seen in earlier
experiments.
The samples were further analysed by EDX with help from Kitty Steenberg to determine
76
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
Figure 4.12: Resistance measured on 80 test elements on the wafer, each resistance
is derived from an I-V characteristic made on each individual element, and resistance is
plotted with errors derived from the I-V curve. The average resistance is 1.29 ± 0.02kΩ,
not including the two outliers.
the success of silicide etching in non-electrode areas of the sample. The samples are
primarily scanned for titanium, silicon, and oxygen, which are the main components of all
the surface materials. The data in Fig. 4.13 shows the sample before (a, c, e, f) and after
the cleaning process (b, d, f, h). The full EDX reports from the AZtec software (Oxford
Instruments) can be found in appendix B. The change of scan contrast seen in the titanium
scan shows a decrease in titanium on top of the silicon dioxide. I.e. most of the silicide
outside the electrodes has been etched away from the sample. It is notable that the silicon
signal strength shows an increase at locations with silicide owing to the higher atomic
percentage of silicon in silicide (TiSi2) than in silicon dioxide (SiO2). Furthermore, an
intermediate area around the electrodes suggests some silicide growth in these regions.
This effect is present in both silicon and oxygen scans before and after cleaning.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
77
==PAGE:86==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
(a) Before RCA 1, overlay scan.
(b) After RCA 1, overlay scan.
(c) Before RCA 1, silicon scan.
(d) After RCA 1, silicon scan.
(e) Before RCA 1, oxygen scan.
(f) After RCA 1, oxygen scan.
(g) Before RCA 1, titanium scan.
(h) After RCA 1, titanium scan.
Figure 4.13: EDX characterisation of a sample before (left) and after (right) a 10 min
RCA 1 cleaning procedure to clean sample before wafer bonding and removal of silicide
in non-electrode areas.
78
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
4.2
Top wafer: PSOI
Figure 4.14: Step 12.4, etch-
stop oxide and poly-Si for
membrane
has
been
de-
posited. The surface is too
rough to bond.
This section will describe the fabrication of a PSOI wafer;
this wafer will hold a thin film of poly-crystalline silicon,
which will serve as the top membrane for the CMUT cells.
This thin film is covered in an electrically insulating dielec-
tric to protect against short circuits between the top and
bottom electrodes.
NB: Due to a shortage of time and equipment malfunction,
the dielectric layer was not fabricated in this iteration of
samples. However, the prime objective is to prove the vi-
ability of this fabrication method, which is done using only
the poly-crystalline silicon layer. There have been no in-
dications of difference in the difficulty of bonding using di-
electric films or without.
The fabrication of the PSOIs was done with great help from
fellow MSc student Sebastian Stangegaard.
4.2.1
Film depostion
Once again, silicon is chosen as the starting substrate. Sili-
con is the most common substrate used in the semiconduc-
tor industry, making it extremely compatible with almost all
fabrication processes. A 350 µm DSP wafer is used; it is
beneficial to use a thin substrate, as the entire substrate
will be etched away in later steps.
The wafers are cleaned in a RCA cleaning process to re-
move any particles, organic or metallic contamination. Im-
mediately after, a 500 nm silicon oxide film is grown thermally in a 12 h30 min dry oxidation
at 1100 ◦C. The film was measured to 512 nm after oxidation using an ellipsometer. This
oxide film will serve as an etch-stop mechanism when removing the bulk substrate. For
poly-silicon deposition, the samples are transferred to a LPCVD furnace. A boron-doped
poly-Si is deposited using the same parameters as in the salicide deposition. The poly-
silicon deposition is divided into two depositions due to equipment rules and to estimate
deposition rates after the first deposition to adjust deposition parameters in the second
deposition. The membrane needs to be 1.6 µm in thickness. It is estimated in previous
studies by the MEMS group that roughly 100 nm is removed when polishing the wafer.
Therefore, a target of 1700 nm is set. The first deposition is measured to 940 nm and the
second to 890 nm. This was measured in X-SEM3 after both depositions to approximately
1.8 µm, a cross-section is presented in Fig. 4.15. The wafer will appear as in the sketch
in Fig. 4.14 at this point in the fabrication process.
4.2.2
Polishing
After this, the samples were polished to a thickness of approximately 1.7 µm, i.e. about
100 nm to thick. This mismatch is not considered a large problem because the thickness
has nothing to do with the ability to fusion-bond, which is the main parameter being tested.
Another reason is that CMUTs have a large operational bandwidth, and slight differences
in resonance frequency are not detrimental. In addition to this, it is difficult to estimate
the etch rate of polishing, as it is reduced over time. As the sample is flattened and
3The X is referring to cross-section imaging for film thickness measurement.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
79
==PAGE:88==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
Figure 4.15: X-SEM of a PSOI before polishing and without oxynitride dielectric layer.
Multiple measurements were made, average PSOI thickness is approximately 1.8 µm.
loses roughness, friction will be reduced between the polishing cloth with the abrasive
and the sample. After polishing, the sample roughness was measured to Ra < 0.30 nm.
Figure 4.16: Step 15.5, the
wafer has been polished,
and a layer of oxynitride has
been formed.
After polishing, the wafers are covered in particles mainly
from the abrasive in the polishing liquid (SiO2). The wafers
are kept submerged in DIW until cleaning, as drying them
will lead to particles ”caking” on the surface, which is harder
to remove. The wafers are first cleaned in a piranha (3:1)
solution for 30 min, after which they are cleaned in DIW but
not dried. The samples are then cleaned in BHF, which
etches SiO2 at a high rate and thus removes the abrasive
from the polishing slurry. After this, the wafers are cleaned
in DIW before another piranha cleaning (4:1) for 30 min.
After this last cleaning procedure, the wafers are rinsed in
DIW and dried, thus, finishing the cleaning process. Typi-
cally, the wafers are scanned for particles to determine the
success of the polishing and cleaning procedure.
4.2.3
Oxynitride formation
NB: In this project, the PSOIs were used as-described now.
The following text describes the remaining fabrication of
the PSOIs, which were not done in this project but should
be done in future iterations of this fabrication.
A layer of oxynitride on top of the poly-Si is desired to pre-
vent short-circuits between the electrodes in the CMUTs
when the cells collapse. A layer thickness of approximately
180 nm is required. This requirement is explained in earlier
sections. First, however, the wafers are cleaned in an RCA
standard cleaning process, not particularly due to contam-
ination but rather as a requirement for equipment usage. It is formed by first oxidising
the samples briefly in a 15 min dry oxidation at 1000 ◦C. The samples are subsequently
placed in an LPCVD furnace for silicon nitride deposition. A 200 nm layer is deposited.
After this, the samples are replaced in the oxidation furnace and wet-oxidised for 3 h at
1100 ◦C to oxidise the silicon nitride into oxynitride, SiNxOy. The wafers will now appear
as in the sketch in Fig. 4.16. After this last step, the samples should be characterised
80
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
Figure 4.17: Left: An AFM scan of the surface topography of a polished PSOI, before
polishing the roughness is 15 −20nm, after polishing it was measured to Ra = 0.28 nm.
Some smaller particles are left after the cleaning, visible as the small white islands. Right:
A particle scan of the same sample, showing only ≈200 particles of which only twelve
are larger than 1 µm.
in AFM, X-SEM and by scanning for particles. The latter is particularly interesting due to
the possibility of significant particle contamination during nitride deposition. This charac-
terisation is also meant to determine if the samples are still sufficiently flat to bond and
whether the approximate membrane thickness has been obtained.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
81
==PAGE:90==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
4.3
Bonded wafers
The last part of the wafer fabrication is to bond the bottom wafer and the PSOI described in
the previous sections. After this, the bulk of the PSOI is removed. Holes are made to the
electrode pads for electrical contact, and top electrodes are deposited and structured. The
last major challenge in the fabrication is the bonding process; this process is vulnerable
to surface roughness and wafer bow, which may be induced by the silicidation process.
Furthermore, the silicide may agglomerate during the high-temperature anneal, which
increases the film’s resistivity.
4.3.1
Wafer cleaning
First, both the top and bottom wafers should be cleaned thoroughly. The cleaning pro-
cess of the bottom wafer is partially described in the earlier section. The cleanliness of
the cleanroom air is an important factor when bonding; therefore, the wafer cleaning and
bonding should be done early in the morning or at weekends outside normal working
hours, as people are a large source of particle contamination. At these times, the clean-
room filters have replaced all the air in the laboratory several times and diluted the particle
concentration. First, the bottom and top wafers are cleaned in an RCA 1 cleaning proce-
dure; this also etches some titanium silicide, reducing roughness in bonding areas. This
cleaning procedure is made in beakers as titanium silicide is considered a contaminant in
the typical RCA chemical benches.
Figure 4.18: Step 16.5, the
top and bottom wafer has
been bonded.
The beakers are cleaned thoroughly with DIW, after which
a 1:1:5 solution of NH4OH:H2O2:H2O is prepared. This is
heated to 70 ◦C by a hotplate while the solution is stirred.
When the target is reached, the stirring is stopped so the
wafers are not damaged by the stirring mechanism. The
wafers are submerged for 10 min; this cleaning will remove
organic contaminants. The samples are cleaned in DIW
and dried in a spin-dryer. They are immediately transferred
to a piranha clean for 10 min, which is made in a rinsed
beaker. The wafers are rinsed in DIW and dried using a
nitrogen gun while holding it with a vacuum tweezer4. The
wafers are carefully placed in single wafer carriers after
drying.
4.3.2
Wafer bonding
When a pair of bottom and top wafers are dried, they are
placed carefully on top of one another.
The active sur-
face of the bottom wafer is oriented toward the polished
surface of the PSOI, and the wafers are aligned to major
flat by hand. Firm pressure is applied at the centre of the
wafers by pressing them with two fingers. The wafers are
pressed together by moving the fingers outward from the
centre. This is referred to as a pre-bond. Enclosing them
reduces particle contamination on the wafer surfaces. Ide-
ally, it should be made as soon as possible after cleaning.
After this, the pre-bonded wafers are placed in the wafer
bonder and pumped to a high vacuum. The wafers are
bonded by applying a 667 mBar pressure at 50 ◦C for 5 min.
The wafers are placed in an annealing furnace to make the
4The vacuum tweezer should be cleaned with isopropyl alcohol (IPA) before use.
82
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
Figure 4.19: PL-maps of three bonded stacks. The leftmost scan is a trial bond made
during normal working hours. The other two scans were made early on the weekend
morning to avoid contamination from the presence of other cleanroom users. Two types
of artefacts are present in the images: sharp circular patterns due to the vacuum chuck
clamping the wafer and that the measurement is made by spinning the wafer, thus being
measured circularly. The latter cause is also the reason behind the distortion of the chips
toward the centre.
bond permanent, and the wafers are annealed at 900 ◦C for 70 min in a nitrogen ambient.
This process has shown the ability to bond without causing significant increases in silicide
resistivity. After this process, the stack will appear as sketched in Fig. 4.18. The quality
of the bonded wafers is assessed by a PL mapping, which detects the reflectivity of the
sample stack all over the wafer. A large reflectivity indicates a poorer bond, while a low re-
flectivity indicates a better bond, as the bond reduces the amount of reflective surfaces in
the stack. However, the prime indicator of a good bond is the uniformity of the reflectance
in the bonded areas. Three pairs of wafers were bonded. The resulting PL-maps are
shown in Fig. 4.19. The leftmost scan is from a trial bond made during normal working
hours. Despite increased particle concentrations in the cleanroom, the resulting bond
looks uniform in most areas. The circular pattern is an artefact from the vacuum chuck,
which holds the sample, and the circular scan pattern used by the machine. The two other
scans are from bonds made during the early morning of the weekend, i.e. at low parti-
cle concentrations. It should be noted that the scale of the measurements is very similar
and uniform in between bonds; this is not guaranteed in this measurement method. It is
interpreted as the result of a highly reproductive fabrication scheme concerning bonding.
The silicide resistance has not been measured after bonding, but it is suspected that the
silicide resistivity will perform equally or better than the experiments described in earlier
chapters. During this annealing, the silicide is not exposed to the ambient nitrogen, which
may result in less damage to the electrodes.
4.3.3
Thinning down the wafer stack
NB: No processing was done after bonding due to lack of time. All descriptions from this
point entirely explain how fabrication should be done to finalise the chip. It should be
noted that there are no current issues in this part of the fabrication process and that the
fabrication from this point is identical to previous successful fabrications. Furthermore,
this chapter will describe the final fabrication as if there were a layer of oxynitride on the
PSOI.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
83
==PAGE:92==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
Figure 4.20: Step 17.4, oxy-
nitride, poly-Si and BOX ox-
ide has been dry etched.
Figure
4.21:
Step
18.7,
opening
to
bottom
elec-
trodes through membrane.
The bulk of the PSOI should be removed to release the
membrane. First, the wafers are cleaned in a piranha for
10 min; due to pre-bonding and PL-mapping, the wafers
are handled quite a bit by hand. This results in high con-
tamination, which may act as a local mask during the thin-
ning of the stack. The first few layers (oxynitride, poly-Si
and oxide) are removed by dry-etching. All these layers
can be overetched aggressively without any risk of dam-
aging the chips due to the large amount of bulk silicon to
be etched later. All dry etches are made in Advanced Sili-
con Etcher by STS MESC Multiplex ICP. First the oxynitride
layer is etched in a 13 sccm C4F8-plasma with 1.3 kW coil
power and 0.2 kW platen power. The pressure is kept at
4 mTorr and the temperature at 20 ◦C. The etch will take
3 min but may be extended if the surface appears incom-
pletely etched.
Next, the poly-Si is etched in the same
equipment, this time with a 260 sccm SF6 and 26 sccm O2-
plasma. The coil power is 2.8 kW (etch) and 1 kW (passi-
vate), platen power is 16 W, temperature and pressure are
kept the same. Roughly four etching cycles are enough to
remove the poly-Si layer; six etch cycles are used to en-
sure complete film removal. Next a 45 sccm CF4 is used
for etching the oxide. The coil power is set to 0.8 kW and
platen power at 15 W at a pressure of 2.5 mTorr at 20 ◦C.
The etch is 8 min for removing 500 nm oxide; if the layer ap-
pears incompletely removed, extra duration is added. The
wafer should appear completely grey as unprocessed sil-
icon. The stack is as presented in Fig. 4.20. The bulk
silicon may be etched in two steps: a dry etch identical
to the poly-Si etch. Approximately 85-115 min is used to
etch 350 µm of silicon. Ideally, the wafer is rotated a few
times during the etch to ensure good uniformity. The sec-
ond method is submerging the wafer in heated KOH. This
solution will etch with a rate of 1.7 µm/min at 90 ◦C, as such
an etch time of 200 min is required.
The wafers should
be checked at several points during the etch. The latter
method has the advantage of being a batch process in-
stead of dry-etching a single wafer at a time. The wafers
are cleaned in DIW and transferred to a BHF-bath, which
will remove the etch-stop oxide. This will take roughly 7 min
for 500 nm oxide. After this, the sample is cleaned in a pi-
ranha solution to remove potassium ions from the silicon
etch.
4.3.4
Opening to bottom electrodes
A photo-lithographic step is done to define areas to open
up the membrane. This is done at electrode pads to create
an electrical path to connect the bottom electrodes. First, a 2 µm layer of MiR 701 pho-
toresist is spun on the wafer; this is exposed using a MLA. The alignment marks should
be visible through the membrane at this point. The wafers are developed using a TMAH-
solution. After development, the poly-Si and oxynitride are etched by using the same dry
84
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
etches used earlier. After this, the resist is removed by plasma ashing for 45 min, using
an oxygen-nitrogen plasma at 1 kW. The wafer will now appear as in Fig. 4.21.
4.3.5
Top electrodes
Figure
4.22:
Step
20.9,
top electrodes have been
etched, and the poly-Si ele-
ments separated.
The top electrodes are made by depositing a thick alu-
minium layer, followed by structuring, after which the poly-
Si membranes are separated between elements. First, the
wafers are placed in the E-beam deposition system, which
pumps them down to a high vacuum. This is particularly
important, as it ensures vacuum in the cavities. An 1 µm
aluminium film is deposited at 10 Å/s. This is done by E-
beam deposition, as earlier described metal depositions.
Next, an 4.2 µm AZ 5214E positive image reversal resist is
spun on the wafer. The thicker layer is due to the more
prominent steps in the structure at this point. The sam-
ples are exposed using an MLA followed by development
in a TMAH based solution. After the resist is developed,
the aluminium is etched using Ion Beam Etching (IBE) Ion-
fab 300 from Oxford Instruments Plasma Technology. The
etching process is run with a beam current of 0.4 A and a
voltage of 0.4 kV, and a cooling gas pressure of 50 Torr is
used. An etch of about 1 h35 min is required to etch 1 µm of
aluminium. The metal is structured such that it plugs any
holes opened in the poly-Si so that no air can get into the
cavities, and they remain a vacuum. After metal etching,
the poly-Si is etched using the same mask, this is done in
an Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP)-a system using the
same parameters as earlier: a 260 sccm SF6 and 26 sccm
O2-plasma. Using a coil power of 2.8 kW (etch), 1 kW (pas-
sivate) and a platen power of 16 W. The etch will require
three to four cycles. As a final fabrication step, the resist
is stripped by a 45 min plasma ashing. The sample should
now appear as sketched in Fig. 4.22.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
85
==PAGE:94==
CHAPTER 4. FABRICATION PROCESS
86
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:95==
5
Discussion
This section will discuss the obtained results during this thesis project, starting with prepara-
tory experiments and moving to chip fabrication. This will include an outlook introducing
some ideas for future experimentation and changes in the fabrication process of titanium
silicide. The project’s conclusion will be presented briefly at the end of the chapter.
5.1
Preparatory annealing experiments
The combined goal of all preparatory experiments was to determine the optimal fabrication
parameters for the high-resistivity phase TiSi2 (C49). Sample uniformity and reduction of
contaminants are considered most important in these experiments. The resistivity of C49-
phase silicide should be around 80-100 µΩcm, but the specific value is less important until
the second annealing process.
First, the wafer orientation in the annealing chamber was investigated. This experiment
is described in section 3.2.1. There have been reports of samples receiving more uniform
thermal exposure during RTP-processing if they are annealed facing the wafer carrier or
susceptor. Two samples were made with this orientation and two with the conventional
upward orientation. Wafers annealed facing upward had circular blob-like shapes with
low resistivity in small areas, and most of the samples had poor resistivity. XPS analysis
showed high concentrations of oxygen in the samples. Samples annealed facing down
towards the carrier had ”eye”-like patterns with corners located as a direct consequence of
wafer placement in the process chamber. this suggested some non-uniformity in either the
heating system or in the thermal contact with the carrier wafer. The film resistivity within
the centre was highly uniform but increased significantly towards the edges. The sample
showed less oxygen contamination in XPS-measurements. Therefore, it was chosen that
samples should be annealed face down toward the carrier. The non-uniform eye pattern
was investigated later.
Second, the optimal annealing temperature for the first annealing of titanium and poly-Si to
titanium silicide was determined. This experiment considers two primary conditions. First,
the annealing temperature must be high enough for titanium silicide to form, section 3.2.3.
This does not have to be the stable C54 phase silicide, but only the meta-stable C49 phase
silicide, which forms at lower temperatures. All investigated temperatures formed silicides
on the silicon dioxide; as such, the lowest temperature was chosen, 550 ◦C. The second
parameter considered is the elimination of the undesired titanium and silicon dioxide reac-
tions, section 3.2.2. This reaction will occur in areas where silicidation is unwanted, e.g.
in bonding areas. It creates a rough surface that hinders wafer bonding and may create
conductive pathways between otherwise electrically insulated electrodes. Temperatures
between 450-700 ◦C were investigated. Silicide formation was investigated using XPS and
was found in samples annealed at every temperature; the formed amount increased at
higher temperatures. Surface roughness was also increased as the annealing tempera-
ture increased. This experiment showed that only annealing at 450 ◦C would provide a
sufficiently low roughness for wafer bonding, ≈1 nm. This annealing also showed the
significantly lowest silicidation of silicon dioxide. However, most literature agrees that
titanium silicide does not form at a significant rate until annealing at above 500 ◦C.
Therefore, it was tested whether an RCA 1 standard cleaning procedure would etch sili-
cide sufficiently to bond wafers. The sample annealed at 550 ◦C, which is the lowest
TiSi2 for CMUTs
87
==PAGE:96==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
temperature used for silicidation in this project, was submerged in the RCA 1 solution for
10 min. This showed a decrease in roughness (Ra) from 4.81 nm to 1.06 nm. This rough-
ness is considered low enough for fusion bonding. Therefore the annealing temperature
is kept at 550 ◦C, which ensures good silicidation in areas with poly-Si without causing
more silicidation on silicon dioxide than can be removed. It is important to note that the
cleaning procedure also etches the electrodes and should be kept as short as possible.
An etch rate of approximately 1.5 nm/min has been estimated. This would result in an
estimated loss of approximately 15 nm, considering a 200 nm thick electrode, this is an
increase in resistance of 8%. However, it is typically done as a pre-clean to bonding pro-
cedures, the silicide etch and clean should clearly be combined to avoid too much loss of
electrode thickness. The silicidation process between titanium and SiO2 will also produce
TiO2. This is not considered a large problem, as it is etched by the piranha clean, typically
used after the first annealing phase.
The sample discolouration was analysed by XPS to determine contaminants in the sam-
ple; this was done by selecting the centre of the colourful bands surrounding the eye
pattern from the sample edge toward the centre. This experiment is done partially to de-
termine contaminants towards the edge. It is also made to determine whether a future
sample has been annealed adequately by eye colour inspection. The colours were yellow-
green, blue-green, blue, brown, pale grey and grey. The XPS analysis of yellow-green
areas showed no presence of silicon and, therefore, no silicide. These areas were purely
titanium oxide for the entire measured depth. Similar results were obtained in blue-green
areas except for a small consistent silicon concentration for the entire measured depth.
A thick titanium oxide layer was observed in blue areas, which transitioned into a silicide
layer at the bottom of the measured depth. Brown areas showed thinner oxide layers at
the depth, although with a significant nitrogen contamination layer in the middle of the
TiO2-TiSi2 transition. The titanium oxide and nitrogen layers were pushed further to the
surface in the pale-grey areas, and silicidation started at earlier etch levels. This tendency
continued in grey areas; the bulk part of the centre of the samples is grey.
The sample setup within the RTP reactor was investigated as the source of non-uniformity
and the ”eye”-patterns which were observed on most samples in prior experiments. It was
suspected that these patterns resulted from poor thermal contact with the carrier wafer or
from the carrier wafer to the susceptor. A poor contact would likely stem from a physical
separation distance between the wafer and the carrier. This may stem from the wafer
bow in the carrier; this could have come from over-use of the carrier, which would mean
many heating processes and contamination from many samples. This distance between
the sample and carrier would also allow for more exposure to the anneal ambient and,
thus, more reactions with contaminants from the surrounding gases. The first tested setup
was a 6” susceptor with a DSP carrier with a recess. This was the standard setup at the
beginning of experimentation, resulting in the eye-pattern non-uniformities. Replacing the
carrier with an identical but new carrier resulted in higher sample uniformity after the an-
nealing process. A reduction in uncertainty from 101.7 ± 23.0µΩcm to 97.6 ± 11.7µΩcm
was observed. The experiment presented a new challenge: the contact between carrier
and sample can become too good. In some areas, the sample fused with the carrier with
such strength that the carrier broke while removing the sample. This is clearly not a very
viable method. Following this, 6” DSP carriers without an etched recess were investi-
gated as a cheaper, easier alternative if sample-carrier fusing persisted. This setup did
not provide worthwhile results, as the sample would slide within the chamber due to the
gas flow of argon. When the sample slides, the heating will become less uniform. How-
ever, even more problematic is that the pyrometer will not provide accurate temperature
88
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
readings. As such, the power supply to the heating elements would fluctuate wildly, and
the emergency shutdown had to be used. After these experiments, the option to use a
4” susceptor became possible due to a hardware upgrade of the machine. This was first
investigated using a non-structured 4” DSP carrier wafer. No carrier structuring was nec-
essary due to the edges of the 4” susceptor being able to hold the sample by themselves
within a few millimetres. After annealing, the samples were completely fused together
in what was likely a silicide bond. This result rendered this setup completely unusable
but raised the question of whether a silicide bond may be used for wafer bonding in the
future. The last attempted setup used the 4” susceptor and a SSP carrier wafer with the
rough side upward. This setup resulted in a near-perfectly uniform sample after anneal-
ing, with only discolourations toward the very edges (< 5 mm). These areas are usually
not used for critical dies due to processing non-uniformity and sample handling in these
areas. The carrier wafer’s rough side is considered a perfect compromise between good
thermal contact and low physical contact.
The second to last preparatory annealing experiment aims to determine the best anneal-
ing temperature for the second annealing process, where the low-resistivity silicide phase
is formed. This experiment is explained in section 3.3.1. This annealing temperature
is a ”window” limited at lower temperatures by the inability to initiate phase formation
of the C54 phase silicide and at higher temperatures by agglomeration. The former is
not destructive of the sample but cannot obtain a sufficiently low resistivity film. The lat-
ter effect will destroy the sample. The silicide film will form islands in the film, which
have a low resistivity. Samples were annealed at temperatures ranging from 650 ◦C to
1000 ◦C in steps of 50 ◦C. These were characterised by measuring the sheet resistance
in 37 points distributed across the wafer to estimate sheet resistance and sample uni-
formity. The centre sheet resistance was considered most indicative of the successful-
ness of the annealing process due to the eye pattern being present in these samples.
Therefore, all measurement points within a 3 cm radius were used to determine the qual-
ity of the annealed sample. This experiment showed, that silicides with resistivity in the
commonly accepted range for C54-phase TiSi2 could be obtained by annealing in tem-
peratures between 750 ◦C-950 ◦C. The lowest and most uniform films were obtained at
800 ◦C, ρ = 15.1 ± 0.4µΩcm, and at 850 ◦C, ρ = 15.7 ± 0.2µΩcm. All samples were also
analysed with respect to surface roughness, film stress and wafer bow. These showed
that the samples annealed at 800-850 ◦C had the highest film stress and wafer bow. This
could deter from using these temperatures in the annealing process, but the resistivity is
considered the prime figure of merit. All samples had high roughness within the same
order showing no clear tendencies toward annealing temperature. Lastly, these samples
were analysed by SEM imaging to determine types of defects, if any. No cracks in the sili-
cide film were observed on any samples, and this defect could have occurred due to high
film stress. Various defects were observed, but these were inconsistent on the samples
and between samples. As such, the cause of these was attributed to surface contam-
ination, which may have reacted with the titanium in the film or caused the silicide film
to form in unusual patterns. However, samples annealed at 850 ◦C and up had a spotty
camouflage-like pattern which appeared to worsen at higher temperatures. The cause of
this appearance is agglomeration. To avoid this, 800 ◦C was chosen for the second an-
nealing process. At this annealing temperature, and for those below, the sample surfaces
appeared to have a crystalline morphology.
The final experiment aimed to determine whether the silicide film could survive the high
temperatures associated with the annealing in the fusion bonding process. Fusion bond-
ing typically requires temperatures of more than 900 ◦C to form a strong bond between
TiSi2 for CMUTs
89
==PAGE:98==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
samples. This may become problematic as higher film non-uniformity was observed at
higher temperatures. Higher temperatures cause agglomeration, which may be a partial
cause of the increased non-uniformity. In addition, fusion bonding in the MEMS group has
typically used a 70 min annealing; this long duration makes the silicide vulnerable in regard
to thermal stability. An experiment was performed by fusion bonding two silicon wafers
cleaned by RCA 1 and a piranha. These wafers were bonded to determine whether the
bonding temperature created a good bond. Along with the bonded pair a silicide sample
was included as well. The change in resistivity was used to determine how well the silicide
survived the annealing process. First, an anneal at 950 ◦C was done. This resulted in a
fine bond quality, although with a distinct particle mark. The silicide resistivity increased
by a factor of 1.97. This increase is too high for the bottom electrode to function properly.
A second anneal was done at 900 ◦C with a new wafer; once again, the bond quality was
decent without any visible particle markings. The resistivity of the film only increased by
a factor of 1.08. This increase is sufficiently low. As such, a fusion bond annealing tem-
perature of 900 ◦C was chosen for the fabrication scheme. The good results of the lower
temperature bond may warrant further experimentation at lower temperatures.
These preparatory experiments aimed to determine the best possible way to integrate
the TiSi2 electrodes into the CMUT fabrication scheme. Building on the experience from
these experiments, a process flow describing the fabrication of a CMUT array with sin-
gle LOCOS defined cavities, SALICIDE fabricated titanium disilicide bottom The resulting
process may be found in Appendix A, along with explanatory figures in Appendix A.3.
The general annealing process for a uniform annealing process of low-resistivity titanium
disilicide was also determined based on past experiences by A. Hyldgård [65] and the
authors’ own bachelor thesis project[69]. The annealing durations were extracted from
the former of these projects, as well as the idea to anneal the samples face down in the
RTP-system, which proved to be beneficial to the film quality. The latter project deter-
mined that conventional furnace annealing was insufficiently uniform for processing the
silicide film. Furthermore, the furnace was suspected not to be able to flush the chamber
sufficiently with nitrogen for high-quality annealing. The nitrogen was also suspected to
interfere with the silicidation by forming TiN in the film. Annealing in a vacuum was highly
unsuccessful due to oxygen contamination, which was thought to enter the chamber due
to small crevices and under pressure. As such, it was determined to use argon as a pro-
cessing gas while keeping the chamber at an overpressure to ensure an outward flow of
gas. Lastly, fused silica substrates were ruled out, as the silicide stress became exceed-
ingly high and caused the film to form cracks. The parameters determined in this master
project and the mentioned previous projects have resulted in the following processing
scheme:
1. (Batch) Samples are prepared by an RCA cleaning procedure and by growing an
insulating oxide film a few hundred nanometers thick.
2. (Batch) Poly-silicon is deposited on the samples, the thickness should be ≈1.1×
the desired silicide thickness. 180 nm is deposited for a target silicide thickness of
200 nm.
3. (Batch) Photo-lithography of the poly-Si layer is done.
4. (Batch) The resist is baked once more before the poly-Si is etched in a HNO3:BHF:
H2O solution. Care should be taken not to over-etch, as the solution will also etch the
oxide below. This leads to difficulty in assessing film thickness by stylus profilometry,
as the poly-Si is located on a shallow oxide mesa. An etch time of ≈3 min should
be used.
90
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
5. (Batch) Resist is removed by plasma ashing, and the wafers are cleaned in a pi-
ranha solution.
6. The wafers can be parked at this point in the process. The following steps should
be made in direct sequence, preferably with no delay in between steps.
7. (Single) A short native oxide etch is done in BHF, 15 s is used. This process will
also etch uncovered oxide; however, the native oxide should be very thin.
8. (Single) The wafers are placed in a vacuum, and titanium is deposited by E-beam
deposition. The titanium thickness should be ≈0.4× the desired silicide thickness;
therefore, 80 nm is deposited.
(a) During titanium deposition, the annealing chamber is prepared. The 4” suscep-
tor is placed in the chamber on the relevant quartz pins. A SSP dummy wafer
(new or cleaned since last use) is placed on the susceptor with the polished
side toward the susceptor on the polished upwards.
(b) Next, the annealing chamber is preconditioned with an additional dummy wafer
by annealing at 550 ◦C for 10 min while flushing with argon. This is to remove
any residual water vapour and other contaminants from the chamber from pre-
vious processing or equipment inactivity.
9. (Single) The sample is placed with the active surface toward the carrier wafer, and
the flats and edges are aligned to ensure a fully uniform contact. Light pressure is
applied across the wafer with a teflon tweezer; this should be done very carefully as
the susceptor and quartz pins are expensive and very fragile. An outward motion
is applied to remove air pockets between the sample and carrier, similar to the pre-
bonding method.
10. (Single) The first annealing process is started. A pump-purge cycle is used 3× to
remove oxygen, water vapour and other contamination. The sample is then heated
to 550 ◦C to form C49-phase silicide while reducing titanium-oxide reactions. The
heating rate is 5 ◦C/s as this was the fastest rate without significant thermal over-
shoot. The annealing temperature was held for 40 min before the chamber was
cooled by fans and gas flow. All gas up til this point was argon; during the cooling,
however, it was changed to process grade nitrogen. The sample is cooled to below
100 ◦C before it is removed from the chamber.
11. (Single) The unreacted titanium is etched from the sample. This is done in a 10 min
piranha etch, which incidentally also etches accessible TiO2 as well as organic con-
taminants. The wafer is cleaned in DIW and spin-dried before further processing. It
is important that the sample is completely dry before further processing, so no water
is introduced into the RTP system.
12. (Single) The sample is once again placed in the annealing chamber, which is pre-
pared similarly to the previous anneal except for no pre-conditioning of the chamber,
as the processing is done in close succession to the first anneal. The chamber is
heated to 800 ◦C first at a rate of 5 ◦C/s until 550 ◦C where the heating rate is re-
duced to 2 ◦C/s as temperature overshoot at higher temperatures were thought to
be more significant than at lower temperatures. All processing is done using argon
gas flow with a small overpressure in the chamber. The sample is cooled in the
same manner as the first annealing process. However, additional cooling cycles
are required to reduce the sample temperature below 100 ◦C.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
91
==PAGE:100==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
13. The silicide formation process is finished and the sample is ready for further pro-
cessing or electrical characterisation.
This fabrication technique resulted in a low-resistivity, high-uniformity titanium disilicide
film, ρ = 15.1 ± 0.4µΩcm. This would result in an ωRC-product 16% higher than the esti-
mated value given in section 1.5. Which were considered viable for use in CMUT arrays
for bottom electrodes. This film, however, showed a high stress and wafer bow, which
may be problematic in scaling the electrode thickness in later design iterations. This may
become an issue, as the electrode resistance requires further reduction to accommodate
larger arrays. This reduction can come in three parts: 1) connector width increase, which
requires some mask redesign and will reduce bonding area. However, it has been es-
timated, that connector widths of approximately 8 µm are viable. 2) Film resistivity, the
lowest boundary for the resistivity of titanium disilicide is at 1213 µΩcm, approximately
25% lower than the obtained resistivity. 3) Electrode thickness, the resistance of an ele-
ment inverse linearly with the thickness of the electrodes. This may introduce challenges
in regard to film formation, as the layers may have difficulty mixing at a significant rate in
thicker films. Furthermore, high film stress was observed, which may introduce defects in
thicker silicide films.
To further improve the formation of silicide films or to ease processing without sacrific-
ing silicide quality, some future experimentation is suggested. First, changing the silicon
deposition method should be tested. This may have several very different effects on the
formed silicide and general processing. First, it is suspected, that the high silicide film
roughness is partially caused by the poly-Si roughness, which is typically around 8 nm
when depositing similar films. This roughness is close to the silicide roughness, which
was observed during this project. This option would not require a different method of
structuring the electrodes than the SALICIDE method, however. Secondly, the option to
use E-beam deposited silicon may be interesting as a method of reducing contamination
and when moving to higher silicide thickness. This silicon film may be deposited with the
titanium film without removing the sample from the vacuum in the deposition chamber.
E-beam deposition also opens up for repeated bi-layer deposition, where thin layers of
titanium and silicon are deposited repeatedly after one another. This method may al-
low for extremely fast annealing by limiting the required diffusion distance of the atoms.
Additionally, it may ease the fabrication of thicker silicide films by mixing the reactants bet-
ter. This deposition method would not work with the SALICIDE method of structuring the
electrodes. One possible solution is etching in XeF2-gas, which reportedly etches both
poly-Si and titanium at a rate of 180 nm/min and 29 nm/min, respectively at a pressure of
2.6 mTorr. All the while not etching either thermally grown silicon dioxide or photoresist
[76]. Removing both titanium and silicon before annealing, will also remove the necessity
of two annealing processes. It is worthwhile to test the viability of this fabrication scheme.
If successful, it may remove several processing steps from the fabrication. Furthermore,
it may well reduce the contamination between film deposition.
Regardless of the deposition and fabrication scheme, the annealing duration should be
tested concerning the first annealing procedures. This is important to reduce unneces-
sary thermal exposure of the sample, but it will also reduce processing time to allow for
streamlined sample production. The first anneal is currently 40 min long, which means
that a lot of time may be gained in optimising the annealing time. Furthermore, various
silicide target thicknesses should be included in this study, to determine a proper an-
nealing duration for scaled-up electrode thickness. The second annealing procedure is
performed after titanium and silicide have mixed, so the length of the anneal is considered
uncorrelated with the layer thickness. Furthermore, it is already short so not much time is
92
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
gained. The heating ramps of both annealing processes should be investigated as well;
during this project, they were selected as the fastest possible ramp without significant
overshoot. The first anneal overshot less than 7 ◦C for a duration of less than 10 s and
the second annealing process overshot less than 3 ◦C for a duration of less than 7 s. Both
the duration of the heating process and the overshoot may be reduced by optimising the
heating process by using a continuously decreasing heating rate. Similar to what was
done with the second annealing process, but possibly in several more steps.
The promising results from the fusion bonding test call for more experimentation. The
silicide quality is still worsened by the fusion-bond annealing at 900 ◦C, however signifi-
cantly less than by annealing at 950 ◦C. Annealing at lower temperatures and for shorter
durations should be investigated with respect to bond quality and changes in silicide film
quality.
5.2
Chip fabrication
Using the parameters learned from these experiments and previous projects, the silicide
fabrication scheme listed above was integrated into a process flow for CMUT arrays with
LOCOS-defined cavities. The general process flow was inspired by earlier work by PhD
Stine L. Grue, and PhD Rune S. Grass [26, 27]. These previous processes used doped
silicon electrodes below the cavities; as such, the process required some changes to be
compatible with titanium silicide bottom electrodes.
The fabrication included twelve samples from the beginning, as to ensure a reserve during
critical processing steps.
The cavity depth had to be increased significantly to make room for silicide electrodes
within. This was done by increasing the oxidation time for the LOCOS process and by re-
moving the oxynitride and nitride film which were used for diffusion barriers in the LOCOS
process. The oxidation time was determined by fitting historical data to the Deal-Grove
model given a desired oxide thickness of 1125 nm. The thickness was determined to fit
both the desired gap and the target silicide electrode thickness and to compensate for
etching steps which will attack the oxide. The oxide thickness was measured by ellip-
sometry, and the cavities were measured by stylus profiling. These measurements indi-
cated a too-thin oxide in the bonding areas of 1040 nm, which means the cavities were too
shallow, depths of 306-316 nm were observed (with ≈55 nm) nitride still in the cavities).
A second oxidation was made to increase the cavity depth, after which the cavity depth
was measured to 363-372 nm (still with 55 nm nitride layer). After an oxide and nitride etch
to remove the oxynitride and nitride layer, the cavity depth is measured to 369-379 nm.
This is near the exact desired cavity depth for this step, as the native oxide-etch is ex-
pected to remove further 20 nm of the LOCOS oxide. All these factors, along with silicide
film formation, make it challenging to reach a set target gap height. However, the given
measurements have proven the possibility of accurately controlling the cavity depth. The
cavity depth target would be easier to obtain and more reproducible if some of these pro-
cess steps affecting the cavity depth were removed or reduced. Considering the proposed
fabrication method in the previous section, several etching steps and native oxide etch
steps could be eliminated completely and replaced only by a single XeF2 vapour phase
etching process.
After the LOCOS-process and removal of the nitride-oxynitride diffusion barrier, the cav-
ities were measured in width by optical microscopy and stylus profiling. A target width
of 37 µm were desired; however, the width was measured to approximately 32 µm. This
reduction is thought to be caused by a combination of under-etching the poly-Si mask
TiSi2 for CMUTs
93
==PAGE:102==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
used for nitride structuring and over-exposure of the positive resist. This reduction of
the cavity dimensions was not considered detrimental to the process, as the main goal
was to prove the viability of titanium silicide electrodes in this fabrication. However, these
considerations should be taken into account in future fabrication iterations.
Poly-crystalline silicon was structured in the cavities, and a SALICIDE fabrication process,
as described in the previous section, was made. Particular care was taken to clean the
samples properly after poly-Si structuring, as organic contamination was thought to have
been a source of poor annealing results in initial samples. The resulting silicide electrodes
were characterised by I-V measurements of the test elements, which resulted in a 1.4 kΩ
resistance before RCA 1 cleaning and 1.29 ± 0.02kΩ. This is equivalent to a resistivity
of 29.4 ± 1.9µΩcm assuming a 200 nm initial silicide thickness and an approximate etch
rate of 1.5 nm/min in titanium silicide by the RCA 1 cleaning procedure. This is quite
a bit higher than the silicide resistivity which was obtained in the pre-experiments, 95%
higher. This will increase the ωRC-product significantly. The titanium silicide resistivity-
linewidth dependency is thought to be the cause of this increase; as such, it may be
solved solely by a design change to wider electrode connectors. A cavity depth of 121 nm
was measured using AFM after silicidation; this is a significant difference from the target of
150 nm. However, not so far from the target to discourage further studies and experiments
into obtaining an accurate gap height.
The RCA 1 cleaning method was investigated to determine if it was sufficient for 1) clean-
ing the wafer surface for a successful bond and 2) removing excess titanium silicide
formed at the titanium silicon dioxide boundary. Analysis showed significant silicide for-
mation at the titanium silicon dioxide interface in both XPS, EDX and by regular SEM
imaging. This was severely reduced after the cleaning process. The surface roughness
was also dramatically reduced to a level at which a fusion bonding process is assumed
to be possible. Furthermore, comparing the test elements’ resistance before and after
the annealing process, an etch rate of 1.5 nm/min was determined in a 1:1:5 RCA 1 stan-
dard cleaning procedure. After the bottom electrode fabrication and sample cleaning, it
was shown that the bottom wafer could be bonded to a PSOI wafer. The bond unifor-
mity was high, as indicated by PL-mapping of the bonded stacks. Three samples were
bonded to PSOIs; all three showed good uniformity and were highly comparable to one
another, suggesting good reproducibility. From this point, no further processing was done
on the samples, although all processing from this point is identical to previous fabrication
iterations, so no significant challenges are expected concerning fabrication.
5.3
Conclusion
This study set out to investigate the viability of using TiSi2 for bottom electrodes in CMUT
arrays. This material was considered a viable candidate due to its high thermal stability
and low resistivity. The former enables the fusion bonding process to attach a top mem-
brane, which is the preferred method when defining cavities with the LOCOS-process.
The latter helps mitigate the ωRC requirement. This was divided into two major areas:
1) preparatory experiments to determine processing parameters and identify any immi-
nent obstacles in silicide formation. 2) Fabrication of a CMUT array using titanium sili-
cides for electrodes. A major fabrication challenge is obtaining an exact gap height due
to the many processing steps that affect this. Furthermore, the silicide formation by the
SALICIDE technique is also considered an important challenge to overcome. The wafer
bonding process is considered the last potentially challenging processing step.
The preparatory experimentation resulted in the development of a procedure to produce
low-resistivity, high-uniformity C54-phase silicide. This resulted in an estimated resistivity
94
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
of 15.1 ± 0.4µΩcm, without observed agglomeration effects in the film. After process inte-
gration into the CMUT-fabrication, a silicide resistivity of 29.4 ± 1.9µΩcm was estimated.
The LOCOS process provided a sufficient cavity depth, which compensated for etched
oxide during processing. However, there was some difficulty in obtaining the exact target
gap height. Last, the fusion bonding process was proven to be viable between the bottom
wafers and a top PSOI, despite challenges from silicide formation concerning wafer bow
and roughness in bonding areas. Furthermore, the thermal stability of the silicide is good,
and only an 8% increase in resistivity is seen after annealing the fusion bond. These
results have shown the viability of using TiSi2 as bottom electrode material in a CMUT
fabrication scheme. However, some major challenges are still to be overcome to produce
a low-resistivity bottom electrode which satisfies the ωRC limitation. The large increase in
resistivity when moving from an entire thin film fabrication scheme to a SALICIDE fabrica-
tion scheme is particularly concerning. Although the cause may be the resistivity-linewidth
effect of the silicide formation as discussed earlier. Furthermore, the increase in resistiv-
ity from the thermal exposure from fusion bonding could possibly be reduced by further
experimentation. In addition, a completely different fabrication scheme is considered us-
ing repeated bi-layers of silicon and titanium deposited by E-beam deposition. This may
ease the annealing process but will pose new challenges when it comes to structuring the
silicide film. This may be done by XeF2 vapour phase etching, which is somewhat of a
niche process.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
95
==PAGE:104==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
96
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
[1]
Jerry L. Prince and Jonathan M. Links. Medical imaging : signals and systems. eng.
Pearson Education, 2015, 519 s., ill. ISBN: 978-0-13-214518-3.
[2]
Marcel Baümler et al. “Ultrasound screening of ovarian cancer”. eng. In: Hormone
Molecular Biology and Clinical Investigation 41.3 (2020), p. 20190022. ISSN: 1868-
1891, 1868-1883. DOI: 10.1515/hmbci-2019-0022.
[3]
Katharina Ascherl and Erwin Schweitzer. “Gadolinium-containing contrast agents
- Cause of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis?” ger. In: Krankenhauspharmazie 29.4
(2008), pp. 141–144. ISSN: 0173-7597.
[4]
Phillip H. Kuo. “Gadolinium-Containing MRI Contrast Agents: Important Variations
on a Theme for NSF”. eng. In: Journal of the American College of Radiology 5.1
(2008), pp. 29–35. ISSN: 1558-349x, 1546-1440. DOI: 10.1016/j.jacr.2007.08.014.
[5]
Center for Devices and Radiological Health. Ultrasound imaging. Jan. 12, 2024.
URL: https://www.fda.gov/radiation-emitting-products/medical-imaging/ultrasound-
imaging.
[6]
Stanley B Barnett et al. “International recommendations and guidelines for the safe
use of diagnostic ultrasound in medicine”. In: Ultrasound in Medicine & Biology
26.3 (2000), pp. 355–366. ISSN: 0301-5629. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 /
S0301 - 5629(00 ) 00204 - 0. URL: https: / / www .sciencedirect . com / science /article /
pii/S0301562900002040.
[7]
Douglas L. Miller et al. “Diagnostic Ultrasound Safety Review for Point-of-Care Ul-
trasound Practitioners”. In: Journal of Ultrasound in Medicine 39.6 (2020), pp. 1069–
1084. DOI: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1002/jum.15202. eprint: https:
//onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/pdf/10.1002/jum.15202. URL:
https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/abs/10.1002/jum.15202.
[8]
“The Safe Use of Ultrasound in Medical Diagnosis, 3rd ed”. In: Radiology 268.2
(2013), pp. 345–346. DOI: 10.1148/radiol.13134021. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1148/
radiol.13134021. URL: https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.13134021.
[9]
David T. Linker. “Chapter 10 - Ultrasound”. In: High-Quality Transesophageal Echocar-
diography. Ed. by David T. Linker. Academic Press, 2022, pp. 133–154. ISBN: 978-
0-12-822932-3. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-822932-3.00010-2. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128229323000102.
[10]
Gail Ter Haar. “The new British Medical Ultrasound Society Guidelines for the safe
use of diagnostic ultrasound equipment”. In: Ultrasound 18 (May 2010), pp. 50–51.
DOI: 10.1258/ult.2010.100007. URL: https://www.bmus.org/.
[11]
United Nations UN. Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of
Chemicals (GHS). 2017.
[12]
European Chemicals Agency. May 2023. URL: https://echa.europa.eu/da/substance-
information/-/substanceinfo/100.032.467.
[13]
Jørgen Arendt Jensen. “Estimation of blood velocities using ultrasound: A Signal
Processing Approach”. eng. 1996. ISBN: 978-0-52-146484-0.
[14]
Jørgen Arendt Jensen and Svetoslav Nikolov. “Fast simulation of ultrasound im-
ages”. eng. In: Proceedings on Ultrasonics Symposium 2 (2000), pp. 1721–1724.
ISSN: 1551-3025, 1051-0117. DOI: 10.1109/ULTSYM.2000.921654.
[15]
Christine E. Morton and Geoffrey R. Lockwood. “Theoretical assessment of a crossed
electrode 2-D array for 3-D imaging”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Ieee Ultrasonics
TiSi2 for CMUTs
97
==PAGE:106==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Symposium 1 (2003), pp. 968–971. ISSN: 1551-3025, 1051-0117. DOI: 10.1109/
ULTSYM.2003.1293560.
[16]
Cordis.Europa.Eu Cordis. 3-D Super resolution Ultrasound Real time imaging of
Erythrocytes. Feb. 2020. URL: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/854796.
[17]
Jørgen Arendt Jensen et al. “In Vivo Super Resolution Ultrasound Imaging using the
Erythrocytes - SURE”. In: 2022 IEEE International Ultrasonics Symposium (IUS).
2022, pp. 1–4. DOI: 10.1109/IUS54386.2022.9958236.
[18]
Harman Saman et al. “Inducing angiogenesis, a key step in cancer vascularization,
and treatment approaches”. eng. In: Cancers 12.5 (2020), p. 1172. ISSN: 2072-
6694. DOI: 10.3390/cancers12051172.
[19]
Cancer Research UK. May 2024. URL: https://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-
cancer/what-is-cancer/how-cancers-grow.
[20]
Raluca Ioana Teleanu et al. “Tumor angiogenesis and anti-angiogenic strategies
for cancer treatment”. eng. In: Journal of Clinical Medicine 9.1 (2020), p. 84. ISSN:
2077-0383. DOI: 10.3390/jcm9010084.
[21]
Quintin Stedman, Kwan Kyu Park, and Butrus T. Khuri-Yakub. “CMUT chip with
integrated temperature and pressure sensors”. eng. In: Ieee International Ultrason-
ics Symposium, Ius 2016- (2016), p. 7728696. ISSN: 19485727, 19485719. DOI:
10.1109/ULTSYM.2016.7728696.
[22]
D. Barauskas et al. “Research of wide range resonant pressure sensor”. eng. In:
Intelligent Technologies in Logistics and Mechatronics Systems, Itelms 2015 - Pro-
ceedings of the 10th International Conference (2015), pp. 51–55. ISSN: 23450088.
[23]
Dovydas Barauskas et al. “CMUT for high sensitivity greenhouse gas sensing”. eng.
In: 2015 Ieee International Ultrasonics Symposium, Ius 2015 (2015), p. 7329282.
ISSN: 19485719. DOI: 10.1109/ULTSYM.2015.0472.
[24]
Libo Zhao et al. “A Novel CMUT-Based Resonant Biochemical Sensor Using Elec-
trospinning Technology”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Industrial Electronics 66.9
(2019), pp. 7356–7365. ISSN: 15579948, 02780046. DOI: 10 . 1109 / TIE . 2018 .
2878123.
[25]
Alessandro Stuart Savoia et al. “Nonlinear ultrasound imaging experiments using a
CMUT probe”. eng. In: Ieee International Ultrasonics Symposium, Ius 2016- (2016),
p. 7728699. ISSN: 19485719, 19485727. DOI: 10.1109/ULTSYM.2016.7728699.
[26]
Rune Sixten Grass. “Micromachined integrated 2D transducers for super resolution
ultrasound imaging”. eng. 2022.
[27]
Stine Løvholt Grue Pedersen. “Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasound Transducers
for Super resolution Ultrasound Real-time imaging of Erythrocytes”. eng. 2023.
[28]
Kitty Steenberg. “Micromachined 2D Transducers for 3-D Super-Resolution Ultra-
sound Real-Time Imaging of Erythrocytes”. eng. 2023.
[29]
William Apoutou N’Djin et al. “1D multi-element CMUT arrays for ultrasound thermal
therapy”. eng. In: Aip Conference Proceedings 1821.1 (2017), p. 050002. ISSN:
15517616, 0094243x. DOI: 10.1063/1.4977621.
[30]
Donatas Pelenis et al. “Acoustic Streaming Efficiency in a Microfluidic Biosensor
with an Integrated CMUT”. eng. In: Micromachines 14.5 (2023), p. 1012. ISSN:
2072666x. DOI: 10.3390/mi14051012.
[31]
Jihee Lee et al. “A 5.37mW/Channel Pitch-Matched Ultrasound ASIC with Dynamic-
Bit-Shared SAR ADC and 13.2V Charge-Recycling TX in Standard CMOS for In-
tracardiac Echocardiography”. eng. In: 2019 Ieee International Solid-state Circuits
Conference (isscc) 62 (2019), 190–U2139. ISSN: 23768606, 01936530. DOI: 10.
1109/ISSCC.2019.8662531.
98
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:107==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[32]
Jonas Jensen, Matthias Bo Stuart, and Jørgen Arendt Jensen. “Optimized Plane
Wave Imaging for Fast and High-Quality Ultrasound Imaging”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control 63.11 (2016), pp. 1922–1934.
DOI: 10.1109/TUFFC.2016.2591980.
[33]
“Recursive Ultrasound Imaging”. English. In: 1999 IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium
Proceedings. Vol. 1-2. I E E E International Ultrasonics Symposium. Proceedings.
United States: IEEE, 1999, pp. 1621–1625. ISBN: 0-7803-5722-1. DOI: 10.1109/
ULTSYM.1999.849306. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/mostRecentIssue.jsp?
punumber=6852.
[34]
Andreas Spandet Havreland et al. “CMUT Electrode Resistance Design: Modelling
and Experimental Verification by a Row-Column Array”. eng. In: I E E E Transactions
on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics and Frequency Control 66.6 (2019), pp. 1110–1118.
ISSN: 1525-8955, 0885-3010. DOI: 10.1109/TUFFC.2019.2906795.
[35]
Øyvind Nydal Dahl. The RC delay element. Oct. 2022. URL: https://www.build-
electronic-circuits.com/rc-delay-element/.
[36]
Andrew B. Kahng and Sudhak ar Muddu. Delay analysis of VLSI interconnections
using the diffusion equation model. 1994. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/
stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=1600440.
[37]
E.D. Fabricius. Introduction to VLSI design. eng. McGraw-Hill, 1990, 17+406 s.
ISBN: 978-0-07-100727-6.
[38]
J. W. Mayer and S. S. Lau. “Electronic materials science: For integrated circuits
in Si and GaAs”. eng. In: Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research.
Section B, Beam Interactions With Materials and Atoms 53.53 (1991), p. 232. ISSN:
0168583x, 18729584. DOI: 10.1016/0168-583X(91)95666-2.
[39]
A HIRAKI, JW MAYER, and E LUGUJJO. “FORMATION OF SILICON OXIDE OVER
GOLD LAYERS ON SILICON SUBSTRATES”. eng. In: Journal of Applied Physics
43.9 (1972), pp. 3643–. ISSN: 10897550, 00218979. DOI: 10.1063/1.1661782.
[40]
A HIRAKI, MA NICOLET, and JW MAYER. “LOW-TEMPERATURE MIGRATION OF
SILICON IN THIN LAYERS OF GOLD AND PLATINUM”. eng. In: Applied Physics
Letters 18.5 (1971), pp. 178–. ISSN: 10773118, 00036951. DOI: 10.1063/1.1653615.
[41]
MARC-A. NICOLET and S.S. LAU. “Formation and Characterization of Transition-
Metal Silicides”. eng. In: Vlsi Electronics Microstructure Science 6 (1983), pp. 329–
464. ISSN: 07367031. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-234106-9.50011-8.
[42]
Karen Maex, Marc van Rossum, and Institution of Electrical Engineers. Properties of
metal silicides. eng. INSPEC, 1995, XIV, 335 S (unknown). ISBN: 978-1-59-124827-
9.
[43]
M. C. Poon et al. “Resistivity and thermal stability of nickel mono-silicide”. eng.
In: Applied Surface Science 157.1 (2000), pp. 29–34. ISSN: 18735584, 01694332.
DOI: 10.1016/S0169-4332(99)00513-9.
[44]
Lih J. Chen, James W. Mayer, and Institution of Electrical Engineers. Silicide Tech-
nology for Integrated Circuits. eng. IET, 2004, pp. xviii+279. ISBN: 978-1-84-919066-
4. DOI: 10.1049/PBEP005E.
[45]
Yuanning Chen et al. “Manufacturing enhancements for CoSi2 self-aligned silicide
at the 0.12-μm CMOS technology node”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Electron
Devices 50.10 (2003), pp. 2120–2125. ISSN: 15579646, 00189383. DOI: 10.1109/
TED.2003.817276.
[46]
Karen Holloway and Robert Sinclair. “High-resolution and in situ TEM studies of
annealing of Ti-Si multilayers”. eng. In: Journal of the Less-common Metals 140
(1988), pp. 139–148. ISSN: 18782728, 00225088.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
99
==PAGE:108==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[47]
L. J. Chen. “Solid state amorphization in metal/Si systems”. eng. In: Materials Sci-
ence and Engineering R: Reports 29.5 (2000), pp. 115–152. ISSN: 1879-212x,
0927-796x. DOI: 10.1016/S0927-796X(00)00023-1.
[48]
MH WANG and LJ CHEN. “SIMULTANEOUS OCCURRENCE OF MULTIPHASES
IN INTERFACIAL REACTIONS OF ULTRAHIGH-VACUUM DEPOSITED TI THIN-
FILMS ON (111)SI”. eng. In: Applied Physics Letters 59.19 (1991), pp. 2460–2462.
ISSN: 1077-3118, 0003-6951. DOI: 10.1063/1.105995.
[49]
IJMM RAAIJMAKERS and KB KIM. “A COMPARISON OF THE REACTION OF TI-
TANIUM WITH AMORPHOUS AND MONOCRYSTALLINE SILICON”. eng. In: Jour-
nal of Applied Physics 67.10 (1990), pp. 6255–6264. ISSN: 10897550, 00218979.
DOI: 10.1063/1.345141.
[50]
H JEON et al. “MORPHOLOGY AND PHASE-STABILITY OF TISI2 ON SI”. eng. In:
Journal of Applied Physics 71.9 (1992), pp. 4269–4276. ISSN: 1089-7550, 0021-
8979. DOI: 10.1063/1.350808.
[51]
Z MA, LH ALLEN, and DDJ ALLMAN. “MICROSTRUCTURAL ASPECTS AND MECH-
ANISM OF THE C49-TO-C54 POLYMORPHIC TRANSFORMATION IN TITANIUM
DISILICIDE”. eng. In: Journal of Applied Physics 77.9 (1995), pp. 4384–4388. ISSN:
1089-7550, 0021-8979. DOI: 10.1063/1.359464.
[52]
Z MA, LH ALLEN, and DDJ ALLMAN. “EFFECT OF DIMENSION SCALING ON
THE NUCLEATION OF C54 TISI2”. eng. In: Thin Solid Films 253.1-2 (1994), pp. 451–
455. ISSN: 1879-2731, 0040-6090. DOI: 10.1016/0040-6090(94)90365-4.
[53]
JA KITTL et al. “KINETICS AND NUCLEATION MODEL OF THE C49 TO C54
PHASE-TRANSFORMATION IN TISI2 THIN-FILMS ON DEEP-SUB-MICRON N(+)
TYPE POLYCRYSTALLINE SILICON LINES”. eng. In: Applied Physics Letters 67.16
(1995), pp. 2308–2310. ISSN: 1077-3118, 0003-6951. DOI: 10.1063/1.115135.
[54]
CM OSBURN et al. “THE EFFECTS OF CONTAMINATION ON SEMICONDUC-
TOR MANUFACTURING YIELD”. eng. In: Journal of Environmental Sciences 31.2
(1988), pp. 45–57. ISSN: 00220906.
[55]
R BEYERS, R SINCLAIR, and ME THOMAS. “PHASE-EQUILIBRIA IN THIN-FILM
METALLIZATIONS”. eng. In: Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology B 2.4
(1984), pp. 781–784. ISSN: 2327-9877, 0734-211x. DOI: 10.1116/1.582879.
[56]
S OGAWA, T YOSHIDA, and T KOUZAKI. “DEPENDENCE OF THERMAL-STABILITY
OF THE TITANIUM SILICIDE SILICON STRUCTURE ON IMPURITIES”. eng. In:
Applied Physics Letters 56.8 (1990), pp. 725–727. ISSN: 1077-3118, 0003-6951.
DOI: 10.1063/1.103314.
[57]
Simon Y.M. Chooi et al. “Titanium silicide etching in sub-half micron device technol-
ogy”. eng. In: Proceedings of Spie - the International Society for Optical Engineering
3508 (1998), pp. 191–201. ISSN: 1996-756x, 0277-786x. DOI: 10.1117/12.324027.
[58]
COMSOL: Multiphysics software for optimizing designs. URL: https://www.comsol.
com/.
[59]
H Lamb. “On the vibrations of an elastic plate in contact with water”. eng. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Royal Society of London Series A-containing Papers of a Math-
ematical and Physical Character 98.690 (1920), pp. 205–216. ISSN: 20539150,
09501207. DOI: 10.1098/rspa.1920.0064.
[60]
Mette Funding la Cour et al. “Electrostatic and Small-Signal Analysis of CMUTs
With Circular and Square Anisotropic Plates”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Ultra-
sonics, Ferroelectrics and Frequency Control 62.8 (2015), pp. 1563–1579. ISSN:
15258955, 08853010. DOI: 10.1109/TUFFC.2014.006553.
100
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:109==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[61]
Erik Vilain Thomsen et al. “Silicon as an anisotropic mechanical material: Deflection
of thin crystalline plates”. eng. In: Sensors and Actuators A: Physical 220 (2014),
pp. 347–364. ISSN: 18733069, 09244247. DOI: 10.1016/j.sna.2014.09.007.
[62]
Alessandro Stuart Savoia, Giosuè Caliano, and Massimo Pappalardo. “A CMUT
probe for medical ultrasonography: From microfabrication to system integration”.
eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control
59.6 (2012), pp. 1127–1138. ISSN: 1525-8955, 0885-3010. DOI: 10.1109/TUFFC.
2012.2303.
[63]
Stephen A. Campbell. Fabrication engineering at the micro- and nanoscale. eng.
Oxford University Press, 2008, XIV, 647 S. (unknown). ISBN: 978-1-61-344110-7.
[64]
BE DEAL and AS GROVE. “GENERAL RELATIONSHIP FOR THERMAL OXIDA-
TION OF SILICON”. eng. In: Journal of Applied Physics 36.12 (1965), pp. 3770–&.
ISSN: 00218979, 10897550. DOI: 10.1063/1.1713945.
[65]
Anders Hyldgård, Ole Hansen, and Erik Vilain Thomsen. “FISH & CHIPS: Single
Chip Silicon MEMS CTDL Salinity, Temperature, Pressure and Light sensor for use
in fisheries research”. eng. In: Proceedings of Mems 2005 (2005), pp. 303–306.
ISSN: 10846999. DOI: 10.1109/MEMSYS.2005.1453927.
[66]
Yogesh B. Gianchandani, Osamu Tabata, and Hans Zappe. Comprehensive mi-
crosystems, three-volume set. eng. Vol. 1-3. Elsevier, 2007, pp. 1–737. ISBN: 978-
0-44-452191-0. DOI: 10.1016/B978-044452190.
[67]
C Chen et al. “Residual stress in C54 titanium silicide formed in silicon-on-insulator”.
eng. In: Proceedings of the Seventh International Symposium on Silicon-on-insulator
Technology and Devices 96.3 (1996), pp. 189–195.
[68]
Reinoud F. Wolffenbuttel. “Low-temperature intermediate Au-Si wafer bonding; eu-
tectic or silicide bond”. eng. In: Sensors and Actuators, A: Physical 62.1-3 (1997),
pp. 680–686. ISSN: 18733069, 09244247. DOI: 10.1016/S0924-4247(97)01550-1.
[69]
Christian Broberg Christensen, Andrea Maria Pierri Enevoldsen, and Peter Dals-
gaard Nicolaisen. “Capacitve Micromachined Ultrasound Transducers (CMUT) us-
ing silicide electrodes, Kapasitive mikrofremstillede ultralyds transducere med silicid
elektroder”. 2021.
[70]
Souder and Hidnert. “Measurements on the thermal expansion of fused silica”. und.
In: Scientific Papers of the Bureau of Standards 21.524 (1926), pp. 1–23. ISSN:
00966231. DOI: 10.6028/nbsscipaper.198.
[71]
JF JONGSTE et al. “ELASTIC-CONSTANTS AND THERMAL-EXPANSION CO-
EFFICIENT OF METASTABLE C49 TISI2”. eng. In: Journal of Applied Physics 73.6
(1993), pp. 2816–2820. ISSN: 00218979, 10897550. DOI: 10.1063/1.353058.
[72]
Akira Nishiyama et al. “Agglomeration resistant self-aligned silicide process using
N2 implantation into TiSi2”. eng. In: Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, Part 1:
Regular Papers and Short Notes and Review Papers 36.6 A (1997), pp. 3639–3643.
ISSN: 00214922, 13474065, 18820778. DOI: 10.1143/jjap.36.3639.
[73]
Werner Kern. The Evolution of Silicon Wafer Cleaning Technology. 1990.
[74]
Phosphoric Acid Nitride Removal. 2007.
[75]
LM LOEWENSTEIN and CM TIPTON. “CHEMICAL ETCHING OF THERMALLY
OXIDIZED SILICON-NITRIDE - COMPARISON OF WET AND DRY ETCHING METH-
ODS”. eng. In: Journal of the Electrochemical Society 138.5 (1991), pp. 1389–1394.
ISSN: 19457111, 00134651. DOI: 10.1149/1.2085792.
[76]
Kirt R. Williams, Kishan Gupta, and Matthew Wasilik. “Etch rates for micromachin-
ing processing - Part II”. eng. In: Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems 12.6
(2003), pp. 761–778. ISSN: 19410158, 10577157. DOI: 10.1109/JMEMS.2003.
820936.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
101
==PAGE:110==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
102
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:111==
Acronyms
0D 0 Dimensional. 4
1D 1 Dimensional. 4
2D 2 Dimensional. 2, 5, 6, 8
3D 3 Dimensional. 5–7, 21
AFM Atomic Force Microscope. 30, 41, 48, 50, 58, 60, 74–76, 81, 94
ALARA As Low As Reasonably Possible. 1
BHF Buffered Hydrofluoric Acid. 70
BMUS British Medical Ultrasound Society. 2
CMUT Capacitative Micromachined Ultrasound Transducer. iii, 6–10, 21, 23, 26, 27, 33,
39, 58, 67–69, 79, 80, 90, 92–95
CT computed tomography. 1
DIW De-Ionised Water. 70, 74, 80, 82, 84, 91
DRIE Deep Reactive Ion Etch. 67
DSP Double Side Polished. 43, 53, 55, 79, 88, 89
EDX Energy-Dispersive X-ray. 41, 74, 76–78, 94, 131
FEM Finite Element Modelling. 23, 25–27
FOV Field of View. 4
FPM Fully Populated Matrix. 5, 6
FWHM Full-Width at Half-Maximum. 8
GHS Globally Harmonized System. 2
IBE Ion Beam Etching. 85
IC Integrated Circuit. 16, 33
ICP Inductively Coupled Plasma. 85
IPA isopropyl alcohol. 82
LOCOS LOCal Oxidation of Silicon. iii, 13, 21, 23–26, 33, 48, 67–69, 71–74, 90, 93–95
LPCVD Low Pressure Chemical Vapour Deposition. 34, 42, 69, 73, 79, 80
MEMS Micro Electro Mechanical Systems. 7, 26, 38, 90
TiSi2 for CMUTs
103
==PAGE:112==
Acronyms
MI Mechanical Index. 1
MLA MaskLess Aligner. 70, 73, 84, 85
MRI Magnetic resonance imaging. 1
NAVMI Non-dimensional Added Virtual Mass Incremental factor. 25
OM Optical Microscope. 30, 70, 72
PET Positron Emission Tomography. 1
PID Proportional-Integral-Derivative. 53, 55
pMUT Piezoelectric Micromachined Ultrasound Transducer. 7
PSF Point Spread Function. 8
PSOI Poly-Silicon On Insulator. iii, 26, 67, 68, 79–84, 94, 95
PZT Lead Zirconate Titanate. 2, 7
RCA Row Column Addressed. iii, 5–10, 13–16, 20, 21, 24, 27–29, 31, 33, 67
RCA RCA standard cleaning process. 21, 38, 42, 71, 73, 79, 80, 82, 90
RTP Rapid Thermal Processing. 18, 33, 35, 38, 53, 55, 57, 74, 87, 88, 90, 91
SALICIDE Self ALigned salICIDE. iii, 18–21, 34, 35, 68, 69, 72, 73, 90, 92, 94, 95
SC-1 Standard Clean 1. 20
SEM Scanning Electron Microscope. 41, 63, 74, 75, 79–81, 89, 94
SSP Single Side polished. 53, 55, 57, 74, 89, 91
SURE Super resolution Ultrasound Real time imaging of Erythrocytes. 6
TI Thermal Index. 1, 2
TMAH Tetramethylammonium hydroxide. 70, 73, 84, 85
US UltraSound. 1
XPS X-ray Photo-electron Spectroscopy. 41, 44–49, 52, 53, 87, 88, 94
104
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:113==
Glossary
RCA 1 The first chemical bath used in the RCA cleaning process. 1:1:5 NH4OH:H2O2:H2O,
heated to 70 ◦C. 20, 21, 48, 50, 52, 65, 69, 75, 76, 78, 82, 87, 88, 90, 94, 131
RCA 2 The second chemical bath used in the RCA cleaning process. 1:1:5 HCl:H2O2:H2O,
heated to 70 ◦C. 69
TiSi2 for CMUTs
105
==PAGE:114==
Glossary
106
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:115==
A
Process flow
A.1
Substrate list
Table A.1: List of used substrates for TiSi2 initial experiments and 1xLOCOS _SALICIDE CMUT chip.
Subs.
Orient.
Size
Doping/
type
Polish
Thickness
Box
Purpose
Sample
ID
Silicon
< 100 >
4”
n-type
(Phos)
SSP
525 ± 25 µm
SN617
TiSi2 in 1x
LOCOS
CMUT
1x
LO-
COS
_SALI-
CIDE
Silicon
< 100 >
4”
n-type
(Boron)
DSP
350 ± 15 µm
SN611
Top Plate
PSOI
A.2
1xLOCOS CMUT with TiSi2 electrodes
Table A.2: Process flow for initial proof of concept for TiSi2 electrodes in single LOCOS cavities on Si wafers.
Descriptive cross-sectional and top-view sketches can be found in section A.3. A list of used substrates
may be found in section A.1.
Step
Heading
Equipment
Procedure
Comments
1xLOCOS with Salicide electrodes
1
Wafer selection
Bottom wafers
1.1
Wafer shop
Wafer box
Take the wafers (Silicon, ID: SN617) from the
shop and place them in the wafer box.
Note the wafer
IDs on the box.
Only use every
other box slot.
2
BOX + LOCOS mask deposition
Bottom wafers
2.1
Wafer
cleaning
RCA (4”,6”)
All wafers including test wafers should be
RCA cleaned
Clean baths and
mixing
contain-
ers before use,
only use as first
user.
Remem-
ber test wafer.
Continued on next page
TiSi2 for CMUTs
107
==PAGE:116==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
Table A.2 – continued from previous page
Step
Heading
Equipment
Procedure
Comments
2.2
SiO2
dry
oxidation –
BOX layer
Furnace:
Phosphor
Drive-in (A3)
Place a test wafer in the center of the boat
and place device wafers and eg. test wafers
equally distributed on each side of the test
wafer. No spacing between wafers.
Recipe: DRY1100
Time (ATHENA): 8 h
Time: (Furnace Script) 8 h11 min
Target thickness: 400 nm
Perhaps less is
enough
2.3
Measure
thickness
Filmtek
or
VASE
Measure thickness on the Filmtek and VASE
and note the result with MSE/RSME and
recipe used. (Measure 5-9p)
Furnace
test
wafer.
Save a
screenshot.
2.4
Si3N4
Nitride
de-
position
Furnace:
LPCVD
Ni-
tride (4”) (B2)
Place a test wafer in the center of the boat
and place device wafers and eg. test wafers
equally distributed on each side of the test
wafer. Only wafers in every other slot.
Recipe: nitride4
Time: 16 min
Target thickness: 55 nm
Deposit on max
12 wafers at a
time,
store the
finished
wafers
in the poly fur-
nace
while
the
2nd batch has ni-
tride
deposited.
Check
recent
deposition rates.
2.5
Measure
thickness
Filmtek
or
VASE
Measure thickness on the Filmtek and VASE
and note the result with MSE/RSME and
recipe used. (Measure 5-9p)
Furnace
test
wafer.
Save a
screenshot.
2.6
Poly-Si de-
position
LPCVD Poly-
Si (4”) (B4)
Place a test wafer in the center of the boat
and place device wafers and eg. test wafers
equally distributed on each side of the test
wafer. No spacing between wafers. Fill up
with dummy wafers for undoped poly.
Recipe: POLY620
Time: 12 min
Target thickness: 100 nm
Deposit on both
nitride
batches
at
once.
Al-
ways adjust the
furnace
time
according to the
deposition rate in
the process log
on LabManager.
2.7
Measure
thickness
Filmtek
or
VASE
Measure thickness on the Filmtek and VASE
and note the result with MSE/RSME and
recipe used (P̃oly-Si on oxide).
Furnace
test
wafer.
Save a
screenshot.
3
LOCOS Lithography
Bottom wafers
3.1
Coat wafer
Spin
coater:
Gamma UV
Resist: MiR 701 (Positive)
Recipe: 1411 DCH 100mm MiR 701 1.5um
HMDS
Thickness: 1.5 µm
(Inverted
mask,
keep nitride on
cavities.)
Continued on next page
108
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
Table A.2 – continued from previous page
Step
Heading
Equipment
Procedure
Comments
3.2
Exposure
MLA-2/3
Dose: 320 mJ/cm2
Defocus: 0
Exposure mode: Fast Mask: Cavity (1st ,
bright-field)
Perhaps a dose-
defocus
test
should be made.
3.3
Develop-
ment
Developer:
TMAH
UV-
lithography
Recipe:
3001 DCH 100mm PEB60s110C
SP60s PEB 110C
3.4
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check pattern and alignment marks.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
4
LOCOS mask etch
Bottom wafers
4.1
Pre-etch
bake
Developer:
TMAH
UV-
lithography
Recipe: 2001-DCH PEB 110C 60s
Bake step prior
to wet poly etch
4.2
Wet
poly
etch
Poly Si etch
(Bath)
Etch rate in Si: 100-200 nm/min
Time: 5 min
Less time may
be
fine,
avoid
overetching.
4.3
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check pattern and alignment marks.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
4.4
Strip resist
Plasma
Asher 2
Process time: 45 min
Flows: O2: 400 mL/min, N2: 70 mL/min
Power: 1000 W
4.5
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check pattern and alignment marks.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
4.6
Stylus pro-
filing
Stylus Profiler
(Tencor P17)
Check cavity width and depth.
Length: 300 µm, Duration: 33 s
Save
profiles.
Only
measure
single wafer
4.7
Wet nitride
etch
Nitride
etch:
H3PO4
(Bath)
Etch rate in nitride: ≈2.3 nm/min
Time: 45 min
Temp: 160◦C
Continued on next page
TiSi2 for CMUTs
109
==PAGE:118==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
Table A.2 – continued from previous page
Step
Heading
Equipment
Procedure
Comments
4.8
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check pattern and alignment marks.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
4.9
Stylus pro-
filing
Stylus Profiler
(Tencor P17)
Check cavity width and depth.
Length: 300 µm, Duration: 33 s
Save
profiles.
Only
measure
single wafer
4.10
Wet
poly
etch
Poly Si etch
(Bath)
Etch rate in Si: 100-200 nm/min
Etch rate oxide: 6 nm/min
Time: 5 min
Less time may
be OK, over etch
will eat the oxide.
4.11
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check pattern and alignment marks.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
4.12
Stylus pro-
filing
Stylus Profiler
(Tencor P17)
Check cavity width and depth.
Length: 300 µm, Duration: 33 s
Save
profiles.
Only
measure
single wafer
5
Wafer cleaning
Bottom wafers
5.1
Wafer
cleaning
(Piranha)
Beaker
Recipe:
H2SO4
: H2O2 in the ratio 4:1.
Rinse the beaker (3×), add sulferic acid (4)
then hydrogen peroxide (1).
Time: 10 min
Wafers must be
fully submerged.
5.2
Wafer
cleaning
(RCA)
RCA (4”,6”)
All wafers including test wafer should be RCA
cleaned. Skip HF steps.
Clean baths and
mixing
contain-
ers before use,
only use as first
user.
Remem-
ber test wafer.
6
1xLOCOS
Bottom wafers
Continued on next page
110
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
Table A.2 – continued from previous page
Step
Heading
Equipment
Procedure
Comments
6.1
SiO2
wet
oxidation –
1xLOCOS
Furnace:
Phosphor
Drive-in (A3)
Place a test wafer in the center of the boat
and place device wafers and eg. test wafers
equally distributed on each side of the test
wafer. No spacing between wafers.
Recipe: WET1100
Time (Furnace Script): 2 h57 min
Target thickness: 1225 nm
Should
be
1050 nm on test
wafer.
For
a
150 nm
gap, 160 V pull-
in.
Total depth
after oxidation is
410 nm
(150 nm
gap
+
200 nm
electrode + loss
at
poly-Si
etch
and strip + 40 nm
loss at oxynitride
etch + 20 nm loss
at native oxide
etch)
6.2
Measure
thickness
Filmtek
or
VASE
Measure thickness on the Filmtek and VASE
and note the result with MSE/RSME and
recipe used.
Furnace
test
wafer.
Save a
screenshot.
6.3
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check pattern and alignment marks.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
6.4
Stylus pro-
filing
Stylus Profiler
(Tencor P17)
Check cavity width and depth.
Length: 300 µm, Duration: 33 s
Save
profiles.
Only
measure
single wafer
6.5
Oxynitride
etch
Oxide etch 2:
BHF (clean)
Duration: 30 s
Etch rate: ≈80 nm/min in oxide.
30 s has shown
to be plenty to re-
move oxynitride
surface from ni-
tride.
6.6
Wet nitride
etch
Nitride
etch:
H3PO4
(Bath)
Etch rate in nitride: ≈2.3 nm/min
Time: 30 min
Temp: 160◦C
Check if nitride
is etched com-
pletely away.
6.7
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check pattern and alignment marks.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
Continued on next page
TiSi2 for CMUTs
111
==PAGE:120==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
Table A.2 – continued from previous page
Step
Heading
Equipment
Procedure
Comments
6.8
Measure
roughness
AFM Icon-1
Use standard probe. Scan size 2 × 2µm, 256
scan lines, ∼1Hz
Scan bottom of
cavity and top of
LOCOS.
6.9
Measure
step height
AFM Icon-1
Use high aspect ratio probe. Scan size 1 ×
5µm, 64 scan lines, ∼0.2Hz
Scan slope from
top of locos to
bottom of cavity
6.10
Wafer
cleaning
(Piranha)
Beaker
Recipe:
H2SO4
: H2O2 in the ratio 4:1.
Rinse the beaker (3×), add sulferic acid (4)
then hydrogen peroxide (1).
Time: 10 min
Wafers must be
fully submerged,
must be done af-
ter nitride etch to
move to RCA.
7
Poly-Si deposition (Salicide)
Bottom wafers
7.1
Wafer
cleaning
RCA (4”,6”)
All wafers including test wafers should be
RCA cleaned
No particle scan
is needed for ini-
tial experiments.
7.2
Poly-Si
deposition
–
Device
layer
LPCVD Poly-
Si (4”) (B4)
Place a test wafer in the center of the boat
and place device wafers and eg. test wafers
equally distributed on each side of the test
wafer. No spacing between wafers. Fill up
with dummy wafers for boron doped poly.
Recipe: POLYBOR
Time: 20 min
Target thickness: 180 nm
Always
adjust
the furnace time
according to the
deposition rate in
the process log
on
labmanager.
Note down target
and
measured
thickness
7.3
Measure
thickness
Filmtek
or
VASE
Measure thickness on the Filmtek and VASE
and note the result with MSE/RSME and
recipe used. Use nanolab standard recipe for
Poly on Oxide.
Furnace
test
wafer. Save this
data.
8
Lithography (Salicide)
Bottom wafers
8.1
Coat wafer
Spin
coater:
Gamma UV
Resist: MiR 701 (Positive)
Recipe: 1421 DCH 100mm MiR 701 2um
HMDS
Thickness: 2 µm
(Inverted
mask,
keep nitride on
cavities.)
8.2
Exposure
MLA-2/3
Dose: 320 mJ/cm2
Defocus: 0
Exposure mode: Fast Mask: Bottom elec-
trode (2nd , bright-field)
Perhaps a dose-
defocus
test
should be made.
8.3
Develop-
ment
Developer:
TMAH
UV-
lithography
Recipe:
3001 DCH 100mm PEB60s110C
SP60s PEB 110C
Continued on next page
112
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
Table A.2 – continued from previous page
Step
Heading
Equipment
Procedure
Comments
8.4
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check pattern and alignment marks.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
9
Poly etch (Salicide)
Bottom wafers
9.1
Pre-etch
bake
Developer:
TMAH
UV-
lithography
Recipe: 2001-DCH PEB 110C 60s
Bake step prior
to wet poly etch
9.2
Wet
poly
etch
Poly Si etch
(Bath)
Etch rate in Si: 100-200 nm/min
Time: 5 min
9.3
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check pattern and alignment marks.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
9.4
Strip resist
Plasma
Asher 2
Process time: 45 min
Flows: O2: 400 mL/min, N2: 70 mL/min
Power: 1000 W
9.5
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check pattern and alignment marks.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
9.6
Stylus pro-
filing
Stylus Profiler
(Tencor P17)
Check cavity width and depth.
Length: 300 µm, Duration: 33 s
Save
profiles.
Only
measure
single wafer
9.7
Wafer
cleaning
(Piranha)
Beaker
Recipe:
H2SO4
: H2O2 in the ratio 4:1.
Rinse the beaker (3×), add sulferic acid (4)
then hydrogen peroxide (1).
Time: 10 min
Wafers must be
fully submerged.
10
Salicide Formation
Bottom wafers
10.1
Oxide etch
Oxide etch 2:
BHF (clean)
Duration: 15 s
Etch rate: ≈80 nm/min
Note:
Steps
10.1-10.4
must
be made in direct
sequence.
10.2
Ti
Deposi-
tion
Temescal
(1
or 2)
Recipe: Ti (Nanolab recipe)
Final thickness: 80 nm
Deposition rate: 0.2 nm/s
Note:
Steps
10.1-10.4
must
be made in direct
sequence.
Continued on next page
TiSi2 for CMUTs
113
==PAGE:122==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
Table A.2 – continued from previous page
Step
Heading
Equipment
Procedure
Comments
10.3
1st Anneal
(C49)
RTP2 Jipelec
Recipe: Peter/RTA 550 TC (Ar)
Time: 40 min
Temperature: 550 ◦C, 5 ◦C/s
Use pump-purge of chamber and Argon as
ambient gas during anneal.
Note:
Steps
10.1-10.4
must
be made in di-
rect
sequence.
Anneal
with
Ti
facing
the
car-
rier.
10.4
Ti Etch (Pi-
ranha)
Glass beaker
H2SO4(98%):H2O2(30%) (4:1 mix)
Time: 10 min
Note:
Steps
10.1-10.4
must
be made in di-
rect
sequence.
Check
if
Ti
is
fully etched
10.5
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check pattern and alignment marks.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
10.6
2nd Anneal
(C54)
RTP2 Jipelec
Recipe: Peter/RTA 800 TC (Ar)
Temp: 800 ◦C, 5 ◦C/s to 550 ◦C, then 2 ◦C/s
to target.
Time: 5 min at target temp.
Use pump-purge (3×) of chamber with Argon
and 200sccm/min Ar ambient gas during an-
neal.
Anneal
with
Ti
facing a carrier.
10.7
Wafer
cleaning
(Piranha)
Beaker
Recipe:
H2SO4
: H2O2 in the ratio 4:1.
Rinse the beaker (3×), add sulferic acid (4)
then hydrogen peroxide (1).
Time: 10 min
Wafers must be
fully submerged.
10.8
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check pattern and alignment marks.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
10.9
Sheet
re-
sistance
Four
point
probe - Jan-
del
Standard settings.
Measure
in
C+N+E+S+W.
Note in excel +
logbook.
This
is
not
possible
on
structured
wafers, only on
samples.
Continued on next page
114
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
Table A.2 – continued from previous page
Step
Heading
Equipment
Procedure
Comments
10.10
Stylus pro-
filing
Stylus Profiler
(Tencor P17)
Check cavity width and depth.
Length: 300 µm, Duration: 33 s
Save
profiles.
Only
measure
single wafer
PSOI
11
Wafer selection
PSOI wafers
11.1
Wafer shop
Wafer box
Take the wafers (Fused Silica, ID: SN611)
from the shop and place them in the wafer
box.
Note the wafer
IDs on the box
12
PSOI Deposition
All PSOI wafers
12.1
RCA
RCA (4”, 6”)
All wafers including test wafers should be
RCA cleaned. Before the RCA clean every
bath and all equipment (Wafer boat, boat-
holder, chemical mixing canisters) should be
rinsed (3×).
Let
the
wafers
dry of for 30 sec-
onds in the spin
dryer after it has
finished.
12.2
SiO2
Dry
oxidation
-
BOX layer
Furnace:
Phosphor
Drive-In (A3)
Place a test wafer at the centre of the boat
and place device wafers equally distributed
on each side of the test wafer. No unfilled
slots between wafers.
Target thickness: 500 ± 25nm
Recipe: DRY1100, time: 12:30 (hh:mm)
12.3
Measure
thickness
Filmtek
/
VASE
Ellip-
someter
Measure oxide thickness on the Filmtek/-
VASE and note the result in the furnace log.
Use test wafer.
Put in NanoLab
storage. Take a
screenshot.
12.4
Poly-Si
deposition
-
Device
layer
LPCVD Poly-
Si (4”) (B4)
Place a test wafer in the center of the boat
and place device wafers equally distributed
on each side of two test wafers (one for
all depositions, one which is replaced be-
tween depositions).
No unfilled slots be-
tween wafers. Fill up with dummy wafers at
the outer spaces.
As target thickness may vary, use the latest
deposition rate from LabManager for the ini-
tial depositions.
Check thickness between
depositions.
Recipe: POLYBOR
Always use at least two depositions to reach
target!
It is not allowed
to
deposit
for
more than 3 con-
secutive
hours,
divide deposition
into
shorter
in-
tervals..
Continued on next page
TiSi2 for CMUTs
115
==PAGE:124==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
Table A.2 – continued from previous page
Step
Heading
Equipment
Procedure
Comments
12.5
Measure
thickness
Filmtek
/
VASE
Ellip-
someter
Measure poly-si thickness on the Filmtek/-
VASE and note the result in the furnace log.
This
step
is
only
performed
on
the
single-
deposition
test
wafers.
Take
screenshots.
13
Chemical Mechanical Polishing (CMP)
PSOI wafers
13.1
Storage
preparation
Plastic
beaker (RED)
Fill
the
plastic
beaker
with
water
and
write a chemical note
for water.
Sub-
merge the dedicated wafer holder in the wa-
ter and place the wafers in it as they have
been polished.
Use a trolley for
storage
of
the
beaker while pol-
ishing and later
for transport.
13.2
Polishing
CMP
Recipe: CMUT_kitste
Time: 1:30 (mm:ss), add 13s for arm move-
ment.
Remember to be clean everything properly
beforehand, keep everything wet, and to per-
form brush conditioning before the first pol-
ish.
Measure height difference between the wafer
and the chuck (CNESW), keep this low using
shims (though > 20 µm), the shims may not
match their stated thickness. Place the wafer
in water storage after polishing.
Do not let the wafers dry. (Step 13.2-.8)
Process
in
batches of max.
7.
The entire
wafer
should
be hydrophobic.
If the wafer is
hydrophobic/-
philic
in
any
spots
or
pat-
terns - this may
indicate
strong
particle contami-
nation.
13.3
Piranha
Beaker 1
Recipe: H2SO4 : H2O2 in the ratio 4:1.
Rinse the beaker (3×), add sulferic acid (4)
then hydrogen peroxide (1).
Time: 30 min
Use
dedicated
beaker.
13.4
Rinse
QDR
Recipe 1, rinse bath before first use.
Use spray-rinse
program. Do not
let
the
wafers
dry.
13.5
Oxide etch
BOE/BHF
in
beaker
Time: 10 min
Use
plastic
beaker
from
earlier
during
polishing
(rinse
first (3×)).
13.6
Rinse
QDR
Recipe 1
Use spray-rinse
program. Do not
let
the
wafers
dry.
Continued on next page
116
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
Table A.2 – continued from previous page
Step
Heading
Equipment
Procedure
Comments
13.7
Piranha
Beaker 2
Recipe: H2SO4 : H2O2 in the ratio 3:1.
Rinse the beaker (3×), add sulfuric acid (3),
and then hydrogen peroxide (1).
Time: 30-60 min
Use
dedicated
beaker.
13.8
Rinse
QDR
Recipe 1
Use spray-rinse
program. Do not
let
the
wafers
dry.
13.9
Spin dry
Spin dryer
Standard recipe.
Let wafers sit for
∼30 s to dry off
before opening.
14
PSOI Characterisation
1 PSOI
14.1
Particle
scan
Particle
Scanner
Takano
Scan only one wafer from the RCA clean.
Use gain 4 (800nm −8.3µm), 5 (300nm −
1.3µm). Use same wafer 14.1-14.3/15.6
Only one wafer.
Recipe/Gain
may
differ
on
new scanner.
14.2
Measure
roughness
AFM Icon-1
Use standard probe. Scan size 2 × 2µm, 256
scan lines, ∼1Hz
Normal Values: Ra < 0.35nm, Rq < 0.5nm,
Rmax < 5nm
Valleys are OK,
hills
are
not.
Measure at least
at
C
and
at
N/E/S/W.
14.3
Measure
thickness
SEM
Break a wafer, handle the side to be mea-
sured carefully, mark the surface with an ar-
row.
Use at least C and N/E/S/W or full
CNESW.
Measure BOX and Poly thickness on front
and back of wafer. Save an image with and
without measurements.
Lens: InLens, Magnification: 25k×, Bias:
5keV
Consider
skip-
ping
this
step
until after oxyni-
tride dep.
15
Oxy-Nitride formation
PSOI wafers
15.1
RCA
RCA (4”, 6”)
All wafers including test wafers should be
RCA cleaned. Before the RCA clean every
bath and all equipment (Wafer boat, boat-
holder, chemical mixing canisters) should be
rinsed (3×).
Let
the
wafers
dry
of
for
30 s
in the spin dryer
after it has fin-
ished.
15.2
Particle
scan
KLA
Tencor
SurfScan
6420
Scan only one wafer from the RCA clean.
Use gain 4 (800nm −8.3µm), 5 (300nm −
1.3µm). Gain 6 is optional as it only record the
smallest of particles which can move through
the HEPA-filters.
Only one wafer.
Continued on next page
TiSi2 for CMUTs
117
==PAGE:126==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
Table A.2 – continued from previous page
Step
Heading
Equipment
Procedure
Comments
15.3
SiO2
Dry
oxidation
Furnace: C1 -
Anneal-Oxide
Place test wafer (No RCA req.) in the mid-
dle of the boat, sample wafers symmetrically
around it.
Fill with dummy wafers on both
sides.
Recipe: DRY1000, Time: 15 min
Target thickness (test wafer): 20 nm
Single
spacing
between wafers.
15.4
Nitride
de-
position
Furnace:
B2
LPCVD
Nitride (4”)
Place test wafer (No RCA req.) in the mid-
dle of the boat, sample wafers symmetri-
cally around it with double spacing. Fill with
dummy wafers on both sides.
Recipe: nitride4, Time: 60 min
Target thickness: (test wafer) 200 nm
Double
spacing
between wafers.
We
may
need
a thicker layer,
beware of high
stress.
15.5
Wet Oxida-
tion
Furnace: C1 -
Anneal-Oxide
Place test wafer (No RCA req.) in the mid-
dle of the boat, sample wafers symmetrically
around it.
Fill with dummy wafers on both
sides.
Recipe: WET1100, Time: 3 h
Target thickness: (test wafer) 920 nm
Single
spacing
between wafers.
15.6
Measure
thickness
SEM
Break a wafer, handle the side to be mea-
sured carefully, mark the surface with an ar-
row.
Use at least C and N/E/S/W or full
CNESW.
Measure BOX and Poly thickness on front
and back of wafer. Save an image with and
without measurements.
Lens: InLens, Magnification: 25k×, Bias:
5keV
Fusion Bonding
16
Fusion bonding
All wafers
16.1
RCA (1)
RCA (4”, 6”)
ONLY RCA1 . Both bottom and top wafers
should be cleaned. TiN is etched in RCA1,
TiSi2 will be etched slowly. Before the RCA:
clean boat, beaker and thermometer with DI-
water (3×).
Time:
10 min, stop magnet stirring while
wafers are submerged.
Don’t
let
the
wafers dry, take
them directly to
the next step. Do
cleaning early in
the
morning
to
avoid
particles
from
other
CR
users.
16.2
Piranha
Beaker 1
Recipe: H2SO4 : H2O2 in the ratio 4:1.
Rinse the beaker (3×), add sulferic acid (4)
then hydrogen peroxide (1).
Time: 10 min
Use
dedicated
beaker.
Continued on next page
118
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
Table A.2 – continued from previous page
Step
Heading
Equipment
Procedure
Comments
16.3
Pre-Bond
HEPA
Prebond PSOI and Bottom wafers, use a vac-
uum tweezer.
Put on an additional new pair of gloves. Pre-
orientate the wafers - match flats. Do this un-
der a HEPA filter, with as few other people
present as possible. Do this as soon as pos-
sible after cleaning+drying.
Merge bottom+top wafer and press in the
center and outwards in circular motions.
There
may
be
some
squeaky
and
crunchy
which
is
OK.
Cleean Vacuum
tweezer
before-
hand.
16.4
Wafer
bonding
Wafer Bonder
02
Recipe: CMUT fusion bonding standard.
Use a dummy silicon wafer to protect surface
(from the piston), unpolished side towards
the stack.
16.5
Fusion
bonding
Furnace:
Al-
Anneal (C4)
Recipe: ANN900
Time: 1 h10 min
Maybe
lower
time
or
tem-
perature
is
possible?
Try
fusion
bonding
in RTP system?
Fusion bond as
a 2nd anneal.
16.6
Bond
in-
spection
PL Mapper
Detector: Si+InGaAs, Gain: 10×
Check bond for
voids. Map from
backside.
16.7
Wafer
cleaning
(Piranha)
Beaker
Recipe:
H2SO4
: H2O2 in the ratio 4:1.
Rinse the beaker (3×), add sulferic acid (4)
then hydrogen peroxide (1).
Time: 10 min
Clean
before
handle removal
17
Handle removal
Bonded wafers
17.1
Nitride etch
ASE
Recipe: MEMS/KITOXYSI
Gasses: C4F8 13 sccm
Power: coil 1300 W, plat 200 W, 4 mTorr
Time: 3 min, 20 ◦C (180 nm oxynitride)
There
should
be
a
visible
color
change
after etch, color
should resemble
Si.
17.2
Poly etch
ASE
Recipe: shallolr
Gasses: SF6 260 sccm, O2 26 sccm
Power:
coil 2800 W (etch) 1000 W (passi-
vate), plat 16 W
Rate in Si: 3-4 µm/min, 600 nm/cycl
Time: 6 cycl for 3 µm poly.
Overetch,
the
underlying
ma-
terial is also to
be
removed.
Etch
rate
may
be slower than
stated.
Continued on next page
TiSi2 for CMUTs
119
==PAGE:128==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
Table A.2 – continued from previous page
Step
Heading
Equipment
Procedure
Comments
17.3
BOX etch
ASE
Recipe: CH4ICP
Gasses: CF4 45 sccm
Power: coil 800 W, plat 15 W, 2.5 mTorr
Time: 8 min for 500 nm oxide
Overetch,
the
underlying
ma-
terial is also to
be
removed.
Should resemble
grey
Si
after
etch.
17.4
Si
etch
(dry)
ASE
Recipe: shallolr
Gasses: SF6 260 sccm, O2 26 sccm
Power:
coil 2800 W (etch) 1000 W (passi-
vate), plat 16 W
Rate in Si: 3-4 µm/min, 600 nm/cycl
Time: 75 min for 225 µm to 300 µm Si to be
removed. (Out of 350 µm wafer)
Underetch,
the
rest is removed
in
KOH.
Use
thickness
mea-
surer before and
after to estimate
removed
and
remaining thick-
ness.
Note in
logbook.
17.5
Si
etch
(wet)
Si
Etch
2:
KOH
Time: Dependent on previous step, check
continuously
Rate in Si: 1.7 µm/min, Temp: 90 ◦C
Check
contin-
uously.
Time
in order of 30-
75 min
17.6
BOX etch
BOE
in
beaker
Duration: 6-10 min for 400 nm oxide
Etch rate: ≈75 nm/min
Less time may
be
sufficient,
check
process
continously. The
wafer
should
be
hydrophobic
after.
17.8
Wafer
photo
Camera
Use a steep angle for the photo. Note ID on
Napkin.
17.7
Wafer
cleaning
(Piranha)
Beaker
Recipe:
H2SO4
: H2O2 in the ratio 4:1.
Rinse the beaker (3×), add sulferic acid (4)
then hydrogen peroxide (1).
Time: 10 min
To
remove
potassium
ions
and more.
18
Opening to bottom electrodes AND alignment marks
Bonded wafers
18.1
Coat wafer
Spin
coater:
Gamma UV
Resist: MiR 701 (Positive)
Recipe: 1421 DCH 100mm MiR 701 2um
HMDS
Thickness: 2 µm
Check
if
align-
ment marks are
visible.
Continued on next page
120
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:129==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
Table A.2 – continued from previous page
Step
Heading
Equipment
Procedure
Comments
18.2
Exposure
MLA-2/3
Dose: 320 mJ/cm2
Defocus: 0
Exposure mode: Quality Mask: Open to
bottom electrode (3rd , bright-field)
Perhaps a dose-
defocus
test
should be made.
18.3
Develop-
ment
Developer:
TMAH
UV-
lithography
Recipe:
3001 DCH 100mm PEB60s110C
SP60s PEB 110C
18.4
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check pattern and alignment marks.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
18.5
Poly etch
ASE
Recipe: shallolr
Gasses: SF6 260 sccm, O2 26 sccm
Power:
coil 2800 W (etch) 1000 W (passi-
vate), plat 16 W
Rate in Si: 3-4 µm/min, 600 nm/cycl
Time: 6 cycl for 3 µm poly.
Etch
rate
may
be slower than
stated. Check in
OM.
18.6
Oxynitride
etch
ASE
Recipe: MEMS/KITOXYSI
Gasses: C4F8 13 sccm
Power: coil 1300 W, plat 200 W, 4 mTorr
Time: 3-10 min, 20 ◦C (180 nm oxynitride)
Check
that
all
oxyni is removed
in OM.
18.7
Strip resist
Plasma
Asher 2
Process time: 45 min
Flows: O2: 400 mL/min, N2: 70 mL/min
Power: 1000 W
18.8
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check pattern and alignment marks.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
19
Top electrode deposition
Bonded wafers
19.1
Al
Deposi-
tion
Temescal
(1
or 2)
Recipe: Al (standard Nanolab recipe)
Final thickness: 1000 nm
Deposition rate: 1 nm/s
Ask for permission from
metal@nanolab.dtu.dk before dep.
19.2
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check if bot-electrode openings are plugged.
Save images with notation and proper nam-
ing.
20
Top Electrode seperation
Bonded wafers
Continued on next page
TiSi2 for CMUTs
121
==PAGE:130==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
Table A.2 – continued from previous page
Step
Heading
Equipment
Procedure
Comments
20.1
Coat wafer
Spin
coater:
Gamma UV
Resist: AZ 5214E (Positive)
Recipe: 0402 HMDS + 3442 - 100mm 5214E
4.2 um 5 mL low speed
Thickness: 4.2 µm
Large
thick-
ness+ slow spin
due to high steps
in structure.
20.2
Exposure
MLA-2/3
Dose: 250 mJ/cm2
Defocus: 0-(-2)
Exposure mode: Quality Mask: Top elec-
trode separation (4th , bright-field)
Mask needs to
be inverted.
20.3
Develop-
ment
Developer:
TMAH
UV-
lithography
Recipe: 1003 DCH 100mm SP120s
20.4
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check pattern and alignment marks.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
20.5
Al etch
IBE/IBSD
Ionfab 300
Recipe: Al etch with resist
Etch time: 1 h35 min for 1000 nm Al
Parameters: Beam current 400 mA, voltage
400 V, cool gas 50 Torr
Separation
be-
tween electrode
requires
extra
time
than
bulk
areas.
20.6
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check pattern and alignment marks.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
20.7
Poly etch
ASE
Recipe: shallolr
Gasses: SF6 260 sccm, O2 26 sccm
Power:
coil 2800 W (etch) 1000 W (passi-
vate), plat 16 W
Rate in Si: 3-4 µm/min, 600 nm/cycl
Time: 6 cycl for 3 µm poly. Temp: 20 ◦C
Etch
rate
may
be slower than
stated. Check in
OM.
20.8
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Check pattern and alignment marks. Check
that electrodes are fully separated.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
20.9
Strip resist
Plasma
Asher 2
Process time: 45 min
Flows: O2: 400 mL/min, N2: 70 mL/min
Power: 1000 W
Continued on next page
122
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:131==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
Table A.2 – continued from previous page
Step
Heading
Equipment
Procedure
Comments
20.10
Inspection
Optical Micro-
scope
Final inspection before removal from CR.
Measure
key
parameters,
save
images
with notation and
proper naming.
20.11
Wafer
photo
Camera
Use a steep angle for the photo. Note ID on
Napkin.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
123
==PAGE:132==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
A.3
Figures for process flow
(a) Step 1.1, Wafer selection.
(b) Step 2.2, BOX dry oxidation.
(c) Step 2.4, nitride LOCOS mask
deposition.
(d) Step 2.6, poly-Si dep., mask
for nitride.
(e) Step 3.3, resist mask for poly-
si etch.
(f) Step 4.2, poly-si etch.
Figure A.1: Step 1.1-4.2 in process flow A.2, Bottom wafer. Material legend in Fig. A.2a.
124
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
(a) Material legend
(b) Step 4.7, nitride mask etch.
(c) Step 4.10, poly-Si strip.
(d) Step 6.1, LOCOS cavity defini-
tion.
(e) Step 6.6, nitride (and oxyni-
tride) etch.
(f) Step 7.2, poly-Si dep. for SALI-
CIDE.
(g) Step 8.3, resist mask for bot-
tom electrode poly-Si etch.
Figure A.2: Step 4.7-8.3 in process flow A.2, Bottom wafer.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
125
==PAGE:134==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
(a) Material legend
(b) Step 9.2, poly-Si etch for SALI-
CIDE.
(c) Step 9.7, wafer clean after
lithography prior to SALICIDE.
(d) Step 10.2, Ti dep. for SALI-
CIDE.
(e) Step 10.3, 1st anneal to C49
silicide
(f) Step 10.4, selective Ti etch (to
TiSi2).
(g) Step 10.7, 2nd anneal to C54
silicide.
Figure A.3: Step 9.2-10.6 in process flow A.2, Bottom wafer.
126
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
(a) Material legend
(b) Step 11.1, wafer selection for
PSOI.
(c) Step 12.2, PSOI BOX layer.
(d) Step 12.4, poly-Si deposition
(top plate).
(e) Step 13.2, PSOI polishing of
bonding side.
(f) Step 15.5, PSOI nitride oxida-
tion (oxy-nitride).
Figure A.4: Step 11.1-15.5 in process flow A.2, PSOI top wafer.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
127
==PAGE:136==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
(a) Material legend
(b) Step 16.5, fusion bonding.
(c) Step 17.3,
etch SiOxNy,
BOX and poly.
(d) Step 17.5, Si etch of PSOI
wafer.
(e) Step 17.5, BOX etch.
(f) Step 18, view is moved to
contact pads.
(g)
Step
18.3,
resist
mask
- opening to bottom contact
pads.
Figure A.5: Step 16.5-18.3 in process flow A.2, Bonded wafers.
128
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:137==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
(a) Material legend
(b) Step 18.6, top plate etch to
contacts.
(c) Step 19.1, Al dep.
for top
electrodes.
(d) Step 20.3, resist mask for top
electrode separation.
(e) Step 20.5, Top electrode ion
etch.
(f) Step 20.9, poly-si etch and re-
sist removal.
Figure A.6: Step 18.6-20.9 in process flow A.2, Bonded wafers.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
129
==PAGE:138==
APPENDIX A. PROCESS FLOW
130
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:139==
B
EDX rapports
This appendix chapter contains EDX rapports created by Oxford Instruments AZtec spectrum software.
The sample is analysed before and after an RCA 1 standard cleaning procedure; the spectra are meant to
assess the RCA 1’s ability to remove TiSi2 from the silicon dioxide surface.
TiSi2 for CMUTs
131
==PAGE:140==
                                                 5/13/2024 
 
Project 2
 
 
APPENDIX B. EDX RAPPORTS
B.1
Before RCA1-cleaning
132
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:141==
                                                 5/13/2024 
 
Project 2
 
 
                                                 5/13/2024 
 
Project 2
 
==PAGE:142==
                                                 5/13/2024 
 
Project 2
 
==PAGE:143==
                                                 5/13/2024 
 
Project 2
 
 
                                                 5/13/2024 
 
Project 2
 
==PAGE:144==
                                                 5/15/2024 
 
Project 3
 
 
APPENDIX B. EDX RAPPORTS
B.2
After RCA1-cleaning
136
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:145==
                                                 5/15/2024 
 
Project 3
 
 
                                                 5/15/2024 
 
Project 3
 
==PAGE:146==
                                                 5/15/2024 
 
Project 3
 
 
 
 
                                                 5/15/2024 
 
Project 3
 
==PAGE:147==
                                                 5/15/2024 
 
Project 3
 
 
==PAGE:148==
APPENDIX B. EDX RAPPORTS
140
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:149==
C
ATHENA Simulation code
The following code was used to simulate the LOCOS process in ATHENA Deckbuild by SILVACO.
1
go athena
2
3
#TITLE: Oxide Profile Evolution Example
4
5
# Substrate mesh definition
6
line y loc=0
spac=0.05
7
line y loc=0.6
spac=0.2
8
line y loc=0.8
9
10
line x loc=-26
spac=0.25
11
line x loc=26
spac=0.25
12
13
init orient=100
14
15
# Insulation layer
16
diffus time=480 minutes temp=1100 dryo2 press=1
17
structure outfile=anoxex_02.str
18
19
20
# LOCOS mask
21
deposit nitride thick=0.055 div=1
22
deposit polysilicon thick=0.1 div=1
23
24
# Structure poly+nitride
25
etch polysilicon left p1.x=-18.5
26
etch polysilicon right p1.x=18.5
27
etch nitride left p1.x=-18.5
28
etch nitride right p1.x=18.5
29
30
# Poly-Si etch also attacks oxide:
31
rate.etch machine=PolEtch oxide n.m wet.etch isotropic=6
32
etch machine=PolEtch time=5 minutes
33
34
# Remove all poly-Si
35
etch polysilicon all
36
structure outfile=anoxex_04.str
37
38
#Check oxide thickness before LOCOS
39
extract name = "T_ox_cent_before" thickness oxide mat.occno = 1 x.val=0
40
41
# Field oxidation with structure file output
42
diffuse tim=160 tem=1100 weto2 press=1
43
structure outfile=anoxex_05.str
44
45
# Removal of oxynitride (30s) and native oxide (15s) from salicide poly-si
46
rate.etch machine=BHF oxide n.m wet.etch isotropic=80
47
etch machine=BHF time=0.75 minutes
48
49
# Remove mask
50
etch nitride all
51
structure outfile=anoxex_06.str
52
53
# tisi
54
deposit tisix thick=0.2
55
TiSi2 for CMUTs
141
==PAGE:150==
APPENDIX C. ATHENA SIMULATION CODE
56
etch tisix left p1.x=-16
57
etch tisix right p1.x=16
58
59
# structuring poly for salicide using poly-si etch:
60
etch machine=PolEtch time=4 minutes
61
62
structure outfile=anoxex_07.str
63
64
# Plot figures
65
tonyplot anoxex_0*.str
66
67
# Extract oxide thickness in various points
68
extract name = "T_ox_cent_after" thickness oxide mat.occno = 1 x.val=0
69
extract name = "T_ox_top_left" thickness oxide mat.occno = 1 x.val=-25
70
extract name = "T_ox_top_right" thickness oxide mat.occno = 1 x.val=25
71
extract name = "T_ox_maskedge_left" thickness oxide mat.occno = 1 x.val=-18.5
72
extract name = "T_ox_maskedge_right" thickness oxide mat.occno = 1 x.val=18.5
73
extract name = "T_ox_electrode_left" thickness oxide mat.occno = 1 x.val=-16.5
74
extract name = "T_ox_electrode_right" thickness oxide mat.occno = 1 x.val=16.5
75
extract name = "T_ox_electrode_lessleft" thickness oxide mat.occno = 1 x.val=-16
76
extract name = "T_ox_electrode_lessright" thickness oxide mat.occno = 1 x.val=16
77
78
quit
142
TiSi2 for CMUTs
==PAGE:151==
APPENDIX C. ATHENA SIMULATION CODE
TiSi2 for CMUTs
143
==PAGE:152==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
