==PAGE:1==
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the
LC3 in Hearing Aids
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
Master Thesis
June 13, 2024
By
Kasper Juul Hesse Rasmussen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
AI-generated by the DALL-E 3 model. Prompted by Kasper Juul Hesse
Rasmussen. Prompt used: “A hardware accelerator for the Low Com-
plexity Communication Codec, a low-complexity and high-quality audio
codec, running on a hearing aid”
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over 5 months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of digital system design
and computer architecture.
Kasper Juul Hesse Rasmussen - s183735
Signature
Date
ii
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In hearing aids and other resource-constrained devices, minimizing power usage is of
great importance. One way of reducing power usage and freeing up resources is by using
dedicated hardware accelerators to replace resource-intensive tasks. However, by using
hardware accelerators, the overall chip area will increase, and more complex interactions
between processor and peripherals is required.
This thesis presents an analysis of the Low Complexity Communications Codec (LC3) and
its current implementation in Oticon’s hearing aids. Based on this analysis, two hardware
accelerators are implemented for the most resource-intensive sections of the current im-
plementation: bitstream coding and spectral noise shaping. The accelerators have been
designed to support two distinct operating modes, and do not support all operating modes
outlined in the LC3 specification.
The accelerators have been implemented in SystemVerilog, extensively tested to verify
their correctness, and synthesized in a 22 nm ASIC process. By using the implemented
accelerators, a 1.5× speedup and 38 % reduction in energy usage is observed when en-
coding an LC3 frame, and a 2× speedup and 59 % reduction in energy usage is observed
when decoding a frame. Using the accelerators also represents a 34 % reduction in in-
struction memory usage and an 18 % reduction in data memory usage. Implementing the
accelerators would mean a 20 % increase in chip area on the Oticon DSP chip.
These results indicate that hardware acceleration of the LC3 is worthwhile, and can lead to
substantial reductions in energy consumption and memory usage. Since the accelerators
do not yet support all required operating modes, future work includes updating them to
support all operating modes, as well as additional optimizations to further decrease chip
area.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Professor Martin Schoeberl from DTU Compute, for
providing guidance and help throughout our meetings the last 5 months. Your aid has
been instrumental in guiding me in the right direction.
I also want to thank the people at Oticon who have helped me during this project: Anders
Hebsgaard, Frank Marek, Peter Hansen and Vijay Bhat. Thank you for all for meeting
with me, sharing your knowledge on the LC3, and welcoming me to Oticon while I was
working on the thesis.
iv
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Related Work
3
3
Background
5
3.1
Style Conventions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Signal Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
LC3 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Design
16
4.1
LC3 Complexity Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.2
High-level Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Bitstream Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.4
Spectral Noise Shaping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.5
Spectral Quantization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5
Implementation
30
5.1
Bitstream Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.2
SNS Quantization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.3
Optimization Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
6
Test and Verification
57
6.1
Software Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
6.2
Hardware Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
7
Results and Evaluation
59
7.1
Synthesis Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
7.2
Performance Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
7.3
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
8
Conclusion
66
Bibliography
67
A Appendices
71
A.1 FSM for Residual Coding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
A.2 FSM for TNS Encoding and Decoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
A.3 Bitstream Module Performance Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
A.4 SNS Module Performance Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
B List of abbreviations
76
C License Attributions
78
C.1 Licenses used
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
C.2 Figures used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
This thesis has been prepared in a collaboration with Oticon.
With the introduction of the Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) standard, the Low Complexity
Communications Codec (LC3) has also been introduced, which will serve as the default
audio codec on most audio Bluetooth connections going forward. The LC3 provides high
audio fidelity at a lower complexity than previously used Bluetooth audio codecs. In addi-
tion to being used in one-to-one connections between, e.g., a phone and a headset, one
of the proposed uses for the LC3 is one-to-many audio streaming. This may replace the
audio induction loops currently used in e.g. churches and conference venues to broad-
cast audio to hearing aid users. For this reason, supporting the LC3 is of high importance
for hearing aid manufacturers such as Oticon.
In embedded, low-power devices such as hearing aids, optimizing the use of hardware
and software capabilities to minimize power consumption, cycles, memory footprint, and
IC area are critical factors. Although general-purpose processors may provide the re-
quired functionality, they do so while consuming more power and taking more time than a
specialized hardware accelerator might. Using hardware accelerators, on the other hand,
takes up additional space on the chip and requires more complex interactions between
the processor and the attached accelerators.
This thesis presents an analysis of the LC3 and its current implementation in Oticon’s
hearing aids. Based on this analysis, a number of candidates for hardware acceleration
are proposed. These candidates are chosen to reduce the processing time and energy
usage of the LC3 while executing on Oticon’s DSP. The hardware accelerators are de-
scribed and implemented in SystemVerilog, simulated, and implemented in an FPGA to
prove their correctness. They are synthesized for an ASIC process to compare power
and area between the accelerators and the current DSP implementation.
The performance of the accelerators is compared to the performance of the current imple-
mentation on factors such as energy usage, cycle count, performance per watt and area.
The results are used in making recommendations on Oticon’s future implementation of
the LC3 and whether hardware accelerating the codec may be worthwhile.
In Chapter 2, related work on audio codecs and hardware acceleration of digital signal pro-
cessing is presented. Chapter 3 provides necessary background information on speech
and audio coding, as well as an introduction to the LC3. Chapter 4 presents the design of
the chosen hardware accelerators, and Chapter 5 presents the implementation of these
accelerators. In Chapter 6, the simulation and testing methodology is shown, followed by
results and evaluation in Chapter 7. A final conclusion is presented in chapter 8
No previous knowledge of speech and audio codecs or the LC3 is required. The reader is
assumed to have some knowledge in the area of digital design and computer architecture.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:11==
2
Related Work
Audio and speech codecs are able to encode and transmit audio signals very efficiently,
and a vast amount of work has been performed in optimizing these codecs for fidelity,
sound quality and reduction of overhead. Three overall approaches to speech coding ex-
ist: Waveform coders, voice coders (vocoders) and hybrid coders [1]. Waveform coders
attempt to reproduce the signal or its corresponding spectrum sample-by-sample , whereas
vocoders attempt to model the human production of speech as a “pulse train” that is mod-
ified by a filter [2]. Hybrid coders are a newer approach that attempts to mix the two other
approaches: A vocoder is used to extract large-scale information from the signal, and a
waveform coder is used to encode the model error, also known as the residual waveform.
This model error is used to reconstruct the speech signal at the decoder [3].
With the introduction of Bluetooth Low Energy Audio [4], the LC3 [5] has been been made
the default audio codec for Bluetooth Low Energy. It exhibits higher fidelity at lower bitrates
than previously used codecs [6] such as SBC [7] G.722 [8] and OPUS [9]. It is also
noted that hearing aids in particular require low-power, low-complexity codecs to efficiently
connect using Bluetooth.
Hardware accelerators are a necessary development in computing since power per mm2
increases with smaller transistor sizes [10]. Since 2010, little improvement in performance
per Watt has been observed in multiply-accumulate (MAC) capabilities, indicating that a
power wall is being reached [11]. Instead of developing ever-more complex general pur-
pose processors, hardware accelerators may be built to exploit the specifics of a given
computing problem, reduce overheads and reduce energy consumption for memory ac-
cesses [12]. On hardware acceleration of audio coding, it is noted in [13] that most au-
dio codecs share three common properties that can be accelerated: Multiply-accumulate
(MAC) instructions are very frequently used, bit manipulation is required when encoding
and decoding bitstreams, and a large number of table lookups are used. Accelerating and
reducing the power consumption of these is thus of great interest.
Hardware multipliers generally rely on a partial product (PP) generator followed by a unit
that sums the partial products [14]. The choice of partial product generator and multiplier
structure has a large impact on overall power consumption [15].
Common structures for reducing the partial products include the array multiplier, Wallace
Tree [16] and Dadda Tree [17]. The general approach is to use 3:2 Carry-Save Adders
(CSA), also known as 3:2 compressors [18], to reduce from 𝑁partial products down to
2, and then use a Carry-Propagate adder (CPA) for the final summation. [19] compares
the area, delay and energy usage of array and Wallace Tree multipliers. While the area
of Wallace and Dadda Tree multipliers may be larger than array multipliers, the delay is
lowered due to the tree structure versus the array structure.
[20] presents a survey of MAC unit architectures on FPGA’s. Here, they also show that
the choice of adder and multiplier topology has a large impact on the area and power of
MAC units. The simplest multiplier structure, an array multiplier, is neither the fastest nor
the most power efficient. Wallace Tree multipliers and Dadda Tree multipliers both have
considerably lower delay and slightly lower power usage than the array multiplier, while
their area is almost identical. They also show that by using Modified Booth Encoding [21],
the delay may be reduced at the cost of a larger area and higher energy per operation.
These findings are supported by [22]. In [23], a gate-level analysis of the delays in Dadda
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
3
==PAGE:12==
and Wallace Tree multiplier shows that Dadda Tree multipliers are slightly faster than
Wallace Tree multipliers. The lower delay in a Dadda Tree comes at the expense of a
potentially wider final addition.
[24] proposes a 2-cycle MAC design that reduces power, energy and area compared to
standard MAC designs. It uses a Wallace Tree for partial product reduction, but postpones
the final carry propagation for the next clock cycle. A 3:2 CSA is used to reduce the outputs
of the PP reduction and the current accumulator value, followed by a CPA. This provides a
better balance of the delay in the pipeline stages, and only requires one carry propagation
per output instead of two carry propagations.
Multipliers may also used higher-order compressor cells to reduce the partial products. Of
these, the 4:2 and 7:3 cells are the most common. In [25] they propose a 4:2 compressor
cell that shows at least 5 % lower dynamic power consumption and 25 % lower leakage
power than using cascaded full adders or prior 4:2 compressor cell designs.
Prior work on accelerating bitstream coding with arithmetic coders includes [26, 27]. In
[27] they present an architecture for a binary arithmetic coder that encodes two neighbor-
ing symbols at the same time. The coder has a number of local lookup tables and uses
a context register to store information about previously encoded symbols, affecting the
location accessed in the lookup tables. [26] presents a design of a binary arithmetic en-
gine where the engine is bypassed if a uniform symbol probability is expected. By using
clock gating on the input to the arithmetic coder they observe a 17 % reduction in dynamic
power consumption.
To reduce the power consumption of table lookups, small, local memories should be used
according to [13]. If a hardware accelerator or co-processor is the only module accessing
a lookup table, that lookup table should be stored locally to reduce wire length, which
in turn reduces capacitance, switching times and power consumption. [28] notes that
accessing an SRAM memory costs approximately 50 fJ/bit whereas accessing off-chip
DDR memory may cost 5 – 20 pJ/bit, an increase on the order of 100×.
The LC3, being a relatively new codec, does not yet have any literature comparing imple-
mentations that use dedicated hardware accelerators versus software implementations
on e.g. digital signal processing (DSP) platforms. A number of platform-specific designs
do already exist, which aim to utilize the features of the specific hardware.
Electronic Design Automation (EDA) companies Synopsys and Cadence both provide
Intellectual Property (IP) cores as part of their offerings to customers. These include DSP
cores, and both EDA companies have made implementations of the LC3 for their DSP IP
cores, which should increase the performance of the codec [29, 30]. They do not provide
information on speedup and efficiency compared to other implementations, but note that
the implementations efficiently use the DSP resources available, and that the full range
of operating modes outlined in the specification are supported.
In addition to the EDA vendors, IP company ARM also provides a software implementa-
tion of the LC3 for their Cortex-M55 CPU’s. They claim a 30 – 50 % improvement in CPU
utilization over Cortex-M33 CPU’s not using the implementation [31].
4
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:13==
3
Background
This section provides relevant background information necessary for reading the thesis.
A review of relevant signal processing theory is presented in section 3.2, followed by an
overview of the LC3 in section 3.3.
3.1
Style Conventions
This section briefly presents the style conventions used throughout the rest of this thesis.
• Monospaced text is used for programming language code, or when referring to e.g.
state names in finite state machine (FSM) diagrams.
• In FSM diagrams, register assignments are denoted by := and signal assignments
are denoted by =. Register updates may be indicated by e.g. the ++ suffix when
incrementing a register.
• In FSM diagrams, if a signal is assigned a value in state STATE_X, that signal is
assumed to have the opposite value in all other states. For multi-bit signals, the
default value is 0 unless otherwise noted
• In block diagrams, dashed lines are used to denote control signals. Slashes across
lines indicate the bit width of the signal unless otherwise specified. Clock and reset
signals are omitted from diagrams to avoid clutter.
• In diagrams and text, {a, b} is used to indicate the concatenation of signals a
and b, with a placed in the most significant bits of the resulting signal. The syn-
tax signal[a:b] is used to indicate bit-slicing, where a is the most significant bit
(MSB) and b is the least significant bit (LSB) of the slice, both values inclusive.
• Hexadecimal values are denoted with the prefix 0𝑥or 'h, dependent on context.
Binary values are denoted with the prefix 0𝑏or 'b. If no prefix is used, numbers are
base 10.
3.2
Signal Processing
Signals are, broadly speaking, any quantifiable values that change with some independent
variable. When it comes to audio processing, the signals will often be sound waves that
vary with time [32].
A codec (coder/decoder) is a program that encodes or decodes a data stream or signal.
Encoding is a process that compresses data in a way that balances the bitrate, i.e. the
amount of data generated per second, with the desired quality of the signal. A higher
bitrate generally implies a higher quality resulting signal. The decoder reconstructs the
signal from the encoded information. Codecs may either be lossless, where the decoded
signal exactly matches the original signal, or they may be lossy, where the decoded signal
has some differences from the original. Lossy codecs will often have lower bitrates than
lossless codecs, and may use information about the human perception of e.g. audio or
video to mask the reduction in quality [33].
3.2.1
Sampling, Quantization and Frequency Analysis
To process signals with computers, the analog signals must be sampled and quantized
using an analog-to-digital converter (ADC). The ADC converts an analog input signal with
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
5
==PAGE:14==
theoretically infinite precision to a digital signal with limited precision. This is the act of
quantization where a range of analog input values 𝐴is mapped to a single digital output
value 𝑎. As such, analog-to-digital conversion always results in some loss of precision.
By using more bits for the digital representation, a higher resolution and lower loss of
precision is achieved.
When encoding audio signals, a common method is pulse-code Modulation (PCM) [32].
In pulse-code modulation, the full range of the input signal is split into 2𝑛subdivisions
where 𝑛is the number of bits used in the digital representation. An example is shown
in Figure 3.1 where a sine wave is quantized using 4-bit linear PCM. In linear PCM, the
quantization steps are of equal size, whereas in some alternative PCM schemes the quan-
tization steps may be non-uniform in size.
Figure 3.1: 4-bit pulse-code modulation of a sine wave. Notice that the blue quantization
values do not exactly align with the red curve. From Wikipedia/user Aquegg. CC BY-SA
3.0.
The analog signal is converted to a digital signal by sampling it at a given frequency.
The sampling frequency 𝐹𝑠is the number of samples taken per second. An important
limitation when sampling signals is described by the Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem
[32], which states that the sampling frequency 𝐹𝑠must be at least twice the frequency
of the highest frequency component in the signal, 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥. If this is violated, the sampled
signal will have aliasing, an undesired effect where frequency components greater than
𝐹𝑠/2 distort the sampled signal.
A common operation in signal processing is to consider the frequency contents of a signal.
By performing a transform operation such as the Fourier transform or the modified dis-
crete cosine transform (MDCT), a time-domain signal may be converted into a frequency-
domain signal. In the frequency domain, the independent variable is frequency, and the
dependent variable is the magnitude of that frequency component in the overall signal.
An example of a time-domain and frequency-domain representation of the same signal
are shown in Figure 3.2.
In Figure 3.2 two frequency patterns are clearly visible in the time-domain data. A low-
frequency trend (indicated by the orange stems) and high-frequency trend (indicated by
the green stems). These are also observed in the frequency-domain data on the right,
the low frequency being approximately 318 Hz and the high frequency around 2 kHz.
When processing audio data in real time, it is obviously not possible to wait until the entire
signal has been received and then perform the frequency analysis. Instead, signal sam-
6
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:15==
Comparison of time-domain and frequency-domain representation of signal
0
50
100
150
200
Sample number
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
Amplitude
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Frequency [Hz]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Amplitude
Figure 3.2: Comparison of time-domain and frequency-domain representation of signal.
The signal is from a recording of a man reading a book. Sampled at 𝐹𝑠= 16 kHz. The
orange stems show a low-frequency trend of around 320 Hz, and the green stems a high-
frequency trend at around 2 kHz.
ples are grouped into frames, and the samples in a frame are processed together. Longer
frames permit for a more detailed frequency analysis, but also require more processing
and introduce a longer delay from input to output. In real-time audio codecs such as the
LC3, a frame length of 5 – 20 ms is common.
3.2.2
Signal Compression
By using audio codecs such as the LC3, an audio signal can be efficiently compressed
(encoded) and decompressed (decoded) such that the resulting audio signal after encod-
ing and decoding is still audible and comprehensible. Dependent on the choice of codec
and the amount of data that may be processed in each frame, the quality of the resultant
audio signal may differ.
Audio codecs leverage the fact that audio, and especially speech, is periodic in nature,
and thus somewhat predictable. The speech signal in Figure 3.2 is an example of this.
Instead of compressing each sample individually, this predictability may be leveraged.
A common representation for speech signals is the source filter model [1], shown in Fig-
ure 3.3. A source signal is added to a noise signal, and these are passed through a filter
to generate the output signal. In human speech representations, the source signal is a
pulse train generated by the vocal folds in the throat. These vibrate at a relatively fixed
frequency, generating pulses at fixed intervals. The filter is the vocal tract, modulating the
pulse train to generate sounds.
Figure 3.3: Source filter model for speech generation.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
7
==PAGE:16==
The human perception of speech especially depends on the frequency of the pulse train,
known as the fundamental frequency 𝐹0. In addition, the resonances in the vocal tract
filter, denoted the formants 𝐹𝑘, 𝑘≥1, also characterize a speech signal. This is shown by
drawing the envelope of the frequency representation of a signal, where the formants are
visible as the peaks of the envelope signal. This is shown in Figure 3.4, where formants
𝐹1, 𝐹2 and 𝐹3 are clearly visible and 𝐹4, 𝐹5 are less prominent.
Figure 3.4: Envelope of an audio signal and identification of the formants. From aalto.fi
[34]. CC BY-SA 4.0.
A general technique that is often employed is the idea of envelopes [35]. An envelope is
a function that models the overall shape of the time-domain or frequency-domain signal,
providing a large amount of information about the signal with few coefficients.
One way of generating a spectral envelope is through Linear Predictive Coding (LPC),
an operation by which a signal is “predicted” based on its past samples. Given 𝑚past
samples 𝑋𝑛−1, 𝑋𝑛−2, … , 𝑋𝑛−𝑚of a signal 𝑋, the next sample 𝑋𝑛may be predicted. The
filter coefficients for an LPC filter are obtained through the Levinson-Durbin algorithm [36]
which generates 𝑀LPC coefficients where 𝑀is freely chosen.
Given the LPC coefficients 𝑎𝑖, 𝑖∈1, 2, … , 𝑀, the next sample of the predicted signal is
then obtained by eq. (3.1) [36].
̂
𝑋𝑛= −
𝑚
∑
𝑖=1
𝑎𝑖𝑋𝑛−𝑖
(3.1)
The error signal 𝑒𝑛, also known as the residual signal, indicates the deviation of the pre-
dicted signal from the actual signal. It is given by 𝑒𝑛= 𝑋𝑛−
̂
𝑋𝑛.
Since the average amplitude of the prediction error is smaller than the average amplitude
of the signal, the prediction errors may then be quantized using fewer bits than are re-
quired to quantize the original signal. Once the residuals are decoded by the receiver,
the LPC coefficients and the decoded residuals may be used to reconstruct the signal.
8
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:17==
0
50
100
150
200
Sample number
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Amplitude
Time-domain signal
Original
Reconstructed
0
50
100
150
200
Sample number
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Amplitude
LPC Error
Original
3-bit quantized
Figure 3.5: Example application of linear predictive coding. Left: Original signal and signal
reconstructed from errors and LPC coefficients. Right: Error signal and quantized error
signal.
An example of linear predictive coding is shown in Figure 3.5. The original signal, the
same as in Figure 3.2, is shown in blue in the left subfigure. 8 LPC coefficients are gen-
erated using the Levinson-Durbin algorithm, and the error signal is computed (blue, right
subfigure). The error signal is then quantized to 8 uniformly spaced quantization values
(orange, right subfigure). The quantized residuals and the LPC coefficients are used to
reconstruct the original signal (orange, left subfigure).
It is evident that the estimate of the original signal quite closely aligns with the original
signal, and the approximation had been even better with additional LPC coefficients.
Another technique used in speech coding is vector quantization (VQ). The previous ex-
amples of PCM and error quantization use scalar quantization, where each value is sep-
arately quantized without information about its neighbors. In many real-world scenarios
such as speech, the value of sample 𝑛somewhat depends on sample 𝑛−1. As such,
some input vectors are much more probable than others, which may be used when com-
pressing the signal.
A vector quantizer works by mapping all 𝑘-dimensional vectors 𝐯∈ℝ𝑘into a codebook
of size 𝑁. The codebook contains a subset 𝑉′ of all vectors in ℝ𝑘, i.e., an N-point vector
quantizer separates the 𝑘-dimensional space into N cells. Generally, these are called
Voronoi cells, or nearest-neighbor cells, such that the 𝑖’th cell consists of all points 𝐮that
are closer to the quantization vector 𝐯𝑖than any other quantization vector 𝐯𝑗, 𝑗≠𝑖. [36].
An example of 2D vector quantization with a Voronoi diagram is shown in Figure 3.6.
The red circles indicate the codebook values. All data points within a given Voronoi cell
get mapped to that codebook value, as it is the closest of all codebook values. Higher-
dimensional vector quantization works in the same way, but can obviously not be visual-
ized.
3.2.3
Arithmetic Coding
Arithmetic coding is a noiseless coding scheme that generates variable-rate codes [36]. A
variable-rate code is in contrast to a fixed-rate code, where the rate determines the number
of bits that are generated per unit time. In other words, the amount of data generated by
an arithmetic coder may differ from one frame to the next.
Arithmetic coding works by analyzing the probability that a given symbol occurs in the
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.6: Voronoi diagram of values sampled from Gaussian distribution. Adapted from
[34]. CC BY-SA 4.0.
input data stream. If a symbol has a high probability of occurring, it requires fewer bits to
represent than a less probable symbol. The encoding process works by iteratively subdi-
viding the internal [0; 1) into smaller intervals. Once the entire input has been processed,
any value in the resulting interval can be used as an output, named the tag of the encoded
message.[37].
Given an alphabet Σ with 𝑁symbols 𝑥𝑖, 𝑖∈1 … 𝑁, each symbol is associated with a
probability 𝑃(𝑥𝑖) and the cumulative probability 𝐶(𝑥𝑖) = ∑
𝑖
𝑗=1 𝑃(𝑥𝑗). Specially, 𝐶(𝑥0) ≡
0. When a symbol 𝑥is processed, the range of the current interval is reduced by a factor
𝑃(𝑥) [38]. When more probable symbols are encountered, the range reduction is smaller.
Therefore, processing more probably symbols reduces the interval by a smaller factor,
and thus fewer overall bits are necessary to represent the tag.
By storing two variables 𝑙𝑖and 𝑢𝑖representing the lower and upper bounds of the interval
after processing the 𝑖’th symbol, and letting 𝑙0 = 0, 𝑢0 = 1, the operations used to update
𝑙and 𝑢are as given in eqs. (3.2) and (3.3) [38].
𝑙𝑖= 𝑙𝑖−1 + (𝑢𝑖−1 −𝑙𝑖−1)𝐶(𝑥𝑖−1)
(3.2)
𝑢𝑖= 𝑙𝑖−1 + (𝑢𝑖−1 −𝑙𝑖−1)𝐶(𝑥𝑖)
(3.3)
Alternatively, the low index and the range of the interval under consideration 𝑟𝑖= 𝑢𝑖−𝑙𝑖
may be stored. In that case, the operations used to update 𝑙and 𝑟are given by eqs. (3.4)
and (3.5).
𝑙𝑖= 𝑙𝑖−1 + 𝑟𝑖−1𝐶(𝑥𝑖−1)
(3.4)
𝑟𝑖= 𝑟𝑖−1𝑃(𝑥𝑖)
(3.5)
10
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:19==
As an example, consider the following alphabet containing three symbols: 𝐷, 𝑇and 𝑈as
presented in Table 3.1.
Symbol
𝑷(𝒙)
𝑪(𝒙)
D
0.55
0.55
T
0.35
0.90
U
0.10
1.00
Table 3.1: Symbol probabilities for the arithmetic encoding example.
The input to be encoded is the string 𝐷𝑇𝑈𝐷𝑇𝐷. The first symbol is 𝐷, and as such, the
values of 𝑙1, 𝑢1 are given by
𝑙1 = 𝑙0 + (𝑢0 −𝑙0) ⋅𝐶(∅) = 0.0 + (1.0) ⋅(0.00) = 0.0
(3.6)
𝑢1 = 𝑙0 + (𝑢0 −𝑙0) ⋅𝐶(𝐷) = 0.0 + (1.0) ⋅(0.55) = 0.55
(3.7)
and the values of 𝑙2, 𝑢2 are given by
𝑙2 = 𝑙1 + (𝑢1 −𝑙1) ⋅𝐶(𝐷) = 0.0 + (0.55) ⋅(0.55) = 0.3025
(3.8)
𝑢2 = 𝑙1 + (𝑢1 −𝑙1) ⋅𝐶(𝑇) = 0.0 + (0.55) ⋅(0.90) = 0.4950
(3.9)
The full processing of the input is shown in Figure 3.7. As shown, after the final symbol is
processed, the range is limited to [0.48157; 0.48316], and any number in that range can be
used as tag. For example, the value 0.482 could be used to reduce the number of decimal
digits required.
Figure 3.7: Arithmetic encoding of the string DTUDTD using the frequency information in
Table 3.1.
The decoding process operates in a similar manner to the encoding process. Given e.g.
the value 0.482, it is evident that the first symbol must be 𝐷as 0.482 ∈[0.00; 0.55), the
range of probabilities associated with 𝐷. The interval is then limited to [0; 0.55). Likewise,
in the interval [0 ∶0.55), the value 0.482 is 88 % from the low value. Since the probability
for 𝑇ranges from 55 % to 90 %, the next symbol must be 𝑇and the interval is reduced
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
11
==PAGE:20==
to [0.3025 ∶0.4950). The process repeats by finding the symbol which maps to the range
currently containing the tag.
An obvious limitation when long messages are processed is the increasingly precise arith-
metic required to compute the tag. This may, however, be circumvented with a few clever
observations [37].
Instead of operating in decimal, consider the interval [0; 1) represented by a binary, fixed-
point number with 𝑁digits. Once the values of 𝑙, 𝑢have both dropped below 0.5 (Event 1),
neither can become larger than 0.5 again. When this is the case, the MSB of both values
is known to be 0. As such, incremental transmission may be leveraged to immediately
output the 0-bit, as the most significant bit cannot become different from 0. The MSB is
shifted out, and the values of 𝑙, 𝑢are then upscaled by a factor of 2 to widen the interval
under consideration [37]. Likewise, when the MSB of both 𝑙and 𝑢is 1 (Event 2), both
values are greater than 0.5 and a 1-bit may be shifted out as the MSB can never change.
If the interval narrows around 0.5 and it becomes the case that 0.25 ≤𝑙and 𝑢< 0.75
(Event 3), it is also possible to upscale the interval under consideration. Instead of imme-
diately outputting a bit, the interval is upscaled and the number of times that Event 3 has
occurred is counted. Whenever Event 1 or Event 2 occurs, the encoder should output the
corresponding value (1 or 0), followed by the opposite bit value as many times as Event 3
has occurred since the last Event 1 or 2. For example, two instances of Event 3 followed
by an Event 2 would output 100.
The probabilities 𝑃(𝑥) and 𝐶(𝑥) may either be determined a priori by e.g. analyzing
representative samples of data that will be coded, or they may be determined ad hoc,
updating the values of 𝑃(𝑥) and 𝐶(𝑥) for every symbol that has been processed [38].
3.3
LC3 Overview
The LC3 is an audio codec developed by Fraunhofer IIS and Ericsson for the Bluetooth LE
Audio protocol [39]. The aim of the codec is to achieve high audio fidelity at low complexity.
The LC3 can operate at a number of sampling frequencies, ranging from 8 kHz to 48 kHz,
and may either use frame sizes of 7.5 ms or 10 ms. The output bitrate can be selected from
16 kbps to 320 kbps for 10 ms frames. A proposed extension, LC3plus, supports shorter
frame intervals, higher sampling frequencies and higher output bitrates. As this is still a
proposed extension, it has not been considered for this project.
In the following, a brief description of the modules used in the LC3 is presented, describing
the functionality of each encoder and decoder module. An overview of the LC3 encoder
modules is shown in Figure 3.8.
Low Delay Modified Discrete Cosine Transform
The Low Delay Modified Discrete Cosine Transform (LD-MDCT) converts the time-domain
audio samples into the frequency domain. The LD-MDCT is a transform that estimates the
magnitude of the frequency components of the input signal. When using higher sampling
frequencies, more spectral coefficients are generated. To simplify the further processing
of the signal, the spectral coefficients are converted into 64 spectral energy values. Each
of these spectral energy values is an average of the signal energy in a subsection of the
frequency spectrum.
Bandwidth Detector
The bandwidth detector is used to detect the frequency range where the majority of the
signal energy is located. If e.g. the signal is sampled at 𝐹𝑠= 44.1 kHz but the majority
12
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:21==
LD-
MDCT
SNS
TNS
SPEC
QUANT
NOISE
LEVEL
ARI. CODER
&
RESIDUALS
BW
DETECT
ATTACK
DETECT
RESAMPLE
LTPF
Input
Signal
BITSTREAM
MULTIPLEX
+
+
+
+
+
Figure 3.8: Overview of the encoder modules in the LC3. Adapted from [5]. The circles
with + indicate that additional data is added to the stream going into the bitstream multi-
plexer.
of spectral energy is present below 8 kHz, there is no need to encode the high-frequency
information. When this is the case, the spectral energy values corresponding to the high-
frequency, low-energy parts of the spectrum can be dropped, making the reconstruction
of the remainder of the spectrum more precise.
Long Term Postfilter
The Long Term Postfilter (LTPF) is used to shape quantization noise in the decoder. On
the encoder side, the signal is analyzed to determine the pitch, the fundamental frequency
𝐹0, of the signal. If a strong fundamental frequency is detected, this can be used at
the decoder to emphasize the frequencies associated with the pitch and thus reduce the
perceived quantization noise.
Attack Detector
In audio, an attack occurs when there is a sudden change in the audio signal, e.g., a
drum hit or some consonants in speech. Attack detection is necessary because these
spikes will affect the regularity of the spectral envelope, invoking the need for additional
processing of the spectral data.
Spectral Noise Shaping
Spectral noise shaping (SNS) is a strong tool in processing audio for human perception.
When multiple signals are present in the same spectral region of a signal, a strong signal
may mask a weaker signal, making it effectively inaudible [40]. A simple representation
of this is shown in Figure 3.9 where a masking signal (blue) has higher sound pressure
level than a masked signal (red). If a human listens to this arrangement, only the blue
signal will be audible.
The human ear is also more susceptible to some frequencies than others. These phe-
nomena can be leveraged when quantizing the spectral information. Instead of allotting
the same number of bits to each of the 64 spectral energy bands, more information is used
to encode the frequency bands that humans are most perceptive to and less for the very
high and very low frequencies. This reduces the impression of noise due to quantization
[41].
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.9: Spectral masking of an audio signal. The mask (blue) is masking the signal
(red), making it inaudible. Adapted from Wikipedia/user Stannered. Public Domain.
Temporal Noise Shaping
Temporal noise shaping (TNS) has an objective similar to that of spectral noise shaping.
But whereas SNS operates on the spectral coefficients, TNS operates on the temporal
data. If e.g. a loud sound immediately precedes or follows a quieter sound, this quiet
sound will be less audible than if it had occured without the loud sound. If the TNS module
determines that applying TNS is beneficial, a set of LPC coefficients are used to further
shape the spectral coefficients in a way that moves quantization noise into regions of the
time-series data where it can be masked.
Spectral Quantization
The spectral quantization module determines the gain value to use when quantizing the
spectrum after it has been processed by the SNS and TNS modules. It does this by simu-
lating a run of the bitstream encoder, estimating the number of bits required to arithmetic
encode the spectral coefficients. Based on the result of the estimate, the gain value may
be increased or decreased, and the bit estimate may be performed again. This is done to
ensure that the arithmetic encoder does not use too many or too few bits when encoding
the spectral coefficients.
After quantizing the spectrum, it may be necessary to truncate the quantized spectrum,
setting some of the spectral coefficients associated with the highest frequencies to zero.
If this is the case, the noise level estimator is used.
Noise Level Estimation
The noise level estimator ensures that discontinuities in the spectral coefficients due to
truncation do not lead to artifacts in the decoded audio data. If the noise level estimator
is not used, the resulting audio data may exhibit clicking sounds due to the lack of any
high-frequency components. The noise level estimator determines a suitable amount of
noise to insert at these frequencies instead, reducing the amount of artifacts experienced
by the listener.
Bitstream Encoder
The bitstream encoder is used to pack all information associated with a processed frame
of data into a bitstream that is transferred to a receiver. It receives information from the
previous modules in the processing pipeline, and packs it into a buffer of size nbytes. It
utilizes arithmetic coding to compress the spectral coefficients and TNS filter coefficients.
The side information, i.e. parameters to the decoder, are also packed into the bitstream.
14
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:23==
3.3.1
LC3 Decoder Modules
An overview of the decoder modules of the LC3 is shown in Figure 3.10. As can be
seen in the figure, many of the encoder modules have a direct counterpart in the decoder.
Generally, the modules of the decoder are less complex than the corresponding modules
in the encoder as they must simply apply the inverse operation of the encoder, and do not
need to perform the same amount of analysis.
BITSTREAM
MULTIPLEX
Restored
Spectrum
ARI. DECODE
& RESIDUALS
NOISE
FILLING
GLOBAL
GAIN
ADJUST
TNS
DECODE
SNS
DECODE
INVERSE
LD-MDCT
LTPF
BW INFO
Output
Signal
Figure 3.10: Overview of the decoder modules in the LC3. Adapted from [5].
Bitstream Decoder
The bitstream decoder parses the received bitstream that was packed by an encoder. It
unpacks the side information and residuals and reconstructs the TNS filter coefficients
and spectral coefficients
Noise Filling
The noise filling module applies the noise filling parameters to the truncated spectral co-
efficients, reducing the amount of artifacts experienced in the final audio signal.
Global Gain Adjustment
The global gain module applies a gain factor to all of the received spectral coefficients to
invert the normalization performed by the spectral quantizer.
TNS Decode
If TNS was activated in the encoder, the LPC coefficients are used to recreate an estimate
of the signal by performing the inverse LPC synthesis with the decoded signal as input.
SNS Decode
Reconstructs the scale factor values that were used to shape the spectrum in the encoder
and applies these to the spectrum output from the TNS decoder, reversing the shaping
that occured in the encoder.
Inverse LD-MDCT
Performs an inverse LD-MDCT, reconstructing the time-domain data from the spectral
coefficients. The result is a time-domain audio signal. The MDCT uses a concatenation
of data from the current and previous frame to perform the inverse synthesis. This ensures
that the transition between frames is smoothed out, reducing artifacts in the resulting audio
signal.
Long Term Postfilter
The long term postfilter is also applied to a concatenation of the current and previous
frame. The LTPF attempts to emphasize the fundamental frequency 𝐹0, if present, and
attenuate the quantization noise, generating a more pleasant listening experience.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
15
==PAGE:24==
4
Design
This chapter will present the design process of the hardware accelerators for the LC3.
First, the complexity of the codec is analyzed in section 4.1 to determine which parts of
the codec may benefit from hardware acceleration. Next, the overall design is presented
in section 4.2. Finally, descriptions of the designs for each of hardware accelerators follow.
4.1
LC3 Complexity Analysis
To determine which submodules of the LC3 are suitable for hardware acceleration, an
analysis of the modules’ complexity has been performed. The analysis is based on two
implementations of the LC3. One is the reference implementation from Fraunhofer IIS.
This reference implementation is not freely available, but is available to Oticon as part of
their efforts in developing and promoting LC3. The second is the current implementation
of the LC3 on Oticon’s DSP platform, executed on their instruction set simulator (ISS).
For the analysis, a number of audio files with different characteristics were concatenated
into one, longer audio file. These include pop music, classical violin music, clear speech
and clacking sounds from castanets. These audio samples are meant to be a represen-
tative sample of many different soundscapes, ensuring that the modules are subjected to
many different spectral and temporal distributions. The characteristics of the sound file
used is shown in Table 4.1.
Name
Value
Unit
Length
77
seconds
Sampling frequency
16
kHz
Bit depth
16
bits
Frame size
10
ms
Target bitrate
32
kbps
Table 4.1: Information about the sound file used when analyzing the complexity of the
LC3.
The average complexity of the various modules is shown Tables 4.2 and 4.3. For the refer-
ence implementation, the complexity value of each submodule is based on the Weighted
Million Operations Per Second (WMOPS) that it performs. The WMOPS of a function
depends on the arithmetic and logic operations performed, with all operation’s complex-
ity values defined by ITU-T G.191 [42]. For example, a division operation has a higher
complexity weight than an addition.
For the Oticon DSP implementation, the percentage of cycles is reported. This is the per-
centage of the cycles required to process a 10 ms frame. The values have been rounded
to the nearest 5 %, as the exact values are confidential. The ratio between encode and
decode processing times is 𝑇𝑒𝑛𝑐/𝑇𝑑𝑒𝑐= 2.2, similar to the ratio between the WMOPS
values generated by the reference implementation.
From Table 4.2, it is evident that some of the encoder modules are responsible for the
majority of the complexity. In the reference implementation, the MDCT, spectral noise
shaping, long term postfilter, spectral quantization and bitstream encoding are the most
complex.
16
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:25==
Name
% WMOPS in ref
% cycles in DSP
Input scaling
N/A
0
LD-MDCT
22.8
5
Spectral Noise Shaping
15.1
25
Temporal Noise Shaping
8.2 / 24.1
5
Long term postfilter
27.1
15
Spectral Quantization
17.0
25
Residual Coding
0.5
0
Bitstream Encode
8.4
20
Miscellaneous, control
0.9
5
Table 4.2: LC3 encoder complexity at 𝐹𝑠= 16 kHz using a 32 kbps bitrate (corresponding
to 40 bytes/frame). The TNS values listed are the average case / worst case. The worst
case is not shown for other modules as the difference is not noteworthy. DSP values are
rounded to nearest 5 %. Total encoder WMOPS: 5.772.
Comparing these numbers to the DSP implementation, it is especially interesting to note
that the complexity of the MDCT decreases by almost 20 %. This is because the DSP has
a dedicated hardware Fast Fourier Transform(FFT)/MDCT unit, whereas the reference
implementation does not have specialized functions for these operations. The remaining
modules have complexities in the DSP implementation which are on the same order of
magnitude as the reference implementation.
Name
% WMOPS in ref
% cycles in DSP
Bitstream Decode
32.0
65
Noise Filling
3.2
5
TNS Decode
1.7
0
SNS Decode
8.5
10
LD-MDCT Synthesis
37.4
10
Long term postfilter
9.1
5
Miscellaneous, control
8.1
5
Table 4.3: LC3 decoder complexity at 𝐹𝑠= 16 kHz using a 32 kbps bitrate (corresponding
to 40 bytes/frame). DSP values rounded to nearest 5 %. Total decoder WMOPS: 2.603.
For the decoder, the LD-MDCT synthesis is responsible for 37.4 % of operations in the
reference implementation, but only 10 % of the active cycles in the DSP. Again, this is due
to the hardware FFT/MDCT module which drastically speeds up the spectral analysis and
temporal synthesis.
Due to the hardware FFT/MDCT unit, only the bitstream decoder is of noteworthy com-
plexity in the DSP implementation. Here, it accounts for 65 % of all cycles spent decoding
on the DSP.
It is not surprising that the majority of the decoder modules are of much lower complexity
than their encoder-side counterparts. For e.g. the TNS encoder, a large amount of pro-
cessing of the signal is performed to determine and quantize the filter coefficients. The
corresponding TNS decoder must simply obtain the quantized coefficients and use these
to filter the spectrum, a much simpler operation.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
17
==PAGE:26==
4.1.1
Overall Conclusion From Complexity Analysis
The TNS encoder, while it has high worst-case complexity on the reference implementa-
tion, does not have high average-case complexity. A common saying in computer archi-
tecture is “make the common case fast” [43]. As such, implementing a hardware accel-
erator for the TNS encoder is not desirable as the common case does not benefit much.
Of the 7700 frames generated by the 77 s sound file, only 3.2 % used TNS. Implementing
hardware accelerators for other modules will still free up processing time on the DSP,
giving more flexibility for handling TNS encoding when necessary.
Of the remaining modules, the long term postfilter has also not been chosen as a hardware
implementation candidate. While it has relatively high average-case complexity in both
the reference and DSP implementations, it is worth noting that the complexity is halved
from the reference implementation to the DSP implementation. While these cannot be
directly compared, it can still be seen as an indication that the LTPF is more efficiently
implemented on the DSP. The LTPF requires the computation of a large number of signal
correlations. This is an operation that is suited for execution on a vector processor such
as the DSP. Therefore, it is not expected that large additional performance gains could be
achieved by designing a dedicated hardware accelerator for the LTPF.
This leaves the following modules as candidates for hardware acceleration: The spectral
noise shaping encoder, the spectral quantization (gain estimate) module, as well as the
bitstream encoder and decoder modules.
The SNS encoder consists of four stages, the most complex of which is the SNS quanti-
zation block. Here, an adaptive “pulse search” is performed to find the best set of quanti-
zation vectors which move spectral quantization noise into regions of the spectrum where
the noise is masked by the signal. Since the logic involved in this pulse search is not easily
vectorizable, it should be possible to instead develop a dedicated hardware accelerator
for this stage.
For the bitstream encoder and decoder, the majority of the complexity comes from the
arithmetic encoder and decoder. This is also an operation that is not easily vectorized,
and as such, may be efficiently implemented by a dedicated hardware accelerator.
For the spectral quantization module, a large part of the complexity stems from estimating
the number of bits required for arithmetic encoding, and not performing the actual quan-
tization. To estimate the bit budget, the module essentially performs arithmetic coding of
the spectrum, but does not write the data into a bitstream. It is expected that this quan-
tization estimate can also be performed by a bitstream encoder operating in a “dry run”
mode.
4.2
High-level Design
The three sections of the LC3 codec that have been chosen as hardware acceleration
candidates are the bitstream encoder and decoder, spectral noise shaping and spectral
quantization.
To simplify the design process and the act of connecting accelerators to a processor, it has
been decided that each of the selected functions for acceleration should be implemented
by separate hardware accelerators.
These accelerators are designed to be connected to a system bus as subordinates, where
they wait for a manager (in this case, a microcontroller) to write data into their configuration
registers. Once this data has been written, the device will start processing the data and
performing its designated task. Once finished, it should either raise an interrupt or have a
18
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:27==
status register that can be polled by the manager to observe when the device has finished
processing. A block diagram of the envisioned use case is shown in Figure 4.1.
Microcontroller
APB
Bitstream
encode &
decode
Spectral noise
shaping
Spectral
quantization
Memory
Figure 4.1: Block diagram of the envisioned use case.
Since the Oticon hearing aids already use the ARM APB (Advanced Peripheral Bus) pro-
tocol for connecting with some peripherals, this was also chosen as the bus interface
for the accelerators. The APB is a simple, synchronous protocol optimized for “minimal
power consumption and reduced interface complexity” [44].
The APB has a single address bus and separate read and write data busses. The address
bus may be up to 32 bits wide, and the data busses may be either 8, 16 or 32 bits wide.
For all peripherals described in this project, a 16-bit address bus and 32-bit data bus are
used, but only the 24 LSB of the data busses are used, as the Oticon microcontroller
uses 24-bit data busses. A single manager (in this case, the microcontroller) controls
multiple subordinates (in this case, the accelerators or memory). All subordinates may
be connected to the shared bus, and individual select-signals can used to indicate which
peripheral is accessed.
Transfers take at least two clock cycles. On the first cycle, the manager indicates that a
request is performed by raising the PSEL line, and on the next cycle, the subordinate may
finalize the access by raising the PREADY line. If the subordinate is not ready to complete
a request, it can keep the PREADY line low until the request can be completed. The signal
PSLVERR indicates that the transfer failed, and must be asserted by the subordinate at the
same time as the PREADY signal.
Examples of APB transfers are shown in Figures 4.2 and 4.3. Figure 4.2 is a write transfer
with no delay cycles and Figure 4.3 is a read transfer with a single delay cycle since PREADY
is not pulled high on the clock cycle after PSEL is asserted. When a signal is shown with
a high and low line, the level of the signal does not matter, but it should be kept constant.
It has been chosen to focus on supporting two LC3 modes: “Mode 1” operates with a
16 kHz sampling frequency and 32 kbps bitrate. “Mode 2” operates with a 24 kHz sam-
pling frequency and 48 kbps bitrate. The implemented accelerators should support all
functionality required by these two modes, but may also support more operating modes
than these two. However, some of the high-sampling frequency and high-bitrate modes
may not be supported by the accelerators.
4.2.1
Design Goals
Following the analysis and high-level design description, the following design goals were
settled upon.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.2: APB write with no delay cycles,
as PREADY is asserted on the clock cycle
after PSEL.
Figure 4.3: APB read with a single delay
cycle. The signal PSLVERR is high at the
same time as PREADY, indicating that the
transfer failed.
• The results produced by the accelerators should be bit accurate with respect to the
reference implementation. While the reference implementation and Oticon’s imple-
mentation may differ in e.g. number format used, the reference implementation was
used as the target, as extracting test vectors and correct results was very simple.
• Using the accelerators should reduce overall energy usage by at least 10 % when
processing the LC3 on Oticon’s DSP core.
• The accelerators should provide at least a 4× speedup over the DSP implementation
for the selected modules.
• The additional chip area required by the accelerators should not exceed 10 % of the
DSP chip area.
• The accelerators should fully support the two selected operating modes. It should
also be possible to extend the accelerators in the future, to add support for additional
modes of operation.
4.3
Bitstream Module
The purpose of the bitstream module, named the bitstream multiplexer in Figure 3.8, is to
pack all data into a bitstream before transmitting it to a receiver. The bitstream consists
of the following components, as shown in Figure 4.4.
• Side Information: These are parameters to the decoder which are not specified by
the current mode of operation. These parameters include e.g. the quantization
vectors used in spectral noise shaping, the detected bandwidth of the signal, and
LTPF data if the long term postfilter is activated.
• Spectral signs and LSBs: These are the sign bits and LSBs of the spectral coeffi-
cients. These are written backward into the bitstream as they are assumed to be
uniformly distributed, removing the need for arithmetic coding.
• Residual bits: The residual bits are used to refine the spectral coefficients after
quantization. The amount of residual data depends on the how much space is used
to encode spectral information.
20
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:29==
• Arithmetic Coded Data: The TNS filter coefficients (if TNS filters are active) and
the MSBs of the spectral coefficients are arithmetic coded before packing into the
bitstream. This data is written forward into the bitstream, whereas all other data is
written backward.
Arithmetic Coded Data
(TNS coeffs, Spectral MSBs)
Side Info
Spectral Data
(Signs, LSBs)
Residuals
nbytes
Figure 4.4: Structure of the packed bitstream for each processed frame of the LC3.
Adapted from [5].
4.3.1
Memory Map
The memory map of the bitstream module has been designed to place related data items
together, reducing the number of data reads that submodules in the bitstream module
have to perform to obtain all required data. The memory map is shown in Figure 4.5.
Memory address 0 contains two status bits SF, DF that can be used to check whether the
accelerator has started or is done, respectively. It also contains a mode flag MF, controlling
whether to encode or decode. The fields nbytes contains the number of bytes in the
bitstream. The mode flag and nbytes fields are only written when the Set Configuration
bit SC is high.
From analyzing the results of the reference implementation and the current implemen-
tation on Oticon’s DSP platform, it was determined that processing the side information
only makes up a small percentage of the overall cycle count required to pack the entire
bitstream. For this reason, as well as to simplify the module handling side information,
the side information should be pre-packed by the microcontroller.
The side information consists of 10 different values. Four of these are of variable width,
and the remaining 6 items are of constant length. The number of bits in the four variable-
length fields are provided in the four fields at address 32. 95 bits are set aside for the side
information, but no more than 78 bits should ever be required for side information.
From evaluating different sound files on the reference implementation using both oper-
ating modes, no more than 55 residual bits were ever generated. In most cases, the
number of residual bits written into the bitstream is less than the number of residual bits
generated. For this reason, using 6 bits to store the number of residual bits allows up to
63 residual bits to be encoded, which is sufficient for all evaluated cases. If more than 63
residual bits are generated, only the first 63 can be encoded. This is expected to have a
small very effect on the decoded audio signal.
The spectral coefficients 𝐗𝐪have been packed such that their effective size is 12 bits.
From evaluating multiple sound files at both supported operating modes, all spectral co-
efficients generated were in range [−288; 274]. With 12 bits for each spectral coefficient,
values in range [−2048; 2047] are supported, providing a large margin of safety. If spectral
coefficients greater than the allowed range are generated, these will have to be saturated
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
21
==PAGE:30==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Not used
DF SF SC
nbytes
MF 0
Bitstream FIFO (R/W)
1
⋮
Not used
TNS 1 order
TNS 0 order
LPC
Num
TNS
16
Not used
LSB
lastnz
RF
𝑁𝐸/2
17
⋮
𝑛𝑏𝑖𝑡𝑠𝐿𝑇𝑃𝐹
𝑛𝑏𝑖𝑡𝑠𝑇𝑁𝑆
𝑛𝑏𝑖𝑡𝑠𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑡𝑛𝑧
𝑛𝑏𝑖𝑡𝑠𝑏𝑤
32
Side info [23:0]
33
Side info [47:24]
34
Side info [71:48]
35
Side info [95:72]
36
residuals [17:0]
𝑛𝑏𝑖𝑡𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑠
37
residuals [41:18]
38
Not used
residual bits [62:42]
39
⋮
Not used
TNS Coeff (0,3)
TNS Coeff (0,2)
TNS Coeff (0,1)
TNS Coeff (0,0)
48
Not used
TNS Coeff (0,7)
TNS Coeff (0,6)
TNS Coeff (0,5)
TNS Coeff (0,4)
49
Not used
TNS Coeff (1,3)
TNS Coeff (1,2)
TNS Coeff (1,1)
TNS Coeff (1,0)
50
Not used
TNS Coeff (1,7)
TNS Coeff (1,6)
TNS Coeff (1,5)
TNS Coeff (1,4)
51
⋮
Xq[1]
Xq[0]
128
Xq[3]
Xq[2]
129
Xq[...]
Xq[239]
Xq[238]
247
MF: Mode flag (encode/decode). SC: Set config. SF: Start Flag. DF: Done flag
Num TNS: Number of TNS filters (1 or 2). LPC: Enable TNS LPC weighting flag
NE: Number of spectral coefficients. RF: High-bit rate flag.
lastnz: Index of last non-zero spec. coeff. LSB: LSB mode flag (for high 𝐹𝑠).
nbitsP,bw ⋯nbitsLTPF: Number of bits used for side info fields of variable length
Xq: The spectral coefficients.
Figure 4.5: Memory map for the bitstream module.
22
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:31==
to fit inside the allowed range. In the worst case, this might lead to audible artifacts in the
audio signal.
By writing 1 to the start flag, the accelerator starts processing the current bitstream. Once
the accelerator has finished, it will set the done flag to 1, indicating that data may be read
out. While the accelerator is processing, it is not possible to write data or read any other
addresses than address 0. Doing so will generate an error on the bus, indicated by the
PSLVERR signal being high while PREADY is asserted.
If a frame has been encoded, the final bitstream can be read back from the accelerator
with successive read operations to address 1. Each read operation returns the next 3
bytes of the final bitstream. If the bitstream length is not a multiple of 3, the last word is
padded with zero-bytes. The bitstream may be read multiple times, so long that the done
flag has not been reset.
If a frame has been decoded, the spectral coefficients, side information, residuals and
TNS filter information may be read from the accelerator. Again, these may be read multiple
times, so long that the done flag has not been reset.
4.3.2
Performing Arithmetic Coding
The arithmetic coder is used to encode and decode the TNS parameters if the TNS filters
are activated, as well as the 2 MSB of the spectral coefficients.
Arithmetic coding in the LC3 is performed in a slightly different way from the method
described in section 3.2.3. Instead of writing out a single bit every time 𝑟< 0.5, the LC3
defers writing out bits until 𝑟< 2−8. This indicates that the 8 MSB of the low and high
values are the same (barring a potential overflow). This reduces the complexity of writing
bits forward into the bitstream, as a full byte is written each time.
Probability values 𝑃(𝑥) and 𝐶(𝑥) have been computed a priori and are stored in a number
of lookup tables. The contents of the probability lookup tables are 10-bit numbers repre-
senting the numerator 𝑁< 1024 in a fraction 𝐹=
𝑁
1024. This greatly simplifies updating
the 𝑙, 𝑟values as shown in eqs. (3.4) and (3.5), as multiplying by 𝐹is the same as first
right-shifting the value of 𝑟by 10 positions and then multiplying by the values obtained
from the lookup tables.
The spectral data is encoded by considering two neighboring spectral lines and encoding
their 2 MSBs together, as shown in Figure 4.6. This approach is used because it is ex-
pected that the MSBs of two neighboring spectral coefficients exhibit some predictability,
and as such, the arithmetic coder may benefit from this information.
The LSB bitplanes and the signs of the spectral coefficients are written directly into the
bitstream, as these are assumed to be uniformly distributed. In Figure 4.6, 2 LSB bit-
planes are present, but the number of bitplanes depends on the amplitude of the spectral
coefficients. Whenever an LSB bitplane is written into the bitstream, an “escape symbol”
is arithmetic coded, to indicate that a bitplane should be extracted when decoding.
To encode spectral information, a 12-bit context value is used. 8 bits of the context variable
depend on the MSBs of the two previously encoded 2-tuples, 2 bits indicate the number of
escape symbols that have been coded for the current 2-tuple, and 2 bits are set by flags.
This 12-bit context value is used to select a 6-bit value in a 4096 × 1 lookup table, which
is used when indexing two 64 × 17 lookup tables, containing the 𝑃(𝑥) and 𝐶(𝑥) values.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
23
==PAGE:32==
abs(amplitude)
freq
a b
2-tuple
1
0
1
1
0 0
0
1
1
1
sym=0b1101
b a
r=0b01
r=0b11
bitplanes
Figure 4.6: Example of coding 2-tuples of spectral information. Adapted from [5].
4.4
Spectral Noise Shaping
The spectral noise shaping process of the LC3 aims to weight the spectrum in such a way
that quantization noise is placed in spectral bands with high energy, causing the signal to
mask the noise. This is done by finding a set of scale factors that will be applied to the
spectrum to perform the shaping.
After performing the modified discrete cosine transform, a set of 64 energy band values
𝐄𝐛are obtained. To obtain the scale factors for spectral shaping, the energy band values
are processed, performing the following operations in order:
• SNS Analysis: The 64 energy band values are interpolated down to 16 scale factors.
First, the energy spectrum is smoothed, and a pre-emphasis function is applied
which emphasizes the high-frequency values. The values are log-transformed, and
finally interpolated down to 16 scale factors.
• SNS Quantization: The scale factors determined in the analysis step are quantized
using a 2-stage pyramid vector quantizer. The first stage selects an initial approx-
imation to the scale factors from a pre-trained codebook, and the second stage
uses a shape/gain search procedure, further described in section 4.4.2, to refine
the estimate. The first and second stage outputs are used to quantize the scale
factors before interpolation. These quantized scale factors are also packed into the
bitstream for use in the decoder.
• SNS Interpolation: During the interpolation step, the 16 quantized scale factors are
interpolated back up to 64 scale factors by a simple linear interpolation.
• Spectral shaping: The spectral shaping applies the quantized scale factors 𝐠𝐒𝐍𝐒
to their respective spectral coefficient 𝐗to shape the spectrum by performing the
vector multiplication 𝐗𝐬= 𝐠𝐒𝐍𝐒⋅𝐗.
A comparison of the WMOPS estimates generated by the reference implementation and
cycle counts for the current Oticon DSP implementation is shown in Table 4.4. It is evident
that the SNS quantization step is responsible for the majority of the complexity in spectral
noise shaping. In the reference implementation, quantization is 66 % of all operations and
in the current DSP implementation it is 75 % of all SNS clock cycles that are spent on the
quantization step.
24
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:33==
While SNS analysis is also a non-trivial amount of the overall complexity of the SNS
pipeline, it has still been decided to only accelerate the SNS quantization. Almost all
operations performed in the analysis are vector operations which are already leveraged
in the current DSP implementation. The operations in the quantizer are not as easy to
vectorise, and are thus better candidates for hardware acceleration.
Process
% WMOPS
% cycles
SNS Analysis
19
20
SNS Quantize
66
75
SNS Interpolate
6
<5
Spectral Shaping
9
<5
Table 4.4: Complexity analysis of spectral noise shaping when encoding an LC3 frame.
WMOPS/frame numbers are generated by the LC3 reference implementation, cycle
counts are generated by the Oticon DSP instruction set simulator.
4.4.1
Memory Map
The memory map for the SNS quantization module is shown in Figure 4.7. The inputs
to the quantizer are the 16 scale factors 𝐬𝐜𝐟which are stored as signed 16-bit numbers.
Once processed, the outputs are the quantized scale factors 𝐬𝐜𝐟𝐐, also stored in 16 bits.
In addition, the module generates two codewords, encoding information about the scale
factors. These codewords are packed into the bitstream as part of the side information.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
𝐬𝐜𝐟[𝟎]
0
𝐬𝐜𝐟[𝟏]
1
⋮
𝐬𝐜𝐟[𝟏𝟓]
15
𝐬𝐜𝐟𝐐[𝟎]
16
𝐬𝐜𝐟𝐐[1]
17
⋮
𝐬𝐜𝐟𝐐[15]
31
Not used
Stage 1 codeword
32
Stage 2 codeword [15:0]
33
Not used
Stage 2 codeword [27:16]
34
Not used
DF SF 35
𝐬𝐜𝐟: Input scale factors
𝐬𝐜𝐟𝐐: Output scale factors
DF: Done flag. SF: Start flag
Figure 4.7: Memory map for the SNS quantization module.
Memory address 35 contains two status flags. By writing data into addresses [0 ∶15] and
writing 1 into the start flag SF, the accelerator is started. Once the done flag DF is asserted
by the accelerator, the results are ready to be read back from memory addresses [16 ∶34].
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
25
==PAGE:34==
While the APB data bus used has a potential bit width of 24 bits, only the lower 16 bits are
used. Since all scale factors are 16 bits, the 28-bit stage 2 codeword is split into a 16-bit
and a 12-bit chunk, simplifying the implementation of the memory interface.
4.4.2
The 2-stage Pyramid Vector Quantizer
The 2-stage pyramid vector quantizer is used to quantize the scale factors found in the
analysis step. The 16 scale factors are transformed into 16 quantized scale factors, and
a 38-bit codeword is generated, containing the information required to recreate the scale
factors at the decoder. The codeword is split into 10 bits for the first stage and 28 bits for
the second stage.
First Stage
The first stage consists of a table lookup to select an initial approximation to the scale fac-
tors. The 16 scale factors 𝐬𝐜𝐟are separated into two 8-element vectors 𝐬𝐜𝐟𝐋𝐅and 𝐬𝐜𝐟𝐇𝐅,
containing the 8 low-frequency (LF) and high-frequency (HF) scale factors, respectively.
Each of the vectors is compared against separate pre-trained codebooks 𝐋𝐅𝐂𝐁, 𝐇𝐅𝐂𝐁
containing 32 first-stage candidate vectors. For e.g. 𝐬𝐜𝐟𝐋𝐅, the best first-stage candidate
vector 𝐋𝐅𝐂𝐁𝑖is the vector that minimizes the mean squared error 𝑑𝑀𝑆𝐸𝐿𝐹,𝑖as given
in eqs. (4.1) and (4.2). The situation is analogous for the high-frequency scale factors.
𝑑𝑀𝑆𝐸𝐿𝐹,𝑖=
7
∑
𝑛=0
(𝐬𝐜𝐟𝐋𝐅(𝑛) −𝐋𝐅𝐂𝐁𝐢(𝑛))
2 ,
𝑖∈[0 ∶31]
(4.1)
𝑖𝑛𝑑𝐿𝐹= argmin
𝑖∈[0∶31]
𝑑𝑀𝑆𝐸𝐿𝐹,𝑖
(4.2)
The chosen low-frequency and high-frequency vectors form the first stage vector 𝐬𝐭𝟏=
{𝐇𝐅𝐂𝐁𝐢, 𝐋𝐅𝐂𝐁𝐢}. The first stage residual vector 𝐫𝟏, which is processed in the second
stage, is given by eq. (4.3).
𝐫𝟏= 𝐬𝐜𝐟−𝐬𝐭𝟏
(4.3)
The first stage codeword consists of the concatenation of 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝐻𝐹and 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝐿𝐹, both repre-
sented in 5 bits, into a 10 bit bitvector.
Second Stage
The second stage of the vector quantizer quantizes the residual vector 𝐫𝟏by performing a
shape/gain search. First, the shape of a quantization vector is decided upon. This is done
by finding a unit-energy vector that has a similar shape (direction in the N-dimensional
space) to the quantization vector. Then, a gain value is applied to bring the shape vector
closer to the quantization vector. This separation into an initial shape search followed by
a gain search reduces the size of the search domain, reducing the overall complexity.
The shape search is applied to the vector 𝐱= 𝐃𝐫𝟏where 𝐃is a 16 × 16 rotation matrix
implementing a discrete cosine transform. Four different shapes are evaluated. A shape
candidate 𝐲𝐣is obtained by separating the 16-dimensional vector space into two sub-
vector spaces with their own pulse configuration. A pulse configuration is an integer vector
obtained by adding 𝐾unit pulse vectors, vectors with one component equal to 1 and all
other components equal to 0.
The four shape candidates and their respective pulse configurations are outlined in Ta-
ble 4.5. A pulse configuration (𝑁, 𝐾) consists of 𝐾unit pulses placed in the 𝑁scale
factor indices.
26
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:35==
Shape index
(𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗)
Name
Scale factor
set A
Scale factor
set B
Pulse config.
for set A (N,K)
Pulse config.
for set B (N,K)
0
AB
[0 ∶9]
[10 ∶15]
(10,10)
(6,1)
1
A
[0 ∶9]
[10 ∶15]
(10,10)
Zeroed
2
Near
[0 ∶15]
Empty set
(16,8)
None
3
Far
[0 ∶15]
Empty set
(16,6)
None
Table 4.5: Shape candidates for the SNS shape search. Adapted from [5].
For example, for 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 2, a valid shape candidate is a vector 𝐲𝟐where ∑|𝐲𝟐| = 8
since 𝐾= 8 unit pulses are placed over the 𝑁= 16 possible scale factors. For 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 1,
a valid shape candidate has ∑|𝐲𝟏| = 10, but the 𝐾= 10 unit pulse vectors may only be
placed in the first 𝑁= 10 entries of the vector since scale factor set B is zeroed. Each of
these shape candidates corresponds to a different type of spectral distribution.
Each of the four shape candidates 𝐲𝐣are chosen to minimize the distortion measure
𝑑𝑃𝑉𝑄,𝑗shown in eq. (4.4) where 𝐱𝐪,𝐣is the unit-energy normalized shape candidate for
shape 𝑗.
𝑑𝑃𝑉𝑄,𝑗= −𝐱T𝐱𝐪,𝐣= −𝐱T𝐲𝐣
√𝐲T
𝐣𝐲𝐣
(4.4)
The distortion measure shown in eq. (4.4) is not desirable as the target for optimization,
as it involves an inverse square root. Instead, by squaring the terms of the fraction, the
term 𝑄𝑃𝑉𝑄in eq. (4.5) may also be maximized. Here, 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑥𝑦is the correlation between
the 𝐱and 𝐲vectors and 𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦𝑦is the energy of the 𝐲vector. The subscripts 𝑗have been
omitted to reduce clutter in the equations.
𝑄𝑃𝑉𝑄= ( 𝐱T𝐲
√𝐲T𝐲
)
2
= (𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑥𝑦)2
𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦𝑦
(4.5)
The correlation and energy obtained by adding a unit pulse vector at index 𝑛𝑐in shape
candidate 𝐲may be computed from the correlation and energy obtained by placing the
initial 𝑘−1 pulses in that vector according to eqs. (4.6) and (4.7). Here, 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑥𝑦(𝑘−1) is
the correlation between 𝐱and 𝐲after adding 𝑘−1 unit pulse vectors, and 𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦𝑦(𝑘−1)
is the energy of 𝐲after adding the first 𝑘−1 unit pulse vectors. 𝐲(𝑘−1) is the vector after
adding the first 𝑘−1 unit pulses.
𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑥𝑦(𝑘, 𝑛𝑐) = 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑥𝑦(𝑘−1) + |𝐱(𝑛𝑐)|
(4.6)
𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦𝑦(𝑘, 𝑛𝑐) = 𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦𝑦(𝑘−1) + 2 ⋅𝐲(𝑘−1, 𝑛𝑐) + 1
(4.7)
When no pulses have been placed, 𝐲is a zero vector and thus 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑥𝑦and 𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦𝑦are
initialized to 0. The best position 𝑛𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡to place the 𝑘’th unit pulse is then the location which
maximizes eq. (4.5).
𝑛𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡= 𝑛𝑐,
𝑖𝑓𝑄𝑃𝑉𝑄(𝑘, 𝑛𝑐) > 𝑄𝑃𝑉𝑄(𝑘, 𝑛𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡)
(4.8)
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
27
==PAGE:36==
Instead of performing the division in eq. (4.5), finding the best pulse configuration can also
be performed by a cross-multiplication between the best squared correlation and best
energy found so far, as shown in eq. (4.9). By initially setting 𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑆𝑞and 𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦
to the squared correlation and energy obtained by placing a pulse at the first index of the
pulse configuration, this placement strategy always places a pulse by scanning over all
possible pulse locations and choosing the best of these.
𝑛𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡
=
𝑛𝑐
𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑆𝑞
=
𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑥𝑦(𝑘, 𝑛𝑐)2
𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡𝐸𝑛
=
𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦𝑦(𝑘, 𝑛𝑐)
⎫
}
⎬
}
⎭
, 𝑖𝑓𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑥(𝑘, 𝑛𝑐)2⋅𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡𝐸𝑛> 𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑆𝑞⋅𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦𝑦(𝑘, 𝑛𝑐)
(4.9)
Once the 4 shape candidates have been found, one for each shape, the gain search is
performed. Each shape has a number of pre-set gain candidates, ranging from 2 candi-
dates for 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 0 to 8 candidates for 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 3.
The final choice of shape/gain parameters 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗and 𝑔𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖is performed by minimizing
the mean squared error 𝑑𝑀𝑆𝐸𝑗,𝑖in eqs. (4.10) and (4.11). 𝐺𝑖,𝑗is the gain value for
a given gain/shape configuration and 𝐺𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑗is the maximum possible gain-index for a
given shape index. 𝐱𝐪,𝐣are the unit-energy normalized pulse vectors for each of the four
shapes.
𝑑𝑀𝑆𝐸𝑗,𝑖=
15
∑
𝑛=0
(𝐱(𝑛) −𝐺𝑖,𝑗⋅𝐱𝐪,𝐣(𝑛))2,
𝑗∈[0 ∶3], 𝑖∈[0 ∶𝐺𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑗]
(4.10)
{𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 𝑗, 𝑔𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖= 𝑖} =
argmin
𝑗=0…3, 𝑖=0…𝐺𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑗
𝑑𝑀𝑆𝐸𝑗,𝑖
(4.11)
Once the parameters 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗, 𝑔𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖have been determined, the final quantized scale fac-
tors are generated. The chosen shape vector is inverse DCT-transformed by using the
transposed 𝐃matrix and the chosen gain value is applied. The final quantized scale fac-
tors are then a linear combination of the first-stage and second-stage vectors as shown
in eqs. (4.12) and (4.13).
𝐬𝐭𝟐= 𝐃T𝐱𝐪,𝐬𝐡𝐚𝐩𝐞𝐣
(4.12)
𝐬𝐜𝐟𝐐= 𝐬𝐭𝟏+ 𝐺𝑔𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖,𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗⋅𝐬𝐭𝟐
(4.13)
The pulse vector 𝐲𝐬𝐡𝐚𝐩𝐞𝐣and the 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗, 𝑔𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖parameters are then packed into a 28-bit
stage 2 codeword, the specific packing behavior depending on the shape. The first stage
and second stage codewords are packed into the bitstream’s side information, and are
used to decode the SNS parameters at the decoder.
4.5
Spectral Quantization
The spectral quantization module has not been implemented in this project. It was decided
to focus on the bitstream coder and the spectral noise shaping modules, as these were
deemed the more promising candidates. This section will briefly note the analysis that
was performed, and how a future design might also incorporate this module.
28
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:37==
As was noted at the end of section 4.1.1, the spectral quantization module simulates arith-
metic encoding to determine the available bit budget. In addition to this, it must perform
an initial estimate of the gain value to use. This initial estimate accounts for roughly half
of the overall complexity of the process, reducing the amount of complexity that could be
tackled by the bitstream encoder.
To determine if a simulated run of the bitstream encoder could be used instead of the com-
puted bit estimate, the quality of the bit estimate and the final bitcount used in arithmetic
coding must be compared. Analyzing all 7700 frames used in the analysis, comparing the
estimated bitcount with the actual bitcount, yields the histogram shown in Figure 4.8.
Quality of spectral quantization estimate
0
5
10
15
20
25
bits diff  = bits
actual  - bits estimated
0 
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
% Frames
Figure 4.8: Comparison of estimated bitcount and actual bitcount after spectral quantiza-
tion.
The histogram shows that the estimated number of bits is never greater than the number
of bits actually used for arithmetic coding, and that the estimate is normally very precise.
In 97 % of cases, the estimate is accurate to within 2 bits of the final bit usage. Thus, by
adding a third mode of operation to the bitstream module, this mode could exclusively per-
form arithmetic coding, and then return the number of bits used to perform the arithmetic
coding. This number could then be used to choose the final gain value.
This analysis indicates that the bitstream encoder could also be used for computing the
bitcount required for the spectral quantization module, replacing the current bit estimation
algorithm. It has not been investigated whether this would sometimes lead to a different
choice of gain value, due to the more accurate estimate.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
29
==PAGE:38==
5
Implementation
This chapter presents the implementation of the hardware accelerators presented in the
previous chapter. Section 5.1 presents the design of the bitstream module, and sec-
tion 5.2 the implementation of the SNS quantization module. Section 5.3 gives a number
of examples on how the designs were optimized for low energy usage and speed.
5.1
Bitstream Module
A block diagram of the bitstream module is shown in Figure 5.1. The connected microcon-
troller can write into a local memory block over the APB interface. A controller manages
the memory block and initiates processing of the data once the start flag has been set. A
module wraps a memory block holding the bitstream, and the remaining modules write or
read data into/from the bitstream wrapper.
The module responsible for side information and residuals also probes a number of signals
from the arithmetic coder and bitstream wrapper. These probes are used to compute
the number of bits available for residuals before these are written into or read from the
bitstream.
TNS / Spec Data
Memory Block
MCU
APB Interface
Read/write bitstream
Controller
Side info & residual data
Read/write backward
Side Info &
Residuals
Frequency pairs
Read/write backward
TNS/Spectral
Coefficients
Read/write forward
probe signals
Arithmetic
Coder
probe signals
Bitstream Wrapper
Check start/done flags
Read/write bitstream data
Figure 5.1: Block diagram of the bitstream module. Some control signals omitted for
simplicity.
The input memory block is readable by the Side Info & Residuals and TNS/Spectral Coef-
ficients modules when they are respectively activated. The interface is a simple memory
30
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:39==
interface with an 8-bit address and separate 24-bit read and write data lines, where read
data is returned on the following clock cycle.
5.1.1
Controller
The controller is designed as a Finite State Machine that coordinates the access of the
other submodules to the bitstream wrapper and the local memory block. The FSM diagram
for the controller is shown in Figure 5.2.
The controller also has a separate state machine responsible for handling requests on
the APB interface. When the controller is idle, this FSM allows writing configuration data
into the memory block according to the memory map shown in Figure 4.5.
start_flag
IDLE
Reset
CLEAR_FLAGS_AND_START
---
start_flag := 0; done_flag := 0
ari.init = 1; bs.init = 1;
bs.bs_idx_max = nbytes-1
sr.go = 1
sr.done
WAIT_SIDE_INFO
!sr.done
DO_ARI_COD
---
tns.go = 1
tns.done && ari.idle
WAIT_ARI_COD
!(tns.done && ari.idle)
DO_RESIDUALS
---
sr.go_res = 1
sr.done && mode == ENC
WAIT_RESIDUALS
!sr.done
bs.idle
WAIT_BS_IDLE
!bs.idle
DO_FORCE_WRITEBACK
---
bs.force_writeback = 1
DO_ARI_ENC_FINISH
---
ari.finish = 1
ari.idle
WAIT_ARI_ENC_FINISH
!ari.idle
SET_DONE_FLAG
---
done_flag := 1
!start_flag
sr.done &&
mode == DEC
Figure 5.2: FSM diagram for the bitstream controller module.
5.1.2
Bitstream Wrapper
The bitstream wrapper is used to coordinate all accesses to a byte-addressable memory
block holding the bitstream. As the largest expected bitrate is 48 kbps, corresponding to
a frame size of 60 bytes, the bitstream memory block is 60 bytes large. When operating
with at a 32 kbps bitrate, only the lower 40 bytes of the memory block are used. An FSM
is used to coordinate accesses to the bitstream wrapper. The FSM diagram has been
split in two parts for ease of reading. Figure 5.3 shows the states used when encoding a
bitstream and Figure 5.4 shows the states used when decoding.
Data can be read and written forward or backward into the bitstream. Backwards accesses
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
31
==PAGE:40==
in.valid && in.dir==BW
&& in.op == WBITS /
data := in.data
len := in.len
in.valid && in.op == WBYTE /
data := in.data;
len := in.len;
in.valid && in.dir == FW
&& in.op == WBITS /
data := in.data; len := in.len;
mem.raddr = bytePtrFw
ctrl_if.enc_init /
bytePtrFw := 0; bs := 0
bytePtrBw := ctrl_if.bsIdxMax
IDLE
---
in.ready = 1
mem.raddr = bytePtrFw
mask == 0x80
len == 1 && mask != 0x80
WRITE_BW_1
---
bs := data[0] ? (bs | mask) : bs
data := data >> 1;
mask := mask << 1;
len--
Reset
len == 0
len != 0
WRITE_BW_2
---
mem[bytePtrBw] := bs
bs := 0; mask := 0x01
bytePtrBw--
len != 1
&& mask != 0x80
WRITE_BYTE_FW
---
mem[bytePtrFw] := data
bytePtrFw++
len == 1
WRITE_BITS_FW_1
---
bs := data[0] ? (bs | mask) : bs
data = data >> 1
mask = mask >> 1
len--
WRITE_BITS_FW_2
---
mem[bytePtrFw] = bs
WRITE_BITS_FW_0
---
mask := 0x80
bs := mem.rdata
bytePtrFw == bytePtrBw /
bytePtrFw := 0
ENC_INIT
---
mem[bytePtrFw] := bs
bytePtrFw++
ctrl_if.force_writeback /
len := 0
len != 1
bytePtrFw != bytePtrBw
Figure 5.3: Excerpt of the FSM diagram for the bitstream wrapper module. Showing states
used when encoding a bitstream.
in.valid && in.op == RBITS /
len := in.len; rbuf := 0
ctrl_if.dec_init /
bytePtrBw := ctrl_if.bsIdxMax
bytePtrFw := 0
IDLE
---
in.ready = 1
mem.raddr = bytePtrFw
mask == 0x80
len == 1 && mask != 0x80
READ_BITS_1
---
rbuf := ((bs & mask) != 0) ? rbuf |
mask : rbuf;
mask := mask << 1; len--
mem.raddr = bytePtrBw
in.valid && in.op == RBYTE
READ_BYTE_FW
---
in.rdata = mem.rdata
in.rdack = 1;
bytePtrFw++;
len != 0
len == 0
READ_BITS_GET_NEW_BYTE
---
bs := mem.rdata
bytePtrBw--
mask := 0x01
len != 1
&& mask != 0x80
READ_BITS_RET_DATA
---
in.rdata = rbuf
in.rdack = 1'b1
DEC_INIT_2
---
bs := mem.rdata
Reset
DEC_INIT_1
---
mem.raddr = bytePtrBw
bytePtrBw--
Figure 5.4: Excerpt of the FSM diagram for the bitstream wrapper module. Showing states
used when decoding a bitstream.
32
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:41==
are performed when coding side information and residual bits, as well as the sign bits
and least significant bits of spectral coefficients. Forward accesses are performed by
the arithmetic coder. The arithmetic coder always reads a full byte each time, and almost
always writes a full byte. The module communicates with other modules over a ready/valid
interface. When reading data, an acknowledge signal indicates that read data is valid.
Because most backward accesses are just one or two bits, and they are as such not
necessarily byte aligned, backward accesses are performed incrementally. A byte register
stores the backward byte being processed, and an 8-bit mask register contains a bitmask
that is used to set or reset individual bits in the byte (when writing), or to check the value
of a bit position (when reading). Once the mask register reaches 0x80, the mask is reset
to 0x01 and the value of the backward byte pointer is decremented. When encoding, the
current byte is written into the bitstream when resetting the mask register. When decoding,
the next byte is read from the bitstream and transferred to the byte register.
Once the last residual bits have been written, the byte register may contain an in-progress
byte. The control signal force_writeback flushes the byte register into the memory block
even though the mask is not 0x80, ensuring that no data is lost.
Most forward writes from the arithmetic coder are a full byte which can be written into the
bitstream buffer at once. For this reason, forward byte-aligned writes are supported by
the module. Whenever the arithmetic coder writes a byte, that data is written directly into
the bitstream and the forward byte pointer is incremented.
When finishing the arithmetic encoding, the last write operation may contain less data
than a full byte. In this case, the module loads the current contents of the memory at the
forward byte pointer. It then updates the byte register with the remaining bits from the
arithmetic coder and writes the byte register back into the memory buffer.
5.1.3
TNS Filters and Spectral Coefficients
This module is responsible for processing values that should be arithmetic coded. This is
performed by selecting the correct symbol frequency and cumulative frequency for arith-
metic coding from the lookup tables supplied in the LC3 specification, and passing these
to the arithmetic coder, described in section 5.1.4.
The module is implemented as three coordinating FSM’s. One central FSM is used as
a controller, and coordinates two other FSM’s that are responsible for coding TNS filters
and spectral coefficients. The module is partitioned into FSM’s with separate registers
to reduce power consumption. By partitioning into multiple coordinating FSM’s, each of
the FSM’s and its associated registers will only experience bit flips during their activation
period, which can reduce power consumption [45].
The FSM responsible for handling spectral coefficients is the most complex and is de-
scribed in further detail here. The overall behavior of the FSM responsible for coding
TNS information is similar, but with a simpler control loop.
The FSM diagram is split into an encoder and decoder section for ease of reading. The
FSM diagram used when encoding is shown in Figure 5.5, and the FSM diagram for
decoding is shown in Figure 5.6. The datapath used for spectral coefficient encoding
is shown in Figure 5.7. The FSM diagrams for the TNS filter handler are shown in ap-
pendix A.2.
When encoding, escape symbols are sent to the arithmetic coder while either coefficient’s
magnitude is greater than or equal to 4. Every time an escape symbol is arithmetic coded,
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
33
==PAGE:42==
spec_go /
spec_idx := 0
spec_context := 0
IDLE
GET_PARAMETERS
---
mem_if.addr =
SPEC_PARAM_ADDR
STORE_PARAMS_GET_FIRST
---
(N_E_half, lastnz_trunc, rateFlag,
lsbMode) := mem_if.rdata
mem_if.addr = SPEC_BASE_ADDR
{spec_idx, 1'b0} >= lastnz_trunc
CHECK_OUTER_LOOP
---
lev := 0
SET_AB_ABS
---
a := abs(spec_data[11:0])
b := abs(spec_data[23:12])
max(a,b) < 4 /
encode_sym := {b[1:0], a[1:0]} 
a >= 4 || b >= 4
ESCAPE_CHECK
---
ari_enc_if.ready
ENCODE_SYMBOL
---
ari.valid = 1
ari_enc_if.cumfreq = sym_cf_rdata
ari_enc_if.freq = sym_f_rdata
ari_enc_if.ready
ENCODE_ESCAPE
---
ari_enc_if.valid = 1
ari_enc_if.cumfreq = escape_cf_rdata
ari_enc_if.freq = escape_f_rdata
bs_if.ready
/ a >>= 1; 
b >>= 1;
lev++ (saturate)
ENCODE_LSBS
---
bs.valid = 1; bs.op = WBITS;
bs.dir = BW;
bs.data = {b[0], a[0]}
spec_data[11:0] == 0
CHECK_WRITE_A_SIGN
---
spec_data >>= 12
sign := spec_data[11]
spec_idx++
bs_if.ready
WRITE_A_SIGN
---
bs.valid = 1; bs.op = WBITS;
bs.dir = BW; bs.data = sign
spec_data[11:0] != 0
spec_data[11:0] == 0
CHECK_WRITE_B_SIGN
---
sign := spec_data[11]
bs_if.ready
WRITE_B_SIGN
---
bs.valid = 1; bs.op = WBITS;
bs.dir = BW; bs.data = sign
UPDATE_CONTEXT_ACCESS_MEM
---
mem_if.addr = SPEC_BASE_ADDR + spec_idx;
spec_context = (lev <= 1) ? ncontext_lev_low :
ncontext_lev_high
UPDATE_CONTEXT_STORE_DATA
---
spec_data = mem_rdata
!ari_enc_if.ready
STORE_FIRST_DATA
---
spec_data := mem_if.rdata
Reset
!spec_go
DONE
---
spec_done = 1
!bs_if.ready
!bs_if.ready
!bs_if.ready
!ari_enc_if.ready
mode == ENC &&
{spec_idx, 1'b0} < lastnz_trunc 
spec_data[11:0] != 0
ctrl_state != IDLE
ctrl_state == IDLE
Figure 5.5: FSM diagram for the spectral coefficient encoder.
34
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:43==
spec_go
IDLE
---
spec_idx := 0;
spec_context := 0
mode == DEC &&
{spec_idx, 1'b0} < lastnz_trunc 
Reset
!spec_go
dec_done && dec_sym == 16
dec_done && dec_sym != 16
DECODE_SYMBOL
---
do_dec_spec = 1
(Select f, cf decoder FSM based on
symbol being tested)
bs_if.rdack /
bits := bs_if.rdata[1:0]
DECODE_ESCAPE_GET_LSB
---
bs_if.valid = 1; bs_if.dir = BW;
bs_if.op = RBITS; bs_if.len = 2
GET, STORE, ...
{spec_idx, 1'b0} >= lastnz_trunc
CHECK_OUTER_LOOP
---
lev := 0
spec_shift := 1
dec_a := 0; dec_b := 0
!bs_if.rdack
spec_shift <<= 1
lev++ (saturate at 3)
DECODE_ESCAPE_SET_LSB
---
dec_a := bits[0] ? (dec_a | spec_shift) :
dec_a
dec_b := bits[1] ? (dec_b | spec_shift) :
dec_b
spec_shift <<= 1
DECODE_SPEC_SYM_LSB
---
dec_a := (dec_sym[0] ? 
(dec_a | spec_shift) : dec_a)
dec_b := (dec_sym[2] ? 
(dec_b | spec_shift) : dec_b)
DECODE_SPEC_SYM_MSB
---
dec_a := (dec_sym[1] ?
(dec_a | spec_shift) : dec_a)
dec_b := (dec_sym[3] ?
(dec_b | spec_shift) : dec_b)
dec_a != 0
CHECK_GET_A_SIGN
bs_if.rdack /
dec_a := (bs_if.rdata) ? -dec_a : dec_a
DO_GET_A_SIGN
---
bs_if.valid = 1; bs_if.dir = BW;
bs_if.op = RBITS; bs_if.len = 1
dec_b != 0
dec_b == 0
CHECK_GET_B_SIGN
bs_if.rdack /
dec_b := (bs_if.rdata ) ? -dec_b : dec_b
DO_GET_B_SIGN
---
bs_if.valid = 1; bs_if.dir = BW;
bs_if.op = RBITS; bs_if.len = 1
UPDATE_CONTEXT_ACCESS_MEM
---
(set mem_if.addr and context as in encode)
mem_if.wdata = {dec_b, dec_a}
mem_if.we = 1
spec_idx++ 
!bs_if.rdack
DONE
---
spec_done = 1
ctrl_state != IDLE
dec_a == 0
Figure 5.6: FSM diagram for the spectral coefficient decoder.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
35
==PAGE:44==
the LSB bitplane is written backwards into the bitstream, and both coefficients are divided
by two, implemented with a right-shift.
Once both coefficients are less than 4, the 4-bit symbol value containing the MSBs of the
two coefficients is arithmetic encoded. If either coefficient is non-zero at this point, its sign
value is written into the bitstream. Finally, the 8-bit context variable is updated, dependent
on the number of escape symbols that were written out.
[7:2]
D
Q
en
A
[7:2]
[1:0]
[11:0]
[23:12]
D
Q
en
spec_data
ABS
ABS
24
=0
0
1
0
1
=0
SYMBOL
TABLE
64x16
[1:0]
{b[1:0], a[1:0}
ESCAPE
TABLE
64x1
D
Q
en
context
8
D
Q
en
lev
0
1
+1
0
2
{rate_flag, upper_half_flag}
from state
2
12
{lev, rate_flag,
upper_half_flag, context}
0
1
2x10
2x10
ari_enc_if.freq
ari_enc_if.cumfreq
2x10
mem_if.rdata
From state
24
CONTEXT
TABLE
4096x1
6
12
[3:0]
4
8
{context[3:0],
new_ctx}
>>1
>>1
To state
From state
D
Q
en
B
STATE LOGIC
mem_if.raddr
From
state
ari_enc_if
ready/valid,
dec_test, dec_ok,
dec_not_ok
bs_if
ready/valid
and ctrl signals
0
1
{6'b0, a[0], b[0]}
bs_if.data
10
0
1
>>12
D
Q
sign
spec_data[11]
2
new_ctx
From state
2
2
Figure 5.7: Datapath for the spectral coefficient module. The logic shown is for encoding
coefficients. The logic for decoding is similar and reuses the lookup tables, but uses
different A,B registers for indexing.
When decoding, the highest index 𝑖∈[0 ∶16] and its corresponding cumulative frequency
𝑐𝑓that is accepted by the arithmetic coder must be found, as further described in sec-
tion 5.1.4. If the decoded index value is 16, this indicates an escape symbol, and the
corresponding LSBs are read from the bitstream. If the index is in the interval [0 ∶15],
this is a 4-bit symbol holding the two MSBs of each spectral coefficient. Registers dec_a,
dec_b hold the decoded values, and bits are incrementally set in these registers by OR’ing
with the mask register spec_shift.
36
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:45==
Since the cumulative frequencies increase monotonically, the search for the correct fre-
quency pair is performed with a binary search over the interval [0 ∶16]. The initial imple-
mentation used a linear search for the correct value, but by using a binary search instead,
the average processing time decreased by 2.7×.
In the specification, 64 × 17 lookup tables are used when encoding spectral coefficients.
Index 16 corresponds to the frequency values for escape symbols, and indices [0; 15] are
used when coding the 4-bit symbol value.
To simplify the frequency tables for spectral coefficients, the 64 × 17 table was split into
a 64 × 1 table only used for coding escape symbols and a 64 × 16 table used for coding
the symbol value. This separation simplifies the logic, as there are now no illegal input
combinations to the tables as all input bit combinations have a corresponding output value.
5.1.4
Arithmetic Coder
The arithmetic coder is responsible for processing frequency pairs (𝑓, 𝑐𝑓), corresponding
to the symbol probabilities 𝑃(𝑥) and 𝐶(𝑥). When encoding, the frequency pairs are used
to update the low, range values, as described in sections 3.3 and 4.3.2. The low, range
values are stored as 24-bit fixed-point numbers, representing a value in the interval [0; 1).
When encoding, data is written into the bitstream wrapper. When decoding, the module
reads encoded data from the bitstream, and determines which frequency pair (𝑓, 𝑐𝑓) was
used to generate a given symbol.
ctrl_if.do_finish /
PC := AC_ENC_FINISH_START
tns_spec_if.valid /
(f,cf) := tns_spec_if.(freq,cumFreq);
(PC is set dependent on
mode and dec_is_test signal)
IDLE
insn == AC_SHIFT
insn == WRITE_BITS
insn == WRITE_BYTE /
wb_retstate := EXEX
exec_done
EXEC
ac_shift_done
AC_SHIFT
wb_done
WRITE_BITS
(when writing out byte)
/ wb_retstate := AC_SHIFT
wb_done &&
wb_retstate := AC_SHIFT
wb_done &&
wb_retstate := EXEC
WRITE_BYTE
Reset
ctrl_if.init /
reset all registers
Figure 5.8: High-level FSM diagram of the arithmetic coder.
The primary function of the module is to perform arithmetic coding, which is relatively
simple and is expressed in a few lines of C-code. The secondary function, which is more
complex and requires more calculations, is performed when finishing arithmetic encoding.
Here, the shortest possible tag value in the interval [𝑙𝑜𝑤; 𝑙𝑜𝑤+ 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒] is computed, and
the remaining bits are written into the bitstream. This requires a number of arithmetic and
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
37
==PAGE:46==
logical operations that must be performed in sequence, as well as some loops of variable
length.
Due to the high complexity of the finishing procedure, it is not reasonable to implement this
module solely as an FSM. The number of states required is ≈80, and implementing and
extending an FSM of this size is not very efficient. Instead, the module is implemented
as a micro-programmed state machine with a datapath, as described in [45]. This micro-
programmed FSM design grants greater flexibility when using a complex datapath with
many instructions.
The microprogrammed FSM has a 64-entry instruction memory. 58 of the instructions are
used when encoding, and 6 of the instructions are used when decoding. A block diagram
of the datapath is shown in Figure 5.9.
In addition to the microinstructions executed by the FSM, the module also include some
additional states, marked by a dashed periphery in Figure 5.8, which are used in spe-
cial circumstances. When encoding, the state AC_SHIFT is used when the 8 MSB of the
arithmetic coder’s interval is fixed and that byte may be written into the bitstream, and
WRITE_BITS, WRITE_BYTE are used to write data into the bitstream. When decoding, the
state AC_SHIFT is used to read bytes from the bitstream, updating the low register with
more data that can be decoded, and adjusting the range register. These are separate
states as the logic they implement is distinct from the logic required by the remaining
datapath. Including them in the instruction space would unnecessarily increase the com-
plexity of the instruction decoding and datapath.
D
Q
PC
INSTRUCTION
MEMORY [64]
OPCODE
DST
REG
SRC1
REG
SRC2
REG
COUT
DST
ADDR_IMM
OPCODE
0
1
2
3
+1
jmp_addr
0
1
(state, opcode 
and cmp-bit)
6
3
wdata
REGISTER
FILE
cout 
      ALU
carry out
destination
< != <= Comparison
Status bits
To PC Mux
state
FSM Control Logic
To PC
Mux
4
4
2
4
wdata
24
1
WRITE_BYTE /
WRITE_BITS
State logic
8
4
AC_SHIFT
State logic
nbits
low
range
Probes from register file
Bitstream Module Interface
freq
cumfreq
10
TNS/Spec Module Interface
Bitstream wdata,
rdata, op, len and dir
ready/valid/rdack
ready/valid
To FSM
controller
TNS/Spec
module
interface
5
dec_is_test
dec_ok,
dec_not_ok
2
2
ctrl_if
4
3
24
24
10
24
24
21
Figure 5.9: Datapath used in the arithmetic coder.
Two instruction formats are used for the instructions, as shown below the instruction mem-
ory in Figure 5.9. The first instruction format is used for unconditional jumps and condi-
tional branches where the immediate is used in the PC-update multiplexer. Conditional
38
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:47==
branches are supported by comparing two values for the relations 𝑎≠𝑏, 𝑎< 𝑏or 𝑎≤𝑏.
When compare instructions are executed, the comparison bit is set if the relation is true.
If the comparison bit is set while executing a branch instruction, the conditional jump ad-
dress is used, otherwise, the next instruction is loaded.
The arithmetic and logic unit (ALU) supports 11 operations, and has three instructions for
going to the additional states. There are a total of 21 values accessible in the register file,
but by limiting some of these to only being the first or second operand to an instruction,
it is possible to limit the register select fields to 4 bits. Only 3 bits are required for the
destination register, as some of the registers are not writable from the ALU. This is for
example the registers holding the frequency and cumulative frequency, as these registers
are updated when a new frequency pair is received from the TNS/Spec module.
3 of the registers are not addressable as destination registers, but can be written by se-
lecting them as the destination of the carry-out bit of arithmetic operations. These are
used for detecting overflow in some operations, which can later be used to decide branch
outcomes. Some of the values that can be selected are not registers, but instead encode
constant values that are used for some computations. The bit width of the ALU is 24 bits,
but some of the registers store fewer bits. These registers are zero-extended up to 24
bits when used in the ALU.
The multiply instruction does not use the same instruction decoder as the other operations.
This is done to reduce the number of bit flips in the multiplier to reduce power dissipation.
The first operand to the multiplier is always the range register that has been right-shifted
by 10 bits, and the second operand can only be one of freq and cumfreq. The multiplier
defaults to selecting the freq register and only selects the cumfreq register if that register
is addressed by the instruction.
When decoding, a frequency pair (𝑓, 𝑐𝑓) may be the frequency pair that was encoded if
eq. (5.1) holds. Notably, all values 𝑐𝑓′ < 𝑐𝑓will also satisfy eq. (5.1). For this reason, a
number of cumulative frequency values must be tested to find the correct value, which is
then used to update the internal state of the decoder.
𝑙𝑜𝑤≥𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒⋅𝑐𝑓
1024
(5.1)
The signal dec_is_test indicates whether the input frequency pair should be tested, and
as such the values of low and range should not be modified, or whether it is the cor-
rect frequency pair and low, range should be updated according to eqs. (3.4) and (3.5).
The signals dec_ok and dec_not_ok indicate whether the input frequency pair satisfies
eq. (5.1), guiding the search for the correct frequency pair in the TNS/Spectral coefficient
module.
5.1.5
Side Info & Residuals
The module responsible for reading and writing side information and residuals only per-
forms backward read/write operations to the bitstream wrapper. A finite state machine
is used to transfer data between the memory block in the controller and the bitstream
wrapper. A subset of the FSM, containing the states used when coding side information,
is shown in Figure 5.10. The FSM diagram containing the states used when processing
residuals is shown in appendix A.1.
Since all side information and residual operations consist of copying data from memory to
the bitstream, or vice versa when decoding, the module has been designed to efficiently
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
39
==PAGE:48==
go_side /
item_idx := 0;
op := SIDE
IDLE
---
addr =
SIDE_INFO_WIDTHS_ADDR
length[item_idx] == 0
length[item_idx] != 0 /
len := length[item_idx]
CHECK_WIDTH_KNOWN
GET_ITEM_WIDTH
---
len := width_vec[4:0]
width_vec:= {width_vec[5:0],
length_vec[23:6]}
SHIFT_BITS_BS
---
bs_if.wdata = mem_wrap.rdata;
bs_if.len = min(len, mm_bitcnt, 8);
bs_if.valid = bs_if.len != 0;
bs_if.dir = BW; 
bs_if.op = (mode == ENC)
? WBITS : RBITS
SHIFT_BITS_MEM
---
mem_wrap.valid = (nbits_enc != 0);
mem_wrap.len = nbits_enc;
mem_wrap.wdata = wdata
op == SIDE
&& item_idx < max_item_idx
UPDATE_ITEM_CHECK
---
item_idx += 1
(set parameter regs. from
decoded side info)
!mem_wrap.ready
mem_wrap.ready
&& len == 0
Reset
GET_WIDTHS
---
width_vec := mem.rdata
mem_wrap.ready && op == RES
FLUSH_MEM_BUFFER
---
mem_wrap.valid = 1
mem_wrap.len = mem_wrap.bitcnt
mem_wrap.wdata = '0
(op == SIDE && item_idx >= max_item_idx)
|| (op == RES)
RESIDUAL
ENCODE
RESIDUAL
DECODE
!mem_wrap.ready
SIDE_OUTPUT_LENGTHS
---
mem_if.addr =
SIDE_INFO_LENGTH_ADDR
mem_if.wdata = {width_vec}
mem_if.we = 1
SIDE_GET_SPEC_PARAMS
---
mem_if.addr =
SPEC_PARAM_ADDR
SIDE_UPD_SPEC_PARAMS
---
mem_if.wdata = {6'b0, LSBmode, lastnz,
mem_if.rdata[8:0]}
mem_if.addr = SPEC_PARAM_ADDR
mem_if.we = 1
SIDE_GET_TNS_PARAMS
---
mem_if.addr = TNS_PARAM_ADDR
SIDE_UPD_TNS_PARAMS
---
mem_if.wdata = {13'b0, tns_filt_order,
mem_if.rdata[2], num_tns_filters}
mem_if.addr = TNS_PARAM_ADDR
mem_if.we = 1
mem_wrap.ready
&& op == SIDE
&& mode == DEC
!(condition below)
(mode == ENC && bs_wrap.ready) ||
(mode == DEC && (bs_wrap.rdack || len == 0) /
wdata := bs_wrap.rdata;
nbits_enc := bs_if.len;
len -= bs_if.len
mem_wrap.ready
&& len != 0
Figure 5.10: FSM diagram for the state machine used when writing side information and
residuals into the bitstream. The dashed states on the right indicate transitions from the
states used when encoding and decoding residuals.
40
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:49==
copy bits between memory and the bitstream. To do this, a memory wrapper module,
shown in Figure 5.11, is used. It contains a 24-bit shift register, which is loaded with a
data word when encoding, and a 0-vector when decoding.
As previously described, he bitstream wrapper module can process up to 8 bits at a time.
The 8 LSB from the memory wrapper’s shift register are always output from the module
and sent to the bitstream wrapper. When encoding, in the state SHIFT_BITS_BS, these 8
bits and the number of bits to write are sent to the bitstream wrapper. Subsequently, in
the state SHIFT_BITS_MEM, that number of bits are incrementally shifted out of the 24-bit
shift register, making the memory block ready for the next read operation.
When decoding, the 24-bit shift register is initialized with a 0-vector. The FSM transitions
from SHIFT_BITS_BS into SHIFT_BITS_MEM once read data arrives from the bitstream wrap-
per. This data, along with the number of bits received, is passed into the memory wrapper,
where the bits are shifted into the top of the shift register.
D
Q
en
wdata_cnt
0
1
[7:0
D
Q
en
bits
!=0
D
Q
en
wdata
>>1
wdata
0
1
-1
len
state != IDLE
rdata
(load when
leaving IDLE state)
0
1
2
mem_if.rdata
0
{wdata[0], shift[23:1]}
24
mem_if.wdata
STATE &
CONTROL LOGIC
4
8
8
D
Q
en
bits_cnt
0
1
-1
24
5
2
ready/valid
2
mem_if.we
state == UPDATE_BITS
&& mode == DEC
mem_if.addr
8
From state
Figure 5.11: Datapath for the memory wrapper module used for side information and
residuals.
Whenever the 24-bit shift register is emptied when encoding (or filled while decoding),
the data is updated. When encoding, a new 24-bit word is read from the next address in
memory. When decoding, the data is written into memory, the shift register flushed, and
the write address is incremented.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
41
==PAGE:50==
In combination, this makes for an efficient bit-exchanging system. Since the bitstream
wrapper can only process one bit per clock cycle, there is no need to update the contents
of the memory wrapper in a single cycle with expensive variable-amount shift logic. The
overhead only amounts to 1 clock cycle per bitstream read/write operation, and the same
hardware and FSM states are used for encoding and decoding data.
When processing side information, a total of 10 separate fields are encoded or decoded.
Some of these fields have variable widths, while the remainder have fixed widths. A lookup
table contains the widths of the known fields, with 0 indicating that the width is unknown.
The unknown widths must be written into memory at address 32 before processing, as
previously shown in Figure 4.5.
When decoding, some of the widths, as well as some parameters for arithmetic coding,
must be inferred from the decoded data. This happens in the state UPDATE_ITEM_CHECK.
When finishing side information decoding, the updated width vector, as well as some
inferred parameters for TNS and spectral coefficient decoding, are written into the memory
block, shown in the sequence of states on the left side of Figure 5.10.
5.2
SNS Quantization
A block diagram of the SNS quantization module is shown in Figure 5.12. A controller
handles requests on the APB interface. When the scale factors are pushed onto the
device, the controller forwards this information into the Stage 1 module. Once the start
flag SF is asserted, the signal stage1_go is pulled high, starting the accelerator.
(When inverse DCT)
IDCT transform of xq,j
(When forward DCT)
DCT transform of r1
(I)DCT
Transform
0
1
Shape
search
scfQ
Quantize
scale
factors
Gain value G_(i,j)
Gain
search
First stage indices indLF, indHF
First stage vector st1(n)
VQ
Stage 1
Residuals r1
16
16
eam_done
Enumerate
and
Multiplex
16
SS->GS: 4x Shape candidates xq,j
GS->SS: Chosen shapej
GS->EAM: Chosen shapej, gaini
SS->EAM: Selected shape vector yj
16
2
16
16
16
16
2
2
MCU
stage1_go
Controller
APB Interface
quant_done
stage1 & stage 2 codewords
Unit energy normalized
shape vector xq,j
do_fwd_dct
shape_search_done
scf
Figure 5.12: Block diagram of the SNS quantization module. Slashes indicate number of
bundled wires and not bit widths. Handshakes between submodules are not shown.
The submodules of the accelerator communicate with a go/done handshake, and are
assumed always ready to receive data. When the first stage search is finished, the 16-
42
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:51==
element 𝐫𝟏vector is transferred to an (I)DCT block, and the 𝐬𝐭𝟏vector is transferred to the
block performing quantization. The (I)DCT block can either perform a forward or inverse
DCT transform, controlled by the signal do_fwd_dct. This signal is initially high when
forward-transforming 𝐫𝟏, and will be pulled low once shape_search_done is asserted, such
that the vector 𝐱𝐪,𝐣can be inverse-transformed before the final scale factor quantization.
The shape search module finds the four shape candidates, transferring these to the gain
search module. Once the gain search module is finished, the pulse vector 𝐲𝐣is trans-
ferred to the enumeration and multiplexing (EAM) module, which is started in parallel with
the inverse DCT transform. When the enumeration and multiplexing finishes, the signal
eam_done is asserted and the controller registers the values of the codewords. Once the
inverse DCT transform finishes, the scale factor quantization is performed and the quan-
tized scale factors are written into a memory block in the controller. Once quant_done
is asserted, the done flag DF is set high in the controller, indicating that processing has
finished and the MCU may read back the results.
5.2.1
SNS Controller
The SNS controller handles the APB interface and orchestrates the data processing in the
accelerator. In the SNS module, the data is processed in a pipeline where the individual
submodules handshake with each other, rather than the controller. For this reason, the
logic for the controller is much simpler than for the previously described bitstream module.
The FSM diagram for the SNS controller is shown in Figure 5.13.
start_flag 
IDLE
!start_flag
DO_STAGE1
---
stage1_go = 1
start_flag := 0; done_flag := 0
quant_done_reg := 0;
eam_done_reg := 0
Reset
shape_search_done
WAIT_SHAPE_SEARCH
---
do_fwd_dct = 1
!shape_search_done
quant_done_reg && eam_done_reg
WAIT_DONE
---
do_fwd_dct = 0
quant_done_reg := quant_done | quant_done_reg
eam_done_reg := eam_done | eam_done_reg
SET_DONE_FLAG
---
done_flag := 1
Figure 5.13: FSM diagram for the SNS controller module.
Once started, the controller will assert the do_fwd_dct signal until shape_search_done
is asserted. This ensures that the forward DCT functionality is no longer required. The
controller will then keep do_fwd_dct deasserted until both the scale factor quantization
and enumerate and multiplex modules are done, setting the done_flag high.
The logic responsible for the APB interface is similar to that for the bitstream controller.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
43
==PAGE:52==
When idle, memory writes to addresses [0 ∶15] and address 35 are allowed, and reading
from addresses [16 ∶35] are allowed. When executing, only reads to address 35 are
allowed. Any other accesses will raise the APB signal PSLVERR when responding to the
request.
5.2.2
VQ Stage 1
The first stage of the vector quantizer finds the best first-stage vector 𝐬𝐭𝟏composed of
two sub-vectors found in the low-frequency and high-frequency codebooks 𝐋𝐅𝐂𝐁and
𝐇𝐅𝐂𝐁. This is performed with an iterative search over the 32 entries in each codebook,
each of which are an 8-element vector. The datapath for the first stage is shown in Fig-
ure 5.14.
The 16 scale factors are loaded into two separate memories, holding respectively the LF
and HF scale factors. The mean squared error for a given codebook vector is found by
pushing the codebook entries and the associated scale factors into a Mean Squared Error
(MSE) block. This contains a subtractor, followed by a MAC unit based on the design
presented in [24]. Both inputs to the MAC unit are tied to the output of the subtractor,
implementing (𝑎−𝑏)2. The output of an MSE block is the 32-bit accumulated error for all
items passed in.
LFCB
32 x 8
async read
HFCB
32 x 8
async read
MSE Block
16
ARGMIN
 row_idx
5
3
argmin_valid
state == TRANSMIT_RESULT_VECS
stage2_if.wdata
(r1-vector)
stage2_if.waddr
5
D
Q
D
Q
quant_if.wdata
(st1-vector)
quant_if.waddr
3
D
Q
write_hf_pipe
4
stage2_if.we
quant_if.we
D
Q
we_pipe
MSE Block
ARGMIN
row_idx
5
argmin_valid
5
16
0
1
write_hf_pipe
0
1
write_hf_pipe
A-B
STATE &
CONTROL
LOGIC
write_hf
we
row_idx
5
5
lf_min_idx
hf_min_idx
{write_hf_pipe, row_idx_pipe}
0
1
5
row_idx
hf_min_idx
0
1
row_idx
lf_min_idx
input_if.wdata
input_if.waddr[2:0]
input_if.we
input_if.waddr[3]
we
waddr
wdata
raddr
rdata
scfLF
mse_valid_pipe
mse_valid_pipe
we
waddr
wdata
raddr
rdata
scfHF
input_if.waddr[3]
input_if.we
input_if.wdata
input_if.waddr[2:0]
col_idx
go
done
16
16
32
32
Figure 5.14: Datapath for the first stage of the SNS vector quantizer. The input interface
signals have been duplicated in the diagram for ease of reading. There is only one input
interface.
Since the codebooks are stored as asynchronous-read read only memories (ROMs) and
the scale factors are stored in synchronous-read memory, the read address to the code-
books is delayed by a register. Likewise, the signal mse_valid is delayed by a register
mse_valid_pipe (not shown in Figure 5.14).
Once a codebook entry has been processed, the output of the MSE block is processed
by an argmin block. The argmin block finds the minimum argument, in this case the row
44
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:53==
index, of all input values it has seen in the frame. After processing all 32 rows in the
codebooks, the outputs lf_min_idx and hf_min_idx contain the values of 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝐿𝐹and
𝑖𝑛𝑑𝐻𝐹respectively.
The vectors 𝐬𝐭𝟏and 𝐫𝟏are output at the same time. The values lf_min_idx and hf_min_idx
are used to index into the codebooks instead of the signal row_idx. The values for 𝐫𝟏are
transferred on the stage2_if to the (I)DCT module and the values for 𝐬𝐭𝟏are transferred
on the quant_if to the scale factor quantization module.
5.2.3
(I)DCT Transform
The (I)DCT transform module implements a forward or inverse DCT transform of a 16-
element vector. The LC3 specification presents a 16 × 16 transform matrix 𝐃that may be
used to perform the transform. The naive approach is to perform a matrix-vector product
which requires 256 multiplications and additions each.
The reference implementation, however, uses a different approach that leverages the
large amount of symmetry present in the transform matrix. The matrix only contains 30
unique values, making it possible to reuse many intermediate results for the transforma-
tion. In the reference implementation, each of the forward and inverse transforms require
50 additions, 24 subtractions, 52 multiplications and 6 move/copy operations, for a total
of 132 operations per transform. This is an obvious reduction in complexity vs. the naive
matrix-vector product. The reference implementation was thus used as the baseline for
the (I)DCT module. The datapath for the (I)DCT module is shown in Figure 5.15.
we
waddr
wdata
raddr1
raddr2
rdata1
rdata2
dest
op
Instruction
ROM [256]
D
Q
en
PC
src1
0
1
0
1
6
6
6
ADD/SUB/MOVE
CONST
DECODER
D
Q
en
1
0
0
1
16
0
1
+1
!=0
2
we
waddr
wdata
0
1
OP == MULT
D
Q
en
D
Q
[3:0]
[5:4]
D
Q
insn_dest_pipe
output_if.wdata
output_if.waddr
output_if.we
=0
4
2
16
16
16
16
16
16
4
state == IDLE
CONTROL
AND STATE
LOGIC
go
2
done
load_addr
do_fwd_dct
8
8
[5:4]
D
Q
4
D
Q
MUL
Input interface
src2
[4:0]
[19:18] [17:12] [11:6]
[5:0]
OP
DEST
SRC2
SRC1
Figure 5.15: Datapath for the (I)DCT transform module. The gray box on the left shows
the instruction encoding used.
The module is implemented as a datapath, with a small controller FSM for interfacing with
the other modules. The datapath consists of an ALU with 4 possible operations: addition,
subtraction, 16-bit multiplication and moving a value from one register to another. A 52-
entry register file is used: 16 entries for the input vector, 32 entries for temporary values,
corresponding to the 32 intermediate variables used in the reference implementation, and
another 4 registers for storing intermediate results from multiplications.
When the go signal is asserted, the system starts processing. The PC is set dependent on
the value of the input signal do_fwd_dct controlling whether a forward or inverse transform
should occur.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
45
==PAGE:54==
All multiplications compute the product of a register value and one of 29 unique constants.
The multiplier’s first input is thus read from the register file, and the second input is ob-
tained by a constant decoder ROM, mapping the values [0 ∶28] to a given constant. On
instructions where a multiplication is not performed, the inputs to the multiplier are kept
fixed by registers to reduce switching activity in the multiplier.
The 2 MSB of the register file write addresses are used to control writeback behavior and
outputting the final results. Addresses [0 ∶15] with MSB’s 2'b00 are used to store the 16
input values. When the destination has the 2 MSB set to 2'b00, this disables the register
file writeback and instead enables the write-enable signal on the output interface.
Since the reference implementation requires 132 instructions for each transform, the total
size of the instruction ROM would slightly exceed 256 instructions. It was desired to
reduce the the number of instructions required for each transform to 128 instructions, such
that the instruction ROM would utilize all possible addresses in an 8-bit address space.
By analyzing the reference implementation, a number of unnecessary move instructions
were identified. By removing these instructions and reordering some other instructions
to remove dependencies, it was possible to reduce the number of instructions for each
transform down to 128, fitting all instructions in a 256-entry ROM.
5.2.4
Shape Search
The shape search is the most complex submodule of the SNS quantization. This submod-
ule is responsible for determining the four shape candidates, as outlined in section 4.4.2
The LC3 specification presents the unit pulse placement strategy described in section 4.4.2,
where pulses are placed iteratively. It also presents a strategy for placing multiple pulses
at once. This downside of this multi-pulse placement strategy is that it requires a division
which cannot be replaced with a lookup table. The multi-pulse strategy is used in the DSP
implementation, but using the multi-pulse strategy in the accelerator would require a hard-
ware division unit which is only used once per processed frame. This was not deemed
worthwhile, and as will be shown later, the shape search module can still efficiently place
the pulses using the iterative strategy.
The module is implemented as an FSM with a datapath. The FSM diagram for the module
is shown in Figure 5.16, and a high-level block diagram is shown in Figure 5.17.
Once the go signal is asserted, the absolute value of the input vector 𝐱is computed and
stored in a separate memory. The pseudo-state PLACE_PULSES is responsible for instru-
menting the pulse search module. The pulse search module implements the iterative
placement strategy described in section 4.4.2. The PLACE_PULSES state will iterate over
all indices for a given pulse configuration, then add a unit pulse at the index specified by
the pulse search module. It will repeat this process until the 𝐾pules for a given pulse
configuration have been placed. The datapath for the pulse search block is shown in
Figure 5.18.
The indexing scheme used in the FSM is opposite to the scheme shown in Table 4.5.
This is done to make memory indexing easier. The module starts by placing the pulses
associated with 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 3 (𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑑𝑥= 0, memory offset 0). Once all 𝐾= 6 pulses have
been placed, these pulses are copied into the section of the y-memory associated with
𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 2 (𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑑𝑥= 1, memory offset 16) as the shape candidate for 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 3 is a
subset of the shape candidate for 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 2. The energy value for the pulse vector is
saved in a separate register, for use when unit-energy normalizing the vectors later.
Once the 𝐾= 8 pulses for 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 2 have been placed, some of these pulses may be
46
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:55==
ctrl_if.go / 
reset registers
IDLE
Reset
cnt == 15 /
cnt := 0
DO_INIT_ROUTINE
---
(Compute abs(x) for all
inputs, find max(abs(x))
cnt < 15 /
cnt++
cnt >= high_pulse_index[shape_idx]
COPY_FAR_TO_NEAR
---
y[shape_idx][cnt] := y[shape_idx-1]
[cnt]
COPY_NEAR_TO_AB
---
y[shape_idx][cnt] := y[shape_idx-1][cnt]
pulse_cnt += y[shape_idx-1][cnt]
energy_y += square_lut[y[shape_idx-1][cnt]]
cnt < high_pulse_index[shape_idx]
/ cnt++
UPDATE_CORR
---
corr_xy += xabs[cnt] *
y[shape_idx-1][cnt]
cnt >= high_pulse_index[shape_idx]
pulse_idx < 15
/ pulse_idx++
shape_idx := 0
PLACE_LAST_PULSE
---
y[shape_idx][argmax.max_idx] = 1
cnt := 0
energy[shape_idx+1] := energy_y + 1
gain_search.gs_done
SIGNAL_SEARCH_DONE
---
search_done = 1
shape_done && shape_idx == 0 (y_far) /
energy[shape_idx] := ps.best_energy;
shape_idx++
shape_done
&& shape_idx == 1 (y_near) /
energy[shape_idx] := ps.best_energy
pulse_cnt := 0; shape_idx++
energy_y := 0; corr_xy := 0; 
shape_done && shape_idx == 2 (y_AB) /
pulse_idx := 10; argmax.clear = 1;
energy[shape_idx] := ps.best_energy;
FIND_LAST_PULSE
---
argmax_idx = pulse_idx;
argmax_data = xabs[pulse_idx]
argmax.valid = 1
cnt < high_pulse_index[shape_idx]
/ cnt++
PLACE_PULSES
---
(resets cnt to 0)
cnt >= high_pulse_index[shape_idx]
!gain_search.gs_done
cnt >= 15
OUTPUT_SHAPE_VECTOR
---
enum_wdata = y[3 - gain_search.shape]
[cnt];
(if gain_search.shape == 0, use y[2][cnt])
enum_waddr = cnt;
enum_we = 1'b1
SIGNAL_OUT_DONE
---
out_done = 1
cnt >= high_pulse_index[shape_idx]
&& shape_idx == 2
OUTPUT_DATA
---
gs_wdata = x[cnt] < 0 ? -y[shape_idx][cnt] : y[shape_idx]
[cnt]
gs_waddr = {offset_lut[shape_idx], cnt}
gs_we = 1'b1
(when shape_idx == 3, index with shape_idx=2)
gs_energy = energy[shape_idx]
cnt < 15 /
cnt++
cnt >= 15 && shape_idx < 3 /
cnt := 0; shape_idx++
cnt < 15 /
cnt++
Figure 5.16: FSM diagram for the shape search module. The state PLACE_PULSES is a
pseudo-state that contains multiple other states, used to send data into the pulse search
module.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
47
==PAGE:56==
gs_energy
ISQRT
LUT
+1
>>1
wdata
7
5
16
17
gs_waddr
gs_we
D
Q
D
Q
waddr
we
17
SEXT
15
16
we
waddr
wdata
raddr
rdata
X[16]
we
waddr
wdata
y
we
waddr
wdata
raddr
rdata
Y[48]
energy_y_current
corr_xy_current
STATE &
CONTROL LOGIC
xabs
we
waddr
wdata
raddr
rdata
XABS[16]
best_idx
best_corr
PULSE
SEARCH
5
16
8
20
4
pulse_idx
clear,valid,busy
4
2
20
best_energy
ABS
7
0
1
NEG
[15]
16
>>1
16
*
D
Q
D
Q
SEXT
Output Interface
Input Interface
Figure 5.17: High level block diagram for the shape search module. Several control sig-
nals omitted for clarity. Unit energy normalization pipeline on output shown in detail.
48
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:57==
copied to 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 1 (𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑑𝑥= 2, memory offset 32). However, the valid pulse indices
for 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 1 are only [0 ∶9] whereas the valid indices for 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 2 are [0 ∶15]. To
facilitate this, the energy_y register is reset after saving the total energy for 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 2.
The pulse values for indices 𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑠𝑒𝑖𝑑𝑥∈[0 ∶9] are copied from 𝐲𝐧𝐞𝐚𝐫to 𝐲𝐀.
Since the energy_y register is reset, the energy for 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗
= 1 must be recom-
puted. When copying the components from 𝐲𝐧𝐞𝐚𝐫to 𝐲𝐀, the energy contribution from
𝐲𝐧𝐞𝐚𝐫(𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑠𝑒𝑖𝑑𝑥) is the square of that component’s amplitude. Since the maximum com-
ponent amplitude at this point is 8, this squaring is implemented with a 9-element
lookup table instead of a multiplier. The correlation contribution is found by multiplying
𝐲𝐧𝐞𝐚𝐫(𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑠𝑒𝑖𝑑𝑥) ⋅|𝐱(𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑠𝑒𝑖𝑑𝑥)|.
xabs
+
corr_xy_current
16
20
20
*
16
D
Q
corr_rnd_sq
*
A-B
>0
y
+
energy_y_current
8
8
*
5
D
Q
en
best_idx
4
best_corr
best_idx
best_energy
<<1
6
32
32
corr_up_shift
<<
20
5
D
Q
energy
sext
16
D
Q
en
    best_corr_sq
D
Q
en
best_corr
8
16
D
Q
corr_pipe
16
D
Q
pulse_idx_pipe
sext
8
D
Q
valid_pipe
found_new_best
found_new_best
best_pulse_en
Round to
16MSB
D
Q
en
best_energy
20
20
4
valid
D
Q
has_best_pulse
pulse_idx
clear
busy
D
Q
en
new_corr_pipe
Figure 5.18: Datapath for the pulse search module. The signal corr_up_shift is used to
left-shift the correlation value, such that the largest possible correlation is unit normalized.
This ensures that no significant digits are lost when rounding from 20 to 16 bits.
After the 𝐾= 10 pulses for 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 1 have been placed, only 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 0 remains. As
this only requires placing one pulse in scale factor set B (indices [10 ∶15]), this pulse must
be placed at the index where the magnitude of 𝐱is greatest. This additional pulse is saved
in the same 16 memory locations as are used for 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 1, as their only difference is
the additional pulse in indices [10 ∶15].
After all shape candidates have been determined, they must be unit-energy normalized
and transmitted to the gain search module. This involves computing the inverse square
root of the vector’s energy and multiplying each vector component with that value. The
smallest possible energy is 6, for 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 3 with no stacked pulses. The largest possi-
ble energy is 101, for 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗= 0 with 10 stacked pulses in scale factor set A, and one
additional pulse in scale factor set B. Due to the limited set of energy values, the inverse
square root can be replaced with a lookup table, labeled ISQRT LUT in Figure 5.17.
The output datapath, shown in Figure 5.17, first negates the shape candidate component
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
49
==PAGE:58==
if the corresponding value in 𝐱is negative. Next, the energy value of the current shape
candidate is used to index the lookup table, outputting the inverse square root of the
energy. A multiplier uses this value to unit-energy normalize each vector component.
The result is rounded to 16 bits, and the output is transmitted to the gain search module.
5.2.5
Gain Search
The gain search module is responsible for finding the final choice of 𝑔𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖, 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗pa-
rameters by testing the pre-trained gain values 𝐺𝑖,𝑗for each shape, and selecting the
gain/shape combination that minimizes the error, as shown in eqs. (4.10) and (4.11). It is
implemented as an FSM with a datapath consisting of an MSE block and argmin block,
similar to the implementation for first stage shown in section 5.2.2. The FSM diagram is
shown in Figure 5.19 and the datapath is shown in Figure 5.20. The shape index 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑑𝑥
now corresponds with the 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗values presented in Table 4.5 and is no longer reversed
as was the case in the shape search.
go / 
reset registers
IDLE
vec_idx == 15 /
vec_idx := 0
PROCESS_GAIN_SHAPE
---
MSE.a = x[vec_idx]
MSE.b := G[shape_idx][gain_idx] * xq[shape_idx]
[vec_idx]
MSE.valid = 1
vec_idx < 15; vec_idx ++
!MSE.busy
WAIT_MSE_FINISHED
MSE.busy
(Finished checking all gains for a shape)
gain_idx == max_gain_idx[shape_idx]
&& shape_idx > 0 /
shape_idx--; gain_idx := 0
(More gains for a given shape)
gain_idx < max_gain_idx[shape_idx] /
gain_idx++
SEND_TO_ARGMIN
---
argmin.data = MSE.out
argmin.idx = {shape_idx, gain_idx}
argmin.valid = 1
MSE.clr = 1
SEND_XQ_VECTOR
---
out_waddr = vec_idx;
out_wdata = xq[best_shape_idx][vec_idx]
out_we= 1'b1
SIGNAL_GS_DONE
---
done = 1'b1
Reset
vec_idx < 15 /
vec_idx++
(Finished all gains for all shapes)
gain_idx == max_gain_idx[shape_idx] 
&& shape_idx == 0
Figure 5.19: FSM diagram for the controller in the gain search module.
A lookup table contains the gain values and is indexed by a concatenation of the shape
and gain index. Once all shape/gain combinations have been iterated over, the output
of the argmin module contains the best shape and gain values. The unit energy normal-
ized vector 𝐱𝐪,𝐣for the chosen shape is transmitted to the (I)DCT module, described in
section 5.2.3. Here, it is inverse DCT transformed before the results are written into the
quantization module for the final quantization of the scale factors.
50
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:59==
we
waddr
wdata
raddr
rdata
XQ_MEM[64]
ss_if.waddr
ss_if.wdata
6
16
D
Q
en
gain_idx
{shape_idx, vec_idx}
6
4
2
ss_if.we
3
GAIN TABLE
5
*
we
waddr
wdata
raddr
rdata
X_MEM[16]
dct_if.waddr
dct_if.wdata
dct_if.we
{shape_idx, gain_idx}
MSE BLOCK
mse_valid
0
1
+1
0
0
1
-1
3
0
1
+1
0
[4:3]
[2:0]
ARGMIN
MODULE
32
5
argmin_valid
eam_if.best_shape
mse_clr
STATE &
CONTROL LOGIC
reg_ens
mux_sels
3
2
D
Q
en
shape_idx
D
Q
en
vec_idx
2
3
eam_if.best_gain
3
2
0
1
argmin.best_idx[4:3]
D
Q
out_waddr_pipe
4
D
Q
out_we_pipe
output_if.waddr
output_if.we
output_if.wdata
16
go
done
Figure 5.20: Datapath for the gain search module.
5.2.6
Enumeration and Multiplexing
The enumeration and multiplexing module generates the 28-bit stage 2 codeword, con-
sisting of a “fingerprint” of the pulse configuration 𝐲𝐣and the chosen values of 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗and
𝑔𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖. The fingerprint consists of an index value, up to 24 bits wide, and a leading sign
bit, the sign of the first (lowest index) pulse in the vector.
The implementation consists of two coordinating FSMs. The first FSM, shown in Fig-
ure 5.21 interfaces with the other modules, registering the values of 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝐿𝐹and 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝐻𝐹
as these arrive from stage 1, the 𝑔𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖, 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗values when these arrive from the gain
search, and the 𝐲vector once this arrives from the shape search module. The second
FSM, shown in Figure 5.22 implements the enumeration function, building the index and
leading sign value.
The final stage 2 codeword is composed from 4 values: The stage 2 submode bit, which
is the MSB of 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗, up to 2 bits of the gain index, the leading sign of pulse configuration
set A, and a joint shape index. Without describing the underlying mathematics in too much
detail, the four following equations are used to build the joint indices.
𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑗𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡,0 = (2 ⋅𝑖𝑑𝑥𝐵+ 𝐿𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑑𝐵+ 2) ⋅𝑆𝑍𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝐴,0 + 𝑖𝑑𝑥𝐴
(5.2)
𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑗𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡,1 = 𝐿𝑆𝐵𝑔𝑎𝑖𝑛⋅𝑆𝑍𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝐴,1 + 𝑖𝑑𝑥𝐴
(5.3)
𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑗𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡,2 = 𝑖𝑑𝑥𝐴
(5.4)
𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑗𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡,3 = 𝑆𝑍𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝐴,2 + 𝐿𝑆𝐵𝑔𝑎𝑖𝑛+ (2 ⋅𝑖𝑑𝑥𝐴)
(5.5)
While three of the four equations for the joint indices use multiplications, all of these can
be implemented without a multiplier.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
51
==PAGE:60==
go / reset registers
IDLE
---
dp.done
DO_FIRST_PULSES
---
dp.go = 1
dp.start_pos = start_pos[shape_j]
dp.cnt_max = cnt_max[shape_j]
!dp.done
shape_j == 0 (check B-segment separately)
shape_j != 0
CHECK_SECOND_PULSES
---
idxA := dp.index
lead_sign_A := dp.lsi
dp.done / 
idxB := dp.index
lead_sign_B := dp.lsi
DO_SECOND_SHAPE
---
dp.go = 1
do.start_pos = 15
dp.cnt_max = 5
COMPUTE_ST2_CDWD
---
st2_codeword :=
st2_sel[shape_j]
!dp.done
SIGNAL_DONE
---
done = 1'b1
stage1_idx_valid /
lf_idx := st1.lf_idx;
hf_idx := st1.hf_idx
Reset
gs_indices_valid /
shape_j := gs.shape_j;
gain_i := gs.gain_i
Figure 5.21: FSM diagram for the controller used in the enumeration and multiplexing
module.
52
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:61==
go / 
reset registers;
pos := fsm.start_pos; cnt_max := fsm.cnt_max
IDLE
PUSH_SIGN
---
index := (y[pos] != 0) ? {index[22:0], lsi} : index
lsi := (y[pos] != 0) ? MSB(y[pos]) : lsi
cnt < cnt_max /
cnt++; pos--
cnt == cnt_max
ADD_OFFSET
---
index += offset_table[cnt][col_ptr]
col_ptr += abs(y[pos])
SIGNAL_DONE
---
done = 1'b1
Reset
Figure 5.22: FSM diagram for the datapath controller used in the enumeration and multi-
plexing module.
• For joint index 0, the value of 𝑖𝑑𝑥𝐵is in the range [0 ∶5] and 𝐿𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑑𝐵∈[0 ∶1], leading
to just 12 unique values that must be multiplied with the constant 𝑆𝑍𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝐴,0. The
result of this multiplication can be replaced with a lookup table.
• Likewise, for joint index 1, 𝐿𝑆𝐵𝑔𝑎𝑖𝑛∈[0 ∶1] so the multiplication may be replaced
with a multiplexer selecting between 𝑆𝑍𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝐴,1 and 0.
• For joint index 3, since 𝐿𝑆𝐵𝑔𝑎𝑖𝑛∈[0 ∶1], the expression 𝐿𝑆𝐵𝑔𝑎𝑖𝑛+(2⋅𝑖𝑑𝑥𝐴) may be
implemented by left-shifting 𝑖𝑑𝑥𝐴by one position and placing 𝐿𝑆𝐵𝑔𝑎𝑖𝑛in the LSB
of the shifted value.
In the end, the four joint indices are realized with a single adder, the inputs to which are
selected based on the value of 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗. In the state COMPUTE_ST2_CDWD, the joint index is
generated, and the correct combination of bits is used to generate the codeword.
5.2.7
Scale Factor Quantization
The scale factor quantization is the final step of the processing pipeline. As values arrive
from the inverse DCT transform, the quantized scale factors are given by eq. (5.6).
𝐬𝐜𝐟𝐐= 𝐬𝐭𝟏+ 𝐺𝑔𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖,𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑗⋅𝐬𝐭𝟐
(5.6)
The module is implemented as a pipeline shown in Figure 5.23. The value stored in the
𝐺𝑖,𝑗register and the 𝐬𝐭𝟏vector will always be valid once the inverse DCT transformed
data arrives on the input interface. A counter is used to track the number of values that
have been processed. When the last value is output, the done signal is asserted and the
4-bit counter rolls over to 0, ready for the next frame to be processed.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
53
==PAGE:62==
D
Q
en
Gi,j
gs.best_gain_value
gs.done
dct_if.waddr
dct_if.wdata
dct_if.we
stage1_if.waddr
stage1_if.wdata
stage1_if.we
we
waddr
wdata
raddr
rdata
st1
ADD
MUL
16
16
16
16
16
16
output_if.wdata
16
4
4
D
Q
D
Q
en
D
Q
D
Q
en
D
Q
output_if.waddr
D
Q
D
Q
en
cnt
+1
output_if.we
=15
16
4
done
4
Figure 5.23: Pipeline used for scale factor quantization.
5.3
Optimization Methodology
Upon finishing the implementation of the bitstream module and SNS quantization module,
3 weeks remained of the thesis period. Instead of implementing a third accelerator for
spectral quantization, it was decided to optimize the already implemented accelerators
and document the steps taken in optimizing them. The accelerators have primarily been
optimized for low power consumption, as low power consumption is of utmost importance
in hearing aids.
The methods for estimating power consumption for each module will be further explained
in chapter 7. The results of the power estimates include reports which provide a break-
down of dynamic and idle power usage for each module and all contained submodules, as
well as the total power usage for all instances of a given module. This makes it possible
to identify exactly where most power is used, and address these issues first.
Using fewer memory blocks to reduce clock gating logic
The initial design for the bitstream module contained byte-addressable memory that was
attached to the APB interface. This byte-addressable memory was created by instantiat-
ing separate memories for each of the three byte offsets. Since the synthesis tool infers
these memories with registers instead of memory standard cells, clock gating cells were
created for each entry in each memory. This effectively created 3 clock gating cells for
each memory location.
Since it was not required that the memory be byte-addressable, a single 24-bit memory
was instead instantiated. This reduced the number of clock gating cells for the memory
to 1
3 of the original design, drastically reducing the area and power usage of the controller
module. This single change decreased the dynamic power usage of the bitstream module
by approximately 7 µW.
54
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:63==
Manually disabling submodules while not in use
The pulse search submodule used in the SNS shape search would consume ∼1.5 µW
while idle, even if no inputs were being toggled. This was because clock gating logic was
not being correctly inferred, and some registers were still being clocked.
1
//Register updates without input enabling
2
always_ff @(posedge clk) begin
3
state_reg <= state_next;
4
cnt_reg <= cnt_next;
5
...
6
end
7
8
//Registers with input enable. Reduces idle power
9
always_ff @(posedge clk) begin
10
if (en) begin
11
state_reg <= state_next;
12
cnt_reg <= cnt_next;
13
...
14
end
15
end
Listing 5.1: Comparison of SystemVerilog code for registers with and without register-
enable.
By manually adding a register-enable signal, as shown in listing 5.1, registers with data-
enable signals as well as better clock gating logic was inferred, completely eliminating
the idle power usage in the pulse search module, at the cost of a very small increase in
area. A similar technique was used in many other modules, where submodules were not
correctly disabled while idling.
Keeping inputs to modules constant instead of resetting to zero
Related to the previous point on disabling registers when not in use, care has also been
taken to reduce the power usage due to switching when modules are not in use. This is
shown in e.g. the block diagram for the (I)DCT module in Figure 5.15, where registers are
used to keep the inputs to the multiplier constant when not in use.
The additional area required to implement these registers is a worthwhile trade-off, as
this essentially eliminates unwanted switching activity in the partial product generation
and partial product reduction tree.
Accepting longer execution times for lower energy usage
The first iteration of some modules was designed with scalability and parallelism as sec-
ondary goals. For example, the first stage of SNS quantization was designed to support
multiple MSE modules operating in parallel. By reading out 𝑁values from the 𝐇𝐅𝐂𝐁
and 𝐋𝐅𝐂𝐁codebooks at once, processing time in SNS stage 1 could almost be reduced
by a factor of 𝑁.
Further testing showed that, while multiple MSE modules per codebook did obviously re-
duce processing time, the increase in power consumption was not offset by the reduction
in processing time. In the end, using one MSE module for each of the codebooks leads to
the lowest amount of energy used when executing SNS stage 1. Further reduction, e.g.
using just one MSE module for both codebooks, would not lead to a further drop in energy
usage, as the increase in processing time would be too large to offset the reduced power
usage.
By applying all of these principles to the implemented modules, it was possible to greatly
reduce the power consumption of the implemented accelerators. From the first iteration
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
55
==PAGE:64==
of the bitstream module, to the final iteration, power consumption was reduced by 28 %.
For the SNS module, power consumption was reduced by 42 % from the first iteration to
the final iteration.
56
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:65==
6
Test and Verification
This section will briefly describe the steps taken to verify the implemented hardware accel-
erators. Verification has been performed in software, followed by testing the accelerators
on an FPGA.
6.1
Software Verification
To verify the behavior of the implemented accelerators, software and hardware testing
has been extensively applied. A large focus has been placed on in-depth verification of
the accelerators, to ensure that bugs were caught early.
The reference implementation of the LC3 has been instrumented by Oticon engineers,
adding a large number of software probing points. When the reference is used to encode
or decode an audio file, the probed values are dumped into logfiles which can then be
analyzed post-hoc. These log files make it possible to extract stimulus vectors and ex-
pected outputs from the reference implementation, which have been used as inputs to the
modules.
All modules and submodules have been tested by using the SVUnit unit testing framework
[46]. This is a lightweight framework for structuring SystemVerilog unit tests, and contains
functionality for defining setup and teardown test fixtures. It does not define a verification
methodology like the Universal Verification Methodology (UVM). UVM was not used for the
project, as the amount of required boilerplate code in a UVM setup would be prohibitive,
given the time frame of the project.
The test flow for all modules has been relatively similar. Smaller submodules (e.g. multipli-
ers) have been tested with randomly generated input vectors. These tests might include
values that were outside the range of legal values generated when executing the LC3.
This was done to ensure that non-trivial input combinations were applied to the modules,
catching some corner-case bugs.
After the randomized tests passed, an in-depth test of a module’s functionality was be
implemented. These tests apply a single test vector from the reference implementation,
closely tracking its execution. In addition to verifying the final outputs of the test, these
tests also verify intermediate results as the module is processing.
These step-by-step tests have been very useful when performing later modifications and
optimizations, as they made it possible to detect the exact location of a test failure from the
log files. This narrows the scope of signals to be checked while debugging, decreasing
resolution time.
Finally, the modules have been tested by applying a series of test vectors extracted from
the reference implementation. Since subsequent audio frames generated when executing
the LC3 will have similar data, test vectors from non-adjacent frames have been used to
ensure a diverse set of test vectors.
The final tests of the top-level modules test the full functionality of the modules. These
tests include pushing the data onto the module from the APB interface, processing the
data and pulling the results from the module over the APB interface. A total of 152 sepa-
rate unit tests, many of which check hundreds of test vectors, have been implemented.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
57
==PAGE:66==
6.2
Hardware Testing
After verifying the modules in software, and checking that they passed the ASIC synthesis,
they have been synthesized for an FPGA. The FPGA development board used is the
Basys 3 development board with an Artix-7 FPGA, model number XC7A35T-1CPG236C.
The board was chosen as it has a USB/Serial adapter, enabling easy connection with the
board over a serial connection.
To perform the FPGA tests, a Serial-to-APB bridge module has been implemented. This
module receives bytes over the serial connection, converting them into APB read/write
commands. It operates according to the FSM diagram in Figure 6.1.
uart.rx_valid /
apb_we := uart.rx_rdata == 8'b1
IDLE
---
uart.rx_ready = 1
Reset
!apb_we
GET_ADDRESS
---
uart.rx_ready = 1
!uart.rx_valid
uart.rx_valid && byte_cnt == 2 /
(set wdata as on other transition)
WRITE_GET_DATA
---
uart.rx_ready = 1
apb_done
DO_APB_WRITE
---
(Handled by APB FSM)
apb_done
DO_APB_READ
(Handled by APB FSM. Sets
24-bit apb_rdata)
uart.rx_valid /
apb_addr := uart.rx_data;
byte_cnt := 0
apb_we
uart.rx_valid
&& byte_cnt < 2 /
apb_wdata := {uart.rx_data,
apb_wdata[23:8]};
byte_cnt++
!uart.rx_valid
tx_buffer.in_ready
&& byte_cnt == 2
READ_RETURN_DATA
---
tx_buffer.tx_data = apb_rdata[7:0]
tx_buffer.in_valid = 1
!apb_done
tx_buffer.in_ready && byte_cnt < 2 /
apb_rdata := {8'b0, apb_rdata[23:8]}
byte_cnt++
!apb_done
Figure 6.1: FSM Diagram for the serial-to-APB bridge module used for FPGA tests.
The accelerators and bridge module were connected in a wrapper module and synthe-
sized, targeting the FPGA’s default clock frequency of 100 MHz. The initial synthesis did
not pass the timing checks. This was due to multipliers incurring a large delay in the par-
tial product reduction tree. The multipliers were modified to add an elaboration-time flag
that chooses between the default Wallace Tree reduction (for ASIC synthesis) and infer-
ring a multiplier from the * operator (for FPGA synthesis). The * operator synthesizes a
multiplier that uses the DSP blocks on the FPGA, which has a much lower combinational
delay than a multiplier implemented with the FPGA LUT’s.
A Python script is used to push data onto the FPGA over the serial connection and read out
the results. The synthesized designs worked correctly on the first try for both implemented
modules, requiring no additional modifications to the designs. This can likely be attributed
to the large amount of testing that has been performed up front, eliminating unexpected
bugs during the FPGA implementation.
58
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:67==
7
Results and Evaluation
This section presents the result of the project. Synthesis results are presented for ASIC
and FPGA synthesis. The performance of the implemented accelerators is compared to
the current DSP implementation on speed, power and energy. Finally, the results are
evaluated and areas for improvement are highlighted.
7.1
Synthesis Results
All implemented accelerators have been synthesized for a 22 nm ASIC process from
TSMC. The process is an ultra low leakage (ULL) process which emphasizes low leakage
power and high voltage threshold transistors rather than transition speed. This process
has been chosen since one of the primary goals is to reduce overall energy usage when
encoding and decoding LC3 frames.
ASIC synthesis has been performed using Synopsys Design Compiler (DC) NXT version
2022.12, targeting a slow process corner at a target operating temperature of 25 °C. The
target clock frequency is 𝐹𝑠= 24 MHz. Clock gating cells have been automatically in-
serted by DC while synthesizing the designs. The designs have been synthesized down
to the supplied standard cell library, but have not been through place and route (PnR) and
clock tree synthesis. This part of the flow is normally handled by another team at Oticon
and was therefore outside of the feasible scope for this project.
ASIC power estimates have been generated with Synopsys PrimePower. From the pre-
viously mentioned 77 s sound file, 100 frames of data have been extracted from the ref-
erence implementation and used as test vectors. The tests include pushing data onto the
accelerator, processing the data and pulling the results from the accelerator’s memory.
Switching activity information from these tests was used to annotate the synthesized de-
sign, granting a more accurate estimate of power consumption than the static estimate
obtained from Synopsys DC.
To obtain accurate switching activity, it was necessary to flatten all registers into 1-bit regis-
ters. As such, the final synthesized area is slightly larger than required, as the synthesizer
has not been able to use standard cells for multi-bit registers, but only the standard cells
for single-bit registers.
FPGA synthesis has been performed targeting the Basys 3 FPGA development board,
using AMD/Xilinx Vivado 2022.1. The FPGA, an Artix-7 35T, has 20800 6:1 LUTs and
41600 registers.
7.1.1
Bitstream Module
ASIC Synthesis results for the bitstream module are shown in Table 7.1, showing area
and power estimates. The power estimates have been generated assuming the 24 kHz /
48 kbps operating mode, as this provides an upper estimate of the power consumption.
The split between regular voltage threshold (RVT), high voltage threshold (HVT) and ultra-
high voltage threshold (UHVT) cells is shown in Table 7.5. RVT cells have higher leakage
current than HVT cells, which again have higher leakage than the UHVT cells. FPGA
synthesis results are shown in Table 7.2.
In the ASIC synthesis results, the high sequential area for the controller is because this
module also wraps the memory block holding the input and output data. Some of this
memory block is implemented with BRAM in the FPGA. The relatively high power usage
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
59
==PAGE:68==
Name
Comb. area (µm2)
Seq. Area (µm2)
Power
Encode (µW)
Power
Decode (µW)
Arithmetic Coder
1698
493
9.9
13.8
Controller
2845
7983
9.7
9.0
Bitstream Wrapper
635
1295
3.5
3.4
Side/Residual Module
472
407
1.0
0.9
TNS/Spec Coder
3686
429
3.1
4.5
Clock Gating Cells
0
446
0.1
0.2
Idle power
14.2
14.2
Dynamic power
13.1
17.6
Total
9336
11053
27.3
31.8
Table 7.1: ASIC synthesis results for the bitstream module synthesized at 𝐹𝑐𝑙𝑘= 24 MHz.
If synthesized with a flat hierarchy and multi-bit registers, the total area drops by 5 %.
for the controller is due to the cycles spent pushing data onto the controller and pulling
them off at the end.
The module is able to synthesize for the target clock frequency 𝐹𝑐𝑙𝑘= 24 MHz. The
critical path is from the TNS / Spectral coefficient encoder’s state register, through the
memory interface to the memory block in the controller, ending when then read address
is registered. Accounting for clock uncertainty and register setup time, the path has a
positive slack of 0.07 ns.
Name
LUT
Registers
BRAM
DSP Blocks
Arithmetic Coder
526
205
0
1
Controller
314
153
0.5
0
Bitstream Wrapper
143
68
0
0
Side/Residual Writer
246
173
0
0
TNS/Spec Handler
1139
206
1
0
Total
2397
807
0.5
1
Table 7.2: FPGA synthesis results for the bitstream module. Synthesized for 𝐹𝑐𝑙𝑘=
100 MHz.
The design has also been synthesized for 𝐹𝑐𝑙𝑘= 25 MHz, which has a clock period
that is 1.6 ns shorter. The design also meets timing at this clock frequency. The idle
power consumption increases by approximately 0.5 µW, and the proportion of RVT cells
increases from 1.8 % to 2.1 %. This indicates that the design is not constrained to operate
at 𝐹𝑚𝑎𝑥= 24 MHz, but that the synthesis tool has chosen a mixture of standard cells
which meet timing while keeping power consumption as low as possible.
7.1.2
SNS Module
ASIC synthesis results for the SNS module are shown in Table 7.3, showing area and
power estimates. The power estimate for the SNS module is independent of sampling
frequency, as the WMOPS required for SNS quantization is also independent of sampling
frequency and bitrate. FPGA synthesis results are shown in Table 7.4. The proportion of
RVT/HVT/UHVT cells is also shown in Table 7.5.
60
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:69==
Name
Comb. area (µm2)
Seq. Area (µm2)
Power (µW)
Controller
316
753
1.3
(I)DCT16
2370
2107
12.2
Gain Search
2325
3390
9.8
Enumerate and Multiplex
573
463
0.9
SCF Quantization
818
743
1.9
Shape Search
3407
2325
7.8
Stage 1
2400
1706
9.3
Clock Gating Cells
0
547
0.4
Idle power
16.6
Dynamic power
27.0
Total
12209
12034
43.6
Table 7.3: ASIC synthesis results for the SNS quantization module synthesized at 𝐹𝑐𝑙𝑘=
24 MHz. If synthesized with a flat hierarchy and multi-bit registers, the total area drops by
5 %.
For the ASIC synthesis, the module is able to synthesize for target clock frequency 𝐹𝑐𝑙𝑘=
24 MHz. The critical path is in the pulse search module, going through the left-shift, round
and multiply pipeline arriving at the corr_rnd_sq register. Accounting for clock uncertainty
and register setup time, the path has a positive slack of 0.03 ns.
This design has likewise been synthesized for 𝐹𝑐𝑙𝑘= 25 MHz, and is also able to meet
timing at this clock frequency. Again, the idle power consumption increases by 0.5 µW,
and the proportion of RVT cells increases to 5.2 %.
Module
LUT
Registers
BRAM
DSP Blocks
Controller
66
64
0
0
(I)DCT16
191
64
1.5
1
Gain Search
362
194
0.5
1
Enumerate and Multiplex
199
124
0
0
SCF Quantization
31
30
0
1
Shape Search
568
208
0
4
Stage 1
958
467
0
0
Total
2375
1151
2
7
Table 7.4: FPGA synthesis results for the SNS quantization module. Synthesized for
𝐹𝑐𝑙𝑘= 50 MHz.
The higher proportion of RVT cells compared to the bitstream module is mainly due to
the higher number of clock gating registers, as the majority of these are implemented with
RVT cells. The higher proportion of HVT cells comes from the fact that more multipliers
are used. These multipliers are often on the critical path in a module, and the synthesis
tool will insert a mixture of HVT and UHVT cells to meet timing.
For the FPGA synthesis, the design does not meet timing at 100 MHz. Additional effort at
pipelining the design and register balancing was made to meet the FPGA’s default clock
frequency of 100 MHz. This was achieved, but the changes had a negative impact on the
ASIC synthesis, increasing power, area and delay. As the design is primarily expected to
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
61
==PAGE:70==
be implemented in an ASIC, the ASIC-optimized design was favored instead of the FPGA-
optimized design. The Vivado “Clocking Wizard” was used to instantiate a mixed mode
clock management (MMCM) tile to generate a 50 MHz clock for the FPGA implementation
of the SNS quantization module. The design meets timing at 50 MHz.
Cell type
Bitstream Module
SNS Module
RVT
1.8
4.8
HVT
34.6
54.2
UHVT
63.6
41.0
Table 7.5: Proportion of RVT/HVT/UHVT cells for the bitstream module and SNS module.
7.2
Performance Comparison
The WMOPS estimates generated by the LC3 reference implementation are used as a
basis for computing the performance per Watt (PpW), measured in WMOPS/µW, of the
accelerators and the DSP. In addition to comparing performance per Watt, it is also of
interest to compare the energy efficiency, measured in nJ/frame.
Power and performance numbers for the Oticon DSP have been generated by simulating a
vector multiplication benchmark on the DSP executing at 24 MHz. The program performs
4 multiplications per clock cycle. Since multiplications have a complexity weight of 1 in
ITU-T G.191, the program has a complexity of 96 WMOPS.
To compare power and performance of the accelerator and the design, only the dynamic
power is used. The idle power dissipated by the DSP core and accelerators is disre-
garded, as the large DSP core obviously has higher idle power consumption than the
smaller accelerators. The dynamic power consumption of the DSP core when executing
the multiplication benchmark is ≈550 µW, yielding a performance-per-Watt of 𝑃𝑝𝑊𝐷𝑆𝑃=
0.17 WMOPS/µW. This will serve as a baseline for comparing the performance of the ac-
celerators to that of the DSP.
7.2.1
Bitstream Module
For the 16 kHz/32 kbps mode, the average time required to encode an LC3 frame is 1488
clock cycles, of which 304 are spent pushing data onto and pulling data off the accelerator.
This yields an average overhead of
304
1488 = 20 %.
The average time to decode a frame is 2603 clock cycles with 275 of these spent trans-
ferring data between the accelerator and microcontroller. The average overhead for de-
coding is
275
2603 = 11 %.
When operating at 24 kHz/48 kbps, the average time to encode a frame is 2136 clock
cycles, and the average time to decode a frame is 3787 clock cycles. The average data
transfer overhead stays at 20 % when encoding and 10 % when decoding.
A comparison of the bitstream module and the DSP implementation has been performed
to evaluate the hardware accelerator’s performance. The calculations are available in
appendix A.3, and the results are presented in Table 7.6. The analysis only considers
the 16 kHz/32 kbps operating mode, as DSP performance numbers were only available
for this operating mode.
7.2.2
SNS Module
The time required for the accelerator to perform the SNS quantization of a 10 ms LC3
frame averages 1589 clock cycles. Of these, 74 clock cycles are spent pushing data onto
62
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:71==
Name
Encoder value
Decoder value
Cycles/frame (DSP)
11000*
16000*
Cycles/frame (Accelerator)
1488
2603
Accelerator Speedup over DSP
7.4
6.1
Process WMOPS
0.405
0.810
Accelerator max performance (WMOPS)
65.3
75.2
Accelerator PpW (WMOPS/µW)
5.0
4.3
𝑃𝑝𝑊𝑎𝑐𝑐/𝑃𝑝𝑊𝐷𝑆𝑃
29.4
25.3
Accelerator energy usage (nJ/frame)
0.8
1.9
𝐸𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒,𝐷𝑆𝑃/𝐸𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒,𝑎𝑐𝑐
315
193
Program memory savings (%)
11
13
Data memory savings (%)
13
N/A**
Table 7.6: Summary of bitstream module performance analysis when operating in the
16 kHz/32 kbps mode.
* Values are rounded from exact cycle counts for confidentiality.
** Data memory savings apply to both encoder and decoder.
the accelerator and pulling data back off, an average overhead of
74
1589 = 5 %.
The complexity of the SNS quantization does not depend on the current sampling fre-
quency, and the LC3 reference implementation reports an average complexity of 0.695 WMOPS
at both tested sampling frequencies.
The calculations involved for the SNS module are similar to those for the bitstream module,
and are presented in appendix A.4. The results are summarized in Table 7.7.
Name
Value
Cycles/frame (DSP)
12000*
Cycles/frame (Accelerator)
1589
Accelerator Speedup over DSP
7.6
Process WMOPS
0.695
Accelerator max performance (WMOPS)
105.0
Accelerator PpW (WMOPS/µW)
3.9
𝑃𝑝𝑊𝑎𝑐𝑐/𝑃𝑝𝑊𝐷𝑆𝑃
22.9
Accelerator energy usage (nJ/frame)
1.8
𝐸𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒,𝐷𝑆𝑃/𝐸𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒,𝑎𝑐𝑐
153
Program memory savings (%)
10
Data memory savings (%)
5
Table 7.7: Summary of SNS module performance comparison when operating in the
16 kHz/32 kbps mode.
* Value rounded from exact cycle count for confidentiality.
7.2.3
Overall evaluation
Given the performance comparisons of the individual modules, it also interesting to com-
pare the expected performance of a system using both accelerators vs. a system using
none of the accelerators.
When encoding a 10 ms LC3 frame sampled at 𝐹𝑠= 16 kHz, using both accelerators
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
63
==PAGE:72==
grants a speedup of 1.5× over the current implementation. The average energy per frame
drops by 38 % when compared to the implementation without either accelerator.
When decoding a 10 ms LC3 frame sampled at 𝐹𝑠= 16 kHz, using the bitstream accel-
erator grants a speedup of 2× over the current implementation. The average energy per
frame drops by 59 % when compared to the implementation without the accelerator.
These results, the difference in chip area, as well as the program and data memory sav-
ings described previously, are summed up in Table 7.8.
Name
Without accelerators (%)
With accelerators (%)
Encode speed
100
67
Decode speed
100
50
Encode energy/frame
100
62
Decode energy/frame
100
41
Program Memory usage
100
66
Data Memory usage
100
82
Chip area
100
120
Table 7.8: Comparison of DSP implementation with and without using accelerators. All
value are relative to the DSP without accelerators. Lower is better.
The comparisons on energy/frame do not account for idle power dissipation, and only
consider the dynamic power dissipation when executing. Obviously, both accelerators
and the DSP will continue to use power, even when they are not executing.
Likewise, it should be kept in mind that the actual power consumption on the DSP is
likely to be lower than 550 µW, as this estimate was generated with a vector multiplication
benchmark. When the DSP is performing bit-manipulating instructions and additions/sub-
tractions, its power usage is bound to be lower than 550 µW. Even so, it is expected that
using the accelerators represents a large reduction in energy usage.
7.3
Discussion
The results presented above indicate that the implemented accelerators are able to ex-
ecute their respective subsections of the LC3, while providing a notable speedup and
reduction in energy/frame. There are however some limitations to the provided results
that should be taken into account.
The area reported for the ASIC synthesis are for the designs synthesized down to standard
cells, but without performing place and route. Since PnR is never 100 % efficient, there
will be some increase in the final area. Talks with engineers at Oticon indicate that the
growth is on the order of 20 – 30 %.
Likewise, the power estimates are reported for a design that has not been placed and
routed. Clock tree synthesis has therefore not been performed, and the power estimation
model does not account for the additional power required to drive the clock tree, as well
as the larger capacitances of long wires that may occur. The final power utilization may
grow by 30 – 50 % according to Oticon’s engineers.
The estimated DSP power usage of 550 µW is generated from a vector multiplication
benchmark. Since neither bitstream coding or SNS quantization exclusively perform mul-
tiplication, the actual power usage when performing these processes is likely to be lower
than 550 µW.
64
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:73==
Even with these caveats in mind, the accelerators definitely provide a meaningful reduc-
tion in energy usage. Assuming that the total dynamic power of the accelerators increases
by a pessimistic 100 %, the energy per encoded and decoded frame only increases by
0.8 + 1.9 + 1.8 = 4.5 nJ, a negligible amount compared to the energy required to process
the remainder of a frame on the DSP. Assuming a decrease in dynamic DSP power use
of 50 %, the energy reduction from using the accelerators drops to 19 % when encoding
and 30 % when decoding, which are still significant.
These improvements in processing time and energy usage come at the cost of a 20 %
increase in area if both accelerators are added as peripherals to the DSP chip. The initial
design goal was that the accelerators should not exceed 10 % of the DSP area, so this
goal has not been met. It is likely that this initial design goal was too optimistic. There
are still some areas for improvement in the implemented accelerators, and it should be
possible to slightly reduce the area without sacrificing performance. It may also be the
case that a slightly higher energy usage is acceptable, if this would significantly reduce
the area of the accelerators, but this requires further analysis and discussion with Oticon’s
engineers.
The current implementation does not support all LC3 modes. If the implementation should
support all LC3 modes, some modifications to the accelerators would be required.
In the bitstream module, the spectral coefficients are currently packed such that 2 co-
efficients occupy a 24-bit word.
In the worst case, it would be necessary to store
1 coefficient/word, almost doubling the size of the required memory. This would increase
the area and power usage of the bitstream module. Likewise, at most 63 residual bits can
be encoded. It more than 63 residual bits need to be encoded, the size of the memory
would also increase.
When operating at high sampling frequencies, additional information about the LSBs of
truncated spectral coefficients may be packed into the side information. This feature,
indicated by the flag LSBmode, is currently assumed to be disabled. To support higher
sampling frequencies, it would be necessary allocate more space in the bitstream mod-
ule’s input memory block, and that the side information & residuals-writer was updated to
also write this information into the bitstream.
To support higher bitrates than 48 kbps, the size of the memory block in the bitstream
wrapper should likewise be increased from the current 60 bytes. The remaining logic
used to interface with the bitstream wrapper should work as-is, as it does not make any
assumptions as to the size of the bitstream.
The bitstream module has a relatively large overhead associated with transferring data
to/from the module. If another bus protocol is used which supports pipelined accesses,
the number of clock cycles spent transferring data could practically be halved, reducing
the overhead.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
65
==PAGE:74==
8
Conclusion
This project has presented an analysis of the LC3, identifying possible optimization points
in the current DSP implementation at Oticon. Three processes from the codec have been
hardware accelerated: The bitstream encoder, bitstream decoder, and the quantization
step of the spectral noise shaping process.
The accelerators have been implemented in the SystemVerilog hardware description lan-
guage. Extensive testing and verification has been performed to ensure their behavior
was correct. Two pairs of sampling frequency and bitrate are fully supported by the ac-
celerators. Other pairs of sampling frequency and bitrate may also be supported, but the
highest sampling frequencies and bitrates supported in the LC3 are not supported by the
accelerators.
The implemented accelerators have been synthesized for a 22 nm ASIC process, as well
as for an FPGA for physical testing. The synthesized ASIC design has not been through
place-and-route, and as such, the area and power estimates are expected to increase
after this has been performed.
The design has been annotated with switching information to generate accurate estimates
of power consumption . Tests indicate that the accelerators provide a speedup of 6.1 –
7.6 times for the replaced processes, with a significantly lower dynamic power usage.
The energy savings for the individual processes replaced by the accelerators range from
a 150× decrease to a 300× decrease in energy per frame.
The total energy used when encoding a frame is reduced by up to 38 %, and when decod-
ing a frame it has been reduced by up to 59 %. Even when accounting for the increase
in power after place and route, and potentially lower DSP power consumption than what
has been assumed, this indicates a significant reduction in energy usage. By using the
accelerators, 34 % of instructions implementing the LC3 can be removed, and the amount
of data memory used is reduced by 18 %. Adding the accelerators to the DSP chip would
increase its size by 20 %.
The results indicate that hardware acceleration of some parts of the LC3 may be worth-
while, as the energy savings are drastic. Further analysis is required to see if the area of
the accelerators can be reduced, without impacting energy usage negatively, as a 20 %
increase in chip area is more than desired. Additionally, the accelerators may need sup-
port for higher bitrates and sampling frequencies before they can be used in Oticon’s
products.
66
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
Gernot Kubin. “Speech Coding”. In: Wireless Communications. Ed. by Andreas F.
Molisch. John Wiley & Sons, 2011. Chap. 15, pp. 319–342.
[2]
Douglas O’Shaughnessy. Review of methods for coding of speech signals. Dec.
2023. DOI: 10.1186/s13636-023-00274-x.
[3]
R. A. Salami et al. “Speech Coding”. In: Mobile Radio Communications. Ed. by
Raymond Steele and Lajos Hanzo. John Wiley & Sons, 2019. Chap. 3, pp. 187–
334.
[4]
Bluetooth Inc. LE Audio. URL: https://www.bluetooth.com/learn-about-bluetooth/
feature-enhancements/le-audio/.
[5]
Bluetooth Hearing Aid Working Group. Low Complexity Communication Codec.
Tech. rep. 2020. URL: https : / / www . bluetooth . com / specifications / specs / low -
complexity-communication-codec-1-0/.
[6]
Markus Schnell et al. “LC3 and LC3plus: The new audio transmission standards for
wireless communication”. In: Audio Engineering Society 150th Convertion. 2021.
URL: http://www.aes.org/e-lib.
[7]
Bluetooth SIG. Advanced Audio Distribution Profile Specification. 2012. URL: https:
//opus-codec.org/.
[8]
ITU-T. 7kHz Audio Coding Within 64 Kbit/s. Melbourne, 1993.
[9]
Xiph.Org Foundation. Opus Codec. 2024.
[10]
John L. Hennessy and David A. Patterson. “A new golden age for computer ar-
chitecture”. In: Communications of the ACM 62.2 (Feb. 2019), pp. 48–60. ISSN:
15577317. DOI: 10.1145/3282307.
[11]
Brian Degnan, Bo Marr, and Jennifer Hasler. “Assessing Trends in Performance
per Watt for Signal Processing Applications”. In: IEEE Transactions on Very Large
Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems 24.1 (Jan. 2016), pp. 58–66. ISSN: 1063-8210.
DOI: 10.1109/TVLSI.2015.2392942.
[12]
Biagio Peccerillo et al. “A survey on hardware accelerators: Taxonomy, trends, chal-
lenges, and perspectives”. In: Journal of Systems Architecture 129 (Aug. 2022).
ISSN: 13837621. DOI: 10.1016/j.sysarc.2022.102561.
[13]
F. Mayer, D. Dalquen, and T. Dettbarn. “Hardware Accelerating Audio Coding Algo-
rithms”. In: 2006 Digest of Technical Papers International Conference on Consumer
Electronics. IEEE, 2006, pp. 283–284. ISBN: 0-7803-9459-3. DOI: 10.1109/ICCE.
2006.1598421.
[14]
Milos D. Ercegovac and Tomas Lang. Digital Arithmetic. San Francisco, CA: Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, 2003.
[15]
M. Jayasanthi and D. Ashvika. “Implementation of Power Efficient Multiply Accu-
mulate Unit for DSP Applications”. In: 2023 International Conference on Intelli-
gent Technologies for Sustainable Electric and Communications Systems (iTech
SECOM). IEEE, Dec. 2023, pp. 546–551. DOI: 10.1109/iTechSECOM59882.2023.
10435014. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10435014/.
[16]
C. S. Wallace. “A Suggestion for a Fast Multiplier”. In: IEEE Transactions on Elec-
tronic Computers EC-13.1 (Feb. 1964), pp. 14–17. ISSN: 0367-7508. DOI: 10.1109/
PGEC.1964.263830.
[17]
Luigi Dadda. “Some schemes for parallel multipliers”. In: Alta Frequenza 34 (1965),
pp. 349–356.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
67
==PAGE:76==
[18]
D.D. Gajski. “Parallel Compressors”. In: IEEE Transactions on Computers C-29.5
(May 1980), pp. 393–398. ISSN: 0018-9340. DOI: 10.1109/TC.1980.1675589.
[19]
P.C.H. Meier, R.A. Rutenbar, and L.R. Carley. “Exploring multiplier architecture and
layout for low power”. In: Proceedings of Custom Integrated Circuits Conference.
IEEE, 1996, pp. 513–516. ISBN: 0-7803-3117-6. DOI: 10.1109/CICC.1996.510609.
[20]
Priyanka A. Patil and Charudatta Kulkarni. “A Survey on Multiply Accumulate Unit”.
In: 2018 Fourth International Conference on Computing Communication Control
and Automation (ICCUBEA). IEEE, Aug. 2018, pp. 1–5. ISBN: 978-1-5386-5257-2.
DOI: 10.1109/ICCUBEA.2018.8697705. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
8697705/.
[21]
O. Macsorley. “High-Speed Arithmetic in Binary Computers”. In: Proceedings of the
IRE 49.1 (Jan. 1961), pp. 67–91. ISSN: 0096-8390. DOI: 10.1109/JRPROC.1961.
287779.
[22]
B. Dinesh et al. “Comparison of regular and tree based multiplier architectures with
modified booth encoding for 4 bits on layout level using 45nm technology”. In: 2014
International Conference on Green Computing Communication and Electrical En-
gineering (ICGCCEE). IEEE, Mar. 2014, pp. 1–6. ISBN: 978-1-4799-4982-3. DOI:
10.1109/ICGCCEE.2014.6922297.
[23]
Whitney J. Townsend, Earl E. Swartzlander Jr., and Jacob A. Abraham. “A com-
parison of Dadda and Wallace multiplier delays”. In: Advanced Signal Processing
Algorithms, Architectures, and Implementations XIII. Vol. 5205. SPIE, Dec. 2003,
p. 552. DOI: 10.1117/12.507012.
[24]
Tung Thanh Hoang, Magnus Själander, and Per Larsson-Edefors. “High-Speed,
Energy-Efficient 2-Cycle Multiply-Accumulate Architecture”. In: IEEE International
SoC Conference (SOCC). 2009, pp. 119–122. DOI: 10.1109/SOCCON.2009.5398079.
[25]
Narendra C.P. and K.M Ravi Kumar. “Low Power MAC Architecture for DSP Ap-
plications”. In: International Conference on Circuits Communication, Control and
Computing (I4C). IEEE, 2014, pp. 404–407. ISBN: 9781479965465.
[26]
Ben Hamida Asma, Nedra Jarray, and Zitouni Abdelkrim. “Low-Power Hardware
Design of Binary Arithmetic Encoder in H.264”. In: International Journal of Advanced
Computer Science and Applications (IJACSA) 8.7 (2017), pp. 412–416. DOI: 10.
14569/IJACSA.2017.080756. URL: www.ijacsa.thesai.org.
[27]
K. Andra, T. Acharya, and C. Chakrabarti. “A multi-bit binary arithmetic coding tech-
nique”. In: 7th International Conference on Image Processing. Vol. 1. IEEE, 2000,
pp. 928–931. ISBN: 0-7803-6297-7. DOI: 10.1109/ICIP.2000.901112. URL: http:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/901112/.
[28]
William J. Dally, Yatish Turakhia, and Song Han. “Domain-specific hardware ac-
celerators”. In: Communications of the ACM 63.7 (June 2020), pp. 48–57. ISSN:
15577317. DOI: 10.1145/3361682.
[29]
Synopsys. LC3 Codec for ARC Processors. URL: https://www.synopsys.com/dw/
ipdir.php?ds=arc_lc3_codec.
[30]
Cadence. “Tensilica HiFi DSP Family”. 2021. URL: https://www.cadence.com/
content / dam / cadence - www / global / en _ US / documents / tools / silicon - solutions /
compute-ip/hifi-dsps-ds.pdf.
[31]
Jason Hillyard. Packetcraft and ESPICO Accelerate Development of Bluetooth LE
Audio Devices on Arm. June 2022. URL: Packetcraft%20and%20ESPICO%20Accelerate%
20Development%20of%20Bluetooth%20LE%20Audio%20Devices%20on%20Arm.
[32]
John G. Proakis and Dimitris G. Manolakis. Digital Signal Processing: Principles,
Algorithms and Applications. 4th. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson, 2006.
68
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:77==
[33]
N. Jayant, J. Johnston, and R. Safranek. “Signal compression based on models
of human perception”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 81.10 (1993), pp. 1385–1422.
ISSN: 00189219. DOI: 10.1109/5.241504.
[34]
Tom Bäckström et al. Introduction to Speech Processing. 2nd ed. 2022. DOI: 10.
5281/zenodo.6821775. URL: https://speechprocessingbook.aalto.fi.
[35]
Tobias Jähnel, Tom Bäckström, and Benjamin Schubert. “Envelope Modelling for
Speech and Audio Processing using Distribution Quantization”. In: 23rd European
Signal Processing Conference. 2015, pp. 584–588. ISBN: 9780992862633.
[36]
Allen Gersho and Robert M. Gray. Vector Quantization and Signal Compression.
Ed. by Robert Gallagher. Norwell, Massachusetts: Kluwer Academic Publishers,
1992.
[37]
Ian H. Witten, Radford M. Neal, and John G. Cleary. “Arithmetic coding for data
compression”. In: Communications of the ACM 30.6 (June 1987), pp. 520–540.
ISSN: 0001-0782. DOI: 10.1145/214762.214771. URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.
1145/214762.214771.
[38]
Khalid Sayood. “Arithmetic Coding”. In: Introduction to Data Compression. Elsevier,
2012, pp. 91–133. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-12-415796-5.00004-1.
[39]
Fraunhofer IIS. LC3/LC3Plus. 2024. URL: https://www.iis.fraunhofer.de/en/ff/
amm/communication/lc3.html.
[40]
Andreas Spanias, Ted Painter, and Venkatraman Atti. Audio Signal Processing and
Coding. Wiley, Jan. 2007. ISBN: 9780471791478. DOI: 10.1002/0470041978.
[41]
Yuli You. Audio Coding. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2010. ISBN: 978-1-4419-1753-9.
DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4419-1754-6.
[42]
International Telecommunication Union. ITU-T G.191 Software tools for speech and
audio coding standardization. 2023. URL: https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.191/en.
[43]
David A Patterson and John L Hennessy. Computer Organization and Design RISC-
V Edition. Cambridge MA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2018. ISBN: 978-0-12-812275-4.
[44]
ARM Limited. AMBA ® APB Protocol Specification. 2023. URL: https://developer.
arm.com/documentation/ihi0024/latest/.
[45]
Shoab Ahmed Khan. Digital Design of Signal Processing Systems. 1st ed. Chices-
ter, West Sussex, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2011.
[46]
SVUnit contributors. SVUnit. URL: https://github.com/svunit/svunit.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
69
==PAGE:78==
70
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:79==
A
Appendices
A.1
FSM for Residual Coding
Figure A.1 shows the states used when encoding and decoding residuals in the Side Info
& Residuals module.
COMPUTE_BITS_USED
---
tmp = nbits_side + nbits_ari
go_res /
op := RES
IDLE
---
REG_IN_DATA
---
rangeReg = ari_enc_if.range
range_ari_inc = 2
COMPUTE_BITS_SIDE
---
tmp = 8*bs_if.bytePtrBw +
mask_value
COMPUTE_NBITS_SIDE
---
nbits_side = ctrl_if.nbits - tmp
range[23]
COMP_25_SUB_LOG2_RANGE
---
!range[23] 
/ range_ari_inc += 1
rangeReg <<= 1
mode == ENC
mode == DEC
COMPUTE_NBITS_ARI
---
nbits_ari = 8*bs_if.bytePtrFw +
range_ari_inc
ADD_CACHE_TO_NBITS_ARI
---
nbits_ari +=
{ari_probe_if.has_cache, 3'b0}
ADD_CC_TO_NBITS_ARI
---
nbits_ari +=
8*ari_probe_if.carry_count
mode == ENC
GET_NBITS_RES
---
len := min(mem_wrap.rdata[5:0], NRE)
mem_wrap.valid = 1
mem_wrap.len = 6
mem_wrap.ready
DROP_NBITS_FROM_MEM
---
Reset
DECODE_SUB_OFFSET
---
nbits_ari -= 32
SHIFT_BITS_BS
mode == DEC /
nbits_enc := 6;
len := nbits_res
wdata := nbits_res
COMPUTE_BITS_REM
---
NRE = nbits - tmp
SHIFT_BITS_MEM
!mem_wrap.ready
Figure A.1: FSM diagram for the Side Information & Residuals module, showing states
used when coding residual data. The dashed states are shown in Figure 5.10
A.2
FSM for TNS Encoding and Decoding
The FSM diagrams for the TNS encoder and decoder are shown in Figure A.2 and Fig-
ure A.3, respectively.
A.3
Bitstream Module Performance Analysis
The complexity of bitstream encoding and decoding depends on the chosen sampling fre-
quency. When operating at 16 kHz/32 kbps, encoding a frame has an average complexity
of 0.405 WMOPS, and decoding a frame has an average complexity of 0.816 WMOPS.
When operating at 24 kHz/48 kbps, encoding has an average complexity of 0.610 WMOPS
and decoding has an average complexity of 1.242 WMOPS. In both cases, the complexity
of decoding is roughly 2× the complexity of encoding.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
71
==PAGE:80==
go /
filter_idx := 0;
rc_idx := 0
IDLE
GET_TNS_PARAMETERS
---
mem_if.addr =
TNS_PARAM_ADDR
STORE_TNS_PARAMETERS
---
(tns_lpc_weight, num_tns_filt,
rc_order) = mem_if.rdata
rc_order[3:0] != 0
&& mode == ENC
rc_order[3:0] == 0
CHECK_RC_ORDER
ari_enc_if.ready
ENCODE_RC_ORDER
---
ari_enc_if.valid = 1
(Set f,cf from RC_ORDER
tables)
GET_RC_COEFFS
---
mem_if.addr = {RC_COEFF_BASE,
filter_idx, (rc_idx == 4) }
STORE_RC_COEFFS
---
rc_coeffs = rdata[19:0]
rc_idx < rc_order && 
rc_idx == 3 &&
ari_enc_if.ready 
/ rc_idx ++
ari_enc_if.ready && k == rc_order
ENCODE_RC_COEFF
---
(Set f,cf from RC_COEFF tables)
ari_enc_if.valid = rc_idx !=
rc_order[3:0]
rc_idx < rc_order &&
rc_idx != 3 && 
ari_enc_if..ready
/ rc_coeffs >>= 5;
rc_idx++;
filter_idx < num_tns_filter 
/ rc_idx := 0; rc_order >>= 4; filter_idx++
CHECK_FILTER_IDX
filter_idx == num_tns_filter && mode == ENC
ctrl_state == DO_SPEC
DONE
!ari_enc_if.ready
!ari_enc_if.ready
ctrl_state != DO_SPEC
Reset
Figure A.2: FSM diagram for the FSM used when encoding TNS filters.
72
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:81==
IDLE
GET_TNS_PARAMETERS
---
raddr = addr of num_tns_filt
STORE_TNS_PARAMETERS
---
(tns_lpc_weight, num_tns_filt,
rc_order) = rdata[xx]
rc_order[3:0] == 0
CHECK_RC_ORDER
DEC_RC_ORDER
---
do_dec_rc_order = 1
dec_done /
rc_order[3:0] := dec_sym + 1
rc_idx := 0
!dec_done
dec_done &&
rc_order[3:0] == (3,7)
rc_idx >= rc_order[3:0]
DEC_FILTER_COEFF
---
do_dec_rc_coeff = 1
ari_enc_if.valid = (rc_idx != rc_order)
rc_idx == 8
rc_idx != 8
DEC_OUTPUT_FILTER_COEFF
---
mem.addr = {RC_COEFF_BASE,
filter_idx, (rc_idx != 4)}
mem.wdata = rc_coeff
mem.we = 1
rc_idx == (3,7)
DEC_FILL_FILTER_COEFF_8
---
rc_coeffs := {5'd8, rc_coeff[19:5]}
rc_idx++
filter_idx < num_tns_filters /
rc_order := {rc_order[3:0], rc_order[7:4]}
filter_idx++
filter_idx >= num_tns_filters
&&  num_tns_filters == 1
filter_idx >= num_tns_filters && num_tns_filters == 2 /
rc_order := {rc_order[3:0], rc_order[7:4]}
CHECK_FILTER_IDX
OUTPUT_TNS_PARAMS
---
mem.waddr = TNS_PARAM_ADDR
mem.wdata = {rc_order, tns_lpc_weight,
num_tns_filters}
!dec_done
dec_done && rc_idx < rc_order[3:0] /
rc_idx++; rc_coeffs := {dec_sym, rc_coeffs[19:5]}
rc_idx != (3,7)
rc_order[3:0] != 0
&& mode == DEC
Reset
Figure A.3: FSM diagram for the FSM used when decoding TNS filters.
Bitstream Encode
Since the target clock frequency is 24 MHz and the average time to encode a frame is 1488
clock cycles, the accelerator is able to process 24⋅106
1488 = 16129 frames per second when
operating at 100 % throughput. This number can be used to calculate the accelerator’s
maximum performance in eq. (A.1).
𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑓𝐵𝑆,𝑒𝑛𝑐= (16 129 frames
s
) ⋅(0.405 WMOPS) ⋅(0.01
s
frame) = 65.3 WMOPS
(A.1)
The performance per Watt of the accelerator is then computed as
𝑃𝑝𝑊𝐵𝑆,𝑒𝑛𝑐= 65.3 WMOPS
13.1 µW
= 5.0 WMOPS
µW
(A.2)
Comparing the PpW for the accelerator to the DSP, the accelerator delivers 5.0
0.17 = 29.4×
more performance per Watt.
The measure of performance per Watt should not stand alone. The energy per frame
is also desired. Given the time to process a frame and the dynamic power usage, the
energy usage per frame is
𝐸𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒,𝑎𝑐𝑐,𝑒𝑛𝑐= 13.1 µW ⋅(1488 cycles
frame ) ⋅(
1
24 ⋅106
s
cycle) = 0.8
nJ
frame
(A.3)
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
73
==PAGE:82==
The number of cycles to encode a frame on the DSP is approximately 11000. The upper
estimate for energy per frame on the DSP is then
𝐸𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒,𝐷𝑆𝑃,𝑒𝑛𝑐= 550 µW ⋅(11 000 cycles
frame ) (
1
24 ⋅106
s
cycle) = 252
nJ
frame
(A.4)
Comparing these numbers, the accelerators uses 252
0.8 = 315× less energy per frame than
the DSP when encoding a bitstream.
Bitstream Decode
Similar calculations for the performance per Watt and energy per frame may be performed
for the bitstream decoder. Operating at maximum throughput, it can process 24⋅106
2603 = 9220
frames per second. The maximum performance of the bitstream decoder, the perfor-
mance per Watt, and the energy per frame is then given by eqs. (A.5) to (A.8).
𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑓𝐵𝑆,𝑑𝑒𝑐= (9220 frames
s
) ⋅(0.816 WMOPS) ⋅(0.01
s
frame) = 75.2 WMOPS
(A.5)
𝑃𝑝𝑊𝐵𝑆,𝑑𝑒𝑐= 75.2 WMOPS
17.6 µW
= 4.3 WMOPS
µW
(A.6)
𝐸𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒,𝑎𝑐𝑐,𝑑𝑒𝑐= 17.6 µW ⋅(2603 cycles
frame ) ⋅(
1
24 ⋅106
s
cycle) = 1.9
nJ
frame
(A.7)
𝐸𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒,𝐷𝑆𝑃,𝑑𝑒𝑐= 550 µW ⋅(16 000 cycles
frame ) (
1
24 ⋅106
s
cycle) = 367
nJ
frame
(A.8)
Comparing these numbers, the performance per Watt of the accelerator is 4.3
0.17 = 25.3×
higher than that of the DSP, and the energy per frame is 367
1.9 = 193× higher on the DSP
than on the accelerator.
For both the encode and decode, it should be noted that the DSP benchmark exclusively
performs multiplications, whereas bitstream coding is primarily a mixture of multiplications
and bit-shift. The actual power usage of the DSP is bound to be lower, but the exact value
is not known. Bitstream decoding performs more multiplications than encoding, and the
DSP power usage is bound to be higher when decoding than encoding. This is also
evident from Table 7.1.
Bitstream Module Memory Savings
By implementing the accelerator, fewer instructions must be executed on the DSP core.
Additionally, the lookup tables holding frequency information do not have to be stored
in memory, as these are now implemented with the accelerator. By implementing the
bitstream encoder and decoder in hardware, 24 % of the instructions in program memory
may be removed. Some instructions for pushing data onto the accelerator and pulling it
back off the accelerator must be added, but this still represents a significant reduction in
program code size.
The lookup tables used for the arithmetic encoding have also been moved to the acceler-
ator. Implementing these in the accelerator represents a 13 % reduction in data memory
usage
74
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:83==
A.4
SNS Module Performance Analysis
The complexity of the SNS quantization does not depend on the current sampling fre-
quency, and the LC3 reference implementation reports an average complexity of 0.695
WMOPS at both tested sampling frequencies.
Since the target clock frequency is 24 MHz and the average time to process a frame is 1589
clock cycles, the accelerator is able to process 24⋅106
1589 = 15104 frames per second when
operating at 100 % throughput. This number can be used to calculate the accelerator’s
maximum performance in eq. (A.9).
𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑓𝑆𝑁𝑆= (15 104 frames
s
) ⋅(0.695 WMOPS) ⋅(0.01
s
frame) = 105.0 WMOPS
(A.9)
The performance per Watt of the accelerator is then computed as
𝑃𝑝𝑊𝑆𝑁𝑆= 105.0 WMOPS
27.0 µW
= 3.9 WMOPS
µW
(A.10)
Comparing the PpW for the accelerator to the DSP, the accelerator delivers 3.9
0.17 = 22.9×
more performance per Watt.
Given the time to process a frame and the dynamic power usage, the energy usage per
frame is
𝐸𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒,𝑎𝑐𝑐= 27.0 µW ⋅(1589 cycles
frame ) ⋅(
1
24 ⋅106
s
cycle) = 1.8
nJ
frame
(A.11)
The number of cycles to encode a frame on the DSP is approximately 12000. The upper
estimate for energy per frame on the DSP is then
𝐸𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒,𝐷𝑆𝑃= 550 µW ⋅(12 000 cycles
frame ) (
1
24 ⋅106
s
cycle) = 275
nJ
frame
(A.12)
Comparing these numbers, the accelerators uses 275
1.8 = 153× less energy per frame than
the DSP when encoding a bitstream.
By implementing the accelerator, fewer instructions must be executed on the DSP core.
Additionally, some lookup tables used in divisions and during the final enumeration and
multiplexing do not have to be stored in memory, as these are now implemented with
the accelerator. By implementing the SNS module, 10 % of the instructions in program
memory may be removed, and 5 % of the data memory is freed up. Some instructions for
pushing data onto the accelerator and pulling it back off the accelerator must be added,
but this still represents a significant reduction in program code size.
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
75
==PAGE:84==
B
List of abbreviations
• ADC: Analog to Digital Converter
• ALU: Arithmetic and Logic Unit
• APB: Advanced Peripheral Bus
• ASIC: Application Specific Integrated Circuit
• BLE: Bluetooth Low Energy
• BRAM: Block RAM
• CPA: Carry Propagate Adder
• CPU: Central Processing Unit
• CSA: Carry Save Adder
• DCT: Discrete Cosine Transform
• DC: (Synopsys) Design Compiler
• DSP: Digital Signal Processing / Digital Signal Processor
• EAM: Enumerate and Multiplex
• EDA: Electronic Design Automation
• FFT: Fast Fourier Transform
• FPGA: Field Programmable Gate Array
• FSM: Finite State Machine
• HF: High Frequency
• HVT: High Voltage Threshold
• IC: Integrated Circuit
• IP: Intellectual Property
• ISS: Instruction Set Simulator
• LC3: Low Complexity Communications Codec
• LD-MDCT: Low-Delay Modified Discrete Cosine Transform
• LF: Low Frequency
• LPC: Linear Predictive Coding
• LSB: Least Significant Bit
• LTPF: Long Term Postfilter
• LUT: Look-up Table
• MAC: Multiply Accumulate
• MMCM: Mixed Mode Clock Management Tile
76
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:85==
• MSB: Most Significant Bit
• MSE: Mean Squared Error
• PCM: Pulse Code Modulation
• PP: Partial Product
• PpW: Performance per Watt
• RVT: Regular Voltage Threshold
• SNS: Spectral Noise Shaping
• SRAM: Static Random Access Memory
• TNS: Temporal Noise Shaping
• UHVT: Ultra High Voltage Threshold
• ULL: Ultra Low Leakage
• UVM: Universal Verification Methodology
• VQ: Vector Quantization (be sure to introduce in design phase)
• WMOPS: Weighted Million Operations Per Second
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
77
==PAGE:86==
C
License Attributions
This thesis has used a number of figures licensed under permissive licenses or from the
public domain. These are attributed in full in this chapter.
C.1
Licenses used
• Creative Commons Attribution Share-Alike 3.0 (CC BY-SA 3.0) https://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
• Creative Commons Attribution Share-Alike 4.0 (CC BY-SA 4.0) https://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/
C.2
Figures used
• Figure 3.1: “Pcm.svg” by Wikipedia user Aquegg, licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.
• Figure 3.9: “Auditoryfiltermaskersignal1.svg” by Wikipedia user Stannered.
Re-
leased into the public domain.
• Figure 3.4: “149889168.png” by Bäckström et. al. [34], licensed under CC BY-SA
4.0.
78
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
==PAGE:87==
Analysis and Hardware Acceleration of the LC3 in Hearing Aids
79
==PAGE:88==
In hearing aids and other resource-constrained devices, minimizing power usage is of great impor-
tance. One way of reducing power usage and freeing up resources is by using dedicated hardware
accelerators to replace resource-intensive tasks. However, by using hardware accelerators, the
overall chip area will increase, and more complex interactions between processor and peripherals
is required.
This thesis presents an analysis of the Low Complexity Communications Codec (LC3) and its current
implementation in Oticon’s hearing aids. Based on this analysis, two hardware accelerators are im-
plemented for the most resource-intensive sections of the current implementation: bitstream coding
and spectral noise shaping. The accelerators have been designed to support two distinct operating
modes, and do not support all operating modes outlined in the LC3 specification.
The accelerators have been implemented in SystemVerilog, extensively tested to verify their cor-
rectness, and synthesized in a 22 nm ASIC process. By using the implemented accelerators, a 1.5×
speedup and 38 % reduction in energy usage is observed when encoding an LC3 frame, and a 2×
speedup and 59 % reduction in energy usage is observed when decoding a frame. Using the ac-
celerators also represents a 34 % reduction in instruction memory usage and an 18 % reduction in
data memory usage. Implementing the accelerators would mean a 20 % increase in chip area on the
Oticon DSP chip.
These results indicate that hardware acceleration of the LC3 is worthwhile, and can lead to substan-
tial reductions in energy consumption and memory usage. Since the accelerators do not yet support
all required operating modes, future work includes updating them to support all operating modes, as
well as additional optimizations to further decrease chip area.
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
