==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Exploring Photogrammetry for High-Fidelity
3D Model Generation: A Power Grid
Inspection Study
Master Thesis
Jørgen Hjemmen Andersen
(s222995)
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 6352
electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master of Science thesis was prepared in part at the department of Electrical
and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, and in part at
SINTEF’s oﬀices in Oslo. The thesis is part of the the requirements for acquiring a
Master of Science degree in Autonomous Systems.
Kongens Lyngby, June 12, 2024
Jørgen Hjemmen Andersen (s222995)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
The following thesis project was a cross-country collaboration, and would not have
been possible without the help and guidance of some really bright minds.
I would like to start of by thanking my DTU supervisor Evangelos Boukas, who
contributed with interesting questions and discussions, as well as some calming re-
marks in times of distress.
Then, I would like to express my sincere gratitude towards SINTEF, for giving me
access to an oﬀice space, their high-performance computers, and all the knowledge
gathered in their oﬀices. More importantly though, I want to thank them for providing
me with Asbjørn Berge as my supervisor, who has spent numerous hours outside
our scheduled meetings to assist me along the way. Thank you for the interesting
discussions, valuable insights and constructive feedback. Additionally, I want to thank
Ludvig Løken Sundøen, who joined all weekly meetings after only a short discussion
in the hallway, for sharing his experiences and knowledge.
Finally, I would like to thank my family and friends for cheering me forward
toward my goal. Most important among them has been Nora. Thank you for your
unprecedented support, and for having the highest beliefs in me. Thank you also for
proof-reading and general academic advise, without which, this thesis report would
not have been the same.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The field of photogrammetry concerns itself with recreating three-dimensional struc-
tures found in the real world from multiple overlapping images captured of these struc-
tures from different viewing angles. For the past two decades, great advancements
in this field have been made, providing robust ways of generating three-dimensional
models from two-dimensional representations of them. This has been applied to areas
such as game development, modelling of construction sites, and inspections.
Recent advancements in sensor technology have seen laser scanners become the
de facto way of capturing the world in three-dimensions.
They are accurate and
reliable, but unfortunately still quite expensive. Meanwhile, advancements in camera
technology have made it cheaper than ever to capture high-quality pictures, even on
small devices such as drones.
In this thesis project, how to utilise high-resolution images and the theories of
photogrammetry, to obtain three-dimensional models that have a higher level of detail
than sparse laser scanners, is explored, in the context of power line inspections using
drones.
The project shows that three-dimensional models generated from as few as thirty
unstructured images, outperform the level of detail provided by a laser scanner. Fur-
thermore, it denotes ways the current data collection process can be improved, to
enhance the quality of the photogrammetric reconstructions.
Ultimately, this thesis project displays the strengths of photogrammetry in a drone
inspection setting, showcasing that a structured data collection, along with high-
resolution cameras, can greatly improve three-dimensional reconstructions of the real-
world environment when compared to sparse laser scanners.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
v
Contents
vii
List of Abbreviations
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Project and its Motivations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Generative Artificial Intelligence Disclaimer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Image Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Structure from Motion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Multi-View Stereo
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Fusing Images and LiDAR Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Neural Radiance Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
The Data
13
3.1
The Data Provider . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
LiDAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Implementation Study
17
4.1
Colmap
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Meshroom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Nerfstudio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4
Comparisons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5
Implementation
31
5.1
Broad Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
The Pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Results
43
6.1
3D Reconstruction from Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.3
Ablation Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7
Discussion
59
7.1
The Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.3
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
8
Conclusion
73
A Additional Results
75
Bibliography
79
==PAGE:11==
List of Abbreviations
CPU
Central Processing Unit
CUDA
Compute Unified Device Architecture
DBSCAN
Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise
FPFH
Fast Point Feature Histograms
GPS
Global Positioning System
GPU
Graphics Processing Unit
GUI
Graphical User Interface
ICP
Iterative Closest Point
LiDAR
Light Detection And Ranging
MVS
Multi-View Stereo
NeRF
Neural Radiance Fields
RANSAC
RANdom SAmple Consensus
RMSE
Root Mean Squared Error
SfM
Structure from Motion
SIFT
Scale-Invariant Feature Transform
UTM
Universal Transverse Mercator
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This chapter will give a brief introduction of this thesis project, describing the main
objectives and motivations behind it. Additionally, a short disclaimer about the use
of generative artificial intelligence for this report is given.
1.1
The Project and its Motivations
The current master thesis project was carried out in collaboration with SINTEF, as a
part of their ongoing SmartWing Infrastructure Failure Tracking and Emergency Re-
sponse (SWIFTER) project [1]. SWIFTER aims to make inspections of the electricity
grid more cost effective, faster, safer and, eventually, carried out fully autonomously,
by drones. Their goal is to provide a sensor suite to go along with smart algorithms,
that ultimately will be able to detect and localise critical faults in the electricity grid,
even in visibility constrained conditions.
Traditionally, inspections of the low-voltage power grid have been carried out us-
ing helicopters. Although allowing for inspections of large areas in one flight, as well
as carrying a heavy payload, this is both expensive and unsafe when compared to the
modern alternative - using drones. With today’s technology, drones are able to carry
out these inspections at a fraction of the cost, while keeping the drone pilots safely
on the ground. Moreover, the drones can be programmed to operate autonomously,
even removing the need for the drone operator entirely. This is made possible by
advancements in technologies such as microprocessors, batteries and wireless commu-
nication, as well as improvements of the sensors that can be mounted to a drone.
High-resolution cameras, both normal RGB cameras and thermal cameras, Global
Positioning System (GPS) sensors, and even light detection and ranging sensors (Li-
DAR) can now be mounted to drones. This has led to the rise of drone inspections,
which is how most of the low-voltage power lines in Norway are being inspected today.
Despite being safer and easier to carry out, inspections using drones are still time
consuming, and heavily reliant on human interpretation. This is what SWIFTER is
looking to improve, and during the first few years of the project, most of the developed
algorithms have focused on processing the image and LiDAR data individually. The
drone is now able to identify masts during its inspection run, capturing pictures of it
as it flies by, as well as identifying crucial components of the mast. From the LiDAR
sensor, the drone obtains a 3D representation of the inspected route, and some work
has been put into developing algorithms that correctly classify this data. However,
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
the interplay between these two data sources, and how one can benefit from the other,
has not yet been explored.
This thesis will explore this interplay, looking at how to obtain 3D models with
higher density of the inspected area by combining the high-resolution images captured
by the onboard camera, and the realistically scaled, but sparse, data obtained by the
LiDAR sensor. The belief is that the collected data, when combined, can be used
to create more accurate 3D reconstructions of the inspected areas, providing the
inspectors with another tool to detect critical faults or failures, before they happen.
1.2
Objectives
In order to achieve the goal of creating real-world-like 3D reconstructions of the
inspected electricity grids, the following objectives must be met during this thesis:
1. Gain the necessary knowledge to know how to improve the fidelity of 3D models,
provided the available sensor data.
2. Find multiple state-of-the-art solutions that address the problem of 3D recon-
struction from images, test them on the provided data, and decide which one
is best suited for this project.
3. Develop an algorithm that takes the sensor data as input, and outputs high-
fidelity 3D models, without human interaction.
4. Output 3D models with 10 times higher point density than that of the LiDAR
scanner.
5. Orient and scale the 3D models to be accurate representations of the real-world
scene.
6. Obtain a root mean squared error of less than 0.14 meters when aligning the
generated point clouds with the LiDAR point clouds.
This will be done by first carrying out a thorough literature review, where the
goal is to find multiple state-of-the-art solutions that can be tested on the provided
image data. The next goal is to obtain the densest model possible, focusing solely on
the reconstructed 3D geometry inferred from the images. Finally, aligning the denser
3D models generated from the images with the equivalent but sparser LiDAR data, is
the final goal, providing a 3D representation of the real-world scene that is as realistic
as possible. All code developed for this thesis project can be found in the following
repository [2].
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Generative Artificial Intelligence Disclaimer
3
1.3
Generative Artificial Intelligence Disclaimer
The following thesis paper holds no content directly generated by any generative
artificial intelligence solution, and is strictly the wording of the author based on the
cited literature. This is a choice made by the author to ensure authenticity. With that
being said, the author cannot guarantee that no part of this report can be reminiscent
of artificially generated text, as it is likely that the data the large language models
are trained on for this particular topic, is also part of the cited literature.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
Over the past two decades, 3D reconstruction and depth estimation have been heav-
ily researched topics within the field of computer vision. In this chapter, the most
relevant theories in relation to this thesis project will be discussed, from the funda-
mentals of photogrammetry, structure from motion and multi-view stereo, to current
state-of-the-art implementations utilising these theories.
2.1
Image Features
In the world of photography, a feature is a distinctive point or area of an image, likely
also visible and easily identifiable in other images of the same scene. For each feature
point, a feature descriptor should be generated. This is a unique identifier describing
this exact feature, which is what will be looked for in a different image. To find
features in an image, one uses a feature extractor, of which there are many. Finding
corresponding points between multiple images is a challenge in and of itself, as all
pixels in one image will likely not be present in another. Matching each pixel in an
image to all pixels in another image is therefore not a viable option, in addition to
being computationally expensive. Instead, matching similar features found in both
images is a popular way to address the problem.
Figure 2.1:
The re-
sulting corners (blue)
found
in
a
checker-
board image using the
Harris corner detection
algorithm in Python.
One of the most basic feature extractors is the Harris
Corner Detection algorithm [3], which, as the name implies,
finds corners in an image. A corner, as opposed to a straight
line, is a good feature because it is easy to distinguish in an
image. At the particular point of a corner, the changes in all
directions are significant, making it more unique than a line
(or edge), where no change is happening along the direction
of the line. An example of corners found in a checkerboard
image using this corner detector, can be seen in Figure 2.1.
There are also more advanced feature extractors, where
some even combine the tasks of finding features, describ-
ing them and matching them. The most well known such
approach, proposed by Lowe in 2004 [4], is the Scale In-
variant Feature Transform (SIFT). This algorithm has been
the golden standard of feature extraction and matching for
decades, as it is robust to change of scale, translation, illu-
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Related Work
mination and view-point position between images. To detect features, SIFT considers
only the minimum or maximum of the Difference of Gaussians (DoG) occurring at
multiple scales within a neighbourhood of an image. This is done after the images
have been convolved with Gaussian filters at different scales, and DoG images have
been generated. These images are then compared to eight neighbours at this scale,
and nine corresponding neighbours at neighbouring scales. The maximum or min-
imum pixel value among the compared pixels is considered a candidate feature, or
keypoint. This procedure will result in an overflow of features however, and the al-
gorithm continues by rejecting features that are low contrast or poorly localised, e.g.
along an edge. Finally, it gives all features one or more orientations based on local
gradient directions in the image, resulting in invariance to rotation. SIFT then goes
on to generate a descriptor for each feature based on the orientation and position
from before. Each descriptor considers an area of 16x16 pixels around the keypoint,
before creating a histogram consisting of eight bins for each area, giving a feature
descriptor vector of 128 elements. This vector is normalised (unit length), in order
to withstand aﬀine changes in illumination. Having obtained feature descriptors for
multiple images, matching these features between images is the final step of SIFT.
Lowe proposed the ALL-ALL-Euclidean distance as a way of matching features, and
utilised K-d trees [5] to speed up the computation. This way, the search space is
iteratively halved based on the distance between two matching features, making it
computationally inexpensive.
SIFT has inspired many other works related to image features, like SURF [6],
BRISK [7] and FREAK [8].
2.2
Structure from Motion
The field of photogrammetry tackles the problem of accurately estimating real-world
geometries and structures, by applying optical principles to multiple overlapping im-
ages. From these images, given they correlate to each other, one can reconstruct
the positions and dimensions of objects found in the pictures, effectively allowing
three-dimensional models to be generated purely from two-dimensional data. The
underlying principle is that a 2D image corresponds to observing one direction from
the camera to the 3D scene point, where the light was emitted or reflected [9].
Having multiple images observing the 3D scene from different viewpoints, and
finding corresponding points in the real world within these images, allow for estima-
tions of 3D coordinates through triangulation. Triangulation, in short, is the process
of estimating the distance to a point by forming triangles based on known points.
In computer vision, as illustrated in Figure 2.2, this often involves calculating the
distance to a point from knowing the position and pose of two cameras that observe
this point.
The assumption that corresponding points can be found within multiple images,
is often referred to as the correspondence problem, which is the underlying geometrical
theory of Structure from Motion (SfM). The SfM theorem states that the structure of
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Structure from Motion
7
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the most basic example of triangulation, estimating depth
from a pair of images (also called the stereo case). By knowing the positions the
images were captured from, their relative distance to each other can be used to derive
how far away an object observed in both images is. Credit: [10]
four non-coplanar points is recoverable from 3 orthographic projections [11]. Since a
photograph is a 2D projection of the three-dimensional scene, the 3D structure can be
inferred from the transformations between the images. Given that depth information
in one single image is lost during this projection, a minimum of two images are
required - making up what is called the stereo case - but more images allow for a
more accurate depth estimation.
The basic principal of SfM is to determine the
position a photograph was taken from, based on its relation to other images of the
same scene, captured from different positions. A basic visual representation of this
procedure is found in Figure 2.3, where it can be seen that the same scene is observed
from different views, and similarities are found within all the images. As will become
evident later in this thesis, methods exist that estimate camera poses at the time
images were captured, purely from the images themselves [12], allowing for three-
dimensional reconstructions that are correct relative to the set of images used, albeit
without any guarantee of being scaled according to the real-world equivalent.
Figure 2.3: The basics of structure from motion. By observing a scene from multi-
ple angles, identifying similar points/objects/features between the images, the three-
dimensional structure of the scene can be inferred using triangulation iteratively.
Credit: [13]
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Related Work
2.3
Multi-View Stereo
Multi-view stereo (MVS) attempts to reconstruct objects in 3D from a series of images
where the camera parameters of each image is known. MVS approaches can be divided
into two sub-categories: traditional, non-learning-based approaches [[14], [15], [16],
[17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22]] and learning-based approaches [[23], [24], [25], [26], [27],
[28], [29]].
The traditional approaches of today rely, in large, on the principles of structure
from motion (SfM), and the PatchMatch algorithm introduced by Barnes in 2009
[14]. This algorithm computes dense approximate nearest-neighbour correspondences
between regions of two images significantly faster when compared to prior methods. It
does this by introducing a clever randomised nearest-neighbour algorithm to search
through patches in pairs of images.
The process is visualised in Figure 2.4, and
consists of three steps. First, patches in both images are initialised randomly. Then,
each patch checks if its nearest neighbour patches happen to be better matches, and if
either of them are, the patch is updated, effectively making good matches propagate.
Finally, to avoid getting stuck in a local optimum, a random neighbourhood search is
performed. This neighbourhood starts off having a large radius, but is exponentially
reduced for each iteration of the search. The original algorithm computes only one
nearest neighbour at the same scale and rotation, which Barnes has since generalised
in [30] to find k-nearest neighbours across scales and rotations. PatchMatch has also
been adapted to stereo matching problems [31], finding the optimal 3D plane for each
pixel among an infinite number of estimates.
(a) Initialisation
(b) Propagation
(c) Random search
Figure 2.4:
The basic principles of the PatchMatch algorithm.
a) displays the
randomly initialised patches in both images, b) shows the propagation step, and c)
highlights the steps of the random search, with exponentially decreasing neighbour-
hood sizes. Figure from the original paper [14].
The main challenges related to depth estimation and 3D reconstruction using tra-
ditional methods, have been the non-trivial nature of the problem itself, as inferring
depth from 2D images that hold no depth information at all is not straightforward.
The lack of publicly available datasets and the PatchMatch algorithm’s poor per-
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Fusing Images and LiDAR Data
9
formance on texture-less areas, where ambiguity between the matching views often
occur, have both inspired more research in this area. Today, more publicly available
benchmarks have been published [[32], [33], [34], [35]], which has given us many high-
performing MVS methods. However, with the rise of deep learning, the traditional
methods are seeing increased competition from a different way of tackling the prob-
lem, which involves deep neural networks that are able to learn deeper and more
complex relationships between the different views.
Learning-based MVS methods leverage the advancements made in the field of
deep neural networks, and the first solutions combine feature extraction, cost volume
formulation and regularisation in one, end-to-end network [24]. MVS methods can
typically be placed in one out of four domains [33]: voxel-based approaches, mesh-
based approaches, point cloud-based approaches and depth map-based approaches.
The voxel-based approaches attempt to enclose a scene with a bounding box, and
divide this box into voxel grids. The mesh-based approaches rely on an initial guess of
the scene, which’ accuracy is iteratively improved. Point cloud-based approaches view
the scene as small patches, and typically rely on post-processing. In today’s literature,
however, the most popular approach is the depth map-based method. These methods
aim at creating dense point clouds from progressively estimating depth maps from
each different view, before later fusing all these depth maps together into one dense
3D reconstructed scene.
As with all deep learning-based methods in any domain, the supervised approaches,
i.e. where a ground truth of the scenes exist, were the firsts to make leaps [[23], [24],
[36]]. This quickly resulted in a lack of labelled data to train on, as the development
of new and better methods went faster than the time it takes to capture and label
new datasets. This has inspired works in semi-supervised [37] and unsupervised/self-
supervised [38] learning methods, where little or no training data is necessary.
Although learning-based MVS methods are a more popular topic in today’s litera-
ture than the traditional methods, this thesis will explore the performance of methods
based on the traditional approaches. The main reason for this is that no labelled data
is provided, and the process of labelling it was considered too time consuming for the
scope of this project.
2.4
Fusing Images and LiDAR Data
The interest in relying on not only RGB images, but rather a combination of images
and data obtained by another depth-perceiving sensor, has flourished in recent years.
These methods are able to combine the rich amount of detail captured by modern
high-resolution cameras, with the accurate dept measurements obtained by appro-
priate sensors. The most popular such sensor is the Light Detection And Ranging
(LiDAR) scanner, which, in simple terms, sends out laser beams at nearby objects
and measures the time delay of the reflected light to determine their relative posi-
tions. Most common when fusing these data sources is to use the very precise depth
information captured by a LiDAR scanner, together with the very precise texture in-
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Related Work
formation from the RGB images. Ultimately, this leads to denser 3D reconstructions
preserving more details, while simultaneously having accurate depth estimations and
scale when compared to the real-world scene. As labelled data is harder to come by
in this research area, the self-supervised methods have been the most popular [[39],
[40], [41], [42]], with some solutions even surpassing the supervised methods in cer-
tain disciplines. Caltagirone et al. [39] displayed that the addition of LiDAR data
made their model much more robust to challenging environments when compared to
pure camera based solutions, and Guizilini et al. [40] showed that even very sparse
LiDARs, with as few as four beams, can greatly improve the accuracy of monocu-
lar depth estimation methods. This work has been further improved by Feng et al.
[42], who demonstrate that sparse LiDAR data can be fused with monocular image
features to predict initial depth maps that are later refined, rather than just as an
iterative post-processing step. Despite the obvious challenges related to the collection
and availability of data, hybrid methods show great potential as an alternative to fur-
ther develop the deep learning methods that are not purely supervised. It omits the
biggest problem of needing labelled data, as the precise depth information obtained
from the laser scanners can work in its place.
Although fusing image and LiDAR data this way would produce the most accurate
3D representation of the scene, these methods were not applicable to the data available
for this project. As will be reiterated in chapter 3, relating the two data sources
directly was not possible, as a transformation between the sensors was unknown.
Instead, the principles of utilising both data sources to obtain the most accurate
model remain, though the final implementation is more concerned with registering a
denser point cloud, generated from the images, to the sparse real-world LiDAR point
cloud. Point cloud registration tackles the problem of aligning two point clouds that
differ in position and pose, but are representations of the same scene or object, by
finding the transformation that provides the best overlap between the two, in one
common coordinate frame [43]. Typically, aligning point clouds can be divided into
two categories; local and global alignment. In the case of global alignment, the focus
is on finding the transformation that converges to a global minimum, which is done
by finding and matching similar 3D features in the point clouds. On the other hand,
local alignment converges towards a local minimum, and is not concerned with point
cloud features. Instead, the most common such algorithm, the Iterative Closest Point
(ICP) algorithm [44], keeps one of the point clouds fixed, and then iteratively goes
through each point of both point clouds, finding the transformation that minimises
the distance between each point’s closest neighbour in the opposite point cloud. What
exact registration methods are used for this project will be described in more detail
in chapter 5.
2.5
Neural Radiance Fields
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) were proposed as a way to synthesise novel views
of complex scenes back in 2020 [45], and quickly became one of the most popular
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Neural Radiance Fields
11
research topics within the field of novel view synthesis, which involves rendering
views that are not captured by the camera, but rather inferred from the other images
captured of the scene. Radiance is a measure of the amount of light being reflected,
emitted or transmitted by a surface in any given direction, and radiance fields are
a way to represent a scene based on this observed variation in light between the
different pixels in an image. This way of representing a scene can conveniently be
parameterised, allowing for a deep neural network to be trained to accurately predict
how scenes look from different views, based on fewer ground truth input views.
NeRF optimises an underlying continuous volumetric scene function from a sparse
set of input views in order to obtain its results. The solution represents the scene
using a fully-connected deep neural network (also called a multi-layer perceptron, or
MLP), where the input is a single continuous 5D coordinate that holds both the
spatial location (x, y, z) and the viewing direction (θ, ϕ) of the camera. The output is
the volume density, as well as the view-dependent emitted radiance, at that particular
spatial location. In order to synthesise views, the 5D coordinates are queried along
camera rays for each pixel in the image, before classical volume rendering techniques
are applied to obtain the output colours and densities into an image. This image, with
predicted colours and densities, is then compared to the ground truth image where the
actual colour values can be found, and the weights in the neural network are updated
through backpropagation. This is the training process of a NeRF network, which
continues until convergence, by the time accurate densities and colours of the scene
from never-before-seen views should be obtained. By optimising neural radiance fields,
even scenes with complicated geometry and appearance can render photorealistic
novel views, using these traditional volume rendering techniques.
Since the original paper [45], several improvements and variations have been made
to NeRFs. Where the original implementation was slow to optimise, and required
all inputs (i.e.
camera views) to be from the same camera in the same lighting
conditions, there are now alternatives that recreate scenes from unstructured images
”in-the-wild”, like NeRF-W [46], and those that allow for real-time training of the
NeRF network, like Instant Neural Graphics Primitives (Instant-NGP) [47].
Given its immense popularity, keeping up with NeRF research can be challenging,
as it is a relatively new field of research and, hence, still sees rapid improvements. To
address this issue, the open-source initiative called Nerfstudio [48] was created. The
goal of Nerfstudio is to make development and deployment of NeRF research easier,
for researchers and other practitioners alike. It does this by providing a framework
that implements several different NeRF methods, utilising PyTorch [49] and CUDA
[50], allowing anyone to easily try out the technology on their own data. For this
thesis, the provided Nerfstudio container was used to test the performance of NeRFs
on the provided image data.
==PAGE:24==
12
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
The Data
In this chapter, attention will be on the data used throughout this project, who pro-
vided it, what exactly it contained, and what challenges it brought. A non-disclosure
agreement was signed between the author and the data provider, and no confidential
information is therefore shared in this thesis.
3.1
The Data Provider
All the data provided for this thesis project was captured by the Octocopter Explorer
1.3, a drone operated by Stellaire [51]. The drone is capable of carrying a payload
of up to 4.5 kg, and equipped with multiple sensors tailored for the specific task of
inspecting the electricity grid. In the near future, the drone is set to perform fully
autonomous inspections without the need for a pilot. In order to accomplish this,
the drone holds a payload consisting of a gimbal-operated high-resolution camera,
a thermal camera, and a nadir camera combined with a 3D Light Detection and
Ranging (LiDAR) sensor. Put together, this allows for highly detailed images as well
as colourised point clouds. The drone also has an onboard GPS, providing precise
localisation.
3.2
Images
For this particular project, the collected data consisted of roughly 120-175 images
of seven different masts from one of Stellaire’s inspection routes. The images were
captured between January and June 2023, i.e. the images vary both in time of day,
season and weather. An example image can be seen in Figure 3.1 All the images
hold additional information, such as the GPS coordinates of the drone, camera pa-
rameters (type, focal length, exposure time, aperture, ISO, etc.) and the ID of the
photographed mast. As a supplement to the images, a CSV file with additional in-
formation was also given. Here, one can find the GPS coordinates of the masts, the
drone’s position and orientation when capturing the image, as well as a timestamp
from when the image was taken.
==PAGE:26==
14
3 The Data
Figure 3.1: One of the images captured by the camera onboard the Octocopter
Explorer 1.3
3.3
LiDAR
To supplement the aforementioned images, coloured 3D LiDAR point clouds were also
provided. Contrary to the images, these point clouds were all collected on the same
day - 9th of January 2024. The point clouds provide a sparse, large-scale view of the
inspection route, ideal for a general, big picture assessment of the area. The point
clouds were provided in the LAS(er) file format [52], and divided into tiles based on
UTM coordinates. Within the point clouds were the UTM coordinates of each point,
as well as their respective class, as a prior project in the SWIFTER project [1] focused
on classifying these point clouds. Of the 15 different classes, six are relevant for this
project, and can be found in Table 3.1. The point clouds were coloured from nadir
images that were captured simultaneously. An extract of one of the point clouds can
be seen in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: A picture of one of the LiDAR point clouds. Along with the power line,
a lot of points related to the surrounding forest are also present.
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Challenges
15
1
unclassified
2
ground
3
vegetation
4
building
5
wire
6
mast
Table 3.1: The six classes of interest inside the LiDAR point clouds
3.4
Challenges
Due to its sparsity, the point clouds from the LiDAR sensor alone can not be used for
thorough inspection of the powerline masts. When zooming in on the masts inside
the point clouds, the level of detail being preserved is simply too low, and detecting
any faults on the crucial components is impossible. This is displayed in Figure 3.3,
where the points belonging to the ground and the electrical wires are more prominent
than the points representing the mast. At its current state, the provided 3D data is
suﬀicient for assessing bigger problems, like a fallen tree or broken pole, but falls short
in more detail-oriented inspection tasks. One of the main objectives of this project
is to improve the density of these point clouds, to allow for thorough inspections of
vital mast components also in 3D, supplementing the high-resolution images that are
currently being used for this task.
Figure 3.3: A closeup picture of one of the masts inside a LiDAR point cloud, where
the colours have been removed. Although barely visible, the mast holding the wires is
in the centre of the figure. Inspecting the state of an insulator from this point cloud
is challenging, as the points are few and sparsely spread.
To obtain an altogether higher resolution 3D model, fusing the data from the
images with the LiDAR data seemed an obvious choice. As mentioned in chapter 2,
this is already quite common and benefits from both sources’ strengths; the accurate
depth and scale information of the LiDAR sensor, and the high level of detail obtained
by the 9504x6336 pixel images. Ultimately, the result would be a 3D model with
==PAGE:28==
16
3 The Data
correct scale, and significantly improved density compared to the existing LiDAR
point clouds.
This is trivial when knowing the transformation between the two sensors, and if
the data is collected simultaneously - which, as already denoted - is not the case for
the provided data. The images were taken throughout the first half of 2023, and the
3D point clouds were obtained one day in January 2024. With no instantaneous way
to relate the two data sources, finding another approach to achieve a similar relation
was another one of the main challenges of this project.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
Implementation Study
In order to decide how to best utilise the provided data to obtain the best 3D model,
a thorough implementation study was carried out. The objective of the study was
to investigate some of the current state-of-the-art 3D reconstruction methods on the
raw data set, and let these results guide how to approach the problem at hand.
Specifically, the images captured and how to generate 3D models from these, is what
will be investigated. The 3D data from the LiDAR is viewed as a starting point; the
baseline to be improved.
Although a large part of today’s literature revolves around learning-based meth-
ods, this was not considered an appropriate approach for this project. No labelled
image data was provided, and labelling it would likely exceed the time constraints of
this project. Instead, traditional methods relying on photogrammetry, structure from
motion (SfM) and multi-view stereo (MVS) were considered. In particular, Colmap
[[12], [16]] and Meshroom [53] were the two photogrammetry toolkits implemented.
Both toolkits are open-source, and have been allowed time to mature as two viable
options for doing 3D reconstruction from unstructured images. A third method was
also implemented, namely Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [45]. Despite approaching
the problem of representing a three-dimensional scene in a completely different way
when compared to the aforementioned traditional techniques, NeRF was considered
another viable option for this inspection problem. As with Colmap and Meshroom,
there exists open-source frameworks for training and implementing NeRFs, and the
chosen API for this thesis was Nerfstudio [48].
The following chapter will describe how each framework was implemented, before
finally concluding on what method will be used further. In section 4.1, the imple-
mentation and results of Colmap will be explained, before an in-depth walkthrough
of the Meshroom implementation finds place in section 4.2. Section 4.3 details how
Nerfstudio was implemented, before section 4.4 and 4.5 will hold a comparison and
the conclusion, respectively. All frameworks were implemented through containers,
as a requirement for accessing the high-performance computer at SINTEF was that
everything be containerised. The container tool used was Podman [54], and the three
containers were all operated headlessly, which means the level of interactivity was
reduced, and the feedback loop process extended. All the containers can be found in
the repository of this project [2]. To give each software the fairest possible starting
point, the default settings were used for the first tests. Any changes made to these
settings will be noted.
==PAGE:30==
18
4 Implementation Study
4.1
Colmap
4.1.1
Intro
Colmap was introduced by Schönberger et al. in 2016 [[12], [16]], and is a popular
software for transforming multiple unstructured 2D images into a 3D model. This is
done by first finding a sparse reconstruction of the scene based on the different images,
which in turn allows for dense reconstruction in the final step. Despite making its
debut in 2016, the repository is still maintained and updated on a regular basis, and
can be found on GitHub [55]. For this project, the provided Docker image was used as
the container, with some adjustments to make it work with Podman and the available
hardware. Unless noted otherwise, all parameters of Colmap were kept as per their
default settings for this implementation study.
4.1.2
The Pipeline
Colmap’s pipeline is made up of six steps, and one need only provide a set of images
(minimum three) as input. Although not a requirement, Colmap can utilise informa-
tion in each image’s metadata, e.g. if GPS or camera information is stored here, to
limit the search space for the reconstruction. As noted in chapter 3, the provided
images hold both camera and GPS information, which will benefit the reconstruction
when relating the images to their real-world positions.
The first step of the pipeline is feature extraction. Colmap uses Scale Invariant
Feature Transform (SIFT) [4] as its feature extractor by default, but also allows for
the more discriminative Domain-sized pooling based SIFT (DSP-SIFT) [56]. Features
are extracted for all the images provided, and the feature descriptors are saved in the
internal database along their respective image for further assessment (i.e.
visual
inspection of the found features is possible). An example of features found in one of
the images is displayed in Figure 4.1
Figure 4.1: An example of fea-
tures (red circles) found in one of
the images.
With the internal database holding all the
images and their respective features, the second
step of the pipeline is matching these features be-
tween image pairs. By default, Colmap uses an
exhaustive matching technique, i.e. all features
in one image is matched against all the features
of another, which is carried out for all the images.
Matching this way is computationally expensive,
but as the number of images for each mast in the
provided dataset is low (<200), the documenta-
tion states this yields the best performance, with-
out taking an excessive amount of time.
Step three of the pipeline is to map the matched features to the different pixels
in the images, using structure-from-motion (SfM). Images that do not have enough
==PAGE:31==
4.1 Colmap
19
(a) Many matched features
(b) Few matched features
Figure 4.2: A look at two examples of images and their features being matched.
The features are displayed in red, and a green line between the left and right images
indicate a match. a) displays two images where many correspondences are found,
whilst b) displays the result when few matches are found. The two images in a) are
both captured from the same side of the mast, which is not the case in b), where
the pictures are taken from opposite directions, likely contributing to the number of
features found to match.
features matching with at least two other images in this step are discarded. This
is the final step before obtaining the sparse 3D reconstruction of the scene, which
means the camera poses and positions are estimated during this step. The model can
be visualised in the GUI of Colmap or by using Python, and shows both a sparse
point cloud and the estimated viewpoints of each camera used to create the model
(see Figure 4.3). This sparse model works as the base moving forward, as the now
obtained camera poses and image relations work as input for the dense reconstruction.
As the first step of the dense reconstruction, all images making up the sparse model
are undistorted. The undistortion is done in pairs, aligning the matched features to
be on the same scanline.
The fifth step of the pipeline is where the majority of the heavy computing hap-
pens. Here, Colmap performs PatchMatch Stereo [31] to obtain depth maps for all the
undistorted images. This method is a stereo adaptation of the original PatchMatch
method [14], focused on computing dense approximate nearest-neighbour correspon-
dences between regions, or patches, of two different images. For each pair of the
==PAGE:32==
20
4 Implementation Study
undistorted images, depth values are calculated for each pixel in the image using
stereo triangulation (as seen in Figure 2.2), resulting in a 2D image holding only
depth values, called a depth map.
One of these depth maps can be seen in Fig-
ure 4.11a. These depth maps hold the depth information of the scene, and are the
final piece needed before calculating the dense 3D model.
As the last step of Colmap’s pipeline, all the depth maps are fused together to
create one dense 3D model. This process is performed by first choosing a random
depth map, which is then projected into all the other depth maps. Then, given that
this process generates multiple point clouds, all the point clouds are finally averaged
together, forming an unstructured point cloud that also holds normal information.
The dense 3D model can be exported in the Polygon File Format (PLY) and examined
in a 3D visualisation software, as seen in Figure 4.4a.
Colmap does offer the opportunity to mesh the dense point cloud using either
Poisson [57] or Delaunay [58] meshing methods, essentially filling in the empty spaces
of the vertices in the point cloud by generating surfaces. For this thesis however, this
is not considered necessary, and is therefore not explored.
4.1.3
Experiments
To get Colmap up and running, all that is really needed is a set of images. Then, going
through each step of the pipeline, both a sparse and a dense 3D reconstruction should
be provided.
To simplify the process for beginners, an automatic reconstruction
option is provided.
It takes as input the path of the images to use, the desired
workspace location, what camera model is being used and whether or not to construct
a dense model. The initial Colmap experiments were carried out using the automatic
reconstructor, with all the images of one of the masts as input, and the same camera
model shared between all images.
The results of the automatic reconstruction were sub-optimal, as the reconstructor
was unable to find correspondences for more than 36 of the 153 provided images. This
is likely caused by a poor choice of the initial image pair from where the reconstruction
starts from, which affects the rest of the reconstruction in a way that might not
be recoverable. Specifying the initial image pair is not an option for the automatic
reconstructor, so an attempt to battle the problem was made by instead hand picking
images that were taken in similar conditions (i.e. same season, similar light etc.), with
larger areas of overlap. Overlap, in this sense, means a portion of what is seen in one
image, which can also be seen in another image. A ”larger area” refers to the removal
of those images that do not contain the mast, as images of the area around the mast
is not of interest. By making sure all images hold some pixels related to the masts,
the assumption was that the number of corresponding features should increase.
Unfortunately, this did not resolve the problem, as now only 20 of the 63 hand
picked images were found to correspond.
From the outputted sparse model, it is
evident that the reconstructor struggles with registering photos taken from the left,
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Colmap
21
right or opposite directions from where the initial image pair is chosen. This can be
seen in Figure 4.3a, where all images are registered at the same side of the mast.
Seeing as the automatic reconstructor performed below expectations, performing
the entire pipeline manually, step-by-step, was tried next. This way, more control of
each parameter within each part of the pipeline is gained. The settings were kept at
their defaults, with the exception of the camera model, which was shared among all
images like before, as opposed to being determined individually for each image based
on its metadata. After performing the steps of the sparse reconstruction this way, a
significant improvement was made - 145 of the 153 provided images were registered
(as opposed to 36). Visualising the output of this sparse model, the cameras can
be seen registered correctly from the four different directions (see Figure 4.3b). As a
result, the automatic reconstructor was discarded, and performing the steps manually
preferred.
(a) The automatic reconstructor
(b) The manual reconstructor
Figure 4.3: Top-down view of the sparse reconstructions results of the two different
ways of performing the Colmap reconstruction. a) displays the result of the automatic
reconstructor, made up of 20 images from one direction. The green circles denotes
areas where the remaining unregistered images were expected to be. b) shows the
result of the reconstruction performed manually, with 145 images registered from four
different directions.
4.1.4
Results
The dense point cloud provided by Colmap after its final step can be seen in Fig-
ure 4.4a. This reconstruction was done using 145 of the 153 provided images of the
mast, and the geometry of the scene is represented in a realistic way. The amount of
noise in the model is kept to a minimum, and holes are only found from a few angles,
speaking to the correspondences found from different viewpoints, and the algorithm’s
ability to correctly reconstruct the scene based on these.
==PAGE:34==
22
4 Implementation Study
(a) Full scene
(b) Zoomed in
(c) LiDAR
Figure 4.4: A display of the Colmap results. a) holds the full reconstructed scene,
b) is a view from when zoomed in on the mast, and c) is the equivalent LiDAR point
cloud. The mast of interest is reconstructed well, and seems denser when compared
to the LiDAR, as seen when inspecting the inner components of the mast.
From Figure 4.4a can be seen a geometry that resembles the real-world structure
of the mast, and the rest of the scene, and when looking closer at the relevant mast
in Figure 4.4b, it can be derived that the mast is reconstructed well, with low levels
of noise or holes in relevant areas when compared to its LiDAR counterpart.
4.2
Meshroom
4.2.1
Intro
Meshroom is a free open-source 3D reconstruction software based on the Alicevision
framework, introduced by Griwodz in 2021 [53]. Much like Colmap, it takes unstruc-
tured images of an object or scene as input, and outputs a 3D model as the final step
of its photogrammetry pipeline. Despite their similarities, Meshroom differs from
Colmap in several aspects when it comes to how features are extracted and matched,
how depth maps are created, and also how the final model is fused together. A Pod-
man container was created by modifying the provided Docker image found in the
oﬀicial GitHub repository [59]. Like in section 4.1, all parameters were kept to their
default settings unless noted otherwise.
4.2.2
The Pipeline
The Meshroom pipeline consists of seven steps: first, features from all images are
extracted using one out of multiple available feature extractors. Scale Invariant Fea-
ture Transform (SIFT) [4] was the feature extractor of choice for this test, as it is a
proven and reliable feature extractor, whilst it also utilises a CUDA enabled GPU in
Meshroom’s implementation.
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Meshroom
23
Then, an optional step to reduce computational complexity for larger datasets
(more than 200 images) can be performed. Here, a vocabulary tree [60] is used in
order to find images holding similar content, before these are grouped into subsets.
The next step then, feature matching, will only be performed within these subsets,
instead of on all the images. However, as the number of images for each mast is low
(max 175), this step was deemed unnecessary.
Feature matching, like extraction, can be done in multiple different ways, and is
tackling the problem of matching feature descriptors found in one image, to those
found in another. As mentioned in chapter 2, the 3D structure of an object can be
determined from these corresponding 2D positions. This is a necessary step before
the fourth step of the pipeline, which is structure from motion (SfM). The default
approach, based on K-d trees using FLANN [61], is the one chosen for this study.
In the fourth step, SfM, the computed matches are fused into tracks, with each
track being a candidate 3D point in space that is visible from multiple cameras.
The goal is to create a sparse 3D representation of the scene by solving the camera
calibration and 3D structure based on these tracks. To find the camera positions,
new cameras are added to an initial solution incrementally. In Meshroom, this is
optimised for having a large number of images, based on works by Moulon [62] and
Schöenberger [12].
Having obtained a sparse 3D model, the next step tackles the depth problem
by estimating depth maps. A depth map, as noted in section 4.1, is a 2D image
where each pixel in the image have an assigned depth value. To calculate a depth
value, a region must be seen in a minimum of two images. Meshroom implements
a Semi-Global Matching method, based on work by Hirschmüller [[63], [64]] in this
step, which offers a good trade-off between accuracy and runtime by combining local
and global stereo matching concepts. Finally, some optimisation and filtering is done
to ensure the best depth maps possible.
The sixth step merges all depth maps into one single dense point cloud, before
finally creating a dense 3D surface by extracting a surface in this point cloud. A
K-d tree approach [65] is used to fuse the 3D points in an iterative way, reducing the
density of the point cloud and, as a consequence, reducing computational cost. It is
this dense model that will be of interest in this project, without the meshing.
The final step projects the texture of the model onto the mesh from the prior
step, using a UV mapping approach [66]. To determine what camera provides the
best texture for any given cell, the resolution of the triangle in all images seeing it, is
calculated. For this project, this step is not considered.
4.2.3
Experiments
Like Colmap, all Meshroom really needs as input is a set of images. By default, a
graph with several nodes performing the different steps of the pipeline is provided,
where all the default settings are already filled in. This means the first try was done
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Implementation Study
simply by pointing to the folder holding the relevant images, upon which the different
nodes of the graph started performing their calculations.
Figure 4.5: The sparse
reconstruction result of
Meshroom obtained after
performing the SfM step.
All 148 camera positions
are coloured green.
During the first few steps of the pipeline, where a
sparse model is to be created, the feature extraction node
took significantly longer when compared to Colmap, de-
spite only a minor increase in the number of images Mesh-
room was able to register (150 vs 145, of the 153 images
total) before the structure from motion (SfM) step. It
was also discovered that during these first steps of the
pipeline, only the CPU of the machine was used, mean-
ing the computing power of the GPU was not utilised.
This turned out to be caused by the default usage
of domain-sized pooling SIFT (DSP-SIFT) [56], and its
implementation in Meshroom which is unable to utilise
the GPU of the machine, as opposed to the implemen-
tation of regular SIFT. A choice was therefore made to
change the feature extractor to instead be SIFT, which
resulted in the feature extraction and matching process
taking less than five minutes (compared to almost 20 with
DSP-SIFT). After the features and images were matched,
148 of the 153 images were registered, which was not an improvement, but still more
when compared to Colmap. Nevertheless, the amount of time saved from loosing only
two images was considered a decent compromise. After the sparse reconstruction was
made, the model could be seen correctly identifying the positions of all the cam-
era poses used, displayed in Figure 4.5. Having seen the impact correctly registered
camera positions made in Colmap, this was promising.
It was decided to carry out the final few steps of the pipeline to obtain a dense
3D model, before considering whether or not to tweak the parameters to further
improve the model. Unfortunately, the dense reconstruction outputted by Meshroom
was underwhelming, as can be seen Figure 4.6a. Despite registering more images
than Colmap and obtaining a seemingly accurate sparse model, the results were poor.
A decision was therefore made to not experiment further with Meshroom, as the
uphill battle to obtain a model comparable to the one from Colmap would likely be
consuming more time than what was available.
4.2.4
Results
The final dense point cloud provided by Meshroom can be seen in Figure 4.6a. This
reconstruction was generated using 148 of the 153 images provided. Evidently, the
scene hosts quite a few problems, mostly related to holes in the overall reconstruction.
This is easier to see when zooming in on the relevant mast in the point cloud, displayed
in Figure 4.6b, where it is clear that it is inaccurately reconstructed and hosts several
holes in crucial areas. Additionally, the wires that are connected to the mast seem
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Nerfstudio
25
(a) Full scene
(b) Zoomed in
(c) LiDAR
Figure 4.6: A display of the Meshroom results. a) holds the full reconstructed scene,
b) is a view from when zoomed in on the mast, and c) is the equivalent LiDAR point
cloud. Looking at the reconstructed mast, the structure appears holey and uneven,
with lacking detail in the area of the inner components. The wires of the scene appear
to not be reconstructed at all.
to be gone, and when looking at the reconstruction from above, it seems they are
projected to instead be on the ground, as seen in Figure 4.7. Here, white lines are
found on the ground running perpendicularly to the crossbar of the mast.
4.3
Nerfstudio
4.3.1
Intro
Figure 4.7:
The dense
reconstruction of Mesh-
room from above, where
the wires are projected
on the ground (leftmost
highlighted in red).
Nerfstudio is an open-source initiative focused on being
a contributor-friendly and easy-to-work-with API for ex-
ploring Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [48]. The API
offers a simplified way of creating, training and testing
NeRFs, with the goal of making the technology more ac-
cessible to researchers and laymen wanting to explore its
capabilities. It does this by offering a modular framework,
where each component can easily be tweaked for personal needs. Additionally, the
modularity makes understanding the technology an easier piece-by-piece experience,
as opposed to the overwhelming experience of trying to take it all in at once. At
the time of writing, Nerfstudio offers 19 different NeRF methods that all become
available to the user after successfully installing the API.
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Implementation Study
4.3.2
The Pipeline
NeRFs’ pipelines, as implemented in all the methods offered by Nerfstudio, consist
of only one step: training the network. However, a prerequisite to be able to train
a NeRF network is known camera poses, which is not the case for the data at hand.
This means a preprocessing step is necessary before the actual NeRF training can be
performed. This preprocessing step is also implemented in Nerfstudio, and a simple
call to a function using Colmap will estimate the camera poses.
Figure 4.8:
The cam-
era
poses
obtained
us-
ing Colmap in the pre-
processing step of NeRF
(areas
marked
in
red
hold
the
camera
posi-
tions).
This bares a lot
of resemblance to the re-
sults in Figure 4.3. The
mast position is circled in
green.
As mentioned in section 4.1, this is the output of the
first step of Colmap, where a sparse 3D model is con-
structed. The pre-processing step was given the 153 im-
ages as input, and outputted a sparse model where 145 of
them had correctly registered camera positions (see Fig-
ure 4.8). This aligns with what was found in section 4.1
for these exact pictures. Having obtained the (estimated)
camera poses of the images, the training of the NeRF
network could begin.
4.3.3
Experiments
Given the many different NeRF methods implemented in
Nerfstudio, knowing which one to choose can be challeng-
ing. The method proposed by the founders of Nerfstudio
is called Nerfacto [67], and this works as the generally rec-
ommended method. This NeRF network is based on not
one paper in particular, but rather multiple papers, bor-
rowing the best properties of each and combining them
into one model.
After obtaining sub-par results from Nerfacto, another
method called Instant-NGP was also tested. Here, NGP
stands for Neural Graphics Primitives, and this method is based on work by Müller
[47].
It utilises multi-resolution hash encoding, where the idea is to optimise the
training of the NeRF network by mapping coordinates to trainable feature vectors,
as opposed to the positional encoding function in traditional NeRF pipelines. Ad-
ditionally, a ray marching scheme using an occupancy grid to avoid sampling over
empty space or behind high density areas, is also proposed, along with a smaller,
fully-fused neural network that allows training to be run on a single CUDA kernel.
Combined, all the optimisations proposed in Instant-NGP allows for real-time
training of NeRFs, opening the door for applications in a multitude of autonomous
tasks. Although real-time performance is not a requirement for this project, Instant-
NGP did provide better results when compared to the default Nerfacto method. This
corresponds to what was found in a more comprehensive comparison of different NeRF
methods, performed by Remondino [68], which is why this became the chosen method
moving forward. The actual training of the network was carried out using the default
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Nerfstudio
27
parameters of the Instant-NGP model, which was provided the 145 registered images
and camera poses as input.
When training is over, the results can be viewed in a web-viewer, where there
are options to make video renderings of the results. Alternatively, the geometry of
the reconstruction can also be extracted as point clouds with or without meshes.
Important to note, however, is that as a product of being a method focused on
rendering 3D scenes from novel views, point clouds, being voxel representations of a
scene, are not the natural way of visualising NeRFs’ outputs. Point clouds are instead
offered as a bi-product, an alternate way of looking at the results. Compared to the
two other methods considered for this implementation study, which are both focused
on providing the most accurate dense point clouds, hence also, providing better such
results, this is an important distinction.
4.3.4
Results
The final 3D model provided by Nerfstudio’s Instant-NGP method can be seen in
Figure 4.9. This result is obtained from the camera poses seen in Figure 4.8, and it
can be seen to do a decent job with reconstructing the geometry of the scene. Upon
taking a closer look, it is evident that the model has its limitations though, and this
can be seen in Figure 4.9b where the details of the mast are either smudged or missing.
A more comprehensive look at the outputted reconstruction can be found in a video
in the repository of this project [2].
(a) Full scene
(b) Zoomed in
(c) LiDAR
Figure 4.9: A display of the NeRF/Instant-NGP results. a) holds the full recon-
structed scene, b) is a view from when zoomed in on the mast, and c) is the equivalent
LiDAR point cloud. From the closeup view in b), the mast appears geometrically cor-
rect and captures more detail compared to the LiDAR point cloud, although it is
quite noisy.
==PAGE:40==
28
4 Implementation Study
4.4
Comparisons
Looking at the three models side-by-side, one particular part of the scene is recon-
structed well in all of them: the ground. It seems the features found here are both
many and distinctive, making them easy to match between images for all three mod-
els. Unfortunately, the ground is not the focus of this project, and when inspecting
the mast of interest more closely, the differences between the three are significant (see
Figure 4.10). As seen in Figure 4.10c, the output from Meshroom barely resembles a
mast, as the poles making up the structure have holes and lack connectivity. In the
area where the mast components are mounted, nearly no 3D points are reconstructed,
making this model unfeasible for inspection. Figure 4.10b and 4.10d show that both
Colmap and Instant-NGP do a better job with reconstructing the overall geometry of
the mast, with properly reconstructed poles and mast components. The Instant-NGP
results do, however, contain more noise when compared to Colmap.
Despite all models using the same feature extraction method (SIFT), and obtain-
ing sparse models that are comparable both in terms of number of 3D points and
estimated camera poses, the results of the final reconstructions vary. This is likely
caused by how the dense reconstructions take place (in Colmap and Meshroom), and
how the technologies differ (NeRF vs the other two).
(a) LiDAR
(b) Colmap
(c) Meshroom
(d) NeRF
Figure 4.10: A side-by-side comparison of the reconstructed masts from all three
models, next to the equivalent LiDAR point cloud (baseline). The pictures are cap-
tured from a zoomed-in position in front of the mast. c) displays the poor results
obtained from Meshroom, which struggled the most with getting the structure of the
mast right. b) and d) show that despite the provided images not being captured with
3D reconstruction in mind, state-of-the-art frameworks are capable of reconstructing
the mast with decent accuracy.
Although a more comprehensive comparison between the three methods was wished
==PAGE:41==
4.5 Conclusion
29
for, e.g. comparing the point densities of the masts, or looking closer at focus areas
where the mast components are, the provided results limits the discussion to one
simple question: which of the methods represented the real-world geometry most
accurately? Here, Colmap separates itself from the other two, being both most geo-
metrically accurate, and also providing the densest output with the least amount of
noise.
4.5
Conclusion
Meshroom’s output was arguably the most lacking of the three, as it struggled with
even reconstructing the poles of the mast in the scene. The holes in this reconstruc-
tion were too severe to be able to inspect the state of the components, or even the
overall state of the mast. Although the reconstruction could certainly be improved
upon, it was considered out of scope of this thesis to tweak all three methods to
perfection, as this would consume more time than what was available. Hence, why,
only minor tweaks to the default settings were carried out for this implementation
study. The separating factor between Meshroom and Colmap seems to be the use
of the PatchMatch stereo algorithm [31] in Colmap, as opposed to the semi-global
matching [64] algorithm of Meshroom when generating their depth maps. In this step,
both methods generate depth maps based on pairs of corresponding images, which
are later fused together with all the other generated depth maps, forming the final
dense outputs. The depth maps can be seen in Figure 4.11, and here it is evident
that the density of Colmap’s depth map greatly outperforms the one of Meshroom.
Looking at the ground in both maps, there is a gradual change from green (close) to
yellow (far away) in Colmap’s map, whilst the ground in Meshroom’s map is a lot
more even, as it seems to interpret the ground to be more or less the same distance
from the drone at any point.
(a) Colmap
(b) Meshroom
Figure 4.11: A comparison of two depth maps provided by Colmap (a), and Mesh-
room (b). The density of the two maps appear very different, with the Colmap one
fading gradually e.g. when looking at the right mast from top to bottom. In b), this
gradual change is not present, and the power lines in the scene are not present for
the most part.
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Implementation Study
Although the output of Nerfstudio’s Instant-NGP method was visually appealing,
there was particularly one reason not to choose this method moving forward; its
relation to the LiDAR data. As the reconstruction is not naturally a point cloud,
relating it to the other half of the data that is being captured during an inspection,
like e.g. aligning it to obtain the correct scale and orientation, is non-trivial. If the
future of these inspections were to involve only photographs, and this relationship
between the two data sources is considered irrelevant, the use of NeRFs could be
reconsidered. This would also involve restructuring how the images are taken, to
capture the masts from views that benefit the neural network’s ability to correctly
predict their colour and density from novel views.
From the above results, it is clear that Colmap provides the best 3D model moving
forward. Its accuracy and level of detail separates it from the other two methods by
quite some margin, and being a point cloud by nature, it allows for multiple ways of
tackling the overall objective of this project - to obtain the most accurate 3D model
from the provided photographs.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
This chapter will provide a full walk-through of the final implementation. First, an
overview of the tools used will be presented, detailing what programming language
the solution was implemented in, and what additional software was used. Then, the
proposed pipeline will be described in much detail, focusing on how and why things
are implemented as they are.
5.1
Broad Overview
This final implementation is looking to tackle the main objectives of this thesis project,
which are to obtain the highest fidelity 3D models possible from the provided image
data, and that these should be generated automatically, i.e. without human input.
The implementation is intended for the following workflow: first, all data is collected,
i.e.
both image and LiDAR data, by the drone.
Then, the collected data is fed
into their respective part of the pipeline. The data is then processed, separately at
first, before being combined later. Finally, a high-fidelity 3D model is outputted, all
without any human intervention.
In order to achieve these objectives, several different frameworks and software solu-
tions have been used. The majority of the point cloud processing is implemented using
Python (v3.10), with multiple libraries concerned with manipulating point clouds. As
mentioned in chapter 4, Colmap was implemented in a Podman container as per the
provided Docker image in the oﬀicial repository, with only minor tweaks. Then, in
order to visualise the results and do quick analysis on the point clouds, CloudCom-
pare [69] has also been an important software.
Except for the Colmap container,
which was run on a high-performance computer provided by SINTEF, the rest of the
implementation is developed and executed on the author’s personal laptop. All the
source code can be found in the project repository [2].
5.2
The Pipeline
This section will describe the inner workings of the final implementation in much
detail. The pipeline can be considered as follows: the images and LiDAR data is fed
into each their own pipeline. The images will first be processed by Colmap, providing
==PAGE:44==
32
5 Implementation
a dense 3D point cloud, before this point cloud is cropped to only hold the region
of interest, i.e. where the mast is located. Meanwhile, the LiDAR data, holding an
immense amount of points covering a large real-world area, will be processed into
several much smaller point clouds, also holding only the regions of interest. After
these initial steps, each mast is now represented in two ways: one by the generated
Colmap point cloud, and one by the LiDAR point cloud. The final step considers the
problem of aligning these point cloud pairs, which differ in size, density, orientation
and colour.
Out of the pipeline comes one large point cloud, similar to the one
captured by the LiDAR sensor, where each of the photographed masts have a much
higher density compared to the original point cloud.
5.2.1
Processing Image Data
As found in chapter 4, Colmap provided the best 3D reconstructions from the images,
and is therefore the chosen method for processing the images. This is the first step
of the image processing, which will provide a 3D model to be processed further. The
next step considers cropping this point cloud to hold only the points in the region
around the mast. As its final output, the image processing step provides separate 3D
point clouds for each of the masts, holding only the points related to the masts and
the ground directly below them. This is the necessary input for the final step of the
pipeline, where these point clouds will be aligned to the LiDAR equivalent.
5.2.1.1
Colmap
As mentioned in section 4.1, all Colmap needs as input is a set of unstructured images.
From these, it will output a dense 3D reconstruction, given that enough of the images
correlate. This first step simply performs this action, i.e. the images for each mast
are fed to Colmap, and a 3D model is generated for each of them.
From section 4.1 it also became evident that the automatic reconstructor should
be replaced by instead performing the steps manually, which is also what is done here.
The parameters used are similar to the default settings when using the graphical user
interface of Colmap, with the only difference being that the camera model is shared
for all images rather than being individually set for each image based on its metadata.
These settings were found to provide the best overall results, despite numerous hours
of trying to tweak them to improve the reconstruction.
The images inputted to Colmap are therefore the only variable in this process,
and is what affects the final reconstruction the most. This will be explored further in
section 6.3, but from the experiences gained during the implementation study, it is
clear that the level of correspondence between the images is what matters the most.
Given that the objectives of this thesis do not consider any time constraints, but
rather to obtain the highest-fidelity 3D models possible, all the images for each mast
will be inputted to Colmap. In the process of matching images to each other, Colmap
will discard those images that have little to no correlation with at least two other
==PAGE:45==
5.2 The Pipeline
33
images, i.e. although all images for each mast are inputted, they might not all be
used for the final reconstruction.
5.2.1.2
Colmap Point Cloud Processing
After receiving a 3D model of the photographed scene from Colmap, the next step is
to crop it to hold only the region of interest. Naturally, the region of interest is the
region where the mast is found, and the objective of this processing step is to analyse
the point cloud and extract this region.
This was done using Python (v.3.10), and the Open3D [70] and Numpy [71] li-
braries. First, the point clouds are downsampled and outliers removed, giving a point
cloud with roughly 3000 points (as opposed to several millions) moving forward. 3000
is a fixed number found to provide a compromise between keeping enough detail to
still represent the scene geometrically correct, and being able to perform calculations
on and manipulations of the point cloud in a reasonable time frame.
The second step estimates the ground plane of the point cloud. Based on the
assumption that the mast is constructed on a flat surface, and that all the mast points
are perpendicular to this ground plane, identifying the points in the point cloud that
make up the ground will help the next few processing steps. The model of the plane
is found by using the Open3D function segment_plane(), which can be called on
a point cloud object to find the plane in the point cloud with the strongest support
[72]. This function uses the Random Sample Consensus algorithm (RANSAC) [73] to
estimate a plane, and does so by being given a distance threshold, how many points for
RANSAC to consider inliers for each iteration, and a total number of iterations. The
distance threshold describes how far away from the estimated plane model a point can
be and still be considered a point in the plane. For the set number of iterations, where
a higher number generally means a higher probability of the segmented plane being
correct, RANSAC will perform the following two operations: First, it will choose the
specified number of points randomly to estimate a plane. Then, all the points in the
point cloud will be tested against this estimation, and the exact number of points
that lie within this plane will denote the strength of this plane. Upon completion, the
algorithm outputs the model of the plane that had the strongest support in the point
cloud, i.e. the plane with the most inliers. The equation of this plane can be denoted
ax + by + cz + d = 0, where a, b, c and d are values returned from the function. An
example of the found plane in one of the point clouds can be seen in Figure 5.1.
Having found the plane equation, the third step is to find the bounding box of
the mast, or the region of interest. This is done by performing a series of small steps,
where the first is to find all the points that are perpendicular to the plane. To be
able to derive this, the normals of each point in the point cloud must be estimated.
A simple call to estimate_normals() provides the desired results, and with each
point having a normal, filtering based on the angle of these normals can be performed.
The next step filters out all points that do not have a normal perpendicular to the
plane normal, with a 45 degree threshold. Remaining in the point clouds after this
filtering are the points of the masts, trees and other types of vegetation growing
==PAGE:46==
34
5 Implementation
Figure 5.1: The result of plane segmentation on the downsampled Colmap point
cloud (ground points in red).
vertically. One could argue this step could have consisted of simply removing the
aforementioned ground points, but from experience, this was found to be less robust,
often leaving a lot of incorrectly classified ground points. Another benefit of filtering
based on the normals in the point cloud is that the wires are also removed. The
remaining vertical points of the point cloud can be seen in Figure 5.2.
From Figure 5.2, it is clear that the point cloud now holds several clusters of
points that are far from each other. As the goal is to remain with only the mast
points, the next step focuses on correctly identifying which of these vertical point
clusters belong to the mast, and which can be discarded. To tackle this problem,
the DBSCAN algorithm is used [74]. DBSCAN is short for Density Based Spatial
Clustering of Applications with Noise, and focuses on clustering points based on a
given distance threshold and a minimum number of required points for a set of points
to be considered a cluster. The algorithm randomly chooses a point in the point cloud,
before retrieving all points that are within the specified radius. If more points than
the specified minimum is found, a cluster is registered, and the point is considered a
core point. Considering the rest of the points in the point cloud, the cluster can later
be expanded, or other clusters, with their own core points, can be found. Finally, the
point cloud will hold all the different clusters found by DBSCAN, where each cluster
has been given a label.
Figure 5.2: The points found to be perpendicular to the ground (coloured in red) in
the downsampled Colmap point cloud. Along with the two masts in the scene, trees
and bushes are also found during this step.
==PAGE:47==
5.2 The Pipeline
35
Open3D have implemented DBSCAN, allowing for a simple call to the function
cluster_dbscan() to cluster a point cloud. Running the algorithm on the point
cloud consisting only of vertical points, with a distance threshold set to 2.5 times the
point cloud’s voxel size (from the downsampling step), and a minimum number of
neighbours equal to 15, the outputted clusters can be seen in Figure 5.3. From this
example, it is easy to spot that the cluster belonging to the mast is also the cluster
closest to the centre of the original point cloud. This holds true for all the masts in
the provided dataset, and is an important assumption for correctly identifying the
cluster belonging to the mast. By extracting the points belonging to the centre-most
cluster, the points belonging to the mast have been found.
Figure 5.3: A display of the outputted clusters after performing DBSCAN on the
vertical points of the downsampled Colmap point cloud. Each cluster is given its own
colour, black points are not considered part of any cluster.
Seeing as all power line masts bear a lot of resemblance to one another, keeping
only the mast points complicates the final alignment to the LiDAR point cloud, as
will be detailed in subsection 7.2.3. To ensure the best possible starting point for
that final step, it was therefore decided to also keep points on the ground directly
underneath, or within a certain distance from, the mast. Put simply, a bounding
box slightly bigger than the mast in all directions was found, and this bounding box
was used to crop the original point cloud. The result is a much smaller point cloud,
holding the mast, the ground around/underneath the mast, and the connected wires,
as seen in Figure 5.4a.
Lastly, having cropped the original point cloud to hold only the region of interest,
one final step is necessary to ensure the best possible input for the alignment later
- removing the wires. This is done in a three-step process, all revolving around the
segment_plane() function from before. Considering what is left in the point cloud
at hand (see Figure 5.4a), it can be said to have three planes: the ground, the mast
and the wires. When performing the first plane segmentation on these points, the
plane with the most support is the ground (like before), as it holds significantly more
points when compared to the mast and the wires. Having found and removed the
ground points, storing them for use later, a second plane segmentation is done. This
time, the best supported plane is the mast, as can be seen in Figure 5.4b. These
points are kept, whilst the outliers (i.e. wires and the like) are discarded. Finally, the
==PAGE:48==
36
5 Implementation
(a) Region of interest
(b) Mast points in red
(c) Wires removed
Figure 5.4: A display of the how the wire points are removed from the cropped
Colmap point clouds.
a) shows the point cloud after cropping the reconstructed
scene to only hold the area of interest, with the wires still present. b) displays the
points found to be related to the mast (red), done after removing the ground points.
These points will be kept, whilst the points holding their original colours will be
removed. c) displays the final result after the removal of these points. The wires are
now removed from the scene, and the point cloud holds only the desired ground and
mast points.
ground points from earlier can be merged with the mast points, providing us a point
cloud holding only the mast and the ground directly below it. The final result can
be seen in Figure 5.4c.
5.2.2
Processing LiDAR Data
The provided LiDAR data consists of larger and smaller tiles of coloured 3D points,
ordered in LASer files [52]. As opposed to the images, there is no relation between
e.g. the centre of the point cloud and where a mast is found, as one tile can hold
multiple masts, or none at all. A display of one such tile can be found in Figure 5.5.
Contrary to the Colmap point clouds, the point clouds captured by the LiDAR sensor,
as denoted in chapter 3, hold a lot more additional information about each individual
point. Where the generated point clouds based on the images only hold each point’s
respective colour value and position, the LiDAR point clouds hold colour, intensities,
coordinates in UTM format, and most importantly, classifications. With each point
being classified, the task of filtering the point cloud is greatly simplified. Like with
the point clouds from Colmap before, the goal of this step is to extract only the mast
points, and some ground points around the mast.
As the first step of processing the LiDAR data, the point clouds are filtered to only
hold ground and mast points. This is done using the laspy library [75] in Python,
by iterating through each point cloud 1 000 000 points at the time, keeping only
the points that belong to one of the two classes.
Although this will keep all the
==PAGE:49==
5.2 The Pipeline
37
Figure 5.5: A picture of one of the point cloud tiles provided by the LiDAR sensor.
The power line of interest can be seen splitting the forest, and obtains a smaller part
of the point cloud. Removing the points related to the trees is one of the necessary
steps during processing of the LiDAR data.
ground points, not only those close to the mast, the total number of points is already
significantly lowered, which allows all the point clouds to be merged into one to limit
the search space. In their original form, merging all the point clouds would have
resulted in an enormous point cloud with a search space unfeasible for the rest of this
pipeline.
Merging the point clouds is done using the Python library PDAL [76], and is a
necessary step to simplify the search for each individual mast, which will be carried
out later.
As mentioned in chapter 3, in addition to the images and the LiDAR
point clouds, a CSV file holding information about the exact position of the drone
and the photographed masts is also provided. This file allows for a direct correlation
between a coordinate in the real world and a mast, which is what will be exploited
next. Having merged all the point clouds into one large point cloud, holding only
mast and ground points, all the positions of the relevant masts can be found inside
this point cloud. By simply extracting the coordinates of each mast from the CSV
file and converting them to UTM format, the photographed masts can be found in
the LiDAR point clouds directly. Masts that have not been photographed will at this
point be discarded.
The coordinates found in the CSV file denote the centre of the top crossbar of
each mast. Since the region of interest is the mast and a small area of the ground
around it, finding a bounding box that encapsulates this area was done next. This
exercise was carried out empirically, looking at all the masts in the provided dataset
and finding the smallest possible box that would encapsulate even the largest one of
the masts. Then, cropping this point cloud was performed by simple Numpy array
operations. The result of this cropping can be seen in Figure 5.6, which is the final
outputted point cloud. This point cloud consists of only a few thousand points related
to one of the masts, and is saved in its separate file to be aligned with the related
Colmap point cloud later.
==PAGE:50==
38
5 Implementation
Figure 5.6: The point cloud of one of the masts captured by the LiDAR sensor,
after the processing steps have been carried out. Unlike before, the point cloud can
now be seen holding only points related to the mast and the ground directly below
it.
5.2.3
Point Cloud Alignment
After preprocessing both the image and the LiDAR data, all the masts are represented
similarly in two different point clouds - one sparse LiDAR point cloud, and one dense
Colmap point cloud. The goal of this final step of the implementation is to align these
point clouds, putting the high-density Colmap point cloud in the correct position, and
with the correct scale, on top of the LiDAR point cloud. This way, the best features
from both models are preserved, and a model with significantly more detail obtained.
5.2.4
Global Alignment
The first challenge to be overcome is the scale and orientation differences between the
two point clouds. Visualising the two 3D models next to each other, as in Figure 5.7,
it is clear that the Colmap model is significantly smaller than the LiDAR model, and
that they are oriented differently. This is the case for all the masts in the provided
dataset, although the scale difference is less extreme for two of the seven. When align-
ing point clouds, the first algorithm that comes to mind is the Iterative Closest Point
(ICP) algorithm [44], a local alignment algorithm which will be detailed in subsec-
tion 5.2.5. However, ICP requires the two point clouds to already be roughly aligned,
which is not the case directly after the data is processed individually. To conquer
this problem, the point clouds must first be roughly aligned, which is often termed
”global registration”. In Open3D, one approach to this problem is implemented using
RANSAC [73].
To obtain a decent result from the global registration, the point clouds must first
be downsampled to hold approximately the same amount of points. This requires the
Colmap point cloud to be downsampled significantly more than the LiDAR equiv-
alent, and after excessive experimenting, downsampling both point clouds to have
around 2500 points was found to yield the most reliable results. Then, features must
==PAGE:51==
5.2 The Pipeline
39
Figure 5.7:
Both processed point clouds visualised relative to each other, with
the bigger being the LiDAR point cloud, and the smaller being the Colmap point
cloud (framed in red). The Colmap point cloud is visibly smaller and rotated upside
compared to the LiDAR cloud.
be found and extracted from both point clouds, which is done through Open3D’s
compute_fpfh_feature() function, based on the Fast Point Feature Histograms
(FPFH) algorithm [77]. FPFH features are scale and orientation invariant, which
means the differences in both, as seen in Figure 5.7, should not be a concern. Af-
ter finding features in both point clouds, these, along with the downsampled point
clouds themselves, can be fed to the registration_ransac_based_on_feature_
matching() function, which will find corresponding features of both point clouds
and estimate the best possible transformation to align them. An example of features
found and matched can be seen in Figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Found correspondences between the Colmap (yellow) and LiDAR (blue)
point clouds. The pink lines are drawn between corresponding features found using
the FPFH algorithm.
==PAGE:52==
40
5 Implementation
(a) Wrong scale
(b) Adjusted scale
Figure 5.9: A comparison between the results of the global registration performed
with and without adjusting the scale. a) displays the result with the wrong scale,
where the smaller Colmap point cloud is barely visible in yellow at the bottom left
corner of the left pole. b) shows the result after adjusting the Colmap point cloud (yel-
low) to have the same scale as the LiDAR point cloud (blue), and a rough alignment
is obtained.
Although the global registration using RANSAC should be able to also estimate
the scale differences between two point clouds, this was not found to be straightfor-
ward. Although hard to visualise in a 2D figure, many of the features found to be
corresponding are in fact wrongly related (e.g. points at the top of the mast are found
to correspond with the other cloud’s ground points). Quite often, even after countless
attempts to adjust the parameters of the algorithm and the look of the point clouds,
the best estimated global alignment is found to be as in Figure 5.9a. Here, the origi-
nal scale difference is still visible, and the algorithm has found the best alignment to
be with the Colmap point cloud in the bottom left corner of the LiDAR mast. After
numerous attempts of letting the global registration function try to estimate the scale
difference without success, it was decided to go a different route. In the end, the scale
of each mast was found manually, through looking at the distance between a pair of
points found in both clouds. This action was carried out in CloudCompare [69], as
doing this in Python automatically, also had its challenges.
After upscaling the Colmap point clouds by the manually found scale factor, the
number of points from earlier (2500) had to be lowered for the ground not to be too
dominant. After instead downsampling the two point clouds to around 600 points,
aligning them saw great improvements. One such result can be seen in Figure 5.9b.
Going back to the original problem, a rough alignment between the point cloud pairs
is now found, and further improvements can be obtained by applying ICP next.
==PAGE:53==
5.2 The Pipeline
41
5.2.5
Refined Local Alignment
ICP is a simple, yet effective method to tightly align two point clouds that are al-
ready roughly aligned. Although there are multiple ways of performing ICP [78], the
method used here is the point-to-point ICP proposed by Besl and McKay [44]. This
ICP method is one of the two implemented in Open3D (the other is point-to-plane),
and provided by far the best results. The objective of this ICP method is to minimise
the sum of squared differences between two point clouds, based on each point’s corre-
spondence to the closest point in the target point cloud. The result of the algorithm is
the transformation matrix providing the minimum sum of squared differences, which
is obtained when the algorithm starts converging. This transformation can then be
applied to the point cloud that is to be aligned with the target point cloud. Given
that the objectives of this project relate to not only obtaining point clouds that have
higher-fidelity than what is currently being captured, but also that these point clouds
are positioned and oriented correctly, the target point cloud will be the one from the
LiDAR.
Applying ICP using Open3D is done with the function registration_icp(). This
function takes the two point clouds, the global transformation found in subsection 5.2.4,
a distance threshold and a number of iterations, as input. It keeps the target point
cloud in a fixed position, and aligns the other point cloud (the source point cloud)
to it by performing the aforementioned nearest-neighbour distance calculations. To
allow for the tightest possible alignment, the number of iterations is exaggerated, and
the distance threshold is set to below half the target point cloud’s voxel size. The
final alignment can be seen in Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10: The final result after aligning the Colmap point cloud (red) to the
LiDAR point cloud (yellow) using ICP. From this particular view, the two point
clouds seem to be aligned well. This is evident from looking at the ground points,
which seem to overlap each other. The mast also appears to have the same position
and orientation, unlike after the global registration step (seen in Figure 5.9b).
==PAGE:54==
42
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 6
Results
This chapter will take a closer look at the results produced by the proposed implemen-
tation. In section 6.1, a thorough look at the 3D point clouds from Colmap will take
place, assessing the performance both qualitatively and quantitatively, in relation to
the thesis’ objectives. Section 6.2 will provide an assessment of the accuracy of the
alignment between the two domains, for all the masts. Finally, an ablation study is
carried out in section 6.3, focusing solely on the Colmap point cloud generation.
6.1
3D Reconstruction from Images
The main objective of this thesis project was to explore ways of obtaining high-fidelity
3D models from high-resolution images. With the point clouds captured by the Li-
DAR sensor as the bar, the goal was to generate 3D models that have a higher density
and detail level. To evaluate this, both visual inspections and metric comparisons will
be performed. A visual representation of the generated point clouds will be presented,
comparing the results to the real-world LiDAR point clouds, as well as detailing their
point density distribution.
Seeing as the main use-case of the point clouds is for
inspection purposes, assessing the results simply by looking at them is considered
a relevant task. To back the visualisations, several density metrics have also been
computed.
Three of the seven provided masts and their respective pairs of 3D models, can be
seen in figures 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3. Here, the point clouds in (a) are from the LiDAR sen-
sor, whilst the point clouds in (b) are generated from the images using Colmap. The
top-two images display the entire area of interest, whilst the bottom-two are zoomed
in on the critical mast components. To enhance the visualisation and highlight the
densities of the point clouds, all points are coloured white.
==PAGE:56==
44
6 Results
(a) LiDAR
(b) Colmap
Figure 6.1: A comparison of the original LiDAR (a) and the Colmap (b) point
clouds of the 6d mast. The Colmap point cloud appears denser and is seemingly
providing more detail than that of the LiDAR. One example of which can be seen
when inspecting the thin vertical pole in both clouds.
From the three figures, all the point clouds generated from Colmap appear denser
than their respective LiDAR counterparts. The LiDAR point clouds correctly capture
high-level structures of the masts, but appear lacking in terms of preserving details.
Colmap, on the other hand, is able to capture both the high-level structures and
the fine-grained details of the masts, evident especially when inspecting the masts’
components more closely.
This difference is bigger in Figure 6.2 and 6.3 than in
Figure 6.1, possibly caused by the latter being a larger mast, or that the materials
present in this mast are somehow easier to capture with the LiDAR sensor. Seeing as
the laser ray outputted by the scanner is somewhat cone-shaped, and aimed directly
downwards from underneath the drone, the diameter of the laser ray being reflected
at a particular point, which is what determines the distance, might benefit from
larger components of different materials. A third reason could be that the drone flew
==PAGE:57==
6.1 3D Reconstruction from Images
45
(a) LiDAR
(b) Colmap
Figure 6.2: A comparison of the original LiDAR (a) and the Colmap (b) point
clouds of the 98 mast. There seems to be a considerable increase in the number of
points representing the top of the mast in the Colmap point cloud, evident from how
clearly the insulators of the mast can be found in this point cloud compare to the
LiDAR.
closer to this mast than the others during the inspection, which would also result
in more points being reflected. The main takeaway from these speculations however,
is that there could be many reasons for this particular mast to have more points in
the LiDAR point cloud. For this comparison, what is most important to note is that
the added number of points seem to benefit the overall representation of the mast,
although the Colmap point cloud still appears much denser.
The notion of the Colmap point clouds appearing denser is backed by the results
in Table 6.1. These results contain three different metrics calculated using Cloud-
Compare and its built-in function ”Compute geometric features” [79].
For a fair
comparison, all points unrelated to the masts are removed. This means no ground
points or cables are found in the point clouds being evaluated (see Figure 6.6 for an
==PAGE:58==
46
6 Results
(a) LiDAR
(b) Colmap
Figure 6.3: A comparison of the original LiDAR (a) and the Colmap (b) point
clouds of the be mast. Although seemingly denser, Colmap’s reconstruction seems
to be noisier for this particular mast, evident from the sparsely distributed points
around the mast.
example). The computed metrics are; the number of neighbours within a certain dis-
tance of each point in the point cloud, the surface density of the point cloud (i.e. the
number of neighbours divided by the neighbourhood surface area), and the volume
density of the point cloud (i.e. number of neighbours divided by the neighbourhood
volume). The neighbourhood surface is the area of a sphere around the current point,
whilst the neighbourhood volume is the volume of this same sphere around the same
point.
As input to the CloudCompare function, a radius must be provided. This radius
specifies the radius of the sphere, who’s size is the maximum distance from any
given point the algorithm will consider part of this point’s neighbourhood. For this
comparison, the radius was set equal to the diameter of a disc making up a standard
insulator. The distance was found empirically inside the LiDAR point cloud using
==PAGE:59==
6.1 3D Reconstruction from Images
47
CloudCompare, and found to be 0.28 meters. This aligns well with the standard units
of suspension disc insulators found in The Electric Power Engineering Handbook,
which states that this diameter normally is 25 centimeters [80].
Inspecting these
insulators in the LiDAR point clouds is nearly impossible given the low number of
points representing them, combined with the sparse point distribution. From this, the
following objective is derived: to accurately represent a standard insulator, and to
provide a detailed enough model to be able to separate the inner discs this insulator
is constructed from, the point clouds representing the masts must hold, on average,
10 times the number of points the LiDAR point clouds hold within the same areas.
To assess this, the CloudCompare algorithm is fed the aforementioned radius and all
the point clouds, before calculating the three metrics. The results are presented in
Table 6.1.
Point cloud
n points
Mean NN
Surface density
Volume density
e1_L
784
23
90
237
98_L
866
25
97
257
67_L
975
22
89
234
66_L
1 039
30
118
312
be_L
1 185
37
145
383
05_L
3 530
60
239
630
6d_L
5 636
59
234
617
e1_C
112 093
2 335
9 208
24 308
98_C
40 250
879
3 466
9 152
67_C
62 579
1 202
4 741
12 515
66_C
93 628
2 123
8 372
22 102
be_C
136 606
2 773
10 933
28 862
05_C
149 697
2 706
10 670
28 168
6d_C
262 315
2 015
7 947
20 980
Table 6.1: A detailed look at different density metrics describing the point clouds.
n denotes the total number of points left in the point cloud when all but the mast
points are removed, mean NN denotes the mean number of nearest neighbours within
the specified radius, _L denotes it is a LiDAR point cloud, _C denotes it is a Colmap
point cloud. On average, the Colmap point clouds can be seen to hold 55 times as
many points as the LiDAR point clouds.
From Table 6.1 it is clear that the Colmap point clouds are in fact a lot denser
than their respective LiDAR counterparts. On average, the Colmap point clouds have
1 968 more mean nearest neighbours inside the specified radius, which is a 55 times
increase. The same increase is reflected in the surface and volume densities.
Another important aspect of the aforementioned results is the difference in noise
between the two sets of point clouds. This is highlighted in Figure 6.4, where the left
pole of the be mast from Figure 6.3b is inspected in more detail. Here, all points not
within the two green lines can be considered outliers or noise, of which there appears
==PAGE:60==
48
6 Results
to be many for the point cloud generated by Colmap (see Figure 6.4a), and none for
the LiDAR (see Figure 6.4b). Considering the LiDAR sensor’s precision, and how
the Colmap point clouds are generated, this is to be expected.
When generating
point clouds using SfM and MVS techniques, even small mistakes in what features
are matched can introduce noise like this, whilst the LiDAR sensor is in fact receiving
direct distance feedback from the actual real-world scene in a more or less uniform
way.
(a) Colmap
(b) LiDAR
Figure 6.4: A closer look at the difference in noise between the two point clouds.
a) displays the Colmap point cloud, where all the points between the two green lines
are considered inliers and part of the left pole. Many points are found outside this
boundary, which is considered to be noise. b) displays the same scene in the equivalent
LiDAR point cloud, where there appears to be no noise at all.
The images captured of the masts are taken from multiple different directions.
Directions, in this scenario, denotes viewing angles, and a maximum of four are
found in the dataset; in front, behind, from the left or from the right. A picture
is considered taken from the front of the mast if it is captured before crossing the
crossbar in the flight direction of the drone going out. When the drone comes back,
the same criteria applies to consider the picture captured from the back. The right
and left directions are considered the same way, but in relation to the power line.
For five out of the seven masts, there are enough images from multiple different
directions, allowing Colmap to reconstruct an accurate 3D model that has details all
around the mast. As for the two remaining masts, this is not the case. This can be
seen in Figure 6.2, were there appears to be corridors of no points at all behind the
two vertical poles. The reason no points are found here, is simply that neither of
the matched image pairs among the registered images have been able to capture this
area due to occlusions. For these two models, all the registered images are captured
from only one direction towards the mast, which in turn results in larger areas being
occluded. The correlation between the number of different directions/images and the
number of mean nearest neighbours in the seven point clouds is plotted in Figure 6.5.
Looking first at Figure 6.5a, there seems to be a clear correlation between the mean
number of neighbours and the number of images used for the reconstruction, where
==PAGE:61==
6.1 3D Reconstruction from Images
49
a higher number of images generally results in a higher number of mean nearest
neighbours. The same can not be said about the number of different directions the
images are captured from, as seen in Figure 6.5b. What can be derived from this
plot is that having pictures of the mast from only one direction seems to result in
the fewest nearest neighbours, and that even from two directions denser models than
those from three and four directions can be generated.
(a) n images vs n mean NNs
(b) n directions vs n mean NNs
Figure 6.5: Plot illustrating the relationship between the number of images (a) and
different viewpoints (b) in relation to the mean number of nearest neighbours. There
seems to be a clear correlation between the number of images and the mean number
of images, whilst the effect of the different number of directions is less prominent.
Knowing the density and total number of points is not enough to tell the whole
story about the quality of the reconstructions, as how the points are distributed should
also be considered. This is displayed in Figure 6.6, where the density distributions
of the LiDAR and Colmap point clouds are visualised side-by-side in relation to the
aforementioned insulator diameter (0.28 m). Similar to the calculations in Table 6.1,
only the mast points are considered for this comparison. From the figure it is clear
that the three point clouds have more points in crucial areas atop the masts where
the insulators are found, indicated by a brighter colour trending towards red. This is
reflected also in the LiDAR point clouds, and is unsurprising given that both sources
of data are captured from above the masts. An important difference between the
LiDAR and Colmap point clouds however, is Colmap’s ability to reconstruct the
vertical poles densely. From all three subfigures, the vertical poles in the LiDAR
point cloud can be seen to have a blue colour, indicating that few points are within
the sought for 28 centimeter radius from each other. Inspecting the vertical poles of
the Colmap point clouds then, a brighter green colour is dominant, indicating that
this area holds more points within the specified radius.
More figures of the dense reconstructions produced using Colmap can be found in
Appendix A, where the point clouds are presented how they naturally look.
==PAGE:62==
50
6 Results
(a) *
(b) 6d
(c) 98
(d) be
Figure 6.6: The point distribution of the LiDAR and Colmap point clouds, consid-
ering nearest neighbours within the insulator disc diameter of 0.28 m. The LiDAR
point clouds are leftmost, with doubled point sizes. A brighter colour trending to-
wards red indicates more nearest neighbours, whilst a darker blue colour indicates
fewer (as indicated in a). From this it can be derived that all point clouds hold a
denser distribution of points in crucial areas related to the mast components.
6.2
Alignment
For this section, an in-depth look at the accuracy of the final alignment of the two
point cloud sources will be assessed. Determining the precision will be supported by
both visual inspection and calculated absolute point-cloud-to-point-cloud distances.
Remembering the fifth and sixth objectives of this thesis project, the goals are to
obtain accurately scaled and oriented point clouds generated from high-resolution
images, with a root mean squared error (RMSE) lower than 0.14 meters (radius of a
standard insulator disc in the dataset) when calculating absolute distances between
the original and the aligned generated point clouds. Three of the seven point clouds
will be compared to their equivalent LiDAR point clouds directly through a visual
assessment of the final alignment. The alignment results for all the masts will also be
presented numerically. As in section 6.1, all points unrelated to the masts have been
removed.
The alignment of one of the masts has already been displayed in Figure 5.10.
From this view, the alignment seems to be tight between the much denser Colmap
point cloud and the LiDAR counterpart. The model also seems to hold the correct
scale and orientation. Naturally, capturing the accuracy of the alignment from one
angle is not suﬀicient to evaluate the three-dimensional scene. Three of the masts are
therefore assessed from three different views, as seen in Figure 6.7. These viewing
angles capture the most important area of the masts, which is the top where all the
components are found.
When looking at each masts top from directly in front, as seen in Figure 6.7a, it
is clear that most of the points making up the top crossbars are not on top of their
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Alignment
51
(a) Top
(b) Left
(c) Above
Figure 6.7: A closer look at the alignment of the Colmap generated point cloud
(red) compared to the original position of the LiDAR point cloud (yellow, 2x point
size). a) displays the top of the masts from directly in front, b) displays the top from
the left, and c) displays the masts from above.
respective LiDAR points, as a gap can be spotted between them. From this view,
the orientation for all three masts seem quite accurate, evident from the crossbars
looking more or less parallel to the LiDAR crossbars. The same vertical error is not
present at the bottom of the point clouds, i.e. the ground points seem properly aligned,
without the ground points in the Colmap cloud being raised above the LiDAR ground
points. This can be seen in Figure 5.10, and its effects will be discussed further in
==PAGE:64==
52
6 Results
subsection 7.1.2. Of the three, the Colmap point cloud at the bottom row of Figure 6.7
seems to have the largest vertical error compared to its respective LiDAR point cloud.
(a) 6d
(b) 66
(c) be
Figure 6.8:
A visual representation of the accuracy of the alignment for three
of the point clouds.
More intense white colour denotes the point is further away
from its respective LiDAR point, more intense brown colour denotes it is closer. The
saturation cap is set at the objective RMSE of 0.14 m, i.e. all points further away than
this are coloured white. a) displays a decent alignment, inferred by most of the points
being more brown than white. b) appears to struggle with the vertical poles, but the
strong brown colour atop the mast indicates the most important area is aligned well.
c) displays the worst performing alignment of all the masts (see Table 6.2), which is
reflected by the point cloud being more white than brown, especially atop the mast.
The horizontal alignment errors seem smaller, best visualised in Figure 6.7c. Of
the three, the model in the middle row seems to have the biggest offset, visible in the
amount of red points positioned to the right of the equivalent yellow LiDAR points.
Another visualisation of the alignment accuracy can be seen in Figure 6.8.
Here,
browner points are closer to the LiDAR points, whilst whiter points are further away.
Completely white points are more than the sought for 14 centimeters away from the
LiDAR points. From Figure 6.8c, most of the points related to the top of the mast
can be seen in a bright white colour, denoting again, the most challenging area of
this mast’s alignment. As can be inferred from the peak of the normal distribution
next to the colour scale of this figure, most of the points seem to be around 14 cm or
further away after the alignment.
The above observations are supported by the calculated metrics in Table 6.2.
Here, the alignment results are evaluated numerically based on the absolute distances
between the two point clouds, after the generated ones from Colmap have been aligned.
Three metrics are calculated for each mast: the root mean squared error (RMSE) of
the absolute distances, the mean absolute distance, and the standard deviation (STD)
of the absolute distances.
==PAGE:65==
6.2 Alignment
53
Mast
RMSE
Mean
STD
e1
0.1186
0.1063
0.0527
98
0.1536
0.1286
0.0840
67
0.1084
0.0890
0.0619
66
0.1224
0.1090
0.0558
be
0.1717
0.1510
0.0816
05
0.0727
0.0667
0.0370
6d
0.1137
0.0897
0.0698
Avg.
0.1230
0.1058
0.0633
Table 6.2: A comparison of the accuracy of the point cloud alignments when com-
puting absolute cloud-to-cloud distances. The objective of a RMSE below 0.14 m is
achieved for five of the seven masts, with the best achieving nearly half of this.
Absolute distance denotes the distance between all the points in the LiDAR and
Colmap point clouds, and is calculated using CloudCompare’s ”Cloud/cloud dist”
function [81], taking two point clouds as input. Then, the mean and standard devi-
ation of all the distances are calculated using the function ”Compute stat. params”
[82], also provided by CloudCompare. Finally, to have a metric that is more sensitive
to outliers, the RMSE is calculated from the following formula: RMSE =
√
σ2 + µ2,
where σ denotes the standard deviation, and µ the mean of the point clouds’ absolute
distances. Seeing as all distances will be squared, larger errors will contribute more
significantly to the final RMSE value of the point cloud, rewarding those reconstruc-
tions that have fewer outliers. The goal is for the masts to be aligned such that the
RMSE is less than 14 cm, which is the radius of the smallest insulator in the LiDAR
point clouds (as mentioned in section 6.1). An error smaller than this is considered
acceptable, whilst a larger error would introduce complications in terms of trusting
the final pose of the masts.
All metrics for the seven masts alignment performance are found in Table 6.2.
From this table, it is clear that all but two point clouds reach the objective of having
a RMSE lower than 0.14 m, with the best being 05 with an RMSE of 7 centimeters.
Another takeaway from this table is that the deviation from the mean is low, with
an average of 6.33 cm for all the point clouds. Of all the masts, be is the one that is
aligned the worst, with an RMSE of more than 17 centimeters. This is the same mast
presented in the bottom row of Figure 6.7, which appears to have the largest vertical
error. From Figure 6.6, the top of the masts can be remembered as the area with the
densest collection of points. Paired with the visible vertical error, this combination
might explain this mast’s poor results presented in the table.
==PAGE:66==
54
6 Results
6.3
Ablation Study
The goal of this ablation study was to see what impact the number of images and the
number of different camera viewpoints have on the 3D reconstructions from Colmap,
and how few of either is necessary to obtain a denser model than that of the LiDAR
sensor. The study was carried out on the mast with the most images and different
viewpoints available, allowing for the most thorough testing.
6.3.1
Number of Images
The first study was done by gradually decreasing the total number of images inputted
to Colmap, while still maintaining all the different viewpoints (i.e. at least one image
from the front, back, left and right areas of the mast, as seen in Figure 4.3). As
denoted in chapter 4, Colmap was able to register 145 of the 153 total images, which
means the goal is to lower this number of registered images, and still obtain a 3D
model denser than the one provided by the LiDAR.
Figure
6.9:
The
result
of
Colmap’s
dense
reconstruction
using
eight
correctly
registered images, two
from
each
of
the
4
directions.
No mast
has been reconstructed,
and only sparse parts
of the ground.
Within the 145 images, large variations in season, light
conditions and weather was found, with images captured
between February and June. The first experiment there-
fore reduced the images in the pool to hold only the images
with similar conditions, which in this case means images
captured between February and early May, with roughly
the same light conditions, weather and camera parameters.
After this filtering, a total of 63 images remained. When
inputted to Colmap, all the provided images were regis-
tered - an improvement from earlier, when 8 images were
discarded.
The next few experiments involved reducing the number
of images from this pool of similarly conditioned images,
as these were found to provide a good model even with
less than half the images available. First, the number was
halved again, giving a total of 28 images of which two were
from both the right and left directions, whilst the remaining
24 were from the front and back (12 each).
Next, another ten images were removed from the pool,
leaving the same four images from the left and right, but
removing five from both the front and the back of the mast, totalling 18 images.
Finally, experiments were also carried out with less than 18 images.
Unfortu-
nately, these were not able to reconstruct the mast at all, as seen in Figure 6.9.
Here, two images from each direction were used as input (totalling 8 images), and
although the camera positions in the sparse model seemed correctly registered, the
dense reconstruction fails at modelling the mast.
The results of this part of the ablation study can be seen in Figure 6.10, where the
different reconstructions are put side-by-side with the equivalent LiDAR point cloud.
==PAGE:67==
6.3 Ablation Study
55
n images
n points
Mean NN
Surface density
Volume density
145
262 315
2 015
7 947
20 980
63
112 093
988
3 897
10 287
28
44 952
381
1 502
3 966
18
23 708
214
846
2 232
LiDAR
5 636
59
234
617
Table 6.3: A comparison of the different density metrics of the point clouds. n
denotes the number of images and the total number of points left in the point cloud
when all but the mast points are removed, respectively. Mean NN denotes the mean
number of nearest neighbours within a sphere with radius 0.28 m (diameter of a
standard insulator disc).
(a) LiDAR
(b) n=18
(c) n=28
(d) n=63
(e) n=145
Figure 6.10: A side by side comparison of the different 3D reconstructions viewed
from the same angle, with the original LiDAR point cloud (point size doubled) to
the left. n denotes the number of images used for the reconstruction. There is a
visible difference in terms of point density between the different runs, although even
b) is able to reconstruct something resembling the mast. When using all the images
(e), noise starts to become a noticeable factor, evident especially around the inner
components.
Additionally, some key metrics are calculated and compared in Table 6.3. Inspecting
the point clouds visually, even the model produced from 18 images looks like a decent
reconstruction, as a mast is clearly visible (see Figure 6.10b). The amount of detail in
this reconstruction is comparable to that of the LiDAR, and along with more images
being used in the other models, more details are being captured. From Table 6.3,
all the reconstructions can be seen to hold more points with a higher density than
that of the LiDAR, although the models with 63 and 145 images are the only ones
achieving the objective of a tenfold increase.
==PAGE:68==
56
6 Results
6.3.2
Number of Viewpoints
The second study was carried out with the goal of seeing the impact the number
of different viewpoints the mast is captured from has on the final reconstruction.
During a normal inspection run, the drone flies past the masts from two directions;
the front and the back. This means the number of images from these two directions
is considerably higher than those from the left and right directions. As the baseline
for this part of the study, the reconstruction found in Figure 6.10d is used. This
model is reconstructed from 63 images that are distributed randomly between the
four different directions. The results will be assessed qualitatively, as density metrics
are inaccurate measures of most of these models.
From subsection 6.3.1, models reconstructed from fewer than 50 images also turned
out as good reconstructions, with the prerequisite that the images are taken from all
directions. To test this, the first model was created with 38 images, where four were
captured from the left and right directions (two each), whilst the remaining 34 is from
the front and back (17 each). Colmap managed to correctly register all the images,
i.e. all 38 were used for the final dense reconstruction.
As mentioned earlier, most of the images captured of the masts are taken either
from the front or from the back of the mast. The second experiment was therefore
done without any left or right images, using 20 images from both of these directions.
All images were registered correctly, with 20 camera poses from each direction.
For the third experiment, pictures captured from only one direction were used.
This model is generated from 20 correctly registered images, all from the back of the
mast. Given the nature of Colmap, this reconstruction should be lacking, as all the
information utilised from the images are from the same direction, i.e. larger portions
of the scene are not seen or occluded in the pictures. The nature of photogramme-
try is to reconstruct a scene from data found in images, not create 3D information
where there is none. This also means that for any depth to be estimated, these 20
images from the same direction still need to have slight local variations between them
position-wise in order to be able to perform triangulation. This is discussed more in
subsection 7.1.1.
Finally, a fourth experiment was also carried out, trying to reconstruct the scene
from the left and right images only, meaning images captured from across the drone’s
normal flight direction. Seeing as the total number of left and right images was 25
(18 from the right, 7 from the left), and that models outputted earlier in this ablation
study showed decent results with around the same amount of pictures, it was viewed
as an interesting comparison. Unfortunately, Colmap was unable to register these
images correctly and simply provided two different models, one from each direction,
neither with a mast in the scene.
In Figure 6.11, the resulting models of this part of the ablation study can be found
in a side-by-side comparison. The models are displayed from opposite directions and
at different heights, trying to capture the significant areas of the reconstructions.
All models were able to reconstruct a mast, however visible differences are present.
In Figure 6.11d, larger empty areas can be spotted on the ground behind the two
==PAGE:69==
6.3 Ablation Study
57
(a) Baseline
(b) n=38, v=4
(c) n=40, v=2
(d) n=20, v=1
Figure 6.11: A side by side comparison of the 3D reconstructions, using different
points of view and number of images, viewed from opposite directions. n denotes
the number of images used for the reconstruction, v denotes the number of different
viewing angles. a) works as the baseline, where n=63 and v=4.
vertical poles of the mast, as no information from these areas were found in the
inputted images. Inspecting it closer, the same can be said for the back of the mast,
where the poles seem flat and the backside of the components are visibly different
from the equivalent components in the direction from where the pictures were taken.
This will be further discussed in subsubsection 7.1.3.2. The other reconstructions do
not struggle with the same empty areas, or lack of detail on one side of the mast.
Looking at the model created from two directly opposite views, the front and back of
the mast, other artefacts can be spotted however. The main struggle of this model
seems to be related to reconstructing the top crossbar. Inspecting the model more
closely, two crossbars can be seen with a visible gap between them, although the
real-world mast only holds one. This will be detailed more during the discussion
in subsubsection 7.1.3.2. Finally, the model created from 38 images, displayed in
Figure 6.11b, can be said to be the closest one to the baseline and the real world
equivalent. This model correctly reconstructs the mast and the environment around
it, although with visibly fewer points when compared to Figure 6.11a. Given that the
number of images is considerably lower, this is to be expected.
==PAGE:70==
58
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
This chapter will discuss the significance of the results, both from the implementation
in general and from the ablation study that was carried out.
Then, some of the
limitations of the proposed implementation will be discussed, before suggestions of
how to improve these in the future will finalise the chapter.
7.1
The Results
The results presented in chapter 6 will be discussed in separate subsections, starting
with the general implementation before moving on to the ablation study.
7.1.1
3D Reconstruction
From the above results, it is clear that Colmap was able to generate models for all
the masts in the dataset based on the high-resolution pictures taken of them. Upon
inspecting the final models, as presented in section 6.1, the 3D reconstructions appear
to hold significantly more points when compared to their equivalent LiDAR models.
This is evident from visual inspection of the two point cloud sources alone, as seen
in e.g. Figure 6.1, and the wast improvement becomes even clear when considering
the zoomed-in scenario, where the mast components are more accurately represented
in the Colmap point clouds. As far as fault detection goes, being able to inspect
these crucial components more closely will allow for detecting even minor defects or
artefacts, which is currently not offered by the LiDAR model alone.
Deriving the results presented in Table 6.1, it is clear that the Colmap point clouds
not only appear denser but do in fact have more nearest neighbours within the same
region. In the table, a significant increase in total number of points, as well as the
density within a specified radius, is found for all the reconstructions. On average, the
point clouds generated from the images have 55 times more points than the equivalent
LiDAR model within a radius of a typical insulator’s diameter (0.28 m). Another
interesting observation about the Colmap point clouds is that the distribution of
points seem to be concentrated around the areas of interest, i.e. where the insulators
and other mast components are found along the top crossbar. This is displayed in
Figure 6.6, where it can be seen that this is also the case for the LiDAR point clouds.
Considering that both sources of data are captured from above the masts, this does
==PAGE:72==
60
7 Discussion
make sense. For the LiDAR sensor, the crossbar will be the strongest reflected area
given that it is closest to the drone. For the images, considering most have the masts
centered in the scene, the crossbar will be a common sight. Additionally, given that
this is also where the wires intersect the mast, many corner-like features can be found
in this cross-section. As explained in chapter 2, corners are strong features that are
easy to distinguish in a picture, which might be a contributing factor to this area
appearing densest.
The density of the point clouds does not tell the whole story however, as the
accuracy of the point clouds are not determined by the number of points or how
densely they are grouped together alone. Taking a closer look at Figure 6.2, belonging
to mast 98, it is clear that the generated Colmap point cloud has its shortcomings.
Behind the vertical poles of the mast, two corridors having no points at all can be
found on the ground. This reflects where the registered images were estimated to be
captured from, which appears to be from one direction only (as seen in Figure 6.5b).
Having images captured from one direction only means larger areas will be occluded
in the registered image pairs used for depth estimation.
The final outcome is a
3D reconstruction that looks good from one direction only, and which appears much
denser than the one from the LiDAR (see Table 6.1). If an assessment of the mast was
done from the opposite direction, no 3D information would be displayed at all (except
as the ”backside” of the one-sided reconstruction). This is one of the weaknesses
addressed in section 7.3, when talking about the importance of capturing images
from multiple different viewpoints around the masts to further improve the models.
One important note about the viewing directions as they are defined in Figure 6.5b
is that the internal variations within each direction are not reflected here. Internal
variations, in this sense, speaks to the difference between each of the images considered
to be taken from one of the four directions. Images captured of some of the masts
are from more or less the exact same position, but with variations just big enough
for triangulation to be performed. Although this also provides a three-dimensional
reconstruction, large areas of the scene remain occluded, and the unfortunate result
is that these areas are not reconstructed. For other masts, large internal variations
allow for much more of the scene to be captured, resulting in less occluded areas.
This difference in internal viewpoint variations is highlighted in Figure 7.1. Here, the
camera poses used for the two reconstructions of masts be and 66 are compared. Both
these reconstructions are made up of images from two different directions, as per the
definition in section 6.1, and two clusters of camera poses tightly grouped together can
be seen in both subfigures. What separates them are the views further away from the
two cluster centres, of which there appears to be more for the be mast. This variation
is likely contributing to why this model has 650 more nearest neighbours within the
specified radius compared to mast 66 (see Table 6.1), although it is important to also
consider the total number of images used for both reconstructions (158 vs 126).
Another takeaway from Figure 6.5 is that there seems to be a clear relation be-
tween the total number of images used for the reconstruction and the number of mean
nearest neighbours. Given how Colmap operates by finding corresponding features
between images that ultimately make up 3D points for the final reconstruction, this
==PAGE:73==
7.1 The Results
61
(a) 66
(b) be
Figure 7.1: A comparison between the camera poses used for the reconstruction of
mast 66 (a) and be (b). The camera poses are pink squares, and the scene below is
the sparse Colmap reconstruction from the SfM step. In b), green circles highlights
camera positions that are registered far away from either of the two cluster centres.
The same phenomenon can not be found in a), although slight vertical variations are
present.
makes sense. If more images are used, it means more images were found to correlate,
which means the initial sparse reconstruction hold more 3D points for the dense re-
construction to build off of. The same correlation can not be seen for the number
of different directions the masts are viewed from, depicted in Figure 6.5b, as four
masts can be seen to have fewer viewpoints than mast 6d while still holding more
mean nearest neighbours. Instead, the number of different viewpoints seem to play a
role in how accurate the masts look compared to their real-world equivalent. This is
evident from the ablation study in section 6.3, where fewer points of view seem to run
a higher risk of introducing artefacts. Section 7.1.3 will discuss this in more detail.
By visual inspection alone, it can be seen that although the generated point clouds
have their weaknesses, the density has been improved significantly, and the recon-
structed point clouds will allow for much more thorough inspections of the masts
and their crucial components. Trying to assess the state of any of the insulators of
the masts in the LiDAR point clouds is not a viable option, as the distance between
the points is too sparse to obtain the necessary level of detail. Even trained profes-
sionals might have to guess the size or location of some of these components in the
LiDAR point clouds, making it diﬀicult to detect geometrical defects or issues. With
the increased density provided by the Colmap generated point clouds, even minor
anomalies or defects can be inspected directly inside the point cloud, which ideally
encapsulates all the different views the components were photographed from. Even
with images captured from only one direction of the mast, the reconstruction displays
more detail than the LiDAR equivalent on the side that is photographed, highlight-
ing that 3D models from high-resolution images like these could really benefit this
inspection setting.
==PAGE:74==
62
7 Discussion
7.1.2
Alignment
Upon inspecting the precision of the point cloud alignments, a few things can be
inferred. First, neither of the models are perfectly aligned, or aligned in a way that
makes is impossible to spot a difference between the two point cloud sources. This
is evident from Figure 6.7, where there are visible differences in the positions of the
LiDAR points compared to the Colmap points. Secondly, two of the reconstructed
masts had an RMSE higher than the objective of 0.14 m (see Table 6.2).
Understanding why the alignment was not more accurate, starts with understand-
ing the algorithms that were used. From chapter 5, the process of aligning two point
clouds consisted of the following steps:
1. Crop the point clouds such that the LiDAR and Colmap clouds represent the
same areas.
2. Upscale the Colmap point clouds such that the masts hold the same size as in
the LiDAR point clouds.
3. Downsample both point clouds to hold around 600 points.
4. Perform global registration on the downsampled point clouds using feature
matching-based RANSAC.
5. Use the global transformation from step 4 as the initial transformation, and use
ICP to refine this transformation for the tightest possible alignment.
One weakness of this approach, is the initial global alignment found using RANSAC,
as displayed in Figure 5.9a and Figure 5.9b. Considering the simple manner of the
ICP algorithm, which iterates over all the points of the point clouds and optimises
a transformation based on what makes the combined distance shortest, this initial
alignment is crucial. Where the global registration considers matching features to
align the point clouds, this is not the case for ICP. Instead, ICP simply takes a point,
calculates the distance to the point closest to it in the other point cloud, and moves
on to the next point. Obtaining a poor global alignment might therefore result in a
poor final transformation, no matter how many iterations one lets ICP run for.
In Figure 6.8, where the accuracy of three of the seven masts’ final alignment
is displayed, there are some interesting observations. Assessing Figure 6.8a first, an
overwhelming majority of the points are more brown than white, which is reflected
on the colour scale. Inspecting the points that are further away (the white points)
in this figure, it seems there is a trend that more of these points are found directly
below the two crossbars. These also happen to be the areas with the most noise
for this point cloud, best visualised by the sparse white points below the bottom
crossbar. Considering how the drone captures its images from above, these areas will
naturally be subject to noise as they are often occluded in the stereo image pairs
estimating the depth. Another observation from Figure 6.8a is the distances between
the points making up the thin vertical pole and the bottom crossbar. Most notably,
the middle area of the bottom crossbar is coloured white, although the rest of it has
==PAGE:75==
7.1 The Results
63
a solid brown colour. The reason for this is inferred from the LiDAR point cloud,
as seen in Figure 7.2a. Here, the middle of the bottom crossbar appears to not be
captured by the LiDAR scanner, hence why no points are provided to represent this
area. Looking at the thin vertical pole connected to the bottom crossbar, the sparsity
of the points representing it contributes the same way, i.e. that when compared to
the Colmap point cloud, which is representing both these poles with many dense
points, the distances become larger. Figure 7.2b displays this in more detail. This is
an important observation, as it affects the alignment metrics presented in Table 6.2
for all the masts. Areas of the masts the LiDAR was unable to capture or had fewer
reflections from, might be reconstructed well by Colmap, which in turn might lead to
larger cloud-to-cloud distances.
(a) Baseline LiDAR point cloud
(b) Coloured Colmap point cloud
Figure 7.2: The baseline LiDAR point cloud (point size doubled) in a), next to the
Colmap point cloud after colouring the points based on absolute distances from the
LiDAR cloud in b). Brown points indicate that they are closer to their respective
LiDAR points (as in Figure 6.8).
The effect of the sparse LiDAR cloud on the
calculated absolute distances is evident especially in the thin poles. In the LiDAR
point cloud, these poles are represented with very few points, and the bottom crossbar
even has a large area missing.
One final observation from section 6.2 is the poor alignment of the be mast seen in
Figure 6.8c. The most problematic area for this alignment seems to be the top of the
mast, which affects the overall alignment significantly considering this typically is the
area with the most points (as seen in Figure 6.6). Although this could be explained
by a poorly calculated scale difference, given this was done manually, Figure 7.3
displays another possible pitfall. Here, the areas highlighted in green are only visible
in one of the point clouds, not in both. These areas seem to differ in height from
the ground directly below the mast, with the left area appearing higher and the right
area lower. Considering how ICP calculates the final transformation to align these
clouds by the nearest neighbour distance, this might affect the resulting alignment
==PAGE:76==
64
7 Discussion
in a big way, as the nearest neighbours of the outer points inside these areas are far
away. Had the cropped areas holding the mast and ground points been equal between
the LiDAR and Colmap point clouds, these outlying points would have been omitted,
likely resulting in a tighter final transformation. This is one of the weaknesses of the
proposed implementation, discussed more in section 7.2.
Figure 7.3:
The aligned points clouds for the be mast (LiDAR yellow, Colmap
red), with focus areas highlighted in green. Areas highlighted in green are areas that
are represented in one of the point clouds, not in both. These areas affect the ICP
algorithm when determining the best refined transformation to align the two point
clouds.
Despite having obvious areas that can be improved, and some limitations that are
discussed more in section 7.2, the implementation managed to align the two point
cloud sources with decent precision, without the two datasets (pictures and LiDAR
points) being captured simultaneously. This is clear from visual inspections, where
the position and orientation of the masts look very similar to the real-world LiDAR
equivalent, and also from the fact that five of the seven masts reached the objective
of having an RMSE lower than 0.14 m. The results are a sign of promise, and with
the proposed improvements discussed in section 7.3, even denser and more precise
models should be possible from using the exact same set of sensors.
7.1.3
The Ablation Study
From the ablation study, many things can be derived. This subsection will discuss
each of the two experiments individually, before a general assessment of the study’s
findings will be made in the end.
7.1.3.1
Number of Images
The impact of the total number of images used to reconstruct the masts was promi-
nent, as seen in Figure 6.10. There is a visible difference between the density of the
==PAGE:77==
7.1 The Results
65
different models, which is further supported by the numbers in Table 6.3. All models,
even the one with as few as 18 images, provide a denser representation of the mast
when compared to their LiDAR equivalent, though not all of them achieve the sought
after increase of 10 times as many nearest-neighbours.
One of the key takeaways from this part of the study, is the fact that not nearly
all the provided images were needed in order to obtain a decent model. Inspecting
the model generated from 63 images, less than half of the total available, it still looks
geometrically accurate and contains a higher level of detail when compared to its
LiDAR counterpart (see Figure 6.10d). In fact, comparing it to the model generated
from all the images (as seen in Figure 6.10e), one can argue it represents parts of the
mast in a more realistic way. As an example, evaluating the top three insulators in
the model with the most images, it seems the cables have started to duplicate, which
is not the case in the model from 63 images. It seems that with more images come
more features, and with more features come a higher chance of wrongly relating two
features, ultimately raising the probability of noisy output.
When evaluating the reconstructions from 28 and 18 images, multiple things
should be considered. First of all, both these models represent the mast in a way
that is comparable to that of the LiDAR. From Table 6.3, it is also clear that both
point clouds are denser representations of the mast than that of the LiDAR. Despite
this, these reconstructions start lacking detail in ways that limit the inspection possi-
bilities. This is evident already when using 28 images, as seen in Figure 6.10c, where
the number of points representing the insulators appears too low to capture enough
detail for an assessment of their condition to be made. Naturally, the model holding
even fewer images suffers from this even more, and also has a hard time representing
the vertical poles of the mast as continuous shapes, with visible holes in the point
cloud (see Figure 6.10b).
7.1.3.2
Number of Viewpoints
Figure 7.4:
A closer look
at the resulting artefact from
reconstructing the mast using
only images from directly in
front or behind the mast. The
model appears to have two
crossbars, one slightly lower
and more to the left than
the other, likely caused by
some differing depth estima-
tions for the same points.
As with the total number of images used to recon-
struct a mast, the number of different angles the
masts are viewed from affected the quality of the fi-
nal reconstructions significantly. The first example
of this was seen in Figure 6.2, where it was clear that
having images from only one direction results in a 3D
model lacking information about larger areas of the
scene, which was further emphasised in Figure 6.11.
Looking first at Figure 6.11b created from 38 im-
ages from all 4 directions, this model bears a lot of
resemblance to the baseline found in Figure 6.11a
created from 63 images, despite having considerably
fewer images. The mast seems to be reconstructed
well upon inspecting it from both directions, although
there are visibly fewer 3D points. All in all, this re-
==PAGE:78==
66
7 Discussion
sult speaks to the strength of Colmap when provided multiple different viewpoints of
the same scene.
Halving the number of directions the images are captured from starts introducing
inaccuracies in the reconstruction. In Figure 6.11c, displaying the model created from
images only from the front and back of the mast, the reconstruction seems accurate
from the two views in the figure. Upon closer inspection however, some problems can
be spotted, like with the top crossbar. It seems the reconstruction has duplicated it,
leaving two crossbars at the top of the mast in the final model, which is highlighted
in Figure 7.4. This is likely caused by the depth map fusion step, where the perceived
depth of the crossbar from one direction differs from the opposite direction. The same
anomalies are not seen upon feeding Colmap images from more angles evenly spread
out around the mast.
Figure 7.5:
A view of
the backside of the model
reconstructed from images
that are all captured from
the same direction.
In-
specting the poles, they ap-
pear flat and seem to have
points dragged out behind
them.
Finally, evaluating the model with all images taken
from the same direction, the limits of photogrammetry
start to become apparent.
In Figure 6.11d, the level
of detail from the side where the images were captured
from is high, which is also the case for the general look
of the mast from this view (bottom part of the sub-
figure). This is to be expected, given that all the used
information from the images is captured from this angle.
Upon further inspection, the same can not be said for
the opposite side of the mast. Although not easy to see
in Figure 6.11d (top part of the subfigure), Figure 7.5
highlights the opposite side of the mast, which is simply
the hull representation of the back of the reconstruction,
as no information is captured from this direction. An-
other way to tell this reconstruction is lacking, is when
looking at the ground of the point cloud, where two cor-
ridors holding no points at all are formed behind the
poles of the mast. The same problem is not present in
the models reconstructed from multiple views.
7.1.3.3
Takeaways
From the ablation study, a few things can be derived. For one, the number of images
required to obtain a model denser than that of the LiDAR scanner is not that many,
and with 30+ images distributed between the four different viewpoints, a model that
is both geometrically accurate and denser can be generated. This is supported by
both visually inspecting the point clouds, as seen in Figure 6.10, and from the metrics
in Table 6.3. The improved density is not 10 times that of the equivalent LiDAR point
cloud for the models constructed from 18 and 28 images however, but rather 3.6 and
5.3 respectively, i.e. this objective was only achieved when using 63 (16.7 times more)
or all 145 (34.1 times more) images.
==PAGE:79==
7.2 Limitations
67
Another takeaway from this study is that more viewpoints give an overall better
reconstruction. This aligns with the core theories of photogrammetry, as discussed in
chapter 2, as the more times any particular point in a scene can be observed from a
different point of view, the more accurate the triangulation and depth estimation is
likely to be. Differing depth estimations for the same point(s) can result in artefacts
such as those seen in Figure 7.4, where there appears to be two crossbars instead of one.
This further proves that creating 3D models from opposite views, with a wide baseline
between them, is challenging for Colmap, and supplementing the reconstruction with
more images from different viewpoints can greatly improve the end result.
Combining the findings of both studies, there is reason to believe a structured way
of capturing the images might result in even better 3D models. In this short study,
the effect of going from two to four viewpoints proved significant. Imagine then, the
effects of capturing the masts from eight, sixteen or thirty different angles in a circle
around them. This is discussed further in section 7.3.
7.2
Limitations
The final implementation presented in this thesis project still has its limitations. This
section will detail some of these, and proposes ways to overcome them.
7.2.1
3D Reconstruction From Images
Although the point clouds obtained from Colmap have the high level of detail sought
for to achieve the thesis objectives, the scenes also hold a lot of extra information.
This is why one part of the 3D reconstruction from images step is to crop the point
clouds to only hold the region around the mast.
For the cropping to work, two
assumptions are made. 1) that the ground below the mast is perpendicular to the
mast, while also being the plane with most support in the scene, and 2), that the
mast is centered in the point cloud.
Figure 7.6: An example of a mast on a smaller hill top. Finding points perpendicular
to the ground in this scene offers more challenges than when the mast is on a flat
surface.
==PAGE:80==
68
7 Discussion
As for the first assumption, this might not always hold true when inspecting the
electricity grid, especially in a country like Norway. Masts mounted in steep hillsides
or with uneven vegetation around them, might perform poorly with the proposed
algorithm. One such mast is provided in the dataset and can be seen in Figure 7.6,
however this can not be said to be an example of the extreme case, as the angles of
this rather small hillside are not very steep in any direction.
The second assumption, that the mast is in the centre of the generated Colmap
point cloud, generally holds true based on the simple fact that the drone is pro-
grammed to only photograph the masts. More importantly though, is that the cluster
associated with the mast in the generated point cloud’s vertical points, is the cluster
with its centre closest to the original point cloud centre. This holds true as long
as there are no tall bushes or other types of vegetation close to the mast, which is
generally the case for safety reasons anyway. However, in cases where this is not the
case, such vegetation might make the algorithm unable to identify the mast inside
the generated point clouds.
7.2.2
Processing the LiDAR Data
As mentioned in subsection 5.2.2, the cropping of the provided point cloud tiles is
done after manually having found the smallest bounding box encapsulating the biggest
mast in the dataset. This means, if more masts are inspected, and a bigger mast is
present, the cropping would likely fail as it is currently implemented. Finding this
bounding box automatically based on the masts present in the entire data set, should
be explored further. With information about the real-world size of the masts, which
it is fair to assume the inspectors have, a bounding box tailored for any particular
mast could be derived easily.
7.2.3
Alignment
When aligning the two sets of point clouds, several challenges were met, and although
the final implementation performs the best on the provided data, it can still be
improved. One of the main challenges of aligning the point clouds was related to the
general geometry of the masts. Initially, aligning only the points related to the masts
were considered, i.e. without ground points, as this would leave fewer points and prove
more computationally eﬀicient. However, when performing the global registration,
more often than not the found transformation had the Colmap point cloud mirrored,
i.e. the front became the back, and the left became the right etc. Given the similarities
of the poles, both the vertical ones and the crossbar, this proved too unreliable. Hence,
why, the final implementation included some ground points, resulting in the masts
being more accurately aligned during the global registration step.
The second challenge relates to the scale difference between the Colmap and Li-
DAR point clouds. This scale varied between the different masts as a natural result
of SfM, which does not account for real-world scale but rather reconstructs a model
==PAGE:81==
7.3 Future Work
69
with a uniform scale. Although most of the Colmap point clouds were found to be
around one seventh of the LiDAR clouds, i.e. they had to be multiplied by a factor
of seven to become the same scale, two of the masts were only 20% smaller. For the
final implementation, the scales ended up being set manually, which is an obvious
shortcoming. There are multiple ways to explore how to do this automatically in
Python, while still obtaining robust results. This is another area of which knowing
the real-world scale might benefit the implementation, as one could then infer the
scale from e.g. the distance between two given points, or the height of a pole. This
particular problem is discussed further in section 7.3.
Finally, cropping the pairs of point clouds to hold roughly the same area was
another challenge. As already mentioned, the bounding boxes of the LiDAR point
clouds were found manually, whilst the bounding boxes of the Colmap point clouds
were calculated based on the assumed mast cluster. During this project, no way was
found to directly relate an area in the LiDAR point clouds to the same area in the
Colmap point clouds, which would have likely allowed for an even better end result.
Instead, two separate bounding boxes were found, having enough overlap for the
alignment to work.
7.3
Future Work
This section will discuss some areas that should be investigated in the future, to
further improve the proposed algorithm. The main focus will be on how the data can
be collected differently, how one can solve the scale difference problem, and also what
the next step of the algorithm should be when these problems are overcome.
7.3.1
Data Collection
Arguably the biggest weakness of the above implementation, is its limitation of having
to treat the two data sources individually. Individually, in this sense, refers to the
lack of synchronously captured data, and that there is no known transformation
between the LiDAR and the gimbal-operated camera. Had all the data instead been
captured simultaneously, with a known transformation between the LiDAR sensor
and the camera pose, it could have been merged directly, rather than going through
the trouble of generating a separate camera point cloud and feature match it with the
LiDAR point cloud. Collecting data synchronously would open the door for posing
images directly into the 3D model, equipping the inspectors with both detail and
scale correctness at a much higher level.
Another improvement that could benefit this implementation, is the way the pic-
tures are taken. At the moment, all of the masts are photographed from the front
and from the back, with a few of the masts also being photographed from the left
and/or right directions. These few are also the ones Colmap is reconstructing the best
3D models for when considering how accurate they represent the real-world mast (al-
though they are not necessarily the densest). As displayed in chapter 6, despite all
==PAGE:82==
70
7 Discussion
masts being photographed from at least two directions, some are reconstructed us-
ing images captured from one direction only. This is a result of Colmap not finding
enough correspondences between the images from opposite views, which as seen in
Figure 4.2b can be challenging. These models end up lacking as much as an entire
side of the mast, resulting in holey reconstructions that are only true to the real-world
geometry from one side. For performing inspections in 3D, this is a problem.
To battle this problem, a more structured way of capturing the images should
be implemented, to raise the chances of more of them being used for the final recon-
struction. From section 6.3, it is clear that having few images from multiple different
viewpoints contribute more significantly to an accurate reconstruction, rather than
having many images from only one or two different directions. The images in the pro-
vided dataset, despite having some overlap, are captured in an unstructured manner
that at times might even seem a bit random. If instead, the drone was programmed
to fly in a structured manner around the masts, e.g. in a circle, the images could
be captured with larger areas overlapping, raising the probability of more features
matching and allowing for a more precise 3D reconstruction. This, of course, is a chal-
lenge when inspecting large areas with a drone that has limited time of flight. It is,
however, the author’s strong belief that a compromise between more overlapping im-
ages and staying airborne for as long as possible, can be made to obtain more images
having larger areas of overlap, which in turn will lead to more accurate 3D models.
Perhaps could one solution be, instead of capturing individual images, to capture
videos of the masts in the proposed circle. This benefits not only from having large
overlapping areas between frames, but would also allow the implementation to utilise
Colmap’s sequential matching algorithm, made specifically for video recordings to
limit its search space and improve the correspondence matching between frames.
7.3.2
The Scale Problem
Another one of the main challenges faced when developing the proposed algorithm is
related to aligning the point cloud pairs, as detailed in subsection 7.2.3. The reason
this became such a challenging part of the implementation seems to be related to the
large scale difference between the Colmap and LiDAR point clouds. As mentioned
in subsection 7.2.3, the difference in scale varied from 1.2 to 7, with all the Colmap
point clouds being smaller.
When experimenting with how to solve this problem, several possible solutions
were explored. In its simplest form, the scale can be derived from finding two points
in one of the point clouds, measuring the distance between them, and then find the
exact same pair of points in the other point cloud and compare the distance found here.
The relation between the two distances will give us the scale difference, and applying
this to the Colmap point clouds will transform them to the correct real-world size
captured by the LiDAR. The first proposed method to solve this problem was to crop
the point cloud pairs evenly, i.e. keeping the exact same regions of both point clouds.
Upon success, one could e.g. find the biggest difference between any two points in
==PAGE:83==
7.3 Future Work
71
both point clouds, as this would be the same relative distance. This, however, proved
challenging, as the orientation of the point cloud pairs are also different, making
all available cropping tools in Open3D give differently oriented bounding boxes for
the two point cloud sources.
Herein lies the reason for the point clouds looking
different when compared to one another, as seen in multiple figures in section 6.1
and in Figure 5.10. An attempt was also made to extract only the masts from both
data sources, which is straightforward for the already classified LiDAR point clouds.
Though less straightforward for the Colmap point clouds, this was achieved during
the preprocessing step described in subsubsection 5.2.1.2 and displayed in Figure 5.4b.
Finding the distance between the two points furthest from one another in both clouds,
showed a lot more promise when compared to also keeping ground points, however,
extracting only the exact points belonging to the mast proved diﬀicult, and more often
than not, the estimated scale was wrong because of outliers affecting the estimation.
A robust way of finding the scale difference between the two sets of point clouds
should be explored further, as this would greatly improve the usability of this im-
plementation. An alternative solution would be to pose the captured images in the
obtained LiDAR point clouds directly, as suggested by Bai [83]. They managed to
pose all the images of a scene directly into a LiDAR point cloud that was captured
of the same scene, using Colmap with some added constraints. Upon successfully
registering the images inside the LiDAR point cloud, correctly scaled point clouds
will be outputted. This solution was explored for some time during this project, but
recreating their results on the provided LiDAR point clouds unfortunately proved
unsuccessful.
7.3.3
Fault Detection
As a stretch goal for this project, ways of detecting faults in the masts were considered.
Although time ran out, this is the natural next step of this implementation, as soon as
the provided reconstructions are accurate enough. Upon obtaining better 3D models
of the areas being inspected, algorithms learning the difference between a good mast
and a faulty one should be developed. As the ultimate goal of the SWIFTER project
is for a drone to autonomously inspect the electricity grid, fault detection is a must.
Some detection, of crucial components mostly, is already being done using the camera
of the drone, e.g. detecting the different insulators of a mast or whether a wire has
been disconnected from one. Crucial faults, such as a tree in danger of falling over
the wires, can likely be detected on-board the drone simply from the 2D image alone,
whilst more intricate faults, such as a fuse malfunctioning, an insulator being out of
position or the crossbar being tilted can be discovered more easily in 3D by processing
the data later. What exact faults to focus on should be agreed upon with the owners
of the infrastructure.
==PAGE:84==
72
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
In this thesis project, a thorough review of the current literature related to the field
of photogrammetry was carried out, providing the necessary theories and methods to
be applied to a real-world dataset.
After the literature review, several state-of-the-art methods were implemented
using containers, before being tested on the provided data. The three frameworks
implemented were Colmap, Meshroom and Nerfstudio, and a detailed description of
how they work and their performance on the dataset was given. Upon comparing
their results, Colmap was chosen as the toolkit best suited for this particular project.
A full data processing pipeline has been proposed, relating image and LiDAR data
captured by a drone at different times, with differing weather conditions and seasons.
The implementation processes both data sources individually at first, cropping large
amounts of data to only hold relevant areas in both datasets, represented as point
clouds. Then, the two point cloud sources of vastly different sizes, scales, and densities
are aligned, using the real-world equivalent LiDAR point clouds as the target position
for the Colmap point clouds. Finally, the output of the proposed implementation is a
three-dimensional representation of the real-world scene in the form of a point cloud,
with considerably higher density than that captured by the LiDAR scanner in crucial
areas, and with correct scale and pose in relation to the coordinate frame of the
LiDAR.
Ultimately, this thesis project achieved all of its objectives and demonstrated a
way to combine image and LiDAR data to obtain higher-fidelity 3D models that are
also correctly positioned in the real-world environment, all without manipulating the
way the data is collected.
==PAGE:86==
74
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX A
Additional Results
Below are more figures of the dense 3D reconstructions generated by Colmap for some
of the less displayed masts.
(a) Colmap
(b) High-resolution image
Figure A.1: A comparison of the generated Colmap point cloud (a) and one of the
high-resolution images (b) used for the reconstruction of the e1 mast
==PAGE:88==
76
A Additional Results
Figure A.2: Picture of the point cloud produced for mast 05
Figure A.3: Picture of the point cloud produced for mast 67
==PAGE:89==
A Additional Results
77
Figure A.4: Picture of the point cloud produced for mast 66
Figure A.5: Closeup picture of the crucial components of mast be
==PAGE:90==
78
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1]
“SWIFTER – SmartWing infrastructure failure tracking and emergency re-
sponse,” SINTEF. (April 19, 2021), [Online]. Available: https://www.sintef.
no / en / projects / 2020 / swifter - smartwing - infrastructure - failure -
tracking-and-emergency-response/ (visited on May 17, 2024).
[2]
J. H. Andersen, 3D Powergrid Inspection, GitHub, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/Jorgen-ha/3D-Powergrid-Inspection.
[3]
C. Harris and M. Stephens, “A combined corner and edge detector,” in Pro-
cedings of the Alvey Vision Conference 1988, Manchester: Alvey Vision Club,
1988, pages 23.1–23.6. doi: 10.5244/C.2.23. [Online]. Available: http://www.
bmva.org/bmvc/1988/avc-88-023.html (visited on May 18, 2024).
[4]
D. G. Lowe, “Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints,” In-
ternational Journal of Computer Vision, volume 60, number 2, pages 91–110,
November 1, 2004, issn: 1573-1405. doi: 10.1023/B:VISI.0000029664.99615.
94. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1023/B:VISI.0000029664.
99615.94 (visited on May 17, 2024).
[5]
J. L. Bentley, “Multidimensional binary search trees used for associative search-
ing,” Communications of the ACM, volume 18, number 9, pages 509–517, Sep.
1975, issn: 0001-0782, 1557-7317. doi: 10.1145/361002.361007. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/361002.361007 (visited on May 18,
2024).
[6]
H. Bay, T. Tuytelaars, and L. Van Gool, “SURF: Speeded up robust features,”
in Computer Vision – ECCV 2006, A. Leonardis, H. Bischof, and A. Pinz, Eds.,
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2006, pages 404–417, isbn: 978-3-540-33833-8. doi:
10.1007/11744023_32.
[7]
S. Leutenegger, M. Chli, and R. Y. Siegwart, “BRISK: Binary robust invari-
ant scalable keypoints,” in 2011 International Conference on Computer Vision,
ISSN: 2380-7504, November 2011, pages 2548–2555. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2011.
6126542. [Online]. Available: https : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org / document /
6126542 (visited on May 18, 2024).
==PAGE:92==
80
Bibliography
[8]
A. Alahi, R. Ortiz, and P. Vandergheynst, “FREAK: Fast retina keypoint,” in
2012 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, ISSN:
1063-6919, Jun. 2012, pages 510–517. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2012.6247715. [On-
line]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6247715 (visited
on May 18, 2024).
[9]
K. Schindler, “Mathematical foundations of photogrammetry,” in Handbook of
Geomathematics, W. Freeden, M. Z. Nashed, and T. Sonar, Eds., Berlin, Heidel-
berg: Springer, 2020, pages 1–14, isbn: 978-3-642-27793-1. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-642-27793-1_63-1. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-27793-1_63-1 (visited on May 18, 2024).
[10]
“Computer vision: Stereo 3d vision | baeldung on computer science.” (Sep. 4,
2022), [Online]. Available: https://www.baeldung.com/cs/stereo-vision-
3d (visited on Jun. 3, 2024).
[11]
S. Ullman, “The interpretation of structure from motion,” Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences, volume 203, number 1153,
pages 405–426, 1979, Publisher: The Royal Society, issn: 0080-4649. [Online].
Available: https://www.jstor.org/stable/77505 (visited on February 16,
2024).
[12]
J. L. Schönberger and J.-M. Frahm, “Structure-from-motion revisited,” in Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.
[13]
M. Crocco, C. Rubino, and A. Del Bue, “Structure from motion with objects,” in
2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
Las Vegas, NV, USA: IEEE, Jun. 2016, pages 4141–4149, isbn: 978-1-4673-8851-
1. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.449. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/7780818/ (visited on Jun. 3, 2024).
[14]
C. Barnes, E. Shechtman, A. Finkelstein, and D. Goldman, “PatchMatch: A ran-
domized correspondence algorithm for structural image editing,” ACM Transac-
tions on Graphics, volume 28, number 3, 2009, issn: 1557-7368. doi: 10.1145/
1531326.1531330.
[15]
J. L. Schönberger, E. Zheng, J.-M. Frahm, and M. Pollefeys, “Pixelwise view
selection for unstructured multi-view stereo,” in Computer Vision – ECCV 2016,
B. Leibe, J. Matas, N. Sebe, and M. Welling, Eds., volume 9907, Series Title:
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2016, pages 501–518, isbn: 978-3-319-46486-2. doi: 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 -
46487-9_31. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-
3-319-46487-9_31 (visited on January 31, 2024).
[16]
J. L. Schönberger, E. Zheng, M. Pollefeys, and J.-M. Frahm, “Pixelwise view
selection for unstructured multi-view stereo,” in European Conference on Com-
puter Vision (ECCV), 2016.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
81
[17]
Q. Xu and W. Tao, Planar prior assisted PatchMatch multi-view stereo, Decem-
ber 25, 2019. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1912.11744. arXiv: 1912.11744[cs]. [On-
line]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.11744 (visited on January 31,
2024).
[18]
Y. Wang, T. Guan, Z. Chen, Y. Luo, K. Luo, and L. Ju, “Mesh-guided multi-
view stereo with pyramid architecture,” in 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Seattle, WA, USA: IEEE,
Jun. 2020, pages 2036–2045, isbn: 978-1-72817-168-5. doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.
2020.00211. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9156553/ (visited on January 31, 2024).
[19]
Z. Li, W. Zuo, Z. Wang, and L. Zhang, “Confidence-based large-scale dense
multi-view stereo,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, volume 29, pages 7176–
7191, 2020, Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, issn:
1941-0042. doi: 10.1109/TIP.2020.2999853. [Online]. Available: https://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9112642 (visited on January 31, 2024).
[20]
Z. Xu, Y. Liu, X. Shi, Y. Wang, and Y. Zheng, “MARMVS: Matching ambigu-
ity reduced multiple view stereo for eﬀicient large scale scene reconstruction,”
in 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), Seattle, WA, USA: IEEE, Jun. 2020, pages 5980–5989, isbn: 978-1-
72817-168-5. doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00602. [Online]. Available: https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9156909/ (visited on January 31, 2024).
[21]
M. Orsingher, P. Zani, P. Medici, and M. Bertozzi, Revisiting PatchMatch multi-
view stereo for urban 3d reconstruction, Jul. 18, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
2207.08439. arXiv: 2207.08439[cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/
abs/2207.08439 (visited on January 31, 2024).
[22]
Z. Huang, Y. Shi, and M. Gong, Visibility-aware pixelwise view selection for
multi-view stereo matching, February 14, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2302.
07182. arXiv: 2302.07182[cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/
2302.07182 (visited on January 31, 2024).
[23]
M. Ji, J. Gall, H. Zheng, Y. Liu, and L. Fang, “SurfaceNet: An end-to-end
3d neural network for multiview stereopsis,” in 2017 IEEE International Con-
ference on Computer Vision (ICCV), October 2017, pages 2326–2334. doi:
10.1109/ICCV.2017.253. arXiv: 1708.01749[cs]. [Online]. Available: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1708.01749 (visited on January 31, 2024).
[24]
Y. Yao, Z. Luo, S. Li, T. Fang, and L. Quan, MVSNet: Depth inference for
unstructured multi-view stereo, Jul. 17, 2018. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1804.
02505. arXiv: 1804.02505[cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1804.02505 (visited on January 31, 2024).
[25]
Y. Yao, Z. Luo, S. Li, T. Shen, T. Fang, and L. Quan, Recurrent MVSNet
for high-resolution multi-view stereo depth inference, February 27, 2019. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1902.10556. arXiv: 1902.10556[cs]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.10556 (visited on January 31, 2024).
==PAGE:94==
82
Bibliography
[26]
F. Wang, S. Galliani, C. Vogel, P. Speciale, and M. Pollefeys, PatchmatchNet:
Learned multi-view patchmatch stereo, December 2, 2020. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
2012.01411. arXiv: 2012.01411[cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/
abs/2012.01411 (visited on January 31, 2024).
[27]
A. Kuhn, C. Sormann, M. Rossi, O. Erdler, and F. Fraundorfer, DeepC-MVS:
Deep confidence prediction for multi-view stereo reconstruction, August 13, 2020.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1912.00439. arXiv: 1912.00439[cs]. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.00439 (visited on January 31, 2024).
[28]
Z. Yu and S. Gao, Fast-MVSNet: Sparse-to-dense multi-view stereo with learned
propagation and gauss-newton refinement, March 29, 2020. doi: 10.48550/
arXiv . 2003 . 13017. arXiv: 2003 . 13017[cs]. [Online]. Available: http : / /
arxiv.org/abs/2003.13017 (visited on January 31, 2024).
[29]
C. Cao, X. Ren, and Y. Fu, MVSFormer: Multi-view stereo by learning robust
image features and temperature-based depth, December 16, 2022. doi: 10.48550/
arXiv . 2208 . 02541. arXiv: 2208 . 02541[cs]. [Online]. Available: http : / /
arxiv.org/abs/2208.02541 (visited on January 31, 2024).
[30]
C. Barnes, E. Shechtman, D. B. Goldman, and A. Finkelstein, “The generalized
PatchMatch correspondence algorithm,” in Computer Vision – ECCV 2010, K.
Daniilidis, P. Maragos, and N. Paragios, Eds., series Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2010, pages 29–43, isbn: 978-3-642-15558-
1. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-15558-1_3.
[31]
M. Bleyer, C. Rhemann, and C. Rother, “PatchMatch stereo - stereo matching
with slanted support windows,” in Procedings of the British Machine Vision
Conference 2011, Dundee: British Machine Vision Association, 2011, pages 14.1–
14.11, isbn: 978-1-901725-43-8. doi: 10.5244/C.25.14. [Online]. Available:
http://www.bmva.org/bmvc/2011/proceedings/paper14/index.html
(visited on February 7, 2024).
[32]
H. Aanæs, R. Jensen, G. Vogiatzis, E. Tola, and A. Dahl, “Large-scale data
for multiple-view stereopsis,” International Journal of Computer Vision, vol-
ume 120, November 1, 2016. doi: 10.1007/s11263-016-0902-9.
[33]
S. Seitz, B. Curless, J. Diebel, D. Scharstein, and R. Szeliski, “A comparison
and evaluation of multi-view stereo reconstruction algorithms,” in 2006 IEEE
Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR’06), ISSN: 1063-6919, volume 1, Jun. 2006, pages 519–528. doi: 10.
1109/CVPR.2006.19. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/1640800 (visited on February 2, 2024).
[34]
A. Geiger, P. Lenz, and R. Urtasun, “Are we ready for autonomous driving?
the KITTI vision benchmark suite,” in 2012 IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, ISSN: 1063-6919, Jun. 2012, pages 3354–3361.
doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2012.6248074. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/6248074 (visited on February 16, 2024).
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
83
[35]
C. Strecha, W. von Hansen, L. Van Gool, P. Fua, and U. Thoennessen, “On
benchmarking camera calibration and multi-view stereo for high resolution im-
agery,” in 2008 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
ISSN: 1063-6919, Jun. 2008, pages 1–8. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2008.4587706. [On-
line]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/4587706 (visited
on February 16, 2024).
[36]
V. K. Vats, S. Joshi, D. J. Crandall, M. A. Reza, and S.-h. Jung, GC-MVSNet:
Multi-view, multi-scale, geometrically-consistent multi-view stereo, December 21,
2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.19583. arXiv: 2310.19583[cs]. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.19583 (visited on January 31, 2024).
[37]
T. Kim, J. Choi, S. Choi, D. Jung, and C. Kim, “Just a few points are all you
need for multi-view stereo: A novel semi-supervised learning method for multi-
view stereo,” in 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), Montreal, QC, Canada: IEEE, October 2021, pages 6158–6166, isbn:
978-1-66542-812-5. doi: 10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00612. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9710236/ (visited on January 31,
2024).
[38]
T. Khot, S. Agrawal, S. Tulsiani, C. Mertz, S. Lucey, and M. Hebert, Learning
unsupervised multi-view stereopsis via robust photometric consistency, Jun. 6,
2019. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1905.02706. arXiv: 1905.02706[cs]. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.02706 (visited on February 16, 2024).
[39]
L. Caltagirone, M. Bellone, L. Svensson, and M. Wahde, LIDAR-camera fusion
for road detection using fully convolutional neural networks, Sep. 21, 2018. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1809.07941. arXiv: 1809.07941[cs]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.07941 (visited on February 5, 2024).
[40]
V. Guizilini, J. Li, R. Ambrus, S. Pillai, and A. Gaidon, Robust semi-supervised
monocular depth estimation with reprojected distances, November 19, 2019. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1910.01765. arXiv: 1910.01765[cs]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.01765 (visited on February 2, 2024).
[41]
Y. You, Y. Wang, W.-L. Chao, et al., Pseudo-LiDAR++: Accurate depth for
3d object detection in autonomous driving, February 15, 2020. doi: 10.48550/
arXiv . 1906 . 06310. arXiv: 1906 . 06310[cs]. [Online]. Available: http : / /
arxiv.org/abs/1906.06310 (visited on February 16, 2024).
[42]
Z. Feng, L. Jing, P. Yin, Y. Tian, and B. Li, Advancing self-supervised monocular
depth learning with sparse LiDAR, November 29, 2021. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
2109.09628. arXiv: 2109.09628[cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/
abs/2109.09628 (visited on February 2, 2024).
[43]
Y. Pan, B. Yang, F. Liang, and Z. Dong, Iterative global similarity points : A
robust coarse-to-fine integration solution for pairwise 3d point cloud registration,
August 12, 2018. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1808.03899. arXiv: 1808.03899[cs].
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.03899 (visited on Jun. 3,
2024).
==PAGE:96==
84
Bibliography
[44]
P. Besl and N. D. McKay, “A method for registration of 3-d shapes,” IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, volume 14, num-
ber 2, pages 239–256, February 1992, issn: 0162-8828, 2160-9292. doi: 10.1109/
34.121791. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
121791/ (visited on May 25, 2024).
[45]
B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ramamoorthi, and
R. Ng, NeRF: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis,
August 3, 2020. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2003.08934. arXiv: 2003.08934[cs].
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.08934 (visited on April 5,
2024).
[46]
R. Martin-Brualla, N. Radwan, M. S. M. Sajjadi, J. T. Barron, A. Dosovitskiy,
and D. Duckworth, NeRF in the wild: Neural radiance fields for unconstrained
photo collections, January 6, 2021. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2008.02268. arXiv:
2008.02268[cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2008.02268
(visited on May 19, 2024).
[47]
T. Müller, A. Evans, C. Schied, and A. Keller, “Instant neural graphics prim-
itives with a multiresolution hash encoding,” ACM Transactions on Graphics,
volume 41, number 4, pages 1–15, Jul. 2022, issn: 0730-0301, 1557-7368. doi:
10.1145/3528223.3530127. [Online]. Available: https://dl.acm.org/doi/
10.1145/3528223.3530127 (visited on May 17, 2024).
[48]
M. Tancik, E. Weber, E. Ng, et al., “Nerfstudio: A modular framework for neural
radiance field development,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings,
series SIGGRAPH ’23, 2023.
[49]
J. Ansel, E. Yang, H. He, et al., “PyTorch 2: Faster Machine Learning Through
Dynamic Python Bytecode Transformation and Graph Compilation,” in 29th
ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Lan-
guages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (ASPLOS ’24), ACM, April 2024.
doi: 10.1145/3620665.3640366. [Online]. Available: https://pytorch.org/
assets/pytorch2-2.pdf.
[50]
J. Nickolls, I. Buck, M. Garland, and K. Skadron, “Scalable parallel program-
ming with CUDA: Is CUDA the parallel programming model that application
developers have been waiting for?” Queue, volume 6, number 2, pages 40–53,
March 2008, issn: 1542-7730, 1542-7749. doi: 10 . 1145 / 1365490 . 1365500.
[Online]. Available: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1365490.1365500
(visited on May 19, 2024).
[51]
“Unmanned aircraft systems.” (), [Online]. Available: https://www.stellaire.
ai/solutions/unmanned-aircraft-systems (visited on May 17, 2024).
[52]
“LAS (LASer) file format, version 1.4.” (January 30, 2020), [Online]. Available:
https://www.loc.gov/preservation/digital/formats/fdd/fdd000418.
shtml (visited on May 17, 2024).
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
85
[53]
C. Griwodz, S. Gasparini, L. Calvet, et al., “AliceVision meshroom: An open-
source 3d reconstruction pipeline,” in 12th ACM Multimedia Systems Confer-
ence (MMSys 2021), Istanbul, Turkey: ACM: Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, Sep. 2021, pages 241–247. doi: 10.1145/3458305.3478443. [Online].
Available: https://hal.science/hal-03351139 (visited on May 17, 2024).
[54]
“Podman.” (), [Online]. Available: https://podman.io/ (visited on May 17,
2024).
[55]
“Colmap/colmap: COLMAP - structure-from-motion and multi-view stereo.” (),
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/colmap/colmap (visited on May 29,
2024).
[56]
J. Dong and S. Soatto, “Domain-size pooling in local descriptors: DSP-SIFT,” in
2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
Boston, MA, USA: IEEE, Jun. 2015, pages 5097–5106, isbn: 978-1-4673-6964-0.
doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7299145. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/7299145/ (visited on March 18, 2024).
[57]
M. Kazhdan and H. Hoppe, “Screened poisson surface reconstruction,” ACM
Transactions on Graphics, volume 32, number 3, pages 1–13, Jun. 2013, issn:
0730-0301, 1557-7368. doi: 10.1145/2487228.2487237. [Online]. Available:
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2487228.2487237 (visited on May 19,
2024).
[58]
B. Delaunay, “Sur la sph‘ere vide. A la m\’emoire de Georges Vorono”\i,” num-
ber 6, pages 793–800, 1934.
[59]
Alicevision/meshroom, original-date: 2015-04-22T17:33:16Z, May 29, 2024. [On-
line]. Available: https://github.com/alicevision/Meshroom (visited on
May 29, 2024).
[60]
D. Nister and H. Stewenius, “Scalable recognition with a vocabulary tree,” in
2006 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition - Volume 2 (CVPR’06), volume 2, New York, NY, USA: IEEE,
2006, pages 2161–2168, isbn: 978-0-7695-2597-6. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2006.
264. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1641018/
(visited on May 17, 2024).
[61]
M. Muja and D. G. Lowe, “FAST APPROXIMATE NEAREST NEIGHBORS
WITH AUTOMATIC ALGORITHM CONFIGURATION:” in Proceedings of
the Fourth International Conference on Computer Vision Theory and Applica-
tions, Lisboa, Portugal: SciTePress - Science, 2009, pages 331–340, isbn: 978-
989-8111-69-2. doi: 10.5220/0001787803310340. [Online]. Available: http://
www.scitepress.org/DigitalLibrary/Link.aspx?doi=10.5220/0001787803310340
(visited on May 17, 2024).
[62]
P. Moulon, “Positionnement robuste et précis de réseaux d’images,” Ph.D. dis-
sertation, Université Paris-Est, January 10, 2014. [Online]. Available: https:
//pastel.hal.science/tel-00996935 (visited on May 17, 2024).
==PAGE:98==
86
Bibliography
[63]
H. Hirschmüller, “Accurate and eﬀicient stereo processing by semi-global match-
ing and mutua information,” presented at the Proceedings - 2005 IEEE Com-
puter Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR
2005, volume II, 2005, pages 807–814, isbn: 978-0-7695-2372-9. doi: 10.1109/
CVPR.2005.56.
[64]
H. Hirschmuller, “Stereo processing by semiglobal matching and mutual infor-
mation,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
volume 30, number 2, pages 328–341, February 2008, Conference Name: IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, issn: 1939-3539.
doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2007.1166. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/4359315 (visited on May 17, 2024).
[65]
J. L. Blanco and P. K. Rai, Nanoflann: A C++ header-only fork of FLANN,
a library for nearest neighbor (NN) with kd-trees, https : / / github . com /
jlblancoc/nanoflann, 2014.
[66]
B. Lévy, S. Petitjean, N. Ray, and J. Maillot, “Least squares conformal maps for
automatic texture atlas generation,” ACM Transactions on Graphics, volume 21,
number 3, pages 362–371, Jul. 1, 2002, issn: 0730-0301. doi: 10.1145/566654.
566590. [Online]. Available: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/566654.
566590 (visited on May 17, 2024).
[67]
M. Tancik, E. Weber, E. Ng, et al., “Nerfstudio: A modular framework for neural
radiance field development,” in Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics
and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Proceedings, Jul. 23, 2023,
pages 1–12. doi: 10.1145/3588432.3591516. arXiv: 2302.04264[cs]. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04264 (visited on May 17, 2024).
[68]
F. Remondino, A. Karami, Z. Yan, G. Mazzacca, S. Rigon, and R. Qin, “A
critical analysis of NeRF-based 3d reconstruction,” Remote Sensing, volume 15,
number 14, page 3585, January 2023, Number: 14 Publisher: Multidisciplinary
Digital Publishing Institute, issn: 2072-4292. doi: 10.3390/rs15143585. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/15/14/3585 (visited on
April 3, 2024).
[69]
“CloudCompare - open source project.” (), [Online]. Available: https://www.
cloudcompare.org/ (visited on May 25, 2024).
[70]
Q.-Y. Zhou, J. Park, and V. Koltun, Open3d: A modern library for 3d data
processing, January 29, 2018. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1801.09847. arXiv: 1801.
09847[cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.09847 (visited
on May 24, 2024).
[71]
C. R. Harris, K. J. Millman, S. J. van der Walt, et al., “Array programming with
NumPy,” Nature, volume 585, number 7825, pages 357–362, Sep. 2020, Pub-
lisher: Nature Publishing Group, issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-
2649-2. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-
020-2649-2 (visited on May 24, 2024).
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
87
[72]
“Open3d.geometry.PointCloud - open3d 0.18.0 documentation.” (), [Online].
Available: https://www.open3d.org/docs/release/python_api/open3d.
geometry.PointCloud.html (visited on May 24, 2024).
[73]
M. A. Fischler and R. C. Bolles, “Random sample consensus: A paradigm for
model fitting with applications to image analysis and automated cartography,”
in Readings in Computer Vision, M. A. Fischler and O. Firschein, Eds., San
Francisco (CA): Morgan Kaufmann, January 1, 1987, pages 726–740, isbn:
978-0-08-051581-6. doi: 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 08 - 051581 - 6 . 50070 - 2. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780080515816500702 (visited on May 24, 2024).
[74]
M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu, “A density-based algorithm for
discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise,” 1996.
[75]
“Laspy: Python library for lidar LAS/LAZ IO. — laspy 2.5.0 documentation.” (),
[Online]. Available: https://laspy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html
(visited on May 24, 2024).
[76]
P. Contributors, Pdal point data abstraction library, August 2022. doi: 10.5281/
zenodo.2616780. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
2616780.
[77]
R. B. Rusu, N. Blodow, and M. Beetz, “Fast point feature histograms (FPFH)
for 3d registration,” in 2009 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, Kobe: IEEE, May 2009, pages 3212–3217, isbn: 978-1-4244-2788-8.
doi: 10.1109/ROBOT.2009.5152473. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/5152473/ (visited on May 25, 2024).
[78]
S. Rusinkiewicz and M. Levoy, “Eﬀicient variants of the ICP algorithm,” in
Proceedings Third International Conference on 3-D Digital Imaging and Mod-
eling, Quebec City, Que., Canada: IEEE Comput. Soc, 2001, pages 145–152,
isbn: 978-0-7695-0984-6. doi: 10.1109/IM.2001.924423. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/924423/ (visited on May 25, 2024).
[79]
“Compute geometric features - CloudCompareWiki.” (), [Online]. Available:
https://www.cloudcompare.org/doc/wiki/index.php/Compute_geometric_
features (visited on May 30, 2024).
[80]
L. Grigsby, The Electric Power Engineering Handbook (The Electrical Engi-
neering Handbook Series). Taylor & Francis Group, 2001, isbn: 9780849385780.
[Online]. Available: https://books.google.dk/books?id=wiv1tuMDbTEC.
[81]
“Cloud-to-cloud distance - CloudCompareWiki.” (), [Online]. Available: https:
//www.cloudcompare.org/doc/wiki/index.php/Cloud-to-Cloud_Distance
(visited on Jun. 1, 2024).
[82]
“Compute stat params - CloudCompareWiki.” (), [Online]. Available: https:
//www.cloudcompare.org/doc/wiki/index.php/Compute_Stat_Params
(visited on Jun. 1, 2024).
==PAGE:100==
88
Bibliography
[83]
C. Bai, R. Fu, and X. Gao, Colmap-PCD: An open-source tool for fine image-to-
point cloud registration, October 9, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.05504.
arXiv: 2310.05504[cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.
05504 (visited on March 21, 2024).
