==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
Detection of clinically significant prostate
cancers in MRI with Deep Learning
Hugo Alcalde (s222700)
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Prostate cancer (PCa) accounts for approximately 15% of total cancer cases. Early
diagnosis and treatment could reduce the mortality of this disease, but it is chal-
lenged by the lack of a reliable and cost-effective diagnostic tool. In this project,
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) has been proven effective for screening clin-
ically significant prostate cancer (csPCa) when combined with Deep Learning.
More specifically, a detailed pipeline for preparing prostate MRIs as input for DL
models has been described and a technique for dealing with false positive predic-
tions has been proposed. This technique has shown an improvement of 44.90% in
the specificity when compared to a model of similar characteristics trained without
the proposed methodology. One of the trained models in this project show, in a
completely unseen test set, 0.7% sensitivity and 0.71% specificity when diagnosing
clinically significant cases based only on bpMRI studies. These results prove that
MRI has the potential of becoming the gold standard in prostate cancer screening
when applied in combination to DL models.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This thesis marks the completion of a Master degree in Human-Centered Artificial
Intelligence at Technical University of Denmark (DTU). I want to thank to my col-
leagues at Cerebriu for the opportunity of writing this project in such a rewarding
field and for creating the best work environment.
Special thanks to Mathias for his supervision and support, as well as for giving
me attention and always listening to my ideas and proposals.
I hope you can
see your feedback reflected in these pages. I would also like to thank Erik, the
meetings with you have helped a lot to the development of the project. Finally, I
want to thank Vedrana for being my academic supervisor.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Data
7
2.1
Data Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
The Challenges of the Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Methods
11
3.1
Data Transformations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Deep Learning Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Results
27
4.1
Prostate Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Tumor Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Discussion
39
5.1
Discussion of the results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Conclusion
43
Bibliography
45
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Prostate cancer (PCa) accounts for approximately 15% of total cancer cases. Un-
like other types of cancer, and despite the increase of funding and improvement
of medical technology for treating this disease, prostate cancer has shown an an-
nual increase in cancer-related deaths. One of the main challenges when trying
to improve the prognosis of prostate cancer is the early diagnosis (and treatment)
of high-risk cases or, in other words, screening the target population to find early
signs of positive cases. [PS23]
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is a protease that is secreted by both prostate
epithelial cells and prostate cancer cells. Some studies have shown that a positive
predictive value (PPV) of 30% in men above 50 years and a negative predictive
value of 85% in men with mean age 69 can be achieved using a threshold of 4.0
ng/mL PSA. Even if PSA screening has been proven to reduce the long-term
mortality associated to prostate cancer in a population of men between 55 and
69 years, its clinical use is questioned by the adverse effects of overtreatment of
non-significant cases, what becomes crucial in the diagnosis of a disease that, in
most cases, will not cause any harm. [HB14]
As PSA alone is not enough for the diagnosis of PCa, PSA greater than 4.0
ng/ml is considered an indication for prostate biopsy (although this indication in
practice is more complex and also includes the findings extracted from the study of
the clinical history or symptoms). During the study of the biopsy, the pathologists
will assign a score, depending on the risk of progress and stage of PCa in the area,
commonly known as the Gleason Score. Gleason Score is always a sum of two
numbers between 1 and 5, being the first number the predominant grade of the
disease and the second number the secondary grade. This score will influence the
treatment the patient will receive. [Hei+08] Considering that the PPV of PSA
with the mentioned threshold is 30%, if this is the only available information,
that would mean that 70% of patients that undergo a biopsy did not need this
procedure, a procedure that is known to be aggressive and with high prevalence
of minor and infectious complications. [Loe+13]
Under these conditions, medical imaging could be a powerful tool in the de-
tection of those high-risk patients that would need a biopsy. However, prostate
tumors are often diﬀicult to diagnose with some imaging modalities, such as com-
puterized tomography (CT). Some studies show that multi-parametric magnetic
resonance (mpMRI) can detect clinically significant prostate tumors, and that can
itself be used for tumor grading and staging, as tumors of different aggressiveness
show different characteristics in MRI.
When working with MR images, their contrast is determined by the choice of
the sequence and sequence parameters. These images are obtained by rotating the
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
magnetization of the body into the transversal plane and measuring the resulting
radio waves. The echo time, TE, is the period of time from the rotation of the
magnetization until the measurement of the radio waves. This rotation/measure-
ment is repeated several times in the acquisition of an MRI, the time between
acquisitions is referred to as repetition-time or TR. Controlling these two param-
eters one can obtain images of different nature, for example, T2 sequences are
made by applying long TR and long TE. An MR sequence (which refers to an MR
measurement) is controlled by many other parameters that are selected depending
on the tissue under study. Diffusion sequences are the ones that include a power-
ful gradient used for reflecting the mobility of the protons in different tissues in
the signal intensity. In diffusion images, one of the most relevant parameters is
the bValue, which defines the strength of the gradient. A higher bValue means a
higher sensitivity to proton movement. [HG09] A contrast enhanced image refers
to a sequence that acquires signal before, during, and after intravenous injection of
an agent, which in prostate cancer screening is typically gadolinium, as it washes
in and out of the tumor more rapidly than in normal tissue. [Ber+16a]
mpMRI consists of the combination of T2-Weighted Imaging (T2), Diffusion
Weighted Imaging (DWI), and Dynamic Contrast Enhanced Imaging (DCE). Bi-
parametric MRI (bpMRI) refers to an MRI study which contains T2 and DWI
images. In Table 1.1, the findings that can identify a tumor in each of the MRI
sequences are presented, as well as an specificity and sensitivity calculation on
the classification performance of radiologists when using these sequences. These
calculations were performed by comparing the radiological reports written by radi-
ologists and the results of a radical prostatectomy (removal of the prostate gland
for further analysis). In the study from which the table was extracted, DWI se-
quences were always provided if apparent diffusion coeﬀicient (ADC) maps were
shown to the radiologists, which are maps derived from the original DWI images.
[Tho+13]
In Figure 1, each of the findings of an MRI study is presented and commented.
In 2012, the European Society of Urogenital Radiology (ESUR) established the
Prostate Imaging-Reporting and Data System (PI-RADS), which standardized the
acquisition and reporting of MRI images of prostate. The oﬀicial recommendation
of PI-RADS is to perform mpMRI including an anatomical image (e.g, T2), DWI,
and DCE sequences.
PI-RADS also provides a guide on how to score mpMRI
findings, based solely on image information, with a five-point scoring system. In
this system, DWI is the dominant sequence for tumors in the periferal zone of
the prostate, T2 for tumors in the transition zone, and DCE is used for uncertain
cases (may change the score from 3 to 4). Patients with PI-RADS of 4 or 5 should
undergo a biopsy. PI-RADS states that DCE should be included in all prostate
mpMRI to avoid missing small but significant tumors. [BTC15]
The European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) current recommenda-
tion guideline for screening and early detection of prostate cancer consists of: (1)
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing of men aged between 55 and 69 years, (2) if
the patient shows elevated PSA, they should undergo a mpMRI (multiparametric
==PAGE:11==
1 Introduction
3
MRI sequence
Tumor Characteristics
Specificity
Sensitivity
T2
Low signal intensity is exhibited by can-
cer areas, but this is not specific for
this pathology (also present in patients
with chronic prostatitis, atrophy or post-
biopsy effects).
44–81%
48–88%
DWI
High signal intensity in tumors, due to
reduced diffusion of water compared to
normal prostate tissue.
In the ADC
map, the tumor is represented as an area
of focal low signal relative to the sur-
rounding prostate.
90%
85%
DCE
Tumors are characterised by early and
intense contrast enhancement followed
by rapid washout of contrast agent.
95%
90%
Table 1.1: Table of different MRI sequences that can be used for PCa detection and
the corresponding intensity characteristics that can potentially identify can-
cerous lesions. The specificity and sensitivity has been calculated compared
to radical prostatectomy. It is important to note that the calculations were
performed on any type of tumor, not only significant ones. [Tho+13].
MRI), and (3) biopsies should be performed on those patients with MRI findings
that confirm the indication for biopsy in men with elevated PSA. [Par+20] The
indication for biopsy becomes uncertain in patients with PI-RADS 3, and the final
decision varies from clinician to clinician.
The implementation of MRI as a screening tool has some challenges in practice.
First of all, a screening test should always be inexpensive, fast, and should produce
no hazard on the target population. [PS23] One of the hazards of MRIs on the
target population could be produced by the use of contrast agents in mpMRI.
Secondly, the indication for biopsies and the assessment of tumor grades is variable
from practitioner to practitioner, and can be challenging even for experienced
radiologists. Finally, patients with positive (clinically significant) MRI findings,
still have to undergo a biopsy, which may result in potential complications and has
a high associated cost. In this scenario, Deep Learning (DL) techniques can lead us
to the development of a screening test based on MRI reducing the associated costs,
hazards (e.g reducing the use of agents such as contrast), inter-reader variability,
and amount of biopsies. [Cuo+19]
Cerebriu is a company founded in 2018 that focuses on automating MRI work-
flows and has been working on the transformation of radiology using DL since
2018, by bringing MR scans closer to practitioners. Its main products are based
on the detection of clinical findings during the MRI scan, while the patient is
still on the table. [Cer24] Both its SmartAlert and SmartProtocol algorithms, find
brain lesions in a smaller subsample of sequences than the ones typically used in an
MR study for certain pathologies, what allows for prioritization of patients and/or
individual adaptation of protocols. Analogously, when thinking about prostate
cancer screening, radiologists could benefit from the use of this kind of algorithms
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: MRI study of a 75 year-old patient (PSA 10.23 ng/mL). The findings are
pointed by the white arrow. (A) corresponds to T2 with hypointense find-
ings, (B) corresponds to the ADC map with restricted diffusion, (C) corre-
sponds to DWI with hyperintense findings, and (D) corresponds to DCE
with positive enhancement of the lesion area. A biopsy confirmed clinically
significant PCa with 4+4 (8) Gleason score. Adopted from [Ber+16b].
by the substitution of mpMRI protocols by bpMRI ones. Not only does these
techniques help the radiologists in their daily workload, but they are also positive
to patients, by reducing the acquisition times and use of contrast agents in the
study, and hospitals, by reducing the associated costs of cancer screening. These
benefits highly depend on the assumption that it is possible to identify high risk
patients from low risk patients based solely on bpMRI. This would mean that
the latter group would not be exposed neither to DCE sequences (and, therefor,
to contrast and longer scanning times) or to prostate biopsies. There is already
some published papers that support this assumption, including those that result
from the PICAI challenge (see Section 2.1 for more information on the challenge).
In these challenge, the researchers were asked to develop an AI algorithm, such
that giving a bpMRI study the likelihood of having csPCa cancer was computed.
The top results were achieved by [Deb+23], by an ensemble of voxel based (as the
one proposed in this project) and box based segmentation models. This ensemble
achieves 57.4 Average Precision (AP) and 81.6 Area Under the Curve (AUC). In
this article, as well as in most of the published literature, there is a special atten-
tion given to the reduction of false positives. In this systematic review [Cuo+21a],
the mean pooled sensitivity was of 0.83 and specificity of 0.71.
During this project, which has been supervised by Vedrana Andersen Dahl
(DTU) and Mathias Perslev (Cerebriu), DL techniques have been analyzed to
study the feasibility of automatizing prostate cancer screening, and to answer to the
main research question, that is, whether or not there exists a deep learning strategy
that can help in the automatizing of prostate cancer screening using bpMRI. More
specifically, a pipeline for prostate cancer MRIs has been designed that takes into
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
5
account the complexity of the problem and provides suggestions on how to improve
the performance of state of the art models.
The main objectives of this thesis are:
• Explore the complexity of the data that comes from prostate cancer screening
and analyze the limitations of the available data.
• Develop a processing pipeline specific for MRI prostate sequences that allows
for the utilization of their corresponding scans for the training and validation
of DL models.
• Develop a data augmentation pipeline that captures the variability of data
that can be found in the clinical practice.
• Select the optimal evaluation metrics to assess the performance of the DL
models.
• Design and train different models and techniques, taking into account the
performance and limitations of the state of the art.
• Evaluate and compare the different trained models.
• Identify the weaknesses of the trained models and propose solutions that
could mitigate them, making them available as a screening tool for prostate
cancer detection.
==PAGE:14==
6
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Data
2.1
Data Sources
The main source of data for this project comes from publicly available datasets.
The PI-CAI challenge is an international comparative study whose main goal is
to prove whether or not state-of-the-art AI models are non-inferior to radiologists
when detecting clinically significant prostate cancer in bpMRI. Although the whole
study was based on 10,000 MRI images, only 1500 cases were available for the
general public. The protocol for patient inclusion was established by 16 experts
from three Dutch centers and one Norwegian center.
All patients included in
the study showed signs of csPCA in a previous test (PSA or digital rectal exam).
For each of the MRI studies included in the dataset, there is both image data,
acquisition variables (scanner manufacturer, scanner model name, and diffusion b-
value), and clinical variables (PSA, prostate volume, PSA density, and patient age).
The included sequences in each of the MRI studies are: axial T2W, DWI, and ADC.
DCE is not made available for any of the studies, but the radiologists in charge of
making the annotations did have access to complete mpMRIs studies. Annotations
refer to the segmentation maps, which correspond to binary images of same size
as one of the corresponding scans of the study in which a value of 1 indicates the
presence of a significant lesion in that given voxel. Out of the 1,500 available cases,
1075 cases have benign tissue or indolent PCa (their lesion masks are empty), 220
cases have csPCa and have been annotated by a human expert (trained radiologists
or resident radiologists under the supervision of expert radiologists), and 205 cases
present csPCa but have not been annotated by a human expert. All annotations
have been resampled to match the dimensions and resolutions of the T2W images.
[Sah+22]
PROSTATEx dataset from Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA) is a subset of
PI-CAI challenge that was previously released for an independent challenge. The
reason why this subset must be highlighted is that two radiology residents and two
board-certified radiologists provided 204 extended annotations for different cases.
These extended annotations include all lesions (not only csPCa) and anatomy
masks of the prostate. [Cuo+21b]
Prostate158 consists of 158 annotated bpMRIs from a German university hos-
pital. It contains segmentations of the prostate (anatomy masks) and PCa lesions
(defined as suspicious areas with a PIRADS score larger than 4). None of the
studies in this dataset was included in PI-CAI challenge. [Ada+22]
Finally, the Medical Segmentation Decathlon, in which algorithms competed
in ten different disciplines, included 48 prostate mpMRIs with anatomical masks.
Although there is no information on the selection criteria for the patients of this
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Data
study, a very large inter-subject variability is confirmed in the original paper, in
contrast to the rest of the datasets that were mentioned before, that only include
patients with PCa suspicion, what could bias the development of an automatic
algorithm for prostate cancer screening. [Ant+22]
Dataset
Number of cases
Use
PICAI Challenge
1500
Training
and
val-
idation
of
Deep
Learning models for
csPCa detection
ProstateX
204 (included in PICAI)
Initial
data
anal-
ysis,
training
and
validation of Deep
Learning
models
for
csPCa
detec-
tion,
training
and
validation of Deep
Learning models for
prostate
segmenta-
tion.
Prostate158
158
Independent dataset
for testing on com-
pletely unseen data.
Medical Segmentation Decathlon
48
Training
and
val-
idation
of
Deep
Learning models for
prostate
anatomy
segmentation
Table 2.1: Dataset sources used in the project and their corresponding number of cases
available for use, as well as their ultimate use in the process.
In Table 2.2, a summary of all data sources and their corresponding use in
this project is presented. All decisions regarding model selection, data processing,
scope of the project... have been made without looking into the cases included in
Prostate158.
2.2
The Challenges of the Data
One of the main challenges of the data is dealing with highly imbalanced datasets,
where the number of cases with available annotations of csPCa (220 cases) is much
lower than the number of cases with no csPCa (1075 cases). Furthermore, the
negative cases of the dataset are not representative of healthy individuals, but have
been extracted from a population with indolent prostate cancer or benign lesions.
In order to understand more about the complexity this peculiarity of the dataset
==PAGE:17==
2.2 The Challenges of the Data
9
hides, an initial comparison of clinically significant vs. not clinically significant
tumors has been made using the annotated data by Cuocolo et al. [Cuo+21c] on
ProstateX dataset.
In Figure 2.1, some metrics have been obtained from the intensities of clinically
significant and not clinically significant lesions in each of the sequences that consti-
tute a bpMRI study. More specifically, the mean, maximum, minimum, entropy,
and standard deviation of the voxel intensity value distribution within each of the
tumors have been computed. As observed in the graph, it is easy to distinguish
between background (any voxel that does not contain a lesion) and lesions, spe-
cially in ADC and DWI sequences. However, distributions are quite similar when
trying to discriminate between csPCa (red) and not csPCa (green) tumors. In the
current context, where it is being investigated whether or not a Deep Learning
model is capable of detecting significant tumors, it is a challenge that there exist
other objects with similar characteristics whose detection will be penalized by the
loss function. Ideally, one may consider to include non significant tumors as a
third class in the training of these neural networks, but this approach is prevented
by the lack of annotations for not csPCa tumors in the majority of studies in the
dataset.
In order to analyze if there are significant differences between csPCa tumors
and benign lesions, a statistical test has been performed. The Mann-Whitney U
test is a non-parametric test, in which the null hypothesis is that two samples come
from the same distribution. Although it does not assume a normal distribution
of the data, it assumes that both distributions are similar in shape. The Mann-
Whitney U test gives as outcome a p-value that corresponds to the probability of
the samples under study to come from the same population, meaning the probabil-
ity that the two samples differ by random change. [Mac+16] A significance level
of 0.05 has been considered for this statistical analysis, which means that vari-
ables are only considered different between benign and cancerous lesions if their
corresponding test outputs a p-value lower than 0.05. The results must be inter-
preted with caution, as only 31% of the tumors were benign in the study, what
could underestimate the distribution of the computed variables.
In Figure 2.1,
the results of the statistical analysis are presented. For all variables but entropy,
there is a significant difference between the two types of lesion in at least one of
the sequences of a bpMRI study. This suggests that it is possible to discriminate
between them without the need of mpMRI or biopsy.
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Data
Figure 2.1: Distribution of image intensity measures (by row: mean, maximum, mini-
mum, entropy, and standard deviation) calculated on clinically significant
(red) and not clinically significant (green) for each of the sequences of a
bpMRI study (by column: T2, ADC, DWI). Background (defined as any
voxel that does not contain tumor) is only included in the mean intensity
graph, as it reduced the visibility of the difference between types of tu-
mors for the rest of variables. Although these basic distributions are very
similar, DWI looks like the sequence with more potential to distinguish
between clinically significant and not clinically significant tumors. The
overall relatively high similarity between image statistics for the two types
of tumor highlights the complexity in their automatic classification..
Variable
T2
ADC
DWI
Mean Intensity
0.01505
<0.00001
0.00003
Max Intensity
0.97465
0.58020
<0.00001
Min Intensity
0.01106
0.00079
0.63331
Entropy
0.09659
0.10388
0.11755
Standard
Devia-
tion
0.89514
0.00103
<0.00001
Table 2.2: Mann Whitney U test p-values for image intensity measures (mean, maxi-
mum, minimum, entropy, and standard deviation) for each of the sequences
of a bpMRI study calculated between clinically significant and not clinically
significant prostate cancer lesions. All significant differences in the distri-
butions (p-value bellow 0.05) are presented in bold letters.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
In this chapter, the techniques that have been applied to data, both for preprocess-
ing and modeling are presented. In Section 3.1, all of the operations that result in
data transformation are mentioned and the reasons why they have been applied
are discussed. In Section 3.2, the selection of models and their corresponding pa-
rameters are listed, including training parameters and evaluation metrics used to
assess the results.
3.1
Data Transformations
This section is divided in Data Preprocessing, which refers to those techniques that
transform the data to obtain consistent results and make some operations possible,
and Data Augmentation Techniques, which refers to data transformations that are
applied to increase the variability of the dataset during the training of the models.
All processing steps have been designed so that no bias is introduced in any data
used for validation or testing of the models, for example, cropping of the images
was done based on the training set and applied for the validation and test sets
without any modification.
3.1.1
Data Preprocessing
3.1.1.1
Image resampling
When acquiring an MRI sequence, the resulting image is a discrete 3D volume.
The characteristics of this volume will be determined by how the MRI scanner has
acquired the signals. The 3D volume can be understood as a tensor of voxels. Each
voxel has a dimensionality, which is a 3D vector that captures the correspondence
between a given distance in the image space and the physical space. For example,
if the voxel dimensions of an MRI study is (1mm,1mm,1mm), that would mean
that, e.g., 3 voxels (in any of the directions) span a total of 3 mm in physical
space. When the three components of the dimensionality vector are equal (as in
the example), the image is said to be isotropic, as opposed to anisotropic images
where dimensions are different in two or more directions. Isotropic images are
frequently preferred over anisotropic ones when working with image analysis, as
it allows for transformations (such as rotation or registration), and when training
DL algorithms (as the size of the detected objects in one image will be directly
comparable with detected objects in the rest of the dataset as measured in voxel
space). [TBU00]
==PAGE:20==
12
3 Methods
The outcome of this preprocessing step is that all images of the dataset have the
same voxel dimensions (1mm, 1mm, 1mm). For making this resampling in prostate
images it is important to note that the images were aligned to the prostate, instead
to the typical scanner axis. That is why resampling was done with an aﬀine matrix
that kept the original image orientation, instead of using the standard identity
matrix that would rotate the image to align with the scanner. The resampling has
been performed using Nilearn python package. [Con24]
Within each bpMRI study, all scans (and annotations) are resized to the shape
of the T2 scan. It is important to note that resampling of the images might impact
the results of the models and visualization of the images, as linear interpolation of
some of the values is included in the resampling. [Ble+23]
3.1.1.2
Image cropping and resizing
MRI studies of the prostate include more anatomy than the prostate itself, includ-
ing other organs (such as the bladder), which do not contain any information on
the cancer lesions. Feeding larger images to the training and inference process of
a neural network require more computational power and/or patching techniques,
which could be a limiting factor when dealing with highly unbalanced datasets, as
dividing an image with a small lesion into different fractions will result in even
more unbalance.
Consequently, images have been cropped to only contain the
prostate.
For this purpose, a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) has been
trained to detect the prostate. More information on how this neural network was
trained and what data was used can be found in Chapter 3. For all images, once
the prostate is detected, a bounding box that goes from the lowest voxel that was
detected as prostate to the highest (with an error of 25%) is used for cropping the
images. All images are then resized to a size of (96, 96, 96). If the original cropped
image is of size larger than 96 in any of the axes, the image will be cropped to that
value. If the original cropped image is of size smaller than 96 in any of the axes,
the image will be padded with 0s to that value. Same transformations are applied
to scans (T2, ADC, and DWI) and lesion’s annotations. In Figure 3.1, an example
of a study with csPCa is shown before and after the initial cropping. Unlike crop-
ping directly to a size (96,96,96), including this prostate detection ensures that the
whole prostate is included in the resulting image, what plays an important role in
cases where the prostate might not be completely centered in the scan.
3.1.1.3
Normalization
All images are normalized to have zero mean and unit variance in each of its chan-
nels, what means that normalization is applied to each MRI sequence separately,
and only taking into account the information contained in that specific sequence.
The normalized images are obtained by subtracting each voxel by the mean and
dividing by the standard deviation of the channel it corresponds to.
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Data Transformations
13
Figure 3.1: Result of cropping in a T2 scan of a positive study (study 100012 of PICAI-
Challenge). The figure includes the image before preprocessing (a) and the
image after resampling and cropping to the prostate (b). The figure does
not include the final step of the processing where the image is resized to
(96,96,96).
3.1.2
Data Augmentation Techniques
Data augmentation is a set of very commonly used techniques in the training of DL
models to avoid overfitting. These techniques were developed under the assump-
tion that training datasets could give much more information to the networks than
the one obtained by the original images. By applying transformations to the scans,
one could obtain data that could resemble the unseen examples. Data augmenta-
tion has been proven effective for improving results in many DL fields, including
classification, segmentation or object detection. [CK19]
In this section, all augmentations that have been applied are presented. These
augmentations were applied only to the studies included in the training of the
neural networks, but never on the validation or test sets. The data augmentation
pipeline has been inspired by the work of Billot et al. in [Bil+23], as implemented
in https://github.com/BBillot/SynthSeg.
3.1.2.1
Random spatial deformations
One data augmentation technique is to apply aﬀine or elastic transformations to
the images. Aﬀine transformations refer to linear transformations, or, in other
words, scaling, rotations, shearing, and translation, while elastic transformations
refer to non-linear ones. Any time a study is sampled during training of the model,
it will be altered by these transformations with a probability of 0.4. If the study is
selected to be transformed, it will be transformed by the aﬀine transformation with
a probability of 0.6 and with the elastic transformation with a probability of 0.3
==PAGE:22==
14
3 Methods
(note that a given study may be transformed by both types of transformations).
To build the aﬀine transformation matrix, the parameters for each of the basic
image operations must be defined. This matrix, ϕaffine, is the combination of
three rotations (θx, θy, θz), three shearings (shx, shy, shz), three scalings (sx, sy,
sz) and three translations (tx, ty, tz). Translation has not been applied to any of
the cases (i.e tx, ty, and tz are set to 0), as the prostate detection algorithm for
cropping the studies prevents any type of variability in that dimension. The values
for the other parameters are sampled from uniform distributions of the following
characteristics (i refers to any of the three axes) :
• θi ∼U(−0.2, 0.2)
• shi ∼U(0.99, 1.01)
• si ∼U(0.95, 1.05)
Similarly, for elastic transformations, a random 3D offset for each voxel between
-1 and 1 is sampled from a uniform distribution. The offset grid is then convolved
with a Gaussian kernel to add the elastic component to the transformation. This
Gaussian kernel has a certain standard deviation, which is sampled from a uniform
distribution between 0 and 4. [SSP+03]
3.1.2.2
Random intensity transforms
While the transformations defined in the previous subsection are geometrical, they
do not modify the values of the images. However, intensity transforms do modify
the intensity values of the scans. These transforms can be applied separately on
each of the scans, while spatial deformations must be consistent within a study
(including the annotation masks). The following transforms have been applied to
each of the studies in the training with a probability of 0.6 when sampled:
• Salt and pepper noise. This noise refers to the appearance of completely
bright (maximum value found on the channel intensity distribution) or dark
(minimum value found on the channel intensity distribution) voxels because
of disturbances in the image signal (dead voxels, analog-to-digital converter
errors, transmission errors...). By inducing this type of noise, the network
learns how to deal with images containing such. For each sampled study
during the training, there is a probability of 0.25 that the study will be trans-
formed with salt and pepper noise. If a study is selected to be transformed, a
probability between 0 and 0.15 is sampled from a uniform distribution. This
probability will determine how likely is it for each voxel to be replaced by 0
or 1. [DPM17]
• Gaussian noise.
Gaussian noise consists of adding a value taken from a
zero mean Gaussian distribution, with a given standard deviation.
It is
also refered as white noise. The probability of transforming a given study
with Gaussian noise is 0.25, while the standard deviation is sampled from a
uniform distribution from 0 to 0.5.
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Deep Learning Models
15
• Gamma augmentation. This augmentation transforms all voxels in an image
by applying the following equation:
T(I) = Ieγ
(3.1)
Where I is the original image and T(I) is the transformed output. Gamma
is sampled from a normal distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation
0.25. The probability of Gamma augmenting a given study during training
is of 0.5.
• Contrast inversion. This transformation consists of inversion of the values of
the image (previously mapped between 0 and 1) following the equation :
T(I) = 1 −I
(3.2)
Where I is the original image and T(I) is the transformed output.
The
probability of this transform to be applied was set to 0.25.
3.1.2.3
Random Gaussian blur
A Gaussian kernel is used for image smoothing by filtering and it can also be
applied for adding variability to a dataset as a data augmentation technique. The
Guassian kernel is convolved with the image obtaining a smoother as you increase
the variance of the kernel. The kernel in 1D can be obtained by:
g(x; t) =
1
√
2tπ e
−x
2t
(3.3)
Where t is the variance of the Gaussian.
The Gaussian is separable, so it is
possible to obtain the same results by convolving the image with three orthogonal
1D Gaussians, and obtain the same result as using a 3D Gaussian. [BA23] The
standard deviation of the blurring kernels is sampled from a uniform distribution
between 0 and 2.5. The probability of a training image of being blurred is of 0.25
for each of the sampled studies. The blurring is applied separately to each of the
scans. The size of the kernel is computed as a function of the sampled standard
deviation following:
KernelSize = ⌈2.5σ⌉2 + 1
(3.4)
3.2
Deep Learning Models
In the last decades, Deep Learning has been one of the biggest research fields,
being applied to solve and automatize tasks in many different scenarios, includ-
ing medical imaging. Among the most typical networks used for medical imaging,
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been proven to overcome the per-
formance of the rest. In CNNs, an image is convolved in each of the layers of
the network with a kernel. In traditional image analysis, convolutions have been
used for feature extraction, edge detection, etc. [Suz+06] The idea behind CNNs
is to substitute traditional kernels for learnable kernels, whose parameters will be
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Methods
optimized during the training of the network. Depending on the configuration of
these kernels, CNNs can be used for image segmentation, classification, regression,
etc. [Li+21]. In this project, a 3D-UNet for segmentation of both the prostate
and csPCa tumors has been used.
3.2.1
Model Architecture
The UNet architecture was first proposed by Ronnenberger et al. in 2015. [RFB15]
Since then, this network or a modification of it, has won most segmentation chal-
lenges, specially in the biomedical world.
It consists of a contracting path (or
encoder) and an expansive path (or decoder). The contracting path follows the
typical architecture of a CNN, where convolutional layers are concatenated. Each
layer consists of two convolutions, whose outputs are activated by a rectified lin-
ear unit (ReLU) and a downsampling layer, where max pooling operation with
stride 2 is used to reduce the dimmensions of the images. As the images down-
sampled, the number of filters (or, as referred in the original paper, the feature
channels) can be doubled without the exponential increase of the computational
load of the network. The expansive path consists of upsampling followed by two
convolutions, each followed by a ReLU. Each expansive layer is connected to the
opposite contracting layer. When using a UNet for segmentation tasks, the input
of the network is of shape (x, y, z, C), where (x,y,z) would be the dimensions of
(in this case) an MR scan, while C corresponds to the number of channels, which
will depend on the number of inputs. So, for example, if both an ADC and DWI
MR scan will be used for segmenting the lesions, the number of channels would
correspond to 2. The output of the model is an image of shape (x,y,z,K), where
(x,y,z) correspond to the original shape of each of the channels of the input, while
K corresponds to the number of classes in the segmentation problem (e.g, if the
task is to distinguish between background and prostate voxels, K will be 2). The
final activation function is the Softmax function, which converts the elements of
the output vector to a probability distribution.[Lia+17] The equation for Softmax
function is :
Softmax(x) =
ex
∑ex
(3.5)
, where x refers to the output vector.
The value of a given voxel for K = 1, corresponds to the probability of that
voxel to belong to class 1. In Figure 3.2, the architecture is presented in a graph.
There are different parameters that impact the capacity of a UNet and that can
be predefined before training. First of all, the depth of the network is defined as
the amount of convolutional layers the encoder (and, consequently, the decoder)
has.
All the networks mentioned and trained in this project have a depth of
5.
In each of these layers, the number of filters per layer can be defined.
As
previously explained, it is a common practice to increase the number of filters as
the image is downsampled, and, therefore, the amount of filters in each layer for
the networks of this project are 16, 32, 64, 128, and 256, each one corresponding
to one layer. In each layer, the amount of filters is doubled. The kernel size of
all the kernels used for convolutions, upsampling, and pooling is of 3x3x3.
In
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Deep Learning Models
17
Figure 3.2: UNet architecture extracted from the original paper of UNet for biomedical
image segmentation. The sizes and parameters do not match to the ones
used for this project, as the network has been adapted to the specific task
that was being handled. The figure has been extracted from [RFB15].
each layer, padding is applied to maintain the size of the input while convolving
the image, so it is only downsampled when pooling. There are different ways of
upsampling an image, in this case, nearest upsampling has been selected, meaning
that each new voxel is populated by the nearest neighbor, or, in other words, that
each value is copied to their surrounding new neighbors. L2 regularization of value
10−5 was applied for kernel regularization, what enforces smoothness in each of
the kernels. [FL19] Finally, and in contrast to the original implementation of the
UNet, the hidden activation function that has been used for this project is the
Exponential Linear Unit (ELU). The activation function plays an important role
on the training of the network by providing non-linearity to adapt to complex
representations of data. ReLU formula and ELU formula are shown in equations
3.6 and 3.7, respectively. ELU is an improved version of ReLU, as it is able to
output negative values (neurons are not as often deactivated by outputting 0 as in
ReLU) and still avoid vanishing gradients. [RAS20]
ReLU(x) = max(0, x)
(3.6)
ELU(x) = max(0, x) + min(0, ex −1)
(3.7)
In each of its layers, the model computes a feature map. It has been shown
that normalizing these computed feature maps ease training and makes conver-
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Methods
sion faster. [WH18] One of the most common normalization techniques is batch
normalization, in which each of the channels of the feature map is normalized by
using the mean and standard deviation of a whole batch.
However, for group
normalization to deliver consistent and stable results, the batch size should be of
at least 32, what limits the depth of the models, especially in a context where
computational capacity is limited.
That is why, and following the assumption
that the different channels of feature maps are not independent from each other,
group normalization has been used as the normalization technique. In contrast to
batch normalization, in group normalization the mean and standard deviation is
extracted from all channels and apply to each of the MRI studies (or to each of
the maps computed from the original MRI studies) independently. In Figure 3.3,
a graphical explanation is presented, in which group normalization is shown for 2
groups. In the training of the models of this project, the number of groups was
set to 1, meaning that all channels are included in the normalization.
3.2.2
Model Training
In this section, the way the UNet has been trained will be expanded, with a spe-
cific focus to each of the tasks the UNet has been used for: prostate detection and
lesion detection. Model training refers to the iterative process of learning the best
weights (according to a loss function, which is introduced bellow in the document)
of the kernels of the different convolutional layers mentioned in the previous sec-
tion. All mentioned models have been trained in a NVIDIA A100-SXM4-40GB
GPU in a Linux environment and using a Machine Learning Operations (MLOps)
system.
The MLOps system, designed using ClearML software, was used as a
logging system for each of the trained models. The use of this kind of systems
guarantees reproducible and comparable results, by running all models under the
same conditions (same random initialization, software versions...).
Figure 3.3: Graphical explanation of from which dimensions and selected examples the
mean and standard deviation is computed in batch normalization (right)
and group normalization (left). Extracted from [WH18].
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Deep Learning Models
19
3.2.2.1
U-Net for prostate segmentation
Although prostate detection is not the main task of the project, the fact that
images are cropped using the output of the network, makes it crucial. For this,
the weights of the network were randomly initialized and optimized during 500
epochs (700 steps per epoch) using Adam optimizer and a learning rate of 10−5.
As a loss function, the weighted categorical crossentropy has been used. This loss
can be defined as (for a binary segmentation problem) :
L(π, t) = −
N
∑
n=1
C1tn log(πn) + C0(1 −tn) log(1 −πn)
(3.8)
Where, πn is the output of the model for the voxel n (corresponding to the
probability of voxel n to belong to class 1), Ck is the weight given to class k
in the loss function, and tn is the ground truth class of the voxel n.
For the
training of the anatomy model, C0 has been set to 0.5 and C1 to 2, which means
that correctly classifying the voxels will impact more heavily the loss function
than correctly classifying background voxels. When working with this version of
the crossentropy, there is a trade-off between the amount of false negatives (the
loss function might not be giving enough attention to classifying positive voxels,
a decrease of C0 or an increase of C1 should be considered) and false positives
(the loss function is penalizing too much the missclassification of positive cases, a
decrease of C1 or an increase of C0 should be considered). [Gor+20]
As already mentioned during the preprocessing section, feeding a neural net-
work with a whole image requires a high computational power or patching tech-
niques. Patching techniques are those techniques in which an image of size (X,Y,Z)
is subdivided in small portions (or patches) of size (x, y, z). If any of the original
dimensions (e.g X) is not evenly divisible by the patch dimensions (e.g x), the
patches corresponding to the borders of the image would be of different dimension
than the rest of the patches. To avoid this, the image is padded with 0s so that
all dimensions are evenly divisible by their respective patch dimensions.
Patching is done differently during training and inference. During training, for
each image, 10 patches of size (64,64,32) are randomly sampled, making sure that
half of these patches contain the ground truth prostate segmentation in some of
their voxels. During inference, the extraction of patches has been done so that
the patches have an overlap of 0.5 with neighbour patches. For those sequences
included in the validation of the network, the whole image is input into it patch by
patch and the evaluation metrics are computed for the image as a whole. Although
this kind of evaluation is slower with respect to patch-based evaluation, it allows a
fair evaluation of the segmentation algorithm when applied to whole MRI studies
(image level metrics vs. patch level metrics).
Although it is of common practice to use isotropic patches (same value in all
directions), it was observed that the MRI studies of the prostate contained a low
number of slices when compared to their dimensionality in the X and Y directions.
This aligns with the fact that the pelvic area takes a small space horizontally,
although this comparison can only be made once the images have been resampled
so that one voxel in any of the directions takes the same physical space.
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Methods
For training the model, the 204 cases included in ProstateX and the 48 cases
included in Medical Segmentation Decathlon (see 2.2) were used. The Medical
Segmentation Decathlon only included ADC and T2 sequences, so DWI sequences
available in ProstateX were ignored for this task. T2 sequences contain most of the
anatomical information of the prostate area, meaning that the exclusion of DWI
sequences should not heavily impact the obtained results. On the other hand, it
was important to include the decathlon dataset as it included non pathological
prostates, which may be important to ensure that the detection algorithm does
not become biased towards pathological cases. Of the total 252, 40 cases (≈15 %)
were randomly selected for use as validation set.
3.2.2.2
U-Net for lesion segmentation
The main difference between the training of the model for anatomy detection and
the model for lesion detection is that, as at the moment the images reach this point
they have been already cropped to include only the prostate, patching is not needed
for training. As mentioned in Section 3.1.1.2, all images and labels are processed in
such a way that the output shape is (96, 96, 96), meaning that the input size of the
model will be (96, 96, 96). As opposed to the previous section, where the number of
channels were 2 (corresponding to ADC and T2 sequences), the number of channels
of this network is 3 (including ADC, T2, and DWI sequences). Although ADC
maps are extracted from DWI sequences, there is no information on what bValues
have been used for extracting the map, and it has been assumed in this project that
the DWI adds more information to the problem, especially considering that DWI
sequences for prostate cancer detection are acquired at values above 1000, which
are rarely used for computing the ADC map. However, it is worth mentioning that
DWI sequences are highly variable across centers and scanners (and even patients),
meaning that, in the context of scarce data availability, models could benefit from
not including DWI. The normalization and data augmentation pipeline previously
described has been developed to take into account this variability.
Apart from the the loss function described in Equation 3.8, the Tversky loss was
included in the optimization of the network for this specific task. The Tversky loss
was introduced in the context of medical imaging segmentation as an expansion
of the commonly used Dice loss, which resulted in high precision but low recall,
as it is a typical issue in the medical field to deal with highly imbalanced classes
and small Regions of Interest (ROIs), such as cancer lesions, so false negative (FN)
predictions needed to be weighted higher than false positive (FP) predictions in
the loss function. The general equation of the Tversky loss is:
TverskyLoss = 1 −
∑N
i=1 p0ig0i + ϵ
∑N
i=1 p0ig0i + α ∑N
i=1 p0ig1i + β ∑N
i=1 p1ig0i + ϵ
(3.9)
Where p0i refers to the probability of voxel i to be classified as background, p1i
refers to the probability of voxel i to be classified as tumor, and g0i and g1i are
binary values which determine if voxel i is background or tumor (respectively) in
the ground truth mask. [SEG17] α controls the penalty given to FPs, larger α will
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Deep Learning Models
21
result in a higher impact of the number of FPs in the value of the loss function,
while β controls the impact of FN in the loss function. ϵ is a smoothing factor.
Both loss functions are combined as :
TotalLoss = W1L1 + W2L2
(3.10)
Where W1 and W2 correspond to the weights given to each of the losses. Dif-
ferent combination of values have been tried and the more meaningful results have
been displayed in Section 4.
3.2.3
Addressing false positives
As mentioned in the introduction (Section 1) and analyzed in Section 2.2, in our
database there are non-annotated tumors which correspond to non-clinically sig-
nificant tumors that share some characteristics with the target segmentation. Al-
though one might expect that this would result in a high number of false positives,
it might impact the learning in unpredictable ways, especially when the amount
of data for non-clinically significant tumors is higher than the amount of data
of clinically significant ones. The ideal approach to solve this would be to have
annotations for all kind of tumors that appear in the image, but, unfortunately,
this would require resources that were not available during the development of
this project. However, a novel approach has been investigated, inspired by active
learning techniques. In this approach, false positives are treated as a new class
in the second step of a two-step training of the UNet. This is similar to some of
the techniques used in research papers, such as the one proposed by Swagata et
al. [Kun+22], where they train a classifier to detect whether or not some portion
of Retinal Fundus Images contained false positives or not, or the one proposed
by Tourassi et al [Tou+06], where the false positives per image are reduced using
feature and knowledge-based analysis in mammographic studies.
In the proposed method, a new dataset is created after a first UNet has been
trained. This dataset is created by adding up the binary prediction mask of the
model and two times the original binary ground truth. This will result in a new
mask with three classes: class 1 corresponding to FP predictions, class 2 corre-
sponding to FN predictions, and class 3 corresponding to TP predictions. These
generated mask is processed so that it contains only class 1 and class 2 (that
includes both original class 2 and 3). One could think of class 1 corresponding
to potential non-significant tumors and class 2 to annotated significant tumors.
There is a complete correspondence between the ground truth mask of the first
model and class 2 in the newly generated masks. However, overdetection of tumor
lesions (for a given tumor, more area is considered as lesion by the AI model than
by the annotator) in the first model will produce objects of class 2 surrounded
by class 1. This can be avoided by applying a dilation to object of class 2 and
removing all elements of class 1 that also belong to the dilated object. In Figure
3.4, an example is presented.
Once this dataset has been created, a new UNet of same architecture (but with
two output channels, one for each of the classes) can be trained trying to predict
both the original labels for clinically significant lesions and false predictions, with
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Methods
Figure 3.4: Example of generation of new dataset based on false positive predictions
from a previous model (model trained with low penalty for false positives).
(a) Corresponds to the original ground truth annotation by a radiologist.
(b) Corresponds to the AI prediction for the same case and slice.
(c)
Corresponds to the newly generated ground truth for retraining the model.
As it can be observed, even if the labels in (a) and (b) do not completely
agree for the true prediction, (c) maintains the original ground truth made
by the radiologist thanks to dilation techniques. The scan under the lesion
masks is a DWI scan, as it was the one in which the lesion was clearly
visible.
the corresponding changes to the loss functions to account for the new class. The
evaluation of the results is only made considering the prediction of class 2 and the
original ground truth labels, so no bias is introduced during the development of
the experiment. As a first UNet, two situations have been considered: (1) a model
trained aiming for the best results in the validation set, and (2) a model trained
with low penalty for FP (α = 0.5 in Tversky loss).
3.2.4
Models trained
In Table 3.1, a brief definition and the chosen parameters for each of the lesion
detection models can be found. All models were trained for 300 epochs (100 steps
per epoch) and a learning rate of 10−6. The models were trained with a batch
size of 4, meaning that 4 studies were used for the calculation of the loss function
every time the model’s weights were updated. Every time a study was sampled
during training, there was a 0.5 probability that it had only background in its
segmentation map. In the training of binary models (model A and model B), there
was a 0.5 probability that the study had a significant tumor in its segmentation. In
the training of models with extra class (model C and model D), once an MRI study
with some label in it was sampled with probability 0.5, there was a probability of
0.4 of that label being a FP label (class 1) and 0.6 of that label being a significant
tumor. 40 cases were randomly selected as validation set. None of the cases used
for training or validation of the network for anatomy detection were selected as
validation set for the tumor detection, so that not biased is introduced in the
processing of the images. In this way, we can assure that the whole pipeline for
prostate cancer detection is generalizable and does not work only in those cases
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Deep Learning Models
23
in which the prostate is detected with a high precision (as the model is likely to
overperform on training cases as compared to unseen cases).
Model
Definition
C0
C1
C2
α
β
ϵ
W1
W2
Model A
Class-weighted
bi-
nary
crossentropy
loss
for
original
dataset.
1.0
NA
3.0
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
Model B
Complex loss for orig-
inal dataset.
1.0
NA
1.0
0.5
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
Model C
Trained on generated
dataset
with
false
positives
from
best
results of Model B.
1.0
1.0
3.0
0.5
0.5
1.0
1.0
1.0
Model D
Trained
on
gener-
ated
dataset
with
false positives from
a
model
with
low
penalty
for
false
positives.
1.0
2.0
3.0
0.5
0.5
1.0
1.0
1.0
Table 3.1: Experiments performed during the project for lesion segmentation. Model
A and B were trained using the original annotations by radiologists, while
Model C and Model D were trained over two different annotation sets gener-
ated by previous models. The four most relevant models have been selected
and presented in the thesis. All models were trained, validated and tested
using the same studies. NA stands for Not Applicable.
3.2.5
Model Evaluation
The evaluation of the results is done to estimate and quantify the performance of
the different models in the defined tasks. This evaluation is based on metrics that
are computed separately for the training, validation, and test (Prostate158 cases)
sets. The obtained results in the validation set are used to select the epoch of
the training with the best results and to compare the performance of the different
models when tuning hyperparameters. The results on the training set are used
to track the performance of the network when working with cases that have been
used for training and to measure overfitting when comparing them with the results
obtained in the validation set for each epoch. The metrics on the test set are only
computed once the best models have been selected using the validation set as a
reliable metric of the results in completely unseen datasets. During this section,
all the metrics that have been used during the project will be presented.
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Methods
3.2.5.1
Segmentation metrics
Segmentation metrics are the ones that compare the ground truth segmentation
by a radiologists with the one obtained when inputting the same MRI study into
the network. This comparison is made voxel by voxel. The main metric that has
been used as a segmentation metric is the F1 score. In this score each predicted
voxel can correspond to a false positive (the voxel was predicted as positive, but
the radiologist did not include it as part of the segmentation), false negative (the
voxel was predicted as background, but the radiologist considered it was a positive
voxel), true positive (both the detection algorithm and the radiologist agreed that
the voxel should be positive), or true negative (both the detection algorithm and
the radiologist agreed that the voxel is part of the background). The metric is
then calculated as [LEN14]:
F1 =
2TP
2TP + fp + fn
(3.11)
This metric is identical to the commonly used Dice score for object similarity.
The Dice score is computed as :
D(y, y′) = 2|y ∪y′|
|y| + |y′|
(3.12)
Where y is the ground truth and y’ is the prediction set. [Ber+19]. The sum
of the ground truth and the prediction will be equivalent to the denominator in
the F1 score, while the intersection of both sets is equivalent to the set of true
positives. The F1 metric can be computed per image or taking into account the
predictions on the set as a whole. During training, this metric is computed taking
into account the predictions as a whole, but during the evaluation of the models
this metric is computed individually for each of the images.
3.2.5.2
Classification metrics
Classification metrics refer to those that are computed taking into account each
MRI study as a whole.
These metrics only take into account whether or not
something was predicted by the model and compares it with whether or not the
corresponding patient had clinically significant cancer or not. These metrics are
not relevant for the U-Net for prostate detection. In this scenario, it is also possible
to define false positive (the algorithm suggests the patient has clinically significant
cancer but the clinical information confirmed it was a benignant tumor), false
negative (the algorithm considers all the voxels of a study as background, but a
clinically significant tumor can be found on it), true positive (both the algorithm
and the clinical information agree the patient suffers from clinically significant
prostate cancer), and true negatives (both the algorithm and the clinical informa-
tion agree the study does not present a clinically significant tumor). Three main
metrics have been used for quantifying the performance of the different models:
F1 score (following the same formula as in the segmentation metric, but taking
the patient level definition of the components), recall, and specificity. Although,
there are other classification metrics that could be considered, recall and speci-
ficity give a good insight of the performance of the models in the medical field, as
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Deep Learning Models
25
it is interesting to analyze the fraction of positive cases that will be caught by the
model with respect to the total number of positive cases (recall) and the amount
of negative cases that will be classified as negative by the model (specificity) and,
therefore, the fraction of negative patients that will not undergo any other diag-
nostic procedure (e.g, biopsy). F1 score is the harmonic mean between the recall
and the precision, what means that adding the precision to the evaluation of the
results will not give any new insights on the performance. Precision is the fraction
of correctly classified positives within the total amount of examples classified as
positive. [Boy+12]
Recall, or sensitivity, can be defined as the fraction of correctly classified posi-
tives:
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(3.13)
Specificity can be defined as the fraction of correctly classified negatives:
Specificity =
TN
TN + FP
(3.14)
==PAGE:34==
26
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Results
In this Chapter, the results of the models are presented. In Section 4.1, the results
of the anatomy segmentation model are listed and discussed (as this has not been
the main focus of project and the results are not part of the objectives of the
thesis). In Section 4.2, the results of the different lesion segmentation models are
listed, but they are discussed in Chapter 5.
4.1
Prostate Segmentation
As stated in the Methods, Chapter 3, this model was trained with the subset of
204 samples of ProstateX challenge that was externally annotated by Cuocolo et
al. [Cuo+21b] and 48 healthy cases of Medical Segmentation Decathlon [Ant+22].
The main goal of the model was to locate the anatomical prostate area within the
images, so a focus was not placed on optimizing the results of this segmentation,
but rather training a network that could give reasonably good results for image
cropping. No hyperparameter tuning experiments were performed, as the initial
set chosen from intuition resulted in good results. In Figure 4.1, the evolution of
the loss function during the iterative training is displayed for both the training
and validation sets. The figure shows a validation loss curve that is consistently
lower than the training loss curve. This suggests that there is no overfitting and
that there is less variation in the train set than in the validation set, and, therefore,
less diﬀicult cases that can make the loss function larger. Furthermore, in Figure
4.2, the evolution of the F1 score during the iterative training is also displayed
for the validation set. The epoch with the highest score was selected as the one
used during the processing of data, which corresponds to the model of epoch 478
with a F1 score of 0.89 for the whole validation set. These results are not far from
those obtained by other researchers, as Comelli et al., that evaluated the prostate
segmentation in MRI using T2-weighted studies and obtained a score of 0.91±0.03.
[Com+21] As an interesting point to highlight, these results suggest the potential
improvement of the results when adding ADC scans to the segmentation of the
prostate.
In Table 4.1, the quantitative results in each of the sets (training and validation)
are presented. Test results were analyzed by visual inspection, by checking whether
or not the prostate appeared completely in the preprocessed images. Quantitative
metrics could not be extracted for this task in the test set, as there was no ground
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Results
Set
F1 Score (Whole)
Mean F1 Score
Max F1 Score
Min F1 Score
Training
0.89
0.88 ± 0.04
0.94
0.75
Validation
0.89
0.87 ± 0.04
0.93
0.8
Table 4.1: Metrics corresponding to the best model for prostate detection considering
validation metrics. F1 Score (whole) refers to the calculation of the metric
(see Equation 3.11), considering all predictions in the set, while Mean F1
Score is calculated individually for each of the images and, then, the mean
is extracted. Max F1 Score and Min F1 Score refer to the studies with
highest and lowest performance, respectively.
truth of segmentation of the whole prostate for the dataset used for testing. In
Figure 4.3, the predicted masks for the validation studies with worse and best
F1 metric are plotted together with their corresponding ground truth annotations.
By visual inspection of the worst prediction, it becomes clear the segmentations
may be used for cropping of the prostate without having any negative implications
on the detection of tumors. Coming back to Figure 3.1, one can see the effect of
applying these masks to the cropping of the MRI studies in one of the studies of
the dataset.
Figure 4.1: Evolution of the loss function (binary crossentropy) during the train-
ing of the network for prostate anatomy segmentation model.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Tumor Segmentation
29
Figure 4.2: Evolution of the F1 score over epochs for the validation set in the
training of the network for prostate detection..
Figure 4.3: Validation studies with best (0.93) and worst (0.8) F1 Score compared to
their corresponding ground truth segmentation. Only one of the slices of
the complete volume is shown in the figure.
4.2
Tumor Segmentation
In this section, the results for the tumor detection models, which were mentioned
in Section 3 will be presented. See Table 3.1 for an overview of all models. As a
starting point, Figure 4.4 shows the evolution of loss functions during the training
for each of the models.
These plots show that the optimization of all models
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Results
converged (both validation and train losses reduced to a stable plateau) and there
is limited apparent overfitting (the validation and train loss do not significantly
diverge at any point of the training). However, overfitting must be also analyzed
taking into account the obtained evaluation metrics on both sets. In Figure 4.5,
the evolution of the F1 score over epochs for the validation set in the training of
each of the models is plotted.
Finally, a comparison tables for test and validation metrics (Table 4.10 and
Table 4.11) of all four models will be introduced and further analyzed in Section
5.
Model A is a baseline model trained with class-weighted binary crossentropy
as a loss function with the original annotations from radiologists as ground truth.
In Table 4.2, the segmentation metrics are presented, while in Table 4.3, the clas-
sification metrics can be found. In Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.7, examples of the
predictions of the model for a validation study and test study (respectively) are
presented. The selected studies are consistent within models in this report.
4.2.1
Model B results
Model B refers to the model trained using the complex loss defined in Table 3.1
on the original annotations. The classification results can be found in Table 4.5,
while the segmentation results can be found in Table 4.4. In Figure 4.8 a validation
example is shown and in Figure 4.9 a test example is shown.
Figure 4.4: Evolution of the loss function during the training of the networks for tumor
detection for each of the models.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Tumor Segmentation
31
Figure 4.5: Evolution of the F1 score over epochs for the validation set in the training
of the networks for tumor detection for each of the models.
Set
F1 Score (Whole)
Mean F1 Score per study
Max
F1
Score
Min
F1
Score
Training
0.64
0.59 ± 0.21
0.88
0.0
Validation
0.42
0.26 ± 0.26
0.77
0.0
Test
0.18
0.13 ± 0.17
0.58
0.0
Table 4.2: Segmentation metrics corresponding to the best epoch of model A. F1 Score
(whole) refers to the calculation of the metric (see Equation 3.11), consider-
ing all predictions in the set, while Mean F1 Score is calculated individually
for each of the images and, then, the mean is extracted. Max F1 Score and
Min F1 Score refer to the studies with highest and lowest performance, re-
spectively.
Set
F1 Score (classification)
Sensitivity
Specificity
Training
0.43
0.96
0.53
Validation
0.77
0.9
0.55
Test
0.70
0.71
0.58
Table 4.3: Classification metrics corresponding to the best epoch of model A.
4.2.2
Model C results
Model C is trained (starting from random weights) based on a dataset generated
from model B. In this model, the annotated tumors by radiologists are considered
as one separate class together with the false positives generated from predicting
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Results
Figure 4.6: Visualization of a true positive prediction of model A on validation study
1000957. From top to bottom, original images without any labels, original
images annotated by radiologists, and original images predicted by model
A. From left to right, T2, DWI, and ADC sequences of the study.
Set
F1 Score (Whole)
Mean F1 Score per study
Max
F1
Score
Min
F1
Score
Training
0.80
0.77 ± 0.10
0.9
0.0
Validation
0.36
0.25 ± 0.26
0.71
0.0
Test
0.19
0.2 ± 0.19
0.6
0.0
Table 4.4: Segmentation metrics corresponding to the best epoch of model B. F1 Score
(whole) refers to the calculation of the metric (see Equation 3.11), consider-
ing all predictions in the set, while Mean F1 Score is calculated individually
for each of the images and, then, the mean is extracted. Max F1 Score and
Min F1 Score refer to the studies with highest and lowest performance, re-
spectively.
Set
F1 Score (classification)
Sensitivity
Specificity
Training
0.57
0.94
0.74
Validation
0.78
0.8
0.75
Test
0.67
0.67
0.49
Table 4.5: Classification metrics corresponding to the best epoch of model B.
all training and validation images using the model. In Table 4.6, the segmentation
metrics are presented, while in Table 4.7, the classification metrics can be found.
These metrics have been computed using the original radiologist’s annotations
as ground truth and only taking into account the class corresponding to csPCa,
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Tumor Segmentation
33
Figure 4.7: Visualization of a false negative prediction & true positive prediction of
model A on test study 103. From top to bottom, original images without
any labels, original images annotated by radiologists, and original images
predicted by model A. From left to right, T2, DWI, and ADC sequences
of the study.
Note that the ground truth segmentation map indicates
two isolated significant tumors of which only one is detected (with a low
segmentation overlap) by model A; a phenomenon discussed in detail in
the Discussion section 5.
meaning that the prediction of FP class is not considered in the analysis. In Figure
4.10 and Figure 4.11, examples of the predictions of the model for a validation
study and test study (respectively) are presented.
Set
F1 Score (Whole)
Mean F1 Score per study
Max
F1
Score
Min
F1
Score
Training
0.78
0.71 ± 0.15
0.9
0.0
Validation
0.41
0.25 ± 0.27
0.72
0.0
Test
0.16
0.16 ± 0.17
0.58
0.0
Table 4.6: Segmentation metrics corresponding to the best epoch of model C. F1 Score
(whole) refers to the calculation of the metric (see Equation 3.11), consider-
ing all predictions in the set, while Mean F1 Score is calculated individually
for each of the images and, then, the mean is extracted. Max F1 Score and
Min F1 Score refer to the studies with highest and lowest performance, re-
spectively.
==PAGE:42==
34
4 Results
Figure 4.8: Visualization of model B performance for validation study 1000957. From
top to bottom, original images without any labels, original images anno-
tated by radiologists, and original images predicted by model B. From left
to right, T2, DWI, and ADC sequences of the study .
Figure 4.9: Visualization of model B performance for test study 103. From top to
bottom, original images without any labels, original images annotated by
radiologists, and original images predicted by model B. From left to right,
T2, DWI, and ADC sequences of the study .
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Tumor Segmentation
35
Set
F1 Score (classification)
Sensitivity
Specificity
Training
0.69
0.94
0.85
Validation
0.86
0.9
0.8
Test
0.74
0.7
0.71
Table 4.7: Classification metrics corresponding to the best epoch of model C.
Figure 4.10: Visualization of model C performance for validation study 1000957. From
top to bottom, original images without any labels, original images anno-
tated by radiologists, and original images predicted by model C. From
left to right, T2, DWI, and ADC sequences of the study .
4.2.3
Model D results
Model D is the model trained in a similar way than Model B, but with the gener-
ated annotations coming from a model where FPs are not as penalized as in the
other models. Table 4.9 show the classification metrics, while Table 4.8 show the
segmentation metrics. As in the other models, Figures 4.12 and 4.13 include an
example of a validation and test study (respectively).
4.2.4
Model Comparison
In order to compare the performance of each of the models, a combined summary
of these for the validation set can be found in Table 4.10 and for the test set in
Table 4.11.
==PAGE:44==
36
4 Results
Figure 4.11: Visualization of model C performance for test study 103. From top to
bottom, original images without any labels, original images annotated
by radiologists, and original images predicted by model C. From left to
right, T2, DWI, and ADC sequences of the study .
Set
F1 Score (Whole)
Mean F1 Score per study
Max
F1
Score
Min
F1
Score
Training
0.70
0.66 ± 0.15
0.91
0.0
Validation
0.44
0.29 ± 0.26
0.73
0.0
Test
0.24
0.18 ± 0.20
0.63
0.0
Table 4.8: Segmentation metrics corresponding to the best epoch of model D. F1 Score
(whole) refers to the calculation of the metric (see Equation 3.11), consider-
ing all predictions in the set, while Mean F1 Score is calculated individually
for each of the images and, then, the mean is extracted. Max F1 Score and
Min F1 Score refer to the studies with highest and lowest performance, re-
spectively.
Set
F1 Score (classification)
Sensitivity
Specificity
Training
0.55
0.91
0.74
Validation
0.83
0.9
0.75
Test
0.76
0.86
0.4
Table 4.9: Classification metrics corresponding to the best epoch of model D.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Tumor Segmentation
37
Figure 4.12: Visualization of model D performance for validation study 1000957.
From top to bottom, original images without any labels, original im-
ages annotated by radiologists, and original images predicted by model
D. From left to right, T2, DWI, and ADC sequences of the study .
Figure 4.13: Visualization of model D performance for test study 103. From top to
bottom, original images without any labels, original images annotated
by radiologists, and original images predicted by model D. From left to
right, T2, DWI, and ADC sequences of the study .
==PAGE:46==
38
4 Results
Classification Metrics
Metrics
Model A
Model B
Model C
Model D
F1 Score (classification)
0.77
0.78
0.86
0.83
Sensitivity
0.9
0.8
0.9
0.9
Specificity
0.55
0.75
0.8
0.75
Segmentation Metrics
Metrics
Model A
Model B
Model C
Model D
F1 (whole)
0.42
0.36
0.41
0.44
Mean F1
0.26 ± 0.26
0.25 ± 0.26
0.25 ± 0.27
0.29 ± 0.26
Max F1
0.77
0.71
0.72
0.73
Min F1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Table 4.10: Combined classification and segmentation metrics for the validation set
and for Models A, B, C, and D. In bold letters, the highest performance
for each metric is highlighted.
Classification Metrics
Metrics
Model A
Model B
Model C
Model D
F1 Score (classification)
0.70
0.67
0.74
0.76
Sensitivity
0.71
0.67
0.7
0.86
Specificity
0.58
0.49
0.71
0.4
Segmentation Metrics
Metrics
Model A
Model B
Model C
Model D
F1 (whole)
0.18
0.19
0.16
0.24
Mean F1
0.13 ± 0.17
0.2 ± 0.19
0.16 ± 0.17
0.18 ± 0.20
Max F1
0.58
0.6
0.58
0.63
Min F1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Table 4.11: Combined classification and segmentation metrics for the test set and for
Models A, B, C, and D. In bold letters, the highest performance for each
metric is highlighted.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
In this chapter, a list of important points extracted from the results in Section 4
is discussed in detail (see Section 5.1). Furthermore, a subsection on future work
related to this project is presented, which includes the limitations faced during the
development of it and future lines of investigation (see Section 5.2).
5.1
Discussion of the results
• Lower F1 Score (classification) in train set than in validation and
test sets: It can be surprising that, for all models under analysis, the F1 score
when used as a classification metric in the train set is lower than in the rest of
the sets, which include data that was not seen by the model during training.
If we take a look into Equation 3.11, it can be concluded that F1 metric
is sensitive to the balance of classes in the dataset, as the numerator only
depends on TP (coming from the population of class 1) and the denominator
depends as well on FP (coming from the population of class 0) and FN. The
train set is highly unbalanced, what means that, even if only a small fraction of
healthy studies are classified as positive, it could impact significant the metric.
Therefore, this metric is accurate for comparing models, but must be taken
with caution when comparing different sets, especially if the distribution of
classes within sets is very different.
• Minimum value for F1 Score (segmentation) is 0 in the train set:
There are around 3 training cases per model in which the F1 score is 0, which
is atypical for an study that has been trained on. In Figure 5.1, an MRI study
(only DWI and ADC sequences have been included in the figure) correspond-
ing to study 1000938 of the train is presented, which corresponds to a study in
which the F1 score was 0 for all models. It can be seen that the ground truth
provided by the radiologists does not correspond to the definition of a tumor
in Table 1.1, while the segmented lesion by model D does follow the typical
findings in the two plotted sequences (hyperintensity in DWI and hypointen-
sity in ADC). This does not mean that the ground truth is incorrect, but that
the case corresponds to an atypical situation that could have been caused by
human errors or atypical physiological findings for the specific tumor under
discussion.
• Low F1 score (segmentation) in test set: When working with a test
set that comes from a completely different source than the training data, a
==PAGE:48==
40
5 Discussion
Figure 5.1: Visualization of model D performance for test study 103. From top to
bottom, original images without any labels, original images annotated by
radiologists, and original images predicted by model D. From left to right,
T2, DWI, and ADC sequences of the study .
decrease in the performance metrics must be expected, as the images coming
from different scanners may present different distributions of data. In Figure
4.11 and all figures related to the test study 103, it can be seen that the
ground truth includes two different lesions. This scenario is not seen in any
study coming from PICAI-challenge (used for training), as only the malignant
lesion is annotated for those cases. There is not enough information to state
whether the test case presents two malignant lesions or if the radiologists
followed a different pipeline for annotating the images in this test set. In any
case, only detecting one of the objects in the image, impact significantly the
segmentation metrics on the test set. In fact, only model D is able to identify
both lesions in the test study, which also corresponds to a model with low
specificity in the same set (0.4).
• Low F1 score (segmentation) and true positives: It can be argued
whether or not a prediction with no overlap or almost no overlap with the
ground truth should be considered as TP in the computation of classification
metrics.
In this project, these predictions are considered as TP, not only
because it has been already discussed some cases in which the prediction
could be highlighting a lesion that was not annotated (Figure 5.1) for the
training set, but also because in models showing high specificity (especially in
the validation set), the detection of lesions does not seem arbitrarily done by
the network.
• Reduction of false positives: One of the main contributions of this project
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Future work
41
is the introduction of a method for reduction of false positive rate, by creating
a new set of ground truth labels that include an extra class that correspond
to the false positive voxels obtained by another network. Model A and B were
not trained using this technique, while model C and D were. The most direct
comparison can be done between Model B and Model C to analyze the results
of this methodology, as Model C was trained using the dataset generated by
the predictions of Model B. All classification metrics improved in Model C
with respect to Model B in all sets. Specificity went from 0.74 to 0.85 (14.86%
performance increase) in the training set, from 0.75 to 0.8 in validation set
(6.67% performance increase), and from 0.49 to 0.71 (44.90% performance
increase) in the test set. Sensitivity also increased from model B to model C,
meaning that there was not sensitivity-specificity trade off that could explain
the increase in the specificity metric. In order words, the method reduced
the amount of false positives eﬀiciently. Segmentation metrics are similar in
both models. The increase in the performance could be explained by: (1)
adding one class to the complex loss function made each of the components
of it be scaled to a space where the optimization was easier, meaning that
the approach could be substituted by finding more appropriate W1 and W2
parameters (see Table 3.1 and Equation 3.10), (2) the FPs found in model B
correspond to benign tumors and the model benefit from training with that
information, or (3) the proposed method can eﬀiciently reduce false positives
from any segmentation task, even if they do not correspond with a known
object.
• Model selection: It is diﬀicult to select one of the models based on the
obtained results. In the validation set, model C show greater results in all
classification metrics than the rest of models and good segmentation metrics.
However, model D seems to be superior in the test set, although a very low
specificity (0.4) is shown at the same time. It is clear that all models would
benefit from training with more data, as the validation results are not main-
tained for the test set in any of the metrics in any of the models.
• Comparison with state of the art: The results of this project can not be
directly compared with the results of the PICAI challenge, as the objective
there was to build a classifier of a given study and the output of the submitted
algorithms were the probabilities of that study to have a csPCa, while the
focus of this project was to segment the significant lesions.
However, the
results from the systematic review performed by Cuocolo et al. are similar to
those obtained in this project. [Cuo+21a]
5.2
Future work
First of all, in order to improve the results of prostate cancer detection it is im-
portant to make more data available for this task. This new data should include
annotations on all types of tumors (not only malignant) and their corresponding
PIRADS score assigned by the radiologists. Clinical practice could benefit from
==PAGE:50==
42
5 Discussion
a model that, not only segments a lesion, but also gives an estimate on what is
the score following the standard. Ideally, data should come from different sources
and scans, as it has been proven that the model fails to maintain the results of the
validation set (that comes from the same source as the train set) in the test set.
For the regression task, two approaches could be followed: (1) multiclass segmen-
tation network with one class representing each of the scores, or (2) analysis of the
segmentation masks obtained by a binary model using image analysis techniques
(e.g feature extraction from the images or knowledge-based algorithms using the
oﬀicial standard as baseline). Option 1 would require a rich dataset including a
large amount of examples for each of the classes, while option 2 could be a better
option in the situation of scarce datasets.
Furthermore, during the development of this project, it has been presented
and proven effective a method for the reduction of false positives. It is left unclear
whether this method has worked only for this specific task, where there is a specific
reason behind the false positives or if, on the other hand, it is an extendable
method that could be applied for other segmentation problems where high false
positive rates are still a challenge. It is of great interest to apply this methodology
for different datasets in a controlled environment where the results of an initial
training can be compared to those obtained by this method.
Finally, the implementation of this type of algorithms into the clinical practice
require a careful investigation on the risks and benefits of the models under study.
A high sensitivity should be prioritized over the rest of metrics while developing
a screening tool using Deep Learning, as missing a positive case has a very high
impact on the health of the patient under study. It is also important to highlight
that the current screening tools have shown a 0.3% specificity in the current screen-
ing pipeline. [Loe+13] This means that specificity can be compromised in favor of
sensitivity and still show an improvement over the current recommendations.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
It has been shown that Deep Learning can be used to mitigate the challenges
of prostate cancer detection, as inter-reader variability, high costs associated to
mpMRI, and excessive number of biopsies with respect to the amount of csPCa
found on them.
In this project, a processing pipeline for MRI images, as well
as a data augmentation pipeline for their use in the training of DL models have
been presented and thoroughly discussed, making sure that it took into account the
complexity of the topic under study. Furthermore, an special focus has been placed
to the development of a technique for the reduction of false positive rate, which has
shown excellent results (44.90% specificity increase with respect to the originally
trained model in the test set without compromising any of the other metrics).
However, the results of the project also highlights the need of a larger dataset before
the implementation of any of these models into the clinical practice. New data
is needed that, not only increases the variability of the studies used for training
so that generalizable results are obtained, but that contains more information
relevant for the radiologists, such as the PIRADS score or not significant lesions.
In conclusion, mpMRI can potentially be avoided in the detection of csPCa
with the use of CNN models, given the availability of a dataset with enough qual-
ity, clinical relevance, and quantity. This would bring MRI closer to the definition
of an effective screening test, reducing the costs, avoiding hazards on the target
population, and producing standardized assessments of the prostate studies inde-
pendent on the radiologist.
==PAGE:52==
44
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[Ada+22]
Lisa C Adams et al. “Prostate158-An expert-annotated 3T MRI dataset
and algorithm for prostate cancer detection.” In: Computers in Biol-
ogy and Medicine 148 (2022), page 105817.
[Ant+22]
Michela Antonelli et al. “The medical segmentation decathlon.” In:
Nature communications 13.1 (2022), page 4128.
[BA23]
Anders Bjorholm Dahl and Vedrana Andersen Dahl. “Advanced Im-
age Analysis. Selected Topics.” In: DTU Compute (2023), page 115.
[Ber+16a]
Rose M Berman et al. “DCE MRI of prostate cancer.” In: Abdominal
radiology 41 (2016), pages 844–853.
[Ber+16b]
Rose M Berman et al. “DCE MRI of prostate cancer.” In: Abdominal
radiology 41 (2016), pages 844–853.
[Ber+19]
Jeroen Bertels et al. “Optimizing the dice score and jaccard index for
medical image segmentation: Theory and practice.” In: Medical Image
Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2019: 22nd
International Conference, Shenzhen, China, October 13–17, 2019,
Proceedings, Part II 22. Springer. 2019, pages 92–100.
[Bil+23]
Benjamin Billot et al. “SynthSeg: Segmentation of brain MRI scans
of any contrast and resolution without retraining.” In: Medical image
analysis 86 (2023), page 102789.
[Ble+23]
Jeroen Bleker et al. “The Effect of Image Resampling on the Per-
formance of Radiomics-Based Artificial Intelligence in Multicenter
Prostate MRI.” In: Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging (2023).
[Boy+12]
Kendrick Boyd et al. “Unachievable region in precision-recall space
and its effect on empirical evaluation.” In: Proceedings of the... In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning. International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning. Volume 2012. NIH Public Access. 2012,
page 349.
[BTC15]
Tristan Barrett, Baris Turkbey, and Peter L Choyke. “PI-RADS ver-
sion 2: what you need to know.” In: Clinical radiology 70.11 (2015),
pages 1165–1176.
[Cer24]
Cerebriu. Cerebriu. Retrieved from https://cerebriu.com/. Ac-
cessed: 04 10, 2024. 2024.
==PAGE:54==
46
Bibliography
[CK19]
Shorten Connor and Taghi M Khoshgoftaar. “A survey on image data
augmentation for deep learning.” In: Journal of big data 6.1 (2019),
pages 1–48.
[Com+21]
Albert Comelli et al. “Deep learning-based methods for prostate seg-
mentation in magnetic resonance imaging.” In: Applied Sciences 11.2
(2021), page 782.
[Con24]
Nilearn Contributors. nilearn.image.resampleimg. Accessed: 2024-06-
10. 2024. url: https://nilearn.github.io/dev/modules/generated/
nilearn.image.resample_img.html.
[Cuo+19]
Renato Cuocolo et al. “Machine learning applications in prostate can-
cer magnetic resonance imaging.” In: European radiology experimental
3 (2019), pages 1–8.
[Cuo+21a]
Renato Cuocolo et al. “Clinically significant prostate cancer detection
with biparametric MRI: a systematic review and meta-analysis.” In:
American Journal of Roentgenology 216.3 (2021), pages 608–621.
[Cuo+21b]
Renato Cuocolo et al. “Quality control and whole-gland, zonal and
lesion annotations for the PROSTATEx challenge public dataset.” In:
European Journal of Radiology 138 (2021), page 109647.
[Cuo+21c]
Renato Cuocolo et al. “Quality control and whole-gland, zonal and
lesion annotations for the PROSTATEx challenge public dataset.” In:
European Journal of Radiology 138 (2021), page 109647.
[Deb+23]
Noëlie Debs et al. “Ensembling Voxel-Based and Box-Based Model
Predictions for Robust Lesion Detection.” In: International Workshop
on Applications of Medical AI. Springer. 2023, pages 42–51.
[DPM17]
Prashant Dwivedy, Anjali Potnis, and Madhuram Mishra. “Perfor-
mance assessment of several filters for removing salt and pepper noise,
Gaussian noise, Rayleigh noise and uniform noise.” In: Empirical Re-
search Press Ltd. (2017), page 176.
[FL19]
Reuben Feinman and Brenden M Lake. “Learning a smooth ker-
nel regularizer for convolutional neural networks.” In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.01882 (2019).
[Gor+20]
Elliott Gordon-Rodriguez et al. “Uses and abuses of the cross-entropy
loss: Case studies in modern deep learning.” In: (2020).
[HB14]
Julia H Hayes and Michael J Barry. “Screening for prostate cancer
with the prostate-specific antigen test: a review of current evidence.”
In: Jama 311.11 (2014), pages 1143–1149.
[Hei+08]
Axel Heidenreich et al. “EAU guidelines on prostate cancer.” In: Eu-
ropean urology 53.1 (2008), pages 68–80.
[HG09]
Lars G Hanson and Theis Groth. “Introduction to magnetic resonance
imaging techniques.” In: Clinical and research applications of diagnos-
tic imaging techniques: MR, PET, SPECT, CT and ultrasound: PhD
Course. 2009.
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
47
[Kun+22]
Swagata Kundu et al. “Nested U-Net for segmentation of red lesions in
retinal fundus images and sub-image classification for removal of false
positives.” In: Journal of Digital Imaging 35.5 (2022), pages 1111–
1119.
[LEN14]
Zachary Chase Lipton, Charles Elkan, and Balakrishnan Narayanaswamy.
“Thresholding classifiers to maximize F1 score.” In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1402.1892 (2014).
[Li+21]
Zewen Li et al. “A survey of convolutional neural networks: anal-
ysis, applications, and prospects.” In: IEEE transactions on neural
networks and learning systems 33.12 (2021), pages 6999–7019.
[Lia+17]
Xuezhi Liang et al. “Soft-margin softmax for deep classification.” In:
International Conference on Neural Information Processing. Springer.
2017, pages 413–421.
[Loe+13]
Stacy Loeb et al. “Systematic review of complications of prostate
biopsy.” In: European urology 64.6 (2013), pages 876–892.
[Mac+16]
Thomas W MacFarland et al. “Mann–whitney u test.” In: Introduction
to nonparametric statistics for the biological sciences using R (2016),
pages 103–132.
[Par+20]
Chris Parker et al. “Prostate cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guide-
lines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up.” In: Annals of Oncology
31.9 (2020), pages 1119–1134.
[PS23]
Anwar R Padhani and Ivo G Schoots. “Prostate cancer screening—
stepping forward with MRI.” In: European Radiology (2023), pages 1–
7.
[RAS20]
Andrinandrasana David Rasamoelina, Fouzia Adjailia, and Peter Sinčák.
“A Review of Activation Function for Artificial Neural Network.”
In: 2020 IEEE 18th World Symposium on Applied Machine Intelli-
gence and Informatics (SAMI). 2020, pages 281–286. doi: 10.1109/
SAMI48414.2020.9108717.
[RFB15]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U-net: Con-
volutional networks for biomedical image segmentation.” In: Medical
image computing and computer-assisted intervention–MICCAI 2015:
18th international conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015,
proceedings, part III 18. Springer. 2015, pages 234–241.
[Sah+22]
Anindo Saha et al. The PI-CAI challenge: public training and devel-
opment dataset. 2022.
[SEG17]
Seyed Sadegh Mohseni Salehi, Deniz Erdogmus, and Ali Gholipour.
“Tversky loss function for image segmentation using 3D fully convolu-
tional deep networks.” In: International workshop on machine learning
in medical imaging. Springer. 2017, pages 379–387.
[SSP+03]
Patrice Y Simard, David Steinkraus, John C Platt, et al. “Best prac-
tices for convolutional neural networks applied to visual document
analysis.” In: Icdar. Volume 3. 2003. Edinburgh. 2003.
==PAGE:56==
48
Bibliography
[Suz+06]
Motofumi T Suzuki et al. “A shape feature extraction method based
on 3D convolution masks.” In: Eighth IEEE International Symposium
on Multimedia (ISM’06). IEEE. 2006, pages 837–844.
[TBU00]
Philippe Thévenaz, Thierry Blu, and Michael Unser. “Image interpo-
lation and resampling.” In: Handbook of medical imaging, processing
and analysis 1.1 (2000), pages 393–420.
[Tho+13]
James Thompson et al. “The role of magnetic resonance imaging in
the diagnosis and management of prostate cancer.” In: BJU interna-
tional 112 (2013), pages 6–20.
[Tou+06]
Georgia D Tourassi et al. “Feature and knowledge based analysis for
reduction of false positives in the computerized detection of masses
in screening mammography.” In: 2005 IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology 27th Annual Conference. IEEE. 2006, pages 6524–6527.
[WH18]
Yuxin Wu and Kaiming He. “Group normalization.” In: Proceedings of
the European conference on computer vision (ECCV). 2018, pages 3–
19.
