==PAGE:1==
Design of an energy system
within the carrying capacities 
for Scandinavia and Germany, 
using Balmorel
Théo Balanza
Supervisors: Anders Bjørn, Mathias Berg Rosendal, Nicolas Campion 
and Michael Zwicky Hauschild
Master’s thesis
DTU Sustain & DTU Management
Division of Climate and Energy Policy
==PAGE:2==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities for Scandinavia
and Germany, using Balmorel
Master’s Thesis
June, 2024
By
Théo Balanza
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowlegdement
This study was conducted at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), during the
spring semester of 2024, as the subject of my master thesis, marking the end of my
double master’s degree in Sustainable energy.
I would like to thank my supervisors, Anders Bjørn, Nicolas Campion, Mathias Rosendal
and Michael Hauschild, for their guidance and support throughout this master thesis.
I would also like to thank Solène Boivent for her helpful comments.
Working on this thesis has been exceptionally enriching, allowing me to explore and im-
prove my understanding of energy modelling and absolute environmental sustainability
assessment. This work has strengthened my hope regarding our possibility of choosing
to design an energy system for a future where a fair environmental and social transition
has been achieved. Regarding the design of energy systems, among other, it necessitates
to acknowledge the complexity of the world surrounding us, to question our behaviours
and to consider global environmental thresholds such as planetary boundaries.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Table of Contents
Acknowlegdement
ii
Abstract
1
Nomenclature
1
1
Introduction
2
2
Methodology
5
2.1
Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Life Cycle Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Goal and scope definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Life Cycle Inventory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.3
Selection of an Absolute Environmental Sustainability Reference
7
2.2.4
Life Cycle Impact Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Allocation of the carrying capacities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Zone of uncertainty of the carrying capacity framework . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Balmorel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Integration of AESA in EM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6.1
Hard constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6.2
Transgression allowed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6.3
Demand reduction and sufficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Results
13
3.1
Net Zero . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
PB CO2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
PB8
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Sufficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
Economic impact of considering carrying capacities
. . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.6
Resource use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.7
Sensitivity on solar panels manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.8
Sensitivity analysis on the allocation principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.9
Discussions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Conclusion
23
5
References
25
Appendices
29
A
Appendix Goal and scope definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
A.1
Goal definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
A.2
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
B
Appendix Technical assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
B.1
Energy demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
B.2
Objective function in Balmorel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
B.3
Additional information on Balmorel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
B.4
Technologies - assumptions for LCA :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
iii
==PAGE:5==
C
Appendix Allocation of the carrying capacities . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
C.1
Framework for the allocation of the safe operating space
. . . .
35
C.2
Allocation of the safe operating space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
D
Appendix : EcoInvent processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
E
Appendix Carrying capacities and Safe Operating Space
. . . . . . . .
42
F
Appendix : Additional results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
F.1
Sensitivity analysis on the uncertainty area . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
F.2
Sensitivity on the penalty value in PB8 scenario . . . . . . . . .
43
F.3
Sensitivity on the weighting of the carrying capacities . . . . . .
44
F.4
Economic impacts of considering carrying capacities . . . . . . .
46
F.5
Sensitivity on transmission capacity in PB8 scenario
. . . . . .
46
F.6
Sensitivity on PB8 scenario : optimisation on the nine carrying
capacities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
F.7
Sensitivity on solar panels manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
F.8
Sensitivity on the allocation principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
F.9
LCA of CCS units
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
F.10
Additional information on the influence of energy technologies
on some impact categories considered . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
iv
==PAGE:6==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
Abstract
This study investigates the introduction of absolute environmental sustainability assess-
ment in energy system modelling. By integrating Life Cycle Assessment and absolute
sustainability into an energy model, a cost-effective solution for an energy system
respecting the carrying capacities, at the Scandinavian and German scale is assessed. A
multi-sectoral energy system including electricity and heat from individuals and major
industries is considered. This study compares four main scenarios for 2050, including a
scenario respecting the Net Zero objective, a scenario minimising the impacts on climate
change, a scenario minimising the impact on eight carrying capacities and a scenario
investigating the need for sufficiency. Results indicate that no absolutely sustainable
energy system could be found without a decrease in energy demand. Specifically,
electricity and heat demands must be reduced respectively by 42% and 72%, compared
to the reference scenario to respect the carrying capacities. Therefore, another approach
is considered, allowing transgression of the boundaries while minimising them. Results
show that a Net Zero scenario on carbon emissions would transgress the allocated
budget by 28 times despite a high deployment of renewable energies. Indeed, emissions
are not assessed with a life cycle approach and only include the operational phase,
therefore it considers no impact for renewable energies. Considering carrying capacities
significantly influences the technologies invested in the energy system. All scenarios
present a high reliance on wind energy and emphasise the need for electrification of
heating. The role of solar energy is significantly reduced when considering carrying
capacities, although relocating solar panel manufacturing could potentially expand its
contribution to the energy mix. The analysis of the different scenarios highlights sub-
stantial burden shifts across carrying capacities when only considering climate change
and praises a global environmental approach in decision-making. Climate change, land
use, resource use of minerals and metals and particulate matter are identified as the
most impacted categories when designing an energy system.
Nomenclature
AESA: Absolute Environmental Sustain-
ability Assessment
AESR : Absolute Environmental Sustain-
ability Reference
CC : Carrying Capacity
CCS : Carbon Capture and Storage
CO2eq : Carbon Dioxide equivalent
CHP : Combined Heat and Power
EF : Environmnental Footprint
EM : Energy Model
EU : European Union
GHG : Greenhouse gas
GVA : Gross Value Added
IPCC : Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change
LCA : Life Cycle Assessment
LCIA : Life Cycle Impact Assessment
LU : Land usage
PB : Planetary Boundary
PM : Particulate matter
1 of 51
==PAGE:7==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
PV : Photovoltaics
SOS : Safe operating space
SoSOS : Share of Safe operating space
TLp : Transgression Level of carrying ca-
pacity p
1
Introduction
The Holocene describes the last 10 000 years period, in which the planet’s environment
has been very stable, enabling the development of Human society (Johan Rockström
& al, 2009). Through this period, energy has played a key role, enabling among
other social welfare, political stability and improvements of human health. Despite
these benefits, energy systems have tremendous environmental and health impact (US
EPA, 2023). The easier access to energy after the industrial revolution contributed to
global warming, as energy system relies on the use of fossil fuels. For instance, energy
use1 is responsible of 75% of CO2eq emissions in the European Union (EU) in 2021
(Eurostat, 2022), followed by agriculture. Despite the growth of renewable energies,
CO2eq emissions of the world energy sector increased in 2023 (IEA, 2024). The impact
of climate change is well-known and leads to an increase in probability and intensity of
natural disasters, already experienced these past years such as heatwaves or storms
(IPCC, 2023), and a decrease of crops yield which could endanger the food system
(Zhao et al., 2017)2. However, impacts of the energy system are not limited to climate
change. Indeed, the impact on ecosystem is tremendous, with high rate of species
extinction noticed and a global biodiversity in decline (IPBES, 2019). Decision support
for policy makers is needed for the design of future energy systems accounting for
various economic and social factors and going beyond economic indicators to minimise
the environmental impact.
The increased pressure of Humans on their environment led Johan Rockström & al
(2009) to identify and quantify planetary boundaries that should not be crossed to avoid
non linear, unpredictable changes and damage with higher probability to compromise
the well being of current and future generations. This Planetary Boundary (PB)
framework provides a science based analysis of the risk that human perturbations will
destabilise the Earth system. Boundaries are defined as a critical threshold humanity
should not cross to maximise the probability to stay in a Holocene like state. Based on
the precautionary principle, Holocene like state is the only state we are sure can support
human societies. The updates of the PB framework, (Steffen et al., 2015, Richardson
et al., 2023), highlight the anthropogenic pressure increase on the environment, as six
out of nine PBs are crossed. These PBs are set to account for uncertainties, giving
time to societies to implement policies to fight against the system inertia, inciting
immediate action. Another update of the PB framework by Rockström et al. (2023)
linked environment, human well-being and justice to quantify safe and just earth system
limits. Another framework has been developed, based on the carrying capacities (CC)
which are defined by Bjørn et al. (2015) as the maximum sustained environmental
1It includes, among other, energy supply e.g. electricity and heat, transport and energy use related
to industrial activities.
2A global average around 3-7% of decrease of crop yield per degree of temperature increase for rice
and soya for instance.
2 of 51
==PAGE:8==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
intervention a natural system can withstand without experiencing negative changes in
structure or functioning that are difficult or impossible to revert. A study followed a
similar philosophy and defined different thresholds for the impact categories based on
natural constraints (Matuštík et al., 2024).
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is a quantitative method to assess environmental impacts,
covering the entire life cycle of a system, from cradle to grave. LCA identifies a
system’s major contributions to environmental impacts, and enables the comparison of
the environmental performance of similar systems, assessing if one is relatively more
sustainable than another. LCA enables to not only account for carbon emissions
but to have a better overview on the environmental impacts of a system. Despite
improved performance of systems through LCA, economic growth and rebound effect
counterbalance these gains, leading to upward trends in many environmental indicators
and threatening to exceed the CCs (Parrique, 2020, Meadows et al., 1972). A new
approach, Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assessment (AESA), combines LCA
and Absolute Environmental Sustainability References (AESR). Unlike traditional LCA,
which compares the impacts of different systems to another, AESA evaluates a system
against global thresholds e.g. CCs, PBs. This approach considers the environment as a
finite element and enables to assess if a system can be considered sustainable, in an
absolute sense, for different impact categories (Bjorn et al., 2020).
The safe operating space (SOS) e.g. CCs must be divided among human activities to
adopt an absolute sustainability thinking at sectoral level. Different sharing principles
can be used to allocate a share of the SOS to the system considered, relying on the
concept of distributive justice. The most used sharing principle is the equal per capita
approach for downscaling to countries or individuals, and is often coupled with an
utilitarian principle to downscale to the sectoral level (Ryberg, Andersen, et al., 2020).
The choice of an allocation principle significantly impacts results (Ryberg, Owsianiak,
Clavreul, et al., 2018, Bjorn et al., 2020). Respecting the global boundaries requires
critical thinking on the allocation of the SOS. If an individual or a sector exceeds
its share of SOS, it will result in the deprivation of another individual or a sector
competing for the same resource. For instance, allocation of land usage between energy
production and agriculture as well as between crops used for food or biofuels must be
defined to ensure fair resource distribution. Since no systematic approach for allocation
has been defined, the common framework for allocation in AESA developed by Ryberg,
Andersen, et al. (2020) will be followed.
Energy models (EM) can be used as a tool to support decision making when designing
energy systems. Current EMs help designing the energy system that minimises costs
while meeting technical and economic constraints. Despite the growing consideration
of Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions, it often only accounts for the production phase
of the energy system. This limited scope considers renewable energy sources as carbon
neutral and overlooks other environmental impacts, potentially shifting the problem
towards other environmental consequences (Laurent et al., 2012). The implementation
of AESA in EMs will contribute to a design of more sustainable systems, not only based
on economic indicators and carbon boundaries, but also respecting global thresholds
across different impact categories.
3 of 51
==PAGE:9==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
Environmental considerations in energy modelling typically focus on climate change
with a scope limited to carbon emissions during the operational phase e.g. in the energy
model Balmorel (Wiese et al., 2018). This approach can overlook other environmental
impacts and underestimate the effects of technologies where impacts predominantly
occur during the manufacturing stage (UNECE, 2021). Recent work implemented
LCA in EM but it fails to evaluate the energy system in regard to absolute thresholds
(Berrill et al., 2016, Blanco et al., 2020). In Europe, one study conducted an AESA on
pre-defined EU electricity generation scenarios within the PB framework3 (Stranddorf
et al., 2023). The implementation of AESA in EM is a relatively new approach (Weidner
et al., 2022), and most of the papers focused on the electricity sector (Algunaibet
et al., 2019, Guillot et al., 2023). Algunaibet et al. (2019) modelled the power sector
in the United States within the PB framework using a life cycle approach. Guillot
et al. (2023) evaluated the environmental impacts of a carbon neutral scenario for the
European electricity system in regard to the PB framework. No study has implemented
AESA into EM while considering sector coupling, nor has any study incorporated the
CC framework into an EM. Therefore, this study is the first to implement AESA into
an EM for several European countries, considering sector coupling between electricity
and heating, based on the carrying capacities framework. The aim of this study is to
answer the following question :
How does the consideration of carrying capacities impacts the design of an energy
system in Scandinavia and Germany?
To this purpose, four sub-questions have been defined to guide the investigations:
• How to design an energy system within the carrying capacities?
• How does a Net Zero scenario using the current modelling of carbon emissions in
Balmorel impact the carrying capacities ?
• How does a single issue vision on climate change affect the optimal system solution
and its impact on carrying capacities?
• Is it feasible to design an energy system within the carrying capacities without
reducing energy demand in Scandinavia and Germany? If not, to what extent
can the solution approach the carrying capacities thresholds, and which specific
carrying capacities would be exceeded?
The present study explores the absolute sustainability of electricity and heat generation
in four countries of Europe : Denmark, Germany, Sweden and Norway. To do so,
the carrying capacity framework is taken as a reference to identify if the system is
absolutely sustainable. Different sharing principles are applied to allocate a share
of SOS for the selected countries’ energy system. This paper aims at giving a first
insight on how to consider environmental impacts while designing future energy system,
incorporating LCA and absolute sustainability concepts into the EM Balmorel. This
approach aims at highlighting the different results when optimisation is based primarily
on cost, on climate change or on several impact categories.
3This study did not integrate AESA into an energy model, but used scenarios already defined and
performed AESA on these.
4 of 51
==PAGE:10==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
2
Methodology
The overall methodology to incorporate CCs in Balmorel is described in Figure 1. This
study will investigate an energy system that includes electricity, heat and industry.
Transportation and hydrogen sectors are not included in this study due to time
constraints. The main challenges are the downscaling of the CCs to the regional and
sectoral level leading to new constraints in the EM, as well as the LCA of energy
technologies to assess their performance in regards to the CCs. In the following sections,
PB will refer as a global threshold acronym embracing the carrying capacities thresholds.
This choice is made for readability and simplification, despite others would differentiate
these two concepts.
Carrying capacity
framework
Energy system
model Balmorel
Scandinavian and
German power and
heat sectors share   
of carrying capacity
Life Cycle Impact
Assessment EF
3.0
Technologies
inventory data
Regional and 
sectorial downscaling
Environmental flows
Impact per 
carrying capacity
Constraints
Figure 1: Modelling framework linking carrying capacities with the energy system model Balmorel.
2.1
Scenarios
This study considers four main scenarios for 2050. The scenario Net zero represents the
optimal energy system for the EU4 that respects the Net Zero objective in 20504. The
’Planetary Boundary on climate change’ scenario (PBCO2) focuses on optimising the
energy system regarding the carrying capacity climate change. This scenario emphasises
the need to consider the impacts of technologies using a cradle to grave approach, rather
than only considering the use phase. The "Planetary Boundaries" (PB8) scenario
optimises on the following eight carrying capacities : climate change, eutrophication of
freshwater, water use, land use (LU), ozone depletion, acidification, particulate matter
(PM) and ecotoxicity freshwater, which selection is detailed in section 2.2.4. This
scenario highlights the importance of integrating the CC framework when designing
energy systems, rather than only focusing on climate change. The Sufficiency scenario
considers a reduction of the demand to meet the CCs. This scenario evaluates the
need and impact of sufficiency to design an energy system absolutely sustainable, not
allowing for the transgression of the eight CCs considered.
4The Net Zero scenario follows the current objective of the European Union. It is part of the
European Green Deal and aims for an economy with net-zero greenhouse gas emissions.
5 of 51
==PAGE:11==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
2.2
Life Cycle Assessment
2.2.1
Goal and scope definition
Figure 2: System Boundaries considered for the LCA (green shape) compared to the energy system
modelled in Balmorel (black shape). The division of the LCA of each technology in two categories
(left) and the sectors modelled in Balmorel (right) are presented.
This study aims at defining a cost-effective solution for an energy system respecting
the CC framework for a selection of European countries: Denmark, Germany, Norway
and Sweden. These countries will be referred as EU4. These countries were selected
to represent suitable conditions for the key technologies of the model, providing a
relevant picture of Northern Europe while saving computational time. The LCA of the
electricity and heat generation is assessed from a cradle to grave approach and used to
perform an AESA.
The Functional unit of this study is defined as the total yearly generation of electricity
and heat needed to meet the EU4 demand in 2050. The energy demand profiles are
exogenous to the Balmorel model and can be found in Appendix B.1. The system
boundaries are described in Figure 2. Data comes from EcoInvent database v3.8 (Ecoin-
vent 2024) and LCA calculations are using the software Simapro v9.4.0.3. (Simapro
2024). More information are detailed in Appendix A.
2.2.2
Life Cycle Inventory
Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) is the quantitative description of the elementary flows
considered in all the life cycle stages of the system. Although data was available across
different geographical locations depending on the technology, a single dataset was
selected for each technology based on the following prioritisation. First, when available,
European average (RER) was chosen. For most of the processes, it was not available,
thus German (DE) processes were selected. Indeed, Germany has the largest population
of the countries considered in this study and it embraces a conservative approach as,
in regards to climate change, the German electricity mix presents the highest carbon
6 of 51
==PAGE:12==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
footprint of the countries considered. In case German processes were not available, other
geographical area were chosen. For these processes, Global production data (GLO) or
data for the Rest of the World (ROW) were selected. Finally, hydropower reservoir
is modelled with data from France, which gives a coherent overview of hydropower
processes in the alpine regions. A comprehensive summary of all the processes used in
the study can be found in Appendix D.
The LCI of the energy plants is divided in two categories to account for all the life cycle
stages of the processes : the infrastructure and the use phase (Figure 2). First, the in-
frastructure category represents the LCA of 1 MW of the energy plant e.g. solar panels,
coal power plant, with a cradle to grave approach, including mainly construction and
disposal. On the other hand, the use phase represents the generation of 1 kWh of high
voltage electricity at the grid connection point, excluding the processes related to the
energy plant infrastructure. It accounts for all the other life cycle stages with a cradle
to grave approach e.g. extraction and production of fuels, electricity generation and
maintenance. This data processing enables an improved accuracy, compared to a single
dataset representing the generation of 1 kWh of electricity that would embrace both
the infrastructure and use phase. This is especially relevant for renewable assets, since
most of the impacts are related to the infrastructure and Balmorel contains country
specific wind and solar production profiles. Thus, it enables a better geographical
accuracy and it reduces the influence of some assumptions such as lifetime and overall
production of the energy plant in EcoInvent used to assign a share of the infrastructure
LCA to each kWh produced. It also excludes the environmental impacts of assets that
have already been constructed, as these impacts have already occurred.
For Combined Heat and Power (CHP) assets, the allocation, which consists in dis-
tributing the impacts between the different products from a process e.g. heat and
electricity, is based on exergy. For heating facilities, LCI data for the use phase is given
per MWh of heat produced. For storage facilities, LCI data is given as a single dataset,
per amount of energy stored, including the infrastructure and use phase, because of
the way energy storage is modelled in Balmorel. Some technologies have been adjusted
manually for a more accurate modelling e.g; solar panels, biomass. Carbon Capture
and Storage (CCS) is considered for electricity production with natural gas only.The
process is detailed in Appendix B.4 and results of the LCA are presented in Appendix
F.9. All the assumptions on the technologies used are further detailed in Appendix
B.4.
Even though the most up to date values available have been used in this study, many
processes are based on electricity mix from 2014. Regarding climate change for instance,
the carbon footprint of the electricity produced is reducing through the years. Therefore,
the LCI adopts a conservative approach and leads to uncertainties that may influence
the results.
2.2.3
Selection of an Absolute Environmental Sustainability Reference
Using AESR to assess the absolute sustainability of a system can be done with two
different approaches, to make LCA indicators and AESR control variables units com-
parable. First, the impacts quantified in LCA can be translated into the unit of the
7 of 51
==PAGE:13==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
PB control variable, using a specific Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) method
known as PB-LCIA (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Richardson, et al., 2018). PB-LCIA developed
new characterisation factors for 85 environmental flows to align with the PB control
variables. On the other hand, absolute thresholds can be defined directly within the
LCIA metric, known as LCIA-based PB. For instance, Bjørn et al. (2015) developed
thresholds, called carrying capacity, for different impact categories. This approach was
later extended by Vargas-Gonzalez et al. (2019) and used by Sala, Eleonora Crenna,
et al. (2020) to perform AESA across all impact categories of the Environmental
Footprint (EF) method. On the overall, studies performing AESA on energy systems
often use the PB-LCIA method (Algunaibet et al., 2019, Stranddorf et al., 2023).
Both the PB and the CC framework present advantages and disadvantages. The PB
framework is well known and communication of the results are eased. However, this
method is quite new and present uncertainty on some PBs. Also, the PB framework
only accounts for boundaries of the Earth system. On the contrary, CCs account for
impacts on Human, Earth and resources, enabling a larger view on the issues tackled in
the design of an energy system. Using a LCIA-based PB method also enables to model
novel entities and biosphere integrity through specific LCA impact category. It remains
however more difficult to communicate about these results as the CC framework is
less known by the large public. Overall, the CC framework is chosen. Sala, Eleonora
Crenna, et al. (2020) presents boundary values for the 16 impact categories of the EF
method, which are used in this study.
2.2.4
Life Cycle Impact Assessment
Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) links the LCI data to its environmental damage.
The EF 3.0 method is used to quantify the impact of the system considered. This
method addresses 16 impact categories at the midpoint level and is consistent with the
CC framework, developed by Bjørn et al. (2015) & Sala, Eleonora Crenna, et al. (2020).
This method is also recommended by the European Union to assess the environmental
footprint of a system (European Commission, 2021). Nine impact categories have
been implemented in Balmorel : climate change, eutrophication of freshwater, water
use, land use (LU), ozone depletion, acidification, resource use minerals and metals,
particulate matter (PM), ecotoxicity freshwater. The impact score ISp is calculated
for a specific year as follow, representing the total environmental burden of the overall
system for the carrying capacity p :
ISp =
X
l,i,j
CFl,p ∗(LCIuse,l,i ∗Ei + LCIinfrastructure,l,j ∗
Cj
Lifetimej
)
(1)
with CFl,p the characterisation factor linking life cycle inventory entry l to CC p,
LCIuse,l,i the life cycle inventory l generated when one kWh of energy i is produced
and Ei the amount of kWh produced by energy type i, LCIinfrastructure,l,j the life cycle
inventory l generated when one MW of generator j is build, Cj the capacity of generator
j build and Lifetimej the lifetime of generator j.
8 of 51
==PAGE:14==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
The selection of the preceding impact categories was informed by a LCA study com-
paring various sources of electricity (United Nations Commission 2021) as well as LCA
studies assessing different scenarios for the European power system (Berrill et al., 2016,
Stranddorf et al., 2023). Additionally, global statements of the current status of impact
categories has been taken into account as well as the carrying capacities frequently
exceeded in the literature (Bjorn et al., 2020). Finally, impact categories with a high
risk of burden shift when optimising on other were selected (Stranddorf et al., 2023,
Algunaibet et al., 2019).
2.3
Allocation of the carrying capacities
Figure 3: Methodology overview of the sharing principles used in this study, to allocate the Safe
Operating Space defined in the carrying capacity framework, to the sectors modelled in the energy
system.
The CC framework developed by Bjørn et al. (2015) & Sala, Eleonora Crenna, et al.
(2020) is used to assess the full safe operating space (SOS) of the different impact
categories. This full SOS determines the budget to be shared among all anthropogenic
activities, derived from the difference between the carrying capacity threshold and the
natural background level (Stranddorf et al., 2023). These global thresholds, SOSp,
are downscaled to the regional and sectoral level, giving SOSp EU4 energy, the absolute
share of the SOSp allocated to the energy sector for EU4, for each carrying capacity p,
setting the upper limit to be considered absolutely sustainable.This study considers
three theories : egalitarianism, utilitarianism and acquired rights. Detailed information
about the sharing principles used for downscaling can be found in Appendix C.1. EU4
are considered as an entity and full cooperation between the countries is assumed in
order to satisfy the demand while respecting the CCs.
Three allocation methods are investigated (Figure 3). First, in the grandfathering
method, the SOS for the energy sector of EU4 is quantified in proportion to historical
impacts of EU and then adjusted according to the population share of EU4 in EU.
SoSOSp, EU4, energy = ISp, EU, energy, 2010
NFp
∗POPEU4
POPEU
(2)
9 of 51
==PAGE:15==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
with ISp, EU, energy, 2010 the LCA results for the 2010 EU energy sector, further detailed in
Appendix C.2, and NFp the global normalisation factor of EF3.0 from 2010 (Eleonora
Crenna et al., 2019). This method is easy to implement as data is available for all
the impact categories, and enables different SoSOSp for the impact categories. This
method, based on the acquired rights theory, benefits historically higher emitters,
perpetuating inequality. It also considers that the effort is the same between all sectors,
an assumption that is not always accurate.
As recommended by Ryberg, Andersen, et al. (2020), sensitivity analysis is conducted
in the allocation stage, using two other allocation principles. First, an egalitarian based
sharing principle is used to scale down from global to regional limits. This principle
praises an equal distribution of the SOS among all individuals without considering
other forms of justice. It is the most commonly employed method in the literature
(Ryberg, Andersen, et al., 2020). This principle is widely accepted among the literature
and data is easily accessible. It was also chosen because it facilitates the comparison
with other studies (Ryberg, Andersen, et al., 2020). It must be noted that this sharing
principle neglects the historical damages of more developed countries, geographical
disadvantages and unequal capital distribution.
For the allocation from regional to sectoral level, it is recommended to use an utilitarian
principle (Ryberg, Andersen, et al., 2020). Estimating the utility that the sector
provides to people is difficult and often relies on economic indicators, even though the
value of money spent is not correlated to the utility (Parrique, 2020). Gross Value
Added (GVA), a commonly used metric for allocation (Algunaibet et al., 2019), will
be used in this study. GVA excludes the intermediary products e.g. extraction of
materials. Therefore, it might underestimate the share of the operating space to be
allocated to this sector. The SoSOS is calculated as follow:
SoSOSp, EU4, energy = POPEU4
POPWorld
GV AEU4, energy
GV AEU4
(3)
with POPEU4 and POPWorld respectively EU4 and world population in 2022 (World
bank data 2022), GV AEU4, energy the GVA for the EU4 energy sector in 2022 and
GV AEU4 the GVA for the EU4 total economy (OECD 2021).
Downscaling from regional to sectoral can also be done using grandfathering, based on
the current -2022- emissions of GHG, expressed in CO2eq. CO2 is used as a proxy for
all the impact categories because of data availability, which leads to high uncertainties.
SoSOSp, EU4, energy = POPEU4
POPWorld
∗GHGEU4, energy
GHGEU4
(4)
with GHGEU4, energy the emissions of GHGs in CO2eq in 2021 for the considered sectors
in EU4, and GHGEU4 the overall emissions of GHGs in EU4 (EEA 2022). Values of
population, GVA and GHG can be found in the supplementary material.
Multiplying the previous equation by the full safe operating space of each CC provides
the thresholds that the EU4 energy sector must respect for each CC, SOSp EU4 energy.
SOSp EU4 energy = SoSOSp EU4 energy ∗SOSp
(5)
10 of 51
==PAGE:16==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
SOS and SoSOS for each carrying capacity can be found in Appendix E. More infor-
mation about the sectors accounted in the GVA and GHG method can be found in
Appendix C.2.
2.4
Zone of uncertainty of the carrying capacity framework
No zone of uncertainty is defined in the CC framework therefore, the methodology from
Sala, Eleonora Crenna, et al. (2020) is used. The upper limit of the zone of uncertainty
is set at twice the level of the considered SOS. Beyond this limit, high risk area begins.
Since some CCs align with the PB framework (Johan Rockström & al, 2009), where
zone of uncertainty are defined, sensitivity analysis is conducted using these zones of
uncertainties in Appendix F.1.
2.5
Balmorel
The EM used in this study, Balmorel, is a linear bottom-up partial equilibrium model.
It is used to assess the least-cost solution of a multi-sectoral coupled energy system
including electricity, heat, industry and transportation e.g. electrification of transport,
aviation, shipping, hydrogen production, to satisfy energy demands, based on the
assumption of perfect competition (Wiese et al., 2018). The optimisation strategy of
Balmorel involves two steps. First, it optimises the deployment of capacities. Then, it
optimises the long-term operational decision, simulating market operation during the
year. Among all, it determines generation capacities, energy production and transmis-
sion capacity. This EM contains a large amount of technologies and infrastructures,
covering the EU27, United kingdom, Norway, Switzerland and the Balkans countries.
It contains updated data of the existing assets and up to date data about technologies
(Danish Energy Agency, 2024). Wind and solar potential are modelled using resource
grades to differentiate potential between different countries and regions. In Balmorel,
the carbon emissions only account for the operational phase, assigning no impact to
renewable energies such as biomass, solar and wind.
This study considers electricity and heat sectors which includes industry, district
heating, residential and tertiary sectors. Transport and hydrogen sectors are not
included in this study. The optimisation is performed for EU4 in 2050. An hourly
temporal resolution is considered, but for computational reason, not all time steps are
modelled. This study simulates four weeks spread throughout the year, by only taking
Thursday, Friday and Saturday to represent working and non-working days. One time
step every three hours is selected for these days, based on the method developed in
Gea-Bermúdez et al. (2020). Additional information can be found in Appendix B.3.
2.6
Integration of AESA in EM
Including AESA into EM can be done with different optimisation approaches. One of
the main challenges is balancing the trade-off between achieving an optimal solution
and minimising computational time. The optimisation process will only consider eight
of the nine impact categories previously mentioned. Resource use will be treated as an
indicator but will not be optimised on. Indeed, contrary to other impact categories, a
11 of 51
==PAGE:17==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
normative approach is considered to define the resource use threshold in Sala, Eleonora
Crenna, et al. (2020).
2.6.1
Hard constraint
Hard constraint on the SOS can be introduced in an optimisation model, not allowing
for any transgression of the boundaries. This method enables a robust optimisation
with a single objective function, but can only be used if the system to optimise can
operate within these thresholds (Weidner et al., 2022). For each CC p, Transgression
Level (TL) are defined as follow:
ISp
SOSp,EU4, energy
= TLp ≥0 ∀p
(6)
with ISp the total impact score generated by the model for the CC p and SOSp, EU4, energy
which is already defined in the allocation section. Hard constraint on TL are introduced
for the CCs optimised on :
TLp ≤1
(7)
This method depicts an optimal system absolutely sustainable but no solution could
be found for the system considered, without a reduction of demand.
2.6.2
Transgression allowed
Thus, transgression of the boundaries are allowed. The problem can be solved in two
steps, by minimising transgression based on an aggregated single metric summing up
the relative transgressions of all PBs and then, fixing the transgression level for each PB
in the model and perform the optimisation on cost, as done by Algunaibet et al. (2019).
Another approach is chosen in this study, which consists in adding Transgression Levels
(TL) to the objective function, to minimise the transgression. Weidner et al. (2022)
advises to use an equal weighting approach of the CC, using a single impact metric
to penalise the objective function. Thus, an aggregated impact metric, modelled as
the sum of the TL of each CC, is used to penalise the objective function, as described
below in a simplified version of the objective function:
min
X
y
Costsy + Penalty ∗
X
p
TLp
(8)
with Costsy including capital costs for new units in year y, operation and maintenance
costs, transmission costs and fuel cost. A detailed formulation of the objective function
can be found in Appendix B.2. A penalty factor of 1e13 €5 is applied and sensitivity
analysis is performed on this factor in Appendix F.2. Sensitivity on the weighting
approach is also considered in Appendix F.3.
2.6.3
Demand reduction and sufficiency
Another modelling approach is considered. Transgression of the allocated SOS is not
allowed, using hard constraints on CCs (Equation 7) coupled with the introduction of a
magic fuel that represents the demand reduction needed. This fuel produces electricity
5This value is chosen based on the results of the sensitivity analysis.
12 of 51
==PAGE:18==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
and heat without any impact on all the considered impact categories, with its price sets
at the commonly used loss of load price of 3000 € per MWh (Weiss et al., 2021). This
price, aiming to be prohibitive, is 278 times more expensive than the natural gas price
in Balmorel in 2050. By being an expensive solution, the cost optimisation model will
limit the use of magic fuel. The use of magic fuel must be interpreted as the demand
reduction needed.
3
Results
This section presents the energy production mix and the transgressions obtained in
2050 for the scenarios Net Zero, PBCO2, PB8 and Sufficiency. Results for resource use
are presented separately in section 3.6 as no optimisation is performed on it.
3.1
Net Zero
Figure 4: Distribution of electricity and heat production per technology in 2050 for the EU4 (left) and
technology contribution to the transgression levels of the eight carrying capacities optimised on (right),
for the Net zero scenario. The green zone represents the safe operating space (until 1), the yellow
zone is the uncertainty area (until 2) and the red zone is the high risk area. For TLs graph (right),
the category Other is specific to each impact category and refers to the technologies responsible for
less than 8% of the impact. For TLs graph (right), offshore and onshore wind are aggregated under
the colour code of offshore wind for better visibility.
First, the Net Zero scenario, which meets a Net Zero objective in 2050 without opti-
mising on the CCs, is analysed. The energy mix results in transgression for six out
of the nine CCs considered (Figure 4), namely LU, PM, climate change, ecotoxicity
freshwater, ozone depletion and resource use6. Among these transgressed CCs, only
ozone depletion falls within the uncertainty area, while the other exceed it. LU, PM and
6Resource use is detailed in section 3.6.
13 of 51
==PAGE:19==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
climate change are the most impacted categories, with transgression levels respectively
of 28, 15 and 11. This means for instance that the impact on climate change is 28
times higher than the allocated SOS. With water usage, eutrophication and acidifica-
tion being the only CCs not transgressed, it questions the feasibility of achieving an
absolutely sustainable energy system without a drastic change in the current objectives
and planning methodology.
In the Net Zero scenario, electricity production mainly relies on the development of
renewable energies e.g. wind and solar, supplemented by hydropower and batteries.
Heat generation is significantly electrified with heat pumps providing 65% of the heat
demand, alongside the use of biomass and municipal waste incineration. As the model
only accounts for operational emissions, all the technologies used in Net Zero, among
other solar, wind, municipal waste incineration and biomass are assumed to be car-
bon neutral. Indeed, most of the EMs do not account for life cycle emissions which
explains that this scenario is considered Net Zero. Thus, this scenario highlights that
assuming zero impacts for renewable energies in EMs does not accurately reflect their
real environmental impact and leads to significant transgression of CCs in practice.
This scenario shows significant similarity with the Net Zero emissions scenario from
IEA for energy production (“IEA, NZE 2050” 2021). Indeed, both scenarios highly
rely on renewable energies e.g. solar, wind, biomass and hydropower with a significant
reduction of fossil fuels.
Analysing the contribution of the technologies to the CCs, the increased use of biomass
is the main reason behind the transgression of the carrying capacities LU, PM and eco-
toxicity respectively explained by a change in land type to provide biomass, the release
of fines particulates in the burning process and the use of fertilizers (Amnuaylojaroen
et al., 2023). Climate change is mainly impacted by municipal waste incineration,
with a CO2 emission factor around 105 gCO2/kWh7 and the important deployment of
heat pumps8. Moreover, solar energy impacts significantly LU, due to the low energy
density of ground mounted system and the use of coal in the manufacturing process,
that can also explain the important impact of solar energy on PM (UNECE, 2021).
Even in a Net Zero scenario, the impact on climate change exceeds the allocated
CC significantly and contributes to 7% of the global climate change SOS instead of
the 0.58% allocated. This highlights the need for a new approach minimising this
transgression. Thus, the Net Zero system operates beyond the CCs, despite a high
development of renewable energies and a phasing out fossil fuels. It must be noted that
based on the current LCA data, the system still relies on fossil fuels for the background
processes e.g. manufacturing of solar panels investigated in section 3.7, which can
potentially overestimate the future transgression of the CCs, as fossil fuels use could
be reduced in the future. This is further discussed in section 3.9.
3.2
PB CO2
PBCO2 scenario embraces a single-issue vision, focused on minimising the impact on
climate change. No solution absolutely sustainable could be found with the hard
7Data from the Ecoinvent process used in this study for municipal waste.
8The main impact of heat pumps on climate change occurs during their construction phase.
14 of 51
==PAGE:20==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
constraint approach applied to climate change. Therefore, the approach minimising
the transgression of climate change is considered. The electricity mix in PBCO2 sce-
nario, compared to Net Zero, replaces solar, biomass and municipal waste mainly with
offshore wind (Figure 5). Indeed, wind production is increased by a factor 2.6 and
solar production is reduced by a factor 6. Moreover, offshore wind is preferred over
onshore, with 77% of wind production coming from offshore. Additionally, alternative
fuels such as biooil and biogas are now considered in a small amount for heating and
the development of batteries is reduced. Heat generation still relies on heat pump,
but there is a significant shift towards biomass due to its lower CO2eq emission factor
(IPCC, 2023).
Figure 5: Distribution of electricity and heat production per technology in 2050 for the EU4 (left)
and technology contribution to the transgression levels of the eight carrying capacities optimised on
(right), for the PBCO2 scenario. The green zone represents the safe operating space (until 1), the
yellow zone is the uncertainty area (until 2) and the red zone is the high risk area. For the energy
mix graph (left), the category Other includes batteries, bioil and biogas. For TLs graph (right), the
category Other is specific to each impact category and refers to the technologies responsible for less
than 8% of the impact. For TLs graph (right), offshore and onshore wind are aggregated under the
colour code of offshore wind for better visibility.
When considering AESA on climate change, one additional CC, ozone depletion, is
satisfied compared to Net Zero, due to the decrease in heat pump usage. Indeed, the
refrigerants used are the main contributor to ozone depletion in these devices. How-
ever, five CCs are still transgressed, all beyond the uncertainty area, showing that no
absolutely sustainable solution has been found. Except for LU, all transgressions would
be reduced by factors ranging from 17% to 79 % compared to Net Zero, highlighting
co-benefits from the reduction of climate change impact. Indeed, PBCO2 shows better
results in term of climate change than Net Zero, with a reduction by a factor 4 of the
impact, owing to the substitution of solar energy with wind, which is emitting less
GHG, and a reduced electrification of heating, now supplied by biomass.
15 of 51
==PAGE:21==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
Climate change is often considered as the main environmental concern by decision
makers, overlooking other impact categories. As shown above, it can be a relevant
proxy in the energy sector, as some impact categories present a proportional evolution.
However, in this scenario, the myopic vision on climate change causes a burden shift on
LU. Indeed, the use of biomass to reduce the climate change impact of heating amplifies
the impacts on LU. Thus, in AESA, and as recommended in the PB framework (Johan
Rockström & al, 2009), it is important to consider various impact categories to avoid
burden shift. It emphasises that considering a LCA cradle to grave approach and
AESA drastically alters the optimal energy mix found in a Net Zero scenario.
PBCO2 shows significant similarities with a scenario from Algunaibet et al. (2019)
implementing the Paris agreement objective for the US electricity sector9. Indeed,
despite the myopic vision on climate change considered in both scenarios, the PB
climate change is transgressed but a reduction of the transgression level of other PBs.
is observed. For both scenarios, no absolutely sustainable solution is found and high
level of transgressions are observed despite the deployment of renewable energies.
3.3
PB8
PB8 scenario is the optimal energy system that minimises the transgression of the
eight CCs considered. No solution absolutely sustainable could be found with the hard
constraint approach, respecting all the CCs, therefore the approach minimising the
transgressions is considered.
In comparison to PBCO2, the electricity mix in the PB8 scenario partially replaces
onshore wind with offshore wind and solar energy (Figure 6). Offshore wind reaches
68% of the total electricity production and solar energy production is increased by
80%. Heat generation sees an increase in electrification through heat pumps and shifts
from biomass to natural gas, reducing LU by a factor of 31, which now falls within
the uncertainty area. This shift leads to a burden shift on climate change, with an
increase of a factor 2.6. Another burden shift is observed in ozone depletion, due to
development of heat pumps and natural gas10. Natural gas accounts for 8% of heating
production and is mainly used to meet peak heating demand. Except the two CCs
previously stated, all transgressions are reduced. PM and ecotoxicity TLs reduction by
a factor three and four can be attributed to the removal of biomass (Amnuaylojaroen
et al., 2023). Acidification, eutrophication and water usage are still satisfied, while
LU and ecotoxicity are now within the uncertainty area. Three CCs, namely climate
change, PM and ozone depletion are transgressed beyond the uncertainty area.
9This study considers the PB framework.
10Nitrogen oxides, which are ozone depleting substances, are produced from burning of natural gas.
Despite an ozone depletion potential of 0.017, the large amount emitted during the burning process
causes a significant impact.
16 of 51
==PAGE:22==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
Figure 6: Distribution of electricity and heat production per technology in 2050 for the EU4 (left)
and technology contribution to the transgression levels of the eight carrying capacities optimised on
(right), for the PB8 scenario. The green zone represents the safe operating space (until 1), the yellow
zone is the uncertainty area (until 2) and the red zone is the high risk area. For the energy mix graph
(left), the category Other includes batteries, bioil and biogas. For TLs graph (right), the category
Other is specific to each impact category and refers to the technologies responsible for less than 8% of
the impact. For TLs graph (right), offshore and onshore wind are aggregated under the colour code of
offshore wind for better visibility.
Considering eight CCs significantly impacts the optimal energy system. The high
reliance on a single technology11 for electricity production is notable. However, the use
of natural gas to reduce the land usage impacts exacerbates concerns for climate change.
One potential solution could be to allow construction of CCS technology for heating,
although this would incur additional costs. This scenario considers an equal weighting
approach for the CCs. To assess the robustness of the approach, other weighting
methods are considered in Appendix F.3, to evaluate the impacts of prioritising some
CCs e.g. giving a higher weight to the CCs the most impacted, but no significant
changes in the energy mix and the TLs are observed.
The overall impact on climate change from the EU4 energy sector represents respec-
tively, for the PBCO2 and PB8 scenarios, 1.7% and 4% of the global SOS to share with
all countries and sectors. When embracing an equal per capita allocation approach,
this represents respectively 30% and 79% of the total budget allocated to Europe for
all sectors, highlighting the substantial use of the budget towards the energy sector
and emphasises the importance of exploring alternative pathways.
PB8 presents significant similarities with a scenario from Algunaibet et al. (2019),
implementing AESA based on the PB framework, referred as US PB below. Indeed,
no absolutely sustainable solution is found in both cases and the optimal mix mainly
relies on wind energy. However, in the US study, onshore wind is preferred to offshore,
11Wind
17 of 51
==PAGE:23==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
likely due to geographical differences between US and EU4. The US PB scenario finds
an optimal solution with no solar energy, which differs from the PB8 scenario of this
study and can be explained by the use of an updated process with lower environmental
impacts. On the overall, the role of solar energy is significantly reduced in both
studies. Moreover, the US PB scenario meets the PB on climate change, thanks to the
deployment of bio energy using CCS, considered as a net negative emission technology
on a life cycle basis. This technology is not considered in our study which can explain
the transgression on climate change. Another study evaluating EU electricity generation
scenarios for 2050 in relation to PB (Stranddorf et al., 2023), founds that none of the
scenarios considered are absolutely sustainable. Similar to our study, a burden shift
from climate change to the PB biosphere integrity, which is related to land use, is
observed with the increased use of biomass. Both the US and the EU studies allocate
a higher share to nuclear than our study which could be explained by the geographical
scope of our study. It would be interesting to extend the study to countries where
nuclear plays a larger role.
3.4
Sufficiency
Given the absence of an absolutely sustainable energy system in the previous results,
a reduction of demand to remain within the carrying capacities is considered in the
scenario Sufficiency. Balmorel already includes energy savings from technology im-
provements of the energy assets. Therefore, this scenario emphasises demand-side
mitigation e.g. socio-cultural and behavioural changes as well as other technological
improvements e.g. renovation of buildings, as presented in the IPCC (2022).
Figure 7: Distribution of electricity and heat production per technology in 2050 for the EU4 (left)
and technology contribution to the transgression levels of the eight carrying capacities optimised on
(right), for the Sufficiency scenario. The demand reduction is assessed through the magic fuel. The
green zone represents the safe operating space (until 1) and the yellow zone is the uncertainty area
(until 2).The category Other includes bio-oil, biogas and water tank.
18 of 51
==PAGE:24==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
To achieve absolute sustainability, this scenario requires reductions of 42% in electricity
and 72% in heat (Figure 7). It must be noted that this study does not consider negative
emissions technologies e.g. biomass in CCS, direct air capture of CO2. Despite their
potential in reducing carbon emissions and without considering their impact on other
CCs, the IPCC considers these technologies as potentially helpful to tackle climate
change but insufficient to offset the need for sufficiency and behavioural changes (IPCC,
2022). As the TL of climate change and PM are equal to one (Figure 7), these impact
categories dictate the required demand reduction. Thus, in comparison with the IPCC
(2022), this scenario reveals demand-side mitigation of the same order of magnitude,
with suggestions of 73.8% reduction for electricity and around 60% for the building
sector, including heating.
3.5
Economic impact of considering carrying capacities
The total cost of the previous systems are compared in Appendix F.4. PBCO2 and PB8
scenario are respectively 3 and 2.5 times more expensive than Net Zero. This additional
cost represents respectively 2.4% and 1.8% of the EU4 GDP in 2023 (Eurostat 2023).
The higher costs can be attributed to the extensive development of offshore wind in
the scenarios accounting for CC, replacing the cheaper solar option. Additionally,
transmission costs increase by approximately a factor 4.5 in the PB8 and PBCO2
scenario compared to Net Zero, due to the higher import and export of electricity
between countries to meet CCs, as detailed in Appendix F.5. PBCO2 is more expensive
than PB8 because of an increase of generation fuel cost, as biomass is more expensive
than natural gas in the model.
Considering PBs increase the cost of the overall
system, as seen in similar studies (Algunaibet et al., 2019). However, this could be
counterbalanced by savings in other sectors highly impacted by a transgression of CCs
e.g. the health sector regarding PM.
3.6
Resource use
Energy systems rely on the use of minerals and metals, which are finite resources. The
impact category resource use evaluates the extraction of these materials based on their
scarcity. Since resource use was not minimised in the previous scenarios, its TL are
presented separately from those of the other CCs. In comparison to the Net Zero
scenario that exceeds the allocated CC by a factor 58, both PB8 and PBCO2 scenarios
present lower values of transgression (Figure 8). Indeed, batteries and solar energy rely
more significantly on scarce materials than wind energy. However, wind energy still
extensively relies on resources, explaining high TLs around 30 for PB8 and PBCO2.
Sufficiency scenario still exceeds the CC by a factor 5 despite presenting the lowest
excess. Thus, co-benefits of optimising on other CC is outlined. Resource use of metals
and minerals is transgressed in all the scenarios considered, showing a high reliance of
energy system on this CC. Further investigation on minimising on this CC is performed
in Appendix F.6.
19 of 51
==PAGE:25==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
Figure 8: Technology contribution to the transgression Levels of the carrying capacity resource use,
minerals and metals, for the scenarios Net Zero, PBCO2, PB8 and Sufficiency. The green zone
represents the safe operating space (until 1), the yellow zone is the uncertainty area (until 2) and the
red zone is the high risk area. The category Other refers to the technologies responsible for less than
8% of the impact.
3.7
Sensitivity on solar panels manufacturing
As shown in the scenarios PB8 and PBCO2, the role of solar panels in the energy
transition is drastically reduced when considering CC and accounting for environmen-
tal impacts with a LCA cradle to grave approach. Indeed, environmental impacts
of Photovoltaic panels (PV) mainly occur during manufacturing, particularly in the
energy-intensive steps of silicium melting and wafering.12 Currently, most of the PV is
manufactured in China (IEA, solar 2022) where the electricity mix mainly relies on coal
(IEA China 2022), resulting in significant environmental impacts. As the European
energy mix becomes less-carbon intensive (IEA Europe 2023), this study investigates
how producing panels with a less impactful electricity mix could affect the energy
system. Manufacturing is assumed to be using the French electricity mix and the
updated environmental impacts are assessed using the tool Incer ACV, which evaluates
the LCA of solar energy for different electricity mix (INCER ACV 2021). Three impact
categories are mainly impacted by the electricity mix, climate change, water usage and
acidification. The LCA updated value of the infrastructure are presented in Appendix
F.7. The carbon footprint and the acidification are almost halved, and a decrease of
water usage impact is observed. This study does not consider endogenous increase in
electricity demand or change in price, although these factors should be included for a
more holistic investigation.
The PB8 scenario with updated LCA values for solar energy, shows a 10% increase in
annual electricity production from solar panels compared to the original PB8 scenario
(Appendix F.7). Additionally, the use of natural gas for heating is reduced, offset by
an increase of the use of heat pumps. This shift induces a higher electricity demand,
now met by the increased solar production. These changes impact the TLs, where land
12As seen in the Ecoinvent process used in this study.
20 of 51
==PAGE:26==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
use pressure increases from 1.3 to 1.4 due to the higher solar deployment (Appendix
F.7). Climate change TL shows a 3% decrease, now lowered to a transgression level
of 7.4, due to the decreased use of natural gas and the lower impact of solar panels
manufacturing. Resources use is slightly decreased as natural gas is reduced. This
scenario illustrates that relocating solar panels manufacturing in a country with a
low-carbon electricity mix can reduce the transgression on some carrying capacities. In
systems with a higher share of solar, such a strategy could lead to substantial benefits,
highlighting the importance of policy decision in that concern. However, it is crucial to
be aware of the potential burden shift to land use.
3.8
Sensitivity analysis on the allocation principle
Values of SOS for the different allocation principles are available in Appendix E, and
show that the choice of the allocation method significantly affects the SOS assigned
to the EU4 and consequently the results, as stated by Bjorn et al. (2020). The most
restrictive allocation principle is the allocation principle 313 (Figure 3) since it allocates
a SoSOS 21 times lower than for allocation principle 214 for all impact categories15.
The latter assigns the highest SOS for all impact categories, except climate change,
eutrophication freshwater and ecotoxicity freshwater, which have higher value in the
allocation principle 116. Sensitivity analysis is performed on the PB8 scenario by
changing the sharing principle.
The influence of the allocation method on the results is highlighted through the changes
in transgression levels (Appendix C.1). The high variation of the TLs puts forward
the significant impact of the choice of the allocation method and praises for a common
framework to allow comparison. The TL for climate change is very sensitive to the
allocation principle used, ranging from 5 to 102, but remains in the high risk area
without altering significantly the conclusion. However, for eutrophication, some sharing
principles indicates that the CC is satisfied whereas other place it in the high risk
area. This underscores the need to use several allocation methods to assess the results
robustness. This study demonstrates a certain level of robustness for acidification,
water usage and ozone depletion, which remain within the CC or the uncertainty area
depending on the allocation principle.
Overall, the annual energy production remains unchanged for several technologies across
the different allocation principles considered, e.g. wind, hydropower, with variation
in the annual production share below 3% (Figure 17 in Appendix). Heat production
presents significant changes with allocations 2 and 3, where biomass replaces natural
gas and to some extent heat pumps. In allocation 3, this shift is mainly due to to the
higher SOS for land usage, which is 21 times higher than in allocation 1. Therefore,
the system is able to favour biomass over natural gas, and succeed in satisfying the
CC LU. In allocation 2, the reason for this shift differs, as the SOS for land usage is
similar to the one of allocation 1, with only a factor 2 of difference. Instead, the shift to
biomass is driven by the reduction by a factor 22 of the climate change SOS, compared
13Equal per capita and GVA
14Equal per capita and grandfathering on CO2
15These two allocation principles give the same SoSOS to all the impact categories, as detailed in
Appendix E.
16Grandfathering
21 of 51
==PAGE:27==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
to allocation 1. Thus, the system optimises within a more restrictive space for climate
change, replacing natural gas with biomass due to its lower carbon footprint.
3.9
Discussions
Future improvements of the methodology could involve exploring alternative modelling
approach to integrate AESA into EM (Weidner et al., 2022), as well as considering
other allocation methods to better account for indirect use of energy as in Strand-
dorf et al. (2023). The system boundary of the AESA could be extended to fully
leverage the sector coupling possibilities offered by Balmorel, by including the trans-
port and hydrogen sectors. Including electric vehicles and hydrogen would increase
electricity demand as well as the SoSOS, but the exact proportionality is to be de-
termined. Moreover, including the environmental impacts of the transmission system
in the AESA would provide a more comprehensive understanding. The restricted
geographical scope of this study, limited to four countries, could be expanded to the
European system. Indeed, the selected countries might overlook some technologies
e.g. solar and nuclear at the European level, as no southern european countries are
considered. Further work could include additional years in the simulation to analyse
the transition of the system e.g. 2030, 2040. Due to computational time restriction,
this study only includes sensitivity analysis that identifies the main contributors of
uncertainty but it does not include uncertainty analysis. To address uncertainty, the
implementation of updated LCI data, from EcoInvent 3.9, that better reflects the
current situation of the energy sector, would be a first step. Further steps could
involve comparing the results with LCI dataset from countries other than Germany
and conducting Monte Carlo simulation on the probability distribution of the LCI.
Considering prospective LCA could enhance accuracy of the AESA (Marini et al., 2014).
The methodology regarding LCA of some technologies presents some limitations, such
as the handling of municipal waste. Indeed, waste are part of the overall system and
must be managed. If waste incineration for energy production is not considered by
the model, the question of its disposal arises. One solution could be to impose to the
system the use of a minimum quantity of municipal waste. Exploring the allocation
of environmental impact between the co-products or introducing hard constraint on
waste management in Balmorel should be further investigated. Regarding CHP, the
allocation used in the dataset is based on exergy values (EcoInvent, CHP 2007) and
relies on a fix ratio of heat and electricity generation. The current allocation method
primarily assigns impacts to electricity production, which may not adequately represent
the variability and flexibility of CHP allowed in Balmorel. Further investigation in this
aspect is needed for a more accurate modelling. Moreover, LCA data for solar panels
is based on a ground-mounted system and is applied to all PV panels technologies in
Balmorel. A more detailed approach, distinguishing between ground-mounted solar and
rooftop solar panels could lead to different results, as rooftop solar panels have a lower
impact on land use but a higher impact on the other eight impact categories considered17.
To account for the LCA of an energy system, two approaches were possible, averaging
impacts over the infrastructure and use phase or separating the data for these two
17As observed in the Ecoinvent processes.
22 of 51
==PAGE:28==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
categories. Both approaches yield similar results on a smaller tested system including
only Denmark. Whereas most studies used the former approach (Stranddorf et al.,
2023), the latter approach was selected as it aligns with Balmorel’s modelling method,
presenting the advantage of considering the impact of construction of only newly built
plants and disregarding the construction impact of existing plants. However, this
method approximates a thirty-year lifetime for all generators without specific data in
Balmorel and necessitates an annualisation of the construction impact to enable the
system to invest in new capacities, which differs from real life where most of the impact
of the infrastructure happen in the construction year.
The use of a linear model introduces limitations in integrating AESA into EM while
allowing for transgressions. This approach fails to distinguish between CCs that have
already been exceeded and those that have not. Consequently, the model keeps opti-
mising on CCs already within the boundary, whereas these should have been excluded
from the objective function by setting them to zero (Equation 8).
As mentioned in section 3.5, considering CC increases the costs of the system, therefore
impacting the future GVA of the sectors considered. This could significantly impact the
SoSOS assessed using the allocation principle based on GVA, as a higher contribution
to the future GVA from the sectors considered could increase their allocated share.
4
Conclusion
The integration of AESA into the EM Balmorel, using the CC framework combined
with LCAs of electricity and heat generation, offers valuable insights for informed
decision-making in energy systems design. The study assessed four scenarios for EU4
in 2050, using three different sharing principles. It reveals that a Net Zero scenario in
2050 would exceed significantly all the carrying capacities, including climate change
which would transgress the allocated budget by 28 times. Thus, it highlights the need
to assess the environmental impacts of energy technologies using a life cycle approach,
rather than the common practice in energy models of only considering the operational
phase. This would prevent considering renewable energies as having no environmental
impact. This study also prevents from using a single-issue policy-making focused only
on climate change and highlights the importance of AESA to address environmental
impacts and reveal burden shifting. It is found that designing an energy system within
the carrying capacities requires a reduction in demand of 42% for electricity and 72%
for heat.
The study identifies offshore wind and hydropower as key technologies to minimise
the environmental impact of the system and advocates for an electrification of heat-
ing through the use of heat pumps. Solar energy is still considered as an important
technology to reduce the impact on climate change, despite its reduced contribution
due to significant impacts on other CCs. Special attention should be given to the
use of biomass with potential burden shift from climate change to land use. The
choice of allocation principle significantly impacts the allocated budget, the TLs and to
some extent the technologies used. Our findings highlights the absence of an entirely
23 of 51
==PAGE:29==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
environmental friendly energy source, reminding that the least impactful energy is
the one not produced. Indeed, without considering demand reduction, the scenario
using the least restrictive allocation principle still leads to high TLs for some carrying
capacities e.g. climate change transgressed five times, ecotoxicity of freshwater and
resource use of minerals and metals transgressed by two times.
Reliance on expensive technologies e.g. offshore wind replacing cheaper technologies
e.g. solar, will initially increase the system costs, but technological advancements could
mitigate these expenses significantly. Exploring the potential of CCS-equipped units
for heat production using natural gas or biomass would enable a more holistic approach,
potentially impacting the energy mix landscape, but particular attention should be
given to potential burden shift. This study founds that the critical impact categories
in energy system design include climate change, land use, PM, ecotoxicity and resource
use. The results are specific to the countries considered, and the implementation
of this methodology to other European countries could improve the global vision
for a future European energy system. Incorporating additional CCs and addressing
uncertainties are crucial to improve the robustness of future studies. Overall, this study
provides important insights into the complex interplay between energy technologies
and environmental impacts.
24 of 51
==PAGE:30==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
5
References
Algunaibet, Ibrahim M., Carlos Pozo, Ángel Galán-Martín, Mark A.J. Huijbregts,
Niall Mac Dowell, and Gonzalo Guillén-Gosálbez (2019). “Powering sustainable
development within planetary boundaries”. In: Energy and Environmental Science
12.6, pages 1890–1900. issn: 17545706. doi: 10.1039/c8ee03423k.
Amnuaylojaroen, Teerachai and Nichapa Parasin (2023). Perspective on Particulate
Matter: From Biomass Burning to the Health Crisis in Mainland Southeast Asia.
doi: 10.3390/toxics11070553.
Berrill, Peter, Anders Arvesen, Yvonne Scholz, Hans Christian Gils, and Edgar G.
Hertwich (2016). “Environmental impacts of high penetration renewable energy
scenarios for Europe”. In: Environmental Research Letters 11.1. issn: 17489326.
doi: 10.1088/1748-9326/11/1/014012.
Bjørn, Anders and Michael Zwicky Hauschild (2015). “Introducing carrying capacity-
based normalisation in LCA: framework and development of references at midpoint
level”. In: International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 20.7, pages 1005–1018.
issn: 16147502. doi: 10.1007/s11367-015-0899-2.
Bjorn, Anders et al. (2020). Review of life-cycle based methods for absolute environmental
sustainability assessment and their applications. doi: 10.1088/1748-9326/ab89d7.
Blanco, Herib, Victor Codina, Alexis Laurent, Wouter Nijs, François Maréchal, and
André Faaij (2020). “Life cycle assessment integration into energy system models:
An application for Power-to-Methane in the EU”. In: Applied Energy 259. issn:
03062619. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.114160.
Cowi (2023). url: https://www.cowi.com/news-and-press/news/2023/comparing-
co2-emissions-from-different-energy-sources/.
Crenna, E., T. Sinkko, and S. Sala (2019). “Biodiversity impacts due to food consumption
in Europe”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 227, pages 378–391. issn: 09596526.
doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.04.054.
Crenna, Eleonora, Michela Secchi, Lorenzo Benini, and Serenella Sala (2019). “Global
environmental impacts: data sources and methodological choices for calculating
normalization factors for LCA”. In: International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment
24.10, pages 1851–1877. issn: 16147502. doi: 10.1007/s11367-019-01604-y.
Dai, Qiang, Jarod C. Kelly, Linda Gaines, and Michael Wang (2019). “Life cycle
analysis of lithium-ion batteries for automotive applications”. In: Batteries 5.2. issn:
23130105. doi: 10.3390/batteries5020048.
Damiani, Darin, John T. Litynski, Howard G. McIlvried, Derek M. Vikara, and Ramesh-
war D. Srivastava (2012). “The US Department of Energy’s R&D program to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions through beneficial uses of carbon dioxide”. In: Greenhouse
Gases: Science and Technology 2.1, pages 9–16. issn: 21523878. doi: 10.1002/ghg.
Danish Energy Agency (2024). Technology catalogue.
Ecoinvent (2020). url: https://ecoquery.ecoinvent.org/3.8/apos/dataset/
24858/export.
Ecoinvent (2024). url: https://ecoinvent.org/database/.
EcoInvent, CHP (2007). url: https://db.ecoinvent.org/reports/20_SmallCombinedHeatPower.
pdf?area=463ee7e58cbf8%22%20allocation%20based%20on%20exergy%20leads%
20to%20higher%20emissions%20per%20kWh%20of%20electricity%20compared%
20to%20per%20kWh%20of%20heat.
25 of 51
==PAGE:31==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
EEA (2022). url: https://www.eea.europa.eu/data- and- maps/data/data-
viewers/greenhouse-gases-viewer.
Electricity and heat statistics (2022). url: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
statistics-explained/index.php?title=Electricity_and_heat_statistics&
oldid=552866#Derived_heat_production.
European Commission (2021). European Platform on LCA. url: https://eplca.jrc.
ec.europa.eu/EnvironmentalFootprint.html.
Eurostat (2023). url: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/nama_
10_gdp/default/table?lang=en.
Eurostat (2022). Eurostat CO2 emissions from energy use up by more than 6% in 2021.
url: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-eurostat-news/-/ddn-
20220624-1.
Gea-Bermúdez, Juan, Lise Lotte Pade, Matti Juhani Koivisto, and Hans Ravn (2020).
“Optimal generation and transmission development of the North Sea region: Impact
of grid architecture and planning horizon”. In: Energy 191. issn: 03605442. doi:
10.1016/j.energy.2019.116512.
Guillot, Victor and Edi Assoumou (2023). Research Paper No. 275 | Transition of
the European power system within planetary boundaries. Technical report. url:
https://hal.science/hal-03894115.
IEA (2024). Emissions grew in 2023, but clean energy is limiting the growth.
IEA China (2022). url: https://www.iea.org/countries/china.
IEA Europe (2023). url: https://www.iea.org/regions/europe.
“IEA, NZE 2050” (2021). In: url: https://www.iea.org/reports/net- zero-
roadmap-a-global-pathway-to-keep-the-15-0c-goal-in-reach/a-renewed-
pathway-to-net-zero-emissions.
IEA, solar (2022). url: https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/charts/
solar-pv-manufacturing-capacity-by-country-and-region-2021.
INCER ACV (2021). url: https://viewer.webservice- energy.org/incer -
acv/app/incer-acv/app.
IPBES (2019). Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services.
Technical report. url: https://www.ipbes.net/global-assessment.
IPCC (1996). url: https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/gl/guidelin/
ch1ri.pdf.
IPCC (2022). Climate Change 2022 Mitigation of Climate Change Working Group III
Contribution to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change Summary for Policymakers Edited by. Edited by Shukla PSkea
JReisinger ASlade RFradera RPathak MAl AMalek KRenée Van Diemen BHasija
ALisboa GLuz SMalley JMccollum D. isbn: 9789291691609. url: www.ipcc.ch.
— (2023). “IPCC”. In: Climate Change 2021 – The Physical Science Basis. Cambridge
University Press, pages 3–32. doi: 10.1017/9781009157896.001. url: https:
//www.cambridge.org/core/product/identifier/9781009157896%23pre2/
type/book_part.
Johan Rockström & al (2009). “A safe operating space for humanity”. In: Nature 461.
Labarde (2022). url: https://labarde-33.centrale-solaire-jpee.fr/.
Laurent, Alexis, Stig I. Olsen, and Michael Z. Hauschild (2012). “Limitations of carbon
footprint as indicator of environmental sustainability”. In: Environmental Science
and Technology 46.7, pages 4100–4108. issn: 0013936X. doi: 10.1021/es204163f.
26 of 51
==PAGE:32==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
Marini, Camille and Isabelle Blanc (2014). LNCS 8581 - Towards Prospective Life
Cycle Assessment: How to Identify Key Parameters Inducing Most Uncertainties
in the Future? Application to Photovoltaic Systems Installed in Spain. Technical
report.
Matuštík, Jan, Aleš Paulu, and Vladimír Kočí (2024). “Is normalization in Life Cycle
Assessment sustainable? Alternative approach based on natural constraints”. In:
Journal of Cleaner Production, page 141234. issn: 09596526. doi: 10.1016/j.
jclepro.2024.141234. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0959652624006814.
Meadows, Donella H, Dennis L Meadows, J • Rgen, Randers William, and W Behrens Ill
(1972). The limits to growth. Technical report.
OECD (2021). url: https : / / data - explorer . oecd . org / vis ? lc = en & fs[0 ]
=Topic%2C1%7CEconomy%23ECO%23%7CNational%20accounts%23ECO_NAD%23&
fs[1 ] =Topic % 2C3 % 7CEconomy % 23ECO % 23 % 7CNational % 20accounts % 23ECO _
NAD%23%7CGDP%20and%20non- financial%20accounts%23ECO_NAD_GNF%23%
7CProduction & pg = 0 & fc = Topic & snb = 11 & df[ds ] =dsDisseminateFinalDMZ &
df[id]=DSD_NAMAIN10%40DF_TABLE6&df[ag]=OECD.SDD.NAD&df[vs]=1.0&pd=
%2C&dq=A.EU27_2020...B1G.....V..&to[TIME_PERIOD]=false&vw=tb.
Parrique, Timothée (2020). The political economy of degrowth. Technical report. url:
https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-02499463.
Richardson, Katherine et al. (2023). Earth beyond six of nine planetary boundaries.
Technical report. url: https://www.science.org.
Risen (2023). url: https://en.risenenergy.com/.
Rockström, Johan et al. (2023). “Safe and just Earth system boundaries”. In: Nature
619.7968, pages 102–111. issn: 14764687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06083-8.
Ryberg, Morten W., Martin Marchman Andersen, Mikołaj Owsianiak, and Michael Z.
Hauschild (2020). Downscaling the planetary boundaries in absolute environmental
sustainability assessments – A review. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.123287.
Ryberg, Morten W., Mikołaj Owsianiak, Julie Clavreul, Carina Mueller, Sarah Sim,
Henry King, and Michael Z. Hauschild (2018). “How to bring absolute sustainability
into decision-making: An industry case study using a Planetary Boundary-based
methodology”. In: Science of the Total Environment 634, pages 1406–1416. issn:
18791026. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.04.075.
Ryberg, Morten W., Mikołaj Owsianiak, Katherine Richardson, and Michael Z. Hauschild
(2018). “Development of a life-cycle impact assessment methodology linked to the
Planetary Boundaries framework”. In: Ecological Indicators 88, pages 250–262. issn:
1470160X. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.12.065.
Sala, Serenella and Alessandro Kim Cerutti (2018). “Development of a weighting
approach for the Environmental Footprint”. In: doi: 10.2760/446145. url: https:
//ec.europa.eu/jrc.
Sala, Serenella, Eleonora Crenna, Michela Secchi, and Esther Sanyé-Mengual (2020).
“Environmental sustainability of European production and consumption assessed
against planetary boundaries”. In: Journal of Environmental Management 269. issn:
10958630. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.110686.
Simapro (2024). url: https://simapro.com/.
27 of 51
==PAGE:33==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
Steffen, Will et al. (2015). “Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a
changing planet”. In: Science 347.6223. issn: 10959203. doi: 10.1126/science.
1259855.
Stranddorf, Liv K., Julie Clavreul, Anne Prieur-Vernat, and Morten W. Ryberg (2023).
“Evaluation of life cycle impacts of European electricity generation in relation to the
Planetary Boundaries”. In: Sustainable Production and Consumption 39, pages 414–
424. issn: 23525509. doi: 10.1016/j.spc.2023.05.026.
UNECE (2021). Life Cycle Assessment of Electricity Generation Options UNITED
NATIONS ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR EUROPE. Technical report. url:
https://unece.org/sites/default/files/2021-11/LCA_final.pdf.
United Nations Commission (2021). Technical report.
United Nations. Statistical Division. (2008). International Standard industrial classifica-
tion of all economic activities (ISIC). United Nations, page 291. isbn: 9789211615180.
url: https://unstats.un.org/unsd/publication/seriesm/seriesm_4rev4e.
pdfhttps://unstats.un.org/unsd/publication/seriesm/seriesm_4rev4e.
pdf.
US EPA (2023). Human Health & Environmental Impacts of the Electric Power Sector.
url: https://www.epa.gov/power-sector/human-health-environmental-
impacts-electric-power-sector#:~:text=Power%20plants%20are%20the%
20largest%20source%20of%20airborne%20emissions%20of,cause%20other%
20significant%20health%20effects..
Vargas-Gonzalez, Marcial, François Witte, Patricia Martz, Laurent Gilbert, Sébastien
Humbert, Olivier Jolliet, Rosalie van Zelm, and Jacques L’Haridon (2019). “Op-
erational Life Cycle Impact Assessment weighting factors based on Planetary
Boundaries: Applied to cosmetic products”. In: Ecological Indicators 107. issn:
1470160X. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2019.105498.
Weidner, Till, Ángel Galán-Martín, Morten Walbech Ryberg, and Gonzalo Guillén-
Gosálbez (2022). “Energy systems modeling and optimization for absolute environ-
mental sustainability: current landscape and opportunities”. In: Computers and
Chemical Engineering 164. issn: 00981354. doi: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2022.
107883.
Weiss, Olga, Giacomo Pareschi, Gil Georges, and Konstantinos Boulouchos (2021).
“The Swiss energy transition: Policies to address the Energy Trilemma”. In: Energy
Policy 148. issn: 03014215. doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2020.111926.
Wiese, Frauke, Rasmus Bramstoft, Hardi Koduvere, Amalia Pizarro Alonso, Olexandr
Balyk, Jon Gustav Kirkerud, Åsa Grytli Tveten, Torjus Folsland Bolkesjø, Marie
Münster, and Hans Ravn (2018). “Balmorel open source energy system model”. In:
Energy Strategy Reviews 20, pages 26–34. issn: 2211467X. doi: 10.1016/j.esr.
2018.01.003.
World bank data (2022). url: https://data.worldbank.org/.
Zhao, Chuang et al. (2017). “Temperature increase reduces global yields of major crops
in four independent estimates”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 114.35, pages 9326–9331. issn: 10916490. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1701762114.
Zwaan, Bob van der and Ari Rabl (2003). “Prospects for PV: A learning curve analysis”.
In: Solar Energy 74.1, pages 19–31. issn: 0038092X. doi: 10.1016/S0038-092X(03)
00112-9.
28 of 51
==PAGE:34==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix A
Appendices
A
Appendix Goal and scope definition
A.1
Goal definition
Intented application
This study aims at defining a cost-effective solution for an energy system respecting
the carrying capacity framework for the EU4, corresponding to Denmark, Germany
Norway and Sweden. The life cycle assessment of the electricity and heat generation,
from cradle to grave, is assessed and compared to the PBs defined in the carrying
capacity framework by (Bjørn et al., 2015, Sala, Eleonora Crenna, et al., 2020). An
AESA is performed using LCA as a tool for assessing environmental life cycle impacts.
Method Assumptions and Impact limitations
A Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is conducted, using the EF methodology to assess the
environmental impact. It offers a comprehensive view of the environmental impacts
associated with the system considered. However, it is important to highlight some
limitations that may affect the relevance of the results.
One of the limitation is the scope of the assessment, focusing mainly on environmental
and human health aspects, which could potentially overlook some social considerations.
The important amount of data required represents another limitations, as data quality
might reduce the reliability of the results. Indeed, some assumptions have been made
in the study due to a lack of data. Other limitations on the geographical and temporal
scope are further detailed in a following section. Despite some limitations, LCA remains
a tool useful for decision making, provided that these limitations are acknowledged
when the results are interpreted. The main assumptions of the study are detailed in
the Appendix B.
Reasons for carrying out the study and decision context
The EU shifts towards a less impactful energy mix. However, the main focus of the
forecasted scenarios for future energy mix mainly focus on climate change, which
could overlook other carrying capacities. The reason for carrying out this study is to
embrace a set of carrying capacities, not only focusing on climate change, and to address
the possible existence of an absolutely sustainable energy mix. This scenario will be
compared with other forecasts and results that don’t account for the carrying capacities.
Commissioner of the LCA Study and other influential actors
The study was performed in DTU, as a Master Thesis. No influential actors have been
involved.
29 of 51
==PAGE:35==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix A
A.2
Scope
Deliverables
The first deliverable is a written report providing the methodology and results of the
study. A supplementary material with additional information will be available as well
as the database used in Simapro.
Functional unit and reference flows
The FU of this study is the total yearly generation of electricity and heat needed to
meet the EU4 demand in 2050.
LCI Modelling Framework
An attributional LCA is considered. Allocation was considered for CHP within the
EcoInvent processes. The study considers all the life cycle stages, embracing a cradle
to grave approach.
System Boundaries
The system boundaries includes all the life cycle stages of the products considered,
based on a cradle to grave approach. Transmission system e.g. transmissions lines,
transmission and distribution stations and pipelines are not considered in this study.
Representativeness of LCI data
• Spatial : Study models the energy generation of EU4.
Although data was
available across different geographical locations depending on the technology, a
single dataset was selected for each technology based on the following prioritisation.
First, when available, European average (RER) was chosen. For most of the
processes it was not available, thus German (DE) processes were selected. Indeed,
Germany has the largest population of the countries considered in this study
and it embraces a conservative approach as, in regards to climate change, the
carbon footprint of the German electricity mix is one of the highest in Europe. In
case German processes were not available, other geographical area were chosen.
For these processes, Global production data (Global GLO or Rest of the World
ROW) were selected. Finally, hydropower reservoir is modelled with data from
the French technology, that gives a coherent overview of hydropower processes in
the alpine regions.
• Temporal : This study depicts an energy system for 2050. Data from the current
energy system is used as inputs. Thus, the temporal representativeness decreases
over the years of simulation. However, improvements rates are modelled within
Balmorel and accounted in the simulations. These improvement rates are based
on forecasts and come with uncertainty.
• Technological : most recent database Ecoinvent(3.8) is used, released in 2021.
This database is representative of the technology in 2024 as no drastic change
30 of 51
==PAGE:36==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix A
occurred. Particular attention was given to PV technology to better account for
the learning curve of this technology, as the EcoInvent data was from 2008 and
significant change has happened for solar panels since. Technological improvement
rates are considered within Balmorel, but environmental impact might overlook
some improvements made in the future and might disregard as well the use of
new materials and processes which have different impacts.
Basis for Impact Assessment
The following impact categories are considered : climate change, eutrophication of
freshwater, water use, land use, ozone depletion, acidification, resource use minerals
and metals, particulate matter and ecotoxicity freshwater.
B
Appendix Technical assumptions
Assumptions in this study are related to the following topics : energy demand, tech-
nologies. Other assumptions such as improvement rates, generation capacities and
costs are based on the projections implemented in Balmorel.
B.1
Energy demand
For the main scenarios, the same projections of annual energy demand is applied. This
is based on the projections used in Balmorel and documented in Table 1. This includes
demand from residential and industries for the four countries considered as well as
demand from datacenter for Denmark only.
Denmark
Germany
Norway
Sweden
Total
Electricity
79
912
135
198
1324
Heat
74
1309
58
171
1612
Table 1: Annual electricity and heat demand (TWh) in 2050 for EU4
It must be noted that the overall electricity and heat production might differ between
scenarios as the model permits endogenous demand adjustments to meet the exogenous
demand described above, for instance regarding the electrification of heating.
B.2
Objective function in Balmorel
The objective function in Balmorel minimises discounted costs over the years y in the
simulation, including investments costs Cinv
y
, variable costs Cvom
y
and fixed costs Cfom
y
(Equation 9). Investments costs include the costs for new generation capacities and are
annualised through the lifetime of the asset, variable costs include fuel costs, operation
and maintenance costs. Fixed costs include costs related to assets in operation. The
present value of future costs is assessed using the discount factor DFy.
min
Cinv
y
,Cvom
y
,Cfom
y
X
y
(Cinv
y
+ Cvom
y
+ Cfom
y
)˙DFy
(9)
31 of 51
==PAGE:37==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix A
B.3
Additional information on Balmorel
Different layers of spatial resolution are defined : countries, which contain regions, and
regions, which contain areas. Regions represent electricity bidding zones. Electricity
trade is allowed between regions, constrained by transmission capacity while heat trade
is allowed between areas. The input data used in this study can be found in the
additional files.
B.4
Technologies - assumptions for LCA :
The assumptions made for the different energy technologies are detailed below. As-
sumptions were made based on the data availability in the database EcoInvent as well
as the technologies implemented in Balmorel. A lifetime of 30 years is assumed for
generators if nothing is stated in Balmorel.
Electricity :
• Solar panels: Solar panels data available in EcoInvent is from 2008 and is outdated.
Indeed, based on the learning curve of this technology, efficiencies and panels
capacity have change significantly (Zwaan et al., 2003). Solar panels on EcoiInvent
are modelled with a capacity of 210 Wp for an area of of 2.4 m2. Based on current
technology, for an area of 3.1 m2, a capacity of more than 700Wp can be obtained
(Risen 2023). Thus, the area of panels needed has been reduced by a factor 2,
to remain conservative. Moreover, the transformation to industrial area value
is also highly impacted by this improvements of power density in PV, leading
to an overestimate of land use impact. Thus, the value has been updated to 1.5
m2 per m2 of ground mounted structure based on real project data (Labarde
2022). Average carbon footprint of the updated process per kWh produced was
assessed and compared to reference value (Cowi 2023). Regarding land use,
same comparison was performed (INCER ACV 2021), showing that the updated
process was closer to the current impact of PV panels. Detailed calculations can
be found in the additional excel document.
• Light oil : Processes using light oil as fuel are similar to the processes used for
heavy oil, except that heavy oil was replaced by light oil in the EcoInvent process.
• Lignite : Processes using lignite as fuel are similar to the processes used for coal,
except that coal was replaced by lignite in the EcoInvent process.
• Hydropower : Due to LCA data availability, run of river and reservoir hydropower
are modelled with an average process per kWh of electricity produced (production
+ construction) in the production part, and construction is set to 0. This assumes
that hydro capacities are almost at their max and no new major capacities should
be build in the near future. This assumption is relevant as no new hydropower
assets construction is allowed in this Balmorel model.
• Natural gas : All the electricity produced from natural gas with condensing power
plants uses conventional natural gas power plant, even if other types of natural
gas plants exist.
32 of 51
==PAGE:38==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix A
• Nuclear : All the electricity generated from nuclear uses the technology of Pressure
Water Reactor, as it is the most commonly used currently in Europe, even if
other technologies exist.
• Wind onshore : A capacity of 4.5 MW is used to account for all the onshore
wind turbines. This is the highest capacity with data available and it describes
accurately the current generation of wind turbine.
• Wind offshore : all the electricity produced from offshore wind uses 2MW wind
turbine due to data availability. A linear correlation per MW installed is assumed
to account for wind turbines with higher capacity.
• Biomass : Due to a lack of data, all electricity produced with biomass is assumed
to be generated in CHP units. Thus, producing only electricity with biomass is
not authorised.
• Geothermal : Geothermal is only considered for electricity production because
the LCA data available considers deep digging that corresponds to electricity
production and not geothermal for District Heating.
• Peat and shale : Investments are not allowed due to a lack of data in LCA.
Heat :
• Biomass : the production process accounts for an equal distribution of hardwood
and softwood chips as fuel. All the types of biomass are assumed to have the
same LCA impact e.g. wood, straw, woodchips due to data availability.
• Heat pump are modelled with air brine water models.
• Muniwaste : The construction part was set to 0 due to a lack of data for the
power plant itself (no data per MW installed). For the production part, the LCA
results are given per kg of waste and it assumes the following ratio of energy or
heat ouptut : 1 kg of waste produces 1.39 MJ of electricity or 2.85 MJ of heat.
• Solar heating : The process on EcoInvent considers that 1 unit of solar heating
accounts for 58.3 m2 of collector. Based on the technology catalogue (Dan-
ish Energy Agency, 2024), average value for specific yearly thermal output
of solar thermal collectors in Denmark is between 300-600 kWh/m2 per year.
A conservative approach is chosen, with 300.
It gives a power capacity of
300
8760
kWh/m2
hours
= 0.034kW/m2. Thus, 1 unit of solar collectors (corresponding to
58.3m2 of collectors) has a capacity of 2 kWp. The process is then scaled up to
1 MWp. On top of the previous modification, the production process available
on EcoInvent has also been modifed. Indeed, it uses electricity as an input and
electricity from the rest of the world has been changed to account for electricity
from rest of Europe only (ReR). The construction part was modified as well to
remove the heat storage (water tank) as it is accounted separately in Balmorel.
CCS :
On Balmorel, carbon capture is only modelled on natural gas energy plants, therefore
33 of 51
==PAGE:39==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix A
bioenergy with carbon capture is not considered in this study. Regarding CCS on
natural gas energy plants, due to LCI data availability, CCS is only modelled on natural
gas plants producing electricity.
The capturing technology is modelled, but not the transport and storage part for now.
Future work could include it. For the infrastructure category of the LCI, a combined
cycle gas power plant is used. For the use phase, a process is created in Simapro,
based on the inventory developed by Damiani et al. (2012). The process is 1 kWh of
electricity from a natural gas power plant with pre-combustion CO2 capture technology.
The previous paper investigated the LCA of two systems with pre-combustion CO2
processes, and an average of those two processes is used in this study. The inventory
can be seen in Table 2. All other data are derived from EcoInvent 3.8. Results of the
LCA can be found in Appendix F.9.
Energy source
Unit
Natural gas with CCS (Petrakopoulou et al., 2015)
Inputs from the environment
Air
g
5945
Water
g
470
Inputs from the technosphere
Natural gas
g
149.48
Solvent MEA
g
1.36
Water
g
590
Palladium (catalyst)
mg
0.60
Outputs products
Net electricity (at plant)
kWh
1.00
CO2 (l)
kg
0.36
Output waste to treatment
Catalysts
mg
0.60
Wastewater
kg
0.51
Outputs emissions to air
Carbon dioxide
g
52.34
Nitrogen oxides
g
0.44
Solvent MEA
g
0.55
Water
g
0.75
Table 2: Life cycle inventory of the production of one kWh of electricity with a CCS power plant using
natural gas (Petrakopoulou et al., 2015)
Storage :
Based on the modelling method of Balmorel, LCA for storage facilities are accounted
with an average value per kWh of energy stored in the production phase, and the
construction phase is set to zero.
• Pit heat storage (PTES) Investments are not allowed due to a lack of data in
LCA.
• Lithium ion battery (LIB) : NMC (Nickel Manganese Cobalt Oxide) prismatic
rechargeable, is one of the most commonly used technology for LIB and for
batteries connected to the grid system (Danish Energy Agency, 2024). The most
recent LCA process available on EcoInvent is selected, it consists in NMC811 LIB
34 of 51
==PAGE:40==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix C
and the process includes the battery management system and the battery with a
cradle to grave approach and results are given per kg of battery. Based on the LCA
process information, the capacity of the battery is of 0.149 kWh/kg (Ecoinvent
2020, Dai et al., 2019). This assumption is confirmed by the technology catalogue
(Danish Energy Agency, 2024) , as NMC technologies should lie between 120 and
300 Wh/kg. LCA data for 1kg of battery is translated in data for a capacity of 1
MWh based on the previous capacity factor. It leads to a factor of 118 gCO2/Wh
stored. The EcoInvent process is based on batteries for electric cars but it is
the same technology and sometimes batteries of electric cars are reused for grid
system at the end of their life. Balmorel also have the technologies of lead acid,
NAS and redox vanadium but as it does not invest in it and no LCA data is
available, these batteries won’t be assessed in the LCA.
• Hydropower pump storage : For the hydro pumped storage, as efficiency and
stored energy are already accounted with other types of production, a value of 0
is assumed.
• Heat storage water tank : Based on the technology catalogue, small scale water
tank have a volumetric capacity of 60-160l and a specific energy content of
180kWh/m3. The smallest tank available in EcoInvent has a volumetric capacity
of 600l. Still, it is assumed that its behaviour is similar to the one of the small
water tank technology described above. Based on the previous specific energy
content value, one unit of water tank with a volumetric capacity of 600l has
a storage capacity of 108 kWh. This process is then upscale to the different
water tank sizes available. On Balmorel, technologies of 160l, 3000m3 and 10000
m3 are available. based on the technology catalogue, bigger tanks have a lower
storage capacity per m3, therefore, the impacts of the technology might be
underestimated. Results show an investment only in the smallest water tank in
Balmorel. This highlights the relevant approximation in the process.
C
Appendix Allocation of the carrying capacities
C.1
Framework for the allocation of the safe operating space
35 of 51
==PAGE:41==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix C
Table 3: Distributive justice framework for allocating safe operating space, based on (Ryberg, Andersen, et al., 2020) recommendations.
Name
From scale
to scale
Distributive
justice the-
ory
Currency Pattern
Geo Scope
Temporal
Scope
Calculation
Equal per capita
Global
to
Regional
(EU4)
Egalitarian
Safe
op-
erating
space as
a
finite
resource
Equal assignment
of safe operating
space among indi-
viduals
EU4
Annual
distribution
based
on
population
in
given
year, 2022
SOSp EU4 =
POPEU4
POPW orld
Grandfathering
Global
to
sectoral
Non
egal-
itarian
-
Acquired
rights
Safe
op-
erating
space as
a limited
resource
Assigned share is
proportional
to
contribution
to
global
environ-
mental impact in
a reference year
Industrial
sector
-
electricity
and
heat
generation
Annual
distribution
based
on
cugvant
conditions
(2010)
SOSp, EU4, energy =
ISp, EU, energy
NFp
∗POPEU4
POPEU
Grandfathering
based on carbon
equivalent
emis-
sions
Regional
to Industry
Sector
Non-
egalitarian
Acquired
rights
Safe
op-
erating
space as
a
finite
resource
Assigned share is
proportional
to
contribution
to
global
environ-
mental impact in
a reference year
Industrial
sector
-
electricity
and
heat
generation
Annual
distribution
based
on
current
conditions
(2022)
SOSp, EU4, energy = GHGEU4, energy
GHGEU4
Utilitarian
Regional
to Industry
Sector
Utilitarian
Safe
op-
erating
space as
a
finite
resource
Assigned share is
proportional
to
the sector GVA
Industrial
sector
-
electricity
and
heat
generation
Annual
distribution
based
on
current
conditions
(2020)
SOSp EU4 energy = GV AEU4 energy
GV AEU
36 of 51
==PAGE:42==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix C
C.2
Allocation of the safe operating space
Grandfathering allocation
A process was created on Ecoinvent to model the electricity and heat production of EU
in 2010, based on data from (Electricity and heat statistics 2022), and is detailed in
Table 4. It accounts for 93% of the total heat production and uses the existing process
on EcoInvent for electricity with data from 2014.
Process
Amount[GWh]
Electricity, high voltage Europe without Switzerland| market group
for | APOS, S
2 979 660
Heat, district or industrial, other than natural gas RoW| heat
production, at coal coke industrial furnace 1-10MW | APOS, S
201 861
Heat, district or industrial, other than natural gas Europe without
Switzerland| heat production, heavy fuel oil, at industrial furnace
1MW | APOS, S
51 373
Heat, district or industrial, natural gas Europe without Switzerland|
heat production, natural gas, at industrial furnace >100kW | APOS,
S
305 481
Heat, brine-water heat pump 10kW Europe without Switzerland|
heat production, borehole heat exchanger, brine-water heat pump
10kW | APOS, S
388
Heat, district or industrial, other than natural gas RoW| heat
production, hardwood chips from forest, at furnace 5000kW | APOS,
S
87 951
Heat, for reuse in municipal waste incineration only RoW| treatment
of municipal solid waste, incineration | APOS, S
24 245
Table 4: Process created on Simapro for the electricity and heat production of EU in 2010
LCA calculation is then performed with EF3.0 method. Results for all impact categories
are obtained. Regarding climate change, the obtained value differs from the overall
CO2eq emissions of the energy sector in 2010 from the Environmental European Agency
(EEA 2022) by less than 1%, highlighting the relevant approximation of the process.
Selection of the sectors accounted to assess the GVA
Based on the International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic activities
(ISIC) rev 4, (United Nations. Statistical Division., 2008) the following sectors are
considered :
• Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply
• Forestry and logging 0%
• Mining and quarrying 0%
For the sake of simplicity, forestry and logging and mining and quarrying sectors
are not included in the calculation of the SoSOS based on GVA. This leads to an
underestimation of the SoSOS as logging is used in biomass for power generation and
37 of 51
==PAGE:43==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix D
natural gas and coal extraction as well as metals extraction are considered in the last
category. When considering 100% of the two latter sectors in the SoSOS calculation,
results aren’t very sensitive, and can be seen in the additional excel file.
Selection of the sectors for grandfathering, for GHG
Based on IPCC classification, (IPCC 1996), the following sectors are included in this
study to assess the allocation share based on grandfathering for climate change :
• 1A1a: Energy industries - Public Electricity and Heat Production : Sum of
emissions from public electricity generation, public combined heat and power
generation, and public heat plants
• 1A1c : Manufacture of Solid Fuels and Other Energy Industries generation of
electricity and heat : Combustion emissions from fuel use during the manufacture
of secondary and tertiary products from solid fuels including production of coal
and own-energy use in coal mining and oil and gas extraction.
• 1A2 : Manufacturing industries and construction : Emissions from combustion of
fuels in industry including combustion for the generation of heat and electricity.
D
Appendix : EcoInvent processes
The following tables present the EcoInvent processes used in this study to assess the
LCA of the technologies. For each technology, the infrastructure process (in black) and
the use phase process (in blue) are given. Processes starting with new are processes
created in this study. Processes with modified are based on existing processes where
the infrastructure of the energy plant has been removed. Storage technologies are only
modelled with one process accounting for the infrastructure and use phase.
38 of 51
==PAGE:44==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix D
Electricity
source
:
con-
densing plant
Ecoinvent process
Coal
Coal power plant, average, GLO = 0.3*Hard coal power plant GLO|
construction, 100MW | APOS, U + 0.7* Hard coal power plant
GLO| construction, 500MW | APOS, U
Electricity, high voltage DE| electricity production, hard coal |
APOS, U, modifed
Lignite
Lignite power plant RER| construction | APOS, U
Electricity, high voltage DE| electricity production, lignite | APOS,
U, modified
Hydropower run of
river
Electricity, high voltage DE| electricity production, hydro, run-of-
river | APOS, S
Hydropower
pumped storage
Electricity, high voltage DE| electricity production, hydro, pumped
storage | APOS, U
PV
Modified, Photovoltaic plant, 570kWp, multi-Si, on open ground
GLO| construction | APOS, U
Modified, Electricity, low voltage DE| electricity production, photo-
voltaic, 570kWp open ground installation, multi-Si | APOS, U
Natural gas
conventional Gas power plant, 300MW electrical GLO| construction
| APOS, U
Modified, Electricity, high voltage DE| electricity production, natu-
ral gas, conventional power plant | APOS, U
Nuclear
Nuclear power plant, pressure water reactor, 1000MW FR| nuclear
power plant construction, pressure water reactor, 1000MW | APOS,
U
Electricity, high voltage FR| electricity production, nuclear, pressure
water reactor | APOS, U, modified
Oil heavy
Oil power plant, 500MW RER| construction | APOS, U
Modified, Electricity, high voltage DE| electricity production, heavy
fuel oil | APOS, U
Oil light
Oil power plant, 500MW RER| construction | APOS, U
Electricity, high voltage DE| electricity production, light oil | APOS,
U, modified
Wind, offshore
Wind power plant, 2MW, offshore, fixed parts GLO| construction |
APOS, U + Wind power plant, 2MW, offshore, moving parts GLO|
construction | APOS, U
Modified, Electricity, high voltage DE| electricity production, wind,
1-3MW turbine, offshore | APOS, U
Wind, onshore
Wind turbine network connection, 4.5MW, onshore GLO| construc-
tion | APOS, U + Wind turbine, 4.5MW, onshore GLO| construction
| APOS, U
Modified, Electricity, high voltage DE| electricity production, wind,
>3MW turbine, onshore | APOS, U
Geothermal
Geothermal power plant, 5.5MWel RoW| geothermal power plant
construction | APOS, U
Modified, Electricity, high voltage DE| electricity production, deep
geothermal | APOS, U
Biogas
Created process assembly : Biogas power plant electricity only 160
kW
Biogas RoW| market for biogas | APOS, S
39 of 51
==PAGE:45==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix D
Heating
only
source Boilers
Ecoinvent process
Biomass
Wood Furnace, wood chips, with silo, 5000 kW (RoW) production
APOS U
Modified, 0.5* Heat, district or industrial, other than natural gas
RoW| heat production, hardwood chips from forest, at furnace
5000kW, state-of-the-art 2014 | APOS, U + 0.5* Heat, district or
industrial, other than natural gas RoW| heat production, softwood
chips from forest, at furnace 5000kW, state-of-the-art 2014 | APOS,
U
Heat pump
Heat pump, brine-water, 10kW RoW| production | APOS, U
Heat, air-water heat pump 10kW Europe without Switzerland|
production | APOS, U
Gas
Industrial furnace, natural gas RER| production | APOS, U (Data
identical as Oil Industrial Furnace 1 MW)
Heat, district or industrial, natural gas Europe without Switzerland|
heat production, natural gas, at industrial furnace >100kW | APOS,
U, modified
Heavy Oil
Industrial furnace, 1MW, oil GLO| market for | APOS, U
Modified, Heat, district or industrial, other than natural gas Europe
without Switzerland| heat production, heavy fuel oil, at industrial
furnace 1MW | APOS, U
Light Oil
Industrial furnace, 1MW, oil GLO| market for | APOS, U
Modified, Heat, district or industrial, other than natural gas Europe
without Switzerland| heat production, light fuel oil, at industrial
furnace 1MW | APOS, U
Coal
Industrial furnace production, coal, 1-10MW RER
Heat production, at coal coke industrial furnace 1-10MW RoW,
modified
MuniWaste
Hypothesis : Same as for CHP
Solar heating
Modified, Solar collector system, Cu flat plate collector, multiple
dwelling, hot water RoW| solar collector system installation, Cu flat
plate collector, multiple dwelling, hot water | APOS, U
Modified, Heat, central or small-scale, other than natural gas RoW|
operation, solar collector system, Cu flat plate collector, multiple
dwelling, for hot water | APOS, U 18
40 of 51
==PAGE:46==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix E
CHP
Ecoinvent process
Biomass
Created process : Furnace production, wood chips, with silo, 5000kW
RoW + Heat and power co-generation unit, organic Rankine cycle,
1000kW electrical GLO| construction | APOS, U = Biomass CHP
power plant (created process)
Modified, Heat, district or industrial, other than natural gas DE|
heat and power co-generation, wood chips, 6667 kW, state-of-the-art
2014 | APOS, U (all countries available) Modified, Electricity, high
voltage DE| heat and power co-generation, wood chips, 6667 kW,
state-of-the-art 2014 | APOS, U
Natural gas com-
bined cycles
Gas power plant, combined cycle, 400MW electrical RER| construc-
tion | APOS, U
Modified, Electricity, high voltage DE| heat and power co-generation,
natural gas, combined cycle power plant, 400MW electrical | APOS,
U Modified, Heat, district or industrial, natural gas DE| heat
and power co-generation, natural gas, combined cycle power plant,
400MW electrical | APOS, U
Oil (heavy/light
fuel)
Industrial furnace, 1MW, oil RoW| production | APOS, U
Modified, Heat, district or industrial, other than natural gas Eu-
rope without Switzerland| heat production, heavy/light fuel oil, at
industrial furnace 1MW | APOS, U
Modified, Electricity, high voltage DE| heat and power co-generation,
havy/light oil | APOS, U
Biogas
Biogas power plant = Heat and power co-generation unit, 160kW
electrical, common components for heat+electricity RER| construc-
tion | APOS, U + Heat and power co-generation unit, 160kW
electrical, components for electricity RER| construction | APOS, U
+ Heat and power co-generation unit, 160kW electrical, components
for heat RER| construction | APOS, U
Modified, Electricity, high voltage DE| heat and power co-generation,
biogas, gas engine | APOS, U
Modified, Heat, central or small-scale, other than natural gas DE|
heat and power co-generation, biogas, gas engine | APOS, U
Coal / Lignite
Same power plant as in electricity process
Modified, Heat, district or industrial, other than natural gas DE|
heat and power co-generation, hard coal/ Lignite | APOS, U
Modified, Electricity, high voltage DE| heat and power co-generation,
hard coal/ Lignite | APOS, U
MuniWaste
Municipal waste incineration facility RoW| construction | APOS, U
Municipal solid waste DK| treatment of, incineration | APOS, U
41 of 51
==PAGE:47==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix F
Other
Ecoinvent process
Water tank
Hot water tank, 600l GLO| market for | APOS, S
Carbon capture
on natural gas
combined
cycle
power plants, pre
combustion pro-
cess, electricity
New, Electricity, high voltage DE| electricity production, natural
gas CCS, conventional power plant | APOS, U
Batteries
Battery, Li-ion, NMC811, rechargeable, prismatic GLO| market for
battery, Li-ion, NMC811, rechargeable, prismatic | APOS, S
Hydropower,
reservoir
Electricity, high voltage FR| electricity production, hydro, reservoir,
alpine region | APOS, S
E
Appendix Carrying capacities and Safe Operating Space
Impact category
Unit
SOS1
SOS2
SOS3
Climate change
kgCO2eq
3.96E+10
3.82E+10
1.80E+09
Ozone depletion
CF111eq
3.42E+04
3.33E+06
1.57E+05
Particulate matter
Disease inc
1.19E+03
2.89E+03
1.37E+02
Acidification
mol H+ eq
4.59E+9
5.61E+9
2.65E+08
Eutrophication, freshwater
kg Peq
1.50E+08
3.26E+07
1.54E+06
Ecotoxicity, freshwater
CTUe
2.07E+12
7.35E+11
3.47E+10
Land use
Pt
1.13E+12
2.92E+13
1.38E+12
Water use
m3 depriv
2.03E+11
1.02E+12
4.82E+10
Resource use, minerals and metals
kg Sbeq
1.55E+05
1.23E+06
5.80E+04
Table 5: Assigned Safe Operating Space (SOS) per impact category for allocation principle 1 (grand-
fathering), allocation principle 2 (Equal per capita & grandfathering on CO2) and allocation principle
3 (Equal per Capita & GVA) for the countries considered in the study (Denmark, Germany, Norway,
Sweden)
Impact category
Unit
SoSOS1
SoSOS2
SoSOS3
Climate change
kgCO2eq
0.58%
0.56%
0.03%
Ozone depletion
CF111eq
0.01%
Particulate matter
Disease inc
0.23%
Acidification
mol H+ eq
0.46%
Eutrophication, freshwater
kg Peq
2.59%
Ecotoxicity, freshwater
CTUe
1.58%
Land use
Pt
0.02%
Water use
m3 depriv
0.11%
Resource use, minerals and metals
kg Sbeq
0.07%
Table 6: Share of Safe Operating Space (SoSOS) per impact category for allocation principle 1
(grandfathering), allocation principle 2 (Equal per capita & grandfathering on CO2) and allocation
principle 3 (Equal per Capita & GVA) for the countries considered in the study (Denmark, Germany,
Norway, Sweden)
42 of 51
==PAGE:48==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix F
Regarding the impact category land use, the boundary given in kg of soil loss is
translated in Pts (E. Crenna et al., 2019).
F
Appendix : Additional results
F.1
Sensitivity analysis on the uncertainty area
Based on calculations from Sala, Eleonora Crenna, et al. (2020), the uncertainty area
for climate change, as defined in Johan Rockström & al (2009), is set at 128% instead
of the 200%used in this study. This does not significantly impact the results, as all
scenarios presented climate change transgressions beyond the uncertainty area. In fact,
considering the lower uncertainty range would exacerbate the critical situation. Among
the other categories comparable between the two frameworks, ozone depletion present
the same area of uncertainty and water usage would be set to 150% (Johan Rockström
& al, 2009), compared to the 200% value considered in this study, but it does not
impact the results as water usage CC is not transgressed in the scenarios considered.
F.2
Sensitivity on the penalty value in PB8 scenario
Sensitivity analysis on the penalty value used in the objective function is performed.
Values ranging from 1e6 to 1e18 are tested. Beyond 1e18, computational time increases
significantly. The results remain robust for penalty values between 1e10 and 1e18,
with only minor variations in the optimal energy mix and TLs (Table 7 and Figure 9).
However, a lower value of 1e6 is not restrictive enough and results in higher TLs and
a significant development of natural gas. Therefore, this sensitivity analysis confirms
that the value of 1e13 chosen in the PB8 scenario is an adequate compromise between
computational time and achieving an optimal solution that minimises the TLs.
Carrying Capacities
S0 (penalty 1e13)
S1 (penalty 1e18)
S2 (penalty 1e6)
Acidification
0.09
0.09
3.07
Eutrophication
0.21
0.21
5.06
Water use
0.72
0.72
2.72
Ozone depletion
2.35
2.35
11.69
Ecotoxicity
1.18
1.18
31.73
Climate change
7.64
7.66
80.59
Particulate matter
4.05
4.04
144.18
Resource use
29.15
29.12
763.49
Land use
1.33
1.32
13.49
Table 7: Sensitivity analysis on the transgression levels of the nine carrying capacities considered in
this study, for different penalty values. S0 refers to the reference scenario with a penalty value of 1e13.
Results for two penalty value are displayed to illustrate the robustness of the results within the range
1e10 - 1e18 with the penalty value 1e18 (S1), and the high variation of results when using a lower
penalty value, with 1e6 (S2).
43 of 51
==PAGE:49==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix F
Figure 9: Sensitivity on the energy mix, for different penalty values. S0 refers to the reference scenario
with a penalty value of 1e13. Results for two penalty values are displayed to illustrate the robustness
of the results within the range 1e10 - 1e18 with the penalty value 1e18 (S1), and the high variation
of results when using a lower penalty value, with 1e6 (S2). The category Other includes batteries,
biogas and bio-oil.
F.3
Sensitivity on the weighting of the carrying capacities
A weighting approach of the carrying capacities is considered, as the approach allowing
transgression lead to solutions that are not absolutely sustainable. It must be noted
that weighting CC has drawbacks as the choice is inherently subjective (Weidner et al.,
2022). Two weighting are considered (Sala and Cerutti, 2018). One is based on the
final weighting factors including robustness recommended for EF3.0 (with scenario
Weighting EF) and the other is based on distance to science based targets weighting
factors e.g. PB (with scenario Weighting SBT). Weighting values for both scenarios
are available in Sala and Cerutti (2018) and in the additional excel document of this
study. The weighting is implemented to the TL in the objective function. Variation of
the energy production mix as well as the TL is considered negligible (Figures 10, 11),
and indicates robustness of the results towards the weighting method.
44 of 51
==PAGE:50==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix F
Figure 10: Comparison of the distribution of electricity and heat production per technology in 2050
for the EU4, between the scenarios PB8, Weighting EF and Weighting SBT. The category Other
includes biogas and bio-oil.
Figure 11: Sensitivity analysis on the weighting of the carrying capacities. The grey bars represent
the TL of the PB8 scenario an equal weighting approach. Each error bar represents the range of TL
values obtained with the three different weighting considered. The green zone represents the safe
operating space (until 1), the yellow zone is the uncertainty area (until 2) and the red zone is the high
risk area.
45 of 51
==PAGE:51==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix F
F.4
Economic impacts of considering carrying capacities
Figure 12: Distribution of EU4 total energy system costs per cost type, in million of euro for the
scenarios Net Zero, PBCO2 and PB8 in 2050.
F.5
Sensitivity on transmission capacity in PB8 scenario
A significant increase in transmission capacity is observed from the Net Zero to PBCO2
and PB8 scenarios, driven by the implementation of CCs (Table 8). Sensitivity analysis
restraining each transmission line between two regions to a maximum value of 15GW is
conducted with the scenario PB_Transmission_max_15GW. This constraint does
not impact the energy production mix and the TLs that remain similar. Costs are
slightly decreased compared to PB8 scenario due to a lower transmission capacity
installed (Table 8). Transmission lines larger than 15 GW in PB8 scenario e.g. DK2-
DE4-E, DK1-DK2 are downscaled to the 15 GW limit while smaller lines see their
capacity increased. Although the transmission system is not considered in the AESA
of this study, including it in future research could be beneficial.
Scenario
Transmission capacity (GW)
Total cost of the system (M€)
Net Zero
319
65 000
PB_CO2
1079
1.94
PB8
1017
160 000
PB_Transmission_max_15GW
819
150 000
Table 8: Comparison of the total transmission capacity installed and the total cost of the system, for
EU4, in the scenarios Net Zero, PBCO2, PB8 and PBT ransmissionmax15GW .
46 of 51
==PAGE:52==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix F
F.6
Sensitivity on PB8 scenario : optimisation on the nine carrying capac-
ities
The scenario PB9 optimises on the nine CC, including now resource use, and is
considered as a sensitivity of the scenario PB8. Compared to PB8 scenario, solar
energy is entirely replaced by electricity produced by offshore wind, municipal waste and
natural gas with CCS in PB9 (Figure 13), reducing the TLs on land use and resource
use. The impact on all TLs is displayed in Table 9. Climate change is negatively
impacted by the shift from solar to natural gas, with a TL increase of more than 50%.
Despite these changes, the system remains not absolutely sustainable.
Figure 13: Distribution of electricity and heat production per technology in 2050 for the EU4, for
PB9 scenario. In this scenario, nine CCs are optimised on, including now resource use. The category
Other includes biogas and bio-oil.
Impact category
Change in TL(%)
Acidification
60
Eutrophication
-24
Water use
-1
Ozone depletion
49
Ecotoxicity
5
Climate change
53
Particulate matter
-15
Resource use
-44
Land use
-69
Table 9: Percentage change in TL for the PB9 scenario compared to PB8. A positive value indicates
an increase of the TL when optimising on nine CCs vs eight.
47 of 51
==PAGE:53==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix F
F.7
Sensitivity on solar panels manufacturing
Figure 14: Comparison of the LCA impacts for the infrastructure phase of solar panels, per MW
installed, for nine impact categories. PB8 refers to the Ecoinvent process used in this study. PBP V
refers to the updated value of the process, using the French electricity mix. Results are normalised
by the highest impact score between the two scenarios for each impact category and displayed as a
percentage of it.
Figure 15: Distribution of electricity and heat production per technology in 2050 for the EU4, for the
scenarios PB8 and PBP V . The category Other includes batteries, bio-oil and biogas.
48 of 51
==PAGE:54==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix F
Figure 16: Technology contribution to the transgression levels of the eight carrying capacities optimised
on, for the PBP V scenario. The green zone represents the safe operating space (until 1), the yellow
zone is the uncertainty area (until 2) and the red zone is the high risk area. The category Other is
specific to each impact category and refers to the technologies responsible for less than 8% of the
impact.
F.8
Sensitivity on the allocation principle
Figure 17: Distribution of electricity and heat production per technology in 2050 for the EU4, for the
PBCO2 scenario using three different allocation methods : grandfathering (GF), equal per capita and
GVA, and equal per capita and GF. The category Other includes batteries, biogas and bio-oil
49 of 51
==PAGE:55==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
Appendix F
Figure 18: Sensitivity analysis on the allocation principle for the scenario PB8. The grey bars
represent the TL of the PB8 scenario using the grandfathering allocation principle. Each error bar
represents the range of TL values obtained with the three different allocation types considered in this
study.(Figure 3) The green zone represents the safe operating space (until 1), the yellow zone is the
uncertainty area (until 2) and the red zone is the high risk area.
F.9
LCA of CCS units
As detailed in Table 2, the production of 1 kWh of electricity using CCS for natural
gas is compared with the process used for the production of 1 kWh of electricity using
conventional natural gas in Figure 19. Despite a lower impact on climate change and
ozone depletion when using CCS, all the other impact categories considered present a
higher impact.
Figure 19: Comparison of the LCA results across nine impact categories, of the production of 1 kWh
of electricity using natural gas with or without CCS. The LCIA method EF3.0 is used. The results
are normalised by the higher value per impact category.
F.10
Additional information on the influence of energy technologies on
some impact categories considered
Eutrophication of freshwater refers to the emission of phosphore in water. The treatment
of spoil, material removed during coal mining, is often contaminated by chemicals and
50 of 51
==PAGE:56==
Design of an energy system within the carrying capacities
21st of June, 2024
leaches phosphates when disposed in landfill. The other technologies mainly impact
eutrophication through the use of coal in backprocesses or through metal extraction
e.g. copper for solar panels, but present significantly lower impact than coal (Berrill
et al., 2016). Freshwater ecotoxicity refers to the toxic impact of polluants e.g. metals,
fertilizers on aquatic systems e.g. river, ground water. It is mainly related to coal
and natural gas extraction with the treatment of spoil, as well as to biomass with
the increasd use of fertilizers. Solar energy presents a significant impact through the
processing of copper leading to sulfidic mine tailings containing important amount of
metals and contaminating water bodies (Berrill et al., 2016). The impact of energy
technologies on climate change is reported in IPCC reports (IPCC, 2023). Particulate
matter considers the impacts of fines particulates e.g. NOx, SO2, which are significantly
released during the burning process of natural gas, coal and biomass.
51 of 51
