==PAGE:1==
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation
Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
Master Thesis
Author:
Thomas C. Benfer
DTU Space
National Space Institute
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
Master Thesis
July 2, 2024
By
Thomas C. Benfer
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
OpenAI’s DALL-E 2
Published by:
DTU, National Space Institute , Building 348, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Den-
mark
www.space.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
This section is dedicated to acknowledging those who contributed to this thesis. Their
help was essential in bringing it to its current state.
To John Peter Merryman Boncori, Head of Microwaves and Remote Sensing at DTU,
my thesis supervisor: Your enthusiasm and willingness to discuss even the simplest matters
were incredibly reassuring, making the entire thesis project very enjoyable. Without your
strong support, this thesis would not have been possible.
To Miquel Negre Dou, PhD Student, Department of Space Research and Technology
Microwaves and Remote Sensing - DTU. You were in a similar situation to mine just a
year ago and were incredibly helpful when I faced problems with IPP. Your support and
shared laughter during our frustrations made my time enjoyable and reassuring.
To Cecile Marie Margaretha Kittel (Project Manager and Senior Remote Sensing
Specialist) and Mikkel Hoeegh Bojesen (Senior Business Development Manager) at
DHI: Your invaluable contributions in providing input data for the primary model were
essential for completing the analysis.
To Diana Vigah Adetsu, Ph.D. Candidate – Dept. of Agroecology Soil Physics and
Hydropedology. I had the pleasure of presenting to you early in the project timeline. Our
discussions were invaluable, and you provided me with essential parcel data. Thank you
for your support.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Methods InSAR
2
2.1
SAR Interferometry (InSAR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.1
InSAR Working Principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Coherence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
InSAR – Creating a Deformation Time Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Time Series Reconstruction
10
3.1
Model Based Approach - Working Principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Model Based Approach - SPAMS Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.1
SPAMS Model - Soft Soil Displacement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.2
Model Parameter Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Numerical Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Data and Area of Interest
22
4.1
Area of Interest - Store Vildmose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Data for Store Vildmose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.1
Indexing of Spatial Extent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.2
PSInSAR Deformation Time Series Corner Reflector Datasets . . . .
23
4.2.3
Daily Mean Precipitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.4
Daily Mean Evapotranspiration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.5
SAR Image Acquisition and Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Coherence for Store Vildmose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Evaluating SPAMS model on Time Series from Store Vildmose
31
6
Results and Analysis
34
6.1
Time Series Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.1.1
Parcel Time Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2
Model-Based Time-Series Reconstruction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2.1
Spatial and Temporal Extent of Parcels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2.2
Model Estimation and Reconstruction - Validation . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.3
Numerical Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
Discussion
46
8
Conclusion
47
8.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
Bibliography
49
A Appendix
51
A.1 Multi Looking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Peatlands, are areas of significant geological interest due to their dynamic surface move-
ments, which are coupled with their crucial role in global carbon storage and water cycle
regulation. The phenomenon observed here, often referred to as ”bog breathing,” describes
the rhythmic elevation and subsidence of the bog surface, a distinctive characteristic of
specific peatlands. This movement is driven by the expansion and contraction of the peat
layer in response to varying moisture levels. During periods of high moisture, the peat ab-
sorbs water and expands, causing the bog surface to rise. Conversely, in times of drought,
the peat loses water and contracts, leading to the descent of the bog surface [1].
To measure these surface deformations, Synthetic Aperture Radar Interferometry (InSAR)
is employed. InSAR detects ground movements by analyzing phase differences between
radar images taken at different times, allowing the creation of surface deformation time
series. However, for InSAR to be applicable, the level of coherence, i.e., statistical similar-
ity, between the phases of these radar images needs to be suﬀiciently high. A challenge in
peatlands is the frequent loss of interferometric coherence during summer periods. This
loss is often due to increased vegetation growth, landscaping, plowing, and harvesting,
which alter the reflective properties of the surface, complicating the construction of a con-
tinuous time series for an entire year. Consequently, we are left with multiple disconnected
time series, each representing different periods with suﬀicient coherence.
This thesis explores two primary methods for reconstructing these time series: a model-
based approach and a numerical approach. The model-based approach uses the SPAMS
empirical model [2], first used in the Netherlands, to realign segmented time series’ [3].
This method creates an average continuous deformation series for an entire year, though
it requires a number of parcels to work. For the first time, this approach is applied to
Denmark, specifically focusing on Store Vildmose. In contrast, the numerical approach,
which is unpublished and the author’s original contribution, integrates a finer numerical
derivative of the segmented data to construct a cumulative reference deformation. This
reference helps realign the original disconnected time series, providing an effective alter-
native despite some additional considerations for numerical stability.
The structure of this thesis is as follows: chapter 2 explains the methods of InSAR, detail-
ing the working principles, techniques, and challenges associated with coherence. chapter 3
discusses the time series reconstruction methods, including the construction of a simula-
tion using actual model parameters. This simulation served as a test to evaluate both
the model-based approach using the SPAMS empirical model and the novel numerical
approach developed for this study. chapter 4 provides comprehensive data on the area of
interest, focusing on Store Vildmose, including its geographical context, historical back-
ground, and specific data sets used for the analysis. chapter 5 evaluates the application
of the SPAMS model on time series data from Store Vildmose, assessing its effectiveness
and accuracy. chapter 6 presents the results and analysis, comparing the outcomes of
both reconstruction methods and discussing their implications. Finally, chapters 7 and 8
discusses the findings in the broader context of peatland research and concludes the study
with suggestions for future work, highlighting potential improvements and applications.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
1
==PAGE:8==
2
Methods InSAR
We begin with an introduction to the general SAR concept, which then leads into the
technique of InSAR. Next, we will present some notable remarks on coherence. Finally,
we will explain how to construct a deformation time series from InSAR deformation maps.
2.1
SAR Interferometry (InSAR)
Before diving into SAR Interferometry (InSAR), it’s helpful to first understand what the
”SAR” component is.
The main difference between conventional radar and synthetic aperture radar (SAR) is
that SAR utilizes the movement of the antenna itself. As shown in fig. 2.1, the radar
moves along a path, looking sideways at the ground, which is appropriately called the
along-track.
Figure 2.1: SAR geometry of the system traveling in the along-track direction, referred to
as the azimuth dimension, while the slant range represents the range dimension [4].
A SAR transmits signals and receives the echoes that are back-scattered from the terrain
below. As it moves, it scans the ground and forms an image by aligning these echoes
one after another. This image has two coordinates: range (r) and along track (x). The
range is the (slanted) distance between the radar and a point, also appropriately called
slant range. Instead of measuring distance directly, the radar measures the time delay (τ)
of the returning signal. Assuming no delay in the signal’s travel, range and time delay
are connected by the formula r = (c/2)τ, where c is the speed of light. The along-track
coordinate is called azimuth, even though traditionally, azimuth refers to an angle in
rotating radars.
For most conventional radars, azimuth resolution depends on the distance to the target.
However, for SAR, the azimuth resolution is independent of distance, making it ideal for
airborne systems like satellites and airplanes that cover large areas from high altitudes.
Achieving this better azimuth resolution requires advanced signal processing called pulse
compression, which will not be covered further in this thesis.
2
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:9==
The output from a SAR system, often referred to as an ”image,” significantly diverges
from traditional photographic imagery. Unlike a camera that captures reflected light, the
image of a SAR is a complex data array where each pixel represents radar backscatter
intensity from the surface it reflects. Specifically, each point is derived from the amplitude
and phase of the returned signal [4].
The raw image acquired by a SAR is focused by applying matched filtering in both the
range and azimuth dimensions, yielding a so-called Single Look Complex (SLC) SAR
image. The phase terms of the focused SAR image, which are exploited in InSAR, can be
expressed by the following proportionality:
z ∝exp
(
−j 4π
λ r0
)
exp (−j2πfcτatmo) exp (jϕb)
(2.1)
where r0 is the slant range of closest approach, λ is the wavelength of the transmitted
signal, fc is the carrier frequency of the transmitted signal, τatmo is the time delay of
the transmitted signal due to atmospheric propagation, and ϕb is the coherent sum of
contributions from resolution cell elements, also known as speckle.
2.1.1
InSAR Working Principle
In general, InSAR uses the phase information from two radar images captured at different
times and examines the phase difference between them to monitor ground movements.
This subsection elaborates on the core principles and challenges associated with InSAR
measurements.
The accuracy of InSAR depends significantly on the wavelength of the SAR signal. A
complete cycle phase shift (2π radians) in the radar signal represents a ground displace-
ment of half the wavelength (λ/2). Consequently, shorter wavelengths, while providing
higher precision by detecting smaller displacements, are more susceptible to atmospheric
disturbances that can degrade measurement accuracy. In contrast, longer wavelengths
penetrate better through vegetation and are less affected by atmospheric conditions but
are less precise in measuring small displacements.
The temporal baseline - the interval between the captures of two SAR images, affects
the sensitivity to slow movements. A longer temporal baseline enables the observation of
such movements but also increases the likelihood of temporal decorrelation. This occurs
when changes in surface or vegetation over time disrupt the coherence of the radar signals,
complicating the extraction of useful data. More details on coherence and decorrelation
are provided in section 2.1.2.
When two co-registered SLC SAR images, where co-registered means they have been
aligned to the same coordinate system, are captured over the same region at different
times, a complex interferogram zint can be generated. This process enables the extrac-
tion of information regarding the Line of Sight (LOS) deformations, which refers to the
displacement along the direction from the satellite to the ground surface. This is accom-
plished by multiplying one of the images (the master) with the complex conjugate of the
other (the slave). Mathematically, this is expressed as:
zint = z1z∗
2 = |z1z∗
2| exp(jϕint)
(2.2)
where z1 and z2 represent the SLC SAR images for the master and slave, respectively, and
the superscript * denotes the complex conjugate operation. ϕint is the complex interfero-
metric phase, which is the component which holds the information regarding the ground
movement. The interferometric phase is made up of multiple sub-components, which can
be written as:
ϕint =
[
−4π
λ (r1
0 −r2
0) −2πfc(τ 1
atmo −τ 2
atmo) + ϕ1
b −ϕ2
b
]
mod 2π
(2.3)
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
3
==PAGE:10==
In this equation, the superscripts 1 and 2 represent the two time acquisitions from the
overhead passes. This phase is composed of several components, including displacement-
related phase shifts due to actual ground displacement, a spatially correlated atmospheric
phase term, and decorrelation phase shifts that can often be filtered out through spatial
averaging techniques like multilooking. Multilooking is a process that reduces noise by
averaging multiple looks of the same area. This technique improves the signal-to-noise
ratio by dividing the radar signal into several independent sub-apertures, each capturing
a slightly different view of the same scene, and then averaging these views to produce a
single, clearer image.
A significant challenge in InSAR is phase wrapping, where the interferometric phase is
”wrapped” from −π to π, as seen in the equation as mod 2π. From the phase gradient, it
is possible to ”unwrap” the phase. Phase unwrapping restores the actual phase differences
between pixels, translating the interferometric data into a coherent map of ground defor-
mation. The process, however, is not straightforward due to the ambiguities introduced
by the 2π periodicity of the phase. There is no single method or algorithm to unwrap a
phase gradient, but it usually works by placing a strategic point from which one unwraps
the phase from. One such approach could be the branch-cut algorithm, which only allows
integration paths that encircle the same number of positive and negative residues in the
data [5].
Once the interferometric phase is filtered and unwrapped, denoted by ϕdefo, it can be
converted into LOS deformation data. This is done by the following relation:
∆dLOS = −λ
4πϕdefo
(2.4)
The minus sign in front of this equation is arbitrary and can be adjusted depending on
the specific problem at hand.
An example output of a LOS deformation map can be
constructed using SLC SAR images from the descending flight path, as seen in fig. 2.2.
These images, captured over northern Jutland on January 6, 2022, and January 18, 2022,
provide a temporal baseline of 12 days. The outputted LOS deformation map has been
geocoded into the coordinates of latitude and longitude from standard SAR coordinates.
Geocoding is the process of transforming coordinates from the radar’s coordinate system
to a geographic coordinate system.
4
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.2: This figure illustrates the changes in the land surface of Northern Jutland over
the specified temporal baseline. This map represents the line of sight (LOS) deformation
data derived from the interferometric phase, as calculated using eq. (2.4). This deformation
map is plotted in the MATLAB colormap hsv.
The values of this deformation map, indicate relative deformation values derived using the
equation eq. (2.4) and is in units of millimeters.
2.1.2
Coherence
Coherence (γ), in the context of InSAR, quantifies how consistent the scattering properties
of a surface are between two radar acquisitions. High coherence indicates that the surface
has maintained its reflective characteristics consistently between radar acquisitions, which
is crucial for accurate measurement of physical movements through the phase information.
Specifically, high coherence ensures that the difference in the deformation-related phase
shifts, represented by ϕdefo = −4π
λ (r1
0 −r2
0) in the interferometric phase eq. (2.3), remains
small. This small variation is essential as it indicates that the changes detected in the
phase information primarily reflect actual ground movement rather than noise or atmo-
spheric disturbances. Conversely, low coherence suggests that the surface has undergone
significant changes in its reflective properties, leading to a loss of correlation between radar
signals across acquisitions. This results in a larger variability in the interferometric phase
components, particularly affecting the displacement-related phase shifts.
Such variability can mask true ground movements, making it diﬀicult to derive accurate
conclusions about the physical changes occurring on the ground.
Coherence is a tricky parameter that can vary in importance depending on what you’re
examining. Generally, we want high coherence, but what counts as ”high coherence” can
change based on the area and specific analysis requirements.
Mathematically, coherence can be expressed as
γ =
E(z1z∗
2)
√
E(|z1|2)
√
E(|z2|2)
≈
∑N
i=1 z1iz∗
2i
√∑N
i=1 |z1i|2
√∑N
i=1 |z2i|2
(2.5)
here E denotes the expected value, which can only be approximated by averaging over a
window of N samples.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
5
==PAGE:12==
A coherence map, similar to the previously created deformation map and using the same
parameters, can also be constructed. This map has been converted to latitude and longi-
tude coordinates and is shown in fig. 2.3.
Figure 2.3: This figure illustrates the coherence over the surface of Northern Jutland,
based on exact parameters as those presented in fig. 2.2.
Several factors can influence interferometric coherence, particularly leading to its loss,
known as decorrelation.
Decorrelation in the context of this thesis in InSAR can be
broadly categorized into three types: geometric, volumetric, and temporal.
Geometric decorrelation occurs when radar signals, which should reflect backscattered
signals consistently, are instead captured from different angles during separate radar scans.
This issue mainly stems from the ”perpendicular baseline,” which is the distance between
the radar’s positions during each scan, measured directly across from the radar’s LOS.
Volumetric decorrelation can occur when plants and crops grow; the thicker and taller
vegetation alters how radar signals penetrate and backscatter. This causes inconsistent
radar returns over time because the same area reflects signals differently based on vegeta-
tion growth. These inconsistencies are especially noticeable during peak growth seasons,
reducing the coherence of radar images. As a result, it becomes harder to reliably detect
and analyze surface deformations or movements beneath the vegetation.
Temporal decorrelation occurs due to changes on the surface over time, whether from
natural events like seasonal snow or human activities such as landscaping, plowing, and
harvesting [5].
In an ideal scenario for InSAR applications, the coherence would perfectly reflect the
physical and temporal stability of the observed surfaces between two radar acquisitions.
However, in a practical sense, this is not the case. To consider the most obvious example,
an area where we would expect zero coherence is the surface of the sea. Trivially, this can
be thought of as comparing an image of the sea to another image of the same area at a
different time; they would be completely different, of course. Upon closer examination of
our coherence map in fig. 2.3, the sea area is not black, which would indicate zero coherence
as expected. Instead, it shows some level of coherence. Averaging over a window of N
samples in the sea area would reveal a non-zero value, as is also denoted by the eq. (2.5).
This unexpected non-zero mean of the sea is due to a phenomenon known as coherence
6
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:13==
estimation bias. The coherence estimation bias is the deviation of the estimated coherence
from its true value, typically caused by noise, finite sample sizes, and processing steps.
A way to combat this is to conduct spatial averaging on one’s interferogram; this can be
done in multiple ways, but a good method is through multilooking techniques. This will
reduce noise and improve the signal-to-noise ratio by averaging multiple looks [5].
To estimate this coherence bias, refer to fig. 2.4. The thick black line indicates completely
unbiased coherence, while the colored lines represent various numbers of independent
looks. It is evident that increasing the number of independent looks reduces the coherence
estimation bias.
Figure 2.4: Coherence estimation bias E(ˆγ) as a function of true coherence γ. The thick
black line represents the ideal unbiased coherence. The colored lines show the effect of
different numbers of independent looks (L) has on the coherence estimation bias, with
higher values resulting in reduced bias. This is a simulation made in MATLAB and is
based on the equations and theory described in [6].
Following this logic, using an infinite number of looks would result in totally unbiased
coherence. However, this is a spatial averaging technique, which will increase pixel spacing
and reduce image resolution. Hence, it is more of a cost-benefit analysis between increasing
the signal-to-noise ratio while ensuring one’s resolution meets one’s requirements.
2.2
InSAR – Creating a Deformation Time Series
This section explains a method based on the Small Baseline Subset (SBAS) approach, a
well-known technique in satellite radar studies for monitoring deformations over time using
interferograms from image pairs [7]. Although SBAS is the foundation, our implementation
is adapted to address the unique aspects of our dataset requirements.
As previously stated, interferograms are formed by combining two images taken on dif-
ferent dates. Each interferogram encapsulates the difference of phases between the two
dates—that is, any surface deformation that occurred over time.
To form a time se-
ries of deformation, we have to connect multiple interferograms and decouple the part of
deformation at every date so it will be possible to track an evolution in the LOS surface-
deformation pattern, i.e. an inversion approach where we reverse the process to isolate
individual deformation segments from the accumulated LOS deformation difference.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
7
==PAGE:14==
Before explaining the process, it can be noted that the decorrelation phenomena have been
totally neglected as well as possible phase artifacts caused by changes in the atmosphere
refraction between the acquisitions. This is simply to allow an easy way to simplify the
method presented here. However, the decorrelation will be brought back for the actual
analysis in chapter 6. Furthermore, each inteferogram has been normalized in relation to
an area of high coherence through the entire set of interferograms. In practice this can be
a city which exhibit high overall coherence.
The method involves a temporal analysis on a pixel-by-pixel basis, i.e. each unique pixel
has it own time series. Initially, let’s examine the generic j-interferogram ∆ϕj computed
at the pixel with azimuth and range coordinates (x, r) at SAR acquisition times tB and
tA, which is given by
∆ϕj(x, r) = ϕ(tB, x, r) −ϕ(tA, x, r)
(2.6)
where ϕ(tB, x, r) and ϕ(tA, x, r) represent the phase values of the radar signal at different
times. In a similar manner the LOS displacement difference between the two times, which
mirrors the previous eq. (2.4), is trivially defined as
∆dLOSj = dLOS(tB, x, r) −dLOS(tA, x, r)
(2.7)
= λ
4π (ϕ(tB, x, r) −ϕ(tA, x, r))
(2.8)
where λ is the transmitted signal wavelength, dLOS(tB, x, r) and dLOS(tA, x, r) is unknown
LOS displacements at times tA and tB respectivly, and ∆dLOS is the LOS displacement
difference which is directly proportional to the phase difference. From this point on, the
notation of the SAR coordinates (x, r) will not be explicitly expressed.
Next let
dLOS = [dLOS(t1), dLOS(t2), . . . , dLOS(tN)]T
(2.9)
be the vector of N unknown values of the pixel displacement associated with the defor-
mation of the considered pixel and
∆dLOS = [∆dLOS(t1), ∆dLOS(t2), . . . , ∆dLOS(tM)]T
(2.10)
represent the vector of M known LOS displacement differences.
From eq. (2.10), the
corresponding index vectors to the acquisition time indexes related to the image pairs
used for the interferogram generation are defined as
IS = [IS1, IS2, . . . , ISM]
IE = [IE1, IE2, . . . , IEM]
(2.11)
where IS and IS indicates the starting and ending times of image pairs equivalent to
the times tA and tB which was done earlier. It is assumed that the image pairs are in
chronological order, ISj > IEj ∀j = 1, 2, . . . , M, which means
∆dLOSj = dLOS(IEj) −dLOS(ISj),
∀j = 1, 2, . . . , M
(2.12)
In this context, we can express a system of M equations with N unknowns, which can be
defined as a linear relationship
AdLOS = ∆dLOS
(2.13)
Here A is an M ×N design matrix. The structure of this matrix is detailed by the following
rules: for each j = 1, 2, . . . , M, if ISj ̸= 0, then A(j, ISj) = −1. Conversely, if ISj = 0,
then A(j, IEj) = 1. All other entries in the matrix are zero [7].
8
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:15==
To clarify, A is constructed in such a way that it incorporates specific relationships between
the indices. For each row j of the matrix, the element at column ISj is set to −1 if the
condition ISj ̸= 0 is satisfied. If this condition is not met, then the element at column IEj
is set to 1. Every other element in the jth row is zero, ensuring that each equation in the
system only involves the specific unknowns dictated by ISj and IEj.
This setup allows us to model the linear relationship between the unknown vector and
the observed changes. Furthermore, to ensure that the constructed time series starts from
zero, the first column of the matrix is removed. This is due to the relative deformation
which we are mapping. This will yields a matrix, which looks something like this
A =


1
0
0
0
0
· · ·
0
0
1
0
0
0
· · ·
0
−1
1
0
0
0
· · ·
0
−1
0
1
0
0
· · ·
0
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
0
0
0
0
0
· · ·
1


(2.14)
In many cases, such a matrix can exhibit rank deficiency, implying that the system might
have an infinite number of solutions. This occurs because the matrix does not have full
rank, meaning that its columns are not linearly independent. When this happens, the
matrix A cannot be directly inverted to find a unique solution for dLOS.
To address this issue, we can employ singular value decomposition (SVD) which decom-
poses the matrix A into three other matrices: A = USVT , where U is an orthogonal
M × M matrix, and V is an N × M orthogonal matrix. S is a diagonal matrix containing
the singular values of A. By using SVD, we can compute the pseudoinverse of A, denoted
as A+.
The pseudoinverse provides a means to obtain a least-squares solution to the
system of equations, even when the matrix is rank-deficient. This involves minimizing the
sum of the squared differences between the observed and predicted values. By applying
the pseudoinverse, we can find a solution that best fits the data, effectively handling cases
where the system has infinitely many solutions [7] [8].
Finally, the least-squares solution for dLOS is determined by multiplying the pseudoinverse
A+ with the vector ∆dLOS - which is essentially solving eq. (2.13)
dLOS = A+∆dLOS.
(2.15)
This approach minimizes the sum of the squared differences between the observed and
predicted LOS displacement variations, ensuring an optimal fit to the data even when the
system is either underdetermined or overdetermined.
To conclude, this method relies heavily on the quality of the data. Specifically, the data
used must have a coherence above a certain defined threshold. Therefore, while the set
may contain numerous interferograms, only those within the coherent subset are suitable
for generating a reliable deformation time series using this technique.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
9
==PAGE:16==
3
Time Series Reconstruction
This chapter covers the basic principles of reconstructing time series using a model-based
approach. We’ll begin with a simple setup to explain the core concepts in section 3.1.
Then, we will introduce a more advanced model based on these principles as seen in
section 3.2. Following this, an introduction to the author’s original, unpublished numerical
approach will be presented in section 3.3.
3.1
Model Based Approach - Working Principle
In this thesis, certain issues cause breaks in the data’s coherence over time, leading to
gaps in what should be a continuous dataset. The data is used to create deformation time
series that describe the surface motion of an area. Any loss of coherence results in gaps in
these time series. Additionally, the deformation is relative deformation, hence, each new
segment starts from zero, making it impossible to maintain a continuous deformation time
series except for some general trends over specific periods.
This method involves certain requirements and assumptions. First, you must be dealing
with multiple surface areas (which can also be referred to as parcels) that are assumed
follow the same motion or displacement model. Second, there must be overlapping usable
data between these areas. We assume that some areas will lose coherence, causing their
time series to stop and restart later, however there should be no overall gaps. If these
assumptions and requirements are met, the method can be used.
To explain the working principle, a simulation is conducted, highlighting the main problem
and the chosen solution method. A simple sinusoidal function is used to represent the
”real” underlying motion for simplicity. Mathematically, this will be described as:
s(t) = sin
( t
a
)
(3.1)
Where s is the surface height, and a is the model parameter, which is set to 0.95 in the
simulation.
This parameter controls the frequency of the sinusoidal function, shaping
the nature of the underlying motion to be captured. But in context, it is chosen for its
simplicity and does not describe actual surface motion. The units of time and deformation
is not denoted as this is just simulation of a simple function, and its purpose is to illustrate
the working principle.
A total of 100 unique time series are generated, each randomly segmented in time and
varying in length. Despite the randomness, these segments are made to overlap suﬀiciently
to ensure no gaps are in the time range, as per the requirement. This overlap is essential
for maintaining continuous coverage of the motion across the entire time span. Next, each
segmented time series is manually normalized so that they all start from a deformation
value of zero. This again is because the aim is to capture the ”relative” deformation which
one would have conducting a real analysis. The results of this can be seen on fig. 3.1.
10
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.1: This figure shows the deformation over time for 100 different time series
segments, each following a sinusoidal motion given by s(t) = sin
(
t
0.95
)
. These segments
start at different times and have varying lengths.
They are all adjusted to start at a
deformation value of zero, providing continuous and overlapping coverage across the entire
time range.
The problem can now be described as follows: each time series segment is affected by
unknown vertical shifts unique to that segment. These shifts create a fragmented repre-
sentation that obscures the underlying continuous function.
The current fragmented data, affected by unknown vertical constants, makes direct pa-
rameter estimation impossible. To solve this problem, one can transform the data into
a form independent of these vertical shifts by differentiating the time series, effectively
eliminating the influence of the constant vertical shifts. Since the segments follow the
model shown in eq. (3.1), differentiating the data will yield the derivative of that model,
represented as:
d
dts(t) = 1
a cos
( t
a
)
(3.2)
In practice it is possible to differentiate the segmented series using simple numerical finite
difference. This method provides the rate of deformation, which remains unaffected by
unknown vertical shifts. The results of this can be seen in fig. 3.2. However, the numerical
derivative is an approximation of the actual analytical derivative.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
11
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.2: The first derivative was computed numerically using finite differences, this
yields the continuous rate of change unaffected by the initial vertical shifts of the segments
as seen by this figure. It is assumed that this data follows the function eq. (3.2).
Since the data overlaps in time, it is now possible to simply average all contributions
at each point in time, creating a continuous deformation rate series. This is done in a
purely practical sense, as it enables the estimation of the model parameter. To estimate
the model parameter, start with the model given by eq. (3.2). Construct a least squares
system to minimize the differences between the observed data and the model’s predictions.
This method refines the parameter estimate to match the model closely. This trick is
useful because the model parameter remains the same in both the original model and its
derivative. By using a standard MATLAB integrated least squares function on the data
shown in fig. 3.2, the estimated value of the model parameter is 0.9480. This value is very
similar to how the initial segmented data was constructed with.
After estimating this value, one can input it into the original model from eq. (3.1) to
determine the unknown vertical shifts for time series and hereby fix the correct the un-
aligned segmented time series’. This is as simple as comparing the difference between the
segments and the model and then apply this difference to each segment. This yields the
following correction plot as seen in fig. 3.3
12
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.3: The plot shows the comparison between the original time-series, the corrected
time-series, and the model function. The original time-series data (grey lines) is frag-
mented due to unknown vertical shifts. The corrected time-series (green lines) the aligned
versions of the fragmented series’ and lastly the model seen in eq. (3.1) with estimated
model parameter (red dashed line).
This method effectively corrects fragmented time series by assuming they follow the same
underlying model and overlap in time. Estimating the model parameters and adjusting
for vertical shifts aligns the segments into a continuous and coherent time series, clearly
revealing the underlying motion.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
13
==PAGE:20==
3.2
Model Based Approach - SPAMS Model
Now that the working principle has been outlined, we will test it on a more sophisticated
model that describes the actual displacement of soft soil using meteorological input data,
as first described in [2]. This explanation will be divided into two parts: first, a simple
overview of the model itself, and then the application of the working principle to it.
3.2.1
SPAMS Model - Soft Soil Displacement
As this thesis focuses on peatland areas with soft soil, the SPAMS empirical model for
soft soil surface displacement was chosen due to its simplicity and previous testing on
peatlands in the Netherlands.
The model tracks changes in soil surface height (H) over time, considering both reversible
processes like shrinkage and swelling, and irreversible processes such as oxidation. It fo-
cuses on surface displacement rather than detailing all subsurface processes and is generally
expressed as:
H (x, P(t), E(t)) = R (x, P(t), E(t)) + I (x, P(t), E(t))
(3.3)
The reversible component is denoted by R, while I is the irreversible component. P repre-
sents the daily mean precipitation, and E represents the daily mean evapotranspiration -
both measured in millimeters (mm). This data can be obtained from local weather stations
or weather models.
The reversible component can be estimated by calculating the scaled cumulative difference
between precipitation and evapotranspiration using the following formula:
R (x, P(t), E(t)) =
∑
τ
[xP · P(t) −xE · E(t)]
(3.4)
Here, xP and xE are empirical scaling factors, and τ represents the integration time. The
irreversible component is modeled as a linear rate and only activates when R is negative,
which indicates drying soil conditions:
I (x, P(t), E(t)) =
t
∑
−∞
xI · f (x, P(t), E(t))
(3.5)
Here, xI is a constant associated with the irreversible component, and
f (x, P(t), E(t)) =
{
0,
for R (x, P(t), E(t)) > 0
1,
for R (x, P(t), E(t)) ≤0
(3.6)
This function ensures the component is active only under specific conditions that signify
the soil is drying. In general this model has four unique model parameters that vary based
on the lithology of the location.
x = [xP , xE, xI, τ]
(3.7)
To effectively show the deformation and subsidence pattern of this model, running a
simulation make sense.
As an example, we consider the meteorological input data on
precipitation and evapotranspiration, as described in sections 4.2.3 and 4.2.4, covering
the period from January 2021 to December 2023.
This data is specific to the area of
interest, which will be detailed later in chapter 4. For now, it is just used to illustrate the
trend of the model. Furthermore, the model parameters for this simulation was set to be:
xP = 5.2 · 10−4 mm/m, xE = 1.5 · 10−4 mm/m, xI = −2.0 · 10−5 m/d, and τ = 80 d.
These, where specifically chosen based on information from previously estimated model
14
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:21==
parameters as seen in [2], and adjusted to fit the meteorological data better. The modelled
subsidence and it’s components can be seen on fig. 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Simulated soft surface subsidence using the model described in eq. (3.3),
with meteorological input data from the Store Vildmose test site detailed in chapter 4,
and the following model parameters: xP = 5.2 · 10−4 mm/m, xE = 1.5 · 10−4 mm/m,
xI = −2.0 · 10−5 m/d, and τ = 80 d.
The simulation is constructed with a very fine time step of which is equivalent to a tem-
poral baseline of 1-day. While such precision is not impossible, it is highly unlikely in
practical scenarios. Where this model will be applied in the coming sections, the temporal
granularity would be at best 6-days, and worst 12 days. But for now, the simulation is
constructed base on this finer time step.
3.2.2
Model Parameter Estimation
Now using the subsidence data (H) simulated in fig. 3.4, it is possible to conduct a com-
parable analysis based on the principles outlined in section 3.1. To do this 67 unique
segments of the observed subsidence starting from different points in time, limited only to
the year of 2022 are constructed. To make this this simulation as realistic as possible, the
lengths time intervals are based on actual InSAR coherence tables, which is used later as
denoted in section 6.2. Again one must ensure that there is overlap between the separated
segments in time. These constraints yield the following fig. 3.5.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.5: 67 unique segments of the observed subsidence starting from different points
in time, with temporal overlap ensuring consistency. This data is taken from fig. 3.4, but
limited to the year 2021 only. The segments are all normalized to ensure that they mirror
a relative deformation pattern.
To handle unknown vertical shifts in subsidence data, a simple numerical differentiation of
the segmented data is performed. This method converts the data into a form that shows
the rate of change in subsidence over time, as depicted in Figure 3.6. Since the original
segmented data followed the SPAMS model, its derivative will naturally adhere to the
same model structure.
Differentiation allows us to handle the reversible and irreversible components of the model
separately. The reversible component, represented by Equation 3.4, can be differentiated
as follows:
d
dtR (x, P(t), E(t)) = xP [P(t) −P(t −τ)] −xE [E(t) −E(t −τ)]
(3.8)
Similarly, the irreversible component from eq. (3.5) gives this equation upon differentiation:
d
dtI (x, P(t), E(t)) = xI · f (x, P(t), E(t))
(3.9)
This results in the differentiated subsidence equation:
d
dtH (x, P(t), E(t)) = d
dtR (x, P(t), E(t)) + d
dtI (x, P(t), E(t))
(3.10)
16
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.6: The first derivative was computed numerically using finite differences, this
yields the continuous rate of change unaffected by the initial vertical shifts of the segments
as seen by this figure. It is assumed that this data follows the function seen in eq. (3.10).
While numerical differentiation offers a practical method for estimating the rate of change
in subsidence data, it should be noted that this approach provides an approximation rather
than an exact analytical result. Hence depending on the discreetness of ones data, this
approximation can vary in quality.
To estimate the parameters for the SPAMS model defined in eq. (3.7), we set up a system
of equations defined by:
Ax = b
(3.11)
Where A is the design matrix, x is the vector of model parameters to be estimated, and b
is the vector of observed differentiated subsidence rates. The design matrix is constructed
using the differentiated forms of precipitation and evapotranspiration data. It is structured
as follows:
A =


Pτ+1 −P1
−(Eτ+1 −E1)
I(Pτ+1 −Eτ+1 ≤0)
Pτ+2 −P2
−(Eτ+2 −E2)
I(Pτ+2 −Eτ+2 ≤0)
...
...
...
Pn −Pn−τ
−(En −En−τ)
I(Pn −En ≤0)


(3.12)
Here, I denotes the indicator function, which is 1 when the condition inside is true and
0 otherwise. Indicating drying conditions where evapotranspiration exceeds precipitation
ensures that the irreversible component is only active under drying conditions.
The vector b contains the differentiated subsidence rates.
b =
[ d
dtH(t1), d
dtH(t2), . . . , d
dtH(tn)
]T
(3.13)
The least squares method seeks to minimize the residual sum of squares between the
observed data b and the model’s predictions, where x = [xP , xE, xI] is the vector of model
parameters.
The standard form for a least squares problem, aiming to minimize the residuals is ex-
pressed as:
min
x
∥Ax −b∥2
(3.14)
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
17
==PAGE:24==
A grid search over possible values of integration time τ is conducted to determine the
optimal value. The residual norm, which indicates the fit of the model, is calculated for
each τ. The set of parameters that results in the minimum residual norm is selected as
the best fit. fig. 3.7 shows the mean squared residuals for different values of τ. Here a
clear minimum of tau was determined to be τ = 79 d.
Figure 3.7: Plot of the mean squared residuals for various values of integration time τ.
The optimal value that minimizes the residuals is indicated as τ = 79.
The estimated model parameters were found to be: xP = 3.70 · 10−4 mm/m, xE =
1.32·10−4 mm/m, xI = −3.93·10−5 m/d, and τ = 79 d. Using these estimated model pa-
rameters, it is possible to now reconstruct the SPAMS model, to then realign our separated
line segments. This can be seen in fig. 3.8.
Figure 3.8: The plot shows the comparison between the original subsidence time-series’,
the corrected time-series, and the model function.
The original time-series data (grey
lines) is fragmented due to unknown vertical shifts.
The corrected time-series (green
lines) the aligned versions of the fragmented series’ and lastly the model seen in eq. (3.3)
with estimated model parameter (red dashed line).
18
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:25==
By estimating the model which the segmented time series’ follow, it is possible to determine
each of the individual unknown vertical shifts, by comparing them to the constructed
model. Here the constructed model is plotted as the red dashed line, and the adjusted
original normalized subsidence time series’ have been given a uniform grey color. And
lastly the corrected subsidence time series’ have all a green color.
To quantify the degree of which the correction of the subsidence, aligns with the original
subsidence, which was taken from the data in fig. 3.4, a RMS error was calculated, com-
paring the average of the corrected subsidence and the original subsidence. This yielded
a value of RMS Error: 0.52425 mm. For fair comparison, the original subsidence was nor-
malized to have its starting deformation at 0, at the same time as the average corrected
subsidence, and their comparison can be seen on fig. 3.9
Figure 3.9: This figure illustrates the comparison of the average corrected subsidence time
series data (green dashed line), and the original subsidence data, normalized to have 0
deformation at the same starting index as the average corrected subsidence (solid black
line). Quantitative comparison was conducted by RMS Error: 0.52425 mm.
3.3
Numerical Approach
The previous method made a key assumption: all disconnected segmented time series
follow the same model or have the same model parameters - this can be simplified to,
that they move in a similar manner. This is essential because, without it, it would not be
possible realign and reconstruct the segmented time series over a year due to coherence
losses. For this numerical based approach, we start in a similar manner to the model
based approach, by determining the average derivative of our segmented data. The same
overarching point is to be able to realign our time series data, hence one must construct
a reference from which the disconnected data can be realigned to. Such a reference can
be derived from this average continuous derivative. Since derivatives and integrals are
inverse operations, taking the cumulative integral of the derivative allows us to estimate
the original average subsidence. This integral serves as the ”cumulative reference,” which
can be used to reconstruct our segmented series’.
However, because our data is discrete, we can only approximate the values of derivatives
and integrals.
Even small errors in calculating the derivative can greatly distort the
integral, causing overestimations or underestimations of subsidence. To improve accuracy,
we switch from a first-order forward difference method to a central difference method.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
19
==PAGE:26==
This second-order approximation provides a more precise derivative by averaging changes
around each data point, which results in fig. 3.10.
Figure 3.10: Average rate of subsidence calculated using the central difference numerical
differnetiation method.
From a numerical perspective, we use MATLAB’s cumtrapz function [9] to perform cu-
mulative numerical integration of the derivative. This function treats the data as a series
of trapezoidal segments, providing a more accurate approximation of the integral over
discrete intervals. The cumulative reference obtained from this integration is then used
to realign the segmented time series data. This approach is similar to the model-based
method used earlier, but it utilizes a directly computed reference from our current data
set, compared to a constructed model.
Figure 3.11: The cumulative reference is plotted in green, the realigned time series seg-
ments are plotted in grey, and the thick blue line represents the average subsidence.
As shown in fig. 3.11, the cumulative reference is plotted in green, and the realigned
time series segments are in grey. The thick blue line represents the average subsidence of
20
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:27==
these realigned segments. This method provides a highly accurate reconstruction of the
underlying time series, with an RMS error of just 0.0015425 mm.
However, it’s important to note that the accuracy of this method heavily depends on the
resolution of the data, particularly the size of the time steps. In this simulation, the data
has a temporal baseline of 1-day, which is quite fine compared to what is typically seen in
practical applications.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
21
==PAGE:28==
4
Data and Area of Interest
4.1
Area of Interest - Store Vildmose
The main area of interest (AOI) which was selected for this thesis analysis was the area of
Store Vildmose. Store Vildmose is the remains of a large raised bog located between Aaby-
bro, Pandrup, and Brønderslev in Vendsyssel, Jutland Denmark. Specifically a small group
of peatland parcels was narrowed for analysis which can be seen on figs. 4.1a and 4.1b.
Store Vildmose, rich in history and ecological value, is crucial to Denmark’s climate ob-
jectives. Significant agricultural development began in 1921 when the state bought 2800
hectares of the central moorland, later expanding to 3700 hectares. This land was trans-
formed through drainage, fertilization, and cultivation for livestock grazing. During World
War II, it became a center for peat extraction. Despite these changes, parts of the original
raised bog remain in the western areas [10]. These are also the specific parcels, which was
chosen for the analysis.
Recently, the importance of Store Vildmose has been highlighted by a lowland restora-
tion project aimed at fighting climate change. Supported by the Danish Nature Agency
and the EU’s Interreg program, this initiative focuses on reducing greenhouse gas emis-
sions by restoring waterlogged conditions in peat-rich soils to sequester CO2. Covering
345 hectares, the project aims to cut annual CO2 emissions significantly, contributing to
Denmark’s environmental goals [11].
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1: (a) Location of Store Vildmose in Denmark, highlighting its geographical con-
text within the region of Jutland. (b) Detailed view of the specific peatland parcels within
Store Vildmose selected for analysis. The red outlines indicate the parcels under study.
Additionally, the PSInSAR corner reflector locations are plotted within these parcels.
Both images are plotted in the WGS84, UTM Zone 32N coordinate reference system.
The decision to focus on Store Vildmose is due to the challenge of inconsistent time
periods, which complicates a complete time series analysis. Previous efforts to decouple
soil moisture effects from ground deformation in Store Vildmose’s peatlands were tested
but gave unsuccessful results in context of the full time series reconstruction [12]. Despite
this, revisiting this area is important for further study.
22
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:29==
4.2
Data for Store Vildmose
This section gives an overview of the different types of data related to Store Vildmose.
Looking at how satellite images are collected and processed, how specific areas are mapped,
and how data deformation time series’ and meteorological datasets are used.
4.2.1
Indexing of Spatial Extent
To identify the specific parcels of interest, polygon files detailing the fields of Store Vild-
mose were obtained through a collaboration with the Dept. of Agroecology at Aarhus
University. These files were geocoded to align accurately with the fields, enabling overlay-
ing on the pixels of the interferograms. This process ensured consistent spatial alignment
of stacked interferograms, making it possible to track which pixels within the interfero-
grams corresponded to each parcel. Furthermore, as these files were acquired through the
Dept. of Agroecology, each parcel came loaded with contextual information specific to
each parcel. Indexing parcels is crucial, but the numbering system used in this project is
not universal. Instead, it is specific to this particular thesis. This means that the indexing
method may very well vary depending on the source of the shape files acquired. But these
indexes will stay consistent in this thesis, which can be seen on fig. 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Store Vildmose Test Site, Parcels plotted with their associated index number-
ing to distinguish them from each other. Plotted in the coordinate reference system UTM
Zone 32N.
4.2.2
PSInSAR Deformation Time Series Corner Reflector Datasets
In December 2021, Geopartner Landinspektører performed a PSInSAR analysis on corner
reflectors installed in the fields of Store Vildmose. The locations of these reflectors are
depicted in fig. 4.1b. The resulting analysis, presented as finalized complete time series
data, will be utilized as a reference for monitoring ground movements and deformations.
Five corner reflectors were used in total, each designated as RRF01-000XX, with numbers
ranging from 40 to 44. The location of the corner reflectors can be seen on fig. 4.1b.
Notably, the reflector RRF01-00043 was anchored deep beneath the peat soil layer, en-
suring a more stable reference point than the others, which were mounted on 150 cm
square metal plates at the peat’s surface [13]. This means that specifically the dataset
for RRF01-00043, is not used in the actual analysis comparisons. The dataset comprises
deformation measurements over time, recorded in millimeters.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
23
==PAGE:30==
Notably, each time series displays a recognizable, almost sinusoidal deformation pattern,
though the extent of deformation varies significantly. This variation can be attributed to
several factors. It is well-known that surface deformation in peatland areas is dependent
on the thickness of the peat layers themselves [12].
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.3: This figure shows the deformation measurements from four corner reflectors
(RRF01-00040 to RRF01-00044, excluding RRF01-00043) recorded from December 2021
to April 2023, sourced by Geopartner Landinspektører [13]. These time series data were
constructed using the PSInSAR technique.
4.2.3
Daily Mean Precipitation
The meteorological data provided gives a general summary and serves as empirical input
for the model used in this thesis. While obtaining this data can vary in complexity, a daily
average from a typical area near the AOI is usually suﬀicient. This is because the data
tends to vary more over time than across space; however, having a smaller spatial extent
around the AOI is always beneficial.
This section describes the extraction of daily mean precipitation data for Store Vildmose.
The data was sourced from the Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI), a reliable provider
of meteorological data. Specifically it was acquired though the DMI Open Data Developers
portal [14].
The daily mean precipitation data was sourced from a weather station close to Store
Vildmose. This station is part of the DMI network. The chosen station had the following
parameters:
24
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:31==
Weather Station Details
Attribute
Detail
Station ID:
06031
Station Name:
Tylstrup
Country:
DNK
Coordinates:
Lat 57.1852, Lon 9.9527
Station Operational From:
Not available
Station Operational To:
Present
Table 4.1: Attributes and Details regarding the chosen weather station for the precipitation
dataset.
The outputted data was converted to daily mean precipitation over for three years, span-
ning from 2021-2023. This was the dataset used as input. The values can be seen on
fig. 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Daily Mean Precipitation in mm, for the three year period spanning 2021-2023.
This data was acquired through the DMI Open Data Developers portal [14].
4.2.4
Daily Mean Evapotranspiration
Evapotranspiration is a critical hydrological parameter for understanding the water cycle
in ecosystems like Store Vildmose, but more so as empirical input for the model discussed
in section 3.2.1. This data was provided for the use in the analysis of this thesis, by Dansk
Hydraulisk Institut (DHI) [15].
Mikkel Hoeegh Bojesen and Cecile Marie Margaretha
Kittel were particularly helpful in supplying the data directly.
The evapotranspiration data represents the amount of water transferred from the land to
the atmosphere by evaporation from the soil and other surfaces and by transpiration from
plants [16]. DHI provided evapotranspiration over the extent of the AOI as described in
section 4.1. This made it possible to conduct a spatial daily mean average, from which each
day would have a single value associated with, similar to the precipitation dataset. This
can be seen on fig. 4.5. Specifically, this also an approximation of the evapotranspiration,
as the spatial extent is over a larger area, but is averaged to a point.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.5: Daily Mean Evapotranspiration in mm/day, for the three-year period from
2021-2023.
The periodic peaks reflect seasonal variations in evapotranspiration rates,
typically higher during the growing season and lower during the dormant months. Data
sourced from DHI [15].
Analysis of the data from 2021 to 2023 shows noticeable seasonal trends, with peaks dur-
ing the late spring and summer months, which correspond to increased sunlight and plant
growth, and troughs during the colder, less sunny winter months. Furthermore, the vari-
ability in daily evapotranspiration rates, highlights the impact of climatic variables such
as temperature, humidity, and solar radiation on the water cycle.
4.2.5
SAR Image Acquisition and Processing
SLC SAR images form the foundation for the analysis presented in this thesis. Sentinel-1
data, available from the European Space Agency in SAFE format, can be downloaded
from the Earth Data Alaska SAR Facility [17]. Sentinel-1 provides images with temporal
baselines of 12 or 6 days and are captured with spatial resolutions of approximately 25×40
m, 5 × 5 m, and 5 × 20 m. These images are generated using standard SAR processing
techniques [18]. For this thesis, the SAR images used had the following parameters: IW
beam mode, Path 139, Frame 401, a descending flight direction, and included both VV
and VH polarization types.
The processing of these SAR images involves the Interferometric Post Processing Chain
(IPP) [19], developed by researchers at DTU. This is a sophisticated version of the standard
InSAR processing, as seen in section 2.1, and is used to create interferometric pairs/inter-
ferograms, which are used for the time series analysis with essential parcel data. Thank
you for your support.
During the multilook decimation process of IPP, range and azimuth decimation factors
are applied to minimize noise and estimation biases. These factors, specifically the range
decimation factor (raDecFac) and the azimuth decimation factor (azDecFac), can be ad-
justed based on user requirements, and is tested in appendix A.1. For the SLC SAR used
in the analysis as seen in chapter 6, decimation factors of raDecFac = 12, and azDecFac
= 4 was used, which is equivalent to approximately 54 independent looks. The reader can
be refereed to section 2.1.2 to see the theoretical relationship of this number of looks to
the coherence.
26
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:33==
The data is processed using the WGS84 geodetic datum and UTM 32N projection system,
with geographic coordinates presented in Latitude, Longitude format. The selection of
general parameters is flexible and can be tailored to meet the specific requirements or
objectives of the analysis. However, it is also possible to use the standard parameters
provided by the IPP [19].
4.3
Coherence for Store Vildmose
To analyze the interferometric coherence of Store Vildmose, we created a set of coherence
maps from interferometric pairs using the IPP, as shown in section 4.2.5.
Analyzing
coherence is a critical step in the process, and specifically analysing the coherence within
individual parcels of the AOI.
During the winter months, from roughly October to April, almost all regions offer data
that is coherent enough (i.e. γ ≥0.14) to be useful for adequate time series analysis.
However, starting in late May and continuing through the summer until October, the
coherence of data in most regions decreases significantly. A clear comparison between a
coherence map from an interferogram taken around mid-April and another from mid-July
clearly shows a general drop in coherence over this period, this can be seen on fig. 4.6.
It’s clear that the loss of coherence is caused by agricultural activities such as mowing and
grazing, as well as changes in how soil and vegetation scatter signals due to drying in the
summer. However, it’s still unclear why some areas manage to maintain higher levels of
coherence than others, even when they are in the same general area and experiencing the
same conditions.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
27
==PAGE:34==
(a) Coherence map of the AOI, in mid-April.
(b) Coherence map of the AOI, in mid-July.
Figure 4.6: (a) coherence image of store vildmose from around mid April. (b) similarly a
coherence image of store vildmose around mid July. Here a clear drop in overall coherence
can be seen comparing the two.
To understand the coherence trends of individual parcels, the mean coherence for each
parcel was calculated by averaging all pixels within and along the parcel boundaries. This
process was applied to each coherence map across the entire year. The resulting mean
coherence values were then plotted over time, allowing for the observation of coherence
trends for all parcels throughout the year, as illustrated in fig. 4.7.
Furthermore, the
coherence estimation bias was determined by averaging pixel values of an area similar in
size to that of a parcel, over the sea along the west coast of Denmark. This is the common
practice method for estimating this value, as presented in section 2.1.2, on fig. 2.4. This
bias serves as a lower bound threshold, below which no real information can be obtained,
and is found to be E(ˆγ) = 0.11465.
28
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.7: Each colored line indicates the mean coherence of a parcel over time for the
year 2022. The dashed black line represents the coherence estimation bias, serving as a
lower bound threshold and was experimentally found to be E(ˆγ) = 0.11465.
It is fascinating to observe that coherence behavior in these regions exhibits both sys-
tematic and random aspects. Very notably, the drastic drop in coherence around mid-
February, which drops almost as fast as it increases again, can possibly be the result of
snowfall in the area.
The mean coherence values for each parcel will serve as the foundation for defining in-
tervals when parcels exceed or fall below a specified threshold. This method allows for
the customization of coherence thresholds to determine the usability of data subsets. For
example, if a parcel’s coherence falls below the threshold, the interferograms for those
dates will be excluded from the analysis. This ensures that only high-quality, coherent
data is used.
Figure 4.8: Time intervals during which each parcel’s coherence is above the threshold of
γ ≥0.147, indicating periods of reliable data for analysis.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
29
==PAGE:36==
For easier readability and accessibility to the time intervals of specific parcels, we can
construct a figure map indicating when parcels exceed a specified threshold. This was
tested using a coherence threshold of γ ≥0.147, which can be seen in fig. 4.8.
This
method not only visualizes but also identifies the time intervals during which data from
each parcel is saved for time series analysis. It also illustrates some general trends for
parcels, which are not as easily seen in the underlying fig. 4.7.
Additionally, it helps
identify specific periods during which each parcel’s data is useful, facilitating targeted
and eﬀicient analysis and providing a better understanding of the temporal dynamics of
coherence across different parcels.
30
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:37==
5
Evaluating SPAMS model on Time
Series from Store Vildmose
In this chapter, we evaluate the effectiveness of the SPAMS model in describing the sur-
face deformation observed in the Store Vildmose peatlands, as outlined in section 3.2.1.
Specifically, we will test/evaluate if the methods of estimating the model parameters using
both a forward least squares approach, and a derivative least squares approach, will work.
Here the forward approach, will be described in this chapter, and the derivative approach
is the method described in the previous section 3.2.2.
The PSInSAR time series analysis conducted by Geopartner Landinspektører, using cor-
ner reflectors, will be used as the time series data describing the deformation of Store
Vildmose. The deformation time series are initially presented in section 4.2.2 and fig. 4.3.
It’s important to clarify that we keep our data in its original 12-day time step and do not
interpolate it to a 1-day baseline. While this approach is not incorrect, it does influence
the order and values of the estimated model parameters.
First we estimate the SPAMS model parameters directly from the PSInSAR time series.
The approach involves setting up a system of equations and solving for the unknown
parameters. The basis for this forward approach is captured in the following equation:
Xβ = y
(5.1)
where X represents the design matrix of predictors derived from environmental data,
namly precipitation and evapotranspiration.
β = [xP , xE, xI] denotes the vector of
model parameters to be estimated. y is the vector of observed deformations, representing
the responses our model aims to predict.
The matrix X is constructed as follows:
X =


∑
τ Pt1−τ+1
−∑
τ Et1−τ+1
I
(∑t1
j=−∞(Pj −Ej) ≤0
)
∑
τ Pt2−τ+1
−∑
τ Et2−τ+1
I
(∑t2
j=−∞(Pj −Ej) ≤0
)
...
...
...
∑
τ Ptn−τ+1
−∑
τ Etn−τ+1
I
(∑tn
j=−∞(Pj −Ej) ≤0
)


(5.2)
Each row of X represents a time step in the series, with columns detailing cumulative
precipitation, cumulative evapotranspiration, and an indicator function of irreversible
changes, respectively.
We apply a least squares method to minimize the residuals between the observed deforma-
tions and those predicted by our model, using MATLAB’s trust-region-reflective algorithm
[20]. This step takes into account the nonlinear nature of the SPAMS model, which can
present multiple local minima, making parameter estimation challenging. But by looking
at fig. 5.1, it is possible to get an accurate estimation of model parameters for each of the
time series.
This confirms that the SPAMS model can describe the motion of peatlands in Store Vild-
mose.
Next the derivative approch will be tested.
By numerically differentiating the
PSInSAR time series data, an approximation of the model’s derivative is achieved, from
which a similar estimation of model parameters can be done. This derivative approach fol-
lows a procedure similar to the one discussed in section 3.2.2. However, unlike before, we
no longer need the average derivative since we now have access to a complete deformation
time series.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
31
==PAGE:38==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.1: Comparison of observed deformation data with model predictions for four
PSInSAR locations (RRF01-00040, RRF01-00041, RRF01-00042, and RRF01-00044). The
observed data (Original Data for RFF01-000XX) are plotted alongside the model predic-
tions derived using two different approaches: the Derivative Approach and the Forward
Approach . The comparison spans from January 2022 to April 2023, showing each mod-
eling approach.
The results of both approaches are visually presented in fig. 5.1, where the SPAMS model
predictions from both the forward and derivative methods are plotted alongside the actual
corner reflector data across four distinct datasets. This comparative analysis spans from
January 2022 to April 2023. Here the observed data (Original Data for RFF01-000XX)
are plotted alongside the model predictions derived using two different approaches: the
Derivative Approach and the Forward Approach.
To further validate the model, we compute RMS error for each approach, quantifying the
degree of similarity between the model predictions and the observed data. The parameters
and performance metrics for both approaches are detailed in tables table 5.1 and table 5.2.
32
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:39==
Estimated Model Parameters from Forward Approach:
CR:
RRF01-00040
RRF01-00041
RRF01-00042
RRF01-00044
xP [mm/m]
6.421 · 10−3
8.535 · 10−3
−5.875 · 10−3
−1.807 · 10−3
xE [mm/m]
1.311 · 10−3
1.689 · 10−3
1.513 · 10−3
5.120 · 10−4
xI [m/d]
−1.421 · 10−3
−1.778 · 10−3
−1.471 · 10−3
−4.626 · 10−4
τ [d]
9
10
9
12
RMS Error [mm]
5.869
3.547
6.919
1.643
Table 5.1: Estimated model parameters from the approach based on the actual subsidence
of the corner reflector time series data.
Estimated Model Parameters from Derivative Approach:
CR:
RRF01-00040
RRF01-00041
RRF01-00042
RRF01-00044
xP [mm/m]
−1.139 · 10−3
−2.793 · 10−3
−1.476 · 10−4
1.756 · 10−3
xE [mm/m]
1.252 · 10−3
1.921 · 10−3
1.632 · 10−3
6.297 · 10−4
xI [m/d]
−1.393 · 10−3
−1.049 · 10−3
−1.762 · 10−3
−6.676 · 10−4
τ [d]
8
6
8
4
RMS Error [mm]
6.042
10.384
7.176
4.015
Table 5.2: Estimated model parameters from the derivative approach based on the subsi-
dence of the corner reflector time series data.
Through both visual and statistical analyses, the SPAMS model effectively describes the
deformation and subsidence observed in the peatlands of Store Vildmose.
Both visual and quantitative assessments indicate that the forward approach provides a
more accurate estimation of the underlying time series compared to the derivative ap-
proach.
This increased accuracy is likely due to the numerical differentiation process,
which introduces additional noise into the data.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
33
==PAGE:40==
6
Results and Analysis
6.1
Time Series Results
This section presents the results of the time series analysis conducted on the parcels at
the test site Store Vildmose. The following subsections will explore the specifics of these
results, beginning with the initial setup and methodology. These findings will facilitate
understanding of the spatial and temporal variations in the data, offering insights into
observed behaviors and trends for later analysis.
Additionally, adjusting the coherence thresholds can impact the construction of the time
series, potentially causing a loss of data subsets in subsequent analyses. This adjustment
could result in separate time series for different parts of the year, each starting from zero
to represent relative deformation.
6.1.1
Parcel Time Series
From a technical perspective, the parcel files were initially derived from shapefiles using
the software QGIS. These files, along with their corresponding geographic information,
were then converted into the same coordinate system (WGS84, UTM Zone 32N) as the
interferometric images, as detailed in section 4.1. This conversion ensured that the pixels
were consistently aligned over time, as the time series analysis is conducted on a pixel-by-
pixel basis, as mentioned in section 2.2.
This allowed one to define the extent of each individual parcel, associating all pixels within
and on the parcel’s boundary with that specific parcel. Consequently, it ensured that the
pixels remained spatially consistent in terms of latitude and longitude when performing
the time series analysis. Looking at fig. 4.2, it is possible to illustrate how the indexing
of pixels, whose deformation values are considered, will be expressed. Examining parcel 1
from the data, the spatial extent and pixel location are defined as
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.1: (a) Parcel 1 highlighted spatially on the AOI. (b) Store Vildmose Test Site,
Parcel 1 extent plotted (thick black outline) with the determined pixel placement (red
squares inside and on the extent boundary). Plotted in the coordinate reference system
WGS84, UTM Zone 32N. The area of Parcel 1 is ∼0.1556 km²
This yields 39 pixels within the extent of parcel 1, as shown in fig. 6.1b, from which a
unique relative deformation time series can be constructed, using the methods outlined in
section 2.2.
34
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:41==
To start, we will construct time series with two coherence thresholds. First, the time
series are constructed with a coherence threshold of γ = 0.05. In other words, this implies
that all parcels’ mean coherence values are above this threshold, ensuring that the parcels
are consistently defined throughout the entire year, with no pixel within the extent of
each parcel falling below the threshold. The time series results are constructed based on
interferograms with a smallest temporal baseline of 12 days and a largest of 24 days. This
results in the following plot where all pixel time series are displayed relating to parcel 1.
Secondly, by increasing the coherence threshold to γ = 0.14, we effectively exclude many
subsets of interferograms from the entire raster of interferograms, due to the generally low
coherence values for the parcels at certain points in time. The specific mean coherence for
parcel 1 over time can be seen in fig. 6.2 and will be the indicator for when a time series
can be constructed.
Figure 6.2: Mean coherence over time for Parcel 1, where the orange line indicates the
mean coherence, the solid red line is the coherence threshold of γ ≥0.14. The dashed
black line is the Coherence Estimation Bias.
The higher coherence threshold ensures that only periods with higher coherence are con-
sidered, resulting in more reliable deformation measurements. However, this also means
that any time intervals where the coherence falls below the threshold are omitted, cre-
ating gaps in our analysis. These gaps divide the continuous time series into multiple
separate segments, each representing periods where the coherence was suﬀicient to per-
form the analysis based on the defined threshold requirement. It can also be noted that
now, the threshold is at least above the Coherence Estimation Bias, which is explained in
sections 2.1.2 and 4.3.
This exclusion leads to the creation of three distinct time series for all the pixels within
Parcel 1, as illustrated in fig. 6.4.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 6.3: Time series of relative deformation for all pixels within Parcel 1 and their aver-
age at Store Vildmose Test Site for the year 2022, constructed using a coherence threshold
of γ ≥0.05, ensuring all parcels’ mean coherence values remain above this threshold
throughout the year. The time series results are constructed based on interferograms with
a smallest temporal baseline of 12 days, and largest of 24 days.
Figure 6.4: Time series of relative deformation for each unique pixel within Parcel 1 and
their average at Store Vildmose Test Site for the year 2022, constructed using a coherence
threshold of γ ≥0.14. The increased threshold results in disconnected time series, reflect-
ing periods where coherence values fall below the set threshold, thereby excluding certain
temporal data points and creating visible gaps in the measurements.
Looking closer at fig. 6.3, one can see considerable spatial variability in deformation, espe-
cially in the latter part of the year following June. Although these pixels are geographically
relatively close to each other, the deformation differences are quite pronounced, with some
pixels showing up to a 40 mm difference. This is likely due to the fact that coherence has
not been accounted for when constructing these time series.
Furthermore, as stated in section 4.3, the time of year when the parcels have the smallest
36
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:43==
coherence stretches from around late May until October. By inspecting the pixel’s time
series, all of them exhibit an almost systematic, equal increase, seen as the triangular
shape. It is diﬀicult to determine whether this is actual surface deformation or an artifact
due to the low coherence.
Comparing the time series in fig. 6.4 to those in fig. 6.3 reveals a significant reduction
in the spatial variability of deformation. The deformation values within each segment
exhibit fewer differences between pixels, indicating a more consistent deformation pattern
when higher-coherence data are utilized, even at later times. Furthermore, it can also be
seen that the triangular artifact, which was prominent in all pixel time series, has been
eliminated, likely indicating that it was a noise artifact from the low coherence.
Hence, it is reasonable to average the deformation time series within the defined margin.
This approach allows for the construction of average disconnected time series, representing
the average deformation of the entire parcel. By doing so, the focus shifts from individual
pixel variations to an overall assessment of parcel deformation. This method provides a
clearer and more coherent understanding of the parcel’s overall deformation behavior by
smoothing out the inconsistencies that may arise when analyzing each pixel separately.
By focusing on the average deformation time series, the goal is to capture the deformation
pattern of the entire parcel as a whole. This is denoted by the blue thick lines in fig. 6.4.
6.2
Model-Based Time-Series Reconstruction
The next section will evaluate the estimation of an underlying model to correct the frag-
mented segments of time series data. This will follow the procedure outlined in the working
principle described in section 3.1.
With a higher coherence threshold, the constructed time series for each parcel is more
reliable. However, the drawback is that it becomes almost impossible to have a continuous
time series for each parcel spanning an entire year, as clearly demonstrated in the final
example of parcel 1 in fig. 6.4. This means that, at least in the area of interest, it is not
possible at the spatial extent of a single parcel. Furthermore, it is only possible to make
significant observations about the trends at certain periods in time.
6.2.1
Spatial and Temporal Extent of Parcels
By increasing the number of parcels analyzed, it might be possible to gather information
about trends over a larger spatial extent, offering a more comprehensive view of the over-
all deformation patterns. This broader spatial coverage captures a wider range of data,
potentially allowing the identification of trends throughout the year, thereby reducing the
risk of data loss that occurs with a single parcel.
Specifically, for validation purposes, it made sense to look at an area of parcels, which
were spatially close to a corner reflector. For the first analysis, the parcels closest to the
corner reflector RRF01-00040, RRF01-00041 and RRF01-00042, was chosen as indicated
by the highlighted parcels in fig. 6.5. Although comparing this data to a corner reflector,
which represents a single point, may not be ideal, as the highlighted parcels has a spatial
extent of ∼0.5336 km² and ∼0.7097 km² respectively - it however remains a necessary
approach for validation purposes.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.5: Selected parcels of interest, chosen for their close location to the corner re-
flectors, whose deformation time series will be used for validation. The green highlighted
parcels has a spatial extent of ∼0.7097 km² and will be used as reference for RRF01-00041
and -42. The yellow highlighted parcels has a spatial extent of ∼0.5336 km² and will be
used as reference for RRF01-00040.
Next, one can map the coherence of the selected parcels over time, denoting when they
fall below the threshold and excluding that subset of data. There is no single correct
method for this; it essentially involves assessing the coherence of the selected parcels
and adjusting the threshold until gaps appear between the parcels. While adjusting the
threshold affects the availability of coherent data, one must still ensure that there is overlap
between coherent parcels in time.
As previously mentioned in section 4.3, the threshold should be set above γ > 0.11465,
as data below this threshold cannot be distinguished between noise and real deformation
and thus should be disregarded. A good rule of thumb is to identify the parcels of interest
and then gradually increase the threshold until an actual discontinuity is observed. This
method ensures that only the most coherent subset of data is used when constructing the
individual time series. Hence, high coherence is always better, and one should strive to
use the highest coherence possible while keeping overlap between parcels.
38
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:45==
(a) Coherence active times of yellow highlighted
parcels.
(b) Coherence active times of green highlighted
parcels.
Figure 6.6: Selected parcels of interest, plotted over time with coherence threshold of
γ ≥0.147. A solid line indicates that the specific parcel is over the threshold.
The coherence threshold of γ ≥0.147 was experimentally found to be the highest value
that still ensured suﬀicient data coverage year-round. As shown in fig. 6.6b, the coherence
of the parcels, such as parcels 5 and 3, does not exhibit complete overlap around the
month of June. However, these parcels are only separated by 12 days, which matches the
time step between all data points. This means that this separation is suﬀicient for later
time series analyses. By lowering the threshold, complete overlap could be acquired, but
it would, in turn, introduce incoherent noise into the time series.
Using the coherence values, the same methods previously applied to parcel 1 (as shown in
section 6.1.1) can now be used for all defined parcels that meet or exceed the coherence
threshold. The process skips directly to obtaining the average deformation time series for
each parcel, as illustrated in fig. 6.7.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.7: Selected parcels of interest, average deformation time series, defined based on
the coherence threshold of γ ≥0.147. (a) Time series’ of parcels close to RRF01-00040, or
the yellow highlighted parcels (b) Time series’ of parcels close to RRF01-00041 and -42,
or the green highlighted parcels.
Now we have consistent temporal coverage from the selected parcels. However, this alone
is insuﬀicient, as all the time series, except those constructed with the first interferometric
pair in the set, have an unknown vertical shift added to them. In other words, all time
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
39
==PAGE:46==
series start from zero, which is problematic if the requirement is for a continuous time
series throughout the entire year.
6.2.2
Model Estimation and Reconstruction - Validation
It’s important to clarify that we keep our data in its original 12-day time step and do not
interpolate it to a 1-day baseline. While this approach is not incorrect, it does influence
the order and values of the estimated model parameters.
The next step is to realign the disconnected deformation time series to obtain an accurate,
continuous estimate of the average deformation across the selected parcels. This involves
using the working principle and method described in sections 3.1 and 3.2. Hence, first, we
must remove the unknown constant vertical shift values from the equation. To do this, one
can simply take the derivative of the disconnected time series. Then, because we ensured
that there was temporal overlap between the parcels, it is then also possible to create a
continuous time series of the trend of the deformation, i.e., the average derivative of the
data. This is highlighted by the thick blue line on fig. 6.8a.
(a) Derivative segmented time series data of yel-
low highlighted parcels.
(b) Derivative segmented time series data of
green highlighted parcels.
(c) Constructed model from derivative based on
yellow highlighted parcels.
(d) Constructed model from derivative based on
green highlighted parcels.
Figure 6.8: (a) and (b) is the numerical derivative of the time series’ from fig. 6.7b,
highlighted in light grey, where the average derivative is highlighted as the thick blue line.
This is the general trend of the deformation for the entire year of 2022. (c) and (d) are
the simulated SPAMS model as described in section 3.2.1, from which the derived model
parameters are used, estimated based on the derivative above. Furthermore, the time step
and range of inputted data is the same as the length of unique dates of the segmented
time series’.
40
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:47==
From this, it is possible to estimate the model parameters by fitting the derivative of the
SPAMS model, which is described in section 3.2.1. By applying the least squares method
to the derivative data, the following model parameters were derived. The estimated results
for both cases are presented in table 6.1.
Once these fitted values were obtained, they were used to recreate the original SPAMS
model. This involved re-entering the estimated parameters into the initial model equations
to simulate the entire deformation process. In the context of processing, the time step and
range of input data will match those used for the segmented time series. This yields the
following SPAMS model, seen in figs. 6.8c and 6.8d.
This was then used to adjust and realign the original disconnected time series, which
essentially bridges the gaps between the segmented parts. Next, the realigned segmented
time series from figs. 6.9a and 6.9b was plotted.
By averaging these plots, an overall
deformation series was derived, representing the average deformation across the segments.
For validation purposes, this average deformation series was compared with the corner
reflector measurements.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
41
==PAGE:48==
(a) The fixed deformation data of yellow highlighted parcels near
RRF01-00040.
(b) The fixed deformation data of green highlighted parcels near
RRF01-00041 and -42.
Figure 6.9: This shows how the corrected segmented time series matches the corner reflec-
tor measurements. The thick blue line represents the average fixed deformation, and the
red, orange and green line shows the PSInSAR time series data. The light grey lines in
the background is the individual fixed segments. A quantitative comparison between the
Average Fixed Deformation and the corner reflectors yielded a RMS Error: 4.4618 mm for
RRF01-00040, 17.1786 mm for RRF01-00041, and 6.2381 mm for RRF01-00042.
The analysis of the fixed deformation data for parcels near the corner reflectors, as shown
in fig. 6.9, shows that the method used to correct the segmented time series works well.
Even though there’s a big spatial difference, and it is tough to compare parcel data to
a single point (the corner reflector), the validation series closely aligns with the model’s
average deformation trend - we accurately capture the same order of magnitude.
This good match suggests that the method for fixing unknown vertical shifts by compar-
42
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:49==
ing them with the model was successful. The consistent results boost confidence in the
model’s ability to accurately capture and correct these vertical shifts. Furthermore, a
quantitative comparison between the Average Fixed Deformation and the corner reflector
was performed - this yielded an RMS Error: 4.4618 mm for RRF01-00040, 17.1786 mm
for RRF01-00041, and 6.2381 mm for RRF01-00042.
The selection of parcels and corner reflectors was made because they were the only feasible
options. This limitation existed because no parcels within the range of the other corner
reflectors had any coherence overlap, which made it impossible to combine trends from
multiple parcels as done in the previous section. That is not to say that it is generally
impossible to increase the spatial extent by using more parcels; however, within the small
spatial separation of the corner reflectors, it was deemed unnecessary.
The results of the analysis can be seen in table 6.1.
Estimated Model Parameters and Performance:
CR:
RRF01-00040
RRF01-00041
RRF01-00042
RRF01-00044
Nr. Parcels used
4
8
8
-
Coherence threshold
0.147
0.147
0.147
-
xP [mm/m]
−4.876 · 10−3
−5.875 · 10−3
−5.875 · 10−3
-
xE [mm/m]
1.276 · 10−3
1.513 · 10−3
1.513 · 10−3
-
xI [m/d]
−1.177−3
−1.471 · 10−3
−1.471 · 10−3
-
τ [d]
8
8
8
-
RMS Error [mm]
4.4618
17.1786
6.2381
-
Table 6.1: An accumulation of the estimate values and performance parameters for the
analysis.
6.3
Numerical Approach
This approach is based on the method presented in section 3.3, which follows the same
procedure, just based on simulated data.
A crucial assumption was made in the last section: all the identified parcels adhere to the
same underlying model, or at least share the same model parameters. This assumption
is very important because, without it, it would be impossible to realign/reconstruct the
segmented time series spanning an entire year due to the coherence losses observed. In
the following numerical approach, the same assumption will be made.
Previously, the average derivative of the time series segments was calculated to estimate
model parameters. Building on that, the current strategy is straightforward: by taking the
integral of this average derivative, the overall deformation is approximated. This method
helps reconstruct the normal deformation time series, effectively translating the previous
derivative data back into the original metric of deformation over time.
Because we use numerical differentiation, we only get an approximate derivative. Since the
data is collected every 12 days, it creates a rather coarse dataset. Although these approx-
imation errors did not affect the model-based approach, using this approximate derivative
as the basis for numerical integration can lead to compounded inaccuracies, distorting
the reconstructed function from the integral. Specifically, these errors can manifest as
overestimations or underestimations of the area under the curve. The switch to the cen-
tral difference method from the forward difference is due to its higher accuracy. Being a
second-order approximation, it delivers a more precise estimate of the derivative by aver-
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
43
==PAGE:50==
aging the rates of change around a point. This yielded new differentiated plots as seen in
figs. 6.10a and 6.10b.
(a) Central Difference on yellow highlighted
group parcel time series data.
(b) Central Difference on green highlighted
group parcel time series data.
(c) Cumulative Reference constructed based on
central difference derivative of yellow highlighted
group parcel time series data.
(d) Cumulative Reference constructed based on
central difference derivative of green highlighted
group parcel time series data.
Figure 6.10: Comparison of central differences and cumulative references of different parcel
groups. Here (a) and (c) are the new derivative and integral of said derivative of the parcel
groups time series’ highlighted in yellow. (b) and (d) are the same, just for the parcel
group highlighted in green.
The derivative data is interpolated specifically to enable integration using MATLAB’s
cumtrapz function. This function necessitates a continuous representation of the data to
achieve accurate and effective cumulative integration over the domain.
A reference deformation time series is effectively created, representing the cumulative
amount of deformation over time and is illustrated as the thick green line in figs. 6.10c
and 6.10d. This series can be used to realign any disconnected segments in the original
data, in a similar way to how it was done in the model-based approach in section 6.2.2.
This can be seen as the grey segmented lines denoted as ”Realigned Time Series”.
In comparison, this cumulative reference mirrors the constructed model, from the model
based approach. As it is used to realign the segmented time series’. From this we can
compare similarly the average of the segmented time series’ of the different parcel groups,
with PSInSAR time series of corner reflectors within that group. This is exactly the same
comparison as was done in fig. 6.9, and can now be seen on fig. 6.11.
44
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:51==
(a) The fixed deformation data of yellow highlighted parcels near
RRF01-00040.
(b) The fixed deformation data of green highlighted parcels near
RRF01-00041 and -42.
Figure 6.11: The thick light blue line represents the average fixed deformation, and the
red, orange and green line shows the PSInSAR time series data. The light grey lines in
the background is the individual fixed segments. A quantitative comparison between the
Average Fixed Deformation and the corner reflectors yielded a RMS Error: 5.9219 mm for
RRF01-00040, 10.8386 mm for RRF01-00041, and 13.5404 mm for RRF01-00042.
By looking at these, we can see the general trend of the parcels by comparing the average
fixed deformation with the trends in the PSInSAR data. The fixed segmented data for
the yellow highlighted parcels, as shown in fig. 6.11a, shows a quite accurate deformation
trend, with a computed RMS Error of 5.9219 mm. Now, looking at the fixed segmented
data for the green highlighted parcels, as shown in fig. 6.11b, shows less alignment with the
PSInSAR data. Here, a computed RMS Error of 10.8386 mm for RRF01-00041 and 13.5404
mm for RRF01-00042. However, in general, it yields a quite accurate representation of
the deformation trend and acts as an alternative to the model-based approach.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
45
==PAGE:52==
7
Discussion
To start discussing the performance of the two approaches—model-based and numerical—
we should first address how the results were validated.
Both approaches allow us to
identify the main trends of a continuous time series. However, validating these trends
is challenging due to the spatial extent required to achieve temporally overlapping seg-
ments. We validated the results using the PSInSAR-constructed time series, which are
point deformation measurements. This makes direct comparison diﬀicult, as our analysis
involved a much larger spatial extent. Despite this diﬀiculty, the trends identified by both
approaches seem to match well, which is a positive outcome. Additionally, even with the
larger spatial extents, the spatial resolution achieved is still quite fine, especially consid-
ering that achieving a continuous time series was not possible before. This makes the
approach acceptable and beneficial.
The temporal resolution of the SAR data was found to affect the performance of the pro-
posed approaches in several ways. Concerning the model-based approach, the resolution
of the time series depends on the time between consecutive SLC SAR acquisitions. The
data used in this thesis was from Sentinel-1 for the entire year of 2022. Typically, both
Sentinel-1A and 1B were used to achieve a 6-day temporal baseline. However, in late
December 2021, Sentinel-1B experienced an electronics power supply issue, preventing it
from providing radar data. This meant that only Sentinel-1A data could be used, resulting
in a 12-day temporal baseline. The data is quite ”rough” due to the 12-day gaps between
displacements. Although this method worked well for the model-based reconstruction of
disconnected time series, this roughness should also be mirrored in the step sizes of the
meteorological datasets. It seems that the sensitivity of the SPAMS model depends on
the underlying data. The SPAMS model can represent very small, fine changes, which
might not be expressed due to the limited resolution of the datasets. The data resolution
greatly affects the estimation of the integration time model parameter (τ).
For high-
resolution data (1-day time step), τ is typically large, indicating the model needs more
time to capture daily changes. In contrast, with lower-resolution data (12-day time step),
τ drops drastically, as the model focuses on broader trends rather than smaller detailed
fluctuations.
Concerning the numerical approach, while keeping to the overall roughness of our datasets,
the numerical approach for reconstructing time series revealed a critical issue: cumulative
errors can build up if not handled carefully.
Since we worked with approximations of
segment derivatives, using finer time steps would help reduce these errors. As this was
not possible at the time of writing this thesis, either interpolation of one’s data could be
an option, or a good alternative would be to use a more sophisticated numerical solver.
The deformation patterns of peatlands vary spatially, so we could only obtain an average
over a larger extent. The validation data came from PSInSAR time series analysis, which
uses point sources on the ground.
This makes it diﬀicult to compare with the larger
spatial extent covered in this thesis. The spatial resolution depends on how many parcels
are considered in the analysis to be able to invert the disconnected time-series. The fewer
the parcels and the closer they are to the corner reflectors, the better the accuracy seems to
be due to the underlying spatial variability of the deformation. It was shown that reducing
the extent or the number of parcels used for reconstruction generally resulted in a smaller
overall error compared to the PSInSAR time series. This can be seen in figs. 6.9 and 6.11,
with RRF01-00040 having a smaller extent closer to the reference, and the smallest RMS
error in both reconstruction approaches.
46
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:53==
8
Conclusion
In this thesis, different approaches to recover the deformation time-series of the Store
Vildmose peatland area in northern Jutland, Denmark, were investigated. A Sentinel-
1 image stack from track 139 was processed using the DTU developed IPP software,
generating all InSAR interferograms, with temporal baselines of 12 and 24 days throughout
the entire year of 2022. An inversion approach was implemented in MATLAB to solve for
the deformation time-series within periods where coherence was suﬀiciently high, ensuring
that only high-quality, coherent data were used. This was necessary because during the
summer months, agricultural activities and environmental changes caused significant drops
in coherence, leading to unreliable data in our specific region. Consequently, it was only
possible to obtain segmented, disconnected time series due to these coherence issues.
The SPAMS empirical model for soft surface subsidence, first formulated in the Nether-
lands [2], was evaluated for its effectiveness in describing the surface motion of peatland
areas. This model was used to address the common issue of loss of coherence in peatland
areas by reconstructing disconnected but temporally overlapping, segmented deformation
time series. This model-based approach proved successful in realigning segmented time
series, allowing for the formulation of an average continuous deformation time series over
a few parcels for an entire year. The results demonstrated the SPAMS model’s capability
to accurately reflect surface motion trends in the specific context of Store Vildmose.
Additionally, an unpublished numerical approach, conceived as part of this thesis, was
investigated for reconstructing disconnected time series. By assuming temporally overlap-
ping, segmented deformation time series again, a cumulative reference deformation was
constructed by integrating a finer numerical derivative of the segmented data. This ref-
erence was then used to realign the original disconnected time series. While this method
required additional considerations for numerical stability, it proved to be an effective al-
ternative for reconstructing these series.
Both approaches demonstrated their potential in reconstructing continuous deformation
time series from segmented data, each with its own strengths and considerations. The
model-based approach leveraged the SPAMS model’s empirical understanding of subsi-
dence, providing a robust framework for realignment. However, it is not as straightforward
as the numerical approach because it requires additional meteorological datasets, which
can add complexity to the implementation. Furthermore, while the SPAMS model proved
effective for Store Vildmose, there is no guarantee that it will perform equally as well for
other peatland regions.
This thesis has shown that these methods can effectively tackle the challenges of recon-
structing deformation time series in peatlands. The successful use of the SPAMS model
and the numerical approach lays the groundwork for future research and practical appli-
cations in similar environmental and geological contexts.
8.1
Future Work
Deformation trends in peatlands depend significantly on the lithology of the location,
which varies spatially due to the concentration and distribution of underlying layers and
their properties. Furthermore, the depth and thickness of the underlying peat play a cru-
cial role in the movement of the surface layers. In the SPAMS model, parameters depend
on the depth and stratigraphy of the Holocene sequence at a given location. However,
peat thickness itself does not currently appear as a variable in this model.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
47
==PAGE:54==
For future work, it is suggested to implement peat thickness as a spatial variable in the
SPAMS model. Incorporating this term could enhance the model’s accuracy in scaling
deformation trends to account for spatial variability. By including empirical peat thickness
data, the model could better reflect local conditions, allowing for the deformation time
series to be adjusted according to the spatial variability of the peatland. This would enable
a more precise understanding of deformation patterns over smaller local spatial extents,
which we currently cannot handle effectively.
48
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
Andreas Heinemeyer Phoebe A. Morton. Bog breathing: the extent of peat shrinkage
and expansion on blanket bogs in relation to water table, heather management and
dominant vegetation and its implications for carbon stock assessments. 2019. url:
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11273-019-09672-5.
[2]
Philip Conroy, Simon A.N. van Diepen, and Ramon F. Hanssen. “SPAMS: A new
empirical model for soft soil surface displacement based on meteorological input
data”. In: Geoderma 440.October (2023), pp. 3–6. issn: 00167061. doi: 10.1016/j.ge
oderma.2023.116699.
[3]
Philip Conroy et al. “Bridging Loss-of-Lock in InSAR Time Series of Distributed
Scatterers”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 61 (2023),
pp. 1–11. issn: 15580644. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3329967.
[4]
Anders Kusk Johan Jacob Mohr. “SAR Light, an introduction to Synthetic Aperture
Radar”. In: 2.1 (2006).
[5]
DTU space John Peter Merryman Boncori. “Synthetic Aperture Radar Interferom-
etry - Lecture Notes”. In: (2023).
[6]
Jerome Bruniquel Ridha Touzi Armand Lopes. “Coherence Estimation for SAR Im-
agery”. In: 37 (1999).
[7]
Gianfranco Fornaro Paolo Berardino. “A New Algorithm for Surface Deformation
Monitoring Based on Small Baseline Differential SAR Interferograms”. In: (2002).
[8]
DTU space Nils Peter Olsen. “Dataanalyse og -modellering i rum- og geofysik -
Lecture Notes”. In: (2023).
[9]
Cumulative trapezoidal numerical integration. url: https://www.mathworks.com/he
lp/matlab/ref/cumtrapz.html.
[10]
Store Vildmose. 2024. url: https://da.wikipedia.org/wiki/Store%7B%5C_%7DVildm
ose.
[11]
“Ringfenner Lavbundsprojekt i St. Vildmose - Realisering”. In: (). url: https://nat
urstyrelsen.dk/ny-natur/lavbundsprojekter/ringfenner-lavbundsprojekt-i-st-vildmose-re
alisering.
[12]
Author Miquel et al. “Decoupling the effects of soil moisture and ground deformation
in SAR interferometry”. In: (2023).
[13]
Geopartner Landinspektører. url: https://geopartner.dk/.
[14]
DMI Open Data Developers portal. url: https://dmiapi.govcloud.dk/?fbclid=IwZXh
0bgNhZW0CMTAAAR34MtncplsmfCCrBT- Ovd5DG6Lq10UOpSBCPQEeF99TemPNg
KsI2nmJkSY_aem_ZmFrZWR1bW15MTZieXRlcw#!/login?redirectUri=%2Fapis.
[15]
DHI Danmark. url: https://worldwide.dhigroup.com/dk.
[16]
Evapotranspiration. 2024. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evapotranspiration.
[17]
ASF Data Search. url: https://search.asf.alaska.edu/#/?zoom=6.513&center=6.46
8,55.109&polygon=POLYGON((9.7346%2057.1437,9.9598%2057.1437,9.9598%2057
.2516,9.7346%2057.2516,9.7346%2057.1437))&start=2020-12-31T23:00:00Z&end=2
021-12-31T22:59:59Z&productTypes=SLC&beamModes=IW&flightDirs=Descending
&resultsLoaded=true&granule=S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20210111T054031_20210111
T054058_036086_043ACA_03CA-SLC&path=139-139.
[18]
Sentinel-1 C-band Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR). url: https://www.earthdata.na
sa.gov/sensors/sentinel-1-c-sar.
[19]
DTU SPACE Anders Kusk. “Interferometric Post -Processing Chain (IPP) - User
Guide”. In: (2022).
[20]
Least-Squares (Model Fitting) Algorithms. url: https://www.mathworks.com/help/o
ptim/ug/least-squares-model-fitting-algorithms.html%7B%5C#%7Dbroz0i4.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
49
==PAGE:56==
50
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
==PAGE:57==
A
Appendix
A.1
Multi Looking
As aforementioned in section 2.1.2, multilook processing is an optional step that can help
achieve a product with a nominal image pixel size. This method involves averaging over
range and/or azimuth resolution cells. While this improves radiometric resolution, it does
reduce spatial resolution. The main benefit is that the image will have less noise and more
consistent pixel spacing after being transformed from slant range to ground range.
Two multi-looking strategies were tested, each with different numbers of looks in both the
range and azimuth dimensions. The first strategy uses the standard decimation factors
of raDecFac = 10, azDecFac = 2, which is approximately equivalent to 26 independent
looks, as shown in fig. A.1a. While the second strategy used factors of raDecFac = 12,
azDecFac = 4, which is approximately equivalent to 54 independent looks, as illustrated
in fig. A.1b. For each strategy, a plot was created to show the mean coherence for each
parcel over a set period, with a coherence threshold set to γ = 0.15 in both cases.
(a)
(b)
Figure A.1: Comparative coherence analysis of parcels over the same time period with dif-
ferent multilook decimation factors. (a) is constructed factors of raDecFac = 10, azDecFac
= 2 (b) is constructed with factors of raDecFac = 12, azDecFac = 4.
Increasing the number of looks on the images reveals a clear distinction between them. To
achieve a good radiometric resolution and significantly reduce coherence estimation bias,
the SAR images will now be processed with multilook decimation factors of raDecFac =
12, azDecFac = 4, which approximately equivalent to 54 independent looks. This approach
still provides enough spatial coverage within individual parcels to conduct an average time
series analysis. The pixel spacing of the output interferograms is approximately 55 × 60
m in range × azimuth.
Furthermore, the coherence estimation bias for this datset was estimated to be E(ˆγ) =
0.11465.
Reconstruction of InSAR Deformation Time-Series of Peatlands in Denmark
51
==PAGE:58==
”Don’t cry because it’s over. Smile because it happened.”
- Dr. Seuss
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
