==PAGE:1==
Framework for data-driven fault detection
models in fermentation processes
Master Thesis
DTU Process and System Engineering Center
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Maximilian Klein
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the custom-
ary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Søltofts Plads,
Building 228A, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.kt.dtu.dk/research/prosys
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was written at the Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineer-
ing in the Process and System Engineering Center from January until July 2024. Prof. Krist
Gernaey, Carina Gargalo and Mads Kaiser-Albæk supervised the work.
I declare that this document is an original work of my authorship and that it fulﬁlls the
requirements of DTU’s code of honour.
ii
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The thesis presents the development and application of a framework for creating data-
driven fault detection models using synthetic data. The framework is applied in the context of
fermentation processes, which are becoming increasingly more complex, making fault detec-
tion and diagnosis more challenging. While traditional model-based approaches to fault detec-
tion are resource-intensive and require considerable process knowledge, data-driven models
can be developed rapidly but require large labeled datasets, which are often unavailable. This
work offers a solution to this challenge by utilizing large synthetic datasets.
The framework consists of two parts: data generation and fault detection model devel-
opment. In the ﬁrst part, a fed-batch fermentation model is modiﬁed to simulate fault events
and biological variance. With that, large synthetic datasets are generated through Monte Carlo
simulations. In the second part, various fault detection models are developed and optimized
based on multiway principal component analysis (MPCA), partial least squares discriminant
analysis (PLS-DA), support vector machines (SVM), and artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN). The
ANN model is further developed for fault diagnosis, including additional feature engineering.
The model evaluation shows that simpler linear models like MPCA and PLS-DA are limited
in detecting certain faults but show better generalization capabilities. While the SVM model
outperforms the ANN model in terms of fault detection, it requires signiﬁcantly more compu-
tational power. The ANN models demonstrate the lowest false alarm rates and prove to be
effective in both fault detection and diagnosis. However, their generalization capabilities need
to be further improved.
This work provides a foundation for developing robust data-driven fault detection models
for fermentation processes based on synthetic datasets. By validating the models with real
process data and improving them based on the results, the framework can be extended to
provide robust fault detection models for practical application.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank a few people who were an important part of this journey. To Ca-
rina, for her continuous guidance throughout my thesis. Her mentoring abilities, paired with
her modeling expertise, were essential for this work, especially in times of doubt. To Mads,
whose hands-on process expertise made this project come alive. Our discussions helped me
tremendously in giving this work its practical relevance. To Krist, for his insightful feedback
and for guiding the broader context of the thesis. And ﬁnally, to my partner Mona, to whom I
am deeply grateful for supporting me throughout this journey as well as for her many hours
spent reading and giving feedback on my work.
iv
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:7==
Abbrevations
ACF
Auto-Correlation Function
ANN
Artiﬁcial Neural Network
DO
Dissolved Oxygen
dV/dt
Rate of Change of Volume
F
Feed Flow Rate
FAR
False Alarm Rate
FDR
Fault Detection Rate
Fevap
Water Evaporation Rate
MPCA
Multiway Principal Components Analysis
MPLS
Multiway Partial Least Squares
ms
Maintenance Coefﬁcient for Substrate
n
Moving time window size
NIPALS
Nonlinear Iterative Partial Least Squares
OOC
Out of Calibration
ODE
Ordinary Differential Equations
OOD
Out of Domain
OUR
Oxygen Uptake Rate
PCA
Principal Component Analysis
PLS-DA
Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis
PLS-R
Partial Least Squares Regression
RBF
Radial Basis Function
RMSE
Root Mean Squared Error
ρbroth
Density of Broth
ρf
Density of Feed
ρr
Rate Parameter Vector
ρwater
Density of Water
Sm
Stoichiometric Matrix
SVM
Support Vector Machine
Y true
XS
True Stoichiometric Coefﬁcient from Substrate to Biomass
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Fed-batch fermentation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Fault detection in fermentation processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Machine Learning-based techniques for fault detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methodology
17
3.1
Methodological framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Part I: Data generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3
Part II: Fault detection model development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4
Results and discussion
31
4.1
Validation of large synthetic datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Model development for fault detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.3
Model development for fault diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.4
Model evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5
Conclusions and future perspectives
53
5.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.2
Future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Bibliography
55
A
Appendix
59
A.1
Process parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A.2
Noise analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
vii
==PAGE:10==
A.3
Generating large datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
A.4
Model development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
viii
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Fermentation processes have become increasingly complex over the last decades. While
this complexity brings some advantages, detecting faults also becomes more complicated, re-
quiring more accurate and speciﬁc models for fault detection and diagnosis. Fault detection is
concerned with the presence of a fault, while fault diagnosis determines the speciﬁc type and
location of the fault. For simplicity, both “fault detection” and “fault diagnosis” are referred
to as fault detection in this work. Developing fault detection models based on fundamental
knowledge about a process is often resource-intensive. Data-driven approaches can alleviate
this by inferring the relationships between the process and faults from historical data. How-
ever, this requires large datasets with a substantial number of labeled fault events, which is not
given in many cases. One way to solve this problem is by synthesizing balanced and labeled
datasets from process models.
Consequently, this work presents a framework for developing data-driven fault detection
models based on synthetic data and applies the framework to a fed-batch fermentation process.
1.2
Approach
The framework developed in this work provides a systematic approach for the development
of real-time fault detection models. It provides a basis for developing a variety of data-driven
fault detection models based on large synthetic datasets. These models should be able to raise
real-time fault alarms so that operators can react accordingly, avoiding sub-optimal process
conditions and failures.
A fed-batch fermentation model provided by Albæk et al. was used for the application
of the framework [1]. Based on expert knowledge, the ﬁve most common fault types of this
process were identiﬁed and implemented in the fermentation model. These faults are listed in
the following.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
1
==PAGE:12==
• Steam entering the tank through the feed stream.
• Steam entering the tank through defective steam barriers.
• Off-gas spectrometer being out of calibration, leading to deviations in oxygen-uptake
rate (OUR) measurements.
• Blocked spargers, reducing airﬂow into the tank.
• Airﬂow meter being out of calibration.
In the ﬁrst step of the framework, large datasets with both regular and faulty batches are
synthesized based on Monte Carlo simulations. Realistic biological variance is also introduced
into the datasets. In the second step, the goal is to develop and optimize a selection of data-
driven fault detection models. In the ﬁnal step, a fault detection model is selected after a
thorough evaluation of all models.
The four machine learning methods used in this work are multiway principal component
analysis (MPCA), partial least squares discriminatory analysis (PLS-DA), support vector ma-
chines (SVMs), and artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs).
MPCA was chosen since it is the most commonly used method in fault detection [2]–[5].
PLS-DA is also widely used but offers different advantages than MPCA as it is a supervised
learning method [6], [7]. SVMs and ANNs offer the ability to capture more complex patterns
and relationships. SVMs can create highly nonlinear decision boundaries for fault detection
[8], [9]. ANNs on the other hand are proven to have complex pattern recognition abilities,
making them a relevant method for fault detection [8], [10].
The framework presented here is intended to be used as a ﬂexible open-source code base,
contributing to efforts for more reproducible open science. By generating synthetic datasets
with different process parameters, these fault detection models can be adjusted to various new
conditions, making them ﬂexible and relevant to the wide operating space of the fermentation
process. Furthermore, this work is meant to be expanded upon. This could involve adding
new faults, reﬁning current faults, or applying the framework to a different process.
The codebase with all developed models and additional resources for this project can be
found on GitHub at https://github.com/datameerkat/fermentation-fault-detection.
2
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:13==
1.3
Outline
The thesis is structured into four chapters. The general structure of the fermentation model
is explained in Chapter 2, focusing on aspects relevant to generating large datasets for fault
detection. Furthermore, introductions to fault detection for fermentation processes and the
machine learning techniques used in this work are given.
The framework for developing data-driven fault detection models is described in detail
in Chapter 3, followed by a detailed explanation of how this approach was applied to the
fermentation model of Albæk et al.
Chapter 4 covers the results and discussion of developing fault detection models with this
approach. It begins with insights into the datasets, followed by showing how the performance
and optimization of the different types of models. Finally, all models are evaluated and com-
pared. The thesis ﬁnishes with conclusions about this work and a glimpse into future perspec-
tives.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:15==
2
Background
2.1
Fed-batch fermentation model
This work is based on a fermentation model developed by Albæk et al. [1], [11]. The fol-
lowing section gives an introduction and overview of this model, focusing on aspects relevant
to modeling and detecting fault events. For further theory on this model, please refer to Albæk
et al. [1], [11].
The model aims to simulate a submerged fed-batch fermentation process of a ﬁlamentous
fungus for the production of enzymes. It was previously used to study various aspects of
this process. Albæk et al. [1] investigate different agitation, aeration, and agitator types. In
a subsequent study, [11], the focus was on evaluating the energy efﬁciency of the process
depending on the agitation, aeration, and headspace pressure. In this work, the model will be
used to simulate the effects of fault events and biological variance to generate large datasets,
which are used to train fault detection models.
The fermentation model is constructed as a state-space model. A state-space model uses a
set of differential equations to evolve a collection of state variables over time, based on initial
conditions. In the case of this model, the state variables are the biomass concentration X, the
substrate concentration S, the enzyme concentration E, the dissolved oxygen concentration
DO, and the submerged volume V. For each time step, the system is solved for the state
variables using a set of ordinary differential equations based on the mass balances of the state
variables (see Eqs. 4-9 in [1]). To solve this set of ODEs, several physical and empirical
equations are used to determine the parameters of the system such as the driving force for
the oxygen transfer or the volumetric mass transfer coefﬁcient (kLa), which are crucial to
solve for the concentration DO. Calculating kLa is based on an empirical equation, which
also accounts for the effects of viscosity since fermentations with ﬁlamentous fungi exhibit an
increase in viscosity over time. A simple ﬂow chart showing the state-space structure of the
model is depicted in Figure 2.1.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.1: Flowchart of the state-space fermentation model. Starting with a set of initial conditions
and parameters, the model controls the feed rate through a PI controller and solves a system of ODEs
for the state variables. This is reiterated for every time step, evolving the state variables.
Another essential part of the mass balances is the speciﬁc growth rate µ. The assumption
of an immediate uptake of the substrate by the fungus combined with very low substrate levels
in the broth leads to a quasi-steady state of the substrate concentration. In this way, µ can be
determined from the mass balances as follows:
µ =
cf · F −S · dVdt
V · X
−ms

·
1
Y true
XS
(2.1)
where cf is the substrate concentration in the feed, F is the feed, ms is the maintenance coefﬁ-
cient for the substrate, and Y true
XS
the “true” stoichiometric coefﬁcient from the substrate to the
biomass. The calculation of µ, as well as the substrate and oxygen uptake calculation, require
the true yield coefﬁcients Y true
XS
and Y true
XO , which represent the theoretical maximum yield
under optimal conditions. The rate of change of the volume dVdt follows from the volume
balance of the reactor
dVdt =
ρf · F + ρwater −Fevap + YSO · F · cf −YSC · F · cf
ρbroth
(2.2)
where ρf, ρwater and ρbroth are the densities of the feed, water and broth, Fevap is the water
6
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:17==
evaporation rate, and YSO as well as YSC are the “observed” yield coefﬁcients.
The rate of change of X, S, E, and DO is determined by the stoichiometric matrix Sm
and the rate parameter vector ρr. Each column in Sm corresponds to one of the four state
variables, while the rows correspond to biomass growth (µ) and the maintenance metabolism
of the fungus, divided into the substrate (ms) and oxygen consumption (mo).
Rate parameter
Stoichiometric Matrix (Sm)
Vector (ρr)
Biomass (X)
Substrate (S)
Enzyme (E)
Dissolved Oxygen (DO)
µX
1
Y true
XS
YSE
YSX
−Y true
XO
msX
0
−1
0
0
moX
0
0
0
−1
The rate of change vector for X, S, E, and DO is then given by:
r = Sm · ρr
(2.3)
The biokinetic parameters, namely the “observed” and “true” yield coefﬁcients as well as
the maintenance coefﬁcients, are part of a conﬁgurable set of parameters. Additionally, the
model allows for different conﬁgurations of initial volume and biomass. As mentioned earlier,
the model is ﬂexible with regard to the reactor and impeller conﬁguration. The empirical
parameters for the viscosity and kLa can be adjusted to reﬂect different scenarios. The aeration
of the system is based on a pre-deﬁned proﬁle, achieved by controlling the DO through the
feed rate. Upper and lower boundaries are deﬁned for the feed rate.
Although the model allows ﬂexibility in different parts of the fermentation system, it is
ﬁxed in some regards. The most relevant aspects here are the temperature and the pH. The
model assumes that the pH is controlled through ammonia dosing and the temperature is kept
constant by a process control system. All empirical and biokinetic parameters are therefore
tied to a speciﬁc temperature and pH.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
7
==PAGE:18==
2.2
Fault detection in fermentation processes
As discussed in Chapter 1, the development of fault detection models began several decades
ago due to their importance for the safety and reliability of processes. These earlier fault
detection approaches were mostly model-based techniques and expert systems, using funda-
mental mathematical models and expert knowledge, respectively. The increasing computa-
tional power in the last three decades gave rise to data-driven approaches relying on process-
historical data. The following paragraphs will provide an overview of all three types of models,
focusing mainly on data-driven approaches since the models developed in this work belong to
this third category.
Model-based approaches for fault detection use mechanistic representations of a process to
detect abnormal process conditions. The process model is usually a state estimation method,
e.g., a state-space model. For this, state variables are deﬁned and recursively solved for using
online measurements as input and a set of physical and empirical equations. State variables
are usually non-measurable variables that are related to speciﬁc faults. Fault decisions can
then be made based on the pattern of these state variables. [12]
Expert systems use the knowledge of operators and engineers to deﬁne precise algorithms
to detect faults [4]. A common way to build a rule-based expert system is through probability
theory or fuzzy rules. Fuzzy rules describe a system consisting of a set of IF-THEN statements
based on knowledge about the process [4]. Therefore, such a system is transparent in its
reasoning and it is accessible as it does not require advanced programming knowledge [13].
Data-driven approaches build empirical models based on historical process data [4]. This
statistical approach does not require fundamental knowledge of the underlying process. In-
stead, the model “learns” the underlying relationships within the process through training on
historical data. The ﬁrst data-driven approaches for fault detection of batch processes were
pioneered by Nomikos and MacGregor in the 1990s [4], [14]. They developed multiway prin-
cipal component analysis (MPCA) and multiway partial least squares (MPLS) approaches to
monitor such processes based on process historical data. Here, “multiway” refers to organiz-
ing the data batch-wise. These advances in using multivariate statistical techniques to monitor
batch processes proved to be a breakthrough, as both MPCA and MPLS are still commonly ap-
plied today [3], [15], [16]. One key advantage of these multivariate approaches is their ability
to handle highly correlated batch process data. MPCA models have an additional beneﬁt: they
do not require faulty batches for calibration, as they are trained purely on normal batch data
8
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:19==
(more in Section 2.3.1). This alleviates the need for balanced datasets between normal and
faulty batches, which would typically be required to train a data-driven model for fault detec-
tion [17].
One disadvantage of multivariate approaches such as MPCA and MPLS is their assumption
of linear relationships. Later advancements in computational power enabled the application
of techniques capable of capturing non-linear relationships. The two most common of these
techniques are support vector machines (SVMs) and artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs). Both
of these as well as MPCA and MPLS will be explained in more detail in the following sections.
2.3
Machine Learning-based techniques for fault detection
In this work, four different machine learning approaches were applied to fault detection
in the aforementioned fermentation process. The following section gives an introduction to
each method with references for further theoretical background. Additionally, Table 2.1 gives
a short comparison of the machine learning methods based on relevant categories, e.g. their
primary purpose or their hyperparameters.
2.3.1
Multiway principal component analysis
The general goal of PCA is to project the original variables of a dataset into a reduced
space deﬁned by new coordinates, called principal components. While still explaining a large
amount of the variance in the original variables, the PCA model describes the data in a simpler
and more meaningful way. The principal components are arranged in descending order of
variance explained: the ﬁrst component accounts for the highest amount of variance, followed
by the second, and so on. A PCA model is characterized by its loadings vectors, which are the
directions in the original feature space along which the data varies the most. Each loadings
vector corresponds to a principal component. In this way, new data points can be projected
onto the PCA space through these loadings vectors [4].
A set of historical batch data can be seen as a three-dimensional array, with its dimen-
sions being time, process variables, and batches. This dataset can be unfolded into a two-
dimensional array by concatenating the batch-wise arrays along the time axis. Considering
this, MPCA is equivalent to performing ordinary PCA on an unfolded 2D version of a 3D array,
since the underlying concept of MPCA and PCA is the same [4], [18]. In general, PCA assumes
the data to be Gaussian distributed [2]. Its computational complexity is low, as it only requires
one singular value decomposition of the input data matrix [2].
As PCA is an unsupervised learning method, statistical tests are used to detect faults. In the
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
9
==PAGE:20==
Table 2.1: Summary of the machine learning approaches used in this project.
Category
MPCA
PLS-DA
SVM
ANN
Learning type
Unsupervised
Supervised
Supervised
Supervised
Primary purpose
Dimensionality reduction
Regression
Classiﬁcation
Classiﬁcation
Regression
Clustering
Assumption on input data
Gaussian distributed
Gaussian distributed
-
-
Adaptability
Static
Static
Static
Adaptive
Hyperparameters
Principal components
Components
C (regularization parameter)
Hidden layers & nodes
Detection threshold
Kernel function
Batch size
Kernel parameters
Learning rate
Activation function
Optimizer type
Relevant variants
Kernel PCA
Kernel PLS
One-class SVM
CNN
Recursive PCA
Recursive PLS
Recursive SVM
RNN
Dynamic PCA
10
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:21==
case of a (M)PCA model, these are usually Hotelling’s T 2 statistic and the squared prediction
error (SPE). Both serve different purposes and will be explained shortly.
Hotelling’s T 2 statistic is based on the sum of the normalized squared scores. A score is
obtained by projecting a new observation onto the PCA space. A low score in PCA indicates
that the observation is close to the mean of the data on which the PCA model was calibrated.
The sum of normalized squared scores therefore indicates the distance of a set of observations
to the center of the model space. A fault can be detected by deﬁning a threshold, above which
a fault alarm is triggered. This threshold is usually based on the distribution of the Hotelling’s
T 2 statistic for normal operating conditions.
The SPE focuses on a different aspect when projecting a new observation onto the PCA
space. Rather than evaluating the structured part of the PCA model, namely the scores, it uses
an unstructured part, namely the residuals. The SPE is deﬁned as the sum of squared residuals
and answers the question of how much of the variation of a new observation is captured by
the PCA model. Similar to the T 2 statistic, an empirically based threshold is used to detect
faults. The application of both statistics in the context of the framework is further explained
in Chapter 3.3.3.
The workﬂow of applying MPCA to fault detection is summarized in Figure 2.2. For further
details on MPCA for fault detection and process monitoring refer to Nomikos and MacGregor
[4].
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.2: Workﬂow of applying MPCA to fault detection via Hotelling’s T 2 statistic and squared
prediction error (SPE). All input data needs to be standardized.
Besides the standard PCA approach, several variants of PCA exist. Recursive PCA can han-
dle data in batches, enabling it to be incrementally trained. Dynamic PCA, on the other hand,
can capture correlations in time series data. Another variant is kernel PCA, which eliminates
the limitation of linear relationships, as its kernel function can be non-linear [19].
2.3.2
Partial least squares discriminant analysis
Partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) is derived from partial least squares
regression (PLS-R). While PLS-R aims to form a regression model to predict a continuous vari-
able, PLS-DA is used for classiﬁcation tasks. This is achieved by using discrete target variables.
For a two-class problem, one target variable can be deﬁned, where the two classes are assigned
the labels 0 and 1. For problems with more than two classes, each class is assigned a one-hot-
encoded target variable. PLS-DA uses slightly different algorithms for each case, namely PLS1
and PLS2. For further details on the PLS-DA algorithms refer to Brereton and Lloyd [20].
PLS-DA captures the most signiﬁcant variation in the input variables while ﬁnding an opti-
mal separation between the target classes. In this way, PLS-DA performs dimensionality reduc-
tion and classiﬁcation at the same time. The output of the PLS-DA model for a new observation
is a continuous value between 0 and 1. This value can be interpreted as the probability that a
12
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:23==
fault is present for this set of input variables.
Similar to PCA, PLS assumes the input data to be Gaussian distributed. Additionally, it
requires a well-deﬁned input-output relationship. Its computational complexity is higher com-
pared to PCA, as it carries out k single value decompositions, where k is the number of iteration
steps needed to satisfy the tolerance requirement when using the NIPALS algorithms [2].
2.3.3
Support vector machines
Support vector machines (SVM) are a common machine learning technique for classiﬁca-
tion tasks in nonlinear systems. They were ﬁrst developed by Vapnik and Chervonenkis in the
1990s. The theory of this section is based on Vapnik’s book about statistical learning, which
offers further explanations beyond the scope of this work [21].
The goal of a support vector machine (SVM) is to construct a decision boundary to per-
form classiﬁcation in a potentially nonlinear system. It achieves this by mapping the input
vector into a higher-dimensional space through a nonlinear mapping, based on a chosen ker-
nel function. In this space, an optimal separating hyperplane is constructed as the decision
boundary.
An essential part of an SVM is the “kernel trick”. This trick allows for computing the simi-
larity between two points in a higher dimensional space without ever explicitly transforming
the data into this higher dimensional space. In this way, the computation required for training
an SVM is reduced signiﬁcantly. A SVM can operate with different kernel functions. Common
ones are the linear kernel, the polynomial kernel and the radial basis function kernel (RBF
kernel). Out of these three, the RBF kernel can create the most ﬂexible and complex decision
boundaries by measuring the Euclidean distance between points in the transformed feature
space.
Although SVMs can construct highly nonlinear decision boundaries, they tend to generalize
better than ANNs [9]. On the other hand, even when using the kernel trick, the computational
complexity for training an SVM increases drastically for larger datasets. Depending on the
algorithm used for training, the computational complexity for training an SVM is between
O(n2) and O(n3), where n is the number of observations in the training set [22].
As with other machine learning techniques, there exist several variants of SVMs. One vari-
ant similar to the MPCA approach is the one-class SVM [9]. It is similar as it also only requires
normal batch data to be trained. The goal of this variant is to ﬁnd a decision boundary that
encapsulates the normal data. Any point outside of this boundary is considered a fault. An-
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
13
==PAGE:24==
other variant relevant to fault detection is the recursive SVM, which can be trained in batches
instead of being trained all at once. This allows for re-training of the model once new data
becomes available.
2.3.4
Artiﬁcial neural networks
Artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN) became essential to machine learning during the rapid
increase in computational power in the last two decades. ANNs offer a high degree of ﬂexibility
and potential complexity, which also opens up many pitfalls. ANNs have several use cases like
regression, classiﬁcation, or clustering, but this work focuses on classiﬁcation. The following
explanations are based on Michael Nielsen’s extensive web page about deep learning [23].
Refer to that page for information beyond the explanations given below.
The basic unit of an ANN is a neuron. The simplest form of connecting neurons to a
network is a feed-forward neural network (FFNN). The basic structure of a FFNN is shown in
Figure 2.3. Feed-forward means that all data moves from an input layer to an output layer in
one direction. Each neuron in an input layer corresponds to one input variable, whereas each
neuron in the output layer corresponds to a class. Between the input and output layers are
hidden layers. The architecture of a FFNN is mainly deﬁned by the number of hidden layers
and the number of neurons in each hidden layer. The basic workﬂow of a FFNN in the case of
one hidden layer is as follows:
1. Inputs are sent to each neuron in the hidden layer and multiplied by the connection
weights.
2. A bias is added in each neuron.
3. The activation function is applied in each neuron.
4. Values are sent from neurons in the hidden layer to output layers.
5. The bias and the activation function are applied in output neurons.
When applying an ANN for classiﬁcation, the softmax function is usually applied to the
output of the network to ensure that all outputs sum to 1. These outputs can therefore be
thought of as probabilities.
An ANN learns from a dataset by adapting its set of weights and biases. The algorithm for
this is called backpropagation. In essence, it uses the partial derivative of the loss function
with respect to the weights and biases in order to update these. The most commonly used loss
function in ANNs for classiﬁcation is the cross-entropy loss function. This function quantiﬁes
14
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.3: Structure of a basic feed-forward neural network.
the difference between the predicted probabilities and the actual classes. The objective is to
minimize this difference, so the predicted probabilities are as close as possible to the actual
labels.
With this setup, ANNs have proven to be a capable machine learning technique. Theoreti-
cally, according to the universal approximation theorem, ANNs can approximate every function
given a complex enough network. Additionally, they are naturally capable of learning adap-
tively without any extensions to the model. This makes them suitable for large datasets and
for learning incrementally from new data. They also offer multiple ways of customizing a net-
work to a speciﬁc problem by changing its various hyperparameters, like the number of hidden
layers/neurons, the activation function, the loss function, the learning algorithms, etc.
As neural networks can become rather extensive and complex due to their architecture and
number of hyperparameters, several pitfalls exist when training ANNs. One common problem
is the issue of vanishing gradients, where the network essentially stops learning after a few
iterations. Additionally, as neural networks can theoretically ﬁt any function, overﬁtting must
be avoided. Numerous regularization techniques exist to ensure that a network generalizes
well enough outside of its training dataset. The vast amount of hyperparameters of an ANN
leads to a high amount of possible combinations, making the optimization of hyperparameters
a challenging task.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
15
==PAGE:26==
16
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:27==
3
Methodology
3.1
Methodological framework
The framework presented in this section provides structured practical guidance for devel-
oping fault detection models based on synthetic datasets by outlining the sequence of methods
applied. A visual representation of the framework can be seen in Figure 3.1. The framework
can be divided into two main parts: (I) data generation and (II) fault detection model devel-
opment. Part I, data generation, encompasses all the steps needed for the creation of large
synthetic datasets. To simulate the ﬁve different fault events, and replicate the biological vari-
ance of the system, modiﬁcations are made to the existing model developed by Albaek et al.
A set of process parameters and initial conditions is deﬁned according to the speciﬁc process
setup. Using this modiﬁed fermentation model, datasets are generated through Monte Carlo
simulations, which randomly sample parameters to simulate two kinds of variance in the fer-
mentation model: biological variance and variance in fault events. Part II, the development
of the fault detection models, starts by pre-processing the datasets. This always involves the
standardization of the data and can be extended with feature engineering techniques. To de-
velop a model, four different datasets need to be deﬁned: a training, a validation, and two
different test datasets. All models are trained based on the training dataset. Following this,
each model’s hyperparameters are optimized according to their performance on the validation
dataset. Following this, the performance of all models is compared based on a separate test
dataset. Additionally, the generalization ability of the models is evaluated using a second test
set with out-of-domain data. Based on the metrics from these two test sets, a decision for an
optimal model can be made. The metrics used for evaluating the performances of the models
are further explained in Section 3.3.2.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
17
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.1: Methodological framework developed in this work. The framework is divided into two
parts (green dotted line): (I) data generation and (II) fault detection model development.
18
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:29==
3.2
Part I: Data generation
3.2.1
Step 1: Modifying the fermentation model
The basis for generating synthetic datasets is a modiﬁed version of the mechanistic fermen-
tation model. This model is deﬁned by a set of process parameters. In this work, the process
parameters of the fermentation model were based on expert knowledge to replicate a realistic
process behavior. A detailed list of all parameters can be found in Table A.1 in the appendix.
This set of parameters is consistently used throughout this work.
The modiﬁcations to the model allow it to include biological variance, simulate fault events,
and apply realistic noise to process parameters. These modiﬁcations will be explained in detail
in the following sections.
Implementing biological variance
The biological system of the fermentation model is deﬁned by a set of biokinetic parame-
ters, previously explained in Chapter 2.1. A concise overview of all parameters can be seen in
Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Biokinetic parameters of the fed-batch fermentation model. The given median for each
parameter is used consistently throughout this work. The parameters are set to resemble an exemplary
case of Aspergillus oryzae based on expert knowledge.
Parameter
Median
Units
Description
X0
5.0
gDW/L
Initial biomass concentration
YSX
0.3
gDW/gS
Yield coefﬁcient from substrate to biomass
YSE
0.1
gE/gS
Yield coefﬁcient from substrate to enzyme
YSO
0.6
gDO/gS
Yield coefﬁcient from substrate to dissolved oxygen
YSC
0.9
gCO2/gS
Yield coefﬁcient from substrate to CO2
YXS_true
1.81
gS/gDW
“True” yield coefﬁcient from biomass to substrate
YXO_true
0.0328
moleO2/gDW
True yield coefﬁcient from biomass to oxygen
ms
0.013
gS/(gDW · h)
Substrate maintenance coefﬁcient
mo
0.0003
moleO2/(gDW · h)
Oxygen maintenance coefﬁcient
Based on expert knowledge, all biokinetic parameters are assumed to be normally dis-
tributed and to vary by 10 % around their median value. Since normal distributions have
no deﬁned upper and lower boundaries, truncated normal distributions were used. This dis-
tribution is based on the assumption that 95 % of the values are within its upper and lower
boundaries. With that, the standard deviation s of the truncated normal distribution can be
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
19
==PAGE:30==
calculated based on its upper and lower boundaries as
s =
 parmax −parmin
4

(3.1)
, where parmax and parmin are the upper and lower boundaries of the respective parameter.
Fault events implementation
As mentioned in the problem statement (see Chapter 1.1), the ﬁve most common faults
according to expert knowledge were implemented in the fermentation model. An overview of
the ﬁve fault types is shown in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Fault types implemented in the fermentation model. For each fault type, a description
explains its effect on the process. Individual fault events are deﬁned by their fault type and a set of
parameters tied to this type.
Fault name
Description
Parameters
Steam in feed
Constant ﬂow of steam entering with
the feed stream, starting at tstart
• tstart [h]
• Steamﬂow [Lwater/h]
Defect steam
barriers
Constant ﬂow of steam entering the
fermenter directly, starting at tstart
• tstart [h]
• Steamﬂow [Lwater/h]
Blocked spargers
Airﬂow decreasing linearly over a cer-
tain period until being constant at a
certain setpoint
• tstart [h]
• Decay period [h]
• Offset [%]
Airﬂow meter
OOC
Airﬂow meter being OOC by a certain
percentage over the whole batch
• Offset [%]
OUR OOC
OUR measurement being OOC by a
certain percentage over the whole
batch
• Offset [%]
Fault events are introduced into the model by passing a fault conﬁguration ﬁle to the model.
This conﬁguration ﬁle contains fault events as speciﬁed by their name and their set of param-
eters (see Table 3.2). When solving the model equations, a function evaluates if a fault event
is present at each time step. When this is the case, certain parameters are changed according
to the fault event. For both OOC-related faults, the measured airﬂow or OUR is changed by
their speciﬁc offset percentage. In the case of blocked spargers, the airﬂow proﬁle is adjusted
according to the speciﬁcations in the fault event. For steam-related fault events, steam enter-
20
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:31==
ing the tank is tracked. It is assumed that the steam immediately condensates, so the steam
is tracked as water. If the steam is leaking through the feed stream, the density of the feed
stream is adjusted. In the tank, the volume, weight and density of the broth are adjusted.
Applying noise to process parameters
For this fermentation model, airﬂow and weight data from a real batch was provided to
extract and apply the underlying noise signal to the model. The raw data is presented in
Figure 3.2. The goal was to extract the white noise signal for both measurements. White noise
describes uncorrelated zero-mean random variables. The auto-correlation function (ACF) was
used as a criterion for white noise. According to this function, white noise is present when the
ACF is within its conﬁdence interval except for lag zero [24]. Lag refers to the delay between
an observation and previous data points. The white noise signal is quantiﬁed by determining
its standard deviation, which is then applied to the process signal in the model.
Figure 3.2: Airﬂow and weight data from an illustrative batch. The section of data used for extracting
the white noise of the airﬂow data is indicated by red dotted lines.
The airﬂow signal does not need to be ﬁltered before extracting the white noise signal,
since for the signal between 50 and 225 hours, the ACF plot already fulﬁlls the criterion for
white noise (see Figure A.1 in the appendix). The standard deviation for the airﬂow noise
signal is:
sair f low = 1.42NL/min.
Contrary to the airﬂow signal, the weight signal does not offer a stationary signal imme-
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
21
==PAGE:32==
diately. For this reason, two techniques were applied to the weight signal to extract the white
noise components: differencing and trimming. Differencing computes the differences between
consecutive points, removing non-stationary components of the time series (see Figure A.2 in
the appendix). Trimming describes the process of deleting outliers and anomalies from the
data. This is done by removing all points in the lowest and highest 5 % of the data (see Figure
A.3 in the appendix). After applying these techniques, the ACF plot showed minor autocorrel-
ative behavior but was overall still close to a white noise signal. The standard deviation of the
weight signal after applying differencing and trimming is:
sweight = 0.57kg.
3.2.2
Step 2: Generating datasets through Monte Carlo simulations
The large synthetic datasets in this framework are generated by Monte Carlo simulations.
The goal is to create a dataset with batch data that replicates the biological variance of the
fermentation process and contains a variety of fault events. For each Monte Carlo simulation,
the number of total batches and the number of fault events of each type are deﬁned beforehand.
For each batch, a set of biokinetic parameters is sampled from their respective distribution (see
Table 3.1). Similarly, for each fault event a set of fault event parameters of the deﬁned fault
type is sampled from their respective distributions (see Table 3.3).
Table 3.3: Distributions of fault event parameters. Each fault type is deﬁned by a set of fault event
parameters. To perform a Monte Carlo simulation, each fault event parameter is assigned a distribution,
which the Monte Carlo method randomly samples from.
Defect steambarriers & steam in feed
Steamﬂow
0.1 - 0.6 L/h
Truncated normal
tstart
0 - 100 h
Uniform
Airﬂow out-of-calibration
Offset
10 to 20 %
Positive & negative normal
OUR out-of-calibration
Offset
10 to 30 %
Positive & negative normal
Blocked spargers
Duration (of decrease)
20 to 30 h
Truncated normal
Offset
-20 to -50 %
Truncated normal
tstart
0 to 100 h
Uniform
22
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:33==
Out-of-calibration faults are modeled by two truncated normal distributions, a positive
and a negative one. Both distributions do not include values close to zero to avoid smaller
and therefore less meaningful out-of-calibration deviations. When a value is sampled for cre-
ating a fault event, the Monte Carlo method randomly picks a value from one of these two
distributions.
Both lists of parameter sets are saved locally and subsequently used to perform the simu-
lations to create the dataset.
Since the Monte Carlo method randomly samples from the respective parameter distribu-
tions, the training, validation, and test datasets can be independently sampled as long as their
distributions are the same. Generating these datasets separately instead of splitting one large
dataset simpliﬁes the process of creating datasets with similar distributions of fault events. It
also allows one to, for example, modify the test set to test the extrapolation abilities of a fault
detection model by creating slightly different fault events compared to the training set.
Every random operation is seeded by using the function random.seed from the NumPy
Python package to ensure reproducibility. If necessary, a local seed is introduced. Depending
on the type of dataset, the following seeds were used.
Table 3.4: Seed values used for generating each type of dataset.
Dataset
Seed
Training
42
Validation
24
Test
44
The features in the dataset were chosen according to the online data available in the fer-
mentation process. The feature matrix containing this data constitutes the input for the fault
detection models. The target matrix on the other hand contains the information about the
fault events and is to be predicted by the fault detection models. Models can be trained for
fault detection or fault diagnosis. In fault detection, the occurrence of a fault has to be de-
tected without classifying the fault type. In this case, the target matrix contains two target
variables. However, if a model is trained for fault diagnosis, the target matrix is made of six
target variables, one for each fault type and one for the normal state. The target variables are
one-hot-encoded, meaning that for any observation one of the target variables is equal to 1,
while the rest is 0. Table 3.5 shows an overview of the features and target variables.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
23
==PAGE:34==
Table 3.5: Features and target variables of batch-wise data. The two-class setup is used for training for
fault detection, while the six classes are needed for training for fault diagnosis.
Features
Target Variables
• Time
• DO saturation
• Weight
• Feed setpoint
• Airﬂow setpoint
• Measured airﬂow
• kLa
• OUR
• Fault detection
– Fault
– No fault
• Fault diagnosis
– Defect steam barriers
– Steam in feed
– Airﬂow OOC
– OUR OOC
– Blocked spargers
– No-fault
3.3
Part II: Fault detection model development
3.3.1
Step 3: Pre-processing
The most important step in pre-processing the data is the standardization of all features.
Speciﬁcally, this means subtracting the mean from each observation and scaling it by the stan-
dard deviation. A sample x is thereby transformed into a standardized sample z as:
z = (x −u)
s
(3.2)
where u is the mean and s is the standard deviation of all the samples with respect to this
feature. This is an essential step, as it ensures an equal contribution of all features to the
model by transforming all features to the same scale. The training, validation, and test sets
are all scaled by the mean and standard deviation of the training set. This avoids information
being spilled between datasets [25].
The pre-processing is handled by data loaders, with separate data loaders for the training,
validation, and test set. The data loader maintains the time series structure and order inside
each batch, while being able to shufﬂe the order of batches. Additionally, it can standardize
the data inside the batches based on the whole dataset without changing the internal order of
the batches.
Feature engineering is also part of the pre-processing step. However, this topic is discussed
later in Section 4.3.2, as feature engineering is used as a tool to improve the performance of
diagnosing speciﬁc fault types and therefore depends on the results obtained without it.
24
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:35==
3.3.2
Model performance metrics
Developing and optimizing fault detection models requires an adequate set of metrics.
Two commonly used metrics are the fault detection rate (FDR) and the false alarm rate (FAR),
which are also used here. Both can be explained from a general confusion matrix (see Figure
3.3)
Figure 3.3: Confusion matrix for fault detection. TP = true positive, FP = false positive, FN = false
negative, TN = true negative.
The FDR is deﬁned as the ratio of observations that were correctly identiﬁed as being faulty
to all observations with faults.
F DR =
T P
T P + FN
(3.3)
The FAR describes the ratio of observations that were incorrectly identiﬁed as being faulty
to all observations without faults.
FAR =
FN
TN + F P
(3.4)
Generally, the goal is to maximize the FDR while minimizing the FAR. To be able to optimize
and compare models based on a singular metric, the accuracy can be used as a performance
metric. It is the ratio of the number of correctly classiﬁed observations to the total number of
observations [3]. The accuracy can be derived from the FDR and FAR in the following way.
ACC =
F DR + (1 −FAR)
F DR + (1 −F DR) + FAR + (1 −FAR)
(3.5)
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
25
==PAGE:36==
3.3.3
Steps 4 & 5: Training and optimizing Machine Learning based models
MPCA model
The implementation of the MPCA model is based on the PCA class from the scikit-learn
Python package. The feature matrix was constructed by concatenating the batch-wise data
along the time axis. An important ﬁrst decision for any PCA model is the number of principal
components used. A common approach to this is deﬁning the percentage of variance that
should be explained by the principal components. In this way, just enough components are
used to explain the deﬁned amount of variance. For this case, the required explained variance
was set to 95 %, as this is a common threshold used with this approach [26].
When calibrating the model with normal batch data, the thresholds for the Hotelling’s T 2
and SPE statistics are calculated based on a given parameter α. The T 2 threshold is then based
on sampling from a chi-distribution using α and the number of principal components (pc).
T 2
limit = χ1−α,pc
(3.6)
The SPE threshold is based on the SPE of the training set, i.e., the squared difference
between the original feature matrix and the reconstructed feature matrix using PCA. This
results in a vector along the time axis. The SPE threshold is determined by identifying the
value below which the observations of the (1 −α) percentile fall.
SPElimit = percentile(SPE,100 · (1 −α))
(3.7)
The hyperparameter α can therefore also be seen as the tolerated false alarm rate of the
MPCA model.
When predicting fault events, a fault alarm is triggered if both the SPE and T 2 are above
their respective thresholds. Both statistics are required to be above their thresholds as this can
lower the false alarm rate [3]. The predictions of this method are absolute (1 or 0) instead of
probabilities.
An additional method to prevent false alarms is the implementation of a moving time
window. By deﬁning a certain window size w, a fault is only triggered if the previous w ob-
servations were also already classiﬁed as faulty. This prevents false alarms due to sporadic
outliers.
With this setup, an MPCA fault detection model can be adjusted through three hyper-
26
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:37==
parameters: the number of principal components, the limit α, and the size of the moving
time window n. While the number of principal components is chosen by deﬁning a required
percentage of explained variance, both α and n are optimized by grid search, choosing the
conﬁguration leading to the highest accuracy.
PLS-DA model
The implementation of the PLS-DA model is based on the PLRegression class from the
scikit-learn Python package. As with MPCA, choosing the number of components is a
crucial decision. The approach used in this work is to train a PLS-DA model on the training set
and then evaluate the RMSE on the validation set. This is performed for each possible number
of components, choosing the number of components resulting in the lowest RMSE. The reason
this method was chosen over the common approach of performing k-fold cross-validation with
only the training set was to ensure a consistent balancing of target classes, as all datasets have
the same proportions of each fault type. While stratiﬁed cross-validation could achieve the
same, this approach also ensures data from the batch is not divided into different datasets.
The fact that the performance of the model is evaluated using a separate test set justiﬁes using
the validation set for optimizing hyperparameters.
Since PLS is originally designed for regression, the output of the PLS-DA model is contin-
uous. According to the PLS-DA model, the higher the prediction value, the more likely a fault
event is. This allows one to implement a more ﬁne-tuned moving time window compared to
the MPCA model. For this moving time window, two hyperparameters need to be deﬁned: the
window size n and a threshold τ. A fault alarm is triggered if the average prediction value of
the last n observations is higher than the threshold. Both hyperparameters are optimized by
grid search, choosing the conﬁguration with the highest accuracy.
SVM model
The implementation of the SVM model is based on the SVC class from the scikit-learn
Python package. The SVM model is implemented as a two-class classiﬁer, meaning there is
one decision boundary between “fault” or “no fault”. The radial basis function (RBF) is used
as a kernel function since it is proven to be effective in nonlinear mappings with a high gen-
eralization ability [27]. An SVM with an RBF kernel is deﬁned by two hyperparameters: γ
and C. The ﬁrst parameter, γ, decides how large the inﬂuence of each individual observation
on the decision boundary is allowed to be. C is a generalization parameter, controlling the
trade-off between a lower prediction error and a low model complexity, hence improving the
generalization ability. The third hyperparameter for the SVM fault detection model is the size
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
27
==PAGE:38==
of the moving time window, equivalent to the one used for the MPCA model.
One challenge when training SVM models with large datasets is the computational com-
plexity (see Section 2.3.3). To be able to perform grid search for hyperparameter optimization
on a local machine within a reasonable timeframe, a dataset of 100 batches was used for train-
ing the SVM fault detection model instead of the usual 1000 batches used in the other models.
The ﬁnal SVM model used for model evaluation was trained on a dataset with 250 batches,
allowing for a more complex model while still limiting the computational cost of training the
model and performing predictions. Table A.2 in the appendix shows an overview of these
different datasets.
ANN model
The ANN fault detection model is built using the PyTorch framework and is structured
as a feed-forward neural network. The number of input nodes is equivalent to the number of
features, while the number of output nodes can either be one or six, depending on whether the
model is trained only for fault detection or also for fault diagnosis (see Table 3.5). The network
depth is ﬁxed to one hidden layer, as this offers sufﬁcient complexity for most applications [28].
The softmax function is applied to the output layer to transform the raw output values (logits)
into a probability distribution.
A general overview of the ANN model setup is shown in Table 3.6. Typical for classiﬁcation
problems, the cross-entropy loss was used. The optimizer of choice is the widely used Adam
optimizer, as it offers gradient-based optimization that is computationally efﬁcient, has low
memory requirements, and is well suited for large data sets [29]. Since the Adam optimizer
adapts the learning rate during the training process, a common initial learning rate offering
stable but not too slow convergence is chosen. As an activation function, the ReLU function
was used, as it is widely used and proven. It also suffers less from vanishing gradient problems
compared to other activation functions [30].
In each forward loop, the data from one fermentation batch is used to calculate the pre-
diction of the ANN for this batch and evaluate the loss function. After each forward loop, all
weights and biases are updated with backpropagation based on the loss function. One epoch
is completed when the ANN has been trained on the data of every fermentation batch in the
training set. The order of batches is shufﬂed after each epoch. For each ANN model, 100
epochs are performed. After each epoch, the state of the network together with the current
loss is saved. In this way, the set of weights and biases of the model with the lowest loss is
picked.
28
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:39==
Table 3.6
Model parameter
Choice
Framework
PyTorch 2.3
Loss function
Cross-entropy loss
Optimizer
Adam
Activation function
ReLU
Number of hidden layers
1
Initial learning rate
0.001
Batch size
1 fermentation batch
Epochs
100
The predictions of the ANN fault detection model can be interpreted as probabilities due
to the application of the softmax function. The class with the highest probability is picked as
the predicted class.
The ANN model has two hyperparameters that need to be optimized. The ﬁrst one is
the number of nodes in the hidden layer. This determines the complexity of the network.
The second one is the weight decay of the network during training, which is a regularization
parameter limiting the network’s complexity by keeping weights low. An optimal conﬁguration
of these hyperparameters is determined through grid search.
One primary goal of training fault detection models is to achieve a low FAR. To facilitate
this, a false alarm penalty factor was implemented in the loss function of the ANN. The cross-
entropy loss is multiplied by this factor in the case of a false alarm.
LFAP = L ×





λ
if false alarm
1
otherwise
(3.8)
where LFAP is the loss function with a false alarm penalty factor applied, L is the regular
cross-entropy loss function, and λ is the false alarm penalty factor. This speciﬁcally discourages
the model from triggering false alarms. The penalty factor is tuned after the grid search that
determines the number of nodes and the weight decay.
3.3.4
Step 6: Model evaluation
Finally, the optimized models for fault detection and diagnosis are evaluated on two dif-
ferent test sets. The in-domain test set is generated with the same distributions for the Monte
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
29
==PAGE:40==
Carlo simulation as the training and validation set. This dataset enables determining the per-
formance metrics of the models on data on which they were not optimized on. The second test
set contains out-of-domain (OOD) data, meaning it contains fault events outside of the upper
and lower bounds the models were trained on. This dataset allows for the evaluation of the
generalization capabilities of the models. Based on the metrics from both datasets, a decision
can be made for an optimal model.
All adjustments made to the out-of-domain test set are shown in Table 3.7. In the OOD
test set, steam-related faults can occur later in the fermentation process than they did in the
previous data sets. Additionally, the ranges for both OOC-related faults were set to be wider.
Lastly, the decrease in airﬂow due to blocked spargers was now allowed to occur over a longer
period and lead to a smaller offset.
Table 3.7: Adjustments made to the fault event parameters in the OOD test set compared to the regular
datasets.
Fault Type
Parameter
Normal Range
OOD Range
Defect Steam Barrier
tstart
0 to 100
0 to 150
Steam in Feed
tstart
0 to 100
0 to 150
Airﬂow OOC
Offset
10 to 20
5 to 30
OUR OOC
Offset
10 to 30
5 to 40
Blocked Spargers
Offset
-20 to -50
-10 to -50
Blocked Spargers
Duration
of
decrease
20 to 30
20 to 50
30
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:41==
4
Results and discussion
This chapter shows how the framework developed in this work (presented in Figure 3.1)
was applied to the aforementioned fed-batch fermentation model. To begin with, the biological
variance of the fermentation process was visualized and discussed, followed by exemplary
simulations to illustrate the effect of the ﬁve fault types on the process. In the ﬁrst step of model
development, four different models were optimized for fault detection, thereby performing
binary classiﬁcation without diagnosing the fault type. Following this step, an ANN model
was developed and ﬁne-tuned for fault diagnosis, enabling it to identify a speciﬁc fault type.
This model was further improved by feature engineering. In a ﬁnal step, the performance of
all models was evaluated with an in-domain test set. An additional test set containing out-of-
domain data was utilized to compare the generalization capabilities of all models.
4.1
Validation of large synthetic datasets
4.1.1
Biological variance
For the case of this fed-batch fermentation process, fault detection is based on eight input
features. The statistical distributions of six of these features throughout the fermentation are
shown in Figure 4.1. The distributions are based on a Monte Carlo simulation with 1000
individual simulations (see Table 3.1 for the distributions of the biological parameters). One
of the remaining two features is time itself. The other, the airﬂow setpoint, is not included in
this visualization as without certain fault events the airﬂow setpoint resembles the measured
airﬂow rate without its noise.
The highest variance is observed in the feed setpoint. This is expected, as the feed setpoint
is the only controlled variable in this set of features. By being controlled through the DO
saturation, it is closely tied to the growth kinetics of the biological system. In some cases, the
feed setpoint reaches its maximum value of 2 g/L and consequently, the OUR decreases while
the DO saturation of the broth increases as less substrate is metabolized.
The weight also exhibits some degree of variance, which can be mostly attributed to the
variance in the feed ﬂow rate. The kLa value differs just slightly between batches. In the
fermentation model, the kLa depends mainly on the airﬂow rate, the power input, and the
viscosity of the broth. As the impeller speed, linked to the power input, and the airﬂow rate
are ﬁxed, the minor variance of the kLa is likely caused by slight changes in the viscosity of
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
31
==PAGE:42==
the broth due to the variance in the metabolism of A. oryzae.
Figure 4.1: Impact of biological variance on input variables. The green line shows the average, the
green area the standard deviation and the dotted line the minimum and maximum values from 1000
batches.
4.1.2
Validation of fault event implementation
All ﬁve fault event types were integrated into the fermentation model. Figure 4.2 visualizes
the maximum effect of the different fault types on the system by comparing the respective
faulty batch to a normal one. For each fault type the parameters were chosen according to
their respective maximum offset in their distribution (see fault event parameter distributions
32
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:43==
in Table 3.3). The start times of faults are indicated with a red dotted line.
Defect steam barriers lead to an increase in weight due to water entering the tank. They
also result in a higher feed setpoint, since the substrate concentration in the tank is lowered due
to the water intake, which the PI controller is reacting to. Steam entering the tank through
the feed has the same effect as defect steam barriers, but additionally lowers the substrate
concentration in the feed as well as the feed stream’s density. However, both variables are
not part of the features used for fault detection as they are not measured in the real process.
Both OOC-related fault types statically change the OUR or airﬂow by a certain percentage
over the whole batch without inﬂuencing other variables. In the case of blocked spargers, the
airﬂow decreases linearly until a certain point. Besides decreasing the airﬂow measured, this
also affects the biological system by limiting the oxygen supply, leading to slightly decreased
biomass and enzyme production.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
33
==PAGE:44==
(a) Defect steam barriers
(b) Defect steam barriers
(c) Steam in feed
(d) OUR OOC
(e) Airﬂow meter OOC
(f) Blocked spargers
Figure 4.2: Validation of fault event types through exemplary comparison of simulations. Each fault
event was generated with its respective maximum impact according to Table 3.3. The simulations
were performed with the standard value of each biological parameter (see Table 3.1), without the
introduction of variance.
34
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:45==
4.2
Model development for fault detection
4.2.1
MPCA
Before training the MPCA model according to step 4 in the framework (see Figure 3.1),
the number of principal components to be used by the model was determined. For this, the
cumulative explained variance for each possible number of principal components was calcu-
lated. The principal components were required to explain at least 95% of the variance of the
training set. While two components explained 88% of the variance, three components were
able to explain 98% of the variance, so three principal components were chosen (see Figure
A.5 in the appendix).
The threshold α and the size of the moving time window n were optimized using grid
search with the validation dataset according to step 5 of the framework (see Figure 4.3).
Figure 4.3: Accuracy of the MPCA model depending on the threshold α and the moving time window
size n.
The grid search showed two local accuracy maxima. The global maximum of these two
occurred with a conﬁguration of α = 0.01 and n = 6 with an accuracy of 0.749. The second
local maximum was found at α = 0.16 and n = 30 with an accuracy of 0.738. However,
choosing n as low as possible is advantageous for a process operator to be able to act quickly
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
35
==PAGE:46==
in case of a fault. A moving time window size of n = 30 would lead to a delay in fault detection
of 3 h, which is why the conﬁguration of α = 0.16 and n = 6 was explored. Its accuracy is
just 0.06 below the conﬁguration with n = 30. Therefore, this conﬁguration was further
considered besides the global maximum. The performance metrics of the MPCA with these
two conﬁgurations are shown in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Performance metrics of to different conﬁgurations of the MPCA model. Both models use
three principal components and n = 6. Metrics show performance on detecting faults, but not on
diagnosing faults.
Metric
Fault type
MPCA (α = 0.01)
MPCA (α = 0.16)
FDR
Defect steam barriers
0.129
0.320
Steam in feed
0.149
0.353
Blocked spargers
0.987
0.992
Airﬂow OOC
1.0
1.0
OUR OOC
0.188
0.730
FAR
0.006
0.240
Accuracy
0.749
0.732
Both MPCA models performed similarly in detecting blocked spargers and out-of-calibration
airﬂow meters. This indicates that these faults were detected below the threshold of α = 0.01.
The MPCA with α = 0.16 had a signiﬁcantly higher FDR regarding an out-of-calibration OUR
value compared to the model with a threshold of α = 0.01. This could imply that the lo-
cal accuracy maximum around α = 0.16 corresponds to its threshold for detecting the OUR
OOC fault. As expected, increasing α also leads to a higher FAR. Both models were unable
to robustly detect steam-related faults. Since a low FAR is crucial for the application of fault
detection models, the conﬁguration of the MPCA with α = 0.01 was further considered.
Table 4.2: Conﬁguration of the ﬁnal MPCA model.
Hyperparameter
Value
Principal components
3
α
0.01
n
6
One issue the MPCA fault detection model had was its tendency for early fault alarms.
Regardless of the fault type, the model tended to classify the ﬁrst few time intervals of a batch
as faults. Two examples of this behavior can be seen in Figures A.6 and A.7 in the appendix.
36
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:47==
4.2.2
PLS-DA
The performance of the PLS-DA model is tied to three hyperparameters: the number of
components, the detection threshold τ, and the moving time window size n. In PLS-DA, the
number of components does not only determine the explained variance of the model with
regard to its training data, but it is also relevant for the correlation between the input and
target variables. As training the PLS-DA model is computationally inexpensive, an optimal set
of hyperparameters was determined by a three-dimensional grid search. This resulted in a set
of hyperparameters with an accuracy of 0.781.
Table 4.3: Optimal conﬁguration of PLS-DA model for fault detection after grid search.
Hyperparameter
Value
nr. of components
6
τ
0.45
n
24
Again, choosing n as low as possible is advantageous for a process operator to be able to
act quickly in case of a fault. Changing the window size n from 24 time steps (2.4 h of delay)
to 6 time steps (36 min of delay) decreased the accuracy from 0.781 to 0.772, which was seen
as a reasonable tradeoff for the reduction in delay from 2.4 h to 36 min. See Figure A.8 in the
appendix for a heatmap showing the accuracy of the PLS-DA model depending on τ and n for
6 components.
The overall metrics of the PLS-DA model with n = 6 are shown in Table 4.4. The PLS-DA
model could detect a majority of the steam-related faults and robustly detect blocked spargers.
The model underperformed at detecting out-of-calibration (OOC) faults. It operated with a
FAR of 0.058.
4.2.3
SVM
The performance of an SVM model with a radial basis function kernel is mainly dependent
on two hyperparameters: the kernel coefﬁcient γ and the regularization parameter C. Similar
to the previous models, an optimal conﬁguration was determined by grid search. A logarithmic
scale was used for adjusting γ and C, as is common practice for tuning the hyperparameters
of SVM models. As mentioned in Section 3.3.3, the computational complexity of training
an SVM model increases polynomially with the number of observations the model is trained
on. To train a variety of SVM models with the available computational power, the size of the
data set was reduced to 100 batches for grid search. This data set still obeyed the same class
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
37
==PAGE:48==
Table 4.4: Performance metrics of the chosen conﬁguration of the PLS-DA model on the validation set.
Conﬁguration according to Table 4.3. Metric shows performance on the task of fault detection, not
fault diagnosis.
Metric
Fault type
PLS-DA
FDR
Defect steambarrier
0.853
Steam in feed
0.813
Blocked spargers
0.961
Airﬂow OOC
0.330
OUR OOC
0.352
FAR
0.058
Accuracy
0.781
distribution as the standard training data set.
With an accuracy of 0.980, the SVM model with the conﬁguration of γ = 10 and C = 1 was
the best-performing model in the grid search (see Figure 4.4). The other models also showed
a high accuracy, as the worst model with γ = C = 0.1 still had an accuracy of 0.933.
Figure 4.4: Accuracy of the SVM model with an RBF kernel depending on its regularization parameter
C and its kernel coefﬁcient γ.
38
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:49==
A moving time window was applied to the best-performing model from the grid search.
However, this decreased the accuracy, offering no improvement to the model (see Figure A.9
in the appendix).
The number of batches in the training data not only affected the duration of the training
but also increased the time it took to make predictions on new data since the SVM uses more
support vectors when being trained on more observations. Therefore, the ﬁnal model was
trained with a training set of 250 instead of 1000 batches to allow predictions in a reasonable
time frame. The performance metrics of this model on the validation set can be seen in Table
4.5 as well as its conﬁguration in Table 4.6.
Table 4.5: Performance metrics of the optimal conﬁguration of the SVM model on the validation set.
Conﬁguration: C = 1, γ = 10. Metric shows performance on the task of fault detection, not fault
diagnosis.
Metric
Fault type
SVM
FDR
Defect steam barrier
0.923
Steam in feed
0.935
Blocked spargers
0.989
Airﬂow OOC
1.0
OUR OOC
0.973
FAR
0.006
Accuracy
0.980
Table 4.6: Optimal conﬁguration of the SVM model for fault detection after grid search.
Hyperparameter
Value
Kernel
radial basis function
C
1
γ
10
4.2.4
ANN
The goal when optimizing an ANN for a speciﬁc problem is ﬁnding a trade-off between
closely ﬁtting the model to the data and ensuring its ability to generalize. This was approached
here in two ways: via the structure of the ANN and via a regularization parameter. For nearly
all problems, one hidden layer is sufﬁcient [28]. The structure of this ANN is therefore solely
deﬁned by the number of nodes in the hidden layer. The regularization parameter to be tuned
was the weight decay, which avoids overly complex models by keeping weights low.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
39
==PAGE:50==
An optimal conﬁguration of both parameters was found with grid search (see Figure 4.5).
The highest accuracy was observed at a weight decay of 1 · 10−8. Increasing the number of
nodes above 40 did not yield a relevant improvement in accuracy (see Figure A.10). Therefore,
to avoid overﬁtting, the number of nodes in the hidden layer was set to 40.
Figure 4.5: Accuracy of the ANN model depending on the number of nodes in the hidden layer and
the weight decay during training. The models were trained for 100 epochs with callback to the model
state with the highest accuracy. The learning rate was 1 · 10−3.
Figure 4.6: Effect of applying a false alarm penalty factor in the cross-entropy loss function on the ANN
model for fault detection. The model has 40 nodes in the hidden layer and was trained with a weight
decay of 1 · 10−8.
40
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:51==
The ANN model with 40 nodes that was trained with a weight decay of 1 · 10−8 already
showed a FAR of under 0.004. To further decrease this, the ANN model was trained with
different false alarm penalty factors. This factor ampliﬁes the effect of false alarms on the loss
function, incentivizing the network to avoid false alarms. Figure 4.6 shows the FDR and FAR
depending on the penalty factor applied. Applying the penalty factor seemed to both lower
the FDR and FAR. However, with a penalty factor of 5, the decrease in FAR was nearly 40-fold,
while the FDR only decreased by about 0.10. Since a low FAR is crucial for a fault detection
model, the ANN trained with a false alarm penalty of 5 was chosen.
The performance metrics of the ﬁnal ANN model for fault detection can be seen in Table 4.7.
For reproducing this model, it is important to mention that training an ANN model with the
same parameters can lead to slightly different models. Even though the random number gen-
erators in PyTorch and NumPy are seeded in the codebase, PyTorch still uses non-deterministic
algorithms.
Table 4.7: Performance metrics of the optimal conﬁguration of the ANN model on the validation set.
Conﬁguration according to Table 4.8. Metric shows performance on the task of fault detection, not
fault diagnosis.
Metric
Fault type
ANN
FDR
Defect steam barrier
0.896
Steam in feed
0.900
Blocked spargers
0.986
Airﬂow OOC
1.0
OUR OOC
0.966
FAR
0.0001
Accuracy
0.954
Table 4.8: Optimal conﬁguration of the ANN model for fault detection.
Hyperparameter
Value
Nodes
40
Weight decay
1 · 10−8
False alarm penalty factor
5
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
41
==PAGE:52==
4.3
Model development for fault diagnosis
While a model for fault detection can detect if a fault is present, a model for fault diagnosis
can also classify which fault is happening. This changes the classiﬁcation from a binary to
a multiclass task. In this chapter, an approach to optimizing an ANN for fault diagnosis is
shown. An ANN was used as the model instead of an SVM for several reasons. To begin with,
SVMs do not natively support multiclass classiﬁcation. Furthermore, the ANN model showed
a signiﬁcantly lower FAR for fault detection, with 0.0001 compared to 0.006 for the SVM
model. Lastly, the computational complexity of the SVM already limited its hyperparameter
optimization for fault detection. This would be an even greater challenge when developing a
model for the more complex task of fault diagnosis.
4.3.1
ANN for diagnosis
The most signiﬁcant difference between the ANN model for fault detection and the ANN
model for fault diagnosis is the number of output nodes. While a model for fault detection dif-
ferentiates between two classes (fault and no fault), a model for fault diagnosis differentiates
between six classes (ﬁve fault types and no-fault).
To optimize the ANN fault diagnosis model, the same approach as in Section 4.2.4 was
used. Grid search revealed the highest accuracy to be at a weight decay of 1·10−6 (see Figure
A.11 in the appendix). With this weight decay, no relevant increase in accuracy could be
achieved with more than 60 nodes. The ANN model for fault diagnosis therefore had 60
nodes in the hidden layer and was trained with a weight decay of 1 · 10−6, which yielded an
accuracy of 0.984.
This model’s FAR on the validation set was already very low at 2.99 · 10−5. This rate
means that out of the 133615 observations without a fault, only four were misclassiﬁed as
having a fault. Regardless, the model was trained with different false alarm penalty factors
to analyze its effect on the model performance. As seen in Figure 4.7, the penalty factor does
not seem to have a clear effect on the training of the model. A reason for this could be that
the changes in FDR and (already low) FAR are obscured by the differences between trained
models introduced by the randomness of the non-deterministic algorithms used. The model
trained with the penalty factor of three was chosen since it offered the lowest FAR with the
second-highest FDR.
42
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.7: Effect of applying a false alarm penalty factor in the cross-entropy loss function on the ANN
model for fault diagnosis. The model has 60 nodes in the hidden layer and was trained with a weight
decay of 1 · 10−6.
Figure 4.8: Confusion matrix of the ANN model for fault diagnosis. Conﬁguration according to Table
4.9.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
43
==PAGE:54==
A confusion matrix was used to gain insights into the performance of this model on the
validation set (see Figure 4.8). For a perfect model, the diagonal entries of the matrix are
equal to 1 while the other entries are equal to 0. The model shown here was nearly perfect
in the case of the two out-of-calibration (OOC) faults. There appeared to be some confusion
when differentiating between blocked spargers and an OOC airﬂow meter. It misclassiﬁed
5.5 % of the observations with a blocked sparger as an OOC airﬂow meter and 2.5 % of the
observations with an OOC airﬂow meter as being due to a blocked sparger. The model did not
detect around 10 % of the observations with steam-related faults. Additionally, the model did
not seem to be able to differentiate between the two steam-related fault types.
Consequently, the ﬁnal conﬁguration for the ANN model for fault diagnosis was as follows.
Table 4.9: Optimal conﬁguration of the ANN model for fault diagnosis.
Hyperparameter
Value
Nodes
60
Weight decay
1 · 10−6
False alarm penalty factor
3
The analysis shows that the input data did not contain enough information to locate
whether a steam-related fault is due to the steam barriers or the feed stream. Additional
ﬂow sensors in the feed stream could enable the model to differentiate these fault types, as
steam entering through the feed would alter its ﬂow rate. The confusion matrix also shows
that the model seemed to confuse the two airﬂow-related fault types, namely blocked spargers
and an OOC airﬂow meter, in a small percentage of cases. The next section discusses how
these issues could be improved with feature engineering.
4.3.2
Feature engineering for improved diagnosis
There were two changes made to the features. First, the two target variables indicating
steam-related fault types were combined into one. Second, the airﬂow rate setpoint and the
measured airﬂow were replaced by two new features derived from these measurements.
Even though combining the steam-related faults into one is a reasonable step to avoid the
implication that the model could discern between the two, it should be noted that it does not
improve predictive capabilities.
The newly introduced features related to airﬂow should support the model in distinguish-
ing between blocked spargers and an OOC airﬂow meter. Airﬂow-related faults always result
in a difference between the airﬂow setpoint Qset and the measured airﬂow Qmeasured, since
44
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:55==
only Qmeasured changes in the case of a fault event. Consequently, the ﬁrst feature added was
the difference between these two values.
∆Q = Qset −Qmeasured
(4.1)
One hypothesis as to why the model misclassiﬁed airﬂow-related fault is a lack of infor-
mation about the time-dependent dynamics of the airﬂow. When spargers get blocked, the
airﬂow decreases throughout a certain period until it reaches a certain setpoint. An out-of-
calibration airﬂow meter on the other hand statically changes the airﬂow value. As the fault
detection model classiﬁes each observation individually, it does not consider the trajectory of
a variable over time. To provide the model with this information about the measured airﬂow,
the average of ∆Q over the last 150 time steps was calculated. For the ﬁrst 150 time steps, the
average was calculated over all previous values.
∆Q = 1
n
n
X
i=1
∆Qi,
where n = min(150,current time step)
(4.2)
A new ANN model was trained on the training data set with the adjustments mentioned
above and with the same conﬁguration as in Table 4.9. The confusion matrix of this model
can be seen in Figure 4.9. As expected, the overall FDR for steam-related faults did not im-
prove, since combining these steam faults does not provide additional information. More
importantly, introducing the two new airﬂow-related features resolved the model’s confusion
between blocked sparger and OOC airﬂow fault events, as both fault types are now clearly
identiﬁed with an FDR of 1 or nearly 1.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
45
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.9: Confusion matrix of the ANN model for fault diagnosis with feature engineering. Steam-
related faults were combined. The airﬂow set point and airﬂow meter features were replaced by the
difference between these two features and a moving past average of this difference (see Equations 4.1
and 4.2). Conﬁguration according to Table 4.9.
4.4
Model evaluation
4.4.1
Model performance on test set
The performance of all models for fault detection and diagnosis was evaluated using the
test data set. This data set consists of 1000 batches and was generated with the same setup
as the training and validation set, but with a different seed for the random number genera-
tors, resulting in different biological parameters and fault events sampled by the Monte Carlo
method.
For the task of fault detection, the FDR of each model depending on the fault type can be
seen in Figure 4.10. Note that these models detect if a fault is happening without classifying the
fault type. Out of the four models, the SVM and ANN models were the best-performing, with
the SVM model being slightly better over the entire range of fault types. This is remarkable
since the SVM model was just trained on a quarter of the dataset the ANN model was trained
46
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:57==
on due to the computational cost of training an SVM. This shows the strong capabilities of
SVMs to form highly nonlinear decision boundaries for binary classiﬁcation. However, this
model type is also by far the most expensive to operate in terms of computational resources.
Both the MPCA and PLS-DA models struggled to detect certain fault types. Especially
detecting that the OUR is out-of-calibration seemed to be the most difﬁcult task for these two
linear models. One reason for this could be that the OUR is both inﬂuenced by the biological
variance and the offset caused by faults, which could make detection harder for these two
simpler models.
Figure 4.10: Fault detection rates for each fault type of all models trained and optimized for fault
detection.
The ANN models for fault diagnosis could reliably detect OOC-related faults, regardless
of feature engineering (see Figure 4.11). The feature engineering, however, signiﬁcantly im-
proved the diagnosis of blocked spargers. Both models did not detect about 10 % of observa-
tions with steam-related faults. Investigating the model predictions more closely, these missed
observations were mostly shortly after the steam-related fault began. As this fault type leads
to an accumulation of water, the effect of this fault increases over time. This makes this fault
type difﬁcult to detect instantly, as its effect is minor in the beginning. By diagnosing the fault
with a delay, the model can still help avoid the majority of this fault’s negative effects.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
47
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.11: Fault detection rates for each fault type of the ANN model trained and optimized for fault
diagnosis with and without feature engineering.
Figure 4.12: False alarm rates of models. The MPCA, PLS-DA, SVM and ANN (detect) modes were
trained and optimized for fault detection, while the two most right ANN models were trained and
optimized for fault diagnosis.
48
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:59==
ANN models offered by far the lowest FAR, as they only raised a false alarm for about 0.2 %
of the observations without fault events. The PLS-DA model has by far the highest FAR with
more than 7 %. As mentioned in Section 4.2.2, the PLS-DA model requires a trade-off between
FDR and FAR by adjusting the threshold τ. The FAR could therefore be lowered, but at the
cost of a decreased FDR.
4.4.2
Evaluating model robustness with out-of-domain data
Applying a model to a separate test set is an important step for evaluating the performance
of the model. Still, the test set shared the same domain as the validation and training data
set, meaning they had the same underlying statistical distributions. To further evaluate the
robustness and extrapolation abilities of the fault detection and diagnosis models, a second
test set with out-of-domain (OOD) data was created. This was implemented by adjusting the
distributions from which the Monte Carlo method samples the fault events as explained in
Section 3.3.4.
The generalization ability of the models can be evaluated by comparing the FDR on the test
set and the out-of-domain (OOD) test set. This difference in performance is shown in Figure
4.13 for the fault detection models. A higher increase in FDR when evaluated using the OOD
test set implies a worse generalization ability of the model.
Figure 4.13: Difference in fault detection rates when fault models trained for fault detection are applied
on the out-of-domain test set instead of the regular test set.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
49
==PAGE:60==
The MPCA and PLS-DA models showed stronger generalization capabilities than the more
complex SVM and ANN models. An explanation for this could be that both MPCA and PLS-
DA perform dimensionality reduction, which reduces the risk of overﬁtting [31]. Additionally,
during its calibration, PLS-DA focuses on the most relevant components of the data regarding
the target variable, further reducing potential overﬁtting.
Out of the more complex and nonlinear models, namely SVM and ANN, the SVM model
generalized better regarding the steam-related faults. Indeed, SVMs show better extrapolation
capabilities than ANNs in different application areas in general [32], [33]. ANNs can converge
to local minima while SVMs converge to a global optimum of their decision boundary, lead-
ing to models that generalize more robustly. To improve the generalization capabilities of the
ANN model, several regularization techniques besides the weight decay exist. One approach is
Bayesian regularization, which favors smaller weights through a prior distribution and thus pe-
nalizes more complex models [34]. Additionally, the weights of an ANN trained with Bayesian
regularization can be interpreted in a probabilistic way, making the network more explainable.
Another approach could be an ensemble method. Instead of using one ANN, an ensemble of
ANNs could be used to reduce individual biases in each model. Shao et al. improved the
generalization capabilities of their ANN-based fault detection model for a fuel cell system by
introducing this approach [35].
The generalization capability of the two ANN-based fault diagnosis models can be evalu-
ated with Figure 4.14. For steam-related faults and blocked spargers, no difference between
the two models could be observed. However, the ANN model with feature engineering showed
a better FDR on the OOD test set than the model without feature engineering. Therefore, in-
troducing the two new airﬂow-related variables did not just help the model in differentiating
between blocked spargers and an OOC airﬂow meter, it also strengthened the model’s gener-
alization capability.
The FAR of no model changed meaningfully when evaluated on the OOD test set (see
Figure A.14). This was expected, as only the distributions related to the fault events were
changed, while the statistical characteristics of the biological parameters were kept the same.
Consequently, the batches without faults in the OOD test set had the same underlying statistical
distributions as in the other datasets.
50
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.14: Difference in fault detection rates when fault models trained for fault diagnosis are applied
on the out-of-domain test set instead of the regular test set.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
51
==PAGE:62==
52
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:63==
5
Conclusions and future perspectives
5.1
Conclusions
The primary objective of this thesis was to create and apply a framework for developing
data-driven fault detection models based on synthetic data. This framework was developed
and then tested on a fed-batch fermentation process, resulting in models capable of fault de-
tection and diagnosis.
In the ﬁrst part of the thesis, the fermentation model was modiﬁed to simulate fault events
and realistic biological variance. Large synthetic datasets were generated through Monte Carlo
simulations, providing the basis for developing data-driven fault detection models. The second
part of the thesis focused on optimizing four different types of fault detection models: MPCA,
PLS-DA, SVM, and ANN. From these, the ANN model was selected for further development and
ﬁne-tuning as a fault diagnosis model. Finally, all models were evaluated for their performance
and generalization ability.
Developing the fault detection models for this fermentation process yielded a few key in-
sights. Steam-related faults proved to be the most challenging to detect without delay due to
their cumulative effect over time. The MPCA and PLS-DA models were limited in their abil-
ity to detect certain fault types, while the SVM model slightly outperformed the ANN model
in fault detection. The capabilities of the ANN model translated well from fault detection to
fault diagnosis. Feature engineering of the airﬂow-related features further improved its fault
diagnosis accuracy by providing the model with additional information. The PLS-DA model
exhibited the highest FAR, which could be lowered by adjusting its detection threshold at the
cost of a decreased FDR. Regardless of the task being fault detection or diagnosis, the ANN
models consistently showed the lowest FAR, making them promising for real-world applica-
tions. However, simpler linear models showed better generalization capabilities, indicating a
potential weakness of the ANN with the present setup. The computational cost of training and
operating the models varied, with the MPCA and PLS-DA models being the least demanding,
and the SVM model requiring by far the most resources.
This work and framework provide a starting point for further efforts in developing robust
fault detection models for this particular fermentation process as well as other process models
given some adaptations. In practice, the framework enables the efﬁcient development of fault
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
53
==PAGE:64==
detection models. In the case of an ANN, the model can even be incrementally re-trained
with new batch data. However, some limitations should be considered. The fault detection
models developed with the framework have not been validated with real process data, which
is a crucial step towards their application in practice. Additionally, noise has only been added
to weight and airﬂow, while other features could also exhibit noisy signals. Fault detection
was limited to ﬁve speciﬁc fault types, not covering the whole range of potential fault types.
In summary, this thesis successfully created and applied a framework for developing data-
driven fault detection models to a fermentation process, contributing to the efforts for rapid
deployment of robust fault detection models.
5.2
Future perspectives
Looking forward, this research could be extended in multiple ways. A crucial next step
would be to validate the framework with real process data to conﬁrm the performance and
generalization capabilities of the fault detection models. Further improvements to the models
trained with the framework can be achieved by exploring different variants such as kernel
PCA and kernel PLS. In this way, simpler models with better generalization capabilities could
be applied to nonlinear problems. Using recurrent neural networks could also be beneﬁcial
to improve the detection of faults with effects accumulating over time. Another promising
extension of the framework could be the introduction of a hybrid modeling approach. This
could strengthen the robustness and generalization capabilities of the fault detection models
[36].
In terms of its practical application, the framework could be implemented in the real fer-
mentation process by validating it with real process data and adapting it based on the valida-
tion results. The effects of further ﬁne-tuning and re-training with new process data on the
performance and robustness of the models could be explored. The open-source code base can
be used to iteratively improve the framework and adapt it to new processes.
54
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
M. O. Albaek, K. V. Gernaey, M. S. Hansen, and S. M. Stocks, “Modeling enzyme pro-
duction with Aspergillus oryzae in pilot scale vessels with different agitation, aeration,
and agitator types,” Biotechnology and Bioengineering, vol. 108, no. 8, pp. 1828–1840,
Aug. 2011.
[2]
S. Yin, S. X. Ding, A. Haghani, H. Hao, and P. Zhang, “A comparison study of basic data-
driven fault diagnosis and process monitoring methods on the benchmark tennessee
eastman process,” Journal of Process Control, vol. 22, no. 9, pp. 1567–1581, Oct. 2012.
[3]
I. Jul-Jørgensen, P. Facco, K. Gernaey, M. Barolo, and C. Hundahl, “Data fusion of raman
spectra in MSPC for fault detection and diagnosis in pharmaceutical manufacturing,”
Computers & Chemical Engineering, vol. 184, p. 108 647, May 2024.
[4]
P. Nomikos and J. F. MacGregor, “Monitoring batch processes using multiway principal
component analysis,” AIChE Journal, vol. 40, no. 8, pp. 1361–1375, Aug. 1994.
[5]
J. C. Gunther, J. S. Conner, and D. E. Seborg, “Fault detection and diagnosis in an
industrial fed-batch cell culture process,” Biotechnology Progress, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 851–
857, 2007.
[6]
P. Nomikos and J. F. MacGregor, “Multi-way partial least squares in monitoring batch
processes,” Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 97–108,
Nov. 1995.
[7]
B. M. Wise and N. B. Gallagher, “The process chemometrics approach to process moni-
toring and fault detection,” 1996.
[8]
I. Monroy, K. Villez, M. Graells, and V. Venkatasubramanian, “Fault diagnosis of a bench-
mark fermentation process: A comparative study of feature extraction and classiﬁcation
techniques,” Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 689–704, Jun.
2012.
[9]
S. Yin, X. Zhu, and C. Jing, “Fault detection based on a robust one class support vector
machine,” Neurocomputing, vol. 145, pp. 263–268, Dec. 2014.
[10]
D. Ruiz, J. Nougués, Z. Calderón, A. Espuña, and L. Puigjaner, “Neural network based
framework for fault diagnosis in batch chemical plants,” Computers & Chemical Engi-
neering, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 777–784, Jul. 2000.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
55
==PAGE:66==
[11]
M. O. Albaek, K. V. Gernaey, M. S. Hansen, and S. M. Stocks, “Evaluation of the en-
ergy efﬁciency of enzyme fermentation by mechanistic modeling,” Biotechnology and
Bioengineering, vol. 109, no. 4, pp. 950–961, Apr. 2012.
[12]
R. Isermann, “Process fault detection based on modeling and estimation methodsa sur-
vey,” Automatica, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 387–404, Jul. 1984.
[13]
V. Venkatasubramanian, R. Rengaswamy, S. N. Ka, and K. Yin, “A review of process
fault detection and diagnosis part III: Process history based methods,” Computers and
Chemical Engineering, 2003.
[14]
P. Nomikos and J. F. MacGregor, “Multivariate SPC charts for monitoring batch pro-
cesses,” Technometrics, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 41–59, Feb. 1995.
[15]
F. A. P. Peres, T. N. Peres, F. S. Fogliatto, and M. J. Anzanello, “Fault detection in batch
processes through variable selection integrated to multiway principal component anal-
ysis,” Journal of Process Control, vol. 80, pp. 223–234, Aug. 2019.
[16]
J. Zhou, F. Huang, W. Shen, Z. Liu, J.-P. Corriou, and P. Seferlis, “Sub-period division
strategies combined with multiway principle component analysis for fault diagnosis on
sequence batch reactor of wastewater treatment process in paper mill,” Process Safety
and Environmental Protection, vol. 146, pp. 9–19, Feb. 2021.
[17]
N. V. Chawla, N. Japkowicz, and A. Kotcz, “Editorial: Special issue on learning from
imbalanced data sets,” ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–6, Jun.
2004.
[18]
M. Ruiz, L. E. Mujica, J. Sierra, F. Pozo, and J. Rodellar, “Multiway principal component
analysis contributions for structural damage localization,” Structural Health Monitoring,
vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 1151–1165, Sep. 2018.
[19]
Y.-J. Park, S.-K. S. Fan, and C.-Y. Hsu, “A review on fault detection and process diagnos-
tics in industrial processes,” Processes, vol. 8, no. 9, p. 1123, Sep. 9, 2020.
[20]
R. G. Brereton and G. R. Lloyd, “Partial least squares discriminant analysis: Taking the
magic away,” Journal of Chemometrics, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 213–225, Apr. 2014.
[21]
V. N. Vapnik, The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory. New York, NY: Springer New
York, 1995.
[22]
L. Bottou and C.-J. Lin, “Support vector machine solvers,” in Large-Scale Kernel Ma-
chines, L. Bottou, O. Chapelle, D. DeCoste, and J. Weston, Eds., The MIT Press, Aug. 17,
2007, pp. 1–28.
[23]
M. Nielsen. (). “Neural networks and deep learning,” [Online]. Available: http : / /
neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/ (visited on 06/19/2024).
56
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:67==
[24]
H. Madsen, “Introduction,” in Time series analysis, OCLC: 1260363861, Boca Raton:
Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2008.
[25]
A. Géron, “End-to-end machine learning project,” in Hands-on machine learning with
Scikit-Learn, Keras, and TensorFlow: concepts, tools, and techniques to build intelligent
systems, Second edition, Beijing [China] ; Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, Inc, 2019.
[26]
I. T. Jolliffe, “Principal components in regression analysis,” in Principal Component Anal-
ysis. New York, NY: Springer New York, 1986, pp. 129–155, Series Title: Springer Series
in Statistics.
[27]
“RBF kernel based support vector machine with universal approximation and its applica-
tion,” F. Yin, J. Wang, and C. Guo, Eds., ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Meeting
Name: International Symposium on Neural Networks, Dalian (China): Springer, 2004.
[28]
G. Panchal, A. Ganatra, Y. P. Kosta, and D. Panchal, “Behaviour analysis of multilayer
perceptronswith multiple hidden neurons and hidden layers,” International Journal of
Computer Theory and Engineering, pp. 332–337, 2011.
[29]
D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, Jan. 29, 2017. arXiv:
1412.6980[cs].
[30]
S. Sharma, S. Sharma, and A. Athaiya, “Activation functions in neural networks,” Inter-
national Journal of Engineering Applied Sciences and Technology, vol. 04, no. 12, pp. 310–
316, May 10, 2020.
[31]
P. Geladi and B. R. Kowalski, “Partial least-squares regression: A tutorial,” Analytica
Chimica Acta, vol. 185, pp. 1–17, 1986.
[32]
M. Behzad, K. Asghari, M. Eazi, and M. Palhang, “Generalization performance of sup-
port vector machines and neural networks in runoff modeling,” Expert Systems with
Applications, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 7624–7629, May 2009.
[33]
E. Byvatov, U. Fechner, J. Sadowski, and G. Schneider, “Comparison of support vector
machine and artiﬁcial neural network systems for drug/nondrug classiﬁcation,” Journal
of Chemical Information and Computer Sciences, vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1882–1889, Nov. 1,
2003.
[34]
D. Livingstone, Ed., Artiﬁcial neural networks: methods and applications, Methods in
molecular biology 458, Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 2008, 254 pp.
[35]
M. Shao, X.-J. Zhu, H.-F. Cao, and H.-F. Shen, “An artiﬁcial neural network ensemble
method for fault diagnosis of proton exchange membrane fuel cell system,” Energy,
vol. 67, pp. 268–275, Apr. 2014.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
57
==PAGE:68==
[36]
J.-A. Jiang, C.-L. Chuang, Y.-C. Wang, C.-H. Hung, J.-Y. Wang, C.-H. Lee, and Y.-T.
Hsiao, “A hybrid framework for fault detection, classiﬁcation, and locationpart i: Con-
cept, structure, and methodology,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 26, no. 3,
pp. 1988–1998, Jul. 2011.
58
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:69==
A
Appendix
A.1
Process parameters
Table A.1: Setup of process parameters. This set of parameters is consistently used throughout this
work.
Process conditions
Parameter
Value
Unit
N (agitation)
250/60
rps
Headspace pressure
1.01325
bar
Substrate feed concentration
500
g/L
Feed density
1100
g/L
Total power input
3
kW/m3
Inlet air temperature
18
°C
Temperature
28
°C
Humidity
0.90
%/100
Initial conditions (after batch phase)
Initial substrate concentration
0.05
g/L
Initial enzyme concentration
0.05
g/L
Initial dissolved oxygen concentration
0.000486
Moles O2/L
Initial volume
300
L
Impeller and reactor properties
Metzner constant
11
-
Impeller diameter (B2-30 impeller)
0.298
m
Mean circulation time
0.5
s
Radius of fermenter
0.34
m
Cylindrical area of fermenter
0.363
m2
Height of volume associated with bottom im-
peller
0.332
m
Bottom impeller width/diameter
0.505
-
Bottom impeller number of vanes/blades
4
-
Top impeller width/diameter
0.685
-
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
59
==PAGE:70==
Top impeller number of vanes/blades
4
-
Unaerated impeller power number for Rushton
disc turbine
5
-
Relative power draw upon aeration for Rushton
disc turbine
0.5
-
Number of impellers
2
-
kLa empirical parameters
C
28.46
-
a
0.4544
-
b
0.0538
-
c
-0.4516
-
Flow/Viscosity behavior
C1
0.0053
-
α
1.56
-
β
0.060
-
C2
2.69
-
δ
-0.568
-
Physical constants
Molar mass of oxygen
32
g/mole
Molar mass of CO2
44
g/mole
Atmospheric pressure
1.01325
bar
Oxygen saturation
0.00057317
Moles O2/L
Temperature of off-gas
27
°C
Density of dry air
0.001292496
kg/NL
Gas constant-air
2.870028305
L Bar/ K kg
Gas constant-water
4.614024417
L Bar/ K kg
Gas constant
0.08134472
L Bar/ K mol
Density of broth
1050
g/L
Gravitational constant
9.80665
m/s2
Density of water at 28 °C
996.31
g/L
Feed rate PI controller
Proportional gain
-40
-
Integral gain
-400
-
60
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:71==
Maximum time vector
0, 14, 24, 28
h
Maximum value vector
0.2, 0.9, 1.5, 2.0
L/h
Minimum value
0.1
L/h
Ramp for maximum ﬂow initially
0.00818181
L/(h2)
Ramp for minimum ﬂow initially
-0.004545
L/(h2)
Flow controller bias during initial limitation
0.2
L/h
Max ﬂow after initial limitation
2
L/h
Min ﬂow after initial limitation
0.1
L/h
Feed bias
0.3
L/h
Batch time and sampling rate
Sampling rate
0.1
h
Simulation end time
230
h
Aeration ramp
Start aeration
300
NL/min
Final aeration
300
NL/min
Initial DO set point value
0.60 * DO_star
Moles O2/L
Final DO set point value
0.40 * DO_star
Moles O2/L
Duration of aeration ramp
12.5
h
Flow rate ramp duration
180
h
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
61
==PAGE:72==
A.2
Noise analysis
Figure A.1: Autocorrelation function (ACF) of the airﬂow signal between 50 and 225 hours. The raw
data can be seen in Figure 3.2. The ACF was calculated and plotted using the statsmodels package
in Python. Since the ACF is inside or very close to its conﬁdence bars except for lag 0, a white noise
signal can be assumed.
Figure A.2: Weight signal after differencing. The raw data can be seen in Figure 3.2. Differencing
leads to a stationary time series with mean zero.
62
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.3: Weight signal after differencing and trimming. The raw data can be seen in Figure 3.2.
Compared to Figure A.2, one can see how trimming reduced the amount of outliers in the time series.
Figure A.4: Autocorrelation function (ACF) of the weight signal after differencing and trimming. The
raw data can be seen in Figure 3.2. The ACF was calculated and plotted using the statsmodels package
in Python. It still shows minor autocorrelative behaviour at lag 1, but overall behaviour close to a white
noise signal.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
63
==PAGE:74==
A.3
Generating large datasets
Table A.2: Dataset sizes for each type of dataset. A separate training set was used for the MPCA since
it is trained without fault events, while the SVM models was trained on a training set with a reduced
size due to its computational complexity.
Dataset
Total batches
Normal batches
Fault batches
Training
1000
500
100 of each type
Training (MPCA)
1000
1000
0
Training (SVM)
250
125
25 of each type
Validation
100
50
10 of each type
Test
1000
500
100 of each type
OOD test
1000
500
100 of each type
A.4
Model development
A.4.1
MPCA model
Figure A.5: Cumulative explained variance of the PCA model for each number of principal components
used. The dataset consists of 1000 batches without fault events. The red dotted line shows the 95%
threshold used for choosing the number of principal components used for the MPCA model.
64
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.6: Fault detection of MPCA model on an illustrative batch with blocked spargers. MPCA model
conﬁguration: components = 3, α = 0.01, moving time window = 1 h (6 time units). Green dotted
line indicates beginning of fault. Blue marked area shows time intervalls classiﬁed as having a fault by
the MPCA model.
Figure A.7: Fault detection of MPCA model on an illustrative batch with defect steam barriers. MPCA
model conﬁguration: components = 3, α = 0.01, moving time window = 1 h (6 time units). Red
dotted line indicates beginning of fault. Blue marked area shows time intervalls classiﬁed as having a
fault by the MPCA model.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
65
==PAGE:76==
A.4.2
PLS-DA
Figure A.8: Accuracy of the PLS-DA model with 6 components depending on the threshold α and the
moving time window size n. The model is trained on the 1000 batch training set. The accuracy is
evaluated on the 100 batch test set. The optimal set of hyperparameters is at τ = 0.45 and n = 24.
A.4.3
SVM
Figure A.9: Inﬂuence of the moving time window on the accuracy of the SVM model. The hyperpa-
rameters of the model are chosen according to the grid search (see Figure 4.4), meaning C = 1 and
γ = 1.
66
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:77==
A.4.4
ANN
Figure A.10: Inﬂuence of the number of nodes on the hidden layer on the ANN models for fault
detection and fault diagnosis. The curve of the ANN model for detection shows the accuracy of Figure
4.5 trained at a weight decay of 1 · 10−8. The curve of the ANN model for diagnosis stems from Figure
A.11 at a weight decay of 1 · 10−6.
A.4.5
ANN for fault diagnosis
Figure A.11: Accuracy of the ANN model for diagnosis depending on the number of nodes in the hidden
layer and the weight decay during training. The models were trained for 100 epochs with callback to
the model state with the highest accuracy. The learning rate was 1 · 10−3.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
67
==PAGE:78==
A.4.6
Model evaluation
Figure A.12: Overall fault detection rate of all optimized models for fault detection and fault diagnosis.
Figure A.13: Difference in the overall FDR between the normal test set and the OOD test set for each
fault detection model. Each model conﬁguration is according to their ﬁnal state as seen in Chapter 4.
68
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.14: Difference in the overall FAR between the normal test set and the OOD test set for each
fault detection model. Each model conﬁguration is according to their ﬁnal state as seen in Chapter 4.
Framework for data-driven fault detection models in fermentation processes
69
==PAGE:80==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Søltofts Plads, Building 228A
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 2822
https://www.kt.dtu.dk/research/prosys
