==PAGE:1==
	
          Technical University of Denmark 
Design strategies for natural ventilation 
and bio-based materials 
Investigation of controlled natural ventilation through energy and 
comfort simulations of a row house construction 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Anna Løkkegaard Niemann - s183620 
Christian Ahlefeldt-Laurvigen - s183612 
Master Thesis in Architectural Engineering 
Spring 2024 
35 ETCS 
Supervisor: 
Kristoffer Negendahl 
Co-supervisor: 
Kevin Michael Smith 
Cover image: Danielsen Architecture 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering 
Building 118, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
Copyright: Reproduction of the publication in whole or in part must include the custo-
mary bibliographic citations, including author attribution, report title, etc. 
ii
==PAGE:4==
Preface 
The project is a master's thesis from the Technical University of Denmark and part of the 
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. The master thesis was carried out 
over 6 months, from the end of January to the end of July 2024, and accounts for 35 
ECTS points.  
The project is a pre-study based on a future project owned by AKF, sketched by Daniel-
sens Architecture, with consulting from Carlo Volf and Artelia. We want to thank them for 
the opportunity to work with their project. 
The thesis was supervised by Kristoffer Negendahl and co-supervised by Kevin Michael 
Smith. To Kristoffer, we would like to express our gratitude for all the guidance and new 
ideas over the past 6 months, and to Kevin, we would like to express our gratitude for 
the software assistance, especially at the beginning of the project.  
_________________________    	
	
 __________________________ 
Anna Løkkegaard Niemann 	
& 	
Christian Ahlefeldt-Laurvigen 
22-07-2024, Kongens Lyngby 
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract 
Emissions from the building industry put pressure on Earth’s ecological systems and are 
a major contributor to the global climate crisis. Therefore, the industry is developing 
toward more sustainable buildings with an increased focus on decreasing emissions and 
energy use with the use of new technologies. Innovative initiatives, such as the Notech 
ventilation system, encounter skepticism across the industry, due to the standardized 
documentation requirements, which leads to a slower and more resistant implementa-
tion.  
This project aims to investigate controlled natural ventilation using the Notech ventila-
tion system, a bio-based ventilation filter, exploring whether controlled natural ventila-
tion can perform equally to mechanical ventilation. It is investigated which parameters 
have a positive and negative effect on the performance of such systems. The project will 
in the end generate results, that can answer the questions: “How can controlled natural 
ventilation challenge mechanical ventilation systems, to be an equally preferred design 
choice in the industry?” and “Which aspects of the industry procedures can be modified 
to make CNV appear equal to mechanical ventilation?” 
The study is conducted on a row house construction to answer the questions, using No-
tech as ventilation system. Danish Technological Institute has provided data for the No-
tech filter used for calibrating the simulation setup. Energy and comfort simulations 
conducted in IDA ICE, based on the what-if approach, are the foundation of the results. 
37 simulations are completed, to investigate different parameters and their effects on 
energy and comfort performance.  
The results from the simulations show that the experiments with controlled natural venti-
lation overall have very good comfort results, however, some of them are challenged 
when it comes to energy use, compared to the mechanical variations. The simulations 
highlight an array of parameters, such as ventilation rate and ease of flow through the 
building, that are crucial for the performance of the controlled natural ventilation sy-
stem. 
Based on the results it can be concluded that controlled natural ventilation can outper-
form mechanical ventilation if it is designed correctly, taking the crucial parameters into 
the early design phase, to ensure the right properties.  
A mindset shift in the industry is necessary to happen across the broad sector, influen-
cing regulation, software, and industry parties, for controlled natural ventilation to ap-
pear equal to mechanical ventilation.  
Controlled natural ventilation is shown to be eligible if it is designed and implemented 
correctly. 
iv
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature  
TI 	
	
Danish Technological Institute - Research institute  
BR	
	
Building regulation - Current Danish building regulation BR18 
DS	
	
Danish Standard - Advisory requirements, some of them are directly used 	
	
	
in the BR 
PMV 	 	
Predicted Mean Vote - Comfort analysis parameter 
PPD 	 	
Predicted Percentage Dissatisfied - Comfort analysis parameter  
Cd 	
	
Coefficient of Discharge - The relation between actual and ideal discharge 	
	
	
of an opening 
LCA 	 	
Life Cycle Assessment - Environmental impact evaluation over a product's 	
	
	
lifetime measured in kg CO2-eq/m2/year 
EPD 	 	
Environmental Product Declaration - Documenting the environmental 	
	
	
	
properties of a product 
WM	
	
Window Master - The Company owns the Notech ventilation system, 	
	
	
	
working for a better indoor environment and helping the building industry 	
	
	
reach its sustainability goals 
CNV 	 	
Controlled Natural Ventilation - Natural ventilation that somehow is 	
	
	
	
controlled by an actuator and sensors 
WWR 		
Window-to-wall ratio - The amount of window area there is on a given 	
	
	
	
external wall 
IPCC	 	
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
v
==PAGE:7==
Table of content
1 - Introduction	
 
1
1.1 - Background	
 
1
1.2 - Objectives	
 
2
2 - Context	
 
3
2.1 - Building industry and global climate crisis	
 
3
2.2 - Responsibility takers	
 
4
3 - Row house introduction	
 
6
3.1 - Kirkebjerg Søpark 2	
 
6
3.2 - Ventilation system	
 
8
4 - Theory	
 
9
4.1 - Natural and mechanical ventilation	
 
9
4.2 - U-value and heat capacity	
 
11
4.3 - Energy frame	
 
11
4.4 - Comfort and thermal environment	
 
12
4.5 - Life cycle assessment	
 
12
5 - Methodology	
 
13
5.1 - Calibration	
 
13
5.2 - Evaluation strategy	
 
16
6 - Baseline model and experiments	
 
18
6.1 - Baseline model	
 
18
6.2 - Experiments	
 
24
7 - Evaluation of experiments	
 
32
7.1 - Overview	
 
32
7.2 - IDA ICE - Energy Balance [kWh]	
 
33
7.3 - IDA ICE - Primary Energy Use [kWh/m2]	
 
35
7.4 - IDA ICE - Time in comfort categories [h]	
 
37
7.5 - IDA ICE - Time with overheating [h]	
 
39
7.6 - IDA ICE - PPD [%] vs Primary Energy Use [kWh/m2]	
 
41
7.7 - IDA ICE - Temperature [°C] and CO2 concentration [ppm]	
 
42
7.8 - Be18 - Energy use [kWh/m2]	
 
44
7.9 - LCAbyg - GWP [kg CO2-eq/m2/year]	
 
46
7.10 - Evaluation rundown	
 
48
8 - Recommendations	
 
52
8.1 - The optimal design constellation for Kirkebjerg Søpark 2	
 
52
8.2 - Notech recommendations for early design stages	
 
58
8.3 - Natural ventilation recommendations	
 
60
9 - Assumptions and limitations	
 
62
9.1 - Occupancy Schedules	
 
62
9.2 - Buoyancy effect and common flows	
 
63
9.3 - Modeling of Notech	
 
63
9.4 - Assumptions regarding allocation of 0.3 L/s per m2 in the rooms	
 
65
10 - Discussion	
 
67
10.1 - Perception of good comfort	
 
67
vi
==PAGE:8==
10.2 - Economical Aspect - Energy Expenses	
 
68
10.3 - Be18 vs. IDA ICE	
 
70
10.4 - Natural ventilation and mechanical ventilation	
 
71
11 - Conclusions	
 
73
12 - Future work	
 
76
12.1 - Optimized control modeling in IDA ICE	
 
76
12.2 - Optimizing the building, by changing different parameters	
 
76
13 - References	
 
78
14 - Appendices	
 
81
14.1 Appendix - House drawings	
 
81
14.2 Appendix - Flow calculations and opening area	
 
81
14.3 Appendix - Result values	
 
81
14.4 Appendix - LCI	
 
81
14.5 Appendix - IDA ICE Files	
 
81
14.6 Appendix - Be18 files	
 
81
14.7 Appendix - LCAbyg file	
 
81
14.8 Appendix - Key values	
 
82
14.9 Appendix - Assumptions	
83
vii
==PAGE:9==
1 - Introduction 
1.1 - Background 
An inflation of up to 10 % in Denmark  caused by the current instability and war in Euro
1
-
pe, combined with fluctuating energy prices led to a higher focus from the consumer to 
save money on this subject. The general increase in demand for electricity, due to 
electric vehicles and more technology in society in general, does put increased pressure 
on the distribution network. As a crucial part of the transition to a green energy sector, 
energy used for keeping buildings within comfort has to decrease, and it will be neces-
sary for the occupant to economize their expenditure. 
At the same time, a global climate crisis is raging on Earth, putting in new global avera-
ge temperature records each month since July 2023 . Following calculation from the 
2
Global Footprint Network, humanity would need 4.3 Earths if every person in the world 
would live as we do in Denmark. The global average is 1.7 Earth, which has been increa-
sing almost every year since they started observing in 1971. This number is directly lin-
ked to the Earth Overshoot Day, which occurs earlier and earlier each year, thus a small 
stagnation, around the start of August. The call for global action is affecting the building 
industry more and more, with higher demands for emission reductions and the need for 
alternative solutions, for instance in replacing emission-heavy building materials. This 
will be followed by “The building environment accounts for 39 % of gross annual carbon 
emissions worldwide” , minimizing this will be necessary for Denmark, to fulfill its com
3
-
mitment to the Paris Agreement. 
Since 2012 there has been a demand by law to have a ventilation system in housing bu-
ildings , either mechanical or natural. The demand puts indoor climate and comfort for 
4
the occupant in focus but does at the same time not give indications of energy use limi-
tations. However, since energy calculations from software, such as Be18 are also de-
manded in terms of documentation, mechanical systems have been the preferred solu-
tion. 
The building industry is in rapid change, and technological discoveries and new ways of 
designing buildings are leading toward new building types with lower emissions and an 
increased focus on exploring possibilities for systems that make better use of nature’s 
resources. This is for instance solar PV on the roof or the implementation of a ground 
heating system. However, regarding ventilation, the industry has developed more and 
more efficient mechanical systems, and in the meantime disregarded the advantages of 
a natural ventilation system. Implementing and maintaining these systems can be ex-
pensive. To lower expenses, new technologies have to be explored. 
 https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/oekonomi/prisindeks/forbrugerprisindeks 
1
 https://www.dmi.dk/nyheder/2024/wmo-indikatorerne-for-klimaforandringer-naaede-rekordnive
2
 https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/09/construction-industry-zero-emissions/ 
3
 https://ditnybyggeri.dk/faser/kom-godt-i-gang/overblik/alt-du-skal-vide-om-ventilationsanlaeg-i-dit-nybyggeri/
4
1
==PAGE:10==
“One of the largest challenges, we face in the industry is the general resistance to chan-
ge and the adoption of new technologies and sustainable solutions. Many are still skep-
tical of innovative ventilation methods (…) it can also be a challenge to convince the 
construction industry of the economic and environmental benefits of investing in sustai-
nable solutions in the long term.“ (2024, translated), says Carlo Volf, Architect and pio-
neer in the building industry. 
Volf and other stakeholders, who are pioneers in the building industry, are working with 
natural ventilation and are trying to innovate the way natural ventilation is thought of. 
The goal is to innovate natural ventilation in a direction so it will become the preferred 
solution while being the most economical and environmental solution on the market.   
1.2 - Objectives 
The study aims to investigate simpler options for building ventilation, while still ensuring 
high performance in terms of energy, emission, and comfort. The study will be con-
ducted as a pre-study based on a future row house construction in Denmark. The project 
will evaluate a series of experiments on a 4-to-1 Planet row house construction using 
controlled natural ventilation (CNV) and bio-based materials. By creating small experi-
ments in a row house construction, the experiments will investigate different parameters 
for designing controlled natural ventilation. The purpose is to evaluate the performance 
of the row house based on energy simulations, Life Cycle Assessments, and general 
comfort. The experiments will show when the controlled natural ventilation will be chal-
lenged, and when it will be performing at its best.  
The study will assess which constellation of design choices for controlled natural ventila-
tion and bio-based materials will be the industry's most optimal and preferred option.  
General recommendations for controlled natural ventilation and the ventilation system 
in the row house construction will be conducted, together with an analysis of whether or 
not the new innovative solutions in the industry are suited for future climate. Further-
more, will the industry's current limitations be investigated through a comparison of 
software results and the impact of the requirements will be analyzed. 
The study will investigate CNV with respectively a system and industry point of view. Ba-
sed on this, the following questions will be investigated: 
How can controlled natural ventilation challenge mechanical ventilation systems, 
to be an equally preferred design choice in the industry?  
• Can CNV maintain the same performance as mechanical ventilation systems? 
• Which situations can challenge the use of CNV, compared to mechanical ventila-
tion systems, and which are crucial properties of the system design? 
Which aspects of the industry procedures can be modified to make CNV appear 
equal to mechanical ventilation? 
• What consequences do the current regulations regarding documentation and 
comfort have on CNV’s eligibility? 
2
==PAGE:11==
2 - Context 
2.1 - Building industry and global climate crisis 
The current situation in the building industry is highly affected by the climate crisis and 
the need for alternative materials, use of resources, and inventions for natural ventila-
tion. Currently, the majority of the industry is still based on more emission-heavy materi-
als, such as concrete, steel, and brick. In January 2023, the Danish government introdu-
ced a demand for the calculation of the total climate footprint of construction and limits 
for the CO2 emissions for certain constructions. In the government’s national strategy for 
sustainable constructions from 2021, it can be seen that the goal is to decrease the CO2 
emissions from constructions by 70 % before 2030, compared to the value from 1990 . 
5
At the same time, the newest IPCC report from 2023, states several opportunities for 
scaling up the climate actions and thereby decreasing greenhouse gas emissions. For 
buildings, the potential for decrease is set to 66 % by 2050 . 
6
2.1.1 - 4- to 1 Planet 
To comply with current and future building regulations in terms of emissions, other al-
ternative materials will be necessary. Research has shown that bio-based materials have 
environmental advantages compared to steel, concrete, etc. which is used on the market 
right now. Several projects are looking into whether wood, straw, and eelgrass could 
function as future building materials . A report from the Danish Technological Institute 
7
states that future constructions will have a higher focus on the use of resources and 
maintenance and renovation instead of building new ones .  
8
One of the organizations looking into this is the “4-to-1 Planet”. Their purpose is to con-
struct buildings with a CO2 limit of 2.5 kg CO2-eq per m2 per year. by 2030. The orga-
nization is raising awareness of the fact that Denmark uses four times their share of the 
amount of the Earth’s resources. Therefore they want to reduce the climate footprint by 
75 % for their projects, to achieve the Paris Agreement. Their projects often contain al-
ternative bio-based materials and passive design strategies, which positions their buil-
dings as front runners in the industry. 
 https://sbst.dk/Media/638248402790994130/National strategi for bæredygtigt byggeri.pdf  
5
 https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_SYR_SPM.pdf 
6
 https://realdania.dk/nyheder/2021/07/groenbog-om-biogene-materialer 
7
 Fremtidens grønnere byggeri.pdf, Marts 2023, Teknologisk institut
8
3
==PAGE:12==
2.2 - Responsibility takers 
2.2.1 - AKF as Project owner  
Which actions does the building industry take to cope with the climate crisis? An examp-
le is the company AKF. They are a large company, working as building administration, 
contractors, and entrepreneurs. Since they are a large company, they also believe they 
have the position to take responsibility and they want to set the bar high for the green 
transition, which is paramount for the future. The company has a sustainability strategy, 
divided into three parts; social, management, and environmental responsibility . The 
9
environmental responsibility contains several initiatives. Through their commitment to 4-
to-1 Planet buildings, they are obligated to minimize environmental impacts. Look into 
energy optimization by renewable energy sources. They want to prioritize environmen-
tally friendly and renewable resources and focus on biodiversity.  
One of their projects, Kirkebjerg Søpark 2, is a portfolio building of how future buildings 
could cope with the current environmental challenges, eg. 4-to-1 Planet requirements. 
This will be investigated in this study, leading to clarification of AKF’s approach, in terms 
of climate impact, energy use, and renewable resources.  
 
2.2.2 - Notech by WindowMasterTM 
One of the initiatives that can be found in a 
4-to-1 Planet building is the Notech ventila-
tion system. The Notech system is a sensor-
based controlled venting hatch, which has 
an eelgrass filter implemented. The panel 
consists of a facade element, which can 
vary so it fits the building in question, and 
on the inside a lamella element, which can 
contain acoustical properties as well. Be-
tween these two elements, the eelgrass fil-
ter and a controlled hatch are placed. The 
controlled hatch is the element that con-
trols the airflow. The hatch is adjusted by a 
small electrical actuator, which over a year 
has negligible electricity usage. The eel-
grass element does affect the airflow, ba-
sed on the compactness of the eelgrass.  
Figure 01 shows a picture of the Notech 
filter.  
 https://issuu.com/akf.as/docs/_rsrapport_2023?fr=xKAE9_zU1NQ 
9
4
Figure 01: Picture of Notech filter, picture by WindowMa-
sterTM
==PAGE:13==
The eelgrass filter contributes by using the natural properties of eelgrass, which in the 
filter, are cleansing, and stabilizing the supply air humidity, while absorbing odor and 
moisture . Both the facade and the internal finish can vary, depending on the design, as 
10
long as the materials, their way of mounting, and the construction provide space for air-
flow. 
One of the largest benefits of the Notech panel, when supplying air, is the ability to in-
crease the temperature of the air and slow the speed it enters the house during the he-
ating season. In the summertime, and when there is a risk of overheating, the large air-
flow allowed through the panel, can take out a large amount of heat in the building. 
Further detailed information about the Notech filter and its properties can be found in 
Notech Slutrapport by Danish Technological Institute. 
 https://www.windowmaster.dk/ekspertise/nyheder-og-trends/notech/ 
10
5
==PAGE:14==
3 - Row house introduction 
3.1 - Kirkebjerg Søpark 2 
The row house construction used for this study is from a building project in Brøndbyve-
ster called “Kirkebjerg Søpark”, set to be built in mid-2024, where they are currently 
working on an expansion with 4-to-1 Planet buildings. This is achieved by alternative ma-
terials, such as straw in the insulation, and eelgrass filters as ventilation filters. The house 
will be built with bio-based materials in as many construction components as possible, 
which reduces the use of heavy materials, such as steel and concrete.  
The external walls will be constructed with an EcoCocon module. The EcoCocon module 
is a lightweight module, constructed with wood. The EcoCocon module uses compres-
sed straw as insulation material, built in between the load-bearing wood. The ground 
slab will be constructed as a concrete slab, placed on concrete strip foundations. The 
internal walls will be made of a wood construction, with gypsum on both sides. The in-
ternal slab will be made of wood, with the necessary sound insulations, etc. The walls 
towards the next buildings will be built in wood with gypsum as a finishing layer and 
there will be no installations in these walls. The roof will be built with a layer of thin-film 
photovoltaics on top of a wooden construction. Each house will be equipped with 45 m2 
of solar panels, which will help provide electricity to the house. The overall construction 
will be based on wooden construction techniques, except for the foundation, the gro-
und slab, and a stabilizing wall placed in the center of the house from bottom to top. A 
more detailed description of the constructions can be found in Appendix 14.4, for the 
wet rooms, there will be small changes to the finishing layers of the construction. 
The chosen house for analysis is one of the houses in the middle and will have an area 
of 112 m2, consisting of two stories and an attic on the upper floor. On the ground floor, 
there will be an entrance, and bathroom together with a combined kitchen and living 
room, following the stairs to the first floor, which will have three rooms, one walk-in clo-
set, and a bathroom. The floor plans can be seen in Figure 02. 
6
Figure 02 - Combined floor plans. Modified drawings,  Danielsen Architecture 2024
==PAGE:15==
In the floor plans, it can be seen that the attic is attached to the bedroom, which isn’t the 
master bedroom, where the walk-in closet is linked together. Detailed sections and fa-
cade drawings of the house can be found in Appendix 14.1. 
The total floor area of the house is distributed equally on the two floors, plus the attic. In 
Table 01, the floor area for each room can be found, without the area of the walls. The 
room height in the house is 2.6 meters. All measurements are based on drawings from 
January 2024, and small deviations can occur. 
As seen in the table, the kitchen and living room are combined as one room, due to the 
open floor plan. The floor area for the combined kitchen and living room also includes 
the area of the stairs. The same area of the stairs is appended in the area on the landing 
area on the first floor. Since the house has a master bedroom and two extra rooms, it is 
assumed, based on statistics regarding occupants per house, that there will be 3 occu-
pants in the house . 
11
 https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/nyheder-analyser-publ/nyt/NytHtml?cid=30704
11
7
Table 01 - Room List, Useable Area and Floor Level
Room
Area [m2]
Floor
Kitchen & Living 
room, plus stairs
38.7
Ground floor
Enterance / utility
3.7
Ground floor
Bathroom
2.6
Ground floor
Tech closet
0.3
Ground floor
Landing area, plus 
stairs
8.0
First floor
Bathroom
4.9
First floor
Master bedroom
9.7
First floor
Walk-in
4.3
First floor
Office
6.9
First floor
Bedroom plus attic
13.7
First floor
Tech
1.0
First floor
Total
93.3
==PAGE:16==
3.2 - Ventilation system 
The main part of the house's ventilation shall be through controlled natural ventilation. 
There will however be fractions of mechanical ventilation, which will exhaust air from the 
kitchen and the bathrooms. A skylight and the venting hatches drive the natural ventila-
tion. The skylight will be in charge of creating the buoyancy effect, and therefore the 
exhaust air will leave the building through there. By ventilating this way, the house itself, 
and especially the staircase, becomes a ventilation duct in itself. To ensure that air can 
flow between rooms when the doors are closed, each room is equipped with a ventila-
tion gap underneath each door of 20 mm. 
The most crucial part of the controlled natural ventilation system in the building is the 
venting hatches, which are placed in 5 rooms. The venting hatch used for the building is 
Notech by WindowMasterTM.  
The venting hatches’ placement can be seen in Figure 02, where they are placed next to 
windows or doors, marked with red, in each room except the kitchen and bathrooms, 
and are punching through the outer wall in its full depth. Underneath each Notech filter, 
a radiator will be placed, marked with green, to heat the air directly when entering 
through the filters. 
In Figure 03, a detailed drawing of the Notech concept is shown. In the figure, the diffe-
rent components in the filter can also be seen. 
In the drawings in Figure 03, the filter has a certain size, but the filter can be modified, 
both the height and width, so it fits every building project. The filter will also come in dif-
ferent sizes for the housing project evaluated in the report. Since the filter is placed as a 
part of the facade of buildings, its insulating properties when closed have been evalua-
ted, and based on calculations the Notech filter has a U-value of 0.4 W/m2K, declared by 
WindowMasterTM. 
8
Figure 03: Notech venting hatch implemented in the external wall 
Danielsen Architecture 2024
Acoustic panel
Eelgrass filter
Air gap
Operable hatch
Airflow
==PAGE:17==
4 - Theory 
The following chapter explains natural and mechanical ventilation, and the factors used 
to dimension and calculate it, along with a brief explanation of regulations. There will 
also be a short description of the life cycle assessment (LCA) and how this is used to eva-
luate the ventilation strategy, combined with the comfort demands and energy 
consumption results. 
4.1 - Natural and mechanical ventilation 
Natural ventilation is ventilation or air exchange in the house, without a mechanical in-
stallation needed. It occurs when occupants, for instance, open a door or a window, and 
the airflow is changing, due to a change in air pressure. The opening can also be a venti-
lation hatch. The house can be ventilated naturally both on a single side with two ope-
nings, or across, for instance, if a window or door is open on each side of the house, le-
ading to pressure difference from one side to another, which will lead to higher airflow 
and air change.  
A house with more than one story can also function as a channel, leading to buoyancy. 
This will happen if the house for instance has an opening on the second floor or in the 
roof. When the temperature inside is higher than outside, the pressure will rise. This will 
lead the indoor air out through the higher openings, and outdoor air through the lower 
openings. The principles of buoyancy ventilation and cross ventilation can be seen in 
Figure 04.  
9
Figure 04: Buoyancy and cross ventilation principals for the filters in the house, Danielsen Architecture 2024
==PAGE:18==
Mechanical ventilation is ventilation with the use of electrical installations, for instance, 
a fan. Most commonly a house will have a supply fan and exhaust fan. The supply fan will 
provide the house with fresh air from outside, and possibly decrease the temperature 
and function as a cooler. The exhaust fan will drag indoor air out.  
In newer constructions mechanical ventilation often consists of both, however older bu-
ildings or buildings with only natural ventilation might only have an exhaust fan in wet 
rooms, for ventilation after baths or cooking. Since this project will explore natural venti-
lation with only a few exhaust fans for the wet rooms, the mechanical ventilation won’t 
be explained further.  
When experimenting with ventilation strategies, heat recovery will also be a part of the 
overall evaluation of the solution. Heat recovery is when you can exploit the heat that is 
already in the house, thereby using less energy for heating, and still ensuring a better 
indoor climate. Heat recovery is often only discussed in terms of mechanical ventilation. 
The pressure loss is calculated when air or liquid must be transported through pipes, 
ducts, and openings. It gives an indication of how much pressure drops through the 
opening, based on its dimensions. With a narrower channel, the pressure will be greater 
and the flow through will therefore increase. Conversely, a wider channel will have less 
pressure, and thus also a lower flow through. For this project, the pressure loss is given 
from a real laboratory experiment, and therefore not calculated. The project will use the 
laboratory values for the calibration of simulations. 
At the same time, the ventilation flow rate is also given from the laboratory experi-
ment, and will therefore not be calculated either for the project. The flow rate is indica-
ted by the mass of the ventilation in L/s or m3/s. The flowrate is in this project is used to 
calculate the Coefficient of discharge [Cd].  Cd is a ratio and therefore unitless and has 
a value less than 1. It’s a value of the ratio between the reel discharge and the ideal dis-
charge. It indicates how well an opening in the facade is operating. The used formula for 
Cd is stated in expression (1).  
  
 
In the formula, Qv is the ventilation rate, A0 is the area of the opening, ρ is the density of 
air, and delta P is the pressure difference upon the opening. 
Cd =
Qv
A0 ⋅ρ
2 ΔP
ρ
 (1)
10
==PAGE:19==
To design a realistic ventilation system for the row house, it must be ensured that regula-
tions are complied with. For residential buildings, chapter 22, §443 in the BR, states that 
in the following room types: kitchen, bathrooms, utility, and toilets, exhaust airflow must 
be when needed, along with an outdoor air supply of at least 0.30 L/s per m2. §443 sub-
section 5 states that for toilets with baths, the extraction must be at least 15 L/s, and in 
utility rooms, it must be at least 10 L/s. In the kitchen, the extraction must be at least 20 
L/s and be able to extract 120 L/s when boosted.  
12
4.2 - U-value and heat capacity 
The U-value is also known as the transmission coefficient since it indicates how much 
heat is transported through a building component and is measured in [W/m²K], which 
means that the lower the U-value, the better the building is insulated. 
Heat capacity is an interesting factor for a building component. When calculating and 
analyzing the energy use through software, heat capacity plays a crucial role. The heat 
capacity is a measure of how much heat a material can store. Materials such as concrete 
have a higher density than lighter materials, such as wood. With a higher density, the 
greater heat capacity. This way, concrete will take longer to heat up, but will also be 
warmer for a longer time, since it has more mass to keep warm, and can therefore relea-
se heat for a longer time than wood. This means, that buildings with materials with a 
good heating capacity will experience less fluctuation between inside and outside tem-
peratures. The house will feel the same. While buildings with lighter materials can expe-
rience more fluctuation, for instance, overheating. This means that lighter constructions 
will need more activity from for instance the ventilation plant. 
4.3 - Energy frame  
Chapter 11, §259 in the BR states the energy frame for residential buildings, dormitori-
es, hotels, etc. “The building's total need for added energy for heating, ventilation, coo-
ling and domestic hot water per m² heated floor area no more than 30.0 kWh/m² per 
year plus 1,000 kWh per year divided by the heated floor area.”  
13
 https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-bestemmelser/22/Krav
12
 https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Historisk/BR18_Version2/Tekniske-bestemmelser/11/Krav 
13
11
==PAGE:20==
4.4 - Comfort and thermal environment 
Regarding the thermal environment, DS/EN 16798 will be used as a reference . For 
14
this project, category IEQ II is chosen, since this is the normal level. For IEQ II the tempe-
rature intervals for heating are 20-25 °C and for cooling 23-26 °C. This is for clothing in-
sulation of 1.0 clo and an activity level of 1.2 met when awake and 0.9 met when sleepi-
ng. For IEQ II the maximum CO2 concentration above outdoor level (380 ppm ) is set to 
15
be 800 PPM. It is assumed, that a person typically will discharge 20 L CO2 per Hour. Re-
garding the relative humidity, it is recommended to have a humidity between 25-60 %. 
Demands for the thermal environment are used to evaluate thermal comfort. In this 
case, the comfort will be measured and evaluated through the Predicted Mean Vote 
(PMV) and Predicted Percentage Dissatisfied (PPD) as the chosen comfort model. Table 
B.1 in DS/EN 16798 states that the PMV for category II must be in the interval -0.5 < PMV 
< + 0.5, and the PPD should be < 10 % . PMV is an index, to calculate the predicted 
16
mean value of votes of a group of people, using the 7-point thermal sensation scale. 
Where +3 is hot, -3 is cold, and 0 is when you are feeling neutral. The PMV and PPD re-
sults are configured from IDA ICE simulations. 
4.5 - Life cycle assessment  
Chapter 11, §297 in the BR, states that buildings covered in §259 need to perform an 
LCA in CO2-eq per m2 per Year. The BR only states a maximum of 12 kg CO2-eq per m2 
per year for constructions above 1,000 m2. However, for a 4-to-1 Planet building project, 
the maximum CO2 emissions are 2.5 kg CO2-eq per m2 per year.  
 Dansk Standard. "DS/CEN/TR 16798-2:2019” (2019)   
14
 https://www.indeklimaportalen.dk/luftkvalitet/maaling-af-luftens-kvalitet/indendoers-co2
15
 Dansk Standard. "DS/CEN/TR 16798-2:2019” (2019)  
16
12
==PAGE:21==
5 - Methodology 
As the whole study revolves around a project that has yet to be constructed, the course 
of action will follow a pre-study mindset. 
In this section, an outline of the methodology employed in the pre-study, aimed at 
laying the groundwork for the future implementation of controlled natural ventilation. 
The methodology encompasses a systematic approach, designed to gather preliminary 
insights, identify key parameters, and establish design strategies for controlled natural 
ventilation. Literature review and stakeholder consultations have enabled simulations of 
different experiments, and data analysis. The aim is to refine the understanding of con-
trolled natural ventilation systems while answering the study’s questions. By clarifying 
the methodological approach, the aim is to provide transparency and clarity in the pre-
study, laying a solid foundation for further investigation of the subject. The experiments 
are divided into design choices and sensitivity analysis. Design choice experiments will 
investigate changes to the building itself, whereas the experiments used for the sensiti-
vity analysis will investigate uncontrollable changes and therefore the robustness of the 
design. 
As a fundamental pillar in the methodology, the Industry Guidance  will serve as a pre
17
-
requisite. Prerequisites such as; window reduction factor, seasonal evaluation periods, 
and occupant cohesion. The integration of the Industry Guidance will not only strengt-
hen the scientific integrity of the pre-study but will also bring along a deeper shared 
understanding. The demands from BR stated in Paragraph 4, will be applied as evalua-
tion parameters in correlation with the occupant cohesion. 
5.1 - Calibration 
As the initial step of the course of action, a calibration of the Notech by WindowMa-
sterTM eelgrass filter against test measurements, made by TI , is terminated. Calibration 
18
of the model against real measurements and tests is paramount for several reasons. 
Identifying model biases; Calibration helps identify biases within the model. Differen-
ces between the model predictions and the real measurements will highlight areas whe-
re the model may give the wrong estimations of certain parameters. By addressing the-
se biases, the model is improved in regards to the predictive power and will ensure a 
better understanding of certain outcomes. 
Accuracy validation; Measurements done in the laboratory serve as ground data to 
which the model’s predictions are compared. Calibrating the model against these real 
data helps validate its accuracy. If the model aligns consistently with these data, it will 
demonstrate the model’s presentative properties. 
Enhancing trust and confidence in the model; Calibration infuses trust and confiden-
ce in the output of the model. When stakeholders are presented with model results that 
reflect real data, they will be more likely to trust the model’s predictions. 
 https://bygst.dk/media/9721/branchevejledning-for-indeklimaberegninger_opdateret-version_final_web.pdf 
17
 [Notech slutrapport]
18
13
==PAGE:22==
Overall, the importance of calibrating a model against real measurements and tests 
cannot be overstated. The calibration of a model with real data is crucial for ensuring the 
accuracy, validity, and reliability of the model when used on a real-world project, under 
the simulations. The calibration also ensures a wide range of applications and decision-
making contexts. 
The data provided by the Danish Technological Institute in their report, Notech slutrap-
port, is measured in their laboratory. The data is measurements of the pressure loss from 
outside to a certain placement in the Notech panel construction. The measurements can 
be seen in Figure 05 - Pressure Loss Over a Panel. The pressure loss over the panel is 
measured at 20 °C and with an absolute pressure of 0 Pa on the outside of the panel. 
The values displayed on the graph will therefore be pressure loss used for further calcu-
lations. 
On the graph in Figure 05, it is the pressure loss given by the purple line which is the 
one used for this project. This is measured on the inside of the panel, meaning behind 
every part of the Notech panel, the facade element, the hatch, the eelgrass filter, and the 
internal finish.  
14
Figure 05 - Pressure Loss over a panel - Notech Slutrapport - Fig 6.5
==PAGE:23==
Using the area  of 0.67 m2 and the power law, Cd, the coefficient of discharge, for the 
19
filter can be calculated for each of the measured air flow rates and the linked pressure 
loss. In Table 02, the Cd-factor is calculated with an air density of 1.204 kg/m3, which cor-
responds to the air temperature of 20 °C the experiments are carried out in. 
The equation for Cd [1] is used together with the power law to calculate the values for 
the different measured points on the graph. 
In Table 02 - Cd-Factor and Corresponding Values, the viable Cd can be seen for each 
measuring point from Figure 05 - Pressure Loss Over a Panel.  
In IDA ICE a damper component is used to model the Notech panel. The following 
equation describes the mass flow through the damper: 
 
In the equation, Cturb is the interpolated value between a fully open panel, Copen, and a 
fully closed panel, Cclosed. ∆P is the difference in the pressure on each side of the panel. 
The two values for C, are defined by the measurements done by Technological Institute 
and represent the coefficient of discharge multiplied by the area of the panel. Cclosed 
equals 0, whereas Copen equals 0.0387. This equality between Cd and Copen in the calibra-
tion is reasoned by the ease in comparison of airflows with TI’s measurements in Figure 
05 when using the same area of 0.67 m2. The interpolation is driven by a control value, 
ranging from 0 to 1, controlling how open the venting hatch is, and in that manner also 
controls the corresponding Cd value. 
The results from the calibration simulations can be seen in Table 03. 
M = Cturb ⋅
ΔP
 (2)
 [Notech slutrapport, p.53] 
19
15
Table 02 - C_D-Factor and Corresponding Values
Flow rate  
[m3/h]
Pressure loss - ∆P 
[Pa]
Cd-factor 
[-]
97
3.43
0.0168
341
15.23
0.0280
508
25.12
0.0325
850
49.54
0.0387
Table 03 - Results From Calibration Simulation
Flow rate 
[m3/h]
Pressure loss - ∆P 
[Pa]
Cturb 
 [-]
Error  
[%]
97
3.3
0.0168
3.8
341
14.8
0.0280
2.8
508
24.66
0.0325
1.8
850
49.97
0.0387
0.9
==PAGE:24==
In the fourth column of Table 03, the margin of the error is calculated. Since the value of 
the errors between the simulation and the measured values from TI only differ by a 
maximum of 3.8 %, the modulation of the Notech venting hatch in IDA ICE is concluded 
to give valid results over an array of tests. 
Due to IDA ICE's way of calculating, assuming fully mixed air in the respective zones, the 
placement of the Notech filter isn’t defined. Furthermore, is the area of the venting hatch 
covered in the Copen value. 
5.2 - Evaluation strategy 
As a robust evaluation strategy for a pre-study, using simulations as its data provider, the 
study combines quantitative metrics and qualitative assessments.  
The first part of the evaluation will be a quantitative analysis providing numerical values 
for each evaluation parameter, based on a series of experiments consisting of variations. 
Different factors will evaluate the performance of the row house. Enabling a comparison 
between the experiments and their outcome, each evaluation factor will be measurable 
and will in the end be presented as a value. Qualitative techniques like sensitivity analy-
sis and experiment testing will provide further perspectives on the performance.  
The second part will conduct an experiment that consists of a mix of some of the best-
performing experiments, which will be the optimal constellation. This constellation will 
be analyzed with weather files suited for the future climate, to ensure that the use of No-
tech filters is realistic for the future. The second part will also contain general recom-
mendations for the Notech filters, including quantity and size.  
5.2.1 - Tools - software 
The environmental impacts will be assessed through a Life Cycle Assessment using 
LCAbyg. The value used for comparison here, which also is the regularity bodies requi-
rements, is kg CO2-eq/m2/year. This value is generated directly from LCAbyg. Further-
more, this value will also be used to compare the total emissions concerning conserved 
energy, when using more and other materials. 
The energy use will be assessed through simulations in IDA ICE and calculations in 
Be18. In regards to the energy use, the value used for comparison is kWh/m2. This value 
will be generated in both Be18 and through the IDE ICE simulations. Since this value is 
generated in two different software for the same experiments, this value will also be 
used to compare the two software’s ability to and calculations of the energy usage.  
16
==PAGE:25==
As mentioned in the theory, comfort in the house will be evaluated based on different 
comfort factors and thermal parameters, for each experiment. These are factors such as 
PPD. Time with overheating, and time in the different categories specified in the BR, are 
both measured in hours and will be used to evaluate the performance of the house. 
Thermal properties, such as temperature, CO2 concentration, and relative humidity, will 
also be looked upon. The results regarding comfort will be generated through IDA ICE 
simulations. All simulations will provide values for each room in the house and values for 
the house as a unit. During simulations, the values for each of the occupied rooms will 
be investigated, and brought into the result paragraph, if any interesting values occur. 
17
==PAGE:26==
6 - Baseline model and experiments 
6.1 - Baseline model 
The first simulation that will be conducted will be the Baseline experiment. The Baseline 
model is based on the drawings from January 2024, from Danielsen Architecture, and is 
a rudimentary model used as a starting point for the more complex experiments later 
conducted. The model will serve as a benchmark for the rest of the experiments. 
The Baseline model will reproduce the building as represented in the drawings. With 
the current design and material use, together with the regulated airflows presented in 
Paragraph 4. The assumed distribution in time of occupants follows; all occupants in 
bedrooms from 23.00 to 07.00, in the living room from 07.00 to 09.00, and again from 
16.00 to 23.00, away from 09.00 to 16.00 on weekdays. This distribution is illustrated in 
Figure 06, showing the simultaneity of occupants in the spaces. 
During Baseline simulation, the ventilation is controlled by CO2 and temperature in the 
rooms and the mechanical ventilation of the wet rooms will be turned on at selected ti-
mes, from 07.00 to 09.00 and again from 20.00 to 22.00, with the kitchen as an excep-
tion, and will only be turned on from 18.00 to 19.00 in the evening. 
In the Baseline model, the venting hatches in the house have four different sizes. The 
size is determined by the architect in collaboration with a consultant, so they fit the win-
dow or door next to the filter and at the same time, have the required size which enables 
them to provide the needed airflow. The Copen values for each panel can be found in 
Table 04. 
For the Baseline model, the internal doors are assumed to always be fully open. This is 
assumed, to ensure the airflow can flow freely in the building, ensuring that fresh air will 
reach every room. 
18
Figure 06 - Simultaneity of occupants
==PAGE:27==
The heating system in the building consists of radiators and floor heating. The floor heat-
ing is only in the two bathrooms and is electrical floor heating of 100 W/m2. There are 
two different kinds of radiators in the row house. The sizes, power, and placement of the 
radiators can be seen in Table 05 below. The Purmo Delta 6 radiator is placed under 
each Notech panel and will heat the air, which is taken in through the filter, directly befo-
re it is led into the house. The Purmo Plan Compact radiators are placed around the 
house to provide extra heat in some of the rooms. 
For the experiments, the heating and cooling season won’t be defined beforehand, but 
the control of the radiators and windows, are active at all times. This means that if heat-
ing is needed, it will be provided the whole year, and the same goes for cooling. 
During initial simulations, to ensure all control systems were set up correctly, it was fo-
und that the thermal comfort on the first floor was heavily challenged. Low temperatures 
were a problem in the three occupied rooms, which required action.  
The first initiative was to increase the heating set point from 21 °C to 22 °C. This initiative 
ensured that the minimum operative temperature in the bedroom and the office was 
above 20 °C. The next initiative was to increase the power of the radiators in the master 
bedroom because the ventilation rate couldn’t be reduced, due to the CO2 limits from 
DS. In Figure 07, the radiator dimensions can be seen as a function of the minimum ope-
rative temperature in the master bedroom. 
  
19
Table 04 - C_open values with corresponding areas
Room:
Area [m2]
Copen
Entrance
0.41
0.0237
Master bedroom
0.41
0.0237
Living room
0.49
0.0283
Bedroom and office
0.32
0.0185
Table 05 - Radiator dimensions
Purmo Delta 6
Purmo Plan Compact
Entrance
350 x 1200 mm - 958 W
-
Living room
350 x 1200 mm - 958 W
800 x 600 mm - 680 W
Master bedroom
350 x 750 mm - 535 W
800 x 600 mm - 680 W
Bedroom 
350 x 750 mm - 535 W
900 x 300 mm - 434 W
Office
350 x 750 mm - 535 W
-
Walk-in
-
400 x 600 mm - 340 W
==PAGE:28==
As it can be seen in Figure 07, the power of the radiators needs to be increased substan-
tially to maintain an operative temperature above 20 °C during the heating season. The 
margin of around 0.3 °C, is because the chosen extra radiator is the same type of radia-
tor, which also is used in other rooms in the house. 
 
The rest of the standard values used for setting up the simulation can be found in Ap-
pendix 14.8 - Key values.  
6.1.1 - Flow calculations 
To comply with the building regulations, the supply airflows that are required for each 
room will be calculated on behalf of the floor areas in Table 01. 
For the rooms without a Notech filter, the air supply is assumed to be provided by the 
nearest room with a Notech filter. This means that the bathroom on the ground floor will 
be provided with air from the entrance. The bathroom and staircase plateau on the first 
floor will be provided ⅓ of the supply air needed from each of the rooms on the top 
floor with a filter. The supply air for each room can be found in Table 06. 
20
Figure 07 - Master bedroom - Radiator power vs. min. Operative temperature, orange point is the chosen radiator
==PAGE:29==
From Table 06, the total supply airflow in the house is summed to 28.2 L/s, which ensu-
res that the Building Regulation is met with the required 0.3 L/s per m2. This air will be 
provided by the Notech filters and will be exhausted by the skylight. However, these 
ventilation flows aren’t the maximum limit for the flow rate through the Notech panels. 
The limit is 380 L/s if all the filters are fully open simultaneously. 
For the house to be able to ventilate, the opening area of the skylight should be able to 
handle 320 L/s and have to have an effective opening area of 1.6 m2, based on calcula-
tions, which can be seen in Appendix 14.2. However, with an opening area of 0.9 m2 for 
the skylight, it will theoretically only be able to ventilate 58 % of the air which is possible 
to be taken in through the Notech filters. 
During the time intervals, when the mechanical system is activated, there will be 30 L/s 
of exhaust air when bathroom exhausts are active and 20 L/s when the kitchen hood is 
active. This means that less air will leave through the skylight. 
6.1.2 - Ventilation control 
For the simulation, all the ventilation is controlled by schedules and different sensors in 
each room, which will trigger the actuator controlling the panels. The mechanical venti-
lation system will exhaust extra air during the day, which will be programmed into the 
control of the skylight. The Notech panels will be controlled by the temperature and the 
CO2 levels in the room they are placed in. All panels will have a minimum ventilation rate 
as described before. The skylight will be controlled by the theoretical airflow taken into 
the building by the Notech panels, minus the exhaust from the mechanical ventilation. 
The skylight will therefore be step-controlled.  
21
Table 06 - Needed supply air for each room
Room
MIn. Required air flow 
[L/s]
Kitchen & Living room, plus stairs
11.6
Entrance / utility
1.1
Bathroom
0.8
Tech closet
0.1
Landing area, plus stairs
2.4
Bathroom 1. Floor
1.5
Master bedroom
2.9
Walk-in
1.3
Office
2.1
Bedroom plus attic
4.1
Techical room
0.3
Total
28.2
==PAGE:30==
For each of the two control measures, temperature and CO2 level, the following set po-
ints are used; 25 °C as the cooling point and 1,000 ppm as the max CO2 level before the 
panel actuator is activated. Both set points are below the DS threshold, allowing activa-
tion and operation time for the filters. For the ventilation system to function, there will be 
some everyday incidents, which will require an adaption of the design strategy. The 
most common will be the boost of the kitchen extractor hood and the bathroom 
exhaust. When boosting the kitchen hood during cooking, the fraction of the exhaust 
airflow in the building will happen mechanically, and the skylight will reduce its opening 
fraction. If the intake is higher than the mechanical exhaust, the skylight will reduce the 
opening area and therefore also the exhaust, but the combination between the skylight 
and the mechanical exhaust will equal the intake through the Notech filters. 
For the standard and the described everyday experiments, the following opening fra-
ctions for each Notech panel are defined in Table 07. 
In IDA ICE the modeling of the control for a room will schematically be built as in Figure 
08. The two PI (proportional integral) controllers will function as a room sensor, one for 
temperature and one for CO2 concentrations. Both controllers get the current value of 
measurement from the zone as input value and will be activated if it surpasses the set-
point value, described above. The two PI controllers are linked to a component picking 
the maximum value of the two it receives, distinguishing between ventilation activated 
by temperature or by CO2 concentration.   
Each controller also has a minimum value, to ensure the minimum ventilation rate is ful-
filled. To enhance the simulation speed, and to make the control more realistic, a delay 
for the output signal of 30 seconds has been implemented. This will strengthen the spe-
ed because the constant measure of temperature and CO2 concentration will be directly 
linked to the output of the control. The mathematics behind the PI controller is a calcula-
tion of the error between the input and the set point and thereafter integration over that 
value, and the integral will be the output signal. The connection of the schematic is 
shown in Figure 08. 
The maximum component passes the chosen value to the damper component, repre-
senting the Notech filter, as the control value for Cturb, described in Paragraph 5.1. The 
control value now functions as the opening fraction. This ensures that the control will 
always control the Notech panel with the value which theoretically will need the most 
attention, to keep comfort or to stay within the regulations.  
22
Table 07 - Opening fraction to ensure ventilation with airflow of 0.3 L/s per m2
Room:
Standard ventilation [-]
Entrance
0.02
Master bedroom
0.06
Living room
0.08
Bedroom
0.22
Office
0.14
==PAGE:31==
The control of the Notech filters is linked to the control of the skylight. The opening fra-
ctions controlling each filter are used as input for the control module for the skylight. 
The opening area is theoretically calculated on behalf of the opening fraction of the fil-
ters, and their theoretical airflow, combined with their placement in the z-axis.  
6.1.3 - Be18 setup   
The calculation in Be18 is conducted as a documentation asset and not as an analysis of 
the house in the experiments. The calculation is performed as described in SBI-213 and 
takes no input from IDA ICE or other simulation programs. 
Since only a few experiments have been chosen relevant for the Be18 calculation, some 
of the values, which are the same in all experiments, will be standardized. These are va-
lues such as losses from pipes and power of different pumps, used for DHW (Domestic 
hot water). 
The Baseline experiment has been chosen for the Be18 calculation, because it repre-
sents a fully natural ventilated house, with light building materials. 
Overall the Be18 documentation is simplified and doesn’t include all installations, their 
loss, and energy use, in the house, such as pipes. Furthermore, the Be18 documentation 
calculation does not take the produced electricity from the solar panels into account, 
because the number would be irrelevant for comparing the different experiments. 
23
Figure 08: IDA ICE schematic build up of Notech control
==PAGE:32==
6.1.4 - LCA setup  
The LCA is conducted using the software LCAbyg and is using the BR18 version of the 
building regulation. The house is a row house construction. The number of occupants, 
floors, and floor height are entered, along with the floor area and the heated floor area. 
It is assumed that the building will be in use by 2025 and that the analyzed period is 50 
years. The energy use and heat will be input from Be18, however, the energy use from 
the construction site will not be taken into account.  
The building model is conducted based on an LCI Excel sheet, Appendix 14.4, where all 
dimensions, material types, and densities are listed based on material from the architect. 
Windows and doors are assumed to be standard constructions and are therefore found 
in LCAbyg. Throughout the building, all the walls which are built in a wooden skeleton 
with insulation in-between, it is assumed that the distribution follows; 90 % insulation 
and 10 % wood. The EcoCocon module is calculated based on the assumption, that the 
module consists of 90 % straw and 10 % wood. The Notech filter is constructed based 
on TI’s Notech slutrapport using three EPDs. One for acoustic mats made of eelgrass, 
one for the actuator, and one for the control box for the CO2 sensors. Smaller parts of 
the Notech filter weren’t taken into account. 
Overall the LCA is simplified and doesn’t include all installations in the house, only the 
radiators, solar panels, and some ventilation pipes which are made of galvanized steel 
and some insulation foam. Amounts of pipes is an estimated guess since data for this 
part hasn’t been possible to collect. All lifetimes are found using the table in LCAbyg, 
made by BUILD.  
6.2 - Experiments 
As the main resource of data and information, simulations of building variations are 
made in IDA ICE. For better comprehensiveness and to enhance the ability to compare 
the effect of the variations, and therefore the changes to the building in each experi-
ment, the experiments are sorted into groups. The group indicates the overall theme or 
the overall change that will form the foundation and scope of the evaluation. Some 
groups will also have subdivisions of experiments, in those instances, the group will fun-
ction more as a gamp for the experiments rather than a compression foundation. 
All experiments are based on the Baseline simulation, and the only changes made are 
the ones highlighted in each group. The experiments are conducted based on a “what 
if”-approach, to test both design choice (DC) and sensitivity (SS). By asking “What if we 
change the materials in the slab?” Or “What if the occupants were home more often?”, 
the robustness of the current choices will be tested. All “what if” is based upon common 
everyday situations and challenges, to evaluate the design strategy against the use of 
the building. For each group of experiments, a description of the deviation from the Ba-
seline model is made, along with an explanation of the expected impacts, which shall be 
analyzed in the results. This can be seen in Table 08. 
24
==PAGE:33==
Table 08 - Overview of Experiments
Group 
#
Case 
ID
Group name
Variation
Design Choice 
or Sensitivity 
Study
Ba
Baseline
1
Ma1
Material
Internal slabs in heavy materials instead of light 
materials
DC
Ma2
Material
Facade walls in heavy materials instead of light 
materials
DC
2
Fi1
Filter
Changes to the size of the Notech filter +50 %
DC
Fi2
Filter
Changes to the size of the Notech filter -50 %
DC
3
Me1
Mechanical
Consultants wet room solution - 24 hours a day 
exhaust
DC
Me2
Mechanical
Full mechanical ventilation system with 85 % heat 
recovery
DC
Me3
Mechanical
Full mechanical ventilation system with 50 % heat 
recovery
SS
Me4
Mechanical
Substitute the skylight with a heatpump
DC
Me5
Mechanical
Full mechanical ventilation system with 50 % heat 
recovery and external openings are closed at all 
time
SS
4
Oi1
Outside impact
Reduce the opening area of the skylight by 50 %
SS
Oi2
Outside impact
Close the skylight at all time
SS
5
Sc1
Schedule
The ventilation system is only active when occu-
pants are at home
DC
Sc2
Schedule
Only night ventilation during heating season
DC
Sc3
Schedule
Minimum ventilation of 0.3 L/s per m2 in average 
and temperature control
DC
6
Co1
Control
Ventilation is controlled by the occupants
SS
Co2
Control
Ventilation is only controlled by CO2
DC
Co3
Control
Ventilation is controlled by CO2, temperature and 
relative humidity
DC
Co4
Control
All internal doors are closed at all times
SS
25
==PAGE:34==
6.2.1 - Group 1 - Material 
Group 1 contains 2 experiments. The aim is to use the tools to evaluate the effect of the 
thermal properties of the building components, eg. the slabs or walls. And thereby 
questioning the design choice. 
Experiment Ma1 will use a building for simulation very similar to the Baseline building. 
This experiment changes the internal slab from light materials to a standard slab, con-
structed in 180 mm concrete as a hollow-core slab . Both slabs have the same thickness 
20
and soundproofing properties, but a very different thermal conductivity. The heat capa-
city of the slab used in the Baseline is 3.1 Wh/K and for the new slab, this value is 8.0 
Wh/K.  
Experiment Ma2 is very alike experiment Ma1, but for this experiment, the external walls 
are changed from light materials to heavy more standard materials. The external walls 
will for the experiment be constructed as in the Baseline model, but the load-bearing 
construction is substituted with concrete instead of wood, with a 230 mm concrete 
sandwich element . The substitution with concrete has also increased the thickness of 
21
the wall to around 610 mm, to ensure that the U-value for the external walls in Ma2 will 
be the same as in the Baseline building, the U-values can be seen in Appendix 14.4. The 
difference in the heat capacity follows; 5.6 Wh/K for the Baseline and 10.3 Wh/K for ex-
periment Ma2. The thicker external walls, will not affect the total usable area of the hou-
se. 
Except for the two changes, one for Ma1 and one for Ma2, there will be no other chan-
ges in these experiments, compared to the Baseline. 
The evaluation of these two experiments will be done both with simulations from IDA 
ICE and from calculations in LCAbyg. Furthermore, will a calculation in Be18 also be 
done, to compare the difference in energy use with the simulations from IDA ICE.  
The expected impact for both experiments is related to the heating demand in the heat-
ing season and the comfort, e.g. risk of overheating or over-ventilation, in the cooling 
season. It is expected that due to the higher heat capacity of the heavy materials, the 
temperature of the construction will not decrease as much as with a light construction 
when ventilating with cold air. This will lead to a smaller need for heating during ventila-
tion in the heating season. But in the warm summer months, this effect of a more thermal 
stable construction could lead to a need for further ventilation if the construction isn’t 
cooled enough during nighttime. 
 https://betonelement.dk/betonelementer/daek/huldaek/
20
 https://betonelement.dk/betonelementer/facader/
21
26
==PAGE:35==
6.2.2 - Group 2 - Filter 
Group 2 contains 2 experiments. Group 2 will investigate the design choice relating to 
the size of the Notech filters and their direct impact on comfort in the building. 
  
Fi1 will be carried out with all the filters increased by 50 % of the area used in the Base-
line model. This will generate new Copen values for the venting hatches, which are shown 
in Table 09. When increasing the area, the air can flow slower through the hatch, 
enabling a higher heat transfer to the outside air, before entering the room. This new si-
tuation will properly increase the local comfort, due to slower moving air and the increa-
sed air temperature when entering the room, resulting in lower energy use. 
Fi 2 will be carried out with all the filter areas decreased by 50 %, compared to the Base-
line. This will generate new Copen values for the venting hatches, which are shown in Tab-
le 09. When the area is decreased the air needs to flow faster over the filter, to provide 
the same ventilative effect as in the Baseline. The higher flow rate is expected to impact 
the local comfort, due to higher speeds of the air in the room, which occupants can ex-
perience when they are close to the filter. 
6.2.3 - Group 3 - Mechanical variation 
Group 3 contains 5 experiments. This group of experiments investigates mechanical va-
riations, and the aim is to evaluate the comfort and energy use of the building, based on 
changes made to the ventilation. The evaluation will be made based on IDA ICE simula-
tions and calculations in Be18. Group 3 contains two experiments that will be used to 
evaluate the sensitivity of the system, Me3 and 5, and three experiments that will assess 
the design choices, Me1, 2, and 4.  
In the first experiment, Me1, the mechanical ventilation in the wet rooms will be chan-
ged. In IDA ICE the schedule will be modified, such that it will exhaust air 24 hours a day, 
to test the impact of the consultant’s suggestion on the mechanical system. Me2 and 
Me3 will change the ventilation systems to mechanical systems, and investigate the dif-
ference in energy use and comfort. This is due to mechanical ventilation often being the 
preferred choice.  
The ventilation in the two experiments will be done by a Nilan Comfort 250 Top, which 
can deliver 83 L/s as the maximum. The ventilation system is chosen, due to the size and 
recommendations on Nilan’s website .  
22
 https://www.nilan.dk/produkter/ventilation/modstroemsveksler?ScrollPos=3031
22
27
Table 09 - Regulated C_open values
Filter
Increased by 50 %
Decreased by 50 %
Living room
0.0427
0.0142
Entrance 
0.0358
0.0119
Master bedroom
0.0358
0.0119
Office
0.0279
0.0093
Bedroom
0.0279
0.0093
==PAGE:36==
These experiments will investigate whether the difference compared to natural ventila-
tion is essential or not. Me2 will have a heat recovery of 85 %, while Me3 will have a 
lower heat recovery of 50 % to inspect how much impact the heat recovery has on ener-
gy use. Both Me2 and Me3 will ventilate as the Baseline model, with a sensor for both 
CO2 and temperature.  
Me4 will substitute the skylight with a heat pump, to investigate if heat recovery of 50 % 
can be implemented for the exhaust fan, and this way create a hybrid ventilation system, 
that can perform equally to a mechanical ventilation system. Me4 will be calculated the-
oretically based on values from Baseline simulation. The calculation will represent 50 % 
of the energy leaving the skylight, which will be the reduction in the primary energy use 
and energy that can be recirculated in the heating system. 
Me5 is the same experiment as Me3, however, this investigates the robustness of me-
chanical ventilation, where the windows and external doors will be closed. This will dis-
miss any natural ventilation source, and showcase the mechanical ventilation system’s 
ability to encounter overheating.  
The comfort and energy use will be evaluated in IDA ICE and Be18. Furthermore, Me1, 
2, 3, and 5 will also be evaluated on their GWP, by conducting an LCA for each experi-
ment in LCAbyg. For the fully mechanical experiments, the Notech filter area in the Base-
line experiment will be substituted for external walls. Me1, Me2, Me3, and Me5 have 
been chosen to be analyzed in Be18, to see the difference in the documentation softwa-
re between mechanical and natural ventilation experiments. 
For Me1 it is expected that the energy use will increase when the mechanical part of the 
ventilation system is turned on 24 hours a day. However, it is also expected that the flow 
in the house will change, due to the new way of exhausting fractions of the air. For Me2 
and 3, the energy used for ventilation is expected to increase and the energy used for 
heating to decrease, due to the full mechanical system and its heat recovery. These two 
experiments will be used to evaluate the saved energy when compared to a more com-
mon type of ventilation system. For Me4, the energy use is expected to decrease, and 
this experiment will investigate the potential of collecting and reusing the heat in the 
exhaust air when implemented in a controlled natural ventilation system. For Me5, the 
energy use is expected to be higher than Me3, however, for this experiment, it will be 
most interesting to analyze hours of overheating and comfort.  
6.2.4 - Group 4 - Outside impact 
Group 4 contains 2 experiments. The aim is to investigate the outside impacts on the 
ventilation system and its vulnerability. Group 4 is, therefore, a sensitivity study.  
The first experiment, Oi1, will have a reduced opening area of the skylight, of 50 %, 
which could be due to rain. The second experiment, Oi2, will have a closed skylight at all 
times. This could be due to heavy rain or technical malfunction. How will this affect the 
buoyancy ventilation, when the building can’t function as a channel? And what will the 
comfort results look like? These experiments will examine PPD and overheating results 
from IDA ICE simulations.  
28
==PAGE:37==
When reducing the opening area of the skylight, the amount of fresh air circulating will 
decrease. The buoyancy ventilation will become smaller, and to obtain the same airflow, 
the need for cross-ventilation will increase.  Cross ventilation depends on the occupant’s 
awareness and ability to open windows and doors, which isn’t as reliable. The CO2 con-
centration will likely increase, and cause an increase in discomfort. When the skylight is 
closed at all times, the airflow will decrease by 50 %, and the buoyancy ventilation won’t 
function at all. Therefore the comfort will be highly negatively affected. The energy use 
will most likely also decrease since the amount of air needed to be heated will decrease. 
However, these two experiments will also investigate how well Notech filters work with 
cross ventilation, when all of a sudden, half the filter area will be used for exhaust air. 
6.2.5 - Group 5 - Schedule 
Group 5 contains 5 experiments. The aim is to investigate the energy use and comfort of 
the building if the ventilation is scheduled in different ways. The first experiment, Sc1, 
contains 3 experiments and is based on different schedules in IDA ICE. The experiments 
will be focused on ventilation when the occupants are at home, and have a fraction of- 
or no ventilation when the occupants aren’t at home. The 3 experiments are displayed in 
Figure 09 - Figure 11. 
In Figure 09 below, the schedule for the first experiment Sc1.1 can be seen. This schedu-
le shows that the ventilation system is on from 16.00-09.00 every day, which is assumed 
to be the period when the occupants are at home.  
In Figure 10, the schedule for the second experiment Sc1.2 can be seen. This schedule 
shows how the ventilation is on for a longer time than Sc1.1, from 15.00-10.00 every day. 
This experiment will investigate if an hour of ventilation when the occupants have left 
the house and an hour before they come back home is enough to remove CO2 and cool 
down the house before they return back home. 
29
Figure 09 - Ventilation Schedule for Experiment Sc1.1
==PAGE:38==
In Figure 11, the schedule for the third experiment Sc1.3 can be seen. This schedule 
shows that the ventilation system is fully active from 16.00-09.00, just as in Sc1.1. Howe-
ver, this experiment also has a smaller fraction of ventilation between 09.00-16.00 of 10 
%. The 10 % will be used as a limiter, only allowing the filters to open 10 % of what they 
are supposed to open. This experiment will have the same function as Sc1.2, investigat-
ing if the house is cooled and ventilated for CO2 when the occupants arrive back home. 
The second experiment, Sc2, will have a schedule, where the heating season only has 
ventilation at night, from 23.00 to 07.00, to try to lower the energy used for heating the 
cold outside air.  
The third experiment, Sc3, will have an average ventilation of 0.3 L/s per m2, and will 
also be temperature controlled. The setup will interpret the requirements from BR diffe-
rently by applying this 0.3 L/s per m2 as an average over the year for the whole building. 
In practice, there will be ventilated 0.6 L/s per m2 when a room is occupied and 0.15 L/s 
per m2 when the rooms are unoccupied. 
This group will investigate the energy use and comfort from IDA ICE simulation. All five 
experiments investigate the design choices. It is expected that the energy use will be 
reduced since there will be a decrease in ventilation for both experiments. At the same 
time, the comfort will also be impacted negatively, due to lower airflow. However, the 
impact on comfort versus energy savings is not foreseen.  
30
Figure 10 - Ventilation Schedule for Experiment Sc1.2
Figure 11 - Ventilation Schedule for Experiment Sc1.3
==PAGE:39==
6.2.6 - Group 6 - Control  
Group 6 contains 4 experiments. The aim is to investigate the control system, and what 
influence this can have on energy use and comfort. This group of experiments will both 
provide an evaluation of two design choices, experiments Co2 and 3, and a sensitivity 
study revolving around the occupants and their behavior, experiments Co1 and 4.  
The first experiment, Co1, will adjust the ventilation, such that it is controlled by the oc-
cupants based on heating, cooling, and PPD demands from DS. DS states that an occu-
pant will open a window if the temperature exceeds 23 °C, which will be the temperatu-
re set point. The CO2 set point has been removed, because there is no scientific value 
describing when humans can feel CO2. Experiment Co2 is modified such that the venti-
lation is only controlled by the CO2 demands.  
Experiment Co3 is modified such that it is controlled by the same demands for Baseline, 
and now also includes demands for relative humidity, with a max of RH 60 %. But in Co3 
the control does not take the outside relative humidity into account, in the same way 
that the normal control doesn’t take outside temperature into account.  
The last experiment, Co4, will have a changed schedule, such that all internal doors in 
the building are closed at all times. Co4 has the same control and set points as the Base-
line. All four experiments will investigate energy use and comfort results from IDA ICE 
simulations.  
The expected output from experiment Co2 and 3, is different from each other. Co2 is 
expected to have a lower energy use due to the lower ventilation rate when only venti-
lating on behalf of the CO2 concentration. This will probably lead to numerous hours of 
overheating, which won’t be ventilated. At the same time, Co3 is expected to have a 
higher energy use, but also better comfort. This will be due to the extra factor activating 
the ventilation.  
For the sensitivity part of this group, the expected output is varying. For Co1, it is 
expected that the energy use will decrease, due to the lower ventilation rate, when con-
trolled by the occupants. However, it is hard to determine how the occupants will venti-
late and how often. For experiment Co4, the expected output is related to the comfort of 
the occupants and will show how important the design of the building, as its own duct, is 
for the ventilation system functionality.  
31
==PAGE:40==
7 - Evaluation of experiments 
7.1 - Overview 
The evaluation starts with an overview of all experiments and their performance compa-
red to the Baseline experiment and the regulation stated in BR, in terms of energy use 
and comfort parameters. The overview compares the experiment to the energy frame 
stated in BR which sums up to 40.7 kWh/m2 for this house. Besides the energy frame, 
the experiments are also compared to the hours of overheating, the total hours in com-
fort Category I and II, and the energy use from the Baseline. This comparison can be 
seen in Figure 12. The values in the figure are calculated with the prerequisite that all 
experiments weigh equally. 
In Figure 12, it is clear that only a few of the experiments comply with the maximum 
energy use stated by BR.  
Furthermore, from Figure 12, it is clear that most of the modifications defining each ex-
periment have made the experiments perform better than the Baseline experiment on 
the three parameters. However, not all experiments perform better than the Baseline on 
the three parameters. 
Detailed values for each experiment used for graphs in the following result paragraph 
can be found in Appendix 14.3. 
32
Figure 12: Overview of all 20 experiments performance compared to BR and Baseline
==PAGE:41==
7.2 - IDA ICE - Energy Balance [kWh] 
The following Figure 13 shows the energy balance for all the experiments, based on si-
mulations in IDA ICE.  
In Figure 13 it can be seen, that for all the non-mechanical experiments, there’s a large 
energy loss due to “Infiltration & Openings”. This result is as expected, due to the large 
supply of and exhaust to the outside air. Around 70 % of this loss is coming from the air 
leaving through the skylight opening. This is the warm air leaving the building, due to 
buoyancy ventilation during the heating season, but in the cooling season, the same 
ventilation flows work with a cooling capacity. The ratio of loss in the heating season and 
cooling in the cooling season is 75 % to 25 %. This loss of warm air is so large, due to the 
large ventilation rate, which secures good comfort. The loss is directly linked to the in-
creased energy use for heating, as shown in red.  
The values for the gains and losses are the same for parameters that haven’t changed 
significantly during the simulations of different experiments. Gains such as “Window & 
Solar” and “Occupants", and losses such as “Envelope & Thermal bridges”. However, all 
these losses and gains are directly connected to the energy inside the house, and there-
fore also the inside temperature, thus the loss or gain are linked by the difference of in-
side and outside temperature. 
The experiments from Group 1 - Material, do not seem to have any effect on the energy 
balance and present around the same values as the Baseline experiment does. 
33
Figure 13: Energy balance, values from IDA ICE
==PAGE:42==
For the mechanical experiments, the energy loss for "Infiltration & Openings” is particu-
larly smaller compared to the other experiment, due to no ventilation filters. In general, 
these experiments have a very small fraction of energy used for heating units, since the 
mechanical systems are working with heat recovery. Me4 has a greater loss to “Infiltra-
tion & Openings" due to the hybrid constellation. However, compared to the Baseline 
experiment, the heat recovery of 50 % on the exhaust from the skylight in the heating 
season, lowers the loss from “Infiltration & Openings”, and therefore also the energy 
used for heating.  
Oi2 shows how the Notech system still works, even when the buoyancy ventilation isn’t 
working when the skylight is closed. The great loss from “Infiltration & Openings” has 
moved from 70 % from the skylight and 30 % from the filters and the leaks to 100 % from 
the filters and leaks. However, the reduction in the loss isn’t at 70 % which the skylight 
represents in Baseline, indicating that cross-ventilation must have happened. 
When looking at the experiments from Group 5 - Schedule, a close link between hours 
of ventilation and the loss due to the “Infiltrations & Openings” is undoubtedly display-
ed. All experiments in Group 5 - Schedule, decrease the time with full active ventilation 
or decrease the airflow, and all experiments present a drop in losses due to infiltration. 
As expected. The coherence between theory and simulations aligns and highlights one 
of the largest challenges with controlled natural ventilation, the heat loss due to the cold 
air during the heating season.  
34
==PAGE:43==
7.3 - IDA ICE - Primary Energy Use [kWh/m2] 
The following Figure 14 shows the primary energy use for all experiments, based on si-
mulations in IDA ICE. The figure is conducted as a bar chart divided into rooms with he-
ating units, plus energy used for mechanical ventilation. For this chart, the potential pro-
duced power from the solar PV’s are included separately. For the following results, the 
power produced by the solar PV’s is not taken into account. 
Generally, the primary energy use for heating and mechanical ventilation is high for 
most experiments. This is directly linked to the high loss of energy from “Infiltration & 
Openings”, displayed in Paragraph 7.2 above. The energy use varies significantly across 
the different experiments. Fi2 has the highest energy use closely followed by Co3 and 
Co4. All three experiments with an energy use of around 120 kWh/m2. Me4 with the 
lowest energy use of the natural ventilation experiments, at around 45 kWh/m2, and 
Me2 with the lowest energy use of the fully mechanical ventilation experiments, with an 
energy use of around 35 kWh/m2. The Baseline experiment is close to the experiments 
with the highest energy use since the Baseline has an energy use of around 115 kWh/
m2. 
The large difference between the experiments was expected and the best results were 
expected to be found within the mechanical variations, due to the heat recovery. Howe-
ver, the distribution between the zones in the house is within the same percentage di-
stribution of each other for most experiments. The few that stand out, are the extreme 
experiments, such as Oi2 and Sc3, where the ventilative flows are very different from the 
other experiments. They also present relatively different results from the Baseline expe-
riment. 
35
Figure 14: Primary energy use - Heating plus mechanical ventilation, values from IDA ICE
==PAGE:44==
From the graph in Figure 14, it is clear that some changes in the design of the ventilation 
system have a negligible impact on primary energy use, whereas others provide data 
that have to be analyzed. 
For all 21 experiments, it is clear that in the two bathrooms, which are the only rooms fa-
cing no external walls, the energy needed to keep the temperature above the set point 
is very low or zero. The reason for this could be the exhaust fan dragging warm air from 
the rest of the house into the rooms, keeping it above the set point. However, in the ex-
periments in Group 3 - Mechanical variation, there is a need for more energy in the bat-
hroom, which is due to the air supply directly into the rooms for those variations. The 
two other experiments which require energy for heating in the bathrooms, are Fi2 and 
Co4. In Fi2 the reason will be the speed at which the air enters through the filters, due to 
the smaller size, and in Co4, the reason will be the lack of air dragged into the room 
when the internal doors are closed. 
Due to the close link between the energy balance and the total energy use, the amount 
of time with ventilation, combined with the ventilation rate, does, as expected, have a 
large impact on the energy use, when investigating controlled natural ventilation. 
The filter size also matters in the design process. This is displayed in the difference be-
tween the two experiments in Group 2 - Filter and the Baseline experiment. The enlar-
ged filters in Fi1 have a notable effect, whereas the smaller filters in Fi2 do not have the 
same impact on energy use, substantially in all zones. The results from Fi1 were 
expected, due to the larger surface, allowing the air to enter with a lower speed, which 
increases the time the air is heated before entering the house. The result for Fi2 was as 
expected because theoretically, the energy use would increase, due to higher entering 
speed. The magnitude could be questioned, because of the theoretical calculations of 
the Copen values and the corresponding opening fraction. The values and their relation 
are calculated on behalf of the measured values from TI, also used for the calibration in 
Paragraph 5.1. The values for airflow and pressure loss are measured at a certain tempe-
rature. When used for calculating the opening fraction, small errors will occur, when the 
values are combined with the weather simulation.  
However, the larger opening fraction of the Notech filter in Fi2 will lead to a larger area 
exposed to the outside temperature, increasing the direct heat loss from the material 
itself.   
The energy use in Group 3 - Mechanical variation is low, except for Me1, which still works 
with controlled natural ventilation, but with 24 hours a day of exhaust in bathrooms and 
the kitchen. Interesting is the fact that the energy use in Me1 is lower than the Baseline 
when extra energy usage to the mechanical part has been added. The small decrease in 
energy use may be due to how the air leaves the building. Instead of most of the time 
leaving through the skylight, the air will leave through the bathrooms and kitchen, re-
circulating some of the warm air from the first floor to the ground floor, before leaving 
the house. When exhausting 24 hours a day in the bathrooms, the skylight will also be 
closed for a longer period, which also decreases heat loss.  
36
==PAGE:45==
It is also worth noticing the difference between Me3 and Me5. These experiments are 
much alike, except Me5 has all external openings closed at all times. Since the heat de-
mand is smaller, it may be assumed that there must be a conflict between the heating 
and cooling seasons. There is a conflict where cooling can happen during the day, but a 
need for heating during the nighttime in the shoulder season.  
7.4 - IDA ICE - Time in comfort categories [h] 
The results for the comfort categories are divided into the zones that have occupancy; 
living room, master bedroom, and bedroom. The comfort in IDA ICE is analyzed based 
on the European standard: EN 16798-1 No mechanical cooling. 
The graph in Figure 15, shows the time in each comfort category for the living room, for 
each experiment. The time on the y-axis is shown in hours. 
Each of the stacked bars reaches approximately 4,000 hours, which is the total time of 
the year when the living room is occupied.  
For all experiments, the graph highlights the dominance of time in comfort Category I, 
which is the highest comfort category. All experiments have well above 3,000 hours in 
this category, and only 8 experiments have under 3,500 hours in Category I. 
None of the experiments have time in the worst Category IV, nor do any experiments 
exceed the scale and have hours out of a category. Except Me5, which has 197 hours in 
Category IV, which is due to high temperatures and high CO2 concentrations. All expe-
riments do have time in both Categories II and III, which can be due to an array of fa-
ctors. Factors such as temperature, too cold or too warm, and the CO2 concentration.  
Experiment Oi2 and Me5 have the highest number of hours in Category III. 206 hours 
for Oi2 and 258 hours for Me5. All the hours in Category III are reasoned by over tempe-
rature. In both experiments, the reason will be the lack of buoyancy ventilation. 
37
Figure 15: Hours in comfort categories for the living room, in different Experiments, values from IDA ICE
==PAGE:46==
For hours outside Category I, most of the time it is due to a too high concentration of 
CO2. But there will also be hours with temperatures above 25 °C or below 21 °C, drop-
ping the comfort out of Category I and into Category II or III. However, for none of the 
experiments, do the hours outside Category I, have enough magnitude to be alarming. 
For the two bedrooms on the first floor, a combined stacked bar chart will be displayed 
in Figure 16, showing hours in each comfort category for some experiments. This is rea-
soned by a high comfort across most of the experiments, for both bedrooms, resulting 
in 100 % of the occupied time in comfort Category I. However, 4 experiments, do influ-
ence the comfort in the bedrooms. 
In Figure 16, the comfort in the master bedroom (MB) and bedroom (B) is shown for 4 
experiments; Co2, 3, 4, and Fi2. Generally, the bedrooms perform well and do have the 
majority of hours in comfort Category I. However the bedrooms in all 4 experiments are 
in the lower comfort categories and even out of category for a limited amount of hours.  
All experiments do have more than 2,000 hours in Category I, and all except the 
bedrooms in Fi2 do have more than 2,400 hours.  
Co3 brings both bedrooms out of comfort Category I as the only experiment. The < 200 
hours in the other categories, in the bedrooms, is due to the increased ventilation rate, 
and therefore a decrease in temperature in the rooms. This decrease in temperature is 
due to the sudden increase in cold air taken into the building, and the heating units in 
the rooms, aren’t able to heat the air to the set point when the ventilation rate increases. 
38
Figure 16: Hours in comfort categories for bedrooms, in different Experiments, values from IDA ICE
==PAGE:47==
For Fi2 in the bedroom, the same issue with too low temperature brings the hours outsi-
de Category I. This brings around ⅓ of the occupied hours in Category II. But even 
though Fi2 is the experiment with the highest amount of hours outside Category I, it is 
the experiment with the lowest amount of hours outside any category, with only one 
hour in total over the occupied time during a year. 
7.5 - IDA ICE - Time with overheating [h] 
The hours with overheating are divided into the three occupied zones, as with the com-
fort categories, thus it does only make sense to look at overheating in the occupied ti-
mes of the zones. The limits follows; 100 hours >27 °C and 25 hours >28 °C.  
For the living room, the hours with overheating can be seen in Figure 17, showing a sta-
cked bar chart, with the time above 27 °C and 28 °C stacked, showing the accumulated 
time with overheating. 
As seen in Figure 17, The majority of the experiments comply with the regulations, ex-
cept for Me5, Oi2, Sc3, and Co2. These four experiments exceed the limits, both Me5, 
Oi2, and Co2 exceed the limit for 27 °C and 28 °C, and Sc3 exceeds the limit for 28 °C. 
The extreme experiments Me5, Oi2, and Co2 do stand out from the rest, accumulating 
around 140 hours of overheating in the living room. The high number of hours with 
overheating unequivocally shows the need for the skylight and the buoyancy ventilation 
and temperature sensors. The many hours indicate that cross ventilation with the Notech 
filters and the other openings in the house isn’t enough during summer. 
39
Figure 17: Hours with overheating in the living room, in different Experiments, values from IDA ICE
==PAGE:48==
Almost every experiment presents more hours with overheating than the Baseline expe-
riment, with only 43 hours with temperatures above 27 °C and 12 hours above 28 °C. 
The two experiments, Ma1 and 2, both have about the same number of hours as Baseli-
ne. This result is surprising because theoretically, the higher thermal masses should 
store the heat for a longer period, disabling the building to cool down during the colder 
nights, resulting in a higher accumulated heat over time. 
The mechanical variations are within the limits, however, performing worse than the Ba-
seline experiment. The hours of overheating in these experiments are due to the limita-
tion in the fan power in the system. The fan is simply put to its maximum, which isn’t 
enough to keep the house under the threshold. And again as with the other experi-
ments, there isn’t implemented any max set point for the outside temperature.  
An interesting value is Me5’s number of hours with temperatures above 28 °C. This indi-
cates that the living room itself has a higher amount of hours with overheating than 
some of the connected rooms. For instance, does the temperature in the entrance reach 
33 °C, due to the large solar effect on the glass door and only one opening for ventilat-
ing. But even when the door into the kitchen and therefore the living room is closed, a 
significantly smaller fraction of this warm air enters the living room, which still encoun-
ters a larger number of hours with overheating. 
Fi1 is expected to have fewer hours with overheating than the Baseline experiment, 
however, the opposite is the case, due to the larger filters, also allowing a higher total 
airflow. But since Fi1 does have 2 more hours with overheating than the Baseline expe-
riment, it may be assumed that the activation and operation time of the filters, do play a 
role, allowing warmer air to enter the building with a higher airflow. This situation can 
occur because the control of the filter opening does not take the temperature of the 
outside air into account. 
Group 5 - Schedule, presents the broadest amount of experiments, with a higher num-
ber of overheating hours. The experiments from Sc1.1 to Sc2 comply with the regula-
tions, whereas Sc3, does have one hour too many with temperatures above 28 °C.  
Overheating in the bedrooms on the first floor is no problem, in all experiments, except 
for Co2, none of the bedrooms have a temperature over 27 °C when occupied. Experi-
ment Co2 does have 34 hours above 27 °C and 15 above 28 °C. This indicates that the 
ventilation system has a better performance in smaller rooms, with a smaller window 
area, when analyzing the hours of overheating. But the time of the day, when the room is 
occupied, also plays a role in the number of hours with overheating. The bedrooms are 
occupied, some hours after the sun has set, allowing the standard ventilation rate, to 
take out some heat before the room is occupied. Another factor affecting the hours po-
sitively is the CO2 generated by the occupants. In the relatively small bedrooms, compa-
red to the combined living room and kitchen, the CO2 generated by the occupants will 
constitute a larger fraction of the total air in the room faster, due to less total volume, al-
lowing the CO2-controlled ventilation to be activated. The CO2-removing ventilation also 
provides cooling and helps prevent overheating. 
40
==PAGE:49==
7.6 - IDA ICE - PPD [%] vs Primary Energy Use [kWh/m2] 
Analyzing the predicted percentage of dissatisfied (PPD), showed that all experiments 
scored a PPD between 2.0 % and 7.5 % on average over the year for all rooms. These 
values correspond well with the high comfort from Paragraph 7.4. The low values for 
PPD challenge the decision-making between the design options.  
In Figure 18 the PPD for the living room is displayed in relation to the total primary 
energy use for the house.  
From Figure 18 one experiment draws attention. This is Me4. The experiment presents 
the best natural ventilated solution with a combination of low primary energy use and a 
PPD of only 0.25 % from the lowest. The rest of the experiments show a tendency be-
tween PPD and primary energy use, indicating that higher primary energy use leads to a 
lower PPD.  
The blue dotted line displays a linear fit to all data points. However, some experiments 
disturb the fit, and subsiding from the fit. This is experiments such as Me2 and Me5 all 
with a great distance to the fit. 
Except for Oi2, which has the highest PPD of 7.1 %, and doesn’t have the lowest primary 
energy use. At the other end of the graph, Co1, 3, and 4 present the same PPD, but have 
around 30 kWh/m2 in difference of primary energy use. 
Furthermore, is the tendency heavily affected by the mechanical scenarios, which are 
performing well, in terms of energy use. From the rest of the experiments, the same ten-
dency can be seen, but the magnitude of the slope can be questionable due to the 
small difference in energy use. 
41
Figure 18: PPD for the living room vs Primary energy use, Values from IDA ICE
==PAGE:50==
7.7 - IDA ICE - Temperature [°C] 
and CO2 concentration [ppm]  
When analyzing energy use and time 
in different comfort categories, it is 
important to look at the measured 
temperatures and CO2 values from 
the experiments, since these values 
often give a deeper understanding of 
the results concerning energy use 
and comfort categories.  
In Figure 19, the minimum and maxi-
mum temperatures for the three oc-
cupied rooms in the house can be 
seen. 
When looking at the temperatures for 
all the experiments, a general ten-
dency is illustrated, the living room is 
the room that has the highest tempe-
rature for almost every experiment. 
The two bedrooms vary much more 
when looking at the maximum mea-
sured temperature. 
The difference between the experi-
ments’ maximum temperatures is not 
very large, which indicates, that the 
changes differentiating the experi-
ments, don’t affect the maximum 
temperature. This also indicates, that 
there will be hours, where there will 
be a need for cooling, which isn’t out-
side air, if the temperature should be 
minimized. 
When looking at the minimum tem-
perature measured, there is also a 
tendency to the measurements, the 
living room is the warmer of the three 
rooms. A few experiments stand out 
from the rest, with very low minimum 
temperatures. These are Co3 and 
Co4. The temperature in the master 
bedroom and bedroom in Co3 
decreases to almost 15 °C and the 
master bedroom in Co4 decreases to 
around 17 °C.  
42
Figure 19: Minimum and maximum temperature for occupied 
rooms, values from IDA ICE
==PAGE:51==
Experiments in Group 5 - Schedule also 
present lower temperatures in the master 
bedroom than the average. 
In Figure 20, the highest measured CO2 
for each experiment is displayed. It is clear 
that the set point for ventilation of CO2 is 
1,000 ppm since most of the experiments 
have a maximum concentration of around 
1,000 ppm for the occupied rooms. Most 
of the maximums are a little above, which 
is canceled by the activation time of venti-
lation, both mechanical and natural. There 
is a clear tendency, showing that the living 
room is the room with the higher values 
for each experiment. The reason for this 
will be the amount of produced CO2 by 
the occupants. The living room is the only 
room with three occupants at once, which 
gives the highest production of CO2, as 
described in Paragraph 4. From the graph 
in Figure 20 of the concentration, chan-
ging the ventilation rate can be seen to 
have the highest values, some even exce-
eding a concentration above 3,000 ppm. 
43
Figure 20: Maximum CO2 concentration in occupied rooms, Valu-
es from IDA ICE
==PAGE:52==
7.8 - Be18 - Energy use [kWh/m2] 
The following Figure 21 shows the primary energy use for selected experiments, based 
on industry calculations standards in Be18. For seven of the experiments, it has been 
chosen to look at the energy use in Be18, to evaluate how these experiments perform 
among themselves when the energy use is calculated in the documentation software 
Be18. 
For clarification, the ventilation flow and the heat capacity of the seven experiments are 
listed in Table 10. In all seven experiments, the kitchen and bathroom will have the same 
ventilation flow, 2.5 L/s per m2 for the kitchen and 2.0 L/s per m2 for the bathrooms. The 
operation time factor for the mechanical part of the ventilation is defined as F0. The lar-
gest difference is in how the ventilation is delivered. Experiments with no natural ventila-
tion, have been granted natural ventilation during the cooling season to encounter 
overheating. This applies for Me2 and 3, but not Me5, due to the concept of the experi-
ment. 
As seen on the graph in Figure 21, 4 experiments comply with BR, two complies with 
Renovationclass 1, and one only complies with Renovationclass 2.  
The Baseline does comply with BR by a small margin. The energy in the Baseline expe-
riment will be used for the heating of the house and ventilation of the wet rooms. The 
two experiments Ma1 and 2 do have a marginal lower energy use, compared to Baseli-
ne. This result was expected, due to the higher heat capacity enabling more stored heat 
during the heating season. 
Me2 has the lowest primary energy use. This is due to high heat recovery of 80 % and 
the low infiltration in the heating season. Helped along the way by natural ventilation in 
the cooling season. 
44
Table 10 - Values Used in Be18 Documentation
F0  
Bath
F0  
Kitchen
Qn  
Winter 
[L/s per m2]
Qn  
Summer 
[L/s per m2]
Qm  
Rest 
[L/s per 
m2]
Heat  
capacity 
[Wh/K/m2]
Ba
0.17
0.04
0.3
0.3
0
39
Ma1
0.17
0.04
0.3
0.3
0
96
Ma2
0.17
0.04
0.3
0.3
0
66
Me1
1
1
0.3
0.3
0
39
Me2
0.17
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.3
39
Me3
0.17
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.3
39
Me5
0.17
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.3
39
==PAGE:53==
Me1 performs poorly because of the high ventilation rate in the wet rooms, leading to 
high energy use, combined with the relatively high losses from the natural ventilation. 
Me3 is surprisingly above the requirement for Be18 but can be reasoned by the lower 
heat recovery of 50 %. The heat recovery percentage isn’t enough to offset the energy 
used for ventilation. 
 
Me5’s poor result is reasoned by hours of overheating, due to no natural ventilation. 
Me5 has 39 hours of overheating, which is added to the energy use. 
As described in Paragraph 6.1.3, the produced energy from the solar panels isn’t consi-
dered. However, if the power was used in the calculation, it could have resulted in some 
of the experiments complying with a better class. 
45
Figure 21: Primary energy use minus energy from solar panels, values from Be18
==PAGE:54==
7.9 - LCAbyg - GWP [kg CO2-eq/m2/year] 
Table 11 shows the Global warming potential in kg CO2-eq per m2 per year for selected 
experiments, based on calculations in LCAbyg. For seven of the experiments, it has been 
chosen to look at the GWP, evaluate how these experiments perform, and see which de-
sign choices affect the GWP.  
Table 11 shows little difference between the seven experiments, with Me2 performing 
best and Me1 performing worst. As expected, the experiments Ma1 and Ma2 perform 
worse than the Baseline experiment due to the heavier materials used to substitute 
wood. Me1 performs poorly because of the higher energy use when ventilating the wet 
rooms. Me5 has a relatively high result, but the result is directly linked to the Be18 result 
and the number of hours with overheating. Me2 and Me3 do have a higher percentage 
allocated to the ventilation system, but will at the same time have a lower energy use, 
which explains their results, and why the two experiments don’t present a higher value 
for GWP.  
Figure 22 shows a more detailed distribution of the different components and their con-
tribution to GWP. 
From the figure, it is clear to see the distribution causing the different outcomes in total 
GWP. The three mechanical experiments of Me2, 3, and 5 have the same materials, but 
different impacts from the operation, which makes the difference for the red part of the 
chart of around 10 % from Me2 to Me5. The same goes for the operation in Baseline, 
Ma1, and Ma2, which have the same impact, but due to the heavier materials in Ma1 and 
Ma2, the fraction of the total impact is reduced, compared to Baseline.  
The impact of the energy use is additionally displayed when comparing Baseline and 
Me1, which have the same amount of materials, but two very different energy uses, and 
therefore around 10 % difference in the impact from operation. 
46
Table 11: GWP for Selected Experiments, Values From LCAbyg
Building parts 
A1-A3 & C3-C4 & D
Operation Total 
[kg CO2-eq per m2per year]
Ba
6.02
2.10
8.12
Ma1
6.49
1.98
8.47
Ma2
6.60
2.02
8.62
Me1
6.02
3.55
9.57
Me2
6.15
1.64
7.79
Me3
6.15
2.09
8.24
Me5
6.15
2.80
8.95
==PAGE:55==
It should be noted, that none of the analyzed experiments complies with the 4-to-1 Pla-
net-building projects. All experiments exceed the limits of four times the allowed. This 
total impact is irrelevant to this thesis since the focus is to look into the difference be-
tween the experiments.  
However, with this simplified LCA and standardized materials, serious changes have to 
happen in order to comply with the 4-to-1 Planet building. If the building is set to be bu-
ilt with the Notech ventilation system, all other known low-emission elements that can 
enable the 4-to-1 Planet goal have to be taken into consideration along the process. 
47
Figure 22: 100 % stacked bar chart with Detailed distribution and their contribution to GWP, value from LCAbyg
==PAGE:56==
7.10 - Evaluation rundown 
Altogether, the changes to the experiments are giving the expected results for most of 
them. A few of the experiments are different than expected, due to the use of theoretical 
calculations. Due to this expectancy, a certain robustness of the IDA ICE model and si-
mulation of the Notech filter is shown, providing valid data to analyze. In Figure 23, the 
performance of the different experiment categories’s energy use is compared to the 
energy use of the Baseline experiment. For the energy use, saved energy is marked with 
a negative number. The comfort is presenting the time outside Category I and II, and 
more time outside the categories is presented with a positive value. For the hours of 
overheating, all hours with a temperature above 27 °C have been summed, and more 
hours than the Baseline are marked with a positive value. 
When going through the results of the simulation in IDA ICE it is clear that it isn’t the 
comfort which are the parameters distinguishing the experiments from each other. The 
experiments are distinguished by the primary energy use, and can be divided into two 
groups; the mechanically ventilated experiments with the low use of energy and the na-
tural ventilated experiments with the higher energy use. However, one natural ventila-
tion experiment makes its way into the first group, and that is Me4. 
The current design, simulated in the Baseline experiment does not present the best per-
formance in any of the parameters, nor does it present the worst. The experiment has 
one of the highest primary energy uses and performs in the middle of the field on the 
rest of the parameters. One of the greatest challenges with the Baseline is the large loss 
due to natural ventilation, which necessitates a high demand for heating. Furthermore, 
no thoughts have been put into the experiment, about how to make the Baseline per-
form well or badly, which is the case with the rest of the experiments. This meant that a 
certain neutrality was expected from this experiment and therefore being only placed as 
the experiment with the fourth highest energy use was surprising.  
48
        Figure 23: Overview of results, compared to Baseline, E - Energy use, C - hours outside Cat 1 and 2, O - Hours >27 °C
==PAGE:57==
The comfort results for all experiments were better than expected and none of the de-
sign changes had a remarkable effect on the comfort in the house. A large explanation 
of this good performance across all experiments must be found when the house is oc-
cupied. The comfort is analyzed when the occupants are at home, during the night, the 
morning and evening, and the whole day during the weekends. These periods are out-
side the periods where the solar gain peaks and overheating is most likely to occur. Fi-
gure 24 displays this issue.  
On the graph, a week in July (1st to 8th) can be seen for the Baseline experiment. The 
operative temperature for the living room is shown on the Y-axis and the time of the day 
on the X-axis. As an overlay, the schedules of the occupants can be found. From the 
graph, the three days with hours of overheating, 1st, 2nd, and 3rd, are the occupants only 
at home during one hour of overheating. This means that the rest of the hours with 
overheating, 3 to 7 hours for these three days, won’t be counted as hours with overheat-
ing nor affect the comfort category. 
Since the simulation doesn’t take holidays and abnormality in occupancy behavior into 
account, it must be assumed that a relatively large fraction of the hours with overheating 
won’t be encountered.  
The most optimal design choice for the house, with controlled natural ventilation, will be 
a combination of different experiments. The combination will use the strength of the va-
rious design choices in different periods of the year and days. On behalf of the primary 
energy use results, the combination should enable a reduction in time with ventilation 
during the heating season in unoccupied rooms, but at the same time ventilates for CO2 
in occupied rooms. The combination should also include the substitution of the skylight 
for a heat pump if the energy should be lowered enough to comply with the BR.  
49
Figure 24: Operative temperature in living room for Baseline experiment, with overlay of occupancy, Values from IDA ICE
==PAGE:58==
When linking the simulations in IDA ICE with the results of the LCA, this substitution with 
the heat pump shouldn’t increase the total GWP. It may be assumed that the lower ener-
gy use combined with the relatively small extra contribution from the heat pump will 
present the best LCA result, based on the values in Figure 22. 
The results are very different when looking at the primary energy use from Be18 and IDA 
ICE. This is due to the fact, that many of the values that are used in IDA ICE, aren’t conf-
gure in Be18. For the mechanical experiments, the energy uses are more alike than for 
the natural ventilation experiments. Be18’s large difference in calculated energy use 
when a building is ventilated naturally indicates a lack of information in the software. At 
the same does Be18 favors heavier buildings more than the simulation in IDA ICE does. 
Be18 decreases the energy use by 5.0 % meanwhile IDA ICE only decreases by 0.5 %. 
Giving a factor 10 difference on a relatively small change in the total building mass.  
The goal is not to make them alike; therefore, they were expected to be very different. 
The CO2 demands aren’t a part of Be18, and consequently, it must be assumed that the 
standardized values used in Be18 lead to high CO2 concentration. Overall the large dif-
ferences are because IDA ICE results are based on measurements, while Be18 is stan-
dardized values.  
This is transferred to the LCA, as LCAbyg uses energy consumption calculated in Be18 
and not in IDA ICE. If LCAbyg had received the energy consumption from IDA ICE, the 
GWP would have been even higher. This is illustrated in Figure 25.  
Here it can be seen that 5 out of 7 experiments have a higher GWP when using values 
from IDA ICE instead of Be18. Me5 is higher when using Be18 values since Be18 will 
have a higher energy use, due to overheating. Me2 has values almost equal from IDA 
ICE and Be18. 
50
Figure 25: Global warming potential for seven experiments, values from LCAbyg
==PAGE:59==
Overall, the high results in LCAbyg were expected, as several of the constructions are 
generic and not necessarily exactly as they are in reality. There is also some uncertainty 
about the installations, radiators, and solar PV’s, and whether these should be designed 
differently. However, this is the same for all experiments. The aim is to make a compari-
son between the experiments, therefore the results can be used well, but it can be seen 
that there are no major changes between the experiments. 
51
==PAGE:60==
8 - Recommendations 
8.1 - The optimal design constellation for Kirkebjerg Søpark 2 
Based on the simulations of the 21 experiments, the recommendation for the most op-
timal design choice of controlled natural ventilation in the row house will take its starting 
point in the hours of ventilation. The leading parameter in determining the choices is the 
energy use, due to the already high quality of comfort across all experiments. 
To lower the hours of ventilation, no room will be ventilated while it is unoccupied. This 
means that the living room will be ventilated from 07.00 to 09.00 and again from 16.00 
to 23.00, while the bedrooms will be ventilated from 23.00 to 07.00. On the weekends, 
the ventilation will be active in the living room from 07.00 to 23.00. In the time of ventila-
tion, the ventilation will be controlled by CO2 concentration and temperature. These 
choices have been recommended due to Sc1.1’s low energy use across the whole hou-
se, but also Sc2’s capability to ensure good comfort in the bedrooms, when only venti-
lating during the night. 
During the summer, when overheating can occur, the rooms will always be ventilated, 
controlled by temperature, and also when unoccupied. The reason for this choice is to 
keep the building as cold as possible because the accumulated heat in the building ta-
kes longer time to cool than ventilating high CO2 concentration. The set points will be as 
in the Baseline experiment, 1,000 ppm and 25 °C, for activation because these can en-
sure good comfort. The overall ventilation rate of 0.3 L/s per m2 stated in the building 
regulation, will be fulfilled as an average over the year when this design choice of the 
controls is made. The average ventilation rate over the year is 0.7 L/s per m2, Appendix 
14.2.  
Furthermore, will the size of the filters be increased by 50 % as in experiment Fi1, becau-
se this has been found to lower the energy use substantially and will be better to keep 
the temperature below 28 °C.  
As an extra experiment, the recommended design choices will also be tested with the 
substitution of the skylight for a heat pump, as in experiment Me4, to see how low in 
terms of energy use, the house can perform. The reason for this heat pump, not being a 
part of the original recommendation, will be the uncertainty in functionality and the ab-
sence of energy linked directly to the heat pump in the calculations. The results for the 
recommendation (Rc) and the substitution of the skylight (Rc1) compared to the Baseli-
ne experiment (Ba), can be seen in Figure 26. 
52
==PAGE:61==
As seen in Figure 26, the primary energy use is for both experiments much lower than 
the Baseline experiment. The Rc experiment has a primary energy use of around 76 
kWh/m2 while Rc1 has a primary energy use of around 26 kWh/m2. Compared to the 
primary energy use for the Baseline experiment of 115 kWh/m2, the Rc experiment is 
decreasing by 37 % and Rc1 by 85 %. The biggest change is the hours of ventilation, 
which was found to only be necessary when the rooms were occupied and was still able 
to maintain good comfort.  
For Rc, the biggest changes can be seen in the office and the bedroom. This is due to 
the decrease in the standard ventilation. In the Baseline experiment, the Notech filters 
were always open with at least 22 %, to maintain the standard ventilation of 0.3 L/s per 
m2, even when unoccupied. For the Rc experiment, the Notech filter is closed when 
unoccupied; therefore, there is no heat loss due to ventilation in unoccupied hours.  
Furthermore, it is found that the Notech filter in the bedroom can ventilate for CO2 pro-
duced by one occupant with an opening fraction of 15 %. This means, that even during 
occupied hours, the ventilation rate will be lower than it was in the Baseline experiment.  
In the Rc experiment, the changes for the living room are very small. The decrease in the 
standard ventilation is lower than for the office and the bedroom. In the Baseline expe-
riment, the Notech filters were always 8 % open in the living room, to maintain the stan-
dard ventilation. In the Rc experiment, they are always closed when the room is unoc-
cupied, however, the change from 8 % to 0 % is much smaller than the change from 22 
% to 0 %. Therefore the decrease in heat loss is also smaller, and therefore the decrease 
in primary use is also smaller.  
53
Figure 26: Primary Energy use - heating + Mechanical ventilation for Rc and Rc1, compared to the Baseline
==PAGE:62==
Furthermore, does the higher occupancy in the living room directly lead to a higher CO2 
production, which will activate the CO2 controller in the Notech filters. This means, that 
in the occupied time, the ventilate rate will remain the same for the Rc experiment as it is 
in the Baseline experiment.  
For the Rc1 experiment, the big reduction in the primary energy use is caused by the 
lower heat loss from ventilation by having the heat pump recirculate 50 % of the energy, 
in exhaust air, since this is warm, and applies the energy in the heating system.  
The comfort is not as good as the Baseline experiment, however, it is still complying with 
the regulations and the experiments have approximately the same amount of hours wit-
hin the same comfort categories. In Figure 27 the PPD vs. primary energy use for the li-
ving room can be seen, including the new results for Rc and Rc1.  
In Figure 27 it can be seen that the Rc and Rc1 are both below the tendency line. The 
PPD is a bit higher than for the Me4, which is due to the activation and operation time of 
the Notech filter when removing standard ventilation. Therefore the CO2 level will exce-
ed the threshold for a short amount of time before the Notech filter reaches the right 
opening fraction. Compared to Me4, which was evaluated as the best-performing de-
sign choice, the PPD is only 0.5 % higher for the new experiments. And as it can be seen, 
the primary energy use for the Rc1 experiment is the lowest of them all.  
As mentioned are the small increase in PPD values due to too high CO2 concentrations 
and not due to overheating. The hours of overheating in Rc and Rc1, are the same as in 
Baseline, which is due to the system still being controlled by the temperature, also when 
rooms are unoccupied.  
54
Figure 27: Living room PPD vs. Primary energy use, including Rc and Rc1
==PAGE:63==
The surprisingly high energy use in Rc will be explained by the hours of which the losses 
are the greatest. The losses have the highest value, in both the Baseline and the opti-
mized experiments, when the rooms are occupied. When maintaining a high level of 
comfort when the rooms are occupied, the savings of not ventilation when rooms are 
unoccupied are limited. 
Overall, when choosing a design choice between these experiments, it’s a matter of 
whether you value the energy consumption or the comfort the highest. For Rc and Rc1 
the PPD is the same, however, the choice between an operable skylight and a heat 
pump might weigh higher than the saving in energy.  
8.1.1 - Future weather conditions 
Since the house is set to be built in 2024 this means the house will only be exposed to 
more extreme weather, due to global warming. Exposure to a more hostile environment 
will change the indoor environment and the impact of the weather. As a standard lifeti-
me value in LCAbyg, 50 years of lifetime is chosen for the house. The Rc experiment will 
be simulated with a projection of the weather in the city of Fredericia (Fa) for 2050 and 
2080. The projection of the weather follows IPCC’s “Business-as-usual” scenario, RCP6.5. 
Since the weather files’ data and location will change, the Rc experiment will also be si-
mulated in 2024, to compare the values to the original Rc experiment. The primary 
energy use is displayed in Figure 28. 
From Figure 28, a small reduction between DRY and Fa 2024 can be seen. The reduction 
is distributed equally over all the rooms with heating units, and therefore this small diffe-
rence will be due to new data. 
55
Figure 28: Primary energy use for Rc experiment for DRY and Fa 2024, 2050 and 2080, Value from IDA ICE
==PAGE:64==
Then comparing Fa from 2024, 2050, and 2080 it is clear that the need for heating 
decreases over the period. The reduction from 2024 to 2050 is 9.13 kWh/m2 and from 
2050 to 2080 the reduction is 4.10 kWh/m2. This gives a total reduction of 13.23 kWh/
m2. This is a relatively high reduction, compared to the period of only 56 years, and indi-
cates a shorter heating season and higher solar gains. When looking at the energy ba-
lance for the house, in Figure 29, the solar gain in 2024 accounts for 1895 kWh, and in 
2080 this number has increased with 420 kWh. The losses to “Infiltration & Openings” 
have dropped by almost 1,000 kWh, and combined with lower losses across all catego-
ries, the large reduction in primary energy use is enabled. 
The lower primary energy use indicates higher temperatures, and higher temperatures 
and larger solar gains, lead to higher operative temperatures inside the house. Table 12 
shows the highest operative temperature measured in the living room for the three 
years. 
56
Figure 29: Energy balance for the 4 experiments, values from IDA ICE
Table 12: Max operative temperatures
Year
Max operative temperature 
2024 29.65 °C
2050 29.76 °C
2080 30.49 °C
==PAGE:65==
The values in the table show an increase over the 50 years. However, the increase from 
2024 to 2050 is relatively small compared to the temperature rise in 2080. This determi-
nes that the decrease in primary energy use for 2050 must be mostly affected by a lon-
ger period with warmer outside air, which isn’t warm enough to raise the highest tempe-
rature, but warm enough to ensure that the heating set point is met. This could lead to 
just a small increase in hours of overheating since the max temperature isn’t that far from 
the overheating thresholds and the max temperature in 2024. In 2080, the highest mea-
sured temperature is increased with almost 1 °C indicating a risk of more hours of over-
heating. 
Figure 30 displays the three simulations from Fredericia's hours of overheating in the 
living room. 
From Figure 30, it is clear that the temperature rise in 2050 doesn’t give a major increase 
in hours with overheating, as expected from the maximum measured temperature. The 
results from 2050 stay within the thresholds presented in BR. In 2080 the result is very 
different and exceeds both limits. However, both the limits are just surpassed by a few 
hours.  
With the increase of hours with overheating, the predicted percentage of dissatisfaction 
has increased to an average of 6.6 % in 2050 and 7.2 % in 2080, increasing by only 1.3 
% compared to 2024. The results indicate the controlled natural ventilation systems sur-
plus concerning cooling capacity and that the design choice made for a house in 2024, 
can perform very close to the threshold in the future.  
57
Figure 30: Hours of overheating in the living room for simulations in Fredericia
==PAGE:66==
8.1.2 - System failure tests 
For periods where there is no need for ventilation for temperature or CO2, the Notech 
filters are fully closed, since this system isn’t using background ventilation. Therefore it is 
worth looking into what would happen if the system fails while the ventilation filters are 
closed, meaning that the system is closed e.g. for an entire night. This could for instance 
be due to a blockage or power failure. Two small tests on the optimal design constella-
tion have been made for one night during summer, and the results for the maximum 
CO2 concentration and maximum temperature can be seen in Table 13. 
As it can be seen in Table 13, the results from the small test show higher values than 
normal. The temperatures don’t seem alarming due to the general handling of overheat-
ing in the building. The cooling set point is set to be 25 °C, and therefore the building 
was already cooled down before the system failed. The temperatures didn’t get any hig-
her, due to the measurements being at night time, where the sun wasn’t out to contribu-
te to any solar heat gains. On the other hand, the CO2 concentrations are getting signif-
cantly higher than allowed. This is due to the occupants and equipment pollutants 
becoming much higher during the night, without any airflow or exhaust flow to decrease 
it. However, even though the values are high, it's not dangerous to be in for one night 
but can become a bit uncomfortable. These tests were made to show what would hap-
pen in case of system failure, without the occupants taking any actions themselves. In 
real life, the occupants would open a window or a door, to create an airflow, which 
would decrease both the temperature and CO2 concentration.  
8.2 - Notech recommendations for early design stages 
As it is now, the industry still very much prefers to use mechanical ventilation as their 
primary solution, since this is easier to document, for instance in software such as Be18. 
But also because the information and recommendations for controlled natural ventila-
tion are very limited.  
Therefore, to promote the idea of controlled natural ventilation, and the use of filters 
such as Notech, it’s important to have overall recommendations for early design stages, 
and for consultants to see how much space in the facade they should allocate to Notech 
filters.  
Since the Notech filters will be used to ventilate for CO2 and overheating to maintain a 
high quality of comfort, the two parameters used to define the sizes for early design sta-
ges are the number of occupants and the window-to-wall ratio (WWR), which is linked to 
the solar heat gain.  
58
Table 13: Examples of System Failure in the Master Bedroom, for One Night in the Summer
Scenarioes
CO2 concentration [ppm]
Temperature [°C]
The ventilation filters are closed 
in the master bedroom all night. 
2,267
26.71
The ventilation filters are closed 
in the whole house all night. 
3,565
28.87
==PAGE:67==
The recommendations are based on parametric simulations, changing the size of the 
Notech filters, to ensure CO2 concentration below 1,000 ppm and less than 100 hours 
with temperature above 27 °C. The simulations will be carried out in a squared room, 
with a window facing south, which will be closed at all times. To ensure the airflow 
through the Notech filter, a mechanical exhaust is put into place, exhausting the theore-
tical airflow, the given Notech size can provide. The south-facing window will present the 
worst-case scenario, however, the shape of the room, will not present a worst-case sce-
nario, but instead closer to an average. Figure 31 shows the results from the parametric 
simulation, with 1 to 3 occupants and with three different WWRs: 15 %, 55 %, and 95 %.  
From Figure 31, a linear tendency for the size of Notech in relation to window-to-wall ra-
tio and room size is clear. The larger the room areas are, the smaller Notech filters are 
needed. This is due to larger rooms having fewer issues with obtaining a good thermal 
environment, due to larger areas that can absorb and distribute the heat generated.  
The graph also displays the issues with overheating, when having small rooms, with a 
large WWR. At the same time, all three room sizes, with WWR at 15 %, will have issues 
complying with the CO2 concentration when 2 or 3 occupants are present. The rest of 
the simulations showed that the area of the needed Notech filter was determined by the 
hours of overheating. 
Even though the results show a clear tendency, if the designed room falls between two 
sizes of Notech filters, it is recommended to choose the largest one. This is on behalf of 
the findings during simulations on Kirkebjerg Søpark 2 row house, in Paragraph 7, where 
it was found that the primary energy use, will decrease with larger filters than necessary. 
Furthermore, a larger filter will also secure the building against predicted warmer weat-
her in the future, allowing a larger airflow. 
59
Figure 31: Notech recommendations for 1-3 occupants in rooms with different areas and WWRs
==PAGE:68==
The rooms with a WWR of 95  %, are the rooms that will need the largest filter, however, 
these will also be the rooms with the smallest viable space to place the filters, which, if 
implemented in the early design stage, can be modified. If the rooms are made large 
enough, at some point a relatively small filter will be able to handle the overheating, but 
in such large rooms, it can be assumed that more than 3 occupants will be present, and 
the CO2 concentrations will probably be the determining parameter for the filter sizes. 
8.3 - Natural ventilation recommendations
Based on the different experiments and the optimal design choices, some general 
recommendations regarding CNV can be listed, for users, the industry, and society: 
8.3.1 - For the users 
• User control. To get the most out of the CNV, the users must be aware of the system. 
For instance, they should turn it off if going on holiday. The users should create the 
most detailed schedules, to save the most on their energy use.  
• The user should be informed of the design of the house, and how the natural ventila-
tion is designed to function in the house, e.g. should the internal doors be open or 
closed. 
8.3.2 - For the industry and consultants 
• Make sure that CNV is a part of the earlier design stages since CNV requires more 
considerations in terms of building orientation, ventilation allocation, window sizes, 
placement, etc.  
• For buildings with more than one story, a skylight is a good idea. A skylight can be 
used to create buoyancy ventilation where the house is functioning as a channel. In 
general, it’s a good idea to map out the ventilation principles in the house in the early 
design stages. Think about how to get the best possible effect out of natural ventila-
tion. Think about the flows through the house. Where could there be cross-ventilation 
opportunities for a whole story? 
• Utilize control systems that can adjust ventilation rates based on temperature, occu-
pancy, and air quality. Make a one-house control unit. 
8.3.3 - For society 
• Enlighten consultants in the industry on how to manage and work with CNV, and which 
strategies suit a specific project type.  
• Focus on developing current software programs to incorporate CNV better and easier 
than it is now. It’s important to look into whether the current documentation software is 
handling CNV correctly, or if changes need to be made. 
• Go through current ventilation standards in the building regulation, and look into 
whether these are suited for CNV, or if CNV should have its own standards included.  
• Incorporate system monitoring, track the performance, and ensure that the system 
functions as intended. Monitor and prevent issues such as mold or blockage.  
• Invest in research to develop new CNV technologies and software, and improve the 
existing ones. 
60
==PAGE:69==
• Document case studies and share them across the industry, to use as future guidance 
for implementation. 
• Establish a feedback platform for users to report issues and suggestions for improve-
ments, since this is important for new inventions such as the Notech filter.  
61
==PAGE:70==
9 - Assumptions and limitations 
A list of the general assumptions for this case study can be found in Appendix 14.9. 
9.1 - Occupancy Schedules 
One of the assumptions is the occupancy schedules used in IDA ICE simulations. The 
schedules are a part of the ventilation system since this is controlled by CO2 concentra-
tion and temperature, which is affected by the user’s behavior.  
The schedules are inspired by and based on the Industry Guidance  and are described 
23
further in Paragraph 6.1. The number of occupants in the home is based on Statistics 
Denmark  and is assumed to be three people for this house size.  
24
All 52 weeks over the years are the same, which may be inaccurate. Holidays and days 
off haven’t been taken into account. In general, abnormalities aren’t a part of the sche-
dules. On weekends, it’s assumed that all occupants are home all day, which might not 
be true. In general, if these abnormalities were taken into account, the magnitude of the 
results could be assumed to be negligible. This is due to a balance between abnormali-
ties on the weekdays and the weekends. For instance, some days could be affected by 
working from home, and some weekends could be spent elsewhere.  
The effect on the energy consumption and the comfort all depends on which season the 
abnormalities occur in. If they occur in the heating season, there could be a direct impa-
ct on energy consumption. And if they occur in the cooling season, there could be a di-
rect impact on the comfort, due to the risk of overheating.  
An adult has on average 5 weeks of holiday over the year, where they could be home or 
out traveling. In general, this might not have made much of a difference to the overall 
energy use if talking about the summer holiday. This would mostly affect the overheat-
ing positively if they were away, but negatively if they stayed at home. As seen in Para-
graph 7.10 many of the potential overheating hours in the unoccupied time could be a 
risk if the occupants were at home in the summer holiday. That would mean that the Ba-
seline potentially wouldn’t comply with the overheating demands.  
However, if the occupants were away in the winter and were able to shut down the hou-
se completely, this would be something that could make a difference to the overall 
energy use, without affecting the comfort, since this only matters in occupied time. Addi-
tionally, this leads to the discussion of whether to further develop the ventilation system 
into more user management. If the occupants were away for a week, it would be benef-
cial to turn off the ventilation system and turn it on for a few hours before returning 
home. This would be a good way to save energy and secure a good indoor environment 
at the return time. Ultimately it comes down to whether the occupants spend their spare 
time at home or are elsewhere. If they were home during all holidays, this would lead to 
a higher use of the ventilation system leading to further heat losses and higher energy 
consumption.  
 https://bygst.dk/media/9721/branchevejledning-for-indeklimaberegninger_opdateret-version_final_web.pdf 
23
 https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/nyheder-analyser-publ/nyt/NytHtml?cid=30704
24
62
==PAGE:71==
In general, the assumption seems realistic when designing the ventilation system. The 
system can’t incorporate abnormalities, and therefore it’s chosen to design the schedule 
based on the majority of the weeks of the year. 
9.2 - Buoyancy effect and common flows  
Another assumption is related to the natural ventilation flows in the house. To be able to 
work with the principle of controlled natural ventilation, it’s assumed that the house fun-
ctions as a chimney and that the buoyancy ventilation is working through the skylight. 
The same applies to cross-ventilation and general ventilative flows throughout the buil-
ding. It’s assumed that the ventilation is naturally working, without having to do anything 
specific for this matter in the software program. On behalf of the values from the simula-
tions, and the mass balance in the skylight, the house is found to be functioning as in-
tended. 
For some of the experiments, the internal flows are being challenged, by closing the in-
ternal doors and thereby blocking it. If the assumption were falsely stated, the experi-
ments wouldn’t function in the intended way and the simulation results would be diffe-
rent than presented in Paragraph 7. Due to the results and the documentation of the 
software, the assumption is concluded to be valid. 
9.3 - Modeling of Notech 
The largest limitation and uncertainty is the modeling of the Notech filter in IDA ICE. 
Due to Notech's relatively immature state, there is no available modeling evidence, 
which leads to a modeling of the filters, based upon basic knowledge and measure-
ments done by Technological Institute. 
9.3.1 - Theoretical calculations 
A large uncertainty revolves around the filter and its performance during different tem-
peratures and weather conditions. The model used for this study is based on measure-
ments done at 20 °C air temperature and under controlled weather conditions in a cli-
mate chamber. The calibration is done with these prerequisites. When the simulation is 
calculated with a weather condition with major differences from the one used for the ca-
libration, it must be assumed that an error will occur. And even with greater difference a 
greater error must be the result. This will not affect the sensor-based ventilation, becau-
se it is activated when it needs to be activated, however, this will affect the standard ven-
tilation in each room, securing the 0.3 L/s per m2 stated in BR. The error will affect in 
both ways, resulting in both higher and lower flows than calculated. The reason for the 
error lies within the modeling of the control and the static opening fraction used to se-
cure the standard ventilation. 
63
==PAGE:72==
The effect of this error on the results will be present in both the comfort, but also in the 
energy use results. For comfort, the temperature in the room can be negatively affected 
if the standard ventilation is higher than calculated. This will also lead to a higher energy 
use, due to the higher supply of cold air and the higher loss of warm air. The effect of 
the standard ventilation is lower than calculated and is not as impactful as the other way 
around because if the temperature or CO2 levels exceed the threshold, the sensor-ba-
sed ventilation will be activated. This can result in a small period of discomfort, due to 
activation time. 
The link between the opening area of the skylight and the Notech filters in the house is 
also based on theoretical calculations regarding buoyancy ventilation, limiting the link to 
a mathematical connection. The connection has been simplified to use values from a 
season-defined equation, resulting in small errors during the other season. The error 
was found during a deep dive into the values of the mass balance for the skylight. It was 
found that for short periods, a small amount of air was entering the house through the 
skylight, and therefore was the skylight in those periods not only working as an exhaust 
segment in the system. 
9.3.2 - IDA ICE 
The modeling of Notech in IDA ICE also stands as a limitation for the study. The complex 
structure of the filter, allowing the outside air to be heated by the heat stored in the filter 
material and the radiators below the filters before entering the house has not been mo-
deled in IDA ICE due to lack of knowledge and functions in this area. The damper com-
ponent used in IDA ICE to model the Notech filter only provides control over the amo-
unt of air and the speed at which it is led through the filters, and not the direct place-
ment of the filters. 
However, the lack of pre-heating before the outside air enters the house, gives a higher 
requirement to the heating units in the rooms, to maintain the temperature. Especially 
the radiators placed directly under the filters, which are used for heating the colder air, 
will be put to work because they are placed on the same wall, where the damper com-
ponents are supplying the air. At the same time, when the cold air enters the house near 
the occupants, local discomfort can occur due to draught and even just too low local 
temperatures. This supply of air with the same temperature as the outside air is the main 
reason for the high loss from the natural ventilation, as presented in Paragraph 7.  
The control of the Notech filters is simplified due to time limitations. Limitations both in 
test runs, but mostly in simulation duration time. Due to IDA ICE's way of calculation 
during simulations, a control with a response input to the control from the damper com-
ponent and skylight would have increased the simulation duration to an extent that 
wouldn’t have been able to run the amount of simulation included in this study. A further 
and more comprehensive control, which also will require more tests before implementa-
tion and which will increase the load on the simulation, could be carried out for future 
work. This will be covered in Paragraph 12. 
64
==PAGE:73==
9.4 - Assumptions regarding allocation of 0.3 L/s per m2 in the rooms 
When working with controlled natural ventilation or mechanical ventilation, one of the 
design strategies to consider is the allocation of ventilation. Not all areas in the house 
will have a ventilation filter, and therefore it must be decided where to allocate ventila-
tion to these areas, to comply with BR. In the row house construction, the airflows in the 
rooms have been decided based on the type of room. These airflows can be seen in 
Table 06. As mentioned before, these airflows summed up is around 28 L/s, which me-
ans an average of 0.3 L/s per m2, as the Danish building regulation states as the mini-
mum requirement. Based on the air flows required for each room, the opening fraction 
of the ventilation filters is calculated, as seen in Table 04. By modifying the opening fra-
ctions, it is possible to change the allocation of the ventilation.  
The current allocation strategy means that the bathroom on the ground floor has an air 
supply from the entrance. The bathroom on the first floor and staircase will be provided 
with ⅓ of the air supply needed from the top floor rooms with Notech filters. The air 
supplies are the Notech filters, and the exhaust air goes through the skylight or the me-
chanical exhaust in the wet rooms.  
The allocation is a strategic design choice, which should include several considerations. 
First of all, when allocating ventilation to different rooms, it’s important to ensure 
adequate air exchange, maintain healthy indoor air quality and if possible optimize 
energy efficiency. When allocating the ventilation differently, while still complying with 
the requirements, it’s possible to save energy. It all depends on the strategy. 
For the experiments, the overall comfort results were of high quality, therefore it’s im-
portant to maintain good comfort, even when changing the allocation.  
Most of the experiments with natural ventilation had a higher energy use than those ex-
periments with mechanical ventilation. For some users, this might be a reason to dismiss 
the natural ventilation system and choose a mechanical one. However, if it’s possible to 
allocate the ventilation differently and decrease energy use, the natural ventilation sy-
stems might end up just as preferable as the mechanical systems.  
If the current allocation should be done differently, this is possible by changing the ope-
ning fraction of the ventilation filters. Previous results showed that the standard ventila-
tion rate for rooms was too high. For instance in the bedroom, where the CO2 sensor 
was never activated. This meant that the room had an unnecessary high loss, in unoc-
cupied and occupied hours.  
Table 14 shows the opening fraction for the allocation as it has been used in the experi-
ments, this is called the standard situation. The table also shows a different allocation, 
where the allocation of the ventilation to the rooms on the first floor without a Notech 
filter goes to the living room, except for the walk-in. This allocation is chosen because 
the living room has been shown as the room with the largest stability during the simula-
tions. And because it is the largest room in the house it is assumed to have the largest 
heat capacity and therefore the highest robustness to natural ventilation. 
65
==PAGE:74==
Table 15 shows the primary energy use for the Baseline experiment and the new alloca-
tion strategy.  
As it can be seen the saving in energy use is about 7 kWh/m2. This saving in energy is 
based solely on changing the control and is therefore a small intervention to make. The 
simulations also showed no negative effect on comfort, since the ventilation is still CO2 
and temperature sensor controlled. For the bedroom, the minimum temperature increa-
sed by 1 °C which most likely will positively affect the comfort.  
66
Table 14 - Opening fraction to ensure ventilation with airflow of 0.3 L/s
Room:
Standard situation [-]
Allocation to the living 
room [-]
Entrance
0.02
0.02
Master bedroom
0.06
0.11
Living room
0.08
0.04
Bedroom
0.22
0.16
Office
0.14
0.08
Table 15 - Primary energy use for allocation strategy
Primary Energy Use  
[kWh/m2]
Ba
116.6
Ba - Allocation to living room
109.5
==PAGE:75==
10 - Discussion 
10.1 - Perception of good comfort 
When analyzing natural ventilation cases, it’s also worth discussing the perception of 
good comfort. Overall, the experiments showed great results within the comfort, which 
was measured through the PPD (Predicted Percentage of Dissatisfied). However, to 
lower the energy use, it might be worth looking into whether the perception of good 
comfort can be challenged, and even cross some of the current thresholds for good 
comfort presented by DS. The PPD includes parameters such as the metabolic rate, clot-
hing rate, air temperature, air velocity, etc.  
However comfort in an indoor environment encompasses physical, thermal, acoustic, 
and visual factors that all contribute to the user's satisfaction. For this project case, it’s 
been the thermal environment and the air quality that has been measured when evaluat-
ing comfort. The focus has been on maintaining a temperature that neither was too cold 
nor caused overheating. At the same time, the air quality has been evaluated through 
pollution measured by the CO2 concentration, since this tends to rise when cooking, 
blocking the airflow for instance with closed doors and windows, or when having guests. 
However, comfort is also visual comfort and acoustic comfort. It’s important also to ensu-
re a quiet environment without too much disruptive noise. It’s about minimizing the 
external noise intrusion and at the same time controlling the internal noise level. Visual 
comfort is about securing the proper light setting, both natural light and artificial light. 
This will ensure productivity and well-being.  
Thus, it’s important to look into whether some of the comfort and regulation factors 
should weigh more than others, and if so, are some of them crucial to comply with or 
can the limits be pushed a bit further?  
From the simulations, the largest energy loss was found due to the high ventilation rates, 
when ventilating to keep the CO2 concentration at the threshold. The high loss roots a 
large saving potential. The only way to enable this large saving will be to allow a higher 
concentration of CO2 and decrease the total amount of ventilation over the year. As an 
example, when allowing up to 1,200 ppm instead of 1,000 ppm in occupied hours, the 
total energy use will be reduced by 26.2 kWh/m2, compared to the Baseline, Table 16. 
At the same time, the hours in the different comfort categories in the living room will 
shift by a small number of hours, with 141 hours lifted out of Category I into Category II, 
and 8 hours will also be added to the hours in Category III. 
When evaluating the relatively high energy saving, compared to the small change in the 
overall comfort of the house, the level of CO2 could be a parameter that normally has a 
too high impact on the overall system and its ability to perform. 
67
==PAGE:76==
Besides looking at the CO2 concentration, the temperature also presents a direct link to 
both comfort and energy use. The temperature affecting the energy use is the heating 
set-point. However, the heating set-point does also affect the comfort, in the opposite 
direction of the energy use. Lowering the set-point saves energy, but will also lower the 
comfort. But the temperature in terms of comfort has many individual aspects. Further-
more is the temperature an occupant feels comfortable in, affected by clothing and me-
tabolic rate. Therefore could the temperature be a valuable parameter to investigate. As 
an example have the heating set-point be changed from 22 °C to 21 °C 
Then the new set-point is implemented it is possible to save 10 kWh/m2 in primary 
energy use, Table 16. But the comfort in the living room will be decreased, with 72 hours 
moved from comfort Category I to Category II. However, this reduction will not be valid 
for all occupants. 
Overall this means that comfort is many different parameters. The perception of comfort 
can vary based on a person’s individual preferences, differences in cultures, and also 
specific needs. Table 16 shows the comfort reduction compared to the primary energy 
use reduction. 
From Table 16 it is clear to see the potential in the savings linked to the perception of 
good comfort. Overall the goal should be to balance the factors, and look at what the 
individual household needs to be satisfied when discussing design strategies for the in-
door environment, hereunder the ventilation design. 
10.1.1 - Future energy supply  
Following Energinet’s environmental report from 2022  the emissions from electricity 
25
and heat production will decrease from 119 grams of CO2 per kWh in 2022 to 3.5 grams 
of CO2 per kWh in 2032. This large reduction should lead to a shift in priority and main 
focus, allowing a higher energy use, to maintain the comfort needed for the occupants. 
10.2 - Economical Aspect - Energy Expenses  
As stated in the introduction, the need for decreasing the energy use will be crucial for 
the transition to a green energy sector. The aim to reduce the energy use coheres with 
the occupant’s wish to lower their expenses for heating, ventilation, and obtaining com-
fort in the house. However, due to different energy factors and energy prices on the 
energy types used in a house, the energy saving has to be done right to also benefit the 
occupant’s expenses. Figure 32 displays the total primary energy use compared to the 
cost of purchasing the energy. The prices are divided into heating, which comes from 
district heating, and mechanical ventilation which is driven by electricity. 
 https://energinet.dk/om-publikationer/publikationer/miljoredegorelse-2022/
25
68
Table 16: Reduction in comfort compared to reduction in primary energy use
Reduction in comfort
Reduction in primary energy use
CO2  set-point
3.8 %
22.5 %
Temperature set-point
1.8 %
8.1 %
==PAGE:77==
From the figure, it is clear to see how the energy factor and the electricity prices are hig-
her than for district heating. The energy factors come from BR §1.1 and the prices are 
average prices for Brøndby in 2023. The energy factor for electricity is 2.5 and the price 
is 3.64 DKK/kWh . The energy factor for district heating is 0.8 and the price is 0.68 
26
DKK/kWh . This relatively large difference in both energy factor and prices means that 
27
the amount of electricity used should be kept as low as possible. 
From the figure, the difference between the natural ventilated and mechanical ventilated 
scenarios is smaller when analyzing the prices instead of the primary energy use. This is 
due to the higher use of electricity, which has a more rapid growth in total cost. Even 
with this rapid growth, the full mechanical scenarios are still the best-performing, when 
analyzing these two parameters.  
Figure 32 shows that even a small amount of electricity can make a huge difference in 
the total prices. The question could be if the occupants are the ones who should have to 
pay for the energy savings. For instance, a solution that uses less total energy but has a 
higher cost due to large consumption of electricity was found to be the best in terms of 
energy use and comfort. 
 https://findenergi.dk/guides/hvad-koster-en-kwh/
26
 https://www.hofor.dk/privat/priser-paa-forsyninger-privatkunder/prisen-paa-fjernvarme-2023-for-privatkunder/
27
69
Figure 32: Total energy expenses compared to energy use
==PAGE:78==
10.3 - Be18 vs. IDA ICE 
For this project, the controlled natural ventilation has been constructed and simulated 
using IDA ICE. However, in several places in the industry, it’s more common to use Be18 
as the preferred software, as Be18 is software suited for the correct documentation that 
is needed. As seen in the results in Figure 14 and Figure 21, where some of the experi-
ments were also constructed using Be18, the choice of software can have much influen-
ce on the overall results for energy consumption. To understand the differences betwe-
en the two software, an overview has been made of some of the overall inputs and out-
puts, which can be seen in Table 17.  
Be18 focuses on calculating energy performance in compliance with the Danish Buil-
ding Regulation, whereas IDA ICE focuses on the graphical outputs of various parame-
ters, such as air velocity, operative temperatures, and comfort analysis. Both software of-
fers detailed insights into building energy consumption, considering multiple factors 
such as climate, building properties, and occupant behavior.  
70
Table 17: Overview of input and output in Be18 and IDA ICE
Input 
Building envelope properties
+
+
Materials
—
+
Thermal properties
+
+
Type of heat supply
+
+
Heated floor area
+
+
Occupied time
+
+*
Ventilation system
+
+**
Occupants
+
+
Mechanical equiptment
+
+
Weather file
+
+
Output
Energy use [kWh/m2]
+
+
Graphical output
—
+*
Comfort analysis 
—
+
Energy regulation compliance 
+
—
* Hour based  
** Simulated, sensor-based for CO2 and temperature 
==PAGE:79==
However, some of these factors can be detailed further using IDA ICE. Occupancy can 
be detailed using hourly-based schedules in IDA ICE, thereby also making ventilation 
sensor-based for thermal factors, such as temperature and CO2 concentration.  
One of the biggest differences is the way the ventilation system is modeled in the 
software. Be18 has a constant flow of 0.3 L/s while adding an extra flow in the summer to 
avoid overheating and comply with summer comfort. This extra flow is assumed to be 
natural ventilation through doors and windows. The system is more detailed in IDA ICE. 
The system is based on sensors. There is a constant airflow of 0.3 L/s when the rooms 
are unoccupied, and always sensors on to measure temperature and CO2 concentration 
to adjust the ventilation according to the occupancy.  
Another large difference is the way Be18 favors heavier materials, with a difference of up 
to ten times. This can be seen when looking at the results for the Baseline model, com-
pared to Ma1 and Ma2. IDA ICE shows that substituting a lighter material with concrete 
is 0.5 % better for the primary energy use, while Be18 shows that the same substitution 
is 5 % better for the primary energy use, based on findings in this study. This is an issue 
when using Be18 as documentation since this would mean that over the building's life-
time, one could illegitimately benefit from using heavier materials for the primary ener-
gy use. This benefit could affect the transition to greener and innovative materials. 
Overall, these large differences in the modeling of ventilation, materials, and assump-
tions are the explanation for the large difference in the energy use results and somet-
hing to consider when choosing software to use. Compared to Be18, IDA ICE is a com-
prehensive tool used internationally for simulating the indoor environment and energy 
performance of buildings. The software provides a robust platform for dynamic simula-
tions and enables the users to model on a more complex level, for both HVAC systems, 
thermal comfort, and energy efficiency. Be18 is more tailored to meet and document the 
specific regulatory requirements. IDA ICE offers broader applicability with features for 
optimizing building performance.  
10.4 - Natural ventilation and mechanical ventilation 
Based on the case study, the experiments, and the ventilation recommendations, it’s 
worth discussing whether controlled natural ventilation is eligible in society today. And 
the same goes for mechanical ventilation. Based on the evaluations, the answer would 
be yes, controlled natural ventilation and mechanical ventilation are both still highly re-
levant, but depend very much on the context and specific objectives of the building 
when choosing which system to use. Both systems have their advantages and disadvan-
tages.  
Regarding the climate impact, for natural ventilation, the carbon footprint will be lowe-
red for the house, since it does not rely on an HVAC system, but uses eelgrass filters in 
the ventilation filter instead. However, controlled natural ventilation systems, such as No-
tech, still contain various parts, which can be difficult to dismantle and recycle. Since the 
Notech panel is still an immature solution, there are also some uncertainties regarding 
maintenance, replacement, and lifespan.  
71
==PAGE:80==
When it comes to energy consumption, the results showed that the mechanical system 
was still beneficial compared to the controlled natural ventilation. Depending on how 
complex the controlled natural ventilation system is constructed, how detailed the sche-
dules are made, and how the perception of comfort is, the energy use can be decrea-
sed, and end up closely to the same amount as for the mechanical ventilation system. 
Although, it’s worth mentioning that the overall comfort results for the natural ventila-
tion are better since the system handles overheating better.  
Both systems have health benefits, in terms of improving indoor air quality, by reducing 
pollutants and decreasing CO2 concentration. However, when it comes to natural venti-
lation systems, successful implementation requires careful design and consideration of 
factors such as building orientation, climate, window placement, and airflow patterns, 
which a fully mechanical system doesn’t rely on. 
Both systems are entitled but also touch within each other domains. For the mechanical 
systems to work, they rely on natural ventilation from windows in the summertime, to 
prevent overheating.  
Natural ventilation is a more complex system, making it harder to construct and harder 
for the consultant to succeed. For natural ventilation to be entitled, it needs to be con-
trolled, otherwise it can’t be documented to fulfill the requirements. The Notech filter is 
a way to control natural ventilation, by using mechanical equipment, such as sensors and 
an actuator. 
At the same time, there’s an uncertainty of where the product's responsibility lies. Me-
chanical ventilation systems are much more commercial and documented, and therefore 
there’s no question regarding product responsibility. Whereas natural ventilation relies 
too much on the weather and other outside impacts, for producers to take responsibility 
yet. 
The space required for implementation is one of CNV’s largest benefits, compared to 
mechanical systems. This benefit could enable better exploitation of the built square 
meters when renovating older buildings. Since renovating has a lower climate impact 
than new buildings , controlled natural ventilation can help enable renovation projects 
28
where the original thoughts and space distribution are wished to be kept. 
 https://fagbladetboligen.dk/alle-nyheder/2021/januar/det-er-billigere-og-gronnere-at-renovere-end-at-bygge-nyt/ 
28
72
==PAGE:81==
11 - Conclusions 
The thesis aimed to investigate controlled natural ventilation and its performance 
through a series of experiments. Simultaneously analyzing its eligibility in comparison to 
a mechanical ventilation system along with the current limitation for controlled natural 
ventilation in the industry. 
How can controlled natural ventilation challenge mechanical ventilation systems, 
to be an equal preferred design choice in the industry?  
Based on the experiments, it was found that for CNV to challenge mechanical ventila-
tion, an array of parameters must be well-designed. The design of the building and the 
system in direct combination with the use of the building plays a huge role in the per-
formance of CNV, whereas mechanical ventilation is less receptive. The difference lies 
within the capability to preheat the supply air before supplying and recover energy in 
the exhaust air before it leaves the building. The most directly affecting parameter on 
CNV was found to be the ventilation rate, which is directly linked to a loss in energy, 
used to heat the cold air supplied.  
In Paragraph 8.1 the analysis showed that with the current requirements and modeling 
of CNV, CNV can't outperform mechanical ventilation in terms of primary energy use. 
The loss of energy is simply too high. For CNV the primary energy use was found to be 
between 69 kWh/m2 and 122 kWh/m2, and for mechanical ventilation systems, it was fo-
und to be between 33 kWh/m2 and 61 kWh/m2. Additionally, it was found that the CNV 
system outperformed mechanical ventilation regarding all the analyzed comfort para-
meters. CNV performed up to 3 times better in terms of hours of overheating and up to 
25 % better in terms of comfort categories, compared to the mechanical experiments, 
indicating a potential for CNV to be the preferred option.  
However, optimizations to the CNV system, found a saving of up to 43 %, minimizing the 
primary energy use to 66.5 kWh/m2, while still maintaining better comfort than mecha-
nical ventilation. 
The optimization parameters found in Paragraph 8.1, present an array of parameters that 
enables CNV to perform with less energy loss. These are parameters such as reduction 
of airflow and enlarging filter size, where larger filters secured slower filtration and enab-
led further heating of the air before entering the house. 
73
==PAGE:82==
During the analysis of results, CNV was found to be easily impacted by many parame-
ters, such as hours of use, set points, and impacts from weather. Many parameters from 
outside and parameters that aren’t controllable for the occupants, were found to have a 
determining effect on the system and its ability to perform and maintain comfort in the 
house. The sensitivity study indicated weak robustness for CNV, where buoyancy ventila-
tion was found to be one of the most important parts of the system to function. In the 
cooling season, the comfort was highly challenged if the buoyancy ventilation was blo-
cked, e.g. due to bad weather conditions. In the heating season, the rate of ventilation 
was shown to be the parameter with the highest magnitude of effect, not on the com-
fort, but on the energy use. Results showed, that a higher ventilation rate equaled a hig-
her loss and vice versa. In general, CNV relies on the designed internal air flows which 
are affected by many parameters and hard to manage. 
The fact that different parameters have the highest effect during different seasons indi-
cates that a controlled natural ventilation system is a delicate system that has to be care-
fully designed and controlled with the right properties, for it to perform.   
Which aspects of the industry procedures can be modified to make CNV appear 
equal to mechanical ventilation? 
Changes to the industry and its procedures will be necessary for CNV to appear equal to 
mechanical ventilation. The industry has to take CNV into account from the very first de-
sign step of the building. These early design steps have to encounter the strategic air 
flows needed in the building, to ensure that the CNV system can work and perform pro-
perly. 
The current standard and standardization of comfort and calculation methods have 
been found to bring a relatively large impediment to the documentation and implemen-
tation of CNV.  
The building regulations demand ventilative airflow. The ventilation shall ensure comfort 
and background ventilation. From the analysis, the background flow was found to be a 
parameter that affected the performance of CNV negatively with a high magnitude, 
compared to the effect on a mechanical system. The interpretation of the regulation on 
this subject has the potential to avoid a large loss of energy due to background ventila-
tion which was found to have close to zero effect on the comfort of the occupants. The 
absence of background ventilation shows a potential saving of up to 20 % on primary 
energy use. 
Perception of comfort varies from occupant to occupant, and the capabilities of both 
large savings and losses occur when distancing from the standardized values in the re-
gulation. Pushing the perception of good comfort and allowing a higher percentage 
outside the high comfort categories, showed that a decrease of 1.8 % in comfort led to 
savings of 8.1 % in primary energy use. 
74
==PAGE:83==
From Paragraph 10.3, a clear indication of which consequences the simplified and stan-
dardized documentation software as Be18 has, when calculating energy use, compared 
to simulation-based results was shown. The small changes in design choice and use of 
CNV, which were concluded to have major impacts on results, urge the importance of an 
accurate replication of reality when calculating the performance of CNV. A worrying dif-
ference in primary energy use between documentation software and simulation softwa-
re, with a 66 % lower primary energy use Be18, was found and analyzed. 
Across every result, the level of detail, and various interpretations of regulations, a direct 
effect emerges and the importance of specific regulations for CNV will build the founda-
tion for its eligibility. 
The investigation has shown that Volf C. and WindowMaster’s Notech system have eli-
gibility in the industry if it is controlled and designed properly. However, since sensor-
controlled natural ventilation is at an immature state and the huge uncertainties from 
many uncontrollable parameters, make it hard to consult and document the correct ef-
fect. 
Notech is a great example of innovative solutions to address some of the challenges in 
the industry, and actions like these will only push the industry in the right direction and 
help enable low-emissions buildings in the future. 
75
==PAGE:84==
12 - Future work 
12.1 - Optimized control modeling in IDA ICE 
As mentioned in Paragraph 9.3.2 a more comprehensive and robust control of the con-
trolled natural ventilation could be modeled in IDA ICE. The new control should be re-
sponse-driven in combination with the sensors presented in the Baseline experiment. In 
addition to the current control with the two sensors, the response will replace the mini-
mum value, defining the opening fraction which will ventilate 0.3 L/s per m2 theoretical-
ly, at all times. 
The response will come from the damper component in IDA ICE, which returns the actu-
al amount of air led through the filters. This value will be used for two things. First, it will 
be used to calculate the opening fraction of the Notech filter, to ensure a ventilative flow 
of 0.3 L/s per m2 at all times, if none of the sensors are activated. In this way, there won’t 
at any time be supply air led through the filters which isn’t fully controlled, e.g. due to 
different weather configurations. 
The second thing the value presenting the actual air led through the filters is used for is 
the control of the skylight. The control of the skylight will receive the values from all 5 
Notech filters and the control will then calculate the opening area needed to lead the 
same amount of air out, as the Notech filters are letting in. Except in situations where the 
mechanical exhaust is active in either the kitchen or the bathrooms, the exhaust airflow 
from these rooms will be subtracted from the needed exhaust airflow in the skylight. 
However, this new response-driven control can be hard to implement in reality, due to 
the need for measurements of the air led through the filters. 
12.2 - Optimizing the building, by changing different parameters 
12.2.1 - g value 
As a part of the design process, the g value of the windows was found to be 0.72, by 
consultants and architects, to fulfill lighting requirements and in the meantime, not bring 
a too high solar gain. But as seen in Paragraph 8.1, the Baseline, and the further opti-
mized design of the controlled natural ventilation system, overheating isn’t a problem 
that can't be handled with the climate data represented with the Design Reference Year 
weather file (DRY). The over-dimensioning of the ventilation system will allow a higher g 
value. The higher g value will result in higher solar gains, which will bring extra heat to 
the rooms, reducing the amount of heat generated by the radiators. As a result of the 
higher g value, the primary energy use will be reduced, but in the meantime, it is im-
portant to not raise the value with a magnitude that will grant too many hours of overhe-
ating. 
But as seen in Paragraph 8.1, the predicted weather in the future does put a higher tem-
perature pressure on the house, resulting in countless hours of overheating. If the g va-
lue was increased in the original design, allowing more heat to enter the house, the 
hours of overheating would increase even further in the future. But at the same time, the 
primary energy use will be reduced, however, the extra amount of overheating can’t ju-
stify the saved energy. Therefore for future weather scenarios, the g value has to be 
decreased to affect the hours of overheating, but the reduction will result in higher 
energy use, due to the loss of solar gains during the heating season.   
76
==PAGE:85==
As a solution, the lifetime and replacement of the windows could be taken into use. This 
means that when designing and building the house, the optimal g value for the current 
weather will be implemented, allowing the highest possible solar gain, without too 
much overheating. When the windows have to be replaced, a new window with a diffe-
rent g value will be taken into use, reducing the solar gains, to reduce the hours of over-
heating, for the warmer weather predicted in the future. For the two windows with the 
two g values, it is important that the house still fulfills the requirements for daylight. 
To optimize and investigate the possible benefits and savings from the different g values 
in the different weather scenarios, further simulations and tests will be needed to gene-
rate data that can be analyzed before the optimal g values can be found. 
12.2.2 - Heating system dimensions 
As seen in Paragraph 8.1, the future weather files used in the simulations show an impact 
on energy use and overheating for 2050 and 2080. If designing the building for the futu-
re, it’s worth looking into the radiator dimensions and general dimensions of the heating 
system. However, it’s important to design the system so it's not compromising the com-
fort for the current users in 2025. An adjustment could for instance be smaller radiators 
in some of the rooms where there’s no problem with keeping the temperature to the 
minimum temperature allowed. It might not be a huge change for the GWP for just one 
house, however, if all new constructions were to decrease some of the resources for he-
ating systems, it could potentially have a higher effect.  
As seen in the energy use for almost every experiment, the floor heating in the bat-
hroom hasn’t been turned on, because the temperature in the bathroom has been high 
enough, due to small heat losses in the bathrooms and high heat gains from other 
rooms. However, a more realistic scenario would be that the occupant would have the 
floor heating turned on, due to the consensus regarding comfort with warm floors in 
bathrooms. The will most likely be the preferred constellation, and the energy use will 
shift. However, the magnitude and scope of the change are unknown and will require 
extra simulation, to be able to analyze the impact on the energy use and comfort of the 
house. 
77
==PAGE:86==
13 - References 
Websites: 
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/09/construction-industry-zero-emissions/ 
(11-02-2024) 
https://sbst.dk/Media/638248402790994130/National strategi for bæredygtigt bygge-
ri.pdf (11-02-2024) 
https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/oekonomi/prisindeks/forbrugerprisindeks 
(12-02-2024) 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_SYR_SPM.pdf 
(12-02-2024) 
https://realdania.dk/nyheder/2021/07/groenbog-om-biogene-materialer (12-02-2024) 
https://ditnybyggeri.dk/faser/kom-godt-i-gang/overblik/alt-du-skal-vide-om-ventila-
tionsanlaeg-i-dit-nybyggeri/ (12-02-2024) 
https://forsyningstilsynet.dk/analyser-og-tal/forbrugerpriser/elpriser/prisstatistik-4-
kv-2023 (12-02-2024) 
https://www.footprintnetwork.org/our-work/earth-overshoot-day/ (12-02-2024) 
https://www.zetland.dk/historie/sOLEkWJa-ae6XddK5-c5c74 (12-02-2024) 
https://energinet.dk/Om-nyheder/Nyheder/2021/05/31/Den-danske-elproduktion-var-
rekord-groen-i-2020/ (15-02-2024) 
https://www.windowmaster.dk/ekspertise/nyheder-og-trends/notech/ (15-02-2024) 
https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-bestemmelser/22/Krav (21-02-2024) 
https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Historisk/BR18_Version2/Tekniske-bestemmelser/11/
Krav (21-02-2024) 
https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/nyheder-analyser-publ/nyt/NytHtml?cid=30704 
(27-02-2024) 
https://betonelement.dk/betonelementer/daek/huldaek/ (14-03-2024) 
https://betonelement.dk/betonelementer/facader/ (14-03-2024) 
78
==PAGE:87==
https://help.iesve.com/ve2021/table_6_thermal_conductivity__specific_heat_capaci-
ty_and_density.htm (14-03-2024) 
https://www.dmi.dk/nyheder/2024/wmo-indikatorerne-for-klimaforandringer-naaede-
rekordnive (13-03-2024) 
https://www.nilan.dk/produkter/ventilation/modstroemsveksler?ScrollPos=3031 (14-03-
2024) 
https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/nyheder-analyser-publ/nyt/NytHtml?cid=30704 
(14-03-2024) 
Velux skylight opening area: https://contenthub.velux.com/api/public/content/
eb424-71453-1341b_downloadOriginal?v=61504739 (14-03-2024) 
Cd-value: https://www.scielo.cl/pdf/ric/v35n2/en_0718-5073-ric-35-02-203.pdf 
(16-03-2024) 
Radiator: https://www.purmo.com/da-dk/produkter/opvarmning-og-koeling/radiatorer/
panelradiator/panelradiatorer/plan-compact (12-05-2024) 
Outdoor CO2 concentration: https://www.indeklimaportalen.dk/luftkvalitet/maaling-af-
luftens-kvalitet/indendoers-co2 (29-05-2024) 
https://bygst.dk/media/9721/branchevejledning-for-indeklimaberegninger_opdateret-
version_final_web.pdf (29-05-2024) 
AKF report 2023: https://issuu.com/akf.as/docs/_rsrapport_2023?fr=xKAE9_zU1NQ (02-
06-2024) 
Energinet’s environmental report 2022: https://energinet.dk/om-publikationer/publika-
tioner/miljoredegorelse-2022/ (10-06-2024) 
Prices of electricity: https://findenergi.dk/guides/hvad-koster-en-kwh/ (03-07-2024) 
Prices of district heating: https://www.hofor.dk/privat/priser-paa-forsyninger-privatkun-
der/prisen-paa-fjernvarme-2023-for-privatkunder/ (03-07-2024) 
Renovating vs new buildings: https://fagbladetboligen.dk/alle-nyheder/2021/januar/
det-er-billigere-og-gronnere-at-renovere-end-at-bygge-nyt/ (03-07-2024) 
79
==PAGE:88==
Studies: 
Fremtidens grønnere byggeri.pdf, Marts 2023, Teknologisk Institut 
Naturlig ventilation til køling af boliger, Per Heiselberg 
Dansk Standard. "DS/CEN/TR 16798-2:2019” (2019)  
Dansk Standard. “DS/CEN ISO 7730-2006” (2006)  
SBI 213 Bygningers Energibehov - Beregningsvejledning - SBI anvisning 213 
[Notech slutrapport] - NOTECH Fuldskala afprøvning og dokumentation af NOTECH-sy-
stemet i en skoleklasse, og i Klimalab på TI - Teknologisk Institut 
EN 16798-1 No mechanical cooling 
80
==PAGE:89==
14 - Appendices 
14.1 Appendix - House drawings 
See attached file: Appendix_14_1_House_drawings 
Drawings made by Danielsen Architecture 
14.2 Appendix - Flow calculations and opening area 
See attached file: Appendix_14_2_Flow_calculations_and_openingarea 
14.3 Appendix - Result values 
See attached file: Appendix_14_3_Results 
14.4 Appendix - LCI 
See attached file: Appendix_14_4_LCI 
14.5 Appendix - IDA ICE Files 
See attached files: Appendix_14_5_IDA_ICE_files  
Due to file sizes, three files have results embedded; Baseline, Notech_rec, and Rc, the 
rest have no results embedded. 
Naming of IDA ICE Files: 
All IDA ICE files used for each experiment are named after the experiment.  
The IDA ICE files named: Baseline_setpoint_21 and Baseline_1200ppm are used for Pa-
ragraph 10.1.  
The file named: Baseline_new_allocation is used for Paragraph 9.4.  
Files named Rad1 to Rad5, are used to find the radiator size in the master bedroom 
which can fulfill the thermal comfort in Paragraph 6.1.  
The file Notech_rec is used to do parametric simulations of the needed Notech area in 
Paragraph 8.2. 
14.6 Appendix - Be18 files 
See attached file: Appendix_14_6_Be18 
14.7 Appendix - LCAbyg file 
See attached file: Appendix_14_7_LCAbyg 
81
==PAGE:90==
14.8 Appendix - Key values 
Parameter
Value
Floor area
93.3 m2
Building volume
263.4 m3
Envelope area
106 m2
WWR
21.3 %
Total Notech area
1.95 m2
Effective opening area of skylight
0.9 m2
Internal thermal gains
Occupants 
Heating set point
22 °C
Cooling set point
25 °C
U-values for external walls
0.12 W/m2 K
U-value for roof
0.08 W/m2 K
U-value for ground slab
0.1 W/m2 K
Window properties
g = 0.72 
U (window) = 1.46 W/m2 K 
Light transmittance = 0.75 
Frame fraction = 0.17
Skylight properties
g = 0.56 
U (window) = 1.19 W/m2 K 
Light transmittance = 0.62 
Frame fraction = 0.20
U-value Notech venting hatch
0.4 
Sun panel area
45 m2
Occupant clo
1
Occupant MET
1.2
Occupants number
3
82
==PAGE:91==
14.9 Appendix - Assumptions 
Drawings: 	
Everything is based on the drawings from January 2024.  
	
	
Measurements made on the drawings might cause small deviations.  
Materials: 	
Materials are assumed based on info from the architect.  
	
	
For instance; wooden facades, floors, etc.  
Windows:	
Glass is assumed to be Optifloat from Pilkington, properties are stated in 	
	
	
the key values.  
IDA ICE:	
Assumed that the buoyancy ventilation is working.  
	
	
Occupant schedules are assumed.  
LCAbyg: 	
EPDs are assumed based on the assumed materials. 
	
	
For the Notech filter, three EPDs are used based on WM’s CA. setup. 
	
	
Installations are simplified and assumed. They are the same for all 	
	
	
	
experiments.  
Be18: 	
Assuming natural ventilation in the cooling season to prevent overheating.  
83
