==PAGE:1==
Resistance Hunt
Identification
of
known
and
novel
beta­
lactamases through a multipronged bioinformatic
approach
Master Thesis
DTU National Food Institute
Group of Genomic Epidemiology
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Group of Genomic Epidemiology,
National Food Institute, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
The reader is assumed to have a basic knowledge of microbiology and bioinformatics.
Attila Beleon ­ s213785
Signature
Date
ii
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is an escalating global threat, necessitating innovative ap­
proaches to identify and combat resistance mechanisms. This study presents a compre­
hensive bioinformatic pipeline designed to identify known and novel beta­lactamase se­
quences from metagenomic samples, focusing on optimising the detection of AMR genes.
The primary objective of the research was to identify resistance genes, specifically beta­
lactamases, and discover novel beta­lactamase sequences.
The pipeline successfully identified over 60,000 AMR genes, confirming the hypothesis
that sewage serves as a significant reservoir for microorganisms exposed to antibiotics.
Known beta­lactamases were accurately detected, and several novel beta­lactamase se­
quences were identified, showcasing the pipeline’s potential in uncovering previously un­
documented resistance genes.
The workflow’s modularity and flexibility allow for easy updates and adaptations, making
it a valuable tool for ongoing and future research.
This project achieved all four of its objectives and provided insights into the complexi­
ties of protein function prediction. The findings underscore the importance of combining
one­dimensional and three­dimensional analyses to accurately identify and characterise
resistance genes, thereby contributing to the broader fight against antimicrobial resistance
and providing a foundation for further analysis.
Resistance Hunt
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I want to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors, Dr. Patrick Munk, Dr. Thomas
Nordahl Petersen, and Prof. Frank Møller Aarestrup, for their unwavering support, guid­
ance, and encouragement during my master’s research. Their expertise and constructive
feedback were crucial in completing this thesis. I am especially grateful for their provision
of resources, including access to the High­Performance Computing facility, and valuable
sequencing data, which significantly contributed to the success of this research.
I sincerely appreciate the Group of Genomic Epidemiology for assisting with questions
that arise. I especially thank Nikiforos Pyrounakis for his suggestions on technicalities
and helpful discussions.
I thank the Computerome support team for providing the necessary assistance.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude for the support I received from my family and
friends.
Patrick Munk, Assistant Professor, National Food Institute
Research Group for Genomic Epidemiology
Supervisor
Thomas Nordahl Petersen, Associate Professor
DTU National Food Institute, Research Group for Genomic Epidemiology
Supervisor
Frank Møller Aarestrup, Professor, Head of Research Group
DTU National Food Institute, Research Group for Genomic Epidemiology
Supervisor
iv
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Antimicrobial Resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Beta­lactams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Beta­lactamases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Relevance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Metagenomics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.6
Gene Prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.7
Protein Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.8
Catalytic Amino Acids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.9
Protein 3D Structures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.10 Structural Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.11 Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Materials and methods
9
2.1
Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3
Gene Annotation and Translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Functional Annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Beta­lactamase Filter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Twilight Zone Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.7
Conservation scoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Results
17
3.1
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Gene Annotation Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
PanRes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4
Function Annotation Results and Filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.5
Conservation Scoring Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.6
Structural Analysis Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Discussion
29
4.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
The Workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.3
PanRes as a Benchmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.4
HMMER, AMRFinder Plus vs. ResFams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.5
Conservation Scoring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.6
Interchangeable Residues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.7
Interpretation of the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.8
Self­Reflection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.9
Suggestions for Improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Conclusion
33
Bibliography
34
Resistance Hunt
v
==PAGE:6==
A Supplementary Materials
37
A.1 Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
vi
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
This project aims to analyse antimicrobial resistance in metagenomic samples using bioin­
formatic tools. The primary goal is to identify novel beta­lactamase sequences, which
necessitates computationally intensive evaluation processes. The challenge is akin to
finding a needle in a haystack. The reader will gain insight into the complexities of this
process: how to approximate the location of the needle, how to simplify the problem by
reducing the size of the haystack, and finally, how to evaluate what could be a needle.
1.1
Antimicrobial Resistance
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is an escalating global concern. Microbes’ natural defence
mechanisms evolve in response to environmental chemical threats, including antibiotics.
This evolutionary arms race makes our medicines less effective over time, leading to a
continuous struggle against resistant bacterial strains.
The battle against AMR already has a century­long history. In 1928, Scottish physician
and microbiologist Alexander Fleming made the groundbreaking discovery of penicillin,
the world’s first antibiotic. His frontier work, which earned him a knighthood and the Nobel
Prize, marked the beginning of our fight against antibiotic resistance.
There are several mechanisms by which bacteria develop resistance to antibiotics:
• Binding Proteins: These proteins act as decoys, preventing antibiotics from exert­
ing their effects by binding to them. Binding proteins have no enzymatic activity and
do not degrade antibiotics.
• Enzymes: Specialized proteins that degrade or modify antibiotics, rendering them
ineffective. Beta­lactamases are a prime example of this mechanism.
• Target Protection: These proteins protect the antibiotic target sites by binding to
them, shielding them from antibiotic action. Some of these proteins have enzymatic
activity that modifies the target site, making it incompatible with the antibiotic.
• Efflux Pumps: Transmembrane proteins that actively transport antibiotics out of
the cell, reducing their intracellular concentration.
This thesis covers two of these mechanisms: beta­lactamase enzymes and binding pro­
teins.
1.2
Beta­lactams
Beta­lactam antibiotics are a diverse group of antimicrobial molecules characterized by a
beta­lactam ring at the centre of their molecular structure involving 4 atoms to form a dis­
tinctive square shape. These antibiotics inhibit bacterial cell wall synthesis by binding to
penicillin­binding proteins (PBPs), which are essential for the synthesis of the peptidogly­
can cell wall. The term ”penicillin­binding proteins” can be misleading, as these proteins
are not the binding proteins described in the previous section but rather the targets of
beta­lactams.
• Penicillins: The first class of beta­lactams discovered, penicillins are effective against
Gram­positive bacteria.
Resistance Hunt
1
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1.1: Beta­lactamase classes. [1]
• Cephalosporins: Cephalosporins are a broad­spectrum antibiotic, effective against
Gram­negative bacteria.
• Carbapenems: Broad­spectrum activity, carbapenems are effective against both
Gram­positive and Gram­negative bacteria, including multi­drug resistant strains.
Examples include meropenem and imipenem.
• Monobactams: Monobactams are effective against Gram­negative bacteria, it is
an alternative in case of allergy to penicillins and cephalosporins.
• Beta­lactamase Inhibitors: Not antibiotics but can bind to beta­lactamases making
them inactive. Often used in combination with beta­lactams to protect them from
degradation by beta­lactamase enzymes.
1.3
Beta­lactamases
Beta­lactamases are enzymes produced by bacteria that degrade beta­lactam antibiotics
by hydrolyzing the beta­lactam ring, thereby providing resistance to the bacteria. These
enzymes are classified into four main classes (A, B, C, and D) based on their structure
and mechanism:
• Class A: These beta­lactamases are serine­based enzymes that are capable of
hydrolysing penicillins and cephalosporins. Examples include TEM, SHV, and CTX­
M enzymes.
Item textbfClass B: Also known as metallo­beta­lactamases, these enzymes utilise
zinc ions. They can hydrolyse a broad spectrum of beta­lactams, including car­
bapenems. Examples: VIM and IMP enzymes.
• Class C: These beta­lactamases or AmpC enzymes primarily hydrolyse cephalosporins.
Examples include MOX, CMY­2, FOX and ACT­1.
• Class D: Known as oxacillinases (OXA­type enzymes), these beta­lactamases.
2
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:9==
They are particularly effective against oxacillin and cloxacillin. Examples include
OXA­22 and OXA­46.
Understanding the diversity of beta­lactamase classes is crucial for developing effective
strategies to counteract antibiotic resistance, as each class exhibits different substrate
specificities.
Figure 1.2: Beta­lactamase classes. [2]
1.4
Relevance
In the XXI. century, a wide spectrum of antibiotics is used around the globe. In 2023,
the global antibiotics market was estimated at USD 50.91 billion; according to experts’
predictions, this number will be USD 68.03 billion in 2030. [see 3] Antibiotics are used in
different fields such as medicine, agriculture, food, chemical and cleaning industries. The
growing demand and emerging new resistance mechanisms make the topic a priority.
1.5
Metagenomics
The main objective is to identify novel beta­lactamases. This objective has two keywords:
novel and beta­lactamases. The second implies that we are searching for a function.
The first keyword suggests analysing many different organisms to increase the chance of
finding something novel. Considering these the suitable approach is metagenomic data
analysis. Metagenomics is the study of all genetic material in an environmental sample.
While single cell and whole genome sequencing work with monocultures, metagenomic
samples contain a microbiome. A microbiome is a community of multiple microorgan­
isms, such as bacteria, archaea, fungi, viruses, and protozoa, in an environment, and
metagenomic sequencing is the sequencing of all nucleotide sequences in such biologi­
cal samples. These features make metagenomics a suitable approach for this thesis.
After sequencing, different data processing and analysis branches are available based on
the desired end product, such as taxon or phylogenetic abundance profiling or genom cov­
erage profiling. This project requires data types that suit functional analysis. A metage­
nomic assembly is such.
Genome assembly is the reconstruction of genomes from the smaller DNA segments
called reads which are generated by a sequencing experiment. [4] There are different
methods to perform a reconstruction.
The workflow presented by this thesis requires an assembly file as an input.
Resistance Hunt
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.3: Schematic representation of the three main assembly methods, – Greedy,
Overlap­Layout­Consensus, and de Bruijn. Greedy is an iterative method merging reads
with maximum overlapping regions into contigs. The Overlap­Layout­Consensus uses
dynamic programming; first, it computes pairwise alignments and then constructs a graph
based on overlaps. In the graph, the Branch­less path highlights the order of merging the
overlaps into contigs. The de Bruijn graph uses short segments of reads called k­mers to
build a graph by computing their overlaps. The branch­less path represents the order of
merging overlaps into contigs. [4]
1.6
Gene Prediction
The process of identifying regions that encode genes is called gene prediction or gene
calling. There are two main approaches to this process. Evidence­based gene prediction
uses homology search in a sequence database. The Basic Local Alignment Tool (BLAST)
[5] is a well­known example that performs such searches. The ab initio approach reads in
a sequence and identifies open reading frames by recognising motifs, such as start and
stop codons, Shine­Dalgarno sequence and ribosomal binding site.
Evidence­based gene calling relies on the reference database. The ab initio method is ad­
vised when searching for novel genes. [5] An example of such a tool is Prodigal (PROkary­
otic DYnamic programming Gene­finding ALgorithm), with performs gene translation too.
[6]
1.7
Protein Search
Translating DNA sequences to amino acid sequences enhances gene function predic­
tion. Because of codon redundancy, amino acids are more conserved than DNA, which
improves the finding of remote homologs. Moreover, translation means a three­fold reduc­
tion in data compared to DNA. Ab initio gene calling says nothing about a gene’s function.
Hence, a function annotation tool is needed.
Probabilistic models present a significant advancement in searching for remote homologs.
Unlike sequence­to­sequence alignments, these models hold generalised information about
4
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:11==
sequences. In a sequence, some regions, known as conserved positions, are critical for
function and cannot tolerate changes. Other regions are more flexible, allowing for varia­
tions or even deletions without loss of function. Probabilistic models encode a consensus
sequence that permits position­specific deviations, penalising alignments for changes in
conserved regions while allowing flexibility in non­conserved regions. HMMER [7] is an
example of such a tool, offering a probabilistic search with computational requirements
similar to those of BLAST.
1.8
Catalytic Amino Acids
To assess functionality, specific amino acids must be examined. Among the 20 proteino­
genic amino acids, some have unique properties that facilitate binding and catalysis. The
following classification of amino acids, based on their side­chain properties, is relevant to
this thesis:
• Carboxyl Group: Aspartic acid (D) and Glutamic acid (E) are negatively charged
and contribute to acid­base catalysis and substrate binding.
• Amide Group: Lysine (K) and Arginine (R) are highly reactive, positively charged
amino acids involved in acid­base catalysis and forming hydrogen bonds.
• Hydroxyl Group: Serine (S), Threonine (T), and Tyrosine (Y) participate in hydro­
gen bonding and nucleophilic attacks.
• Amino Group: Asparagine (N) and Glutamine (Q) are uncharged and polar, capa­
ble of forming hydrogen bonds and stabilising substrates.
• Metallic Interaction: Histidine (H) is an aromatic amino acid that coordinates metal
ions in metalloenzymes such as Class B beta­lactamases.
The active site is the region of an enzyme that facilitates chemical reactions; it cannot
function without a combination of chemically active residues.
1.9
Protein 3D Structures
In an enzyme’s amino acid sequence, active site residues can be found far apart, but in
the folded 3D structure, they must come together within a specific distance and orienta­
tion for the enzyme to be functional. Sequence alignments are unreliable in predicting
enzymatic activity. Analysis of 3D structures of proteins is computationally complex and
costly compared to previous methods, but a more reliable predictor. Determining the 3D
structure of a protein experimentally requires advanced and expensive technology.
1.9.1
Methods of Determining Atomic Structures
X­ray Crystallography
X­ray crystallography was the first method developed for investigating atomic structures.
When purified and concentrated, proteins can form crystals by evaporating the solution
containing the purified protein. These crystals are then exposed to an X­ray beam, which
scatters and creates a distinct pattern, specific to the crystal structure. Algorithms decode
this pattern into atomic coordinates, building the 3D structure. This method is expensive
due to the need for precise and powerful X­ray beams. While smaller devices are avail­
able, achieving high resolution often requires a particle accelerator, known as a cyclotron.
However, not all proteins can form crystals, limiting this method’s applicability.
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy
NMR spectroscopy offers a broader range of protein analysis, as it does not require crystal
formation. In NMR, a protein sample is placed in a strong magnetic field, causing nuclei
Resistance Hunt
5
==PAGE:12==
to align and spin around the magnetic lines. Radio waves excite the nuclei, This mea­
surement allows mapping of the electron density in the molecule, and further refinements
build the 3D structure.
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy
NMR spectroscopy offers a broader range of protein analysis, as it does not require crys­
tal formation. In this method, a protein sample is mixed with a special buffer designed
for NMR measurement and placed in a strong magnetic field. In such conditions, nuclei
behave like microscopic magnets and align to and spin around the magnetic line. Nuclei
are then excited using radio waves causing them to resonate at specific frequencies influ­
enced by the surrounding electron density. The frequencies are recorded and processed.
This measurement allows us to map the electron density in the molecule, which is then
transformed into 3D structures.
Cryo­Electron Microscopy (Cryo­EM)
Cryogenic electron microscopy is the most recent advancement in structural determina­
tion. Purified protein samples are placed on a copper grid and frozen in liquid ethane.
Imaging is performed using a transmission electron microscope.
In the frozen state,
molecules have random orientations, and thousands of images of similarly oriented molecules
are grouped together. Advanced algorithms then piece these images together to construct
a 3D structure.
1.9.2
AlphaFold
AlphaFold [see 8] represents a major breakthrough in protein structure prediction. Unlike
previous methods, using AlphaFold does not require sample preparation or expensive
equipment. It is a deep learning­based AI model trained on experimentally determined
3D protein structures. Given an amino acid sequence as input, AlphaFold predicts the 3D
structure, working without reference structures. However, an attached query database to
find similar structures can improve performance by serving as templates for prediction.
The first version of AlphaFold was released in 2018 with impressive performance. The
second version, published in Nature on July 15, 2021, brought significant improvements.
The latest version, released in May 2024, further outperforms its competitors even without
a query database. With ongoing innovations in AI and microchip technology, AlphaFold
has become more accurate, affordable, and capable, including new features such as pre­
dicting protein­ligand interactions.
1.10
Structural Analysis
Protein 3D structures enable new possibilities for alignments and measurements. While
one­dimensional amino acid sequence alignments may show high similarity, the corre­
sponding 3D structures might differ significantly. Conversely, sequences with low identity
may fold into similar 3D structures, resulting in comparable functions. For instance, two
different enzymes might degrade the same substrate due to similar active site structures.
These measurements are complex and computationally expensive, but they are crucial
for verifying protein function before final in vitro confirmation.
1.11
Objectives
Given the escalating threat of antimicrobial resistance, exploring new avenues in our fight
against it is crucial. This study aims to push the boundaries of gene identification by
combining conventional bioinformatic methods with the latest technologies in one pipeline.
The specific objectives of this research are:
• Identification of resistance genes: To detect and catalogue genes responsible for
antimicrobial resistance in various microbial populations.
6
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:13==
• Identification of beta­lactamases: To identify known beta­lactamase genes that
confer resistance to beta­lactam antibiotics.
• Identification of novel beta­lactamases: To discover new beta­lactamase genes
that have not been previously documented.
• Construction of an automated pipeline: To develop a flexible and modular bioin­
formatic pipeline capable of efficiently identifying and characterising resistance genes,
including beta­lactamases.
Resistance Hunt
7
==PAGE:14==
8
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:15==
2
Materials and methods
2.1
Environment
The workflow was developed on an HPC server (Computerome.dk) [9] utilising Linux com­
mands, Shell scripts, Python, Snakemake [10], and various bioinformatics tools, including
Prodigal [6], HMMER[7], AlphaFold [8], and PyMol [11]. Snakemake is a tool designed
to organise scripts in a pipeline. It is especially useful when a workflow generates many
intermediate result files with multiple inputs. Using Snakemake also makes reproducibility
easier.
This is a simplified diagram generated automatically by Snakemake, representing the
complexity of the workflow. 2.1
Figure 2.1: Simplified diagram generated automatically by Snakemake, presenting the
automated portion of the workflow.
Resistance Hunt
9
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Data Collection
This pipeline requires contig inputs. We hypothesise that sewage can serve as a rich
reservoir of microorganisms exposed to antibiotics and, thus, have a high antimicrobial
resistance (AMR) gene concentration. A ipnut data is part of an ongoing experiment under
the Global Sewage Study. This metagenomic assembly file contains 369,196 contigs.
Sample selection was guided by the Flankophile [12] evaluation strategy to ensure the
initial dataset was suitable for testing our hypothesis. By analysing the results from the
Flankophile project, samples were ranked based on their beta­lactamase content, and the
sample with the highest identified beta­lactamase genes was selected.
2.3
Gene Annotation and Translation
The pipeline’s initial step involves identifying and translating genes from the assembly
input file. While initially considering PROKKA [13] and BAKTA [14] for these tasks, the
workflow prioritises more intricate methods for subsequent gene classification. Therefore,
only the core function of translating genes to amino acid sequences was used. Prodigal
[6] (Prokaryotic Dynamic Programming Gene­finding Algorithm) was employed for these
steps.
Prodigal offers two modes for gene annotation: ”normal” for whole­genome data and
”meta” for fragmented metagenomes. At this step, the ”meta” option was selected.
Subsequently, amino acid sequences were filtered based on the presence of start and stop
codons, with incomplete sequences being discarded. Complete sequences are essential
as partial genes cannot be utilised for final in vitro verification.
2.4
Functional Annotation
To identify a protein’s function, it must be compared to known reference sequences. While
BLASTP could be used for this purpose, its sensitivity is insufficient for identifying low­
identity amino acid sequences. Therefore, I opted to use HMMER version 3.4.
2.4.1
HMMER
HMMER [7] employs a probabilistic searching method called the Hidden Markov Model
(HMM). This approach is more sensitive to detecting sequences with low identity and
has computational demands similar to those of BLASTP. An HMM profile describes the
probability of occurrence of each of the 20 amino acid residues at each position in a
sequence. These values are referred to as emission probabilities.
To build an HMM profile, curated reference sequences representing different protein vari­
ants are required. The algorithm measures and stores various parameters to construct
the model, such as:
• The occurrence of amino acids at each position (describing the consensus sequence)
• The probability of transitions between amino acids
• The likelihood of gaps in the sequence
This method provides more comprehensive information than sequence­to­sequence align­
ment by generalising descriptive information about a group of genes.
I used HMMER’s sequence­to­profile database search function, known as “hmmscan.”
This function aligns each gene to all HMM profiles in the database and calculates the
significance of hits to target profile. Similarities identified in this search are termed “hits”,
and profile names are termed “targets”.
10
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:17==
The standard output of HMMER is a “.domtblout” file, which is a table containing a ranked
list of the top hits, meaning those with the lowest e­values for each input sequence. By
default, the highest e­value considered is 10.0, and the output table lists a maximum of 10
of the most significant hits for each sequence ordered by increasing e­value. If the input
sequence has two or more distinct regions that align well with the profile, each region is
recorded as a separate domain in the output file. Below is a list of the important elements
of the output table for this study:
• Target name: Names of the HMM profiles.
• Query name: The unique sequence ID from the sample.
• E­value: Statistical significance of the hit.
• Alignment start coordinate: Start position of the alignment.
• Alignment end coordinate: End position of the alignment.
This structured approach ensures accurate functional annotation of proteins by leveraging
the sensitivity of HMMER’s probabilistic models.
2.4.2
Profile Databases
A suitable profile database is required to search for AMR genes. For this purpose, I used
two different databases: ResFams [15] and NCBI AMRFinder Plus [16]. The ResFams
database contains 170 profiles, while the NCBI AMRFinder Plus database contains 743.
The noticeable difference in the number of profiles is because the NCBI AMRFinder Plus
database is actively maintained and regularly updated. In this project, version 2024­05­
02.2 was used. Meanwhile, ResFams’s last update was on 2015­01­27.
Both databases cover the major classes of AMR genes. However, AMRFinder Plus is
more detailed and includes profiles for very specific subclasses, which is expected to
result in significant differences in the search outcomes.
2.5
Beta­lactamase Filter
At this point, we have HMMER results regarding the proteins’ functions. To determine the
number of beta­lactamase genes in our sample, we count the number of times each beta­
lactamase profile was hit, considering only the ”best” hit for each sequence. An e­value
threshold is used to exclude hits of low significance.
Our objective also includes identifying potential novel beta­lactamases. Multiple filters
were applied to enhance the efficiency of the downstream analysis. The first filter is the
beta­lactamase filter.
The simplest beta­lactamase filter uses the descriptions of the HMM profiles. While this
method would be satisfactory for known variants, it may miss novel variants. Theoretically,
new variants could share some similarity with non­beta­lactamase profiles, leading to false
negatives. To minimise false negatives, we benchmark HMM profiles’ similarity to known
beta­lactamase sequences using reference sequences. This refined list is then used as
a filter.
2.5.1
Protein Data Bank
The first attempt at using reference sequences involved downloading all beta­lactamase
structures from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) and processing them with HMMER, similar
to the sample. This method aimed to create a list of HMM profiles that matched the PDB
sequences, resulting in 752 proteins. However, upon review, it became apparent that
Resistance Hunt
11
==PAGE:18==
using ”beta­lactamase” as a keyword, searching on the PDB website only identified a
subset of the desired structures. Many proteins with beta­lactamase activity were listed
under broader terms such as ”hydrolase.” Including these additional keywords produced
a non­specific list containing many proteins without beta­lactamase activity, prompting the
search for alternative solutions.
2.5.2
PanRes
PanRes [17] is a manually curated database of resistance genes compiled from published
large databases. It is well­structured and easily automatable, making it convenient to
use. PanRes contains 6,613 beta­lactamase genes. The same steps were applied to the
PanRes genes and the sample to create a comprehensive list of HMM profiles for beta­
lactamases. This process involved gene identification and translation using Prodigal, this
time with the ”normal” flag instead of the ”meta” flag, followed by scoring with HMMER
using both ResFams and AMRFinder Plus profile databases.
Using PanRes offers several advantages over the PDB approach, such as more straight­
forward automation by reusing an existing part of the pipeline and a greater abundance
of published DNA sequences compared to protein structures. However, some modifica­
tions were necessary due to the noise in the results. Numerous HMM profiles unrelated to
beta­lactamases, such as those for Ribosome protection by ABC­F proteins, were initially
included.
Further investigation revealed that some PanRes sequences contained multiple open
reading frames, likely due to co­regulation, and sequences with multiple annotations re­
flecting their roles in resistance to different antibiotics. For instance, efflux pumps, which
actively transport antibiotics out of the bacterium, do not have enzymatic activity. Re­
moving these sequences from PanRes resulted in an estimated 30% reduction of false
positive hits.
2.6
Twilight Zone Filter
The Twilight Zone refers to the region of genes with intermediate to low sequence identity,
where distinguishing functional similarity becomes challenging. Practically, this is imple­
mented as an e­value filter. The motivation behind this filter is to narrow the scope for
subsequent protein structure prediction, which is computationally expensive.
Initially, the e­value threshold was set to 1e­03 and gradually increased until the number of
protein candidates for 3D structural analysis became unmanageable within the project’s
timeline. Through this iterative process, the threshold was ultimately set to 1e­07.
2.7
Conservation scoring
Applying the Twilight Zone filter resulted in a data reduction of more than 50%, but the re­
maining data still comprises several thousand genes. To aid in the selection of candidates
for structural analysis, a custom­made scoring method was employed. These genes have
low identity compared to the HMM profiles, with aligned parts usually less than 30% of the
sequence length. The strategy involved assessing highly conserved amino acid residues
and their catalytic importance. Genes with a high matching ratio of these residues were
considered suitable candidates for further analysis. The solution needed to handle thou­
sands of sequences and hundreds of profiles, so an algorithm was implemented to extract
conserved positions from HMM profiles.
Conservation extraction from profiles
Conservation extraction is straightforward if the meaning of different lines in an HMM pro­
file file is understood. In an HMM profile file opened by a text editor, the first few lines
12
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:19==
contain basic information such as ”Version,” ”Name,” and ”Accession Number.” The pro­
file starts at the line where ”HMM” is written, followed by the single­letter symbols of all 20
amino acids in alphabetical order, serving as column headers for the emission probability
table beneath it. The next line is also a header to enhance readability, containing sym­
bols for different state transitions. The subsequent COMPO line is followed by position
coordinates as row names in ascending order. Each row is composed of three lines of
numbers. The algorithm focuses on the first line, known as the ”Match emission line,”
where the numbers are negative natural log probabilities. For example, a 50% probability
is represented as ­ln(0.5) = 0.693.
The COMPO line represents the overall probability of residues for the entire sequence, re­
flecting the background residue composition. The algorithm iterates through all positions,
checking for high­probability residues using a threshold and the following equation:
e(−mp,k) −e(−compok) > T
(2.1)
where:
• m ­ match emission probability
• p ­ position (1...P)
• k ­ residue or column number (1...20)
• T ­ threshold
• compo ­ values in the COMPO line
In other words, if the emission probability of a residue at a given position compared to
the background is greater than the threshold, it is considered a conserved position, and
both the position and the residue are stored in a list. The threshold used is 0.33. Al­
though this may not seem high at first glance, considering a uniform probability of amino
acids (0.05) and that this threshold represents the difference between the match emis­
sion probability and the background, the average value is around 40%. In many profiles,
conserved regions far exceed this threshold. This value accommodates the character­
istics of HMM profile databases. For example, in the AMRFinder Plus database, some
narrow niche profiles are built from as few as three sequences, resulting in low emission
probabilities due to low statistical significance. Conversely, in the ResFams database,
some profiles cover a broader spectrum of variants, introducing more noise. The list of
conserved residues with positions for each profile is used to check the number of matches
in the sample sequences.
Residues with catalytic properties
An additional measure to identify interesting proteins is a subset of the overall conserved
match ratio, which counts only amino acids with catalytic properties. The difference be­
tween these two numbers can provide helpful information about the sequences. An ideal
scenario is a high catalytic match ratio with a low overall match ratio, indicating that the
sample sequence has a low identity but still has potential catalytic activity.
Interchangeable Amino Acids
Additional flexibility is introduced through a dictionary of interchangeable amino acids to
allow for alternative folding and different conformations. These amino acid groups have
similar properties and chemical activities but vary in size:
• ’E’ ↔’D’ (both are negative)
Resistance Hunt
13
==PAGE:20==
• ’R’ ↔’K’ (both are positive)
• ’N’ ↔’Q’ (polar uncharged side chains with ­NH2 group)
• ’S’ ↔’T’ ↔’Y’ (all have ­OH group)
Curated active site knowledge
To ensure true­positive hits, a list of residues with positions describing the active sites was
introduced for the four major classes of beta­lactamases. Experimental results from the
”Mechanism and Catalytic Site Atlas” [18] were gathered to create these lists. The original
coordinates from the Atlas were manually transformed into HMM profile coordinates.
Calculating Score Tables
A detailed score table containing all relevant information is generated for each profile.
The first step involves aligning each sequence with the corresponding profiles using the
hmmalign function of HMMER. Then, an algorithm checks positions against conserva­
tion and active site lists from the previous step, utilising the interchangeable amino acid
dictionary. This process results in five different match ratio values:
• Match ratio
• Catalytic match ratio
• Interchangeable catalytic match ratio
• Active site match ratio
• Interchangeable active site match ratio
Additionally, the conserved positions with residues are included. These columns are com­
bined with the values calculated by HMMER, such as:
• Target length
• Query length
• E­value
• Alignment length
• Domain number
These steps are executed in parallel for the two HMM profile databases. The final step
of the automated pipeline combines individual score tables of profiles into two compre­
hensive tables: one for the AMRFinder Plus database and the other for the ResFams
database.
Data Evaluation and Candidate Selection
At this point in the workflow, the combined score table and individual profile score tables
were transferred to a computer with a display for visualisation and data exploration. For
this step, R with RStudio and tidyverse packages were used. The analysis revealed the
following trends in the data:
Collected sequence IDs were saved in a text file and transported back to the HPC server.
Structure Prediction
Using the previously saved and transported sequence ID list, sequences were extracted
into individual fasta files through a shell script. The source was a large fasta file con­
taining amino acid sequences translated by Prodigal, which was filtered to include only
complete genes. Protein structures were predicted using a shell script that generates
submission commands for each fasta file containing the protein’s amino acid sequence.
14
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:21==
Each submitted job utilised 1 GPU node with 40 CPU cores, 150 GB RAM, and 10 hours
of walltime. AlphaFold2 ran without the relaxation flag (­r) because enabling relaxation
crashed the algorithm. Relaxation in AlphaFold2 helps resolve stereochemical violations
in the structure, but the authors claim these violations are rare and the initial structure
without relaxation is already ”quite good.” Result files were then transferred to a computer
with a display for 3D evaluation.
Structural Analysis
Structural analysis was performed in PyMol, a state­of­the­art graphical software for 3D
protein structures. A reference protein with an experimentally validated structure is needed
for an insightful comparison. This protein should be the closest, most similar structure to
the query sequence, at least from the same subclass of beta­lactamases. Fortunately,
AlphaFold provides this information. In the output folder created by AlphaFold, there is
a subfolder called ”msas,” which contains sequence alignment files that AlphaFold uses
to find 3D structures to use as templates during predictions. The ”pdb_hits.hhr” file is an
alignment file of PDB structures with scores. Structures with the highest significance were
downloaded as ”.PDB” files from the PDB website.
The most significant beta­lactamase hit was also downloaded if the best hit was not a beta­
lactamase protein. These protein structures were then loaded into PyMol along with our
sample structure. Water molecules were removed for better visibility, and if the reference
proteins had multiple chains, they were separated. The reference protein was aligned to
the sample protein, and the RMSD value was stored.
Manual annotation and visual comparison of the active sites were conducted to gain in­
sights into the potential catalytic activity using curated knowledge from the catalytic atlas
website. Rotating animations of the aligned structures were saved for reporting purposes.
To measure the distance between the sample and the closest reference sequence, I cal­
culated the % identity. The aligned sequences were saved, and a custom Python script
was used to calculate two different % identity values: overall identity and aligned region
identity. It is important to note that this alignment is a 1D sequence alignment represen­
tation of a 3D structural alignment, resulting in improved accuracy compared to regular
sequence alignments.
Resistance Hunt
15
==PAGE:22==
16
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:23==
3
Results
The main objective is to identify novel beta­lactamase structures. This chapter covers
data descriptions, statistics, intermediate results, visualisations of protein structural align­
ments, and other findings.
3.1
Data collection
The input data is a metagenomic assembly file using Fasta format. It contains 369196
contigs, which are 854 megabases collectively. The file is part of the Global Sewage
Study. This file was selected by analysing a previous evaluation, which showed that his
sample contains 112 Beta­lactamase variants.
3.2
Gene Annotation Results
Prodigal identified 1066615 genes in 369117 contigs, while 79 contigs have no genes.
501735 genes are complete, and 564880 are partial, which means either the start codon
or the stop codon or both are missing. Partial genes were excluded from the analysis.
3.3
PanRes
PanRes database was used as a reference to create a beta­lactamase filter for the sam­
ple. After filtering for beta­lactamase genes and removing genes with multiple open read­
ing frames or roles in multiple pathways, 6,405 beta­lactamase genes remained. Fol­
lowing translation and hmmscan scoring, 268 profiles from AMRFinder Plus and 59 pro­
files from ResFams were identified as ”beta­lactamase” profiles. The number of profiles
identified differs from the initial profile descriptions. The differences resulting from using
PanRes as a reference are detailed in table A.1 and table A.2. In the case of ResFams,
additional profiles that were not originally classified as beta­lactamases were identified.
For AMRFinder Plus, there were both additional and excluded profiles. The excluded
profiles are genuine beta­lactamase profiles but were not the best hits for any PanRes
beta­lactamase genes, indicating that other profiles better described the similarities. This
suggests that the excluded profiles are broader and less specific.
An example of this is the profile bla_subclass_B2­NCBIFAM, which generally describes
the B2 subclass. However, there are six more specific profiles for B2 subclass genes:
• bla_B2_CphA­NCBIFAM
• blaCVI­NCBIFAM
• blaPFM­NCBIFAM
• blaSFH­NCBIFAM
• blaSFH_gen­NCBIFAM
• blaYEM­NCBIFAM
The additional profiles identified in both AMRFinder Plus and ResFams include penicillin­
binding proteins, efflux pumps, and beta­lactam sensor proteins.
Resistance Hunt
17
==PAGE:24==
3.4
Function Annotation Results and Filters
Functional annotation was performed using HMMER with two profile databases: AM­
RFinder Plus and ResFams. The number of genes identified is shown in the table below.
In the Twilight Zone, genes with an e­value higher than 1e­07, as scored by HMMER,
were considered.
AMRFinder Plus
ResFams
Identified genes
66368
77464
Beta­lactamase hit
9733
30169
Beta­lactamase in the Twilight zone
4326
12068
Table 3.1: Table of comparation of AMRFinder Plus and ResFams beta­lactamase hit
counts. Identified genes = using all profiles during the search. Beta­lactamase hit =
applying beta­lactamase filter using PanRes as reference. Beta­lactamase in the Twilight
zone = further filtering by and e­value threshold
Distributions of hits by their e­values are illustrated in fig. 3.1 and fig. 3.2. It is important
to note that in both cases, the x­axis starts from 1e­70, while the lowest e­value in both
figures is around 1e­300. This truncation results in less than 1% of data loss, which only
affects this visualisation. For a complete spectrum, refer to fig. A.7 and fig. A.8.
(a) Complete E_value range
(b) Twilight zone
Figure 3.1: Distribution of genes by their E_value, using AMRFinder Plus database. Three
different histograms are plotted in front of each other. Green is a subset of the orange,
which is a subset of the blue area. The vertical dashed red line shows the E_value thresh­
old applied to separate the Twilight Zone. Blue = all resistance genes. Orange = beta­
lactamase filter using PanRes as reference. Green = Beta­lactamases using the HMM
profile description.
The orange area represents the flexibility introduced by using the PanRes database as a
filter. In the case of AMRFinder Plus, this area is relatively small, allowing us to introduce
a desired amount of flexibility to widen our scope at the boundaries.
The difference between the results from AMRFinder Plus and ResFams is evident. AM­
RFinder Plus contains more than four times as many profiles as ResFams. Using PanRes
as a reference showed that only 11 of the AMRFinder Plus profiles overlapped with other
18
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:25==
(a) Complete E_value range
(b) Twilight zone
Figure 3.2: Distribution of genes by their E_value, using ResFams database. Three differ­
ent histograms are plotted in front of each other. Green is a subset of the orange, which
is a subset of the blue area. The vertical dashed red line shows the E_value thresh­
old applied to separate the Twilight Zone. Blue = all resistance genes. Orange = beta­
lactamase filter using PanRes as reference. Green = Beta­lactamases using the HMM
profile description.
profiles in their focus group. We conclude that AMRFinder Plus is more specific, resulting
in less noise, which is crucial for narrowing the scope of the final evaluation. Additionally,
it is apparent that in the case of ResFams, the 18 extra profiles account for most of the
hits in the Twilight Zone, which is not ideal. The green area indicates that only a few hits
occur using profiles strictly associated with beta­lactamases.
3.5
Conservation Scoring Results
The two most important indicators within the conservation table are the Catalytic Match
Ratio and the Active Site Match Ratio. The advantage of the former is that it is calculated
automatically; however, the latter is more reliable as it is based on experimentally verified
knowledge about active sites.
Additionally, two extra columns were calculated using the concept of interchangeable
amino acids. A comparison between the original and interchangeable values shows slight
differences, with no significant outliers or distortions in the data.
An interesting filter idea was to compare the Interchangeable Active Site Match Ratio
against the alignment length. A short alignment length with a high match ratio could
suggest that only the active site region is aligned, indicating that the remainder of the
sequence may represent something novel. As shown in fig. 3.5, the highest match ratio
is 0.5 in this region. Both ResFams hits with an alignment length of 33 and 67 are among
the selected sequences for further analysis.
We are now in the Twilight Zone, at the final filtering step is before the 3D structural
evaluation. This part of the process is conducted manually. Overall, 27 sequences were
selected for 3D evaluation. As candidates for novel beta­lactamases, 16 sequences are
identified by AMRFinder Plus with an Interchangeable Active Site Ratio greater than 0.6.
Identified by ResFams, 5 sequences of the best candidates. Also, to show examples
from both extremes of the E_value spectrum, 6 more sequences are included. 4 of them
Resistance Hunt
19
==PAGE:26==
(a) Conserved catalytic residues
(b) Active site
Figure 3.3: Comparation of the original conserved residue ratio to the interchangeable
one.
(a) Conserved catalytic residues
(b) Active site
Figure 3.4: Scatter plots of Interchangeable match rations with respect to e­values.
are outside of the Twilight zone, these are positive references with low E_values and
2 negative references from the higher end of the E­value spectrum. These reference
sequences are either evidently good hits, therefore aligning precisely, or obvious bad hits
with almost no alignments.
Protein structures of the selected 27 genes were predicted using AlphaFold2.
3.6
Structural Analysis Results
In this section, our major findings are presented, starting with a few positive and negative
examples to provide a reference for the reader. Predicted protein structures were trans­
ferred to a computer with a display available. For each prediction, one or two reference
structures were downloaded from the PDB website. Alignments and measurements were
done in PyMol. The quality of the alignments is measured by the Root Mean Square De­
viation (RMSD) in ångström Å. The similarity between structures is measured per cent
identity, %identity. In this analysis, two different kinds of %identity are calculated; one is
a ratio of matching residues and sequence length, and the other is the ratio of matching
residues and alignment length.
3.6.1
Positive references
In this section, four positive reference proteins, each from one of the four major classes
are presented. These are low E_ value proteins with good alignments. The summary of
important parameters can be seen in table 3.2.
20
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.5: Scatter plot of Twilight genes. Alignment length vs Interchangeable Active
Site match ratio
Target Name
E_value
Align to
RMSD
bla_class_A­NCBIFAM
5.3e­104
5VPQ.PDB
0.775 Å
bla_subclass_B1­NCBIFAM
2.7e­71
5FQA.PDB
0.867 Å
bla_class_C­NCBIFAM
6.9e­159
6FM6.PDB
0.887 Å
bla_class_D_main­NCBIFAM
3.3e­83
4OH0.PDB
0.912 Å
Table 3.2: Table of positive reference proteins.
3.6.2
Negative references
In this section, we present two negative reference proteins that were identified as false
positives in our analysis.
Target Name
E_value
Align to
RMSD
blaR1_generic­NCBIFAM
0.038
4TQU.PDB
2.159 Å
1XA1.PDB
17.555 Å
blaHER­NCBIFAM
0.091
5OL2.PDB
20.642 Å
UniProt Q84EY3
20.042 Å
Table 3.3: Table of negative reference proteins.
The first negative reference is blaR1_generic­NCBIFAM, as shown in fig. 3.7. According
to AlphaFold2, the closest structure is 4TQU.PDB, a bacterial ABC transporter. This align­
ment appears to be good, with a low RMSD value, suggesting a strong similarity, however,
since 4TQU.PDB is not related to beta­lactamases, this indicates a false positive hit by
HMMER. Additionally, AlphaFold2 did not identify any beta­lactamase­related hits among
its queries. The second structure associated with this reference is 1XA1.PDB, the sensor
domain of BLAR1 from Staphylococcus. The alignment for this structure shows significant
mismatches and the RMSD value is high, further supporting the conclusion that this is a
false positive hit in our pipeline.
Resistance Hunt
21
==PAGE:28==
(a)
Class_A
­
5VPQ.PDB,
(beta­
lactamase)
(b)
Subclass_B1
­
5FQA.PDB,
(metallo­beta­lactamase)
(c) Class_C ­ 6FM6.PDB, (Class­C beta­
lactamase TRU­1)
(d) Class_D ­ 4OH0.PDB (OXA­
58 carbapenemase)
Figure 3.6: Positive references Proteins. Green = AlphaFold prediction, Cian = protein
PDB database.
(a) blaR1 ­ 4TQU.PDB (ABC transporter)
(b) blaR1 ­ 1XA1.PDB (sen­
sor domain of BLAR1)
Figure 3.7: Negative references Protein_1. Green = AlphaFold prediction. Cian and
Magenta = PDB references
The second negative reference protein is blaHER­NCBIFAM, as shown in fig. 3.8. Ac­
cording to AlphaFold2, the closest structure is the D­chain of 5OL2.PDB, an electron­
transferring flavoprotein/BUTYRYL­COA dehydrogenase from Clostridium difficile. This
alignment is poor, with a high RMSD value, and importantly, this protein is not a beta­
lactamase, confirming it as a false positive. The second structure is a beta­lactamase,
Q84EY3 from UniProt. While there is no experimentally verified blaHER structure in the
PDB, the Q84EY3 structure was predicted using AlphaFold, and I retrieved its 3D struc­
22
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:29==
ture from the AlphaFold database (ID: AF­Q84EY3­F1­model_v4.pdb). Despite being a
beta­lactamase and from the same family as the HMM profile, the alignment is poor, and
the RMSD value is high, confirming it as another false positive hit. Additionally, its function
is unknown.
(a) Closest structure: 5OL2.PDB
(ELECTRON
TRANSFERRING
FLAVOPROTEIN),
Alignment
RMSD = 20.642 Å
(b) Closest beta­lactamase related hit:
UniProt
Q84EY3 (blaHER), Alignment RMSD = 20.042 Å
Figure 3.8: Negative references Protein_2. Green = AlphaFold prediction, Cian = PDB
reference, Magenta = UniProt reference
3.6.3
Novel Beta­lactamases
In this section, we present the results of proteins that are novel and can be candidates for
in vitro analysis.
Protein_#1
Protein_1 is 401 amino acids long and best matches the AMRFinder Plus bla_class_C­
NCBIFAM profile with an E_value of 1.3e­07. The closest structural homolog is 2QMI.PDB
is an octameric penicillin­binding protein. In PyMol, alignment using the A­chain of 2QMI
shows high similarity, with a low RMSD value of 2.238 Å. Notably, 2QMI contains an
additional structure on all eight chains responsible for binding and forming the octameric
structure, which is absent in Protein_1, as shown in ??.
Class_C HMM Profile
protein_#1
3D match
S60
S71
+
K63
K74
+
Y146
Y154
+
E268
E276
­
K311
R318
­
Table 3.4: Table of active site residues match of protein_#1.
PDB ID
Description
RMSD
%identity
2QMI
PENICILLIN­BINDING PROTEIN
2.238
17.59%
4WYY
HYDROLASE, AMPC
3.113
15.35%
4WZ4
HYDROLASE, AMPC
3.088
15.35%
Table 3.5: Table of PDB structures used for alignment with protein_#1.
When comparing the active site residues of Protein_1 to those in the M­CSA [see 18],
3 out of 5 active site residues are a perfect match by location, while the other 2 differ.
Resistance Hunt
23
==PAGE:30==
Although the relative distances between residues within the sequence are accurate, two
residues are located on the protein’s outer side, away from the active site. Similarly, in
2QMI, E268 and K311 are also positioned on the protein’s exterior.
Two additional reference proteins, 4WYY and 4WZ4, are nearly identical, with all 5 active
site residues correctly positioned. However, using these proteins as templates to search
for similar residues in the proximity of the active site yielded no results.
We can conclude that Protein_1 is likely a penicillin­binding protein without enzymatic
activity. This conclusion is supported by the alignment with 4WYY, which contains a beta­
lactamase inhibitor that binds to a serine residue in the same position as in Protein_1
[19].
(a) Green = AlphaFold prediction, Cyan
= 2QMI.PDB, Blue = multimeric binding
site
(b) Active site residues
(c) 4VZ4
(d) 4WYY with inhibitor
Figure 3.9: Active site alignment of Protein_#1, Green = Protein_#1, Red = Protein_#1
active site residues, Magenta = reference protein, Blue = Reference protein active site
residues, Yellow = inhibitor
Protein_#2
Protein_2 is 295 amino acids long and best matches the AMRFinder Plus bla_class_C­
NCBIFAM profile with an E_value of 3.9e­05. The closest structural homolog is the A­
chain of 4GB7.PDB, a dimeric hydrolase. In PyMol, the overall alignment shows high
similarity, with an RMSD value near the acceptable limit, at 3.288 Å. Notably, 2QMI also
appears in the AlphaFold query list and aligns even better with Protein_2, with an RMSD
of 2.238 Å. Similar to Protein_1, the region responsible for multimer formation is absent
in this protein.
Initial analysis showed that only 3 out of 5 active site residues (S45, K48, Y138) were
24
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:31==
Class_C HMM Profile
protein_#2
3D match
S60
S45
+
K63
K48
+
Y146
Y138
+
E268
E231
+
K311
K243
+
Table 3.6: Table of active site residues match of protein_#2.
PDB ID
Description
RMSD
%identity
4GB7
DIMER HYDROLASE
3.288
11.42%
2QMI
PENICILLIN­BINDING PROTEIN
1.976
16.33%
3OZH
D­ALANINE CARBOXYPEPTIDASE
1.635
13.60%
Table 3.7: Table of PDB structures used for alignment with protein_#2.
aligned using HMMER and sequence alignment. However, after structural alignment in
PyMol, two additional amino acids (E231, K243) were identified near the active site. The
relative distances between these residues differed significantly, preventing HMMER from
aligning them with the profile, as shown in fig. 3.10.
Interestingly, E231, an active site residue in Protein_#2, is absent in the reference struc­
tures but present here. It serves as a hydrogen bond acceptor and electrostatic stabiliser.
The active sites, depicted in fig. 3.11, align well with known structures; let us hypothesise
about enzymatic activity of Protein_#2.
Figure 3.10: Comparation of active sites coordinates and relative distances of protein_#2.
Top = HMM profile coordinates, Bottom = protein coordinates
Protein_#3
Protein_#3 is 366 amino acids long and best matches the AMRFinder Plus bla_class_C­
NCBIFAM profile with an E_value of 7.4e­06. The closest structural homolog is the A­
chain of 2QMI.PDB, octameric penicillin­binding protein. In PyMol, the overall alignment
shows high similarity, with a good RMSD value, 2.590 Å.
Protein_#4
Protein_#4 is 365 amino acids long and best matches the AMRFinder Plus bla_subclass_B1­
NCBIFAM profile with an E_value of 5.8e­05. The closest structural homolog is the A­
chain of 2ZO4.PDB, a metallo­beta­lactamase. In PyMol, the overall alignment shows
high similarity, with a good RMSD value, 1.121 Å.
3.6.4
Other Findings
In this section, I present two more interesting findings.
Resistance Hunt
25
==PAGE:32==
(a) 4GB7
(b) 2QMI
(c) 3OZH
Figure 3.11: Active site alignment of Protein_#2, Green = Protein_#2, Red = Protein_#2
active site residues, Blue = Reference protein active site residues
Class_C HMM Profile
protein_#2
3D match
S60
S76
+
K63
K79
+
Y146
Y173
+
E268
­
K311
R306
*
Table 3.8: Table of active site residues match of protein_#3. 3 out of 5 is a match, E268
is missing, and K311 is an interchangeable match.
PDB ID
Description
RMSD
%identity
2QMI
penicillin­binding protein
2.590
16.67%
2QZ6
Beta­lactamase class­C
1.665
12.79%
Table 3.9: Table of PDB structures used for alignment with protein_#3.
Class_C HMM Profile
protein_#2
3D match
H76
H109
+
H78
H111
+
H139
H214
+
N143
H218
­
C158
D233
­
K161
R238
o
H200
H278
+
Table 3.10: Table of active site residues match of protein_#4. 4 out of 7 is a match, N143
and c158 are missing, and K161 is an interchangeable match.
3VWL_like hits
Out of the 16 candidates of best AMRFinder Plus candidates, 12 look almost identical, and
according to ALphaFold, their best match is 3VWL.PDB, which is a 6­aminohexanoate­
dimer hydrolase mutant. Organism: Paenarthrobacter ureafaciens, Flavobacterium sp.
KI723T1. All 12 proteins align to 3VWL between RMSD 1.168 angstrom and 3.473 angstrom.
They all hit the best to the bla_class_C­NCBIFAM profile and have 3 out of 5 active site
26
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:33==
PDB ID
Description
RMSD
%identity
2ZO4
metallo­beta­lactamase
1.121
23.48%
6AO1
Beta­lactamase
0.759
37.70%
Table 3.11: Table of PDB structures used for alignment with protein_#4.
amino acids.
Class_C HMM Profile
protein_#2
3D match
S60
S76
+
K63
K79
+
Y146
Y173
+
E268
­
K311
­
Table 3.12: Table of active site residues match of protein_#3. 3 out of 5 is a match, E268
is missing, and K311 is an interchangeable match.
ResFams
After the investigation of the 5 best ResFams hits, all of them are false positives. They
align perfectly with the closest structural homolog from the AlphaFold query and poorly
with any beta­lactamase structures.
ResFams protein
PDB ID
Description
RMSD
ResFams_prot_#1
2PBY
GLUTAMINASE
0.811
3W4O
BETA­LACTAMASE
10.409
ResFams_prot_#2
2PBY
GLUTAMINASE
0.776
3W4O
BETA­LACTAMASE
12.045
ResFams_prot_#3
6OK4
GAPDH
0.760
ResFams_prot_#4
2Y4A
TRICOVALENT BINDING
1.620
1GHP
BETA­LACTAMASE
21.879
ResFams_prot_#5
2D30
CYTIDINE DEAMINASE
0.555
Table 3.13: Table of ResFams protein alignment.
Resistance Hunt
27
==PAGE:34==
28
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:35==
4
Discussion
4.1
Data
The final results support the hypothesis that sewage is a reservoir for microorganisms
exposed to antibiotics, harbouring a high amount of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) genes.
In this study, over 60,000 AMR genes were identified, highlighting the potential of sewage
as a significant source of AMR. However, due to time constraints, only one sample was
tested. Further studies with a broader range of samples are necessary to validate these
findings.
4.2
The Workflow
The automated pipeline developed for this study proved successful, though its complexity
poses challenges. While the pipeline efficiently processed the data, its current complexity
makes it difficult to present and debug. Future optimisation could significantly stream­
line the workflow. Initially, the use of Snakemake, as recommended by my supervisors,
seemed burdensome and time­consuming, particularly in the early stages. However, as
the project progressed, Snakemake became a significant asset. It allowed for quick mod­
ifications and facilitated the execution of the pipeline with a single command, greatly en­
hancing workflow efficiency.
The modularity of the pipeline is another strong advantage. The HMM databases, the
PanRes reference database, and even the manual annotation of active sites for scoring
are all replaceable and expandable. This flexibility means that the pipeline can be easily
adapted to search for other protein families, making it a valuable tool beyond the scope of
this project. The runtime of the automated part with the given input file is approximately 8
hours, which is within acceptable limits. The most time­consuming processes are PRODI­
GAL and HMMER, while conservation calculation and table merging steps are completed
within minutes.
4.3
PanRes as a Benchmark
The initial purpose of using the PanRes reference database was to expand the boundaries
and include beta­lactamase­like proteins. However, PanRes also provided a valuable
benchmark for comparing the performance of different HMM databases. This dual role of
PanRes enhanced the reliability and robustness of the workflow.
4.4
HMMER, AMRFinder Plus vs. ResFams
Working with probabilistic models like HMMER provided valuable insights into the strengths
and limitations of HMM profiles. The nine­year gap between the development of Res­
Fams and AMRFinder Plus is evident in the results.
ResFams contributed minimally
to the overall findings, whereas AMRFinder Plus, despite not being fully utilised in this
project, demonstrated significant potential. The current limitation of AMRFinder Plus lies
in the manual annotation of active sites, with only four annotations corresponding to the
four major classes. Despite this, the extensive profiles in AMRFinder Plus helped reduce
false positives, particularly in the Twilight Zone. In contrast, hits from ResFams often
corresponded to more specific AMRFinder Plus profiles with lower e­values.
One critique of AMRFinder Plus is the inclusion of specific profiles based on fewer than
five sequences. The utility of such profiles is questionable and warrants further scrutiny.
Resistance Hunt
29
==PAGE:36==
4.5
Conservation Scoring
The results support the utility of conservation scoring in identifying candidate proteins. The
manually annotated active sites are subsets of the broader catalytic residue conservation,
with a strong correlation between the two. While the manually annotated sites offer greater
sensitivity, both approaches are valuable for candidate selection. In the context of the
3D structural pipeline, knowledge of the active site coordinates is essential for accurate
analysis.
4.6
Interchangeable Residues
The hypothesis regarding interchangeable residues remains to be verified through in vitro
experiments. This verification is crucial for confirming the functional relevance of the
identified residues and their potential role in enzymatic activity.
4.7
Interpretation of the Results
One of the most significant findings is the disparity between one­dimensional (1D) and
three­dimensional (3D) structural alignments. Instances where HMM alignments failed to
capture highly conserved active site residues, yet these residues aligned perfectly in 3D,
underscore the limitations of 1D analysis. Conversely, cases where HMMER identified all
active site residues but 3D modeling revealed misalignment—such as residues positioned
on the protein’s exterior—highlight the importance of incorporating 3D structural analysis
for accurate functional predictions.
4.8
Self­Reflection
One significant area where I could have improved is in setting up additional published tools
designed for the identification of remote homologs and novel proteins. Implementing tools
like pairwise comparative modelling (PCM), as designed by Ruppé et al. [20], would have
provided a valuable benchmark for comparing my results. This comparative approach
could have offered insights into the accuracy and effectiveness of my pipeline relative to
existing methodologies.
Furthermore, investing more time in deeply understanding the biochemical interactions of
beta­lactamases could have streamlined the development process. A stronger founda­
tional knowledge in this area might have allowed me to anticipate challenges and design
more efficient solutions, ultimately saving time and improving the overall quality of the
project.
Additionally, a more disciplined and coherent approach to data and code management
would have greatly benefited the research process. Consistent documentation and or­
ganisation of data and scripts would have facilitated easier debugging and reproducibility,
leading to a more efficient workflow and a higher quality of work.
4.9
Suggestions for Improvement
Several minor modifications could significantly enhance the workflow’s efficiency and ef­
fectiveness. The following suggestions aim to improve throughput and streamline the
process:
• **Remove ResFams:** By removing ResFams and allowing AMRFinder Plus to
utilise all resources, you can save significant runtime—potentially reducing it by
hours—and conserve hard drive space.
30
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:37==
• **Automate Candidate Selection:** Automating the candidate selection process within
the conservation table would eliminate the need for extra file transfers between ma­
chines, thereby improving workflow efficiency.
• **Automate Sequence Extraction and AlphaFold Execution:** Streamlining the pro­
cess by automating sequence extraction and initiating AlphaFold runs directly within
the pipeline would reduce manual intervention and save time.
• **Automate Reference PDB Collection:** Automating the retrieval of reference PDB
files after the AlphaFold run would further enhance the pipeline’s efficiency by re­
ducing the need for manual data collection.
4.9.1
HMM to HMM Search
Currently, HMMER lacks the capability to perform HMM to HMM searches, which could
be valuable for pairwise scoring using AMRFinder Plus profiles. Implementing a method
for HMM­to­HMM comparison could provide insights into the relationships between pro­
files. For instance, specific profiles for narrow subsections of Class­A beta­lactamases
are subsets of larger Class­A profiles. Understanding these relationships could allow for
the automatic distribution of manually annotated active sites to narrower profiles. Achiev­
ing active site annotation for all profiles would unlock significant potential in the workflow
and is an objective worth pursuing.
4.9.2
Large Language Models (LLMs)
Large Language Models (LLMs) are rapidly advancing and may soon have the capa­
bility to replace traditional HMM­based approaches and conservation scoring within this
pipeline, potentially even handling all processes up to the AlphaFold stage. Specifically,
LLMs could be trained to flexibly identify active site residues, offering a more dynamic and
potentially more accurate approach to protein function prediction.
Resistance Hunt
31
==PAGE:38==
32
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:39==
5
Conclusion
This study successfully achieved all four of its primary objectives, marking progress in the
fight against antimicrobial resistance. While the results are promising, they also highlight
areas for further improvement, particularly in optimising the workflow and verifying find­
ings through experimental validation. Integrating both 1D and 3D analyses is crucial for
accurate protein function prediction, and future research should continue to explore the
full potential of these tools.
Resistance Hunt
33
==PAGE:40==
Bibliography
[1]
Yeongjin Yun et al. “Structural Insights for Core Scaffold and Substrate Specificity
of B1, B2, and B3 Metallo­β­Lactamases”. In: Frontiers in Microbiology 12 (2022).
ISSN: 1664­302X. DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.752535. URL: https://www.frontiersin.
org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.2021.752535/full.
[2]
Corneliu Ovidiu Vrancianu et al. “Emerging Strategies to Combat β­Lactamase Pro­
ducing ESKAPE Pathogens”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences 21.22
(2020). ISSN: 1422­0067. DOI: 10.3390/ijms21228527. URL: https://www.mdpi.
com/1422-0067/21/22/8527.
[3]
Antibiotics Market Size, Share & Trends Analysis Report By Action Mechanism
(Cell Wall Synthesis Inhibitors, RNA Synthesis Inhibitors), By Drug Class (Penicillin,
Cephalosporin), By Type (Branded, Generic), And Segment Forecasts, 2024 ­ 2030.
URL: https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/antibiotic-market.
[4]
Jay S. Ghurye et al. “Metagenomic Assembly: Overview, Challenges and Applica­
tions”. In: The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine 89.3 (Sept. 30, 2016), pp. 353–
362.
[5]
Victor Kunin et al. “A Bioinformatician’s Guide to Metagenomics”. In: Microbiology
and Molecular Biology Reviews 72.4 (2008), pp. 557–578. DOI: 10.1128/mmbr.
00009-08. eprint: https://journals.asm.org/doi/pdf/10.1128/mmbr.00009-08. URL:
https://journals.asm.org/doi/abs/10.1128/mmbr.00009-08.
[6]
Doug Hyatt et al. “Prodigal: prokaryotic gene recognition and translation initiation
site identification”. In: BMC Bioinformatics 11.1 (2010), p. 119. DOI: 10.1186/1471-
2105-11-119. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-11-119.
[7]
Sean Eddy. HMMER: biosequence analysis using profile hidden Markov models.
URL: http://hmmer.org/.
[8]
John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, et al. “Highly accurate protein struc­
ture prediction with AlphaFold”. In: Nature 596.7873 (Aug. 2021). DOI: 10.1038/
s41586-021-03819-2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2.
[9]
URL: https://www.computerome.dk/.
[10]
F. Mölder, K. P. Jablonski, and B. et al. Letcher. “Sustainable data analysis with
Snakemake [version 1; peer review: 1 approved, 1 approved with reservations]”. In:
F1000Research 10.33 (2021). DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.29032.1. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.29032.1.
[11]
Warren L. DeLano. PyMOL by Schrödinger. URL: https://pymol.org/.
[12]
Alix Vincent Thorn et al. “Flankophile: a bioinformatic pipeline for prokaryotic ge­
nomic synteny analysis”. In: Microbiology Spectrum 12.1 (2024), e0241323. DOI:
10.1128/spectrum.02413-23.
[13]
Torsten Seemann. “Prokka: rapid prokaryotic genome annotation.” In: Bioinformat­
ics 30.14 (July 2014). DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu153. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1093/bioinformatics/btu153.
[14]
Oliver Schwengers et al. “Bakta: rapid & standardized annotation of bacterial genomes
via alignment­free sequence identification”. In: Microbial Genomics (Nov. 2021).
DOI: 10.1099/mgen.0.000685.
[15]
M. K. Gibson, K. J. Forsberg, and G. Dantas. “Improved annotation of antibiotic
resistance functions reveals microbial resistomes cluster by ecology.” In: The ISME
Journal 9.1 (Jan. 2015). DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2014.106. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1038/ismej.2014.106.
34
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:41==
[16]
M. Feldgarden et al. “AMRFinderPlus and the Reference Gene Catalog facilitate
examination of the genomic links among antimicrobial resistance, stress response,
and virulence.” In: Scientific Reports 11.1 (June 2021). DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-
91456-0. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-91456-0.
[17]
Hannah­Marie Martiny et al. “PanRes ­ Collection of antimicrobial resistance genes
(1.0.1) [Data set].” In: Zenodo (2023). DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.10091602. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10091602.
[18]
António J M Ribeiro et al. “Mechanism and Catalytic Site Atlas (M­CSA): a database
of enzyme reaction mechanisms and active sites”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 46.D1
(Nov. 2017), pp. D618–D623. ISSN: 0305­1048. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx1012. eprint:
https://academic.oup.com/nar/articlepdf/46/D1/D618/23161908/gkx1012.pdf. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx1012.
[19]
David C. McKinney et al. “4,5­Disubstituted 6­Aryloxy­1,3­dihydrobenzo[c][1,2]oxaboroles
Are Broad­Spectrum Serine β­Lactamase Inhibitors”. In: ACS Infectious Diseases
1.7 (July 2015), pp. 310–316. DOI: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.5b00031. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1021/acsinfecdis.5b00031.
[20]
Etienne Ruppé et al. “Prediction of the intestinal resistome by a three­dimensional
structure­based method”. In: Nature Microbiology 4.1 (Jan. 2019), pp. 112–123.
ISSN: 2058­5276. DOI: 10.1038/s41564-018-0292-6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41564-018-0292-6.
Resistance Hunt
35
==PAGE:42==
36
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:43==
A
Supplementary Materials
Excluded according to Panres
Included according to Panres
bla_subclass_B2­NCBIFAM
AAC_3_VIII­NCBIFAM
blaAMZ­NCBIFAM
AAC_6p_Ib­NCBIFAM
blaBIM­NCBIFAM
ANT_3pp_I­NCBIFAM
blaB­IND­MUS­NCBIFAM
BlaI_of_MRSA­NCBIFAM
blaCAE­NCBIFAM
ble_MBL­NCBIFAM
blaOXA_Campylobacter­NCBIFAM
efflux_CmlA­NCBIFAM
blaPLA_ORN_TER­NCBIFAM
EntFM_CwpFM­NCBIFAM
blaSFH_gen­NCBIFAM
mac_hydro_EstT­NCBIFAM
blaZ_gen­NCBIFAM
MECA_PBP2A­NCBIFAM
classA_carba­NCBIFAM
MECA_pure­NCBIFAM
SHV_LEN_OKP­NCBIFAM
MECA1_pure­NCBIFAM
MECB_PBP­NCBIFAM
MECC_PBP­NCBIFAM
MECD_PBP­NCBIFAM
MecI_of_mecA­NCBIFAM
MecI_of_mecC­NCBIFAM
RND_perm_OqxB­NCBIFAM
sensor_BlaR1­NCBIFAM
sensor_MecR1­NCBIFAM
tet_MFS_A­NCBIFAM
tet_MFS_H_J­NCBIFAM
vanR_ACDEGLN­NCBIFAM
vanY_of_D­NCBIFAM
Table A.1: Comparation of AMRFinder Plus beta­lactamase profiles using PanRes as
reference.
A.1
Code
% identity calculation
1 def parse_clustal(file_path):
2
with open(file_path , 'r') as file:
3
lines = file.readlines()
4
5
# Remove header and empty lines
6
lines = [line.strip() for line in lines if line.strip() and not
line.startswith('CLUSTAL')]
7
8
sequences = {}
9
10
for line in lines:
11
if not line[0].isspace():
12
parts = line.split(maxsplit=1)
13
key = parts[0]
14
seq = parts[1] if len(parts) > 1 else ''
15
Resistance Hunt
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure A.1: Visualization of all hit counts/profiles using the AMRFinder Plus HMM profile
database
Figure A.2: Visualization of beta­lactamase hit counts/profiles using the AMRFinder Plus
HMM profile database filtered by PanRes reference
Figure A.3: Visualization of beta­lactamase hit counts/profiles using the AMRFinder Plus
HMM profile database. Filtered by profile description
38
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:45==
Figure A.4:
Visualization of all hit counts/profiles using the ResFams HMM profile
database
Figure A.5: Visualization of beta­lactamase hit counts/profiles using the ResFams HMM
profile database filtered by PanRes reference
Figure A.6: Visualization of beta­lactamase hit counts/profiles using the ResFams HMM
profile database. Filtered by profile description
Resistance Hunt
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure A.7: Distribution of genes by their E_value, using AMRFinder Plus database. The
vertical dashed red line shows the E_value threshold applied to separate the Twilight
Zone.
Figure A.8: Distribution of genes by their E_value, using ResFams database. The vertical
dashed red line shows the E_value threshold applied to separate the Twilight Zone.
40
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:47==
Excluded according to Panres
Included according to Panres
AAC6­Ib
ACR_tran
ANT2
ANT3
CblA
CepA
CfxA
Chlor_Efflux_Pump
MFS_1
MarR_2
Methyltransf_18
RND_efflux
TetA
TetA­G
Transpeptidase
msbA
romA
vanR
Table A.2: Comparation of ResFams beta­lactamase profiles using PanRes as reference.
Simplified ID
Original ID
Protein_#1
NODE_2472_length_16276_cov_4.634590_2
Protein_#2
NODE_2849_length_15123_cov_1.845626_11
Protein_#3
NODE_10047_length_7833_cov_1.776668_4
Protein_#4
NODE_19401_length_5492_cov_1.394035_3
Protein_#5
NODE_38153_length_3794_cov_1.031906_3
Table A.3: Table of protein IDs in 3D analysis, found by AMRFinder Plus
16
# Skip lines of alignment annotation
17
if set(seq).issubset(set("* . :")):
18
continue
19
20
if key not in sequences:
21
sequences[key] = seq
22
else:
23
sequences[key] += seq
24
25
return sequences
26
27 def calculate_percent_identity(sequences):
28
if len(sequences) != 2:
29
print(f"Error: Expected exactly 2 sequences , but found {len(
sequences)}")
30
for key, sequence in sequences.items():
31
print(f"Sequence {key}: {sequence[:50]}... (length {len(
sequence)})")
32
raise ValueError("Exactly two sequences are required for
percent identity calculation.")
Resistance Hunt
41
==PAGE:48==
33
34
seq1, seq2 = sequences.values()
35
if len(seq1) != len(seq2):
36
print("Error: Sequences must be of the same length.")
37
print(f"Length of sequence 1: {len(seq1)}")
38
print(f"Length of sequence 2: {len(seq2)}")
39
raise ValueError("Sequences must be of the same length.")
40
41
total_length = len(seq1)
42
match_count = 0
43
aligned_residues = 0
44
45
# Calculate percent identity for the full length and aligned
residues
46
for a, b in zip(seq1, seq2):
47
if a != '-' and b != '-':
48
aligned_residues += 1
49
if a == b:
50
match_count += 1
51
52
if aligned_residues == 0:
53
print("Error: No aligned residues found.")
54
raise ValueError("Aligned length is zero.")
55
56
percent_identity_noGap = (match_count / aligned_residues) * 100
57
percent_identity = (match_count / total_length) * 100
58
59
# Trim gaps from both ends for the trimmed alignment percent
identity
60
start_index = 0
61
end_index = total_length
62
63
# Find the first non-gap character
64
while start_index < total_length and (seq1[start_index] == '-' or
seq2[start_index] == '-'):
65
start_index += 1
66
67
# Find the last non-gap character
68
while end_index > start_index and (seq1[end_index - 1] == '-' or
seq2[end_index - 1] == '-'):
69
end_index -= 1
70
71
trimmed_seq1 = seq1[start_index:end_index]
72
trimmed_seq2 = seq2[start_index:end_index]
73
74
trimmed_match_count = sum(1 for a, b in zip(trimmed_seq1 ,
trimmed_seq2) if a == b)
75
trimmed_length = len(trimmed_seq1)
76
77
if trimmed_length == 0:
78
print("Error: Trimmed alignment length is zero.")
79
raise ValueError("Trimmed alignment length is zero.")
80
81
percent_identity_trimmed = (trimmed_match_count / trimmed_length)
* 100
82
83
return percent_identity , percent_identity_noGap ,
42
Resistance Hunt
==PAGE:49==
percent_identity_trimmed , aligned_residues
Resistance Hunt
43
==PAGE:50==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Henrik Dams Allé, Building 204
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.food.dtu.dk
