==PAGE:1==
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing
Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow
Fibers
Master Thesis by Rebecca Krebs
DTU Health Tech
Research Section: Cell and Drug Technologies
Research Group: Engineered Fluidics and Tissues
==PAGE:2==
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow
Fibers
Supervision by Niels Bent Larsen, Professor at DTU.
Project collaboration with The Cardiology Research Unit at Rigshospitalet
Master Thesis by Rebecca Krebs
July, 2024
Rebecca Krebs - s184245
Signature
Date
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Stem cell therapy requires the manufacturing of large numbers of cells, which necessitates
in vitro expansion. Hollow fiber bioreactors are used to expand anchor-dependent cells on a
large scale. The Cardiology Research Unit (CRU) at Rigshospitalet in Denmark utilizes a hol-
low fiber bioreactor to cultivate adipose-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (AD-MSCs) used
for cell therapy. The hollow fiber bioreactor consists of 11.500 hollow fibers where the liquid is
perfused through the intracapillary (IC) and extracapillary (EC) compartments of the bioreactor.
Cells adhere to the inner surface of IC, allowing a large number of cells to be expanded in one
bioreactor. However, the hollow fiber bioreactor does not allow real-time cell investigation dur-
ing cultivation.
This study aimed to develop a 3D-printed PEGDA 700 hydrogel model of the hollow fiber biore-
actor that captures the functionality of one fiber in the bioreactor. The key requirements of
the model were identified to be the allowance of real-time visualization of cells while maintain-
ing the geometry of a fiber and replicating the liquid flow. The first aspect of designing the
model included thoroughly investigating the hollow fiber bioreactor. This included determining
the dimensions of the fiber and understanding the fluid dynamics in the bioreactor. From these
findings, the 3D printed model of a hollow fiber was designed. The project involved optimizing
the 3D printing of the model in the process of finding a compromise between good resolution
and transparency of the printed hydrogel. The model was successfully printed with the correct
IC diameter (233 μm horizontal diameter and 133 μm vertical height) and the intended dimen-
sions of the surrounding EC (84 μm). The model could withstand liquid flowing through the IC
and EC compartment with similar velocities as the bioreactor for the indented seven day period
needed for cell cultivation.
Cell experiments with the flow chip were conducted, where HEK-293-GFP cells were success-
fully seeded in the hollow fiber. The cells could be visualized in both bright field microscopy and
fluorescent microscopy. To enhance cell visibility further, the model was simplified to only con-
taining the IC compartment of the hollow fiber bioreactor. This decision was based on analyzing
the effect of EC through numeric modeling (COMSOL). The simplified model with only IC was
produced, but a cell experiment with cell seeding in the model was not successful within the
timeframe of this study. It is hypothesized that cell visualization is improved compared to the
flow model containing the EC, where the HEK-293-GFP cells were visible. Since state-of-the-
art models do not allow for real-time visualization of the cells, this model is particularly relevant
for cell dynamic investigation.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Niels Bent Larsen, for all the time and energy he has put
into this project. During our discussions, he has shown great passion in advising me, both in
overcoming problems encountered during the project and in sharing his knowledge more gen-
erally. Thanks to him, I now understand how an LAF bench works. He has transformed me
from a cell biologist into a curious engineer.
I would also like to thank Ellen Mønsted Johansen and Morten Juhl Nørgaard for their time,
for providing product and cell-specific details, and for sharing their enthusiasm for cell work.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acronyms
αMEM
Minimum Essential Medium Alpha.
AD-MSCs adipose derived mesenchymal stem cells.
CAD
computer-aided design.
CPPT
cryoprecipitate.
CRU
Cardiology Research Unit.
DMD
digital mirror device.
DMEM
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium.
EC
extracapillary.
ECM
extracellular matrix.
FBS
fetal bovine serum.
FEP
fluorinated ethylene propylene.
Fn
fibronectin.
GelMA
gelatin methacryloyl.
GFP
green fluorescent protein.
GFs
growth factors.
GMP
good manufacturing practice.
HEK
human embryonic kidney.
hPL
heparin free human platelet lysate.
IC
intracapillary.
IHD
ischemic heart disease.
LAP
lithium phenyl- 2,4,6-trimethylbenzoylphosphinate.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
iv
==PAGE:6==
MSCs
mesenchymal stem cells.
P/S
penicillin-streptomycin.
PBS
phosphate-buffered saline.
PEGDA
poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate.
PLL
Poly-L-Lysine.
QY
quinoline yellow.
RT
room temperature.
SLA
stereolithography.
STD
standard deviation.
STL
standard tessellation language.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Background
1
1.1
Project Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Introduction
3
2.1
Hollow Fiber Bioreactor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
State of the Art for Hollow Fiber Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Requirements of a Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Production of the Model and Material Choice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Cell Attachment to PEGDA Hydrogel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Parameters to Tune for Printing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.7
Objectives for the Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Method
14
3.1
Creation of the Printed Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Flow Experiments with the Chip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Cultivation of the Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Cell Cultivation on Chips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Results
18
4.1
Dimensions and Fluid Dynamics in the Bioreactor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Designing the Model and Optimizing the Printing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Performing of a Flow Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Cell Cultivation in Chips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5
MSC Experiments in PEGDA700 Hydrogel Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Discussion
46
6
Conclusion
49
Bibliography
50
A Appendix
53
A.1 Measurements of Bioreactor and Calculated Dimensions
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.2 Velocity Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A.3 Reynolds Number
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.4 Cell Numbers used by Rigshospitalet when Cultivating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.5 Fibronectin in CPPT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.6 COMSOL Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
vi
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Background
Stem cell therapy is a rapidly developing field that holds the promise of treating cancer, de-
generative diseases, and damaged tissues [1]. Developing effective clinical cellular therapies
requires the manufacturing of large numbers of cells, which necessitates in vitro expansion in
compliance with GMP guidelines. This is essential for ensuring the safety, efficacy, and avail-
ability of cell therapy treatments [2, 3, 4, 5]. The three most common approaches to expand
anchor-dependent cells in large-scale production are multilayered cell factory systems, biore-
actors with microbeads, and hollow fiber bioreactors, see Figure 1.1.
The multilayered cell factory system is a static cell culture method widely used due to the ease
of use and easy translation from T flasks to the multilayered system [6], see Figure 1.1A. How-
ever, the method’s limitations consist of the large quantities of culture media, the creation of
concentration gradients, and inefficient gas-liquid oxygen transfer, resulting in a low cell culture
number. Furthermore, the manual, labor-intensive method increases the risk of contamination,
vessel-to-vessel variability, and is time-consuming [6, 7].
Stirred bioreactor with 100-400 μm diameter microbeads creates a large surface area. The
large surface area allows many cells to adhere, resulting in high cell expansion numbers in
one tank, see Figure 1.1 B. Spargers placed at the bottom of the vessel allow for controlled
addition of gas. Furthermore, rotation of impellers in the center of the tank prevents the cre-
ation of concentration gradients in the media [6, 7]. This method is less labor intensive, time
demanding, and better at avoiding vessel-to-vessel variability since the processes can be mon-
itored and computer controlled [6]. This production method exposes the cells to hydrodynamic
shear stress, and the dynamic culture system is complex. This also implies a complicated,
expensive, and time-demanding optimization of the cultivation method, especially when shear
stress-sensitive cells are cultivated [6, 7, 8]. Furthermore, the dissociation of cells from the
microbeads can be tricky, and the efficiency can vary [6].
The third method is growing cells in a hollow fiber bioreactor where the cells are continuously
perfused with fresh media [8], see Figure 1.1 C. The hollow fibers are encased in a cylindrical
shell containing ports for media to flow through into either the intracapillary (IC) space through
the hollow fibers or the extracapillary (EC) space surrounding the hollow fibers [9]. The cells
can either be in suspension in the EC or anchored to the inner side of the hollow fiber. The
method contains a large surface area, and the cells can be cultivated with sufficient nutrients
while avoiding high hydrodynamic shear stress and concentration gradients. However, cell
cultivation can only be monitored by analyzing the metabolites in the media [9].
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
1
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1.1: Three ways to grow anchor dependent cells in large scale. A simple figure of each technique is shown,
and a magnification of the cells is used to illustrate the different conditions for the cells. A: Multilayered cell factories
of T flasks. The cells are attached to the bottom of the flasks and grown under static conditions. B: Bioreactor,
where the cells are attached to microbeads kept in solution due to the stirring. C: Hollow fiber bioreactor. The cells
are grown on the inside of the hollow fiber. Media is being perfused in IC and EC. The flow rate of each medium can
be changed independently. The figure was created in BioRender.com.
1.1
Project Motivation
The Cardiology Research Unit (CRU) at Rigshospitalet in Denmark is developing stem cell ther-
apy to treat ischemic heart disease (IHD) patients with the injection of adipose derived mes-
enchymal stem cells (AD-MSCs) [5]. Dosis of 1 × 108 cryopreserved allogeneic AD-MSCs is
intramyocardially injected at the area surrounding the ischemic region in IHD patients to re-
generate the damaged myocardium. The treatment has been tested in both phase 1 and 2
trials, and to further develop the treatment, access to a large number of GMP-produced cry-
opreserved allogeneic AD-MSCs is necessary [5, 10]. The AD-MSCs are adherent-dependent
cells highly sensitive to shear stress [6]. As a result, the need for a large surface area with
minimal shear stress makes the hollow fiber bioreactor the most suitable production method.
The CRU group utilizes the hollow fiber bioreactor from Quantum System (Quantum System;
Terumo-BCT, Lakewood, CO) for the production of AD-MSCs [4]. The hollow fiber is coated
with cryoprecipitate (CPPT) before the AD-MSCs are seeded, and the AD-MSCs are cultivated
twice in the bioreactor for six days before the cells are harvested and cryoprecipitated. The
highest published harvest cell number by the CRU group after the second cultivation is 6.02 ×
108 cells [11].
The CRU group wants to understand the cell cultivation in more detail to gain the insights needed
for process optimization. This involves expanding a large number of cells while minimizing me-
dia usage. Their main questions concern cell distribution after seeding and throughout cultiva-
tion, confluence levels at different time points, and the influence of different flow rates. However,
the only insights into cell culturing in the hollow fiber bioreactor are obtained through glucose
and lactate measurements during cultivation. The current cultivation process cannot address
the questions raised by the researchers. Therefore, they are interested in a hollow fiber biore-
actor model that provides insight into the cell dynamics during cultivation. This project aims
to develop a 3D-printed perfused flow model that captures the essential functionalities of the
hollow fiber bioreactor while enabling cell visualization.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
2
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Introduction
2.1
Hollow Fiber Bioreactor
The first description of the bioreactor was provided by Knazek et al. in 1972 [12]. They identified
the major obstacle to achieving the desired cell densities was the addition of new nutrients
and accumulating cell products. The solution proposed was the hollow fiber bioreactor, which
allowed for continuous media exchange [12]. The hollow fiber module consists of four major
components: the hollow fiber membrane bundle, two tubesheets, the housing, and the two end
caps, see Figure 2.1 [13]. Hollow fibers are small cylindrical membranes tightly arranged in
parallel into a bundle of fibers. The EC space is the space between the housing and the outer
surface of the fibers. While the IC space consists of the enclosed space inside the membranes.
The tubesheets form a fluid-tight sheath, preventing fluid from flowing between the EC and IC
spaces. The cylindrical housing contains inlet and outlet ports for the liquid in the EC to be
infused and removed. The two end caps also contain a port where liquid can be fused in and
removed, respectively. This allows media to enter one of the caps, flow through the hollow fibers
towards the opposite end cap, and exit the bioreactor through port-connected tubes [13].
Figure 2.1: Pictures of the hollow fiber bioreactor. A-C: Pictures taken from the Quantum Cell Expansion System
(Quantum System; Terumo-BCT, Lakewood, CO) bioreactor provided by CRU group.
D: Illustration of a hollow
fiber bioreactor [13].
The bioreactor modeled in this project is the Quantum Cell Expansion System (Quantum Sys-
tem; Terumo-BCT, Lakewood, CO). The hollow fiber membrane bundle comprises 11,500 poly-
ether sulfone fibers, creating an internal surface area of 2.1 m2. The bioreactor is an automated
system where feeding rates can be changed individually in the EC and IC [10]. The hollow
fibers are non-adherent, and coating with adherence-promoting compounds of the hollow fibers
is required for cell attachment. The most common substrates for coating used are fibronectin,
vitronectin, and human donor pooled CPPT [10, 14]. All three coatings perform equally well for
MSC culturing [14]. During production, cells are monitored by measuring glucose and lactate
levels in the EC media to calculate cell growth kinetics. Based on these measurements, the IC’s
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
3
==PAGE:11==
flow rate increases during production to meet the nutrient demand of the increasing number of
cells.
When using a bioreactor, the bioreactor is primed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The
coating material is loaded into the system and circulated for 16-24 h at 37◦C. Afterward, the
coating is replaced with complete media, and the cells are loaded into the IC [14]. The circula-
tion is stopped for 24 hours to allow cells to attach to the coated material of the hollow fibers.
The bioreactor is turned to ensure cells attach to both the top and the bottom of the hollow
fibers. The circulation is started again with a flow rate of Q=0.1 mL
min, and non-adherent cells
are washed away [14]. The flow rate is increased to support the growth of the increasing cell
numbers but kept slow throughout the cultivation, ranging from Q=0.1 to 2 mL
min. The flow rate
of the recirculating medium in the EC remains constant at Q=30 mL
min throughout the cultivation
[4]. The cells are harvested by standard trypsinization with TrypLe [4, 10].
2.2
State of the Art for Hollow Fiber Models
Hollow fiber bioreactor models has attempted to scale down the bioreactors, aiming to create
models closely resembling full-scale hollow fiber bioreactors for easier translation. Researchers
have developed miniaturized bioreactors with one or a few fibers, where cells are seeded in the
EC and connected to a perfused system [15].
Gramer and Poeschl [15] developed a micro-bioreactor specifically for use as a screening
method. The developed bioreactor contained 30 cellulose acetate fibers (inner diameter of
200 μm, outer diameter of 230 μm), and the housing was a 20 cm silicone tubing. The IC had a
volume of 0.2 mL, while the EC held 4.6 mL [15]. In the model, the cells are seeded in the IC,
and the EC acts as a medium reservoir to supply nutrients. This is the only hollow fiber model
found during this literature research where the cells were seeded in IC. The cells are cultivated
without perfusion, and the EC reservoir is changed every second day. In this model, high cell
densities could be achieved with minimal media consumption and a low total cell count. The
micro-bioreactor did not require any pump, and the authors claim it was inexpensive [15]. Mi-
croscopy of the cells was not a component of the study.
The authors identify the most significant limitation of the model as the absence of process con-
trol mechanisms found in automated large-scale bioreactors [15]. This makes it clear that the
visualization of cells was outside the scope of the model’s objectives. Furthermore, the article
does not discuss the aspect of the missing perfusion.
The same authors compared growth predictions between T-flasks and the created micro biore-
actor, aiming to identify the best predictor of growth in large-scale hollow fiber bioreactors [16].
Different media types and cell lines were tested, and the micro-bioreactor was better at predict-
ing cell growth in the large-scale bioreactor compared to T flasks [16].
This demonstrates the value of developing bioreactor models, as they provide better growth
predictions, potentially saving significant costs in process development. Furthermore, these
micro-bioreactors dramatically reduce the cost of running a large-scale bioreactor, especially
regarding the media expenses and the total number of cells needed. However, the models are
time-demanding and, therefore, labor-expensive. Besides reducing material usage, small biore-
actors typically do not provide new insights into culturing information. Therefore, they are better
suited for screening purposes rather than gaining insights into cell dynamics during cultivation.
A miniaturized hollow fiber bioreactor with a focus on visualizing the cells during cultivation
was developed by Gloeckner and Lemke [17], see Figure 2.2 A. This is the first method where
perfusion is incorporated in a hollow fiber model with the objective of visualizing the cells seeded
in the EC. They used two different membrane boundless, one containing 25 dialysis fibers made
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
4
==PAGE:12==
of cellulose (inner diameter=215 μm, wall thickness=16 μm), where media was perfused. The
second membrane bundle contained 17 fibers (inner diameter=280 μm, wall thickness=50 μm)
and was used for passive gas exchange in the incubator. They placed two different membrane
bundles into a transparent polycarbonate housing. The cells were seeded in the EC in a 1 mL
volume. One of the project’s aims was to measure metabolites produced by the cells in the EC.
They state that GM-CSF and IL-3 were selectively retained in the cell compartment of the model
since 50% of cytokine concentration after seven days of cultivation could be detected in the cell
media in EC. However, this retention of cytokines also means that other molecules with the same
or larger molecule size cannot cross the membranes. Since fresh media is perfused through
the IC department, molecules from the cell media cannot cross the wall of the membranes and
enter the EC. The cells must lack essential growth factors from the media. However, this is not
commented on in the article.
Another aspect missing is microscopy pictures of the cells seeded in the EC. Even though the
article highlights that, to their knowledge, their hollow fiber bioreactor model is the only model
allowing visualization of cells during culture, it does not include any pictures of the cells. The
article does not comment on this absence.
Figure 2.2: Pictures of two hollow fiber bioreactor models created in two studies. A: Hollow fiber model created by
Gloeckner and Lemke [17]. The model consists of two different membrane bundles, and the cells were seeded in the
EC compartment. Cell media is perfused through one of the membrane bundles, while the other allows for passive
gas exchange. B: Hollow fiber model created by Sauer et al. [18]. The model consists of hollow fibers placed in
between two glass slides. The cells are seeded in the EC, and media is perfused through IC. C: Visualization of the
cells in the EC compartment of the hollow fiber model created by Sauer et al. [18].
The model idea was further developed by Sauer et al. [18] to allow visualization of the cells in
EC, see Figure 2.2 B. In this model, the hollow fibers are placed between two glass slides, and
the EC is made tight by sealing it with silicone. This setup allows for continuous monitoring of
temperature, gas flow rates, and pressure values. The cells were seeded in the EC, and the
liquid in the IC was circulated. The cells could be visualized in real-time [18], see Figure 2.2 C.
This is the only hollow fiber reactor model found during this literature research where the model
allowed real-time visualization of the cells. So, even though the cells were seeded in the EC,
the objective of the model was visualization of the cells. The seeding of cells in the EC is often
used to expand immune cells. However, it is not suitable for anchor-dependent AD-MSCs and
the CRU group cannot utilize this model.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
5
==PAGE:13==
T flask is still used as the only reference model by the CRU group, despite hollow fiber bioreactor
models having been developed. In an article from Haack-Sørensen et al. [4], the CRU group
describes the investigation of growing AD-MSCs in the Quantum bioreactor as an alternative
to conventional flask-based culture. The translation was directly from T flasks to the bioreactor
[4]. Also, when the group investigated the influence of serum change from fetal bovine serum
(FBS) to heparin free human platelet lysate (hPL), the large-scale bioreactors were used [19].
The review article by Hulme et al. [10] also advocates for using a T flask to follow the cell
growth indirectly in the bioreactor. The purpose of this is to investigate how well a particular
population is growing. They do point out that the T flask is not directly comparable, particularly
regarding substrate concentrations and the missing perfusion [4]. The objective of their review
was to describe, compare, and discuss both research and clinical applications of the hollow
fiber bioreactor. No other model other than the T flask is mentioned, indicating that hollow fiber
models are not being utilized.
This observation was further confirmed in the article by Frank et al. [14] written by the producers
of the bioreactor (Terumo BCT). Here, eight different coating materials were tested for cultivating
MSCs in large-scale bioreactors [14]. When using large bioreactors, experiments become very
expensive due to the high costs of both media and materials. The study mentions using a total
of 46 bioreactors for testing the three coatings fibronectin (Fn), CPPT, and vitronectin [14]. If
similar experiments need to be conducted for every cell type expanded in these bioreactors, the
material costs and usage would escalate significantly, becoming very costly. The article does not
mention the use of smaller bioreactors or discuss the potential advantages of developing such
models. This absence could suggest that the company’s focus does not include developing a
small bioreactor model.
No further literature on hollow fiber bioreactor modeling could be found during this literature
study. Therefore, the literature study shifted towards the field of tissue engineering. In this
context, hollow fibers have been incorporated into in vitro tissue models to address the mass
transport challenges. This is particularly a challenge within the center of constructs when us-
ing high cell densities. Despite the differences between the fields, designing and optimizing
operational parameters for the systems are crucial [20].
The review article by Eghbali et al. [20] compares different tissue models which utilizing hollow
fibers for organ and tissue engineering. The cells have primarily been seeded in the EC and
perfused fluid in the IC. Two articles have the cells seeded in IC with perfused fluid IC and static
fluid in EC [20].
The first of these articles is by Ozgen et al. [21]. Two polysulfone hollow fiber modules were used
in this study. They used both a small module containing 40 hollow fibers of 17 cm in length and
a larger module containing 1600 hollow fibers of 34 cm in length. After the cells were incubated
in the IC, the hollow fibers were removed from the module and sectioned into pieces, and the
cells were analyzed with electron microscopy [21]. Therefore, this model does not allow for any
real-time analysis of the cells. Furthermore, the model is costly since the modules can only be
used once, and large amounts of media are needed.
The second of the articles by Oo et al. [22] used 3 polyether sulfone hollow fiber membranes.
The cut slices were investigated after staining in an Epifluorescence microscopy, allowing for
better cell investigation. However, the fibers still had to be cut open [22]. The fixation of cells,
followed by an opening and cutting of the hollow fibers to observe the cells under a scanning
electron microscope, was performed by multiple articles [23, 24, 25]. However, no articles were
found, describing a model with cells seeded in the IC that allowed real-time visualization of the
cells.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
6
==PAGE:14==
2.3
Requirements of a Model
State-of-the-art models cannot answer the questions raised by the CRU group about the cell
dynamics, introduced in Section 1.1. A new approach to making hollow fiber bioreactor models
is therefore needed.
When modeling a hollow fiber for cultivating anchor-dependent cells, critical parameters to con-
sider are cell attachment, the geometry of the model, and mass transfer mechanisms, which are
influenced by the model’s fluid dynamics and membrane properties. The membrane properties
are important for modeling the mass transfer across the membrane. The fluid dynamics are im-
portant to replicate to mimic the transport throughout the channel of nutrients and gasses. The
cells in the IC need to be visible during cultivation while the geometry and attachment to the
fibers are replicated. Tabel 2.1 shows a prioritized list of requirements for a hollow fiber model
with the aim of answering the questions raised by the CRU group. In the table, four different
models are evaluated for each requirement. The first method involves the utilization of a T flask,
which is the reference model currently utilized by the CRU group [19]. The second method is
the state-of-the-art of hollow fiber models, where hollow fibers attach to a housing and cells are
seeding in IC, described in Section 2.2. The third method would include the same approach
as state of the art, however, the tubes would be changed to something where visualization is
possible. Here, silica tubes are suggested, which are transparent. The fourth and last model in
the comparison is the 3D-printed perfused flow model developed in this project. The model is
a poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA) 700 hydrogel, designed, printed, and tested in this
project.
Table 2.1: List of the requirements of a hollow fiber model. The requirements are listed in prioritized order. Four
different models are being compared for each requirement. The first model is a T flask, and the second model
utilizes hollow fiber membranes to make a miniaturized hollow fiber using the approach presented in an article by
Gloeckner and Lemke [17] but seeding the cells in the IC compartment. The third method uses the same approach
but utilizes silica tubes, which are transparent. The fourth method is the 3D printing perfused flow model, which this
project is based on.
Requirements of a Model for a Hollow Fiber Reactor
Requirements
T Flask
Hollow Fiber
Silica Tube
3D Printed Model
Visualization of the cells
in IC in real time
Possible
Unknown
Possible
Possible
Replicate geometry
of the hollow fiber
Not possible
Possible for IC
Correct length
Unknown for EC
Possible for IC
Correct length
Unknown for EC
Possible for IC & EC
Wrong length
Replicate flow conditions
Not possible
Possible for IC
Unknown for EC
Possible for IC
Unknown for EC
Possible for IC and EC
Replicate attachment
of cells to the surface
Not possible
Possible
Unknown
Maybe possible
Replicate mass transfer
between EC and IC
Not possible
Possible
Not possible
To some degree
Easy to replicate
and cheap
Possible
Unknown
Unknown
Possible
Replicate stiffness
of the hollow fibers
Not possible
Possible
Unknown
Not possible
Include the presence
of more channels
Not possible
Possible
Possible
Possible
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
7
==PAGE:15==
From this comparison, the 3D printed perfused flow model meets many of the requirements,
most importantly the first three. The 3D printed model can capture the functionalities of a single
hollow fiber membrane in a bioreactor and answer some of the main questions of the CRU group
regarding cell dynamics.
2.4
Production of the Model and Material Choice
The goal is to design and produce a perfused 3D-printed model that captures the key function-
alities of a single hollow fiber in the bioreactor. To match the dimensions of one hollow fiber,
the chosen production method needs a high resolution in all three spatial dimensions (X, Y, Z)
to print the intended microstructure. Furthermore, high freedom of design and quick production
are preferred. The material utilized for the model needs to be transparent, diffusively open,
allow for cell attachment, biocompatible, and inexpensive. Stereolithography (SLA) 3D printing
of a PEGDA 700 hydrogel meets the requirements for producing a flow chip model.
2.4.1
Stereolithography Printing
The SLA printer available is a home-built top-down SLA printer. SLA printing is based on the
photo-polymerization process of a liquid printing resin, allowing spatially controlled solidification
controlled by a light pattern [26].
Figure 2.3 provides a simplified illustration of the printer and the different steps during printing.
The print resin is placed in a vessel containing a transparent and non-adherent foil at the bottom
of the vessel. The light is projected through this foil from underneath, and a computer-driven
building stage is dipped into the resin from above, see Figure 2.3 A. To control the pattern
illuminated on the surface of the resin, the light source hits a digital mirror device (DMD) that
contains two million mirrors, each with a size of 10.8 μm × 10.8 μm (1920 pixels×1080 pixels).
Each mirror can be rotated individually, so a mirror can either be ’on’ or ’off’ state. In the ’on’
state, the mirror is turned so the light reflected will be illuminated onto the surface of the resin.
In the ’off’ state, the mirror is turned away from the print resin onto an absorber. The DMD is
digitally controlled, and by rotating the mirrors, it allows a two-dimensional 10.8 μm × 10.8 μm
pixel pattern to be projected onto the surface of the print resin, solidifying a complete layer of
resin in one step [26], see Figure 2.3 B. The mirrors and the light projection optics determine
the XY resolution, yielding a 10.8 μm XY resolution.
Figure 2.3: Simplified illustration of the different steps during STL printing. NB: dimensions are not to scale. A:
Presentation of the different components of the printer. B: The photo-polymerization step where a pattern of light
is projected at the vessel. The light enters from the bottom of the vessel and causes the print resin to cross-link in
the specific pattern. C: Reflow step where fresh print resin enters the printing area. D: The stage is moved to the
printing height of the print. E: The photopolymerization step is repeated. F: Printing of an object is completed.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
8
==PAGE:16==
After photo-polymerization, the stage is moved up, pulling the solidified resin away from the foil
and allowing fresh print resin to flow into the printing area. The fresh print resin washes away
any partially solidified resin that otherwise could affect the next printing pattern, see Figure 2.3
C. Once recoated with new liquid print resin, the stage is moved down to a defined step height,
leaving a gap of 20 μm between the previously printed layer and the foil, see Figure 2.3 D.
As shown in Figure 2.3 E, a new pattern is exposed. These steps are repeated until the solid
three-dimensional object is printed, see Figure 2.3 F [26]. This production method allows highly
complex and detailed solidified 3D structures due to highly controllable curing of the printing
resin [26, 27].
2.4.2
Composition of the Print Resion
This project uses a predefined and optimized print resin to print a hydrogel with the SLA printer.
The print resin consists of a monomer (PEGDA, Mn 700 g mol−1), a photoinitiator(lithium phenyl-
2,4,6-trimethylbenzoylphosphinate (LAP)), and a photoabsorber (quinoline yellow (QY)), the
molecular structures are shown in Figure 2.4. The principle of SLA printing is photopolymer-
ization, creating crosslinking of monomers. The photopolymerization process is initiated when
light is absorbed by the photoinitiator in the print resin, which generates free radicals to promote
crosslinking of the monomers [28].
Figure 2.4: Molecular structures of the active components in the print resin. A: Monomer PEGDA [29]. B:
Photinitiatior LAP [30]. C: Photoabsorber QY [31].
The monomers in the print resin are PEGDA 700. PEGDA consists of PEG, which is a water-
soluble, hydrophilic polymer [32]. PEGDA is created when substituting terminal hydroxyl groups
of PEG with acrylates.
This substitution gives PEGDA its ability to be crosslinked thereby
forming a three-dimensional polymer network. PEGDA can be crosslinked to form a three-
dimensional polymer network. Due to the hydrophilic properties of PEGDA, the polymer net-
work can absorb and retain water, which is called a hydrogel [33]. Due to the presence of
water, the hydrogel is diffusive open to water-soluble compounds. The ability to absorb and
retain water also means the hydrogel undergoes a swelling [33]. The cross-linking can be done
by photopolymerization, which allows for spatial and temporal control of polymerization, and
the PEGDA hydrogel can be controlled into complex shapes [32]. The hydrophilic properties
of PEGDA also account for the hydrogel’s resistance to adsorb proteins [33]. PEGDA is a cell-
compatible synthetic polymer with non-fouling properties [34].
To initiate the cross-linking of the PEGDA 700 monomers, the print resin also consists of the pho-
toinitiator LAP. The absorption of a photon excites LAP, which results in cleavage of LAP, creat-
ing two free radicals [30], see Reaction 1 in Figure 2.5. The free radical opens the carbon-carbon
bond in the vinyl group in PEGDA, initiating the formation of polymer chains. The polymeriza-
tion process is propagated by reacting with available vinyl bonds on other reactive monomers or
polymer chains. Combining two growing chains creates a dead polymer chain, terminating the
polymerization process [29]. Thereby, LAP’s absorption of a photon leads to the cross-linking
reaction of PEGDA 700 monomers in the prints resin [29, 30], see Reaction 2 in Figure 2.5. The
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
9
==PAGE:17==
local absorption maximum for LAP is approximately 375 nm, but has a significant absorbance
at 365 nm [30]. The SLA printer contains a 365 nm high-power LED light source, enabling LAP
to be used as the photoinitiator in the print resin [34].
Figure 2.5: Reaction in the print resin when the light is illuminated onto the print resin. Reaction 1: LAP absorbs
light which generates two free radicals [30]. Reaction 2: The free radical opens the carbon-carcon bond on PEGDA
and the reactive monomers cross link forming PEGDA700 polymers [29].
The printing depth is an important parameter to control and optimize for a new printing job.
To ensure chemical and mechanical bonding between printed layers, the light exposure depth
needs to be slightly deeper than the layer thickness. However, this further cures the previously
printed layer since the light penetrates deeper than the printing area. This can change the de-
sign of the previously printed layer. When designing and optimizing the print resin and settings,
there is a compromise between resolution and adherence of the printed layers, influencing the
mechanical strength of the print. The solidification depth can be controlled by adjusting the light
source intensity, exposure time, and the chemical composition of the print resin [26]. In the pre-
defined and optimized printing resin used for this project, the photoabsorber QY is added to the
print resin, see the molecule structure in Figure 2.4 C. A photoabsorber is a non-reactive com-
ponent in the print resin, and the absorbance spectrum overlaps the photoinitiator absorbance.
Therefore, the two components compete in the light absorbance, which results in a decreased
penetration depth [26]. The print resins used for this project, the concentration and printing
settings have been optimized to achieve an optimal Z resolution [34]. The penetration depth of
light in the print resin can be controlled by changing the QY concentration in the print resin.
2.5
Cell Attachment to PEGDA Hydrogel
Cell attachment is critical when cultivating cells on a PEGDA hydrogel. Due to the protein-
repellent nature of PEGDA, modifying the hydrogel is necessary to allow cell adhesion molecules
to coat the surface [33, 34]. However, it is important to find a balance that enables cell adhesion
without promoting excessive protein absorption.
In this project Poly-L-Lysine (PLL) is used to facilitate protein binding to the PEGDA 700 hydro-
gel. PLL strongly adsorbs to solid surfaces [35]. At physiological pH, PLL is positively charged,
exposing cationic sites that enable non-specific binding to anionic sites. This interaction medi-
ates the electrostatic binding of proteins to the hydrogel [35, 36]. The selection of cell adhesion
molecules must be chosen based on the specific cell type used.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
10
==PAGE:18==
2.5.1
MSCs and Cell Attachment to Fibronectin
AD-MSCs are isolated from liposuction of adipose tissues, and the availability of the adipose
tissue enables much larger quantities of the primary cells compared with bone marrow-derived
MSCs (BM-MSCs). The MSCs have the ability to differentiate into mesenchymal lineage cells,
including adipocytes, osteoblasts, and chondrocytes [37, 38]. When expanding MSCs, it is
essential to minimize the number of cell passages, since the phenotype of the cells changes
from passage to passage [38]. MSCs predominantly use glycolysis for the production of ATP
and, therefore, have a high glucose consumption to produce energy. This also results in high
sensitivity to glucose deprivation [39, 40].
Cell attachment to the extracellular matrix (ECM) can be mediated through integrins expressed
on the cell surface. Integrins are a family of cell adhesion receptors consisting of an α and β
subunit [37]. The integrin β1 subunit is expressed in high numbers on the surface of AD-MSCs.
The cell binds Fn by binding to the Arg-Gly-Asp peptide sequence (RGD motif) on Fn. The
binding is primarily mediated through interactions of the β1 subunit, enabling cell adhesion [37].
Fn has been used for coating the bioreactor to ensure adhesion of the MSCs [14]. Fn is a gly-
coprotein present in the ECM where it can bind cells, growth factors (GFs), and to other ECM
structures [41]. The large Fn molecule contains regions near the (N)-terminal end of Fn that en-
able the binding of fibrin in one region and collagen and gelatin (denatured collagen) to another
region. A region in the central part of Fn contains the RGD motif where integrins bind, enabling
cell adhesion. Another important synergistic sequence PI-ISRN is located in the central part of
Fn, which enhances the cell adhesion [42]. Fn forms dimers through a pair of disulfide bonds
connecting the two 250 kDa subunits in the C-terminal ends.
When expanding AD-MSCs in the hollow fiber bioreactor, the hollow fibers must be coated
with cell adhesion molecules [14]. The CRU group utilizes CPPT as coating material [4]. CPPT
is frozen, thawed, and centrifuged plasma. It contains many different blood components, but
most importantly, for its coating properties, it contains Fn. Since the CPPT is donor-derived,
there is a batch-to-batch variation [10].
2.6
Parameters to Tune for Printing
In this project, a predefined and optimized print resin is used. 3D printing requires optimization
since the proper settings and print resin compositions all depend on the geometry of the print.
Different parameters can be tuned to print specific geometries. The first part of the project in-
volved optimizing the printing of the hollow fiber. The parameters that are being tuned include
increasing the exposure time, increasing the photoabsorber QY concentration, and blurring out
the printed squares in print by fast pixel-sized oscillations of the during exposure. Figure 2.6 vi-
sualizes the influence of increasing the three parameters on the chip’s transparency, resolution,
and robustness. A compromise within this parameter span needs to be found when printing the
mode.
The concentration of QY influences the light penetration depth, thereby the Z resolution of the
printing. The balance between good adherence to the previous printed layer and not changing
the pattern of the previous print becomes critical when printing closed channel structures. When
printing the roof on the closed channel, the semi-solidified polymers present from the previously
printed layer are trapped in the channel and, therefore, not washed away during the reflow step.
When printing the roof of the channel, the semi-solidified polymers from the previous layer are
solidified, and the roof of the channel becomes thicker than intended. If the QY concentration is
increased, the printing resolution is increased, but as a compromise, the robustness of the chip
is decreased. On the other hand, if the exposure time increases, the robustness of the chip
is increased, but the increased penetration depth decreases the resolution of the print. The
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
11
==PAGE:19==
penetration depth is essential to control, especially when printing round horizontal structures.
The parameters need to be optimized for the hollow fiber print, and the compromise of including
and increasing the parameters is illustrated in 2.6.
The SLA printer utilizes a DMD when projecting the light onto the printing area. The print is
based on the mirror sizes of the DMD: 10.8 μm × 10.8 μm. This poses a challenge when print-
ing round designs with squares, but it also influences the transparency of the chip. The mirrors
are spaced with an edge-to-edge spacing of 1.9 μm on the DMD, leading to lower curing of the
print resin in these areas. This leads to a clear imprint of the mirrors in the print, creating 10.8
μm × 10.8 μm pixels in the print. A DMD oscillator can be used to reduce the imprint of the pix-
els. The function of the DMD oscillator is to translate the DMD so the reflected light is distributed
into the 1.9 μm spaces between the mirrors on the DMD. This increases the transparency of
the print, but the printing resolution is decreased, see Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Visualization of the three parameters tested in this project and the influence on different print properties.
The three printing parameters are the exposure time, the photo absorber QY concentration, and adding a DMD
oscillator. If the parameter increase positively influences a property, the word has been written in green. On the other
hand, if the parameter increase negatively influences a property, the word has been written in red. A compromise
within this parameter span must be found when printing the hollow fiber model.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
12
==PAGE:20==
2.7
Objectives for the Project
This project aims to investigate if an observed growth rate of cultivated AD-MSCs in a 3D-
printed PEGDA 700 flow chip could match the calculated growth rate in the bioreactor when
corresponding flow rates over a six-day cultivation period were used.
The project’s first objective is to investigate the bioreactor’s dimensions and fluid dynamics.
The second objective is to design the flow chip and optimize the printing settings. The third
objective is to complete a six-day flow experiment. The fourth objective is to seed and cultivate
AD-MSCs in the flow chip.
Objectives one, three, and four will be discussed in detail in the results section within the con-
text of the experimental work. The second objective lays the foundation of the project, and the
design choices are therefore presented in Section 2.7.1.
2.7.1
Design of a Hollow Fiber Model
When designing a 3D model of the hollow fiber with EC around it, four different designs were
created, see Figure 2.7. The hollow fiber model needs to capture the functionalities of a hollow
fiber in a bioreactor and allow the visualization of cells in the IC. Design A offers a straightfor-
ward representation of the hollow fiber, however, visualizing the cells inside the IC presents a
significant challenge due to the curved lines. Furthermore, the design contains three ”feet” to
ensure the attachment of the structure. However, this extra foot changes EC’s fluid dynamics
and mass transfer in this area. In design B, straight lines on the outer surface of the fiber have
been introduced. This could increase the visibility of the design, but this introduces differences
in the wall thickness and, therefore, influences the mass transfer. The wall thickness could be
more evident when introducing straight lines of the inner surface of the top and bottom of IC, as
done in design C. This would further increase the visibility of the cells inside the IC, but the IC
will no longer be round as in the hollow fibers, which could change the distribution of the cells.
This design would be better printed since we print in box-shaped voxels (vertically extruded
square pixels). Design D is the more extreme version, where the design has been changed to
consist of squares but with smoothed edges. This design would be the best design to print with
the printer used for this project. However, the design will be further away from the geometry of
the hollow fiber.
To decide which design to choose, the printability of the designs needs to be investigated, and
a better understanding of the bioreactor is required.
Figure 2.7: Four different CAD designs in cross-section that could be used when printing a hollow fiber model.
Grey color shows the printed material A: Cell seeding in focus. B: Cell seeding is in focus but with better visualization
of the cells. C: Visualization in focus. D: Visualization in focus and optimized design for the SLA printer.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
13
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Method
3.1
Creation of the Printed Model
3.1.1
Investigation of the Bioreactor
To measure the dimensions of the hollow fibers in the commercial Quantum bioreactor, the reac-
tor’s end was investigated with a microscope. The hollow fiber dimensions were measured using
the image processing program ImageJ (Fiji). The scale was calibrated with a Stage Micrometer
10 mm/0.1 mm from Graticules Optics. To validate the precision of the measurements, six frag-
ments of a silica capillary tube (Polymicro TECHNOLOGIES TSP250350, Lot No. CLGE12A)
was used. The coating of the silica fused capilaries were removed by first bruning the coating
followed by a ispropanol wash.
3.1.2
Printing the Model
The hollow fiber model was designed using Autodesk’s CAD software, Inventor Professional
2024. The design was created in multiples of the mirror size (10.8 μm) to optimize the XY res-
olution of the print. The printer has a maximum illumination size x: 20.736 mm and y: 11.664
mm (1920 pixels×1080 pixels) and the design utilized the maximum printing space.
The CAD file is converted to a standard tessellation language (STL) file, then sliced into 20 μm
high layers to create 2D slices of the 3D model. These 2D slices contain cross-sectional infor-
mation of the 3D model, enabling layer-by-layer printing of a physical model. When printing,
the exposure time for a 20 μm layer was set to 3 seconds. To increase the attachment of the
print to the coverslip, the first five layers corresponding to the first 100 μm of the print were
overexposed to create a foundation layer. The first two layers were sliced to a height of 5 μm,
with an exposure time of 6 seconds each, the next three layers were sliced to a height of 10 μm
with an exposure time of 6 seconds each.
When preparing the print resin the QY, LAP, and PEGDA 700 were dissolved at four times higher
concentration than the working concentration. After the reagents had dissolved, the reagents
were mixed and further diluted in Mili-Q water to a final concentration of CPEGDA700 = 200 mg
mL
(Sigma-Aldrich, 455008-500 mL, CAS-No: 26570-48-9), CLAP = 5 mg
mL (TCI, CAS-No: 85073-
19-4, LOT: YX7WB-FAand) either CQY = 9 mg
mL or CQY = 12 mg
mL (sigmaaldrich, CAS-No: 8004-
92-0). The mixture was vortexed and filtered through a 0.22 μm filter. The print resin was
degassed for three minutes in a water bath at 35 ◦C, and keep at 35 ◦C for approximately one
hour before printing.
The coverslips (22×22×0.4 mm) were treated with methacrylate solution before printing. The
coverslips were plasma treated in a plasma chamber (Diener Atto B (2011, serial no: 111415))
for 10 min.. The coverslips were placed in a heat-resistant Petri dish. 30 mL 96% Ethanol (pH
adjusted to pH 5 using acetic acid) was mixed with 600 μL 3-(Trimethoxysilyl)propyl methacry-
late (Sigma-Aldrich, 440159-100 mL) rimethoxysilane and vortexed. The solution was poured
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
14
==PAGE:22==
over the coverslips and left for 10 min at RT. Afterward, the coverslips were washed three times
in absolute ethanol, followed by two washes with Mili-Q water. They were gently dried with air to
remove as much water from the coverslips before placing them on a heater at 100◦C for 10 min.
The treated coverslip was attached to the stage with double-sided tape with the non-treated side
inwards the stage.
Fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP) foil, a hydrophobic and apolar 150 μm thick foil, was cut
using a laser cutter into circles with a diameter of 33 mm. The FEP foil is attached to the bot-
tom of the vat with two double-sided tape rings. The printing resin was added to the vat. 3 mL
printing resin was used to print the flow model with a printing time of 107 min., and 2 mL printing
resin was used to print the open model chip with a printing time of 65 min.. Both vat and stage
were fixed to the printer with screws and the print was run by a provided MatLab code. Once
the print was finished the print was removed from the stage by loosing op the glue between the
stage and the coverslip with Ethanol. The print was placed in Mili Q water and was not used
before four hours after print to ensure that post-printing swelling was finished.
3.2
Flow Experiments with the Chip
When performing a flow experiment, both a peristaltic pump and a syringe pump were used.
Tubes with an ID of 0.8 mm and with a length of 50 cm tubes were used. A 250 μL Hamilton
syringe was used when small flow rates were used (Q<0.2 µL
min), and a 1000 μL Hamilton syringe
was used for higher flow rates. Blue and red food dyes (Dr.Oekter) were used to follow the liquid
flow through the flow chip.
3.2.1
Velocity Measurements
The velocities were measured by following fluorescent beads (2 μm in diameter). When mea-
suring the velocities of the small diameter model, a 250 μL Hamilton syringe was used. The
focus was set so the fast-moving beads were in focus. Eight different beads were measured,
and the three fast-moving beads were used for the velocity measurements. The beads mea-
sured would, therefore, be the vmax, and the average velocity in the tube is vmax
2
for a channel of
circular cross-section. An average velocity was calculated from the three fastest-moving beads
out of eight measured beads.
3.3
Cultivation of the Cells
HEK-293 green fluorescent protein (GFP) cells were cultivated in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle
Medium (DMEM) (Gibco) media (10 % FBS (Gibco), 1% penicillin-streptomycin (P/S) (Gibco)),
and cells were harvested in trypsin.
Three vials with APC cells were provided by the CRU group containing 1×106×106 cells
mL frozen in
CryoStor10 (StemCell, REF: 270502). Each vial contained 1 mL, and the cells were in passage
2 (P2), all from the same donor. The three vials were kept as a cell bank, and a working cell bank
was created from one of the vials and frozen in 0.5×106 cells
mL 1 mL CryoStor10. This ensured
that all cells used for the experiments were in passage four. The AD-MSCs were cultivated in
sterile filtered (0.22 μm filter) Minimum Essential Medium Alpha (αMEM) medium (Gibco, REF:
22561-021, LOT: 2661500) (10% hPL, 1% P/S).
When expanding both AD-MSCs and HEK-293-GFP cells, they were either cultivated in a T25
flask containing 5 mL complete media or a T75 flask containing 15 mL complete media. The
media was changed every second day and the cells were grown until 80-90 % confluence was
reached. Before harvesting the cells, the cells were washed in PBS (1x) (Gibco, REF: 14190-
144). 1 mL or 3 mL TrypLE (Gibco, REF: 12563-029, LOT: 2366123) was added to the flask
for 2 minutes in the T25 and T75 flasks, respectively. Complete media was added to the flask,
and the cells were spun (300×g, 5 min, 25oC, Acc 9, De 7).
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
15
==PAGE:23==
3.4
Cell Cultivation on Chips
To make a print ready for cell cultivation, the water where the print was placed was changed
three times with 24 hours between every water change. The print was sterilized by bringing
it to a sterile LAF bench, placing it in a sterile 6-well plate, and covering the prints with 2.5 %
glutaraldehyde (MP, CAT NO.: 198595, LOT NO: S8677) in PBS for one hour. The prints were
afterward washed twice in PBS with one hour in between. After the last wash, the prints were
covered in complete media O/N. The chips were afterward ready for coating.
3.4.1
Coating of Open Models
The open model chips were placed in PBS for 24 hours before coating. The chips were first
coated with PLL (R&D systems Cultrex, Catalog #: 3438-200-01, LOT: 1716316) for 5 min. To
coat chips used for HEK-293-GFP experiments, the chips were coated with 30
µg
mL fibronectin
(R&D systems, Catalog number: 1918-FN, Lot: MQC2923071) in PBS. To coat chips used for
AD-MSCs, the chips were coated in CPPT (provided by the CRU group). The chips were left
for 24 hours at room temperature (RT) before the coating material was washed away with PBS,
and the PBS surrounding the chips was changed. The cells were seeded in the open model
and incubated at 37◦C and 5% CO2. The media in the chip and the surrounding environment
was changed every other day.
3.4.2
Experiment with the Hollow Fiber Flow Model
The flow chips were placed in complete media 24 hours before the experiment. The chip was
inserted in a chip-holder and placed in a 6-well plate with fresh, complete media.
The inlet tube consisted of one 30 cm long tube (inner diameter=0.7 mm) and one 15 cm long
tube (inner diameter=0.25 mm) connected through a metal connector. The outlet needle was
connected to a 30 cm long tube (inner diameter=0.7 mm). The outlet tube was filled with PBS.
The inlet tubes were connected to a 1 mL syringe (B BRAUN, REF: 9166017V) filled with PLL
(R&D systems Cultrex, Catalog #: 3438-200-01, LOT: 1716316). The syringe was placed into
the syringe pump and the needles were inserted into the chip. The total volume that needs to
be disposed of when changing the syringe includes the volume in the small tube (V=7.4 μL),
the inlet needle (V= 3.5 μL), and the volume of the model (V(double-sized model)= 2.3 μL,
V(correct-sized model)= 0.6 μL). Therefore, the total volume that needs to be disposed of when
changing the syringe is 13.2 μL for the double-sized model and 11.5 μL for the correct-sized
model.
HEK-293-GFP in Hollow Fiber Model
The double-sized chip was used for the HEK-293-GFP cells experiment, and a flow rate of Q=5
µL
min was used during the experiment. The chip was infused with 5 μL PLL and left for 5 minutes.
Afterward, the syringe’s two tubes connected to the inflow needle were disconnected under PBS
in a petri dish to ensure no air bubbles were introduced during the change. A new syringe was
connected to the large tube and the tube was fully primed before the two tubes were connected
again in PBS. The two tubes were once again connected and 20 μL of 30
µg
mL fibronectin was
pumped into the chip. The chip was placed at RT for 2 hours.
The HEK-293-GFP cells were cultivated in a T75 flask with 15 mL DMEM media until a stage
of 80% confluence was reached. The cells were trypsinized in 3 mL trypsin and resuspended
in complete media at a concentration of 5.6 ×107 cells
mL to achieve the desired seeding density
(SD) of 6300 cells
mm2 , see Equation 3.1 & 3.2. The cell suspension was taken up in a syringe, and
the cell suspension flowed into the chip with a flow rate of Q=5
µL
min. The cells were seeded in
the open model and incubated at 37◦C and 5% CO2.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
16
==PAGE:24==
Total Cells = ASurface · SD = 20.4mm2 · 6300 cells
mm2 = 128, 597 cells
(3.1)
c = Total Cells
Vmodel
= 128, 597 cells
2.3 × 10−3mL = 5.6 × 107 cells
mL
(3.2)
3.4.3
AD-MSCs in Hollow Fiber Model
The correct-sized chip was used for the AD-MSCs cells experiment, and a flow rate of Q=1.5
µL
min was used during the experiment. The chip was infused with 5 μL PLL and left for 5 minutes.
Afterward, the syringe’s two tubes connected to the inflow needle were disconnected under PBS
in a petri dish to ensure no air bubbles were introduced during the change. A new syringe was
connected to the large tube, which was fully primed, before the two tubes were connected again
to PBS. The two tubes were once again connected, and 15 μL CPPT was pumped into the chip.
The chip was placed at RT for 24 hours.
The AD-MSCs were grown in a T25 flask in 5 mL complete media until 80% confluence was
reached. The cells were stained by adding Calcein AM (eBioscienceTM, Viability Dye, Ref: 65-
0853-81, LOT: 2294771) dissolved in DMSO to the T flask at a concentration of 2
µg
mL and left
for 1 hour at 37oC before the cells were harvested in 1 mL TrypLe. The cells were spun (300×g,
5 min, 25oC, Acc 9, De 7) and resuspended to in αMEM complete media at a concentration of
1.6 ×106 cells
mL to achieve the desired seeding density (SD) of 93 cells
mm2 , see Equation 3.3 & 3.4.
The cell suspension was taken up in a syringe, and the cell suspension flowed into the chip with
a flow rate of Q=1.5
µL
min. The cells were seeded in the open model and incubated at 37◦C and
5% CO2.
Total Cells = ASurface · SD = 10.2mm2 · 93 cells
mm2 = 949 cells
(3.3)
c = Total Cells
Vmodel
=
949 cells
0.6 × 10−3mL = 1.6 × 106 cells
mL
(3.4)
3.4.4
Investigation of the Cells
The cells were investigated 6-18 hours after cell seeding using an inverted microscope (Axio
Observer Z1, Carl Zeiss). Lifetime images were captured with the uEye Cockpit program. Imag-
ing was performed with bright field, phase contrast, or widefield green fluorescent light at 5x and
20x magnifications. The images were analyzed using ImageJ (Fiji).
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
17
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 4
Results
4.1
Dimensions and Fluid Dynamics in the Bioreactor
4.1.1
Investigation of the Bioreactor Dimensions
The initial task in designing the hollow fiber model was to investigate the dimensions of the hol-
low fibers within the bioreactor. Microscopy pictures of the bioreactor’s end cap were taken and
the dimensions of the fibers were analyzed using ImageJ, see Figure 4.1 A&B. The inner di-
ameter and the wall thickness were measured in microscopy pictures with 3x and 5x objectives
corresponding to a total magnification of -30x and -50x, see the measurements in Appendix
Table A.1. To validate how precise the measurements of the hollow fibers were, fragments of
fused silica capillaries with known dimensions and removed coating were measured, see Figure
4.1 C and Table A.1 in the Appendix for the measurements. The measurements of the inner
diameter of the fused silica were most accurate in the 5x magnification pictures. Therefore,
the 5x magnification pictures were used to obtain the most reliable measurements of the hol-
low fibers. The mean inner diameter of the hollow fibers were determined to be 221 μm with
a standard deviation (STD) of 9.4 μm with a wall thickness of 54 μm with an STD of 4.1 μm.
The sizes of the hollow fibers varied, with a minimum inner diameter of 207 μm and a maximum
inner diameter of 240 μm. Consequently, cells in the larger fibers will experience lower velocity
compared to those in the smaller fibers.
The fiber density was calculated from the 3x magnification picture to be 6.81 fibers
mm2 , see Fig-
ure 4.1 A. This corresponds to a total of 11,384 hollow fibers in the bioreactor with an internal
surface area of 2.2 m2, see Appendix Table A.2 for measurements and calculations. According
to Quantum System product information, the hollow fiber membrane bundle contains 11,500
fibers, providing an internal surface area of 2.1 m2 [10]. Based in this, the calculations align
with the company’s specifications. The calculated total cross-sectional area of IC is A=4.37
cm2 and EC is A=7.04 cm2.
The distance between the fibers is calculated if they are equally distributed, which is best de-
scribed with hexagons. The distance from the outer surface of the fiber to the hexagon (p)
was calculated, see Appendix Section A.1. p was calculated to be 42 μm, and if the fibers
were equally distributed, the distance between the fibers would be 84 μm, see Figure 4.1 E&F.
However, when comparing to Figure 4.1 A, it is obvious that the hollow fibers are not equally
distributed.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
18
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.1: Pictures taken during dimension investigation of the fibers in the hollow fiber bioreactor. A&B: Pic-
tures of the hollow fiber taken from the bottom of the end cap of the hollow fiber bioreactor with 3x (A) and 5x
(B) magnification, respectively. The orange circles indicate which fibers have been measured. Fibers from the 3x
picture were used to calculate the fiber density in the bioreactor. C: 5x magnification pictures of six fused silica
capillary tubes with dimension inner diameter 250 μm, wall thickness of 50 μm were used to validate the measure-
ment method. D: 5x magnification picture of one hollow fiber taken out of the bioreactor. Dimensions of the hollow
fiber were measured. E: Shows how the distribution of fibers with equal distance would be arranged and illustrates
how hexagons describe the distribution of the hollow fibers. NB: dimensions are not to scale. F: Illustration of the
measured dimensions of the average hollow fiber and the calculated distance from the outer surface of the fiber to
the hexagon. NB: dimensions are not to scale.
4.1.2
Investigation of the Flow Profile in a Hollow Fiber
The flow in the bioreactor is an essential part of the system and important to understand before
making a model of the system. Therefore, the average velocities (v) in the IC and EC were
calculated based on the flow rates (Q) used during cultivation and the cross-sectional area (A)
using Equation (4.1):
vaverage = Q
A
(4.1)
The flow rate in IC is started at Q=0.1 mL
min and increased during cultivation. The producers use
the highest flow rate of Q=2 mL
min. The velocity of the IC and EC is calculated by inserting their
respective flow rates used and the cross-sectional areas which yields:
vEC =
30 cm3
min
7.04cm2 = 4.26 cm
min
(4.2)
vICmin = 0.1 cm3
min
4.37cm2 = 0.02 cm
min
(4.3)
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
19
==PAGE:27==
vICmin =
1 cm3
min
4.37cm2 = 0.23 cm
min
(4.4)
vICmax =
2 cm3
min
4.37cm2 = 0.46 cm
min
(4.5)
To understand the flow profile in the hollow fiber bioreactor and whether the flows are dominated
by viscous or inertia forces, the Reynolds number was calculated in both the EC and IC. The
Reynolds number (Re) can be calculated using Equation (4.6):
Re = ρLv
µ ,
(4.6)
where ρ is the density of the fluid, L is the characteristic length, v is the average velocity, and
µ is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid. IC is a circular tube, and the characteristic length L is
equal to the diameter of the tube. The characteristic length for EC is L=2p. The media flowing
through the tube is assumed to be a Newtonian fluid with a viscosity of µ = 0.692 × 10−3 kg
m·s at
37◦C and a density of ρ= 993.37 kg
m3 at 37◦C.
In Equation 4.7, Reynolds number calculation for IC at the highest flow rate (Q=2 mL
min) is shown,
Reynolds numbers for IC at lower flow rates and EC can be seen in Appendix Table A.4.
Re = 993.37 kg
m3 · 0.221mm · 4.6 mm
min
0.6913mPa s
= 0.02
(4.7)
The Reynolds number in both EC and IC was Re«1, characterized by creeping flow. The flow
profile, therefore, follows a parabolic flow velocity profile, illustrated in Figure 4.2. In a parabolic
flow velocity profile, the highest velocity is in the middle of the tube and the velocity decreases
towards the walls. As a consequence of the no-slip conditions at the walls, the velocity at the
wall is v=0 (vx(± 1
2h) = 0). The numerical value of the velocity gradient is at its maximum at the
walls dv
dy(± 1
2h) = 0) and zero at the center of the flow ( dv
dy(0) = 0). Since the cells are located at
the walls, the cells experience a high velocity gradient. Therefore, the cells experience shear
stress, see Figure 4.2. The shear stress at the wall was calculated to investigate the size of this
force.
Figure 4.2: Illustration of the parabolic flow velocity profile in the hollow fiber. The cells are located at the inner
surface of the hollow fiber and will experience shear stress (τ).
To calculate the shear stress the following equations were used. The media flowing through the
tube is assumed to be a Newtonian fluid with a viscosity of µ = 0.692 × 10−3 kg
m·s at 37◦C. The
shear rate in the liquid can be described with Equation (4.8):
τ = µdv
dy
(4.8)
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
20
==PAGE:28==
In the parabolic flow velocity profile, the velocity v as a function of y can be described as follows:
v
vmax
= 1 −(2y
h )2
(4.9)
The derivative with respect to y gives the following equation:
dv
dy = −8vmax
h2
· y
(4.10)
Combining Equation (4.8) & (4.10) gives following:
τ = µ · −8vmax
h2
· y
(4.11)
For the highest flow rate of Q=2 mL
min corresponding to a velocity of vaverage=4.6 mm
min and vmax=9.2
mm
min inserted in the Equation 4.12 with the insertion of h=0.221 × 10−3 m and y=0.1105 × 10−3
m yields:
τ = 0.692 × 10−3 kg
m · s · −8 · 1.5 · 10−4 m
s · 0.1105 × 10−3m
(0.221 × 10−3m)2
= −0.00192Pa
(4.12)
The shear stress experienced by the cells is τ = 1.92×10−3Pa when utilizing a flow rate of Q=2
mL
min in the bioreactor. When a flow rate of Q=1 is utilized in the bioreactor, the cells experience
a shear stress of τ = 0.96 × 10−3Pa. The low shear stress indicates that the system applies
an almost negligible shear stress to the cells. Therefore, the important aspect to include in the
model is not the applied shear stress but the change of media to ensure a sufficient amount of
nutrients to support cell growth.
4.1.3
COMSOL Simulations of Flow Properties
To enhance the understanding of the flow within the bioreactor, a COMSOL 2D simulation was
set up with two hollow fibers approximated by these 2D cross-sections for computational effi-
ciency. As shown in Figure 4.3, the model includes the two fibers along with cell layers in the IC
and the surrounding EC, accurately representing the fibers’ length. The cell layer was created
as a 10 μm thick layer in the IC, making the diameter of the IC 20 μm smaller. The calculated
average velocities of IC and EC were used. Since the CRU group does not use a flow rate
above 1 mL
min, that flow rate is chosen as the QIC max in the simulations. The dimensions and
parameters used for the simulation are shown in Appendix Tabel A.6.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.3: The COMSOL model with colors to illustrate the model geometry. The IC diameter was 0.227 mm,
EC diameter Inner= 0.083 mm, EC diameter outer=0.0415 mm, wall thickness= 0.054 mm, Cell layer=0.01 mm and
the length was 22.7 cm. Please note the very high compromize of the vertical dimension in the visualization of the
geometry.
First, the velocity profile in the model was investigated, see Figure 4.4. The highest flow rate
in the IC was used. Here, two parabolic flow profiles in both IC and EC can be observed in
conformity with the calculated Reynold’s number, see Figure 4.4 B.
Figure 4.4: Velocity results from the COMSOL simulations. The velocity used corresponds to a flow rate of
Q = 1 mL
min in IC and Q = 30 mL
min in EC. A: Visualization of the velocity in the full length of the two hollow fibers. B:
The velocity profile in a cross-sectional 1D plot 10 mm into the model is shown. In both IC and EC, a parabolic flow
profile is observed.
The mass transfer of glucose in the model was investigated, including both glucose transport
and cell usage. Understanding glucose dynamics is important since AD-MSCs are sensitive to
glucose deprivation due to their reliance on glycolysis as the main respiratory pathway.
Glucose flux across the cell compartment and the walls depends on diffusion. The hollow fibers
are porous with a cut-off of 17 kDa, but the pore density is unknown. To account for the lower
permeability of glucose through the walls and cell layer in the COMSOL simulations, the diffusion
constant (D) of glucose was in these regions was halved. The COMSOL model included a
cell layer of 10 μm height. The cells consume glucose diffusing through this layer, following
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
22
==PAGE:30==
a Michaelis-Menten reaction. The parameters used for the simulation are shown in Appendix
Tabel A.6.
Figure 4.5 shows the simulations of the glucose concentration with the harvest cell density of
227
cells
mm2 and the velocity corresponding to a flow rate of 1
mL
min. Figure 4.5 shows that the
glucose concentration reaches an equilibrium after 3000 μm / 3mm at a 4.5 mol
mL which remains
almost constant throughout the 227 mm.
Figure 4.5: Results from the COMSOL simulations when investigating the glucose concentration throughout the
model. The cell density corresponds to the cells density when AD-MSCs are harvested, c=277
cells
mm2 . The velocity
used corresponds to a flow rate of Q = 1 mL
min in IC and Q = 30 mL
min in EC. A: Visualization of the glucose concen-
tration in the full length of the two hollow fibers. B: The glucose concentrations in the axial direction of the model in
both the center of EC (green), cell layer (red), and IC (blue). A constant glucose concentration of c=4.5
mol
mm3 from
3 mm into the model and throughout the length of the model (275 mm) is observed.
To investigate the effect of the EC the velocity of EC was turned off, see Figure 4.6. A clear
concentration gradient in the axial direction of the hollow fibers can be observed, see Figure 4.6
B. This illustrates the role of the EC in maintaining uniform glucose concentrations for all cells
in the fiber, facilitated by the higher velocity profile in the EC.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
23
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.6: Results from the COMSOL simulations when investigating the glucose concentration throughout the
model without a flow in EC. The cell density corresponds to the cells density when AD-MSCs are harvested, c=277
cells
mm2 . The velocity used corresponds to a flow rate of Q = 1 mL
min in IC. A: Visualization of the glucose concentration
in the full length of the two hollow fibers. B: The glucose concentrations in the axial direction of the model in both
the center of EC (green), cell layer (red), and IC (blue). The glucose concentration decreases throughout the model.
At the end of the channel (l=275 mm) a glucose concentration of c=4
mol
mm3 is observed.
To investigate how the glucose consumption would change if the cell number were doubled,
simulations were performed. As seen in Figure 4.7 A&B, the glucose concentration equilibrium
drops to 3.5 mol
mL . However, if the velocity in the IC is doubled, the glucose concentration in-
creases to an almost constant level of 4.5 mol
mL , see Figure 4.7 C&D. This demonstrates that
doubling the cell concentration is feasible if the IC velocity is increased. Nonetheless, this ad-
justment would result in higher shear stress on the cells and increased media consumption. The
AD-MSCs are shear stress-sensitive, so it would be necessary to test whether the increased
shear stress due to the higher velocity would influence the cells negatively.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
24
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.7: Results from the COMSOL simulations when investigating the glucose concentration throughout the
model with a cell density double the harvest cell density. The velocity used corresponds to a flow rate of Q = 30 mL
min
in EC. A&B: The velocity used corresponds to a flow rate of Q = 1 mL
min in IC. A: Visualization of the glucose
concentration in the full length of the two hollow fibers. B: The glucose concentrations in the axial direction of the
model in both the center of EC (green), cell layer (red), and IC (blue). A nearly constant glucose concentration of
c=3.5
mol
mm3 from 3 mm into the model and throughout the length of the model (275 mm) is observed. C&D: The
velocity used corresponds to a flow rate of Q = 2 mL
min in IC. C: Visualization of the glucose concentration in the full
length of the two hollow fibers. D: The glucose concentrations in the axial direction of the model in both the center
of EC (green), cell layer (red), and IC (blue). A nearly constant glucose concentration of c=4.5
mol
mm3 from 3 mm into
the model and throughout the length of the model (275 mm) is observed.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
25
==PAGE:33==
4.1.4
Choosing the EC dimensions for the Model
The model designed in this project only contains one hollow fiber. In the bioreactor, two hollow
fibers would be distanced by 2p, see Figure 4.8 A. Cells in both fibers will consume molecules
diffusing into the hollow fibers. However, since the design only contains one hollow fiber, the
dimension of the EC can be chosen as either p or 2p, see Figure 4.8. If p is chosen, diffusion
is best represented, but the velocity gradient will be steeper, and therefore, the velocity will be
too high near the walls. Conversely, with 2p, the velocity profile is accurately represented, but
diffusion is incorrect because the radial length is much larger than in the model, resulting in an
increased diffusion length.
Figure 4.8: Illustrations of the parabolic flow velocity profile. NB: dimensions are not to scale A: Visualization of
how the velocity profile changes when changing the dimension of the EC. When EC has the dimensions of p chosen,
the gradient of the velocity profile is steeper compared to an EC dimension of 2p. B: Illustration of the parabolic flow
velocity profile and the characteristic length (L) used for calculating the Peclet number.
To decide if the advection profile or diffusion distance is the most important to replicate, the
Peclet number is calculated. The Peclet number describes the ratio between advection and
diffusion. A large number indicates that transport is dominated by advection. In contrast, a
small Peclet number means that transport is dominated by diffusion. Again, the diffusion of
glucose is chosen due to its importance for cell growth.
The Peclet number (Pe) can be calculated using Equation 4.13. Where v is the average velocity,
L is the characteristic length, and D is a diffusion constant [43]:
Pe = v · L
D
(4.13)
For the IC the characteristic length is the radius of the hollow fibers: LIC=0.1105 mm. For
the EC, both dimensions with either p and 1
2p were calculated. In Equation 4.14, one Peclet
calculation is shown, and the results from the rest of the calculations can be seen in Tabel 4.1.
PeIC = 0.2 mm
min · 0.1105mm
0.03696mm2
min
= 0.7
(4.14)
For the IC, the Peclet number ranges from 0.7 to 14. At the beginning of the cultivation, with
a flow rate of Q=0.1 mL
min, transport is dominated by diffusion (Pe=0.7). When the flow rate is
increased to Q=0.15 mL
min, transport is equally dominated by advection and diffusion (Pe=1). As
the flow rate is continuously increased throughout the cultivation, transport becomes increas-
ingly dominated by advection, reaching a Peclet number of 14 at a flow rate of Q=2 mL
min.
In EC, the transport is in both cases with L=1
2p and L=p dominated by advection since the
calculated Peclet numbers are 24 and 48, respectively. Therefore, from these calculations, the
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
26
==PAGE:34==
dimension for the modeling should represent the advection/velocity profile, and therefore, the
EC dimensions should be 2p.
Table 4.1: Peclet numbers calculated for the hollow fiber. For the IC, the highest and the lowest flow rates were
used for calculations. For the EC, the flow rate is the same throughout the cultivation. The inner diameter of the
IC was measured with a three-digit precision, and the EC dimensions were calculated using the measurements in
Section 4.1.1. The characteristic length (L) is changed for the EC to be either p or 1
2p to investigate which dimensions
are to be used when modeling the hollow fiber.
Peclet Numbers
IC
Q (bioreactor)
V (average)
L
Pe
0.1 mL
min
0.2 mm
min
r=0.1105 mm
1
0.15 mL
min
0.3 mm
min
r=0.1105 mm
1
1.0 mL
min
2.3 mm
min
r=0.1105 mm
7
2.0 mL
min
4.6 mm
min
r=0.1105 mm
14
EC
Q (bioreactor)
V (average)
L
Pe
30.0 mL
min
42.6 mm
min
1
2 p=0.021 mm
24
p=0.042 mm
48
To investigate if the diffusion in IC is influenced by the change of EC dimensions, COMSOL
simulations were performed. The model presented in Section 4.1.3 was utilized again. The di-
mensions of the outer EC were changed between p and 2p, and a cross-sectional concentration
plot 10 mm into the channel was investigated, see Figure 4.9. From this, it can be seen that the
glucose concentration does not change in the IC when the dimensions of the outer EC in the
model are changed. Based on the Peclet number, the dimensions of the design were chosen
to be 2p to accurately represent the velocity profile.
Figure 4.9: Results from the COMSOL simulations when investigating the glucose concentration profile in a cross-
sectional 1D plot 10 mm into the model is shown. The cell density corresponds to the cells density when AD-MSCs
are harvested, c=277 cells
mm2 . The velocity used corresponds to a flow rate of Q = 1 mL
min in IC and Q = 30 mL
min in EC.
A: Visualization of the glucose concentration in the full length of the two hollow fibers. The line for the cross-sectional
profile is highlighted. B: The build COMSOL model with the two outer EC compartments with the diameter of p. C:
The build COMSOL model with the two outer EC compartments with the diameter of 2p.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
27
==PAGE:35==
4.2
Designing the Model and Optimizing the Printing
After determining the necessary dimensions for the hollow fiber model, the next task was to
investigate the printing of the designs. When 3D-printing the PEGDA 700 hydrogel model, the
print resin used for stereolithography is composed of monomers PEGDA (Mn 700
g
mol), the
photoinitiator LAP, and the photoabsorber QY. The concentration of QY influences the light
penetration depth, thereby the Z resolution of the printing. The balance between good adher-
ence to the previous printed layer and not changing the pattern of the previous printed layer
when printing the closed channel in the hollow fiber was investigated.
To investigate the appropriate QY concentration, design B presented in Section 2.7 was printed
in double size. Figure 4.10 shows 5x magnification microscopy pictures of printed hollow fiber
models after being cut to get a cross-section view of the print. The first concentration of QY
used was c=9 mg
mL. As seen in Figure 4.10 B, the top of the IC became more oval than round.
To optimize the printed model, the QY concentration was increased to c=12 mg
mL to decrease the
light penetration through the print resin. The resolution is, therefore, increased with the compro-
mise of lower adherence between the printed layers. As observed in Figure 4.10 C, increasing
the concentration of QY results in a more circular print of the IC layer. However, the reduced
penetration depth affects the top layer of EC, causing it to arc. The diminished cross-linking
and, consequently, lower mechanical strength in the EC top layer may prevent it from maintain-
ing its shape when being pulled from the foil during printing. This deformation results in an arc,
which prevents the next printed layer from being attached.
Figure 4.10: Pictures of printed double sized models after they have been cut with a scalpel and investigated
under the microscope (5x magnification). A: Shows the CAD of the print and the dimensions used for all four prints.
B: The model was printed with a QY concentration of c=9 mg
mL. C: The model was printed with a QY concentration
of c=12
mg
mL. D: The model was printed with a QY concentration of c=9
mg
mL, and the first two layers of EC were
exposed during printing for the double time. E: The model was printed with a QY concentration of c=9 mg
mL, and the
first two layers of EC were exposed during printing for double the time and the next two layers for 1.5 times longer.
To solve this problem, the exposure time of the two first layers of the EC top was doubled to
increase the strength of the printed layers, see Figure 4.10 D. This resulted in a thicker gap
between the two top layers and therefore not solving the problem. To see if the top layer could
be connected to the next layers, the exposure time of the next two layers was increased 1.5
times, see Figure 4.10 E. This extra exposure time did not solve the EC problem, as the top
layer’s arc worsened.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
28
==PAGE:36==
Since the channel’s visibility is likely to worsen when the arc is present, this issue needs to be
addressed. One potential solution could be to introduce support structures, or ”pillows,” to sta-
bilize the layer. However, adding these supports would alter the liquid flow in EC and diffusion
dynamics between the EC and IC compartments.
For continued work with the model, a print resin with a QY concentration of c=12 mg
mL was used,
and the first two layers of the EC were printed with double exposure times. This decision was
made because this printing setting was expected to provide better mechanical strength without
significantly disrupting the model’s transparency. Furthermore, the arc could have been intro-
duced when applying force with the scalpel while cutting the model, suggesting that the arc
might be less pronounced before cutting.
4.2.1
Printing the Four Designs
To investigate the design of the hollow fibers, the four designs presented in Section 2.7 were
printed. A print resin with a QY concentration of c=12 mg
mL was used and the prints were printed
in both the correct size and the double size. In both sizes, all four prints were successfully
printed, see Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11: Pictures of four different printed models (A-D) in two sizes (1 & 2). The dimensions of the print
are shown as a CAD for design A. The prints were cut with a scalpel and investigated under a microscope (5x
magnification). The models were printed with a QY concentration of c=12 mg
mL and the first two layers of EC with a
double exposure time.
The two most interesting designs are designs B and C, where the design has been made with
the objective of increasing the visibility of the IC. Model B best represents the geometry of the
IC in the bioreactor, but the cells might not be visible without staining the cells. Model C would
allow for better visualization of the cells, but the geometry will differ from the hollow fiber’s IC.
Table 4.2 contains the advantages and disadvantages of the two models and the answers each
model would best answer.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
29
==PAGE:37==
Table 4.2: Comparison of model B and C to evaluate which model to continue with. Each model has design
choices that have different disadvantages and advantages. The questions each model best answers are listed.
Comparison of Model B and C
Model B: Cell seeding in focus
Change
Advantage
Disadvantage
Keep IC round
• Better understanding of
cell seeding and distribution
• Worse transparency and cells would
need to be stained for visualization
• Wall thickness is not equal
which results in differences
in the diffusion between IC and EC
Best at answering question:
- How are the cells distributed after seeding?
- Can the cells migrate during cultivation
- When is different confluencies achieved?
Model C: Visualization in focus
Change
Advantage
Disadvantage
Introduce straight lines in IC
• Make it more transparent
• Better understanding of the cells
• Maybe no need to stain cells
• Cell seeding and
distribution would be different
Make the walls thinner
• Better transparency/visualization
of the cells
• Model would be less robust
and flow for six days could
be a challenge
Change material
• Better transparency/visualization
of the cells could maybe be achived
• Disadvantages of PEGDA700:
- Rigid
- Low protein binding
- Contains water and therefore
it spreads light
- Complications of being a hydrogel
• Advantages of PEGDA700:
- Diffusion open
- Minimal post-printing swelling
- More or less transparent,
- Can be printed very precisely,
cheap.
Best at answering question:
- How does the flow influence the cells?
The models and their respective advantages and disadvantages were compared in relation to
the main questions asked by CRU group, as introduced in Section1.1. The primary interest of
the group concerns the cell dynamics in the IC. Since the CRU group did not have issues with
staining the cells, it was agreed that Model B was the most relevant design to continue with.
4.2.2
The Design of the Flow Chip
The design of the flow chip is shown in Figure 4.12. When designing the chip, the goal was to
create the longest possible channel. Therefore, the maximum dimensions that could be printed
were utilized, with needle holes placed near the edges. Sharp edges were avoided, and the
coaxial alignment of the two channels was created while minimizing the space used. This re-
sulted in a model containing a 14.7 mm straight IC channel surrounded by the EC compartment,
as shown in Figures 4.12 A&B. A window was designed to enhance visibility over the channel
area by minimizing the amount of material obstructing the view. The model’s height is set to 7
mm to ensure stable needle insertion, resulting in a printing time of 115 minutes and using 3 mL
of print resin.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
30
==PAGE:38==
The needle holes in the chip were designed with a 0.1 mm smaller inner diameter than the
outer diameter of the needle to ensure a tight seal around the needles after insertion. However,
due to the rigid properties of the PEGDA hydrogel, inserting the needles causes them to scratch
the sides of the holes, creating clumps of loose PEGDA. These clumps can clog the channels.
To address this issue, a pocket at the bottom of each needle insertion hole was added to the
design to trap the loose PEGDA, as shown in Figures 4.12 D&E.
Figure 4.12: CAD drawings and photos of the flow model. A-C: CAD of the model designed. The flow model
has four needle holes that allow two different fluids to be perfused in the flow chip. The flow model is 20.7 mm long,
11.6 mm wide, and 7 mm high. The flow model contains a 14.7 mm long hollow fiber through the center of the flow
model. The center of the flow model has a window for observation where the PEGDA 700 has been made as thin
as possible to improve the visualization in the chip. D&E: A cross-sectional view of the needle holes shows pockets
created beneath them to trap loose PEGDA 700 hydrogel. F: A cross-sectional view of the model to visualize the
fiber running through the model G: The CAD was sliced into 20 μm thick 2D pictures used when printing. Four
pictures of the slicing have been shown to represent different parts of the model (Pictures 10, 35, 46, and 80). H:
Photo of the printed model after 24 hours in MiliQ water. J: CAD of the hollow fiber with dimensions. K: Microscopy
picture (5x magnification) of the printed hollow fiber. The diameter of the fiber has been measured in ImageJ.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
31
==PAGE:39==
A holder for the chip was designed, see Figure 4.13. The principle of the holder was to help with
the insertion of the needles, stabilizing the needle after insertion, stress-releasing the tubes, and
moving the chip around. The size of the holder was optimized to be 0.54 mm larger than the chip
in both the X and Y directions. The holder maintains a tight grip on the chip after post-printing
swelling of the hydrogel, keeping it securely in place even when moved around, though without
damaging the chip upon insertion. For cell experiments, the chip must be turned for 30 minutes
after cell seeding to get cells attached to both the top and bottom of the channel. A rotating tool
was designed to keep needles and tubes from falling out while being turned upside down, see
Figure 4.13 E&F. The rotating tool was designed so that when placed in a 6-well plate with a
lid, the plate would be tight. By keeping the 6-well plate tight, the chip could be out of water for
longer, even when placed on an LAF bench with flow turned on.
Figure 4.13: A holder for the chip and a rotating tool was designed. A-B: CAD of the holder. The holder contains
four holes for needles and tube holders where the tubes can be inserted to hold them in place, thereby preventing
them from twisting and destroying the chip. C: STL-printed holder in the material Dental LT Clear. D: A picture of
the holder where the chip has been inserted with four needles connected to tubes. The chip was used for a flow
experiment, where blue-colored water was flown through the IC and red-colored water through the EC. E: CAD of
a tool for rotating the holder that can be put on the holder after inserting needles and tubes. This allows the chip to
be turned while keeping everything in check. F: Picture of the rotating tool on top of the holder to show how they fit
together.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
32
==PAGE:40==
4.3
Performing of a Flow Experiment
When performing the flow experiment, the double-sized model was used. A syringe pump was
employed to achieve the low flow rate in the IC channel, ranging from Q = [0.035 ; 0.705]
µL
min.
The IC channel was connected to a 1 mL Hamilton syringe, which was inserted into a syringe
pump, as shown in Figure 4.14. At the highest flow rate, Q = 0.705
µL
min, the volume of liquid
pushed through the IC was V = 1.015 mL
d , necessitating daily refilling of the syringe. For the
EC channel, a flow rate of Q = 24.0
µL
min was required. The EC channel was connected to a
peristaltic pump, delivering a volume of V = 35.5 mL
d . The experiment setup is shown in Figure
4.14. For the final setup of the flow chip, 50 cm long tubes were needed, and thus, all tubes used
in the experiment were this length. To solve the problem of air bubbles forming and damaging
the chip, the liquid was heated and degassed in a water bath for 15 min. before use. To prevent
gas from dissolving into the liquid, the container with the liquid for the EC was kept on a heater,
maintaining the media at a temperature of 37◦C, as shown in Figure 4.14.
Figure 4.14: Picture of the experimental setup used to achieve flow in the flow chip in both EC and IC for seven
days. The reservoir for EC with red color was heated during all seven days. A peristaltic pump was used to pump
the red watercolor through the EC. A syringe pump was used to pump blue watercolor into the IC of the flow chip.
The flow chip was placed under a microscope and pictures were taken every day.
An experiment was conducted to determine if the chip could withstand continuous flow for seven
days. Blue-colored water was used for the IC, and red-colored water for the EC. A seven-day
flow experiment was completed, with pictures taken daily to monitor any changes in the design,
as shown in Figure 4.15. Starting from day 4, some sediments began accumulating where the IC
and EC channels are made co-axial, see Figures 4.15 C1-3, D1-3, E1-3. These sediments came
from the red dye, which was heated and reused, leading to the accumulation of sediments. The
sediments were also visible in the container with the red-colored water. The flow experiment
was successful, with continuous flow maintained throughout the seven days. The chip can,
therefore, withstand a full cultivation experiment needed when cells are introduced.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
33
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.15: Pictures taken during the seven day flow experiment (10x magnification) where red color is being
pumped through EC and blue color through the IC. Throughout the flow experiment, the highest flow that will be
used under cultivation was used for all seven days. The flow chip’s dimensions were the double size of the hollow
fiber measured in the bioreactor. Every day, three pictures of the flow chip were taken at the beginning of channel
(3), the middle of the channel (2), and the end of the channel (1). The pictures from every second day are displayed.
As seen in C.3, D3, and E.3, the red color traps sediments where IC and EC meet. The sediments come from the
red color after being heated over a long period, accumulating in this area of the chip. The flow model successfully
completed the 7-day flow experiment.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
34
==PAGE:42==
4.4
Cell Cultivation in Chips
4.4.1
Initial Cell Experiments in PEGDA 700 Hydrogel Chips
To investigate the experiment setup with cells seeded in the PEGDA 700 hydrogel chip, the cell
line of HEK-293-GFP cells were first utilized. The cells constitutively express the GFP protein,
and the cells can be visualized in a fluorescent light without staining. First, an open model was
designed to test the growth of the cells in the PEGDA 700 hydrogel chip, see Figure 4.16.
Figure 4.16: Design of an open model chip for cell experiments. A&B: CAD of the open model chip. The chip
was used to observe the growth and distribution of the cells before adding them to the flow chip. The chip is 20.7
mm long, 11.6 mm wide, 4 mm high, and contains three chambers. Each chamber had a surface area of A=32mm2,
equal to the surface area of a 96-well plate. The three champers on each chip enable replications on the same chip.
The volume in each chamber is 136.5 μL. C: Picture of a printed chip.
The model was coated with PLL+Fn and the HEK-293-GFP cells were cultivated for six days
at three different seeding densities: 12,600 cells
mm2 , 6,300 cells
mm2 , and 3,150 cells
mm2 , see Figure 4.17.
Cultivation at all concentrations was successful, though, at all densities, some areas previously
covered with cells became unoccupied starting from day 4, see Figure 4.17 B&E&H. The clear-
ing became worse at the lowest cell density and the cells started to aggregate. The distribution
of the cells at the two highest concentrations resulted in the most equal cell distribution. Based
on this experiment, the cell seeding concentration of 6,300 cells
mm2 was used for further experi-
ments with the HEK-293-GFP cells.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
35
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.17: Microscopy pictures of cultivated HEK-293-GFP cells in the open model at day 1, 4, and 6 (20x
objective). Three different seeding densities were tested. A-C: Seeding cell density of 12,400 cells
mm2 . D-F: Seeding
cell density of 6,300 cells
mm2 . G-I: Seeding cell density of 3,150 cells
mm2 .
The subsequent experiment involved introducing the HEK-293-GFP cells to the flow chip. After
coating the chip with Fn for 24 hours, the cells were flown into the model. The chip was inverted
for 30 minutes at RT before being returned to its original position and placed in the incubator.
After 6 hours, the chip was examined in an inverted microscope, as shown in Figure 4.18. No-
tably, as depicted in Figure 4.18 A&C, the cells were not visible in a bright field image. However,
when a fluorescent microscope was used, the cells became visible, revealing that the seeding
of the cells was successful. The cells could not be focused into a sharp image, as shown in
Figure 4.18 D. The cells occupied both the top and the bottom of the fiber, which meant that 30
minutes turned upside down was enough for the HEK-293-GFP to attach to the top of the fiber.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
36
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.18: Microscopy pictures of HEK cells expressing GFP 6 hours after seeding in the flow chip with double
dimensions (Inner diameter of IC is 442 μm). A&C: Bright field pictures where visualization of the cells was not pos-
sible. B&D: GFP pictures from the inverted widefield fluorescence microscope, where the cells could be visualized.
Since the cells were not visible with the bright field microscopy the next task was to see if this
could be improved. As described in Section 2.3, a crucial requirement for the model is to make
it as transparent as possible to ensure the best visualization of the cells.
The hollow fiber model B has straight lines in the EC and stands upon a 100 μm thick plateau
and has a flat top layer above the EC, see Figure 4.12 J. Making the flat surfaces as transparent
as possible is important. It could be improved by preventing the creation of the black lines in the
print, see Figure 4.19 C. Printing with a DMD oscillator was therefore investigated. The function
of the DMD oscillator is to shake the DMD so the reflected light distributes into the 1.9 μm spaces
between the mirrors on the DMD. This results in curing of the print resin in the spacing between
the mirrors, and the straight lines are therefore blurred, see Figure 4.19 D. Since the dark lines
were still visible, it was hypothesized that the exposure time was too short for the DMD oscillator
to complete the movement of the DMD before the light was turned off again. To investigate this,
the exposure time was doubled from 6 seconds to 12 seconds, and the light intensity halved, see
Figure 4.19 E. These printing settings clearly blurred the black lines. By printing with the DMD
oscillator and changing the printing settings, the printed hydrogel becomes more transparent.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
37
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.19: Investigation of the influence of a DMD oscillator. A&B: CAD drawings of the 100 μm thick plateau
printed with different printing settings. C: Microscopy image (20 x magnification) of the plateau printed without DMD
oscillator. D: Microscopy image (20 x magnification) of the plateau printed with DMD oscillator. E: Microscopy image
(20 x magnification) of the plateau printed with DMD oscillator, double exposure time, and halved light intensity.
A new cell seeding experiment was performed to investigate visibility through a flow chip printed
with the new printing settings and the DMD oscillator. The HEK-293-GFP was reintroduced to
a flow model printed with the new pritning settings. The results of this experiment can be seen
in Figure 4.20. The cells were now visible in the bright field pictures 4.20 A&C, and the cells’
fluorescence was more defined due to the better transparency through the printed model, see
Figure 4.20 B&D. The printing settings with the DMD oscillator, therefore, resulted in at improved
visualization of the cells.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
38
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.20: Microscopy pictures of HEK cells expressing GFP 6 hours after seeding in the flow chip with double
dimensions (Inner diameter of IC is 442 μm). The flow chips have been printed with a DMD oscillator, half light
intensity, and double exposure time. A&C: Bright field pictures where visualization of the cells was possible. B&D:
GFP pictures from the inverted widefield fluorescence microscope, where the cells could be visualized.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
39
==PAGE:47==
4.5
MSC Experiments in PEGDA700 Hydrogel Models
The next part of the project was to investigate AD-MSCs seeding and cultivation on PEGDA 700
hydrogel coated with CPPT. First, the cultivation of AD-MSCs was investigated in a T75 flask,
see Figure 4.21. Here, the spindle-like shape characteristic for AD-MSCs can be observed.
The size and the elongation vary between the cells, see Figure 4.21 B.
Figure 4.21: Phase contrast microscopy pictures of AD-MSCs cultivated in a T75 flask with 4x (A) and 10x (B)
magnification. A dense cell population with some overlapping cells can be observed.
The AD-MSCs was first cultivated in the open model shown in Figure 4.16. The chips were
coated with PLL+CPPT 24 hours before the cells were seeded. Six different cell seeding densi-
ties were tested, and the two most successful cell seeding densities are shown in Figure 4.22.
The cells spread in the chip, and the spindle-like cell shape could again be observed, indicat-
ing a successful coating of the chip. The seeding density of 93 cells
mm2 was the most successful
without cells aggregating, and the cells spread as wanted.
As seen in Figure 4.22 G&H, the cells are hard to visualize even in this simple design, which
does not have curved lines or a roof. Since the flow chips are a much more complicated struc-
ture, the AD-MSCs would not be visible in a phase contrast microscope. To improve the visibility
of the cells in the IC, the EC could be removed. The primary function of the EC is to ensure
uniform concentrations for all cells in the fiber. However, the fibers in the bioreactor have a
length of 275 mm, while the fiber in this model is only 14.7 mm long. Thus, the need for the EC
to feed cells further down the fiber may not be necessary.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
40
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.22: Microscopy pictures of cultivated AD-MSCs in the open model at day 1, 2, and 3 (5x and 20x
magnification). Six different cell seedings were tested, and the two most successful cell seeding densities are
shown. A-D: Cell seeding concentration was 43 cells
mm2 and pictures at day one (A&B) and day two (C&D) are shown.
E-G: 93 cells
mm2 and pictures at day two (E&F) and day three (G&H) are shown
To test this, COMSOL simulations without velocity in the EC, as presented in Figure 4.6, were
investigated. These simulations still included two fibers and the EC. This means the glucose
concentration in the simulations had to equilibrate in a larger volume than in the model. The
simulations can, therefore, still be used for this purpose, though a faster decrease in glucose
concentration could be expected.
When investigating the glucose concentration 14.7 mm downstream from the inflow in the COM-
SOL simulations, the glucose concentration remained at the initial concentration of c = 5.5 mol
mm3 ,
see Figure 4.23 B. This confirms that the cells in the IC will not experience different glucose con-
centrations if the EC is removed from the model.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.23: Results from the COMSOL simulations with no flow in EC. The cell density corresponds to the cells
density when AD-MSCs are harvested, c=277 cells
mm2 . The velocity used corresponds to a flow rate of Q = 1 mL
min in IC
and Q = 30 mL
min in EC. A: Visualization of the glucose concentration in the full length of the two hollow fibers. The
line 14.7 mm into the model used for the cross-sectional profile is highlighted. B: The glucose concentration 14.7
mm into the fibers is equal to the initial glucose concentration in the media of c= 5.5
mol
mm3 .
A new design of the flow chip without the EC was made, see Figure 4.24. When removing the
EC, the roof over IC could be decreased to 100 μm. When investigating the printed model in
4.24 E, the print of the IC is round but with an elliptical instead of a circular perimeter. Veloc-
ity measurements were conducted at three different flow rates (Q=0.1 mL
min, 1 mL
min, and 2 mL
min)
to ensure the flow rates used in the bioreactor could be replicated. The measurements were
done by following 2 μm diameter fluorescent beads flowing through the channel. The mea-
sured velocities showed some fluctuations during flow but successfully matched the flow rate at
which the liquid is transported during cultivation, see Appendix Figure A.2 and Table A.3. This
achievement is significant as it allows us to accurately replicate the cells’ feeding in this model.
To determine the maximum flow rate the model could withstand the 2 μm fluorescent beads
were used again to track the flow. The chip successfully handled a flow rate of Q=1.5
µL
min for
20 minutes. However, the flow chip broke when the flow rate was increased to Q=1.8
µL
min.
Therefore, the highest flow rate that could be used for cell experiments was Q=1.5
µL
min, which
corresponds to a velocity of v=39.1 mm
min. The same velocity is reached when the hollow fiber
bioreactor utilizes a flow rate of Q=17.1 mL
min.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
42
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.24: CAD of the design with only IC in the model. A: The CAD from the top. The length of the fiber is 14.7
mm. B: A cross-sectional view of the model to visualize the fiber running through the model. C: Two pictures after
a 20 μm slicing of the model. Picture 10 and 70 have been chosen to represent two different places in the model.
Picture 10 is at the center of the channel, and picture 70 is in the reservoir above the channel. D: CAD of the fiber
and its dimensions. E: A printed model cut to investigate the print. The picture has been measured, and the hollow
fiber’s dimensions had the intended width but a decreased height.
4.5.1
Experiment with Cell Loading into the Flow Chip
When designing experiments with AD-MSCs in the flow chip, the coating and cell loading pro-
cedures used in the hollow fiber bioreactor must be closely replicated. The hollow fiber coating
process involves continuous flow for 24 hours at 37◦C. For practical reasons, it would be prefer-
able to avoid coating the flow chip with a running flow. To determine if coating could be done
without flow, the concentration of Fn in CPPT was calculated. Subsequently, the percentage of
Fn in the volume of the IC that would bind to the surface of the IC was determined, see Appendix
A.5 for calculations. The calculations showed that under 3% of the Fn dimers in the volume of
IC would be bound, if the inner surface area of IC was completely covered by Fn dimers. Based
on these calculations, it was reasoned that the flow could be turned off during coating without
influencing the binding of Fn.
When seeding the cells in the flow chip, the experiment design had to be optimized to ensure
that the cells could enter the flow model without first sedimenting in the tubes. Since the highest
flow rate that could be used is Q=1.5
µL
min, the tubes had to be selected carefully.
To prevent air bubbles during the experiment, a trade-off must be made regarding tube length.
Since different liquids had to be infused into the chip, the syringe had to be changed multiple
times. To facilitate this, two tubes were used during the experiment: one tube was connected to
the inlet needle, and the other tube was connected to the syringe, see the experimental setup in
Figure 4.25. The two tubes were connected through a metal connector. To prevent air bubbles
from being introduced during the syringe changes, the metal connector was immersed in PBS
in a Petri dish, before the two tubes were disconnected. For this practical reason, the tubing
connected to the inlet needle had to be 15 cm long. Despite choosing a tube with an inner diam-
eter of 0.25 mm, this setup required 13 μL to be disposed of before the cells could enter the flow
model. With a flow rate of Q=1.5, this equated to a flow time of 8 minutes. Unfortunately, the
experiment was not successfully completed within the timeframe of this project due to various
complications encountered during the attempts.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
43
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.25: Picture of the experimental setup used when coating and seeding cells in the flow chip. The flow
chip was inserted in a chip-holder and placed in a 6-well plate with complete media. A syringe pump was used to
pump liquid through the IC. The syringe was connected to a 30 cm long inlet tube (Inner diameter=0.7 mm). The
tube was connected to a 15 cm long inlet tube (Inner diameter=0.25 mm) through a metal connector. The metal
connector was immersed in PBS in a Petri dish, before the two tubes were disconnected. The outlet needle was
connected to a 30 cm long tube (inner diameter=0.7 mm).
4.5.2
Problems with the Printed Chips
During the project, the printing of the chips began to fail. When cultivating AD-MSCs in the open
model, the model would fail after only 1-2 days in the incubator. The model started to loosen
from the cover slip in large pieces, eventually resulting in the chip completely detaching from
the cover slip. The open models were printed with a 200 μm thick bottom layer, ensuring good
adhesion to the cover slip. The prints were printed with a QY concentration of c=12 mg
mL, with
the DMD oscillator turned on and settings of double exposure time and half light intensity for
the first 200 μm. Visually, the chips appeared fine after printing and before seeding the cells,
but they consistently failed after 1-2 days in the incubator.
To investigate the reason for the detachment of the chips, four new chips were printed. Three
chips were printed with the DMD oscillator, and the last one without the DMD oscillator. All
four prints were successful, as seen in Figure 4.26 B&C. One chip was coated with PLL+CPPT,
another with only PLL, and both were placed in an oven at 37◦C. The chip printed without DMD
oscillator and the last chip printed with DMD oscillator were set at 37◦C without any coating. The
chips were checked daily. On day three, the first breaks in the chips were observed, and by day
four, all chips had detached from the cover slip, as shown in Figure 4.26 E&F. To determine if
decreasing the QY concentration and thereby increasing the cross-linking between the layers
would solve the problem, three chips were printed with a QY concentration of c=9 mg
mL without
DMD oscillator. The same three coating combinations were tested, but again, by day four, all
three chips had detached.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
44
==PAGE:52==
Upon closer examination, it was observed that the top part of the chip was shorter than the
lower part, indicating uneven swelling. The chip is supposed to swell by 10% after printing, but
the top part of the chip did not have the expected length at day four, as seen in Figure 4.26 D.
During this project, a new LAP (photoinitiator) was used, raising the suspicion that it might differ
from the old one used for the initial experiments with HEK cells. Unfortunately, there was no
time to further investigate the problem within the timeframe of this project.
Figure 4.26: Pictures of the open model, which failed after four days at 37◦. A: CAD of the open model with the
dimensions inserted. B: Picture of the printed model after being in the water for 24 hours at room temperature. C:
Microscopy picture of the print 24 hours after print (10 x magnification). D-E: Pictures of the print after four days at
37◦C where the print has detached from the cover slip. The dimensions of the chip were measured with a Vernier
caliper gauge. F: Microscopy picture of the print after four days at 37◦where the breaks in the PEGDA 700 hydrogel
can be observed (10 x magnification).
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
45
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5
Discussion
The project aimed to design and develop a model of a hollow fiber bioreactor. The model should
capture the essential functionalities of the hollow fiber bioreactor while enabling cell visualiza-
tion. A stereolithographically (STL) 3D-printed PEGDA 700 flow model containing one hollow
fiber with a length of 14.7 mm was produced. The need for such a model came from the CRU
group, who is growing AD-MSCs for cell therapy in a hollow fiber bioreactor. The group wanted
to investigate the cell dynamics in the hollow fiber during cultivation. An STL 3D-printed model
with similar dimensions to a hollow fiber was successfully produced. The model could withstand
fluid perfusion at the desired velocities for the intended time period. Though the attempt to intro-
duce AD-MSCs into the chip did not succeed due to practical complications of the experiment,
it was successful in introducing HEK-293-GFP into the chip. The cells were visible even in a
brightfield picture. The most important requirement of the model was to ensure visualization
of the cells, and this requirement was met. State-of-the-art models do not allow for real-time
visualization of the cells, making this accomplishment particularly relevant.
AD-MSCs are more challenging to observe under a phase contrast microscope than HEK-293-
GFPs. So even though stained AD-MSCs are likely to be visible in the flow chip, the best
visualization of the cells is desired. Therefore, more effort was made to improve transparency
further. Unfortunately, enhancing the transparency of the model required compromising other
model requirements.
The first aspect discussed was changing the model’s geometry to increase visibility. However,
the geometry of the IC was found too important to alter. Changes in the geometry of the IC
could disrupt cell seeding, migration, and possibly cell signaling. State-of-the-art models utilize
hollow fiber membranes and, therefore, accurately replicate the geometry [15, 21, 22]. Altering
the geometry of the IC compared to other models would thus be a significant disadvantage.
Additionally, changes in geometry could affect the AD-MSCs phenotype during cultivation. While
no studies specifically examine the effects of growing AD-MSCs on curved lines could be found,
it has been shown that epithelial cells alter their shape and interactions with neighbors in dif-
ferent curved geometries [44]. Investigating the influence of geometry on AD-MSCs dynamics
could be an interesting future research direction. This investigation could be conducted us-
ing the 3D-printed model, as its design flexibility and rapid production capabilities make such
studies feasible. However, for the model to serve its primary purpose, it should replicate the
geometry of the hollow fibers as closely as possible.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
46
==PAGE:54==
Removing the EC compartment was another aspect considered to increase the visibility of the
cells in the IC. When investigating the fluid dynamics and mass transfer between the EC and IC
by numerical modeling (COMSOL), it became clear that the requirement for an EC compartment
is most important when developing longer models. The bioreactor contains hollow fibers with a
length of 27.5 cm, and the perfused EC ensures a uniform concentration distribution along the
axial dimension of the fiber.
Since the model created in this project is only 1.5 cm long, the cells will not experience signifi-
cant concentration gradients in the axial direction when only the IC is present. This assumption
is based on the low number of cells in the model, resulting in minimal nutrient concentration
difference between the beginning and end of the fiber. COMSOL simulations support these
assumptions. Therefore, although the mass transfer between the EC and IC was initially con-
sidered a requirement for the model, the EC compartment was removed as a compromise to
achieve better visualization. Compared to state-of-the-art models with cells seeded in the IC,
none of those models include a perfused EC compartment.
Instead, the cells are either fed by changing the media reservoir in the EC every second day,
as in the model created by Gramer and Poeschl [15] or by only perfusing the IC while keeping
the EC compartment static, as in the model created by Ozgen et al. [21] and Oo et al. [22]. In
the last two models, the hollow fibers are 11 cm long [22] and 17&34 cm long [21], respectively.
To ensure that the cells at the end of the fiber receive sufficient nutrients and gases, the flow
rate through the IC is significantly higher compared to the flow rate used for the cultivation of
AD-MSCs. In both studies, renal epithelial cells are used. For this cell type shear stress is a
biophysical cue playing an important role in cell regulation [45].
The shear stress experienced by cells in vivo in the Early Proximal Tubule is estimated to be in
the range of τ = 2−4 dyn
cm2 [45]. This contrasts sharply with the AD-MSCs expanded by the CRU
group, a cell type that does not experience shear stress in vivo. When cultivating the AD-MSCs
in the hollow fiber bioreactor, the calculated shear stress experienced by the AD-MSCs to be
τ = 1.92 × 10−3Pa, which is equivalent to τ = 1.92 × 10−2 dyn
cm2 . This emphasizes that the cell
type in the model dictates how high a flow rate can be used.
When keeping the hollow fiber model short, the EC compartment can be left out while ensuring
a homogeneous concentration distribution, even with the low flow rates. Thus, the EC could be
removed to increase cell visibility. If the fiber is designed to be longer or if an aspect of the EC
were to be investigated, the design of the model created in this project could be utilized. Includ-
ing a perfused EC compartment would be state-of-the-art. Depending on the cell types utilized,
cell visualization could still be possible in a model with EC, as shown when HEK-293-GFP was
introduced in the model.
Future work with the model includes developing an experimental setup for seeding AD-MSCs
in the flow chip. Since the model operates with low volumes and flow rates, the experimental
setup is challenging. This includes ensuring that cells are delivered to the chip quickly before
they settle in the tubes and avoiding applying excessive force when changing syringes. Though
the experiment takes time to learn and requires precise planning and optimization, progress is
made with each attempt. By the end of the project, the experiment was very close to succeeding,
but due to the project’s timeframe, it could not be completed.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
47
==PAGE:55==
Once the AD-MSCs have been successfully seeded, their spreading could be investigated. This
is particularly interesting when considering PEGDA’s protein-repelling properties [33]. Getting
proteins to bind to the hydrogel can be challenging, even with PLL. It may be necessary to
modify the hydrogel to improve cell adherence. One method previously tried by this group is
incorporating gelatin methacryloyl (GelMA) into the print resin before printing [46]. GelMA is a
photopolymerizable hydrogel made from gelatin with methacrylate group substitutions on the
amine-containing side groups of gelatin [47]. Incorporating GelMA would enhance Fn binding,
as Fn contains a binding site for gelatin [48]. However, adding GelMA to the model complicates
the production, sterilization methods, and properties of the printed chip. Therefore, the addition
of GelMA comes with its own set of sacrifices and complications.
When a flow experiment is conducted, the project’s hypothesis can be tested. The growth
rate of the cells in a flow experiment with similar flow rates to those used in the bioreactor can
be calculated. The growth rate of the cells in the flow model provides insight into how well the
model captures the functionalities of a hollow fiber in a bioreactor. If the cells grow successfully
and with similar growth rates, the model offers a cost-effective way to test different cultivation
procedures and generally better understand the cultivation of the AD-MSCs grown in the hollow
fiber bioreactor. The design could be further developed to include more hollow fibers in the
model, allowing for the investigation of the dynamics of having additional fibers with cells and
increasing the cell number for testing if harvested from the model.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
48
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
A successful 3D-printed flow chip was designed and produced to create a new transparent hol-
low fiber bioreactor model. The inner diameter of the hollow fiber from the bioreactor’s IC was
measured to be 221 μm. The model’s geometry was designed with straight outer IC surfaces to
allow better visualization of the cells in the IC. The printed model closely captures the geometry
of a hollow fiber in the bioreactor, with an EC compartment surrounding it. The model was suc-
cessfully printed with the correct IC diameter (233 μm horizontal diameter and 133 μm vertical
height) and the intended dimensions of the surrounding EC (84 μm). Thus, the model replicates
the IC geometry of a hollow fiber, except for the length of the fiber. It was possible to replicate
the flow conditions in both the IC and EC, and the flow chip could successfully withstand a flow
for seven days, which is the required time for cell cultivation. When seeding HEK-293-GFP
cells in the chip, they were visible in both bright field and fluorescent microscopy. The chip suc-
ceeded in meeting the three most important requirements identified for a hollow fiber bioreactor
model: cell visualization, geometry replication, and replication of flow rates. Furthermore, the
designed model is inexpensive and easy to replicate.
The fluid dynamics and mass transfer between the EC and IC were investigated through numer-
ical modeling (COMSOL). From this analysis, it became clear that incorporating the EC is most
important when developing longer models. Therefore, the EC compartment was removed for
this model, since it has a length of 14.7 mm. So, despite identifying mass transfer between the
IC and EC as a requirement for a hollow fiber bioreactor model, the model was simplified during
the project to contain only the IC, as a compromise to enhance cell visibility further. Completion
of seeding AD-MSCs in the chip and performing a flow experiment is yet to be done.
Furthermore, an investigation of cell attachment is needed to determine if the coating of PEGDA
700 hydrogel successfully replicates the CPPT coating used in the bioreactor. The initial exper-
iment with cells seeded in a simplified open model looks promising, as the spindle-like structure
of the AD-MSCs was observed. However, the stiffness of the polyether sulfone hollow fibers in
the bioreactor is not replicated in the PEGDA 700 hydrogel. This difference in stiffness should
be further investigated to determine if it affects cell behavior. Once a seeding experiment with
AD-MSCs is completed, cell attachment can be further analyzed. Additionally, the cell dou-
bling time in the model can be compared to the doubling time in the bioreactor. If the doubling
times are equivalent, it would indicate that the model accurately captures the functionality of the
bioreactor as intended. This model will allow for a better understanding of cell dynamics during
cultivation, including seeding homogeneity and cell migration. The model can also be further
developed to include more channels, enabling the investigation of the dynamics of additional
fibers with cells while increasing the cell number for testing if harvested.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
49
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
Carla A Herberts, Marcel SG Kwa, and Harm PH Hermsen. “Risk factors in the develop-
ment of stem cell therapy”. In: Journal of translational medicine 9 (2011), pp. 1–14.
[2]
Lars Ährlund-Richter et al. “Isolation and production of cells suitable for human therapy:
challenges ahead”. In: Cell Stem Cell 4.1 (2009), pp. 20–26.
[3]
Christian Unger et al. “Good manufacturing practice and clinical-grade human embryonic
stem cell lines”. In: Human molecular genetics 17.R1 (2008), R48–R53.
[4]
Mandana Haack-Sørensen et al. “Culture expansion of adipose derived stromal cells. A
closed automated Quantum Cell Expansion System compared with manual flask-based
culture”. In: Journal of translational medicine 14 (2016), pp. 1–11.
[5]
Abbas Ali Qayyum et al. “Danish phase II trial using adipose tissue derived mesenchymal
stromal cells for patients with ischaemic heart failure”. In: ESC Heart Failure 10.2 (2023),
pp. 1170–1183.
[6]
Sunghoon Jung et al. “Large-scale production of human mesenchymal stem cells for clin-
ical applications”. In: Biotechnology and applied biochemistry 59.2 (2012), pp. 106–120.
[7]
Li-Yi Sun et al. “Functional cells cultured on microcarriers for use in regenerative medicine
research”. In: Cell transplantation 20.1 (2011), pp. 49–62.
[8]
James A King and William M Miller. “Bioreactor development for stem cell expansion and
controlled differentiation”. In: Current opinion in chemical biology 11.4 (2007), pp. 394–
398.
[9]
Carlos AV Rodrigues et al. “Stem cell cultivation in bioreactors”. In: Biotechnology ad-
vances 29.6 (2011), pp. 815–829.
[10]
Charlotte H Hulme et al. “A comprehensive review of quantum bioreactor cell manufac-
ture: Research and clinical applications”. In: Cytotherapy (2023).
[11]
Mandana Haack-Sørensen et al. “GMP compliant production of a cryopreserved adipose-
derived stromal cell product for feasible and allogeneic clinical use”. In: Stem Cells Inter-
national 2022 (2022).
[12]
Richard A Knazek et al. “Cell culture on artificial capillaries: an approach to tissue growth
in vitro”. In: Science 178.4056 (1972), pp. 65–67.
[13]
Chun Feng Wan et al. “Design and fabrication of hollow fiber membrane modules”. In:
Hollow Fiber Membranes. Elsevier, 2021, pp. 225–252.
[14]
Nathan D Frank et al. “Evaluation of reagents used to coat the hollow-fiber bioreactor
membrane of the Quantum® Cell Expansion System for the culture of human mesenchy-
mal stem cells”. In: Materials Science and Engineering: C 96 (2019), pp. 77–85.
[15]
Michael J Gramer and Douglas M Poeschl. “Screening tool for hollow-fiber bioreactor
process development”. In: Biotechnology progress 14.2 (1998), pp. 203–209.
[16]
Michael J Gramer and Douglas M Poeschl. “Comparison of cell growth in T-flasks, in
micro hollow fiber bioreactors, and in an industrial scale hollow fiber bioreactor system”.
In: Cytotechnology 34.1 (2000), pp. 111–119.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
50
==PAGE:58==
[17]
Herma Gloeckner and Horst-Dieter Lemke. “New miniaturized hollow-fiber bioreactor for
in vivo like cell culture, cell expansion, and production of cell-derived products”. In: Biotech-
nology progress 17.5 (2001), pp. 828–831.
[18]
Igor M Sauer et al. “The SlideReactor—a simple hollow fiber based bioreactor suitable
for light microscopy”. In: Artificial organs 29.3 (2005), pp. 264–267.
[19]
Mandana Haack-Sørensen et al. “Development of large-scale manufacturing of adipose-
derived stromal cells for clinical applications using bioreactors and human platelet lysate”.
In: Scandinavian Journal of Clinical and Laboratory Investigation 78.4 (2018), pp. 293–
300.
[20]
Hadis Eghbali et al. “Hollow fiber bioreactor technology for tissue engineering applica-
tions”. In: The International journal of artificial organs 39.1 (2016), pp. 1–15.
[21]
Nazira Ozgen et al. “Evaluation of long-term transport ability of a bioartificial renal tubule
device using LLC-PK1 cells”. In: Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation 19.9 (2004), pp. 2198–
2207.
[22]
Zay Yar Oo et al. “The performance of primary human renal cells in hollow fiber bioreactors
for bioartificial kidneys”. In: Biomaterials 32.34 (2011), pp. 8806–8815.
[23]
Nazira Ozgen et al. “Evaluation of long-term transport ability of a bioartificial renal tubule
device using LLC-PK1 cells”. In: Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation 19.9 (2004), pp. 2198–
2207.
[24]
Akira Saito. “Research into the development of a wearable bioartificial kidney with a con-
tinuous hemofilter and a bioartificial tubule device using tubular epithelial cells”. In: Artifi-
cial organs 28.1 (2004), pp. 58–63.
[25]
Miho Inagaki et al. “Prevention of LLC-PK1 cell overgrowth in a bioartificial renal tubule
device using a MEK inhibitor, U0126”. In: Journal of biotechnology 132.1 (2007), pp. 57–
64.
[26]
Ferry PW Melchels, Jan Feijen, and Dirk W Grijpma. “A review on stereolithography and
its applications in biomedical engineering”. In: Biomaterials 31.24 (2010), pp. 6121–6130.
[27]
Jigang Huang, Qin Qin, and Jie Wang. “A review of stereolithography: Processes and
systems”. In: Processes 8.9 (2020), p. 1138.
[28]
Wanlu Li et al. “Stereolithography apparatus and digital light processing-based 3D bio-
printing for tissue fabrication”. In: Iscience 26.2 (2023).
[29]
Wenguang Yang et al. “Rapid fabrication of hydrogel microstructures using UV-induced
projection printing”. In: Micromachines 6.12 (2015), pp. 1903–1913.
[30]
Benjamin D Fairbanks et al. “Photoinitiated polymerization of PEG-diacrylate with lithium
phenyl-2, 4, 6-trimethylbenzoylphosphinate: polymerization rate and cytocompatibility”.
In: Biomaterials 30.35 (2009), pp. 6702–6707.
[31]
Nahid Shahabadi and Maryam Maghsudi. “Gel electrophoresis and DNA interaction stud-
ies of the food colorant quinoline yellow”. In: Dyes and Pigments 96.2 (2013), pp. 377–
382.
[32]
Stephanie Nemir, Heather N Hayenga, and Jennifer L West. “PEGDA hydrogels with
patterned elasticity: Novel tools for the study of cell response to substrate rigidity”. In:
Biotechnology and bioengineering 105.3 (2010), pp. 636–644.
[33]
Anna Cavallo et al. “Photo-crosslinked poly (ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA) hydro-
gels from low molecular weight prepolymer: swelling and permeation studies”. In: Journal
of Applied Polymer Science 134.2 (2017).
[34]
Rujing Zhang and Niels B Larsen. “Stereolithographic hydrogel printing of 3D culture chips
with biofunctionalized complex 3D perfusion networks”. In: Lab on a Chip 17.24 (2017),
pp. 4273–4282.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
51
==PAGE:59==
[35]
Daniel Mazia, Gerald Schatten, and Winfield Sale. “Adhesion of cells to surfaces coated
with polylysine. Applications to electron microscopy.” In: The Journal of cell biology 66.1
(1975), pp. 198–200.
[36]
Anna Bergstrand et al. “Comparison of PEI-PEG and PLL-PEG copolymer coatings on
the prevention of protein fouling”. In: Journal of Biomedical Materials Research Part A:
An Official Journal of The Society for Biomaterials, The Japanese Society for Biomaterials,
and The Australian Society for Biomaterials and the Korean Society for Biomaterials 88.3
(2009), pp. 608–615.
[37]
In-Su Park et al. “The correlation between human adipose-derived stem cells differentia-
tion and cell adhesion mechanism”. In: Biomaterials 30.36 (2009), pp. 6835–6843.
[38]
Patrick J Hanley et al. “Efficient manufacturing of therapeutic mesenchymal stromal cells
with the use of the Quantum Cell Expansion System”. In: Cytotherapy 16.8 (2014), pp. 1048–
1058.
[39]
Austin Nuschke et al. “Mesenchymal stem cells/multipotent stromal cells (MSCs) are gly-
colytic and thus glucose is a limiting factor of in vitro models of MSC starvation”. In: Stem
cell research & therapy 7 (2016), pp. 1–9.
[40]
Louise A Mylotte et al. “Metabolic flexibility permits mesenchymal stem cell survival in an
ischemic environment”. In: Stem cells 26.5 (2008), pp. 1325–1336.
[41]
Alicia J Zollinger and Michael L Smith. “Fibronectin, the extracellular glue”. In: Matrix
Biology 60 (2017), pp. 27–37.
[42]
Debra J Romberger. “Fibronectin”. In: The international journal of biochemistry & cell bi-
ology 29.7 (1997), pp. 939–943.
[43]
Hazwani Suhaimi, Shuai Wang, and Diganta Bhusan Das. “Glucose diffusivity in cell cul-
ture medium”. In: Chemical Engineering Journal 269 (2015), pp. 323–327.
[44]
Jean-Francois Rupprecht et al. “Geometric constraints alter cell arrangements within curved
epithelial tissues”. In: Molecular biology of the cell 28.25 (2017), pp. 3582–3594.
[45]
Nicholas Ferrell et al. “Application of physiological shear stress to renal tubular epithelial
cells”. In: Methods in Cell Biology. Vol. 153. Elsevier, 2019, pp. 43–67.
[46]
Milan Finn Wesseler et al. “Optical 4D oxygen mapping of microperfused tissue models
with tunable in vivo-like 3D oxygen microenvironments”. In: Lab on a Chip 22.21 (2022),
pp. 4167–4179.
[47]
Jason W Nichol et al. “Cell-laden microengineered gelatin methacrylate hydrogels”. In:
Biomaterials 31.21 (2010), pp. 5536–5544.
[48]
Xiaoyan Gao and Michael J Groves. “Fibronectin-binding peptides. I. Isolation and char-
acterization of two unique fibronectin-binding peptides from gelatin”. In: European journal
of pharmaceutics and biopharmaceutics 45.3 (1998), pp. 275–284.
[49]
Jean-Pierre Allain. “Non factor VIII related constituents in concentrates”. In: Scandinavian
Journal of Haematology 33.S41 (1984), pp. 173–180.
[50]
Jeannie L Callum, Keyvan Karkouti, and Yulia Lin. “Cryoprecipitate: the current state of
knowledge”. In: Transfusion medicine reviews 23.3 (2009), pp. 177–188.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
52
==PAGE:60==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Measurements of Bioreactor and Calculated Dimensions
A.1.1
Overview of Measured Dimensions of Fibers
Table A.1: Overview of the measured dimension of hollow fibers and Fused Silica Capillary (Inner diameter: 250
μm. Outer diameter: 350 μm). The dimensions are measured on microscopy pictures of 3x magnification and 5x
magnification.
Fiber Measurements
3x magnification
Fused Silica
Hollow Fiber
Inner Diameter (μm)
Mean = 255.9
STD = 4.7
min = 250.2
max = 263.9
Mean = 219.3
STD = 5.1
min = 208.3
max = 235.8
Wall Thickness(μm)
Mean = 40.6
STD = 2.5
min = 38.2
max = 45.1
Mean = 58.0
STD = 6.0
min = 46.7
max =69.4
5x magnification
Fused Silica
Hollow Fiber
Inner Diameter (μm)
Mean = 250.5
STD = 5.7
min = 240.3
max = 256.7
Mean = 221.0
STD = 9.4
min = 207.4
max = 240.3
Wall Thickness(μm)
Mean = 42.8
STD = 3.5
min = 39.0
max =47.3
Mean = 53.8
STD = 4.1
min = 47.3
max =59.1
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
53
==PAGE:61==
A.1.2
Overview of Dimensions and Surfaces of the Bioreactor.
Table A.2: Measurements of the dimensions and surface areas of the Quantum bioreactor (Quantum System;
Terumo-BCT, Lakewood, CO).
Measurements of the Bioreactor
Bioreactor
Length of the bioreactor
EC: 265 mm
IC fibers: 275 mm
Total IC length : 305 mm
Diameter of the bioreactor
46.13 mm
Cross-sectional area of the bioreactor
1671.31 mm2
Fibers & IC
Measured dimensions of fibers
Inner diameter: 0.221 mm
Wall thickness: 0.054 mm
Total diameter: 0.329 mm
Calculated density of fibers per cross-sectional area
6.81 fibers
mm2
Calculated total numbers of fibers (n)
11,384 fibers
Calculated distance between fibers
0.082 mm
Total cross-sectional area of IC (inner)
436.68 mm2
Surface area of one hollow fiber
190.93 mm2
Volume of one hollow fiber
10.5 μL
Surface area of all hollow fibers (inner)
2.17 ·106 mm2
Volume of IC
117.9 mL
EC
Cross-sectional area of EC
703.53 mm2
Volume of EC
186.4 mL
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
54
==PAGE:62==
A.1.3
Calculating the Distance between the Fibers in the Hollow Fiber Bioreactor
The distance from the outer surface of the fiber to the hexagon (p) was calculated. The distance
between the fibers is calculated if they are equally distributed.
Figure A.1 has been created to visualize the different dimensions used for the calculations.
Figure A.1: Illustraion of the hollow fiber distribution in a bioreactor. NB: dimensions are not to scale A: Shows
how the distribution of fibers with equal distance would be arranged and illustrates how hexagons describe the
distribution of the hollow fibers. B: Illustration of the different dimensions used to calculate the distance between the
fibers. r: radius of IC; w= wall thickness of IC; p: minimum distance from the wall to close-packed hexagons; s: wall
length of one side of a hexagon; a: distance between the center of the hexagon to the middle of the hexagon side.
The ABioreactor=1671.3mm2 area must be equal to the area of the hexagon (AReactor) multiplied
by the total numbers of hexagons (n=11,384). The relation can, therefore, be written as in
Equation (A.1):
AReactor = AHexagon · n = 3
√
3 · s2
2
· n
(A.1)
s is isolated in the equation and calculated as follows:
s =
√
2 ·
√
n · AReactor
√
3
3 · n
(A.2)
=
√
2 ·
√
11.384 · 1671.3mm2√
3
3 · 11.384
= 0.237mm
(A.3)
The area of the hexagon is calculated as in Equation (A.4):
AHexagon = 3
√
3 · s2
2
= 0.147mm2.
(A.4)
The distance between the centrum of the hexagon and the middle of one of the sides (a) is
calculated as follows:
A = a · 6s
2
⇐⇒a = A
3s
(A.5)
Inserting A and s yields:
a = 0.206mm
The distance between the outer surface of the fibers and the hexagon is calculated by substrat-
ing the radius of the fiber (r) and the wall thickness (w) as follows:
p = a −r −w = 0.206mm −0.1105mm −54mm = 0.042mm
(A.6)
p was calculated to be 42 μm, and if the fibers were equally distributed, the distance between
the fibers would be 84 μm, see Figure 4.1 E&F. However, when comparing to Figure 4.1 A, it is
obvious that the hollow fibers are not equally distributed.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
55
==PAGE:63==
A.2
Velocity Measurements
Figure A.2: Velocity measurements of the liquid flowing through ID. A: Illustration of one tracking of one 2 μm
bead. To illustrate the fluctuations and, thereby, the changes in the length it travels between each frame rate, the
distance between each frame rate has been visualized by orange lines with the distance traveled. The tail length
(blue line) was also measured to ensure that there was consensus between the two velocities, which there was.
B: The velocity plotted against time. The plot confirms the fluctuations in the flows. C: The accumulated fluid
transported in the channel is plotted against time. The plot confirms that even though the fluctuation is observed,
the fluid transported is correctly replicated.
Table A.3: Measured velocities. The velocities were measured by following fluorescent beads (2 μm in diameter).
When measuring the velocities of the small diameter model, a 250 μL Hamilton syringe was used. The focus was
set so the fast-moving beads were in focus. Eight different beads were measured, and the three fast-moving beads
were used for the velocity measurements. The beads measured would, therefore, be the vmax, and the average
velocity in the tube would, therefore, be the vmax
2
. Out of eight measured beads, an average velocity was calculated
from the three fastest-moving beads.
Measured Velocities
Small diameter model (correct)
Q (bioreactor)
v (calculated)
Q (model)
vmax (measured)
v (average)
Q= 2 mL
min
v= 4.6 mm
min
Q= 0.185
µL
min
v=7.4 mm
min
v= 3.7 mm
min
Q= 1 mL
min
v= 2.3 mm
min
Q= 0.093 µL
min
v=5.4 mm
min
v=2.7 mm
min
Q= 0.1 mL
min
v=0.2 mm
min
Q= 0.009
µL
min
v=0.5 mm
min
v=0.2 mm
min
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
56
==PAGE:64==
A.3
Reynolds Number
Table A.4: Calculated Reynolds number. The Reynolds number for IC is calculated using the velocities corre-
sponding to the lowest and highest flow rates. The Reynolds number for EC is calculated using 2p.
Reynold’s Numbers
IC
Q (bioreactor)
V (average)
L
Re
0.1 mL
min
0.2 mm
min
d=0.221 mm
0.001
1 mL
min
2.3 mm
min
d=0.221 mm
0.012
2 mL
min
4.6 mm
min
d=0.221 mm
0.024
EC
Q (bioreactor)
V (average)
L
Re
30 mL
min
42.6 mm
min
2p =0.083 mm
0.084
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
57
==PAGE:65==
A.4
Cell Numbers used by Rigshospitalet when Cultivating
Table A.5: Cell numbers when cultivating in the hollow fiber bioreactor. The cell densities at seeding and harvest
have been calculated based on published results by the CRU group [4, 11]. The doubling time of the cells has been
calculated from these numbers.
Cells in the Bioreactor
Cell Seeding
Total cells seeded [4]
30 × 106 cells
Calculated seeding cell density
14 cells
mm2
Calculated seeding cell density with 30% loss of cells
10 cells
mm2
Total cells seeded [11]
50 × 106 cells
Calculated seeding cell density
23 cells
mm2
Calculated seeding cell density with 30% loss of cells
16 cells
mm2
Cell Harvest After 6 Days
Mean cell yield [4]
9.53 × 107 cells
Calculated harvest cell density
44 cells
mm2
Calculated doubling time (loss included)
67.4 hours
Mean viable cell yield [11]
6.02 × 108 cells
Calculated harvest cell density
277 cells
mm2
Calculated doubling time (loss included)
35.0 hours
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
58
==PAGE:66==
A.5
Fibronectin in CPPT
One unit of plasma is between 200-250 mL plasma. The plasma is frozen and centrifuged at
50000 × g for 6 min., The supernatant is removed, and the pellet is resuspended in the remain-
ing liquid (5 to 15 mL plasma). The CPPT is frozen and ready to use. The Fn concentration
is not given, but the fibrinogen concentration can be used to calculate the Fn concentration.
Fibroninogen accounts for 60 % of the total proteins in CPPT, while Fn accounts for 22 % of the
total proteins in CPPT [49].
Fibroninogen concentration in CPPT preparations is 150 mg per bag [50]. The average con-
centration of fibrinogen in the CPPT must, therefore, be (assuming 10 mL remaining plasma):
CFibroninogen = m
V = 150mg
10mL = 15 mg
mL
(A.7)
Total concentration of proteins in CPPT is calculated
Ctotal = 15 mg
mL
0.6
= 25 mg
mL
(A.8)
Since Fn accounts for 22 % of the proteins in CPPT, the concentration of Fn is therefore
CFn = 25 mg
mL · 0.22 = 5.5 mg
mL
(A.9)
CPPT is used in the bioreactor diluted to a total volume of 189 mL and is the dilution used for
these experiments. The concentration of Fn in this solution (CFDW ) is therefore:
CFDW = 5.5 mg
mL · 10mL
189mL
= 0.291 mg
mL
(A.10)
The concentration of the CPPT dilution used for these experiments is therefore CFn=0.291 mg
mL.
Fn is a dimer consisting of two similar 250 kDa polypeptide chains [42]
M = 500kDa · 103
g
mol
kDa = 500 × 103 g
mol
(A.11)
The volume of the model is 0.60 µL. The number of Fn dimers (FD) present in the model is
calculated
m = C · V = 5.5 mg
mL · 0.60 × 10−3mL = 0.00330mg
(A.12)
n = m
M = 3.30 × 10−6g
500 × 103
g
mol
= 6.20 × 10−12mol
(A.13)
The number of Fn dimers is calculated by multiplying with Avogadro’s number (NA):
NFD = n · NA = 6.60 × 10−12mol · 6.02 × 1023 molecules
mol
= 3.97 × 1012molecules
(A.14)
The model’s total number of Fn dimers in solution is 3.97 × 1012 molecules. To calculate how
many there can be on the surface in the model, the assumption of the Fns, once bound to the
surface, take up an area of 10 nm × 10 nm = 100 times 10−12mm2. The surface area in the
model is 10.48 mm2. The number of binding Fn dimers (N) is calculated:
N =
10.48mm2
100 · 10−12mm2 = 1.048 × 1011
(A.15)
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
59
==PAGE:67==
Dimers Binding = 1.048 × 1011molecules
3.97 × 1012molecules · 100% = 2.64%
(A.16)
Only 2.63% of the solution’s Fn will be able to bind to the model’s surface. Based on these
calculations, the amount of Fn dimers binding is so low that the coating without flow would not
decrease the amount of Fn dimers binding. If the surface area was completely covered with Fn
dimers, the reduction in Fn concentration in the solution would be negligible. The coating can,
therefore, be done without flow.
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
60
==PAGE:68==
A.6
COMSOL Parameters
Table A.6: Parameters used for COMSOL simulations. The geometry parameters are based on the calculations
presented in this project. The CRU group has provided the cell-specific parameters.
Parameters for COMSOL Simulations
Geometry
Length Bioreactor
227 mm
Length Model
14.7 mm
IC diameter
0.221 mm
Cell layer
0.01 mm
Wall Thickness
0.054 mm
EC Diameter Inner
2p=0.083 mm
EC Diameter Outer
1p= 0.0415 mm
Transport and Reaction Constants
Cell Density (Harvest density)
27,700 cells
mm3 [11]
Cell Glucose Consumption
7.5 10−17 mol
s·cell
Vmax (glucose)
Cell Density · Cell Glucose Consumption
KM (glucose)
0.1 mM
Cglucose
5.5 10−3 mol
L (Thermo Fisher)
Dglucose
6.16 10−10 m2
s [43]
ConsumtionRate
Vmax·Cglucose
(KM+Cglucose)
EC velocity
42.6 mm
min
IC max velocity
2.3 mm
min
IC lowest velocity
0.2 mm
min
Perfused 3D Printed Models for Optimizing Mesenchymal Stem Cell Production in Hollow Fibers
61
