==PAGE:1==
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol
production under EU RED Delegated Acts
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
Thesis subtitle
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Franco Federico Bloise
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary bibliographic
citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Management and Economics, Akademivej, Building 358,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Energy Economics and Modelling, Depart-
ment of Technology, Management and Economics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc in Sustainable Energy.
Franco Federico Bloise - s222839
Signature
Date
ii
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The transition to renewable energy sources necessitates the exploration of innovative solutions for sustain-
able fuel production. This thesis investigates the techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production
under the context of the new EU RED Delegated Acts, with a focus on their impact in costs, emissions and
competitiveness. The research uses the OptiPlant model to simulate e-methanol production under diverse
conditions, analyzing the impacts of electricity price volatility, regulatory compliance, and geographical ad-
vantages. The analysis reveals that while the Delegated Acts might influence technologies final cost, the
specific parameters of electrolyzer (such as CAPEX, efficiency, and output pressure) play a crucial role
in determining the optimal configuration. These findings underscore the importance of tailoring these en-
ergy systems to local conditions and market dynamics to achieve cost-effective and regulatory compliant
e-methanol production. This research contributes to the broader understanding of how regulatory frame-
works and technological parameters can synergize to promote sustainable e-methanol production. The
findings also reveal that the current context of high electricity prices limits the impact of the application of
the EU Delegated Acts on the design and configuration of new e-methanol plants, since it motivates the
use of renewable sources, therefore reducing the importance and impact of additionality, temporal, and
geographical correlation for grid electricity sourcing.
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my deepest gratitude to my supervisors, Nicolas Jean Bernard Campion and Rasmus
Bo Bramstoft Pedersen from the DTU Management, Department of Technology, Management, and Eco-
nomics. Their insightful feedback and continuous support have greatly shaped the direction and quality of
this thesis.
I would also like to extend my sincere thanks to my supervisor and colleague from European Energy A/S,
Alexander Reumert, for his significant contributions and expert guidance. His practical insights and exper-
tise in the energy sector have provided a valuable perspective that enriched my research.
I am also grateful to my family, friends and beloved wife for their constant encouragement, patience and
support, which have been crucial to the completion of this MSc degree.
Thank you all for your exceptional support and inspiration.
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface
ii
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Methods
3
2.1
Production pathway
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Model Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Delegated Acts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Choice of Locations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Scenarios Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Results and Discussion
10
3.1
Impact of EU Delegated Acts on e-Methanol Plant Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Preferred electrolysis technologies and storage methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Relaxing minimum load requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Competitiveness of e-methanol across European countries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Conclusion
17
4.1
Impact of EU Delegated Acts on Design and Configuration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Technology Preferences and Compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Competitiveness of sites around Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.4
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Bibliography
19
A Locations Studied
22
A.1 Coordinates and Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
A.2 Electricity Prices Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
A.3 Supplementary Graphs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
B Techno-economical input for the model
25
C Correction methodology for Wind Power Data
26
D Results of Delegated Acts implementation on every location studied
28
E
Methodology for Electrolyzer Parameters Calculations
31
E.1 Electrolyzer Parameters Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
E.2 Calculation of Electricity Needs for Compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
E.3 Combination of Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
iv
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations and Nomenclature
AEC
Alkaline Electrolysis Cell
BESS
Battery Energy Storage System
CAPEX
Capital Expenditure
CI
Carbon Intensity
CCU
Carbon Capture and Utilization
CO2
Carbon Dioxide Molecule
CH3OH
Methanol Molecule
DA
Delegated Act
DAC
Direct Air Capture
ENTSO-E
European Network of Transmission
System Operators for Electricity
EC
European Commission
EU
European Union
FLH
Full Load Hours
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
H2
Hydrogen Molecule
H2O
Water Molecule
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IRENA
International Renewable Energy Agency
IEA
International Energy Agency
JEC
Joint Research Centre
LCOE
Levelized Cost of Energy
LCOH
Levelized Cost of Hydrogen
LCOM
Levelized Cost of Methanol
MeOH
Methanol
OPEX
Operating Expenditure
PEM
Proton Exchange Membrane
PPA
Power Purchase Agreement
PtX
Power-To-X
PV
Photovoltaic
RCF
Recycled Carbon Fuel
RE
Renewable Energy
RED
Renewable Energy Directive
RES-e
Renewable Energy Sources Electricity
RFNBO
Renewable Fuel of Non-Biological Origins
SOEC
Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cell
WACC
Weighted Average Capital Cost
WTT
Well-to-Tank
WTW
Well-to-Wheel
1
Introduction
1.1
Context
The EU has the ambitious target of becoming the first
carbon-neutral continent by 2050. Through the appli-
cation of several strategic plans and legislative pack-
ages. In the European Green Deal [1] it has set the
objective of reducing emissions by 55% compared to
1990 levels by 2030. To achieve this goal, in 2021
the ’Fit for 55’ [2, 3] package was announced. This
comprises a set of proposals to revise and update EU
legislation, aiming to ensure that EU policies align
with these climate goals and can deliver the Green
Deal.
For achieving these goals, green hydrogen and its
derivatives, are seen as keys to decarbonizing hard-
to-abate sectors such as aviation, maritime trans-
port, fertilizer and steel production.
Fuels derived
from renewable hydrogen produced via electrolysis
are known as Renewable Fuels of Non-Biological
Origin (RFNBO). In 2020, the EU released its Hydro-
gen Strategy [4] setting a target to increase the in-
stalled capacity of renewable hydrogen electrolyzers
to 40 GW by 2030. Later, in 2022, the REPowerEU
Plan [5] set out a target of 10 million tonnes of do-
mestic renewable hydrogen production and 10 mil-
lion tonnes of renewable hydrogen imports by 2030.
In this context, last year the EU Commission adopted
two Delegated Acts, required under the RED II, with
detailed rules to define what is considered green
hydrogen and RFNBOs in the EU. The first Dele-
gated Act [6] defines under which conditions hydro-
gen, hydrogen-based fuels or other energy carriers
can be considered as an RFNBO, setting specific
rules based on the principles of additionality, and
temporal and geographic correlation.
The second
Delegated Act [7] provides a methodology for calcu-
lating life-cycle greenhouse gas emissions for RFN-
BOs, considering from the upstream emissions to
those associated with transporting these fuels to the
end-consumer.
These requirements will apply to both domestic pro-
ducers as well as producers from third countries that
want to export RFNBOs to the EU.
Finally, the RED III [8] was approved and entering
into action in November 2023. In this new directive,
the target for the share of renewables was raised to
42,5% of final gross energy consumption by 2030
and binding targets for the transport and industry
sectors in the use of RFNBOs.
1.2
State of the Art
In this context, the field of e-methanol cost optimiza-
tion has advanced due to the urgent need to de-
carbonize energy systems.
In this section, a re-
view of academic literature is performed to provide
an overview of the current state-of-the-art RFNBOs
models.
Recent advancements in renewable energy sourc-
ing and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions account-
ing have led to the development of several models.
However, only a few of these models incorporate the
latest EU regulations.
For instance, Klatzer et al.
(2022) [9] highlighted the absence of a comprehen-
sive, integrated expansion planning model that inte-
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
1
==PAGE:7==
grates all relevant aspects such as systemic char-
acterization with Mixed-Integer Linear Programming
(MILP), hourly management of storage and demand-
side management, and detailed technical formula-
tions. Notably, the inclusion of dedicated policy con-
straints for specifying hydrogen production types re-
mains limited.
Kountouris et al. (2024) [10] examined hydrogen in-
frastructure development using the Balmorel model,
finding that in a 2050 scenario restricted to green hy-
drogen, competitive solar power-based hydrogen im-
ports from South to Central Europe could play a cru-
cial role, which aligns with the recent results from H2
Auction from the EU [11], where southern countries
like Spain, Portugal and Greece presented the low-
est cost. However, no deep analysis on the impact of
the regulation the design of the plants was performed
here.
Langer et al.
(2023) [12] conducted a compre-
hensive study on RFNBO production for a Danish
case using the Enerhub2X model. Their research,
which considered investments in production capac-
ity, storage assets, and Power Purchase Agree-
ments (PPAs) under varying fuel price assumptions
for 2030, identified e-methanol as offering the most
favorable business case. However, the study did not
focus on modelling the emissions savings of the fu-
els.
In contrast, Brauer et al. (2022) [13] explored the
balance between environmental integrity and eco-
nomic viability for electrolytic hydrogen production in
Germany. Their study highlighted the advantages of
strict temporal correlation requirements in reducing
carbon emissions, despite modest economic draw-
backs.
Zeyen et al.
(2024) [14] studied the implications
of different requirements for the temporal and ge-
ographic matching between renewable energy and
green hydrogen production for selected European
countries for 2025 and 2030, using the energy sys-
tem model called PyPSA-Eur. They demonstrated
that the costs for hourly matching compared to
monthly matching are only 7%–8% higher with flex-
ible operation or low-cost hydrogen storage is avail-
able.
Monthly matching can reduce system emis-
sions if the electrolyzers operate flexibly or the re-
newable generation share is large.
Campion et al.
(2023) [15] developed an open-
source model for techno-economic analysis of
power-to-X plants. They identified significant biases
in cost estimations when using fixed electricity prices
and highlighted the importance of plant flexibility.
The paper focused on e-ammonia production com-
bined with different electrolyzer technologies, renew-
able power sources, and grid connection set-ups in
various locations, but their analysis does not con-
sider the impact of the EU Delegated Acts.
Brandt et al.
(2023) [16] assessed the cost and
competitiveness of green hydrogen within the frame-
work of recent EU regulations. They analyzed the
implications of the EC’s Delegated Acts, focusing
on different power sourcing scenarios for the elec-
trolyzer across different European regions.
They
found that unrestricted use of the grid electricity
mix could lower production costs without necessar-
ily increasing GHG emissions, although strict regu-
lations are necessary to prevent potential emission
increases under certain conditions. Low electricity
price levels, in particular, could provide an economic
incentive for high electricity mix usage thereby sup-
porting the EU concerns and strict requirements.
1.3
Research Question
The literature review reveals a clear research gap:
while there is substantial work on various aspects of
e-methanol production and RFNBOs, there is a lack
of comprehensive analysis incorporating the latest
EU Delegated Acts. The integration of these regula-
tions into existing models and their impact on the de-
sign of plant, technology choice and competitiveness
of e-methanol production remains underexplored.
To address this gap, this study uses the updated Op-
tiPlant model from Campion et al. (2023) [15] to in-
vestigate the following research questions:
• How can the EU Delegated Acts impact the
design and configuration of new e-methanol
plants?
• Does compliance with the Delegated Acts fa-
vor any particular electrolysis or storage tech-
nology?
• How do the Delegated Acts affect the compet-
itiveness of RFNBO-compliant methanol pro-
duction across different European countries?
This study aims to provide insights into how the
EU’s regulatory framework influences the techno-
economic aspects of e-methanol production, thereby
addressing a significant gap in current research and
policy analysis.
2
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:8==
2
Methods
2.1
Production pathway
This study will focus in the production of e-methanol
through the catalytic reaction of CO2 and green hy-
drogen. Hydrogen is generated through water elec-
trolysis using renewable electricity, followed by its
catalytic reaction with CO2 to produce e-methanol.
The synthesis reaction is described by equation 1.
For each tonne of MeOH produced, approximately
1.38 tonnes of CO2, 0.19 tonnes of H2, and 10-
11 MWh of electricity are required [17]. The plant
modelled in this study has a capacity of 100 kton
of methanol a year, which is the capacity of several
projects under development today [18, 19].
CO2 + 3 H2 −−⇀
↽−−CH3OH + H2O
(1)
The plant modelled is similar to the one described
in [20] and illustrated in Fig. 1. The process begins
with renewable electricity, in this case solar PV or
wind, either generated on-site or sourced procured
from the grid, serving as the primary power source.
The possibility of including batteries, that can only
charge when renewable energy is available, is also
allowed in the model. Hydrogen is obtained through
water electrolysis. For this study, three technologies
are considered in the analysis, which are the most
mature until today: alkaline electrolysis cell (AEC),
proton exchange membrane (PEM) and solid oxide
electrolysis cell (SOEC). CO2, can be sourced from
either DAC or bought as biogenic CO2 captured and
purified from sustainable point sources.
Biogenic
CO2 is the carbon dioxide resulting from the de-
composition, digestion or combustion of biomass
or biomass-derived products [21, 22].
Temporary
H2 storage may be needed to manage fluctuations
in electricity supply and system dynamics, so it is
considered in the model too. The last step of the
process is the methanol unit (MeOH CCU), which
employs well-established technology for the catalytic
conversion of H2 and CO2 to methanol, which is later
purified through distillation.
2.2
Model Description
The Optiplant model used for this study is com-
pletely open-source and described in Campion et.
at, 2023 [15].
It is a least cost optimization lin-
ear programming model that optimizes the costs as-
sociated with investments and operations of stor-
age, power-supply, and fuel production units. The
model optimizes the plant’s design and integration
within the local energy system. The model integrates
various components, including a desalination plant,
hydrogen storage, a battery park, an electrolyzer,
and methanol units. It can simulate different power
sourcing strategies, being off-grid and semi-islanded
setups, incorporating detailed weather profiles from
the locations selected and using techno-economic
data and weather-driven renewable power gener-
ation profiles.
The linear formulation allows rapid
scenario analysis, facilitating a comprehensive ex-
amination of cost-effective strategies for renewable
methanol production and comparison for the differ-
ent locations and scenarios analysed.
It is important to notice that the excess of local re-
newable energy generated is curtailed by the model
when optimizing the solution and therefore it is not
taken into account as a revenue in this study.
A summary of the main techno-economic data used
as input can be found on the Appendix B. The dif-
ferent simulations were solved using the commercial
solver Gurobi, with Julia/JuMP language.
2.3
Delegated Acts
To be considered as an RFNBO, e-methanol is re-
quired to comply with the rules set out in Article 27(6)
of the RED II (or the new RED III revision [8]) for the
sourcing of renewable electricity and achieve 70%
emissions savings.
In this context, the Delegated
Acts set out detailed rules for sourcing renewable
electricity that is used for the production of RFNBOs
and for determining the GHG emission intensity. The
rules have to be met to count renewable hydrogen
towards the targets set out in the RED.
The RFNBO delegated act complements the RED
by setting out detailed rules on how fuel producers
can source electricity that counts as fully renew-
able.
The GHG methodology includes a life-cycle
approach to determine the greenhouse gas emis-
sion intensity of RFNBOs (and recycled carbon fuels
“RCF”). This approach distinguishes between elec-
tricity that counts as fully renewable and electricity
that counts as partially renewable. In addition, the
methodology includes a formula that allows deriving
the amount of RFNBOs and RCF that is produced
as this is required to derive the emission intensity.
The delegated acts are therefore closely interlinked.
Delegated Regulation 2023/1184
The European Commission’s Delegated Regula-
tion (EU) 2023/1184, supplementing Directive (EU)
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
3
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1: Diagram of e-methanol production facility modelled
2018/2001, establishes detailed rules for when elec-
tricity used to produce a RFNBO is deemed renew-
able.
The regulation emphasizes that such fuels,
must be derived from renewable electricity to qual-
ify as renewable.
In this context, the RFNBO has to demonstrate 3
conditions to prove that the electricity used is renew-
able:
• Additionality
• Temporal Correlation
• Geographical Correlation
The additionality condition means that fuels produc-
ers need to generate renewable electricity equiva-
lent to the amount they used either in their own facil-
ities or through power purchase agreements (PPAs)
and the installations producing the renewable elec-
tricity must have started operating no more than 36
months before the fuel production facility and should
not have received operational or investment aid.
The temporal correlation implies that the produc-
tion of RFNBO must occur within the same one-
hour period the renewable electricity is consumed.
This condition is always met if fuel production co-
incides with a one-hour period where the clearing
price of electricity in the day-ahead market is below
20€/MWh or less than 0.36 times the CO2 allowance
price. Before January 1st 2030 the alignment can be
monthly.
Finally, the geographical correlation, is satisfied if
the electrolyzer is in the same bidding zone as the re-
newable electricity installation, in an interconnected
bidding zone with equal or higher electricity prices, or
in an offshore bidding zone interconnected with the
electrolyzer’s zone.
Beside this, there are four special situations where
one or more constraints can be overlooked. Those
are:
1. Direct Connection: The fuel production in-
stallation and the renewable electricity plant
are connected via a direct line or are within
the same installation.
If there is connection
to the grid too, a smart metering system mea-
suring all electricity flows from and to the grid.
Additionality still needs to be fulfilled (the RE
plant should have come into operation not ear-
lier than 36 months before the installation pro-
ducing RFNBO) but temporal and geographical
correlations are considered fulfilled.
2. Grid with a RES-e share higher than 90%:
When the RFNBO plant is located in a bidding
zone where the average proportion of renew-
able electricity exceeded 90%, based on gross
final consumption of electricity in the previous
4
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:10==
calendar year, electricity taken from the grid
counts as fully renewable, up to a maximum
number of hours that is equal the total num-
ber of hours in each calendar year multiplied
by the share of renewable electricity reported
for the bidding zone. Once the average share
of renewable electricity exceeds 90% in a cal-
endar year, it shall be continued to be consid-
ered to be higher than 90% for the subsequent
five calendar years. There is no need to com-
ply with additionality and temporal correlation
in this scenario.
3. Grid with emission intensity below 18
gCO2eq/MJ:
If
the
installation
producing
RFNBO is located in a bidding zone where the
emission intensity of electricity is lower than 18
gCO2eq/MJ, electricity may count as fully re-
newable if the fuel producers have concluded
a PPA with economic operators generating re-
newable electricity for an amount that is at least
equivalent to the amount of electricity that is
claimed as fully renewable and the electricity
claimed is effectively produced in this or these
installations. In this situation, there no need
to demonstrate additionality, but temporal and
geographical correlation still apply.
4. Electricity used during imbalance settle-
ment periods: If the electricity used to pro-
duce RFNBO is consumed during an imbal-
ance settlement period during which the fuel
producer can demonstrate, based on evidence
from the national TSO that RE generations
units were re-dispatched downwards and the
electricity consumed for the RFNBO reduced
the need for re-dispatching by a corresponding
amount, electricity may also be counted as fully
renewable.
Since this work does not cover the effects of geo-
graphical placement on the grid or the RFNBO plant
and the analysis focus on the optimal investment of
new RE generation capacity and RFNBO produc-
tion, the additionality and the geographical correla-
tion conditions are assumed to be fulfilled by default
in all scenarios. Therefore, the implementation of the
renewable criteria will focus mostly on compliance
with the temporal correlation. Since the plant mod-
elled will operate beyond 2030 and must meet the
temporal correlation throughout its entire lifetime, the
hourly constraint will be applied in this study from the
beginning.
Also, since the objective of this work is not to analyze
the optimal placement within a bidding zone or coun-
try of the RE plant and the fuel production plant, from
a developer perspective then, it can be considered
that a PPA sourcing strategy with a RE asset that
provides renewable energy fulfilling the additionality,
temporal and geographical conditions will behave in
the same way as a Direct Connection configura-
tion, besides a difference in absolute cost. The sit-
uation for a grid with an emission intensity below 18
gCO2eq/MJ represents a similar situation since the
temporal and geographical correlation still needs to
be met via a PPA sourcing.
Moreover, the sourcing from the grid during imbal-
ance settlement periods will likely be only in excep-
tional cases [23], therefore it will be omitted in this
analysis.
The Optiplant model used for the optimization comes
by default with the functionality to define a ’Renew-
able Criterion Profile’ parameter (RECrit
l,y,h) for every
hour h of the year y for the location l under anal-
ysis. If assigned the value of 1, the electricity im-
ported from the grid is considered renewable and is
not counted toward the carbon intensity of the grid.
Taking into account all of the considerations from this
section, in the end, the renewable criteria of the elec-
tricity sourced from the grid can be assured if the
RES-e share is higher than 90% in the bidding zone
where the RFNBO plant is located based on gross
final consumption of electricity in the previous cal-
endar year (REshare
l,y−1 ) or if the electricity in the grid
(pgrid
l,y,h) is below 20 €/MWh or less than 0.36 times
the CO2 allowance price (pETS). This is modelled
in Optiplant in the following way, being RECrit
l,y,h = 1
electricity considered fully renewable:
RECrit
l,y,h =











1
if pgrid
l,y,h ≤20€/MWh
1
if pgrid
l,y,h ≤0.36 × pETS
1
if REshare
l,y−1 > 0.9
0
otherwise
This RECrit
l,y,h parameter can then be enforced in each
scenario in a mandatory or optional way, by set-
ting the CriterionApplication option. If assigned the
value −1 the RFNBO plant can only use the grid
if RECrit
l,y,h = 1. If assigned a value higher than 0,
the plant is allowed to draw from the grid whenever
is economically convenient and grid usage is incen-
tivized applying a discount equivalent in €/kWh the
value assigned on the grid cost if RECrit
l,y,h = 1. For
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
5
==PAGE:11==
example, if CriterionApplication = 0.001, the model
applies a discount on the grid price of 10 €/MWh ev-
ery hour where RECrit
l,y,h = 1. This will allow the explo-
ration of different forms of application of the 1st DA,
which will be detailed in section 2.5.
Delegated Regulation 2023/1185
The 2nd Delegated Act specify the methodology for
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions accounting for
RFNBO and RCF. It specifies that every fuel needs to
accomplish a 70% emissions saving compared to a
fossil fuel comparator of 94 gCO2eq/MJ, which trans-
lates into a threshold of 28,2 gCO2eq/MJ for every
fuel claiming to be renewable. It also specifies the
way to calculate the emissions of the fuel with the
following formula.
E = ei + ep + etd + eu −eccs
(2)
Where:
• E: total emissions from the use of the fuel
(gCO2eq/MJ)
• ei: eielastic+eirigid–eex−use: emissions from sup-
ply of inputs (gCO2eq/MJ).
– eielastic: = emissions from elastic inputs
(gCO2eq/MJ)
– eirigid:
emissions
from
rigid
inputs
(gCO2eq/MJ)
– eex−use: emissions from inputs’ existing
use or fate (gCO2eq/MJ)
• ep: emissions from processing (gCO2eq/MJ)
• etd: emissions from transport and distribution
(gCO2eq/MJ)
• eu: emissions from combusting the fuel in its
end-use (gCO2eq/MJ)
• eccs:
emission savings from carbon capture
and geological storage (gCO2eq/MJ)
The regulation establishes that emissions data
should be sourced from recognized databases such
as JEC-WTW, ECOINVENT, IPCC, IEA, or equiva-
lent official and peer-reviewed sources when spe-
cific values are not listed in the Annexes from the
DA. Suppliers must calculate and report the emis-
sions intensity of their inputs throughout the supply
chain, ensuring transparency and accuracy in the
emissions attributed to each production step.
The DA also describe the methodology for the calcu-
lation of carbon intensity of the grid, which has to be
done at national or bidding zone levels, considering
upstream and combustion emissions. However, for
EU members, it provides a table (Table A in [7]) with
average annual values that should be used.
For the context of this methodology, electricity that
meets the requirements of the 1st DA [6] (described
in section 2.3) is given zero emissions value, as it
is considered fully renewable.
When using such
fully renewable electricity to enhance the heating
value of the fuel, the 70% emissions savings must
be achieved according to the temporal correlation re-
quirements. Specifically, until December 31, 2029,
the emissions intensity values for individual time in-
tervals can be averaged over a month to meet the
70% emissions savings threshold. Starting in 2030,
this savings must be achieved within each hourly
time interval. Since plants in development today will
operate beyond this period and must meet the re-
quirement throughout its entire lifetime, this study will
apply the hourly constraint from the beginning.
The calculation intends to cover for the emissions
generation during the whole life time of the fuel (up-
stream, production and use). The emissions from
inputs’ existing use or fate (eex−use) include all emis-
sions in the existing use that are avoided when the
input is used for fuel production, which in other words
refers to the CO2eq of the carbon incorporated that
would have otherwise been emitted into the atmo-
sphere. For this study, only biogenic carbon sources
are considered and since the CO2eq captured to be
used as input are almost the same as the ones emit-
ted when combusting the fuel in its end-use (eu), the
life-cycle emissions of this have no net climate im-
pact, so the sum of both is considered 0 for this study.
Regarding the emissions from processing (ep) and
from transport and distribution (etd), under the as-
sumption that the sources of biogenic CO2 and the
off-taker of the fuel are close to the production site,
they are almost irrelevant as demonstrated in several
studies [24–28]. For simplicity, they have been also
considered as 0 in this study. The same goes for the
emission savings from carbon capture and geologi-
cal storage (eccs), since no CCS is considered for the
fuel aster its use in this study.
So, the only relevant emissions left to be considered
under the scope of the current study are the ones
coming from the electricity imported from the grid as
eielastic. According to the Delegated Act Methodol-
6
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:12==
ogy, these have the value of 0 gCO2eq/MJ if the elec-
tricity fulfills the requirements expressed in section
2.3. On the contrary, there are 3 options given:
1. Assign a CI according to Annex C from DA
1185/2023 (Table A for EU members)
2. Assign according to FLH of the RFNBO plant.
If they are equal or lower than the number
of hours in which the marginal price of elec-
tricity was set by RE or nuclear power plants
in the preceding calendar year, then they are
assigned the value 0 gCO2eq/MJ. Where it is
higher, they are assigned the value 183 of
gCO2eq/MJ.
3. Assign the CI value of the marginal unit gener-
ating electricity at the time of the production of
the RFNBO, if this information is available.
In this study, the method adopted is number 1, for
being the one with the most straightforward applica-
tion and with data availability.
As for the renewable criteria, Optiplant already has
the functionality to impose a yearly emissions thresh-
old CO2WTTop to the fuel production.
However, to
account for the hourly compliance of the emissions
threshold stipulated in Section 2.3, a new constraint
is added to the model, where elbought
grid,h and xu,h are the
variables optimized, as follows
CIgrid
h
× elbought
grid,h
+
U
∑
u=1
(
COproc
2u
× xu,h
)
≤COW T Top
2
× F en_cont
∀h
(3)
Where:
• CIgrid
h
: Carbon intensity of the electricity im-
ported from the grid, in hour h, according the
the GHG methodology [7].
• elbought
gridh : Amount of electricity bought from the
grid in hour h.
• COproc
2u : Fixed CO2 emissions due to process-
ing per unit of output for the unit u.
• xu,h: Output flow of mass or energy from unit u
at hour h.
• COWTTop
2
: Threshold value for CO2 emissions
from [7].
• F en_cont: Fuel energy content.
2.4
Choice of Locations
No specific study has been conducted to identify the
optimal locations with the best combination of renew-
able energy resources. However, the selected loca-
tions for this study were carefully chosen to repre-
sent various combinations of four fundamental as-
pects: availability of renewable energy resources,
grid prices, carbon intensity, and the share of re-
newable energy (RE) in the grid. The weather data
was obtained from the Global Wind Atlas [29] and
Global Solar Atlas [30], while the electricity prices
and generation data were obtained from [31] and the
CI from Table A in [7]. The objective was to select lo-
cations across Europe where both onshore and off-
shore wind resources, as well as solar energy, could
be harnessed. Consequently, all selected locations
are close to the coast, despite the potential for higher
renewable energy inland. Table 1 presents the seven
locations chosen for the study along with a summary
of the conditions described.
As it can be seen in Table 1, Soderhamn, located
in bidding zone SE2, exhibits the lowest CO2 inten-
sity and the highest share of renewable energy in
the grid. Furthermore, it is the only selected loca-
tion with a sufficiently high share of renewables as
of now, enough to avoid the additional, temporal and
geographic constraints of the Delegated Acts. Con-
versely, Gdansk has the highest CO2 intensity and
electricity prices in Europe and one of the lowest
shares of renewables among the selected locations.
Spain and Greece achieved some of the lowest lev-
elized costs of hydrogen in the recent Pilot Auc-
tion from the European Innovation Fund [11], mak-
ing them interesting regions to analyze. Huelva and
Athens, representing these countries, demonstrate
relatively high solar irradiation and a significant pen-
etration of renewables in the grid. Athens, in partic-
ular, is subject to some of the highest grid prices in
Europe and high carbon intensity.
Rostock and Klaipeda stand out as locations with
high wind capacity factors. However, Klaipeda has
a carbon intensity that is 60% lower and nearly dou-
ble the renewable grid share compared to Rostock.
Lastly, Marseille, arises as an interesting location for
analysis, being a place with good availability of re-
newable resources and a grid that has a low carbon
intensity but with a low share of renewables present,
due to the significant nuclear capacity of France.
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
7
==PAGE:13==
Table 1: Summary of conditions in 2023 for locations studied
Rostock
Huelva
Marseille
Athens
Klaipeda
Gdansk
Soderhamn
Country
Germany
Spain
France
Greece
Lithuania
Poland
Sweden
Bidding Zone
DE
ES
FR
GR
LT
PL
SE2
CF Onshore Wind
unit
0.45
0.23
0.41
0.29
0.47
0.38
0.38
CF Offshore Wind
unit
0.46
0.21
0.44
0.29
0.41
0.40
0.38
CF PV
unit
0.17
0.26
0.23
0.24
0.17
0.16
0.15
Average Grid Prices (year)
€/MWh
95.04
87.10
96.86
119.11
94.44
111.65
39.98
CO2 Intensity a
gCO2eq/MJ
99.30
54.10
19.60
125.20
57.70
196.50
4.10
Share of RE in Grid b
%
60%
56%
27%
52%
67%
27%
98%
a Values based on Table A from [7].
b Value calculated based on data for electricity production on 2023 from ENTSO-E.
Electricity Prices and Period Studied
The electricity price data utilized in this study con-
sists of day-ahead electricity prices for 2023, pri-
marily sourced from ENTSO-E [31].
However, for
France, the data was obtained from EMBER [32] due
to unavailability on ENTSO-E.
The study focuses on the year 2023 as it represents
the most recent period with publicly available data,
during which electricity prices began to gradually re-
vert to their historical average values following the
COVID-19 pandemic and the energy crisis triggered
by Russia’s attack on Ukraine at the end of 2021,
as depicted in Figure 12 on Appendix A.3. Although
prices remain higher than the historical average up
to 2019, which can be considered the most recent
average year in terms of electricity prices, the share
of combined solar and wind energy in the grid has in-
creased by at least 60% in relative terms since 2019
in the selected locations. This can be seen in Fig-
ure 13 from Appendix A.3, calculated based on data
obtained from IEA [33] (up to 2022) and electricity
generation data from [31] for 2023.
This significant increase in renewable energy pres-
ence in the grid could potentially have a consider-
able impact on the design of semi-islanded e-fuel
plants, making it worth to take this period for study.
However, this context should be considered when
interpreting the results of the model in terms of cost,
design, and operation of the plants.
Carbon Emissions Allowance Data
One of the conditions to determine the renewable
condition of grid electricity is the carbon emission
allowance price, as explained for the temporal cor-
relation requirement in section 2.3. As indicated in
[23], in this study the data used as reference for each
hour correspond to the closing price of the previous
trading day for December futures for the emissions
allowances for the year 2023. The data was down-
loaded from Investing.com [34].
Solar Power Data
For solar generation technologies, both fixed-axis
and one-axis tracking PV systems were considered.
The annual energy production data for both types
of installations was obtained using the open-source
reanalysis model based on satellite data from Re-
newables.ninja [35]. The data processing methods
for this model are described in [36].
Optimal az-
imuth and tilt angles for the specific coordinates were
sourced from the Global Solar Atlas 2.0 [30], a free
web-based application, developed and operated by
the company Solargis s.r.o. on behalf of the World
Bank Group.
Wind Power Data
In this study, eight different onshore wind turbine
models and four offshore turbine models were con-
sidered as options for wind generation technologies.
For simplicity, the same 12 models as those used
in Campion et al., 2023 [15], were employed. How-
ever, as of this study, the latest data available in DTU
Wind’s CorRES model [37] is from 2022. Therefore,
the wind power profiles for 2023 were derived by
comparing wind speed data for each location and
turbine model between 2022 data from the CorRES
model and Renewables.ninja [35, 38].
A correc-
tion factor was applied to align the capacity factors
from both sources. This correction factor was then
applied to the 2023 wind speed data from Renew-
ables.ninja, and these values were used to calculate
the output power using the power curves of each
turbine model. This approach ensures consistency
between data from different sources. For more de-
tails about how this was calculated, please refer to
Appendix C.
8
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2: Diagram of scenarios defined
2.5
Scenarios Definition
To examine the impact of the Delegated Acts, four
distinct scenarios were defined, each imposing the
conditions of the DAs in varying degrees. The first
scenario, identified as No_DA, models a situation
where the conditions of the DAs are not applied in
any form. This scenario serves as the baseline, rep-
resenting the conditions before the approval of the
DAs by the European Commission.
The second scenario, RFNBO, enforces mandatory
compliance with the DA conditions. In this scenario,
the production of e-fuel is restricted to only the hours
where the renewable electricity requirements spec-
ified in [6] and the emissions threshold outlined in
[7] are met. Essentially, this scenario represents a
100% production compliance with RFNBO standard.
The remaining two scenarios relax these constraints,
allowing the production of e-methanol that par-
tially complies with the DA requirements.
The
LOW_C scenario mandates only compliance with
the emissions threshold, allowing the production of
e-methanol using electricity that does not meet the
renewable criteria set by the DAs.
This scenario
provides plants with greater flexibility, enabling the
production of both RFNBO-compliant methanol and
low-carbon intensity e-methanol.
Finally, the IN-
CENTIVE scenario, similar to LOW_C, introduces a
subsidy of 7.68 €/MWh of imported fully renewable
electricity to incentivize the production of RFNBO-
compliant e-methanol. This subsidy value was cal-
culated based on 80% of the highest winning bid from
the European Commission’s H2 Pilot Auction [11],
corresponding to the approximate energy percent-
age in the Levelized Cost of Hydrogen (LCOH).
The difference between these scenarios is summa-
rized in Figure 2.
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
9
==PAGE:15==
3
Results and Discussion
This sections will present and discuss the core find-
ings of this research on the impact of the EU Dele-
gated Acts on the design and configuration of new
e-methanol plants, examining how compliance in-
fluences technology selection of electrolyzers and
storage methods. Before answering the last ques-
tions about the competitiveness of different locations
around Europe, an analysis of the impact of mod-
elling requirements and limitations is presented. Fi-
nally, the competitive landscape across European
countries for RFNBO-compliant methanol produc-
tion. Each subsection addresses one of the research
questions, detailing the relevant data and analyses
conducted.
3.1
Impact of EU Delegated Acts on
e-Methanol Plant Design
After performing several simulation covering every
possible combinations of CO2 sources, electrolyzers
technologies and configurations for every location in
the four scenarios defined, the results indicate that
the implementation of the DA on e-methanol plant
will mostly lead to a reduction of the grid usage from
e-methanol plant. Therefore, this leaves with fewer
hours availability of fully renewable energy, which
will have a direct impact on the installed electrolyzer
capacities and storage size, increasing both of them
significantly. The reduction of grid usage is compen-
sated by an oversizing of the RE plant, mostly wind
power, because of it higher capacity factor against
solar PV.
Locations like Soderhamn with unrestricted access
to renewable electricity from the grid, doesn’t experi-
ence a cost increase or design change when the DA
requirements are imposed.
The results suggest that when the requirements from
the DA are imposed as mandatory and only RFNBO-
compliant methanol is allowed for production, the
LCOM increases in every location and for every con-
figuration. However, these results are heavily influ-
enced by the addition of batteries, which will be an-
alyzed and discussed in Section 3.3. If the cost of
installing batteries is not considered, then the rise in
the LCOM is not that significant in the context ana-
lyzed.
Figure 3 shows the result of the DA application for
Huelva, which is one of the locations studied where
the effects of DA implementation can be seen in a
clearer way. The results for the rest of the location
can be found on Appendix D. As it can be seen in the
figure, the gradual implementation of the DA require-
ments in each scenario, reduces the cost of electric-
ity import from the grid and replace it with the instal-
lation of more wind and H2 storage. Finally, when
the plant is constrained to only produce RFNBO-
compliant methanol, batteries are introduced as a
storage technology. However, disregarding the bat-
tery cost, the impact on the LCOM is limited, basi-
cally due to the relatively low share of grid electricity
on the total electricity consumption of the plant, as
can be seen in Figure 4. As depicted, even when the
DA requirements are not implemented, the share of
grid in the electricity mix of the plant is just a 10% in
Huelva.
Figure 4: Share of total power supply per source in
each scenario and configuration for Huelva
However, the total cost is heavily impacted by the
presence of batteries, so this should further studied
in a different study, without this modelling limitations.
For example, the effects of emission caps in LCOM
was analyzed by Mingolla S et al (2024) [39], where
it was concluded that depending on the grid prices,
carbon intensity and renewable availability, the effect
of emissions threshold on the cost of the fuel is differ-
ent. However, part of this effect is lost when batteries
are forced in the configuration of the plant.
On the other hand, the analysis revealed some in-
teresting insights regarding the emissions.
When
the requirements are relaxed as in the scenarios
LOW_C and INCENTIVE, even if in this situation part
10
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3: Cost breakdown for Huelva across different technologies, configurations and scenarios
of the production doesn’t comply with the DA condi-
tions, the GHG emissions accounted are still below
the threshold stipulated of 70% emissions saving, as
shown on Figure 5 for the two competitive technolo-
gies (AEC and PEM).
These results align with the ones found by Brandt J
et al (2024) [16], which discussed that unrestricted
grid usage does not necessarily leads to a carbon
intensity of the fuel surpassing the Delegated Acts
emissions thresholds. In their paper, it is discussed
that when average electricity prices surpasses the 50
€/MWh level, the final CI of the fuels shows a steep
decrease. This is the same situation as the one ana-
lyzed here, where as shown by Table 1, the average
electricity prices in every location are so high that it is
more economically convenient to source the electric-
ity from local renewable sources or PPAs and avoid
importing from the grid, which as also illustrated in
Figure 4 for Huelva.
However, this statement is heavily sensible to the av-
erage electricity prices on the locations under analy-
sis. As discussed also in [16], when electricity prices
are below the 50 €/MWh level, if electricity usage
is not restricted, there is a high risk of ending with
high-carbon intensity e-methanol.
3.2
Preferred electrolysis technologies
and storage methods
Choice of electrolysis technologies
As illustrated in Figure 3, SOEC technology remains
in its initial stages and is not yet competitive on
this scale and application against AEC or PEM elec-
trolyzers. This is mainly because the CAPEX costs
for this technology are so high that it cannot com-
pensate for the improved efficiency of the technology
for this application. In the other hand, for AEC and
PEM, the implementation of the Delegated Acts does
not alter the preference for one over the other. The
results indicate that while PEM electrolysis incurs in
a slightly higher capital expenditure (CAPEX) and is
less efficient than AEC, the savings in the rest of op-
erational and maintenance (O&M) cost nearly offset
these differences, leaving both technologies compet-
itive for Power-to-X applications without a clear pre-
ferred technology.
It is crucial to note that the validity of these results
is confined to the scope of this study. The optimiza-
tion model employed (Optiplant) is formulated as a
linear problem, with no unit commitment variables,
which allows rapid solving and the flexibility to run
multiple scenarios. Electrolyzers are known for their
non-linear, load-dependent efficiency, which could
be modelled in greater detail as done in [40] if the
objective is to analyze the optimal dispatch of elec-
trolyzers. Related to this, Baumhof et al. (2023) [41]
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
11
==PAGE:17==
Figure 5: CO2eq emissions accounted for the different locations
concluded that when optimizing the dispatch of hy-
brid plants, a simplified electrolyzer model could un-
derestimate H2 production by up to 13.5% annually
due to non-linearity, thereby affecting cost estima-
tions. Another context where the results of this study
may not be applicable is in optimizing electrolyzers
to provide ancillary services to the grid and participa-
tion in reserve markets. As studied by Reinert et al.
(2024) [42], in these situations where fast response
is needed and unit commitment is required with a 15-
minute resolution, PEM technologies arise as a more
suitable alternative compared to AEC. However, in
the context of this study, where an overall compar-
ison between technologies, scenarios and locations
is performed, with no interest in detailed optimal dis-
patch of the electrolyzers, the results remains valid.
Additionally, the simulations in this study were based
on average values sourced from the Danish Tech-
nology Catalogue [43] for 2024.
However, the lit-
erature indicates broader parameter ranges within
each technology than between them. For instance,
Deloitte [44] estimates CAPEX values for AEC from
750 to 1400 €/kW and for PEM from 800 to 1800
€/kW. Similarly, IRENA [45] places these values be-
tween 500-1000 €/kW for AEC and 700-1400 €/kW
for PEM. There is also significant variability in ef-
ficiency and output pressures across technologies,
as highlighted in the electrolyzer market overview
by GH2SA [46]. Assuming different low, mid, and
high values for CAPEX, efficiency and output pres-
sure of the electrolyzer system, a series of simula-
tions were conducted revealing substantial variation
in final costs. For more detailed information on the
methodology and calculations performed refer to Ap-
pendix E.
Figure 6 shows the results of this study for the two
most extreme cases of Soderhamn and Huelva (the
rest are presented in Appendix E). In general, it can
be concluded that the choice of technology will be
influenced less by the new EU regulations and more
by the specific application under consideration, the
particular parameters of the electrolyzers (CAPEX,
efficiency, and output pressure), and the electricity
market context.
Figure 6: Impact on LCOM of different CAPEX, ef-
ficiency and output pressure levels in Huelva and
Soderhamn
12
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:18==
In applications or locations where the electrolyzer
is expected to work fewer amount of hours, like in
Huelva as showed by Fig. 7 below, CAPEX becomes
the most relevant and influential parameter to con-
sider.
On the other hand, in markets with higher
electricity prices or where more full load hours are
expected, like Soderhamn, the selection of the right
electrolyzer will be more influenced by the efficiency
and output pressure of it.
Figure 7: Full load hours and average cost of im-
ported electricity for Huelva and Soderhamn
Choice of storage technologies
For off-grid configurations, H2 storage is consistently
paired with some battery storage capacity.
Given
that battery storage is more expensive than com-
pressed H2 storage in terms of cost per unit of en-
ergy stored, it seemed interesting investigating why
the model opts for the more costly battery storage
over additional H2 tanks.
To provide a clearer understanding, the CAPEX for
battery energy storage systems (BESS) used in this
model is 550 k€/MWh. In contrast, the CAPEX for
H2 storage tanks used is 900 k€/tonH2. Considering
the energy content of hydrogen (LHV), which is 33.3
MWh/tonH2 the cost of storing energy using hydro-
gen tanks in terms of cost per unit of energy stored is
27027 €/MWh. This demonstrates that H2 storage is
significantly cheaper, at least 20 times cheaper than
BESS without considering any energy conversion in-
efficiency, that would amplify this difference.
This results will be presented in more detailed in Sec-
tion 3.3, but they show that the need for battery is
strictly related to the flexibility of the MeOH process-
ing unit in off-grid configurations.
A more flexible
unit reduces the need for battery storage as energy
backup.
In semi-islanded configurations, H2 storage is always
present in some capacity, whereas battery storage
only emerges as a viable option in specific circum-
stances. When only the emissions threshold is man-
dated without a requirement for renewable electricity
(LOW_C and INCENTIVE scenarios), batteries are
adopted only in countries with the highest grid car-
bon intensity, such as Gdansk, Athens, and Rostock.
In these locations, the model identifies a lower-cost
solution by investing in expensive storage technol-
ogy rather than oversizing other systems to meet
methanol demand.
These findings would suggest
that the threshold for this decision is approximately
99 gCO2eq/MJ, as indicated by the minimal battery
storage capacity relative to other energy sources
at this value. In contrast, when the use of renew-
able electricity is also mandatory (as in the RFNBO
scenario), battery storage is implemented across all
studied locations. To explore this in detail, the same
study as for the off-grid configuration (detailed in Ta-
ble 2) was performed, providing similar results. How-
ever, for the semi-islanded configuration, this high-
lights a limitation for this application of the model
used.
3.3
Relaxing minimum load requirements
To address the issue of the model investing in expen-
sive battery storage instead of more H2 tanks, new
simulations were conducted by altering one param-
eter at a time within the off-grid and semi-islanded
configurations, as detailed in Table 2.
Table 2: Cases for Storage Analysis
Case definition
Type of units
changed
Parameter
changed
Case
value
Initial
value
No_Battery
Batteries
Not allowed
-
-
No_H2Tank
H2 tank
Not allowed
-
-
Flex_MeOH
MeOH plant CCU
Load min
(% of max capacity)
0
0.4
No_El_MeOH
MeOH plant CCU
Electrical consumption
(kWh/output)
0
1.7
The results indicate that for the off-grid configura-
tion in the No_Battery case, the model becomes in-
feasible due to the combined minimum load require-
ment and electrical consumption of the methanol
unit.
This constraint forces the continuous opera-
tion of the methanol unit, consuming electricity even
when the sole source of variable renewable electric-
ity is not available (with no backup from the grid),
thereby forcing the model to incorporate batteries in
the solution.
However, if any of these constraints
are relaxed, as in the Flex_MeOH or No_El_MeOH
case, the model does not invest in battery capacity.
The Flex_MeOH case seems to approximate more
closely to reality, where the methanol plant is un-
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
13
==PAGE:19==
likely to produce if there is a period without renew-
able energy (RE) long enough to shut off the plant.
The cost associated with a case like this is lower
than that of installing batteries to maintain plant op-
eration. In conclusion the need for batteries in the
off-grid configurations is strictly related to the flexibil-
ity of the methanol production unit. A methanol unit
with short ramping periods, low minimum load re-
quirements and/or lower electricity consumption will
require less or even none battery storage. Although
this analysis was conducted using PEM electrolyz-
ers and biogenic CO2 as a carbon source, the results
can be extrapolated to other setups too.
For semi-islanded configurations, the same study
detailed in Table 2) was performed, providing simi-
lar results. The same are illustrated in Figure 8. As it
is depicted, when DAs requirements are mandated,
the LCOM increased a 9.9% for Huelva. However,
most of this increase is due to the investment in bat-
tery storage. When the minimum load requirement
on the MeOH unit are relaxed, battery storage disap-
pears and the LCOM decreases a 5.7% against the
RFNBO scenario, leaving only a 4% increase com-
pared to location with the lowest LCOM found in this
study, Soderhamn.
Figure 8: Sensitivity of Huelva results against Soder-
hamn
However, for semi-islanded configurations, these re-
sults exposed a limitation of Optiplant for this appli-
cation, since it cannot distinguish between the elec-
tricity consumption of the methanol CCU unit and
the one of the electrolyzer. According to the GHG
accounting methodology specified in the Delegated
Act (DA) [7] and [23], the requirement to verify the
use of renewable electricity applies only to process
steps that increase the heating value of the product.
In the case of e-methanol production, this applies
specifically to the electrolyzer. However, the model
imposes the same renewable electricity constraints
on the consumption of the MeOH unit as it does on
the electrolyzer. Due to the minimum load require-
ment of 40% of this unit, there are periods when RE
is unavailable and importing from the grid is not feasi-
ble due to non-compliance with the DA requirements.
Even if these periods are brief (e.g., approximately
100 hours annually for Huelva), the methanol unit
cannot produce methanol without installing batteries
for electricity, despite the availability of stored H2.
Figure 9 shows these results, comparing a week of
plant operation (between hours 7450 and 7617) for
the Flex_MeOH and Semi-Islanded cases. In the
Flex_MeOH case, the plant would not operate dur-
ing hours highlighted in orange because no electric-
ity can be sourced from the solar park, wind farm or
the grid, despite available H2 stored. However, in the
original Semi-Islanded case, the methanol unit must
meet the minimum load requirement during these
hours, needing a battery installation to source elec-
tricity from it. Conversely, in the hours highlighted
in green, since electricity from the grid complies with
the DA requirements, it will prefer to use that as an
energy source in both cases.
Similar conclusions
can be drawn from the No_El_MeOH case, while the
No_Battery case remains infeasible.
If the model could differentiate electricity flows and
impose distinct requirements on each, it would likely
opt not to use batteries, instead choosing to either
shut down or draw from the grid, depending on the
most cost-effective solution.
3.4
Competitiveness of e-methanol across
European countries
Having into consideration the limitations described in
the previous section, some conclusions can be ex-
tracted from the results. In the context of high elec-
tricity prices like today, the application of the Dele-
gated Acts seem to have little impact on how com-
petitive different locations are.
Analysis of various scenarios doesn’t show signif-
icant benefits for any location except Soderhamn,
which benefits mainly from its low-cost electricity
rather than the Delegated Acts. It is the only place
under analysis with average grid prices below 50
14
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:20==
(a) Electricity Prices (€/MWh)
(b) Flexible MeOH Synthesis (0% Min Load)
(c) Semi-Islanded (Battery + H2 Tanks)
Figure 9: Hourly operation of the plant for Flex_MeOH and Semi-Islanded cases
€/MWh and several hours below that price (6071),
as presented in Appendix A.2. Due to the high grid
electricity prices still present in 2023, the grid elec-
tricity share in the final consumption of the plants is
almost irrelevant in most locations (see Figure 22 in
Appendix D). It should be further studied if this con-
clusion still holds true with a prices scenario similar
the one that prevailed until 2019 (refer to Figure 12
in Appendix A.3) with average prices closer to 40-50
€/MWh.
When constraining the plant to only produce RFNBO,
the results reveal that locations with higher PV ca-
pacity factor and lower wind CF (Athens and Huelva),
are the ones suffering the biggest impact and losing
more competitiveness. This is due to the high corre-
lation and concurrence of high solar irradiation with
low electricity prices. Therefore when grid usage is
restricted to only hours with prices below 20 €/MWh,
those hours usually coincide with hours where there
is high local solar PV generation. Therefore, these
locations have to compensate for the loss in FLH
with biggest investments and installations of wind en-
ergy, apart from oversizing the plant. On the con-
trary, locations with high Wind CF can replace grid
usage hours with wind in a more optimal way, avoid-
ing a higher increase in the LCOM of the e-methanol.
However, due to the low grid usage, as explained in
section 3.1, the impact is limited, even in the worst
locations.
Figure 10 shows the competitive landscape of the lo-
cations studied once the battery effect is disregarded
relaxing the MeOH load requirement, as explained in
Section 3.3. As it can be seen, the places with the
higher LCOM are Gdansk and Athens. This does not
represent a change regarding the NO_DA scenario.
However, the location losing more competitiveness
against the rest with the application of the DA, even
is limited to only a 4% increase in LCOM, is Huelva.
This is not surprising, being the location that has to
replace the biggest amount of grid imports (10% of
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 10: Competitive Landscape for RFNBO production in locations studied
total electricity share) with the installation of local re-
newable resources.
The results obtained do not completely align with
the results from the H2 Auction [11], where Spain,
Greece and Sweden reported the lowest levelized
cost of H2. This still holds for the case of Soderhamn,
but not for Huelva and Athens. A similar situation is
present for Lithuania and France, which reported rel-
atively high LCOH costs in the bids presented in the
auction, and some of the lowest costs in the analysis
performed in this study.
The differences in these results could be due to sev-
eral different reasons, from the scale of the projects,
the particular context of the 2023 prices under analy-
sis or specific conditions of the countries or projects,
like specific taxes or tariffs, out of the scope of this
study. A sub-optimal selection of the specific location
for the regions under study could also be the reason
difference in the cost achieved.
This highlights the importance of analyzing each spe-
cific case and application in detail and taking into
account the assumptions made before drawing gen-
eral conclusions of the competitiveness of different
projects around Europe.
16
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:22==
4
Conclusion
This study provided a comprehensive analysis of the
techno-economic factors influencing the production
of e-methanol under the EU RED Delegated Acts.
Through the utilization of the model Optiplant, vari-
ous scenarios were simulated to explore the impacts
of different levels of applications of the DA require-
ments and technological parameters on the optimal
cost and emissions accounting of e-methanol pro-
duction.
4.1
Impact of EU Delegated Acts on
Design and Configuration
Answering the main research questions of the re-
search, the EU Delegated Acts will not have a signif-
icantly influence on the design and configuration of
new e-methanol plants under the current prices sce-
narios. High electricity prices motivates the use of re-
newable sources, therefore reducing the importance
and impact of additionality, temporal correlation,
and geographical correlation for renewable electric-
ity sourcing. Only locations where grid has reached
already a 90% share of renewables are positively im-
pacted by the regulation application, due to almost
unrestricted grid access.
However, the research
suggests that if electricity prices revert to pre-2020
levels, the economic landscape for e-methanol pro-
duction could change significantly. Lower grid elec-
tricity prices would increase the grid usage, therefore
reducing e-methanol costs. In an scenario like this,
the emissions threshold and carbon intensities of the
grid in the different locations will become more rele-
vant and could have more influence in the design and
operation of the plants.
4.2
Technology Preferences and
Compliance
The compliance with the Delegated Acts does not
drastically change the preference between Alkaline
(AEC) and Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) elec-
trolyzers for Power-to-X applications. Both technolo-
gies remain competitive due to the compensating ef-
fects of CAPEX and efficiency against O&M costs,
with PEM electrolyzers showing slightly higher capi-
tal costs and electricity consumption but lower oper-
ational and maintenance costs. The choice between
these technologies is thus more dependent on the
specific application context, the electrolyzer parame-
ters, and the electricity market conditions rather than
the regulatory framework alone.
A detailed examination of the influence of three elec-
trolyzer parameters (CAPEX, efficiency, and output
pressure) reveals significant variations in the final
costs of e-methanol production. For instance, in lo-
cations or applications where the electrolyzer oper-
ates for fewer hours annually, such as in Athens or
Huelva in this study, CAPEX becomes the most crit-
ical factor. In contrast, in regions with higher elec-
tricity prices or greater expected full-load hours, like
Gdansk or Soderhamn, efficiency and output pres-
sure become more influential, since they directly
impact on the electricity consumption of the elec-
trolyzer, which is by far the largest cost component
of e-methanol. This underscores the necessity for a
special attention in the selection of electrolyzer tech-
nologies based on specific applications, regions and
market conditions.
Moreover, the study highlights the substantial im-
pact of storage technologies on the economic per-
formance of e-methanol production systems. In off-
grid configurations, if the methanol unit, comprising
mainly the methanol reactor and methanol distilla-
tion, is not flexible enough, it could require a com-
bination of hydrogen storage and battery capacity to
satisfy operational constraints, with battery storage
increasing the final cost in a significant way. How-
ever, the inclusion of batteries becomes essential
due the minimum load requirements of the methanol
synthesis unit with its correspondent need for con-
tinuous electricity supply. Simulations show that in
scenarios where these constraints are relaxed, the
need for battery storage disappears, indicating po-
tential for cost reduction with flexible systems.
However, the results regarding semi-islanded config-
urations revealed the importance of considering the
regulation constraints in detail and modelling them
accordingly. Not taking this into consideration could
generate errors in the optimization results, leading to
modification in the hourly simulated operation of the
plant, with a cost increase of 10% in some cases,
like Huelva, for the addition of battery storage when
it is not the most optimal storage solution. A further
study should be performed in this topic, without this
limitation to fully understand the impact off the regu-
latory requirements on the levelized cost and needed
storage systems across all locations.
4.3
Competitiveness of sites around
Europe
The cost of producing fully renewable methanol will
vary significantly across Europe.
Locations with
lower grid electricity prices and abundant renewable
energy resources, such as Soderhamn, will have a
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
17
==PAGE:23==
competitive advantage. These regions can achieve
lower levelized costs of methanol (LCOM) by lever-
aging favorable market conditions and reducing re-
liance on expensive storage solutions.
Complying with the Delegated Acts is feasible but
will come at a cost, specially in locations with more
dependence on solar resources, with low wind ca-
pacities.
Even in the context simulated, with low
grid usage, locations like Athens and Huelva expe-
rience around 5% increase in the LCOM when im-
plementing the DA requirements. The strict renew-
able electricity sourcing requirements, limit the avail-
able hours where electricity can be sourced from
the grid as ’fully renewable’. This must be compen-
sated with the oversizing of the electrolyzer and stor-
age capacity. This impact is minimized in the cur-
rent context of high electricity prices, but will become
more relevant if prices decreases. Producers will be
faced with the decision of fully complying with the
DA requirements and produce RFNBO-compliant e-
methanol at higher costs, or partially comply, produc-
ing a low-carbon methanol at lower costs. The final
decision will in the end depend on the willingness to
pay of consumers, and their need of buying RFNBO-
compliant e-methanol, which was out of the scope of
this study, but should be further analyzed.
4.4
Future Work
As highlighted in several sections of this report, the
results and conclusions drawn from this study are
valid in the current electricity prices context and con-
sidering the modelling limitations. Future research
focused on the impact of the Delegated Acts im-
plementation in a context with grid electricity prices
closer to their historical average should be con-
ducted, in order to analyze the relevance of emis-
sions thresholds and green electricity sourcing re-
quirements.
However, this analysis should not be done on his-
torical data, due to the steep increase on renewable
share in the electricity grid around Europe in the last
years, and its strong correlation with the amount of
low-prices hours (below 20 €/MWh), where electric-
ity can be sourced as renewable. Also, further efforts
should be put on removing the modelling limitations
found on this study, to draw clear conclusions about
the impact of the DA requirements on the final LCOM
of methanol, without the distorting effects introduced
by the forced addition of battery storage in the sys-
tems.
In conclusion, the findings of this research empha-
size the importance of considering local conditions,
market dynamics, and specific technological param-
eters in the optimization of e-methanol production
systems.
By aligning regulatory frameworks with
technological advancements and economic reali-
ties, it is possible to enhance the viability of the
e-methanol production, contributing to the broader
goal of transitioning to a renewable energy future
and achieving the EU’s ambitious carbon neutrality
targets by 2050. This thesis adds valuable insights
into the complex interplay between policy, technol-
ogy, and economics in the area of green hydrogen
and RFNBOs, offering a foundation for further re-
search and development in this field.
18
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:24==
Bibliography
[1]
European Commission. The European Green
Deal. 2019. URL: https : / / eur - lex . europa .
eu / legal - content / EN / TXT / ?uri = CELEX %
3A52019DC0640&qid=1710231979169.
[2]
European Commission. Fit for 55: Deliver-
ing on the proposals. 2021. URL: https : / /
commission . europa . eu / strategy - and - policy /
priorities - 2019 - 2024 / european - green - deal /
delivering-european-green-deal/fit-55-delivering-
proposals_en.
[3]
European Commission. Fit for 55. 2021. URL:
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/
green-deal/fit-for-55-the-eu-plan-for-a-green-
transition/#what.
[4]
European Commission. A hydrogen strategy
for a climate-neutral Europe. July 2020. URL:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=CELEX:52020DC0301.
[5]
European Commission. REPowerEU Plan.
May 2022. URL: https://eur- lex.europa.eu/
legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=COM%3A2022%
3A230%3AFIN&qid=1653033742483.
[6]
European Commission. 1st Hydrogen Dele-
gated Act. Feb. 2023. URL: https://eur- lex.
europa . eu / legal - content / EN / TXT / ?uri =
CELEX%3A32023R1184.
[7]
European Commission. 2nd Hydrogen Dele-
gated Act. Feb. 2023. URL: https://eur- lex.
europa . eu / legal - content / EN / TXT / ?uri =
CELEX%3A32023R1185.
[8]
European Commission. RED III. Oct. 2023.
URL: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/
EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32023L2413&qid=
1699364355105.
[9]
T. Klatzer, U. Bachhiesl, and S. Wogrin. State-
of-the-art expansion planning of integrated
power, natural gas, and hydrogen systems.
June 2022. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2022.04.
293. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.
2022.04.293.
[10]
Ioannis Kountouris et al. “A unified European
hydrogen infrastructure planning to support
the rapid scale-up of hydrogen production”.
In: Nature Communications 15.1 (June 2024),
p. 5517. ISSN: 2041-1723. DOI: 10 . 1038 /
s41467-024-49867-w.
[11]
European Hydrogen Bank pilot auction results.
2024. URL: https://climate.ec.europa.eu/eu-
action/eu- funding- climate- action/innovation-
fund / competitive - bidding _ en # european -
hydrogen-bank-pilot-auction-results.
[12]
Lissy Langer et al. “Renewable fuel regulation:
Implications for e-fuel production infrastructure
in energy hubs”. In: International Conference
on the European Energy Market, EEM 2023-
June (2023). ISSN: 21654093. DOI: 10.1109/
EEM58374.2023.10161826.
[13]
Johannes Brauer, Manuel Villavicencio, and
Johannes Trüby. “Green hydrogen – How grey
can it be?” In: (2022). URL: https://hdl.handle.
net/1814/74850.
[14]
Elisabeth
Zeyen,
Iegor
Riepin,
and
Tom
Brown. “Temporal regulation of renewable
supply for electrolytic hydrogen”. In: Environ-
mental Research Letters 19.2 (Feb. 2024),
p. 024034. ISSN: 1748-9326. DOI: 10.1088/
1748-9326/ad2239.
[15]
Nicolas Campion et al. “Techno-economic as-
sessment of green ammonia production with
different wind and solar potentials”. In: Re-
newable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 173
(Mar. 2023), p. 113057. ISSN: 1364-0321.
DOI: 10.1016/J.RSER.2022.113057.
[16]
Jonathan Brandt et al. “Cost and competitive-
ness of green hydrogen and the effects of
the European Union regulatory framework”. In:
Nature Energy (May 2024). ISSN: 2058-7546.
DOI: 10.1038/s41560-024-01511-z.
[17]
IRENA AND METHANOL INSTITUTE. Inno-
vation Outlook : Renewable Methanol. Abu
Dhabi, 2021. ISBN: 978-92-9260-320-5. URL:
https : / / www . irena . org/ - /media / Files /
IRENA/Agency/Publication/2021/Jan/IRENA_
Innovation_Renewable_Methanol_2021.pdf.
[18]
The first PtX tender in Denmark has been de-
termined: Six projects will establish electroly-
sis capacity on more than 280 MW. Oct. 2023.
URL: https://ens.dk/en/press/first-ptx-tender-
denmark-has-been-determined-six-projects-will-
establish-electrolysis-capacity.
[19]
Methanol
Institute.
“Renewable
Methanol
Projects”. In: (). URL: https://www.methanol.
org/renewable/.
[20]
Christoph Hank et al. “Economics &amp; car-
bon dioxide avoidance cost of methanol pro-
duction based on renewable hydrogen and re-
cycled carbon dioxide – power-to-methanol”.
In: Sustainable Energy & Fuels 2.6 (2018),
pp. 1244–1261. ISSN: 2398-4902. DOI: 10 .
1039/C8SE00032H.
[21]
Biogenic CO2 from the Biogas Industry. Tech.
rep. European Biogas Association (EBA),
2022. URL: https://www.europeanbiogas.eu/
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
19
==PAGE:25==
wp-content/uploads/2022/10/Biogenic-CO2-
from-the-biogas-industry_Sept2022-1.pdf.
[22]
A Roshini, C Boumrifak, and L López. Carbon
for Power-to-X. Suitable CO 2 sources and in-
tegration in PtX value chains. Tech. rep. Frank-
furt: DECHEMA Gesellschaftfür Chemische
Technikund Biotechnologie e.V., Apr. 2024.
URL: https : / / dechema . de/ - p - 20480537 -
EGOTEC - 4db64de1ab0ffc70fa96ff586b306e7e /
_/CO2-R_03-04-24_f.pdf.
[23]
European Commission. Q&A implementation
of hydrogen delegated acts. Tech. rep. 2024.
URL: https : / / energy . ec . europa . eu /
topics/energy- systems - integration/hydrogen/
renewable - hydrogen _ en# : ~ : text =
The % 20Delegated % 20Act % 20on % 20a ,
%2Dbiological%20origin%20(RFNBO)..
[24]
M Prussi et al. JEC Well-to-Tank report v5.
Tech. rep. Joint Research Centre (European
Commission), Sept. 2020. DOI: 10 . 2760 /
959137. URL: https : / / op . europa . eu / en /
publication-detail/-/publication/a857087a-fe0c-
11ea-b44f-01aa75ed71a1/language-en.
[25]
Fabio
Cameli
et
al.
“Conceptual
Pro-
cess Design and Technoeconomic Analy-
sis of an e-Methanol Plant with Direct Air-
Captured CO <sub>2</sub> and Electrolytic H
<sub>2</sub>”. In: Energy & Fuels 38.4 (Feb.
2024), pp. 3251–3261. ISSN: 0887-0624. DOI:
10.1021/acs.energyfuels.3c04147. URL: https:
//pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.
3c04147.
[26]
Mohammed Al-Breiki and Yusuf Bicer. “Com-
parative life cycle assessment of sustainable
energy carriers including production, storage,
overseas transport and utilization”. In: Jour-
nal of Cleaner Production 279 (Jan. 2021),
p. 123481. ISSN: 09596526. DOI: 10.1016/j.
jclepro.2020.123481.
[27]
Bugra Arda Zincir and Yasin Arslanoglu. “Com-
parative Life Cycle Assessment of Alterna-
tive Marine Fuels”. In: Fuel 358 (Feb. 2024),
p. 129995. ISSN: 00162361. DOI: 10.1016/j.
fuel.2023.129995.
[28]
Carlo Hamelinck and Mark Bunse Back-
ground.
Carbon
footprint
of
methanol
Colophon Title Carbon footprint of methanol
Commissioned by Methanol Institute. Tech.
rep. URL: www.studiogearup.com.
[29]
Neil N. Davis et al. “The Global Wind Atlas:
A High-Resolution Dataset of Climatologies
and Associated Web-Based Application”. In:
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Soci-
ety 104.8 (Aug. 2023), E1507–E1525. ISSN:
0003-0007. DOI: 10.1175/BAMS-D-21-0075.1.
[30]
Global Solar Atlas 2.0. URL: https : / /
globalsolaratlas.info/map.
[31]
ENTSO-E Transparency Platform. URL: https:
//transparency.entsoe.eu/dashboard/show.
[32]
European wholesale electricty prices. 2024.
URL: https : / / ember - climate . org / data -
catalogue/european-wholesale-electricity-price-
data/.
[33]
IEA Electricity Information. URL: https://www.
iea . org / data - and - statistics / data - product /
electricity-information.
[34]
Investing.com. ETS Price. 2023. URL: https:
//www.investing.com/commodities/european-
union-allowance-eua-year-futures.
[35]
Reneables.ninja.
URL:
https : / / www .
renewables.ninja/.
[36]
Stefan Pfenninger and Iain Staffell. “Long-term
patterns of European PV output using 30 years
of validated hourly reanalysis and satellite
data”. In: Energy 114 (Nov. 2016), pp. 1251–
1265. ISSN: 03605442. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.
2016.08.060.
[37]
Matti Koivisto et al. “Using time series simula-
tion tools for assessing the effects of variable
renewable energy generation on power and
energy systems”. In: WIREs Energy and En-
vironment 8.3 (May 2019). ISSN: 2041-8396.
DOI: 10.1002/wene.329.
[38]
Iain Staffell and Stefan Pfenninger. “Using
bias-corrected reanalysis to simulate current
and future wind power output”. In: Energy 114
(Nov. 2016), pp. 1224–1239. ISSN: 03605442.
DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2016.08.068.
[39]
Stefano Mingolla et al. “Effects of emissions
caps on the costs and feasibility of low-carbon
hydrogen in the European ammonia industry”.
In: Nature Communications 15.1 (Dec. 2024).
ISSN: 20411723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467- 024-
48145-z.
[40]
Ioannis Kountouris et al. “Power-to-X in energy
hubs: A Danish case study of renewable fuel
production”. In: Energy Policy 175 (Apr. 2023),
p. 113439. ISSN: 0301-4215. DOI: 10.1016/J.
ENPOL.2023.113439.
[41]
Manuel Tobias Baumhof et al. “Optimization of
Hybrid Power Plants: When is a Detailed Elec-
trolyzer Model Necessary?” In: 2023 IEEE Bel-
grade PowerTech. IEEE, June 2023, pp. 1–
20
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:26==
10. ISBN: 978-1-6654-8778-8. DOI: 10.1109/
PowerTech55446.2023.10202860.
[42]
Elisabeth Andreae et al. “Cost minimization
of a hybrid PV-to-methanol plant through par-
ticipation in reserve markets: A Danish case
study”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen
Energy 68 (May 2024), pp. 190–201. ISSN:
03603199. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . ijhydene . 2024 .
04 . 158. URL: https : / / www - sciencedirect -
com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/science/article/pii/
S0360319924014319.
[43]
Danish Energy Agency. Technology Data –
Renewable fuels. 2024. URL: https : / / ens .
dk / en / our - services / technology - catalogues /
technology-data-renewable-fuels.
[44]
Deloitte. Fueling the future of mobility: hydro-
gen electrolyzers. Tech. rep. 2021.
[45]
International Renewable Energy Agency. Mak-
ing the breakthrough: Green hydrogen poli-
cies and technology costs. 2021. ISBN: 978-
92-9260-314-4. URL: www.irena.org.
[46]
P Radebe and S Hofmann. Electrolyser Mar-
ket Overview 2023. Tech. rep. GH2SA, 2023.
[47]
IRENA. The cost of financing for renewable
power. Tech. rep. International Renewable En-
ergy Agency, 2023. URL: www.irena.org.
[48]
Projected Costs of Generating Electricity.
Tech. rep. International Energy Agency (IEA),
2020.
[49]
Hydrogen Transport and Storage Cost Re-
port. Tech. rep. United Kingdom: Department
for Energy Security and Net Zero, Dec. 2023.
URL: https : / / www . gov . uk / government /
publications/hydrogen- transport- and- storage-
cost.
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
21
==PAGE:27==
A
Locations Studied
A.1
Coordinates and Maps
Table 3: GIS Information of Locations
City
Country
Bidding Zone
PV & Onshore Wind Coord.
PV parameters
Offshore Wind Coordinates
Lat.
Long.
Tilt (°)
Angle (°)
Lat.
Long.
Huelva
Spain
ES
37.31104
-7.000264
33
180
37.144505
-7.07738
Soderhamn
Sweden
SE2
61.1879542
17.15038062
44
180
61.1960460
17.283808
Klaipeda
Lithuania
LT
55.712753
21.135047
39
180
55.68999
21.00383
Rostock
Germany
DE
54.088671
12.140021
38
180
54.241712
12.05336
Marseille
France
FR
43.296174
5.369953
37
180
43.238017
5.191718
Gdansk
Poland
PL
54.348291
18.654023
38
180
54.440118
18.883152
Athens
Greece
GR
37.975565
23.734832
31
180
37.71266
23.815552
Figure 11: Locations studied
22
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:28==
A.2
Electricity Prices Statistics
Unit
Rostock
Huelva
Marseille
Athens
Klaipeda
Gdansk
Soderhamn
Max Price
€/MWh
289.43
220.00
276.12
384.82
777.18
216.47
332.00
Min Price
€/MWh
-132.79
0.00
-134.94
0.00
-56.55
-13.81
-60.04
Average Price
€/MWh
95.04
87.10
96.86
119.11
94.44
111.65
39.98
Median Price
€/MWh
97.40
92.13
97.70
112.48
93.78
111.15
32.13
First Quartile (Q1)
€/MWh
73.06
63.47
74.94
93.01
57.54
93.31
14.99
Third Quartile (Q3)
€/MWh
121.93
116.21
124.34
141.33
124.71
134.39
57.95
Hours with Price <0 €/MWh
hours
224
0
147
0
100
43
434
Hours with Price <20 €/MWh
hours
670
835
684
258
719
238
2747
Hours with Price <50 €/MWh
hours
1302
1735
1241
515
1915
597
6071
A.3
Supplementary Graphs
Figure 12: European Wholesale Electricity Prices 2015-2024, from [32]
Figure 13: Share of Solar ad Wind in electricity generation (%)
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
23
==PAGE:29==
Figure 14: Hourly 2023 prices sorted from largest to smallest
24
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:30==
B
Techno-economical input for the model
Table 4: Techno-economics inputs used in the model
Unit
Min.
Load
Electrical
consumption
CAPEX
Fixed OPEX
(per year)
Variable
OPEX
Lifetime
(years)
Discount
ratea
Source
CO2 capture DAC
0%
0.5
kgCO2
7000.00
€/kgCO2/h
350.00
€/kgCO2/h
20
7%
[15]
CO2 capture PS
0
kgCO2
0.120
kgCO2
[17]
MeOH plant CCU
40%
1.7
kgMeOH
19212.76
€/kgMeOH/h
768.51
€/kgMeOH/h
0.000
kgMeOH
30
7%
[15]
Desalination plant
0%
0.003
kgH2O
168.72
€/kgH2O/h
5.06
€/kgH2O/h
0.000
kgH2O
30
7%
[15]
Electrolysers AEC
0%
56.7
kWh/kgH2
875.00
€/kW
35.00
€/kW
30
7%
[43]
Electrolysers PEM
0%
60.5
kWh/kgH2
975.00
€/kW
19.50
€/kW
30
7%
[43]
Electrolysers SOEC
20%
43.4
kWh/kgH2
2075.00
€/kW
249.00
€/kW
30
7%
[43]
H2 Storage
(tank and compressor)
3%
3.5
kWh/kgH2
900.00
€/kg
18.00
€/kg
25
7%
[43]
Solar fixed
0%
552.68
€/kW
9.12
€/kW
35
5%
[15][43]
Solar tracking
0%
646.53
€/kW
11.16
€/kWh
35
5%
[15][43]
ON_SP198-HH100
0%
1758.68
€/kW
14.60
€/kWh
0.002
€/kWh
27
5%
[15][43]
ON_SP198-HH150
0%
2188.79
€/kW
14.60
€/kWh
0.002
€/kWh
27
5%
[15][43]
ON_SP237-HH100
0%
1554.76
€/kW
14.60
€/kWh
0.002
€/kWh
27
5%
[15][43]
ON_SP237-HH150
0%
1947.47
€/kW
14.60
€/kWh
0.002
€/kWh
27
5%
[15][43]
ON_SP277-HH100
0%
1414.98
€/kW
14.60
€/kWh
0.002
€/kWh
27
5%
[15][43]
ON_SP277-HH150
0%
1807.69
€/kW
14.60
€/kWh
0.002
€/kWh
27
5%
[15][43]
ON_SP321-HH100
0%
1301.29
€/kW
14.60
€/kWh
0.002
€/kWh
27
5%
[15][43]
ON_SP321-HH150
0%
1694.01
€/kW
14.60
€/kWh
0.002
€/kWh
27
5%
[15][43]
OFF_SP379-HH100
0%
2205.19
€/kW
41.77
€/kWh
0.003
€/kWh
27
5%
[15][43]
OFF_SP379-HH150
0%
2534.61
€/kW
41.77
€/kWh
0.003
€/kWh
27
5%
[15][43]
OFF_SP450-HH100
0%
1988.12
€/kW
41.77
€/kWh
0.003
€/kWh
27
5%
[15][43]
OFF_SP450-HH150
0%
2265.53
€/kW
41.77
€/kWh
0.003
€/kWh
27
5%
[15][43]
Batteries
10%
550.00
€/kW
8.25
€/kWh
15
7%
[15]
a The discount rates used were taken from values based on IRENA [47] and IEA [48] industry reports.
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
25
==PAGE:31==
C
Correction methodology for Wind Power Data
For each geographical location and wind turbine generator (WTG) model, wind speed and wind power data
for 2022 were obtained from two sources: CorRES (CR) and Renewables.ninja (RN). Although RN provides
data extends up to 2023, which was necessary for the modelling in OptiPlant, CorRES is deemed to be a
more reliable source. To enhance the reliability of the 2023 data from RN, the hourly wind data for 2022
was compared with the data provided by the RN model for the same year.
Due to observed discrepancies between the datasets, a correction factor α was applied to the hourly wind
speed data from RN for 2022, vRN,2022
t
. This corrected wind speed data was then used to derive the cor-
rected wind power output P Corrected,2022
t
utilizing the WTG power curves from CorRESfWTG:
vCorrected,2022
t
= α · vRN,2022
t
(4)
P Corrected,2022
t
= fWTG(vCorrected,2022
t
)
(5)
The appropriate correction factor α was determined through an iterative process, ensuring that the average
capacity factor of the corrected wind power output for 2022 CF Corrected
2022
matched that obtained from the
CorRES model CF CorRES
2022
. Once α is established, it was applied to the 2023 wind speed data from RN.
Using this corrected wind speed data for 2023, the wind power output was calculated in the same manner
as for 2022.
vCorrected,2023
t
= α · vRN,2023
t
(6)
P Corrected,2023
t
= fWTG(vCorrected,2023
t
)
(7)
This corrected wind power output for 2023 is used as the input for the OptiPlant model. The results of this
process can be visualized in the following figures, where 600 hours of wind data for 2022 for Gdansk are
show as an an example.
26
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:32==
(a) Wind Speed Data
(b) Wind Power Output for SP198-HH100
Figure 15: Wind Speed and Power Data for Gdansk in 2022
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
27
==PAGE:33==
D
Results of Delegated Acts implementation on every location studied
Figure 16: Cost breakdown for Athens across different technologies, configurations and scenarios
Figure 17: Cost breakdown for Gdansk across different technologies, configurations and scenarios
Figure 18: Cost breakdown for Klaipeda across different technologies, configurations and scenarios
28
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:34==
Figure 19: Cost breakdown for Marseille across different technologies, configurations and scenarios
Figure 20: Cost breakdown for Rostock across different technologies, configurations and scenarios
Figure 21: Cost breakdown for Soderhamn across different technologies, configurations and scenarios
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
29
==PAGE:35==
Figure 22: Share of total power supply per source in each scenario and configuration for all locations
30
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:36==
E
Methodology for Electrolyzer Parameters Calculations
The methodology described in this appendix outlines the systematic approach taken to evaluate and com-
bine different electrolyzer parameters. In this study, the two most competitive water electrolysis technolo-
gies, AEC and PEM, were selected for the analysis. The parameters considered include CAPEX, efficiency,
and output pressure, each evaluated at three different levels (high, medium, and low). This approach re-
sults in 27 different combinations of these parameters for each technology, which offer valuable insights
into the performance and economic viability of electrolyzer systems in different applications.
E.1
Electrolyzer Parameters Selection
CAPEX, an important economic factor, affect the investment cost, which is one of the largest components
oin the LCOH. On the other hand, efficiency is a critical parameter that influences the overall energy con-
sumption and OPEX of the electrolyzer. And finally, the output pressure is essential for subsequent hydro-
gen processing steps, including compression and storage and will influence the final energy consumption
indirectly too.
The values selected and detailed in Table 6 were derived from a comprehensive review of recent studies
and industry reports, like [44–46] and chosen based on the typical operating conditions of commercial
electrolyzers, trying to simulate relevant real-world applications.
Table 5: Electrolyzers Parameter Ranges
Unit
Low
Mid
High
CAPEX
€/kW
750
975
1600
Efficiency
kWh/kg
60.5
55
50
Output Pressure
bar
1
30
80
E.2
Calculation of Electricity Needs for Compression
Assuming a final process pressure requirement of 80 bar, the work required for compression was calculated
using the following formula and parameters from [49] for isothermal and adiabatic compression processes:
For adiabatic compression:
Wadiabatic =
[
γ
(γ −1)
]
p0V0
[(p1
p0
)(γ−1)/γ
−1
]
For isothermal compression:
Wisothermal = p0V0 ln
(p1
p0
)
Where:
• W is the specific compression work J/kg ) required,
• p0 is the initial pressure (Pa),
• p1 is the final pressure (Pa),
• V0 is the initial specific volume (V0 = 11.11m3/kg for hydrogen),
• γ is the ratio of specific heat (γ = 1.41 for hydrogen).
The final value used is an average between Wisothermal and Wadiabatic. Considering that the reference cases
from [43] use 30 bar as output pressure for the electrolyzer systems, the value used for the simulation is
expressed as the difference between the reference case and the respective case. The final values used for
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
31
==PAGE:37==
the difference in electricity consumption were 1.42 kWh/kg, 0 kWh/kg and -0.62 kWh/kg for the Low, Mid
and High output pressure levels, respectively.
E.3
Combination of Parameters
The combination of the three parameters (CAPEX, efficiency, and output pressure) at three levels (high,
mid, and low) for the PEM electrolyzer results in a total of 27 unique configurations. This approach ensured
a thorough exploration of the potential performance and economic outcomes of the electrolyzers under
different operational scenarios.
Table 6: Combinations of Electrolyzer Parameters Simulated
Combination Name
CAPEX
Efficiency
Output
Pressure
CAPEX Value
(€ / kW)
Efficiency
(kWh/kg)
Extra Elec. Consumption
for compression (kWh/kg)
LowCA_LowEf_LowP
Low
Low
Low
750
60.5
1.42
LowCA_LowEf_MidP
Low
Low
Mid
750
60.5
0
LowCA_LowEf_HighP
Low
Low
High
750
60.5
-0.62
LowCA_MidEf_LowP
Low
Mid
Low
750
55
1.42
LowCA_MidEf_MidP
Low
Mid
Mid
750
55
0
LowCA_MidEf_HighP
Low
Mid
High
750
55
-0.62
LowCA_HighEf_LowP
Low
High
Low
750
50
1.42
LowCA_HighEf_MidP
Low
High
Mid
750
50
0
LowCA_HighEf_HighP
Low
High
High
750
50
-0.62
MidCA_LowEf_LowP
Mid
Low
Low
975
60.5
1.42
MidCA_LowEf_MidP
Mid
Low
Mid
975
60.5
0
MidCA_LowEf_HighP
Mid
Low
High
975
60.5
-0.62
MidCA_MidEf_LowP
Mid
Mid
Low
975
55
1.42
MidCA_MidEf_MidP
Mid
Mid
Mid
975
55
0
MidCA_MidEf_HighP
Mid
Mid
High
975
55
-0.62
MidCA_HighEf_LowP
Mid
High
Low
975
50
1.42
MidCA_HighEf_MidP
Mid
High
Mid
975
50
0
MidCA_HighEf_HighP
Mid
High
High
975
50
-0.62
HighCA_LowEf_LowP
High
Low
Low
1600
60.5
1.42
HighCA_LowEf_MidP
High
Low
Mid
1600
60.5
0
HighCA_LowEf_HighP
High
Low
High
1600
60.5
-0.62
HighCA_MidEf_LowP
High
Mid
Low
1600
55
1.42
HighCA_MidEf_MidP
High
Mid
Mid
1600
55
0
HighCA_MidEf_HighP
High
Mid
High
1600
55
-0.62
HighCA_HighEf_LowP
High
High
Low
1600
50
1.42
HighCA_HighEf_MidP
High
High
Mid
1600
50
0
HighCA_HighEf_HighP
High
High
High
1600
50
-0.62
The combinations detailed in Table 6 were simulated for the PEM electrolyzer and compared agains the
reference case for AEC in every location and the results are showed in Figure 23, were the final LCOM is
detailed for every combination.
32
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
==PAGE:38==
(a) Impact on LCOM of different CAPEX, efficiency and output pressure levels
(b) Full load hours and average cost of imported electricity for each Location
Figure 23: Variability of the LCOM for different electrolyzers parameters
Techno-economic optimization of e-methanol production under EU RED Delegated Acts
33
==PAGE:39==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
