==PAGE:1==
A Microscopic Look in to the Texture of Feta Type
Hybrid Cheese:
hi
Use of Pea Protein Isolate (PPI) mixed with
Micellar Casein Isolate (MCI) raw materials
for Hybrid Cheese Processing
Master Thesis, August 2024
Author: Ina Rud Folmer (s223160)
Supervisors:
Blandine Genet (DTU), Claus Heiner Bang-Berthelsen
(DTU), Lilia Ahrné (KU), Egon Bech Hansen (DTU), &
Kristian Albertsern (Thise)
DTU Food: National Food Institute
Research Group for Microbial Biotechnology and Biorefining
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Use of Pea Protein Isolate (PPI) mixed with Micellar Casein Isolate (MCI) raw mate-
rials for Hybrid Cheese Processing
A Microscopic Look in to the Texture of Feta Type Hybrid Cheese
Master Thesis
August, 2024
By
Ina Rud Folmer
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must
include the customary bibliographic citation, including au-
thor attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo: Ina Rud Folmer
Published by:
DTU, Research Group for Microbial Biotechnology and
Biorefining, Henriks Damms Allé, Building 202, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.food.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months in affiliation with the MMF granted project
SusCheese through a multidisiplinary approach between The Research group for micro-
bial biotechnology and biorefining, Department of Food at the the Techinical University
of Denmark (DTU), the section for Ingredient and Dairy Technology (IDT), Department of
Food Science at the University of Copenhagen (KU) and Thise.
Laboratory work on rheology, laser diffraction, texture analysis and so on was performed
at IDT, KU.
Image acquisition of SEM images was performed at Nanolab, DTU.
Image acquisition of confocal images was performed at the Danish Molecular Biomedi-
cal Imaging Center (DaMBIC, University of Southern Denmark), supported by the Novo
Nordisk Foundation (NNF) (grant agreement number NNF18SA0032928).
Protein conten analysis data was generated through accessing research infrastructure at
KU, including FOODHAY (Food and Health Open Innovation Laboratory, Danish Roadmap
for Research Infrastructure)
Fat and moisture content analysis data was generated through accessing research in-
frastructure at DTU, including FOODHAY (Food and Health Open Innovation Laboratory,
Danish Roadmap for Research Infrastructure).
Ina Rud Folmer - s223160
Signature
Date
ii
02-08-2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In the face of climate change a shift towards a more plant-based diet seems inevitable.
The dairy industry is ripe for this change which could bring down the environmental impact
drastically. Even so, many plant-based alternatives available do not live up to the sensory
criteria of the ever-growing flextarian consumer base. To accommodate this issue, this
study investigated the possibility of creating a hybrid feta-like cheese product incorporat-
ing both plant- and dairy-based protein ingredients and yet still aiming to preserve the
textural characteristics of dairy-based feta cheese.
Consequently, pea protein (PPI) and caseins (MCI) in an emulsion with rapeseed oil
were co-gelled and investigated for their textural and rheological properties. Five different
mixed ratios were tested, ranging from 100% of each protein source, to 70/30 and 50/50
ratios. All emulsions were characterized for their protein content and droplet size distribu-
tion. Rheological tests were first conducted on the gelation properties of curd formation
from respectively acid induced geltaion by glucono-δ-lactone (GDL) addition and enzyme
induced gelation by addition of Microlant (Chr. Hansen, Denmark). An in-situ time sweep
was performed with acidification measurements along side and afterwards the gels formed
were tested for their strain and frequency dependency. The curds formed were also inves-
tigated under confocal microscopy. Subsequently acid and enzyme induced curds were
formed, which were then cut and molded to to investigate how the five matrices would sus-
tain this process. The fresh cheeses formed were then tested by texture profile analysis
and characterised by compositional analysis and pH. The cheese samples were further
investigated under scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The whey produced from the
samples was also characterised by protein content and composition.
It was found that both the ratio of PPI to MCI in the gels had a significant effect on the
gel rigidity. Similar was also found for the treatment used to induce the gels where a
correlation was found between MCI concentration and rigidity for the enzyme induced
gels. The highest rigidity was observed for the acid induced 100% PPI gel. In contrast,
it was found that gel strength was only significantly influenced by the MCI concentration,
increasing with increasing concentration. Through confocal microcopy it was observed
that the protein network was influenced by both the ratios and the treatment use, while
mostly the ratios impacted the oil droplets size within the network.
From all five emulsions it was possible to produce a cheese like product that had similar
composition to that of commercial cheeses although a slightly higher measured pH. Con-
cerning the influence of the protein ratios it was seen that higher fractions of PPI lead to
slightly darker cheese, less whey produced but more loss during the production. It was
also found that higher PPI fractions had a significant impact on textural parameters such
as hardness, cohesiveness and gumminess, while a more angular structure could be ob-
served under SEM. The ratio of proteins was however found to have little impact on the
protein expelled with the whey.
In conclusion it was found that incorporation of MCI into a plant-based matrix was not only
possible but it also improved the textural parameters of the cheese samples produced
without expelling the plant-based protein with the whey.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract in Danish
I lyset af klimaforandringer synes et skift mod en mere plantebaseret kost uundgåelig.
Mejeriindustrien er klar til denne udvikling, som vil kunne reducere den miljømæssige
påvirkning drastisk. Alligevel lever mange plantebaserede alternativer ikke op til de sen-
soriske kriterier sat af den stadig voksende fleksitariske forbrugerbase. For at imødekomme
dette problem er der i dette speciale blevet undersøgt muligheden for at skabe et hybrid
feta-lignende osteprodukt, der inkorporerer både plante- og mejeribaserede proteiningre-
dienser og samtidig sigter mod at bevare de teksturen af mejeribaseret fetaost.
Af den grund blev ærteprotein (PPI) og kaseiner (MCI) i en emulsion med rapsolie geleret
sammen og undersøgt for deres teksturelle og reologiske egenskaber. Fem forskellige
blandingsforhold blev testet, fra 100% af hver proteinkilde til 70/30 og 50/50. Alle emul-
sioner blev karakteriseret for deres proteinindhold og dråbestørrelsesfordeling. Reolo-
giske tests blev først udført for ostemassedannelse af henholdsvis syreinduceret geler-
ing ved tilsætning af glucono-δ-lactone (GDL) og enzyminduceret gelering ved tilsæt-
ning af Microlant (Chr. Hansen, Danmark). Rheologiske målinger af geleringsprocessed
blev udført med samtidig pH-måling og derefter blev de dannede geler testet for deres
belastnings- og frekvensafhængighed. De dannede ostemasser blev også undersøgt un-
der konfokal mikroskopi. Efterfølgende blev ostemasser dannet ved tilsættelse af både
syre og enzym. Derefter blev ostemasserne skåret og formet til oste for at undersøge,
hvordan de fem blandingsforhold ville reagere på denne proces.
De friske oste blev
derefter testet ved teksturprofilanalyse og sammensætning og pH af ostene blev karak-
terisetet.
Osteprøverne blev yderligere undersøgt under scanning elektronmikroskopi
(SEM). Den valle, der blev produceret fra prøverne, blev også karakteriseret for protein
indhold og sammensætning.
Det blev fundet, at både forholdet mellem PPI og MCI i gelerne havde en betydelig effekt
på gelens stivhed. Lignende sås ligeledes det ligeledes at det have en signifikant effect on
geler blev dannet ved syre eller enzym tilsætning. Her blev der yderligere fundet en korre-
lation mellem MCI-koncentrationen og stivhed for de enzyminducerede geler. Den højeste
stivhed blev dog observeret for den syreinducerede 100% PPI-gel. I modsætning hertil
blev det fundet, at gelstyrken kun var signifikant påvirket af MCI-koncentrationen, hvor gel-
styrken steg med stigende koncentration. Gennem konfokal mikroskopi blev det ligeledes
observeret, at proteinnetværket blev påvirket af både forholdene og om de var enzym-
eller syreinducerede, mens kun forholdene hovedsageligt påvirkede oliedråbestørrelsen
inde i netværket.
Fra alle fem emulsioner var det muligt at producere et ostelignende produkt, der havde
en lignende sammensætning i forhold til de kommercielle produkter. Dog havde oste
prøverner fremstillet i dette projekt en lidt højere målt slut-pH. Med hensyn til protein-
forholdenes indflydelse kunne det ses, at højere fraktioner af PPI førte til lidt mørkere ost,
mindre produceret valle, men mere tab under produktionen. Det blev også fundet, at hø-
jere PPI-fraktioner havde en betydelig indvirkning på teksturparametre så som hårdhed,
sammenhængskraft og gummighed, mens en mere kantet struktur kunne observeres un-
der SEM. Forholdet mellem proteinerne blev dog fundet at have lille indvirkning på det
protein, der blev udskilt med vallen.
Afslutningsvis kan det konkluderes at det ikke kun var muligt at inkoorporeret mælke pro-
teiner i en plantebaseret matrix, men det forbedrede også teksturparametrene for de pro-
ducerede osteprøver uden at det øgede udskillelsen af protein med vallen drastisk.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Ina Rud Folmer, MSc Foodtechnology, DTU
I would like to first of all express gratitute to all of my supervisors. To Claus Heiner Bang-
Berthelsen for introducing me to this project, to Lilia Ahrné for hosting me at IDT at KU
and making me feel welcome and to both of them for including me in REPLANTED AND
HYCHEESE, giving me the chance to network. I would also like to give a special thanks to
Blandine Genet for taking me on in her PhD project and for keeping me company on this
journey. Thanks for answering my never ending questions and for many good discussions.
I would also like to thank José Bonilla and Mathias Porsmose Clausen for hosting me for
a few days at SDU and for all their help and assistance on confocal microsopy. Similarly,
I would like to thank Marie Karen Tracy Hong Lin for her assistance at Nanolab, DTU.
To Gabrielle D’Oria, thank you for your helpful insights in rheological measurements of
gels and for some good discussions on the material.
To all the members of the Institute of Dairy Technology at KU, thank you for making me
feel welcome, for keeping me company and making long lab days fun and entertaining.
Likewise a thank you to the members of the Research Group for Microbial Biotechnology
and Biorefining, thank you for also making me feel welcome although my time there was
limited.
Lastly, a special thank you to Anton Fischer-Nielsen. I could not have finished this thesis
without your support and understanding and your helpful insights on Python program-
ming.
v
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations & Nomenclature
Abbreviations
CCP
Calcium Phosphate
CI
Confidence Interval
CLD
Compact Letter Display
CSV
Critical Strain Value
FDM
Fat per Dry Matter
GDL
Glucono Delta-Lactone
GHG
Green House Gasses
GWP Global Warming Potential
HSD
Honestly Significant Difference
HW
Hunter Whiteness
LAB
Lactic Acid Bacteria
LAOS Large Amplitude Oscillatory Shear
LVR
Linear Viscoelastic region
MCI
Micellar Casein Isolate
o/w
Oil in Water
PDO
Protected Designation of Origin
pI
Isoelectric Point
PPI
Pea Protein Isolate
SAOS Small Amplitude Oscillatory Shear
SD
Standard Deviation
SDS-PAGE Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate–PolyAcrylamide Gel Electrophoresis
SE
Secondary Electron
SEM
Scanning Electron Microscopy
TPA
Texture Profile Analysis
UF
Ultrafiltration
WD
Working Distance
vi
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
Y ieldc Yield of Cheese
Y ieldw Yield of whey
G’
Storage Modulus
G”
Loss Modulus
MCI
Sample with only MCI protein
MCI70 Sample with 0.7 MCI / 0.3 PPI protein
PPI
Sample with only PPI protein
PPI70 Sample with 0.3 MCI / 0.7 PPI protein
PPIMCI Sample with 0.5 MCI / 0.5 PPI protein
Span Span factor indicating the width of the droplet size distribution.
vii
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract in Danish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Characteristics of Salad and Feta Cheese . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Manufacturing Process: Traditional and Modern
. . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Milk Proteins and their Gelling Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.1
Coagulation of Micellar Casein; Rennet and Acid Induced . . . . . .
5
1.3
Pea Proteins and their Gelling Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.1
Extraction Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.2
Gelling Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Plant-based Ingredients in Cheese alternatives and Cheese Hybrids . . . .
9
1.5
Hypothesis and Aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2
Materials & Methods
11
2.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Preparation of Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Preparation of Emulsions and Pre-Treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
Preparation of MICROLANT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4
Characterisation of Raw Material, Solutions and Emulsions . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4.1
Protein Concentration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4.2
Droplet Size Distribution of Emulsions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.5
Rheology of Curd Formation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.6
Super Resolution Confocal Microscopy of Curd Structure
. . . . . . . . . . 13
2.6.1
Preparation and Imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.6.2
Image Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.7
Preparation of Cheeses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.8
Compositional Analysis and Characterisation of Cheeses
. . . . . . . . . . 14
2.8.1
Yield . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.8.2
SDS-PAGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.8.3
Nitrogen Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.8.4
Fat and Moisture Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.8.5
Ash Content
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.8.6
Colour Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.9
Texture Profile Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.10 Cryogenic Scanning Electron Microscopic Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.11 Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3
Results and Discussion
19
3.1
Material Characterisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.1.1
Protein Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.1.2
Oil Droplet Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Curd Formation: Gelation Properties and Microstructure . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2.1
Gelling Behaviour
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
viii
==PAGE:11==
3.2.2
Gelling Properties under Small Deformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.2.3
Microscopic Structure of the Curds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.3
Cheese Formation: Composition and Texture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.3.1
Appearance and Yield . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.3.2
Whey
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.3.3
Texture analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.3.4
Microstructure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4
Summary Discussion
39
4.1
Pre-trials and Choice Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.2
Investigation of Curd Formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.3
From Gels to Cheese
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5
Conclusion and Perspectives
43
Bibliography
45
A Rheology of Curd Formation
57
B Heat Treatment
61
C Acidification Profiles
62
D Yield & Compositional Analysis
63
E Analysis of Whey
64
F
ImageJ Macro for Processing of Confocal Images
66
ix
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
In 2024 it is now more clear than ever that global warming is a reality and therefore there
is an immense focus on bringing down our collective impact on the environment and the
climate. This is also clearly seen in the food industry which globally contributes to 19-29%
of anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (Vermeulen et al., 2012). The food
industry is however not only one of the major contributors but also stand to lose the most
as climate change and food security are strongly linked (Gregory et al., 2005). With an
ever growing global population there is as a consequence now a strong need to turn this
around. This has fostered many initiatives such as the report ”Food in the Anthropocene:
the EAT–Lancet Commission on healthy diets from sustainable food systems” by Willett
et al. (2019), which focuses on setting scientific targets for creating a planetary health diet
for a global population. A key factor in the proposed diet seen in Figure 1.1. is that the
majority intake of protein and fat should be plant sourced. This statement is also backed
by the Danish Food Administration in the new official dietary recommendations from 2021
which a.o. is based on research by Lassen et al. (2020) and Trolle et al. (2024). They
also recommend to increase the intake of plant-based proteins, such as legumes, and to
choose plant-based oils. These new dietary recommendations open the market to a new
and emerging consumer group of flexitarians that although still consuming animal based
products in their diet seek to decrease their intake and therefore are more open to try
plant-based alternatives.
Figure 1.1: Planetary Health Diet. From EAT-Lancet Report (Willett et al., 2019).
One place where such plant alternatives could be introduced is in the dairy sector, which
account for 4.0% of global GHG emissions and includes products of a wide range, such
as plain milk and cheese. In recent years we have seen a success in the introduction
of plant-based milk alternatives, with an increasing selection in the supermarkets and
1
==PAGE:14==
many cafés also adopting the practice. However, plant substitutions in dairy foods is not
a new thing as hybrid products such as butter spread has been widely adopted for many
years. The incorporation of plant-based ingredients in the cheese market has though
been less successful. Although more and more plant-based products are available in the
stores (Aschemann-Witzel et al., 2021) consumer studies are not as optimistic, stating
that plant-based cheese has not yet achieved the taste and texture of real cheese (Eu-
romonitor, 2020). This is backed by consumer studies from Landbrug & Fødevarer where
it was found that 68% of Danes think that dairy based cheese is tastier than plant-based
(Landbrug & Fødevarer, 2024) while 86% at the same time state that the taste is their
main reason for purchasing cheese (Landbrug & Fødevarer, 2023). Further the studies
showed that the danish consumers also found the plant-based cheeses more unnatural
and doubted if they were as nutritionally healthy (Landbrug & Fødevarer, 2023).
To combat this problem one suggested route to go is to follow the previously successful
hybrid butter (Panchal & Bhandari, 2020) with a hybrid cheese. Making a hybrid prod-
uct offers the opportunity of seamlessly combining animal and plant-based ingredients to
replicate familiar products but with lower carbon footprint by bringing the amazing proper-
ties of casein micelles such as calcium delivery and taste together with more sustainable
ingredients. The cheese industry (Thise) is ripe for this hybrid disruption and hopes that
this could break the often lack of sensorial and nutritional value seen in the current plant-
based alternatives.
This master thesis originates from the MFF granted project, SusCheese, which aims to
accelerate the development of more sustainable cheeses with a blend of milk and plant
components targeting the flexitarian preferences. In the thesis the use of plant-based
ingredients such as pea protein and rapeseed oil mixed with conventional dairy ingredients
will be investigated for the purpose of producing a fresh feta type cheese. The project will
focus on optimizing and investigating the textural properties of these hybrid products and
seek to find a basis for creating an innovative sustainable process for achieving a hybrid
product with a texture similar to a commercial dairy feta cheese.
1.1
Characteristics of Salad and Feta Cheese
Feta is a white soft cheese originating from Greece and dates back to the Homeric times. It
has a salty and slightly acidic taste and is traditionally made using sheep’s milk, however
some varieties might include up to 20-30% goat’s milk which gives the cheese a hard
texture and a stronger flavour (Anifantakis, 1996). Sheep’s milk generally has a higher
fat and protein content than cow’s milk with fat composition varying between 7-9 w/w-%
and total protein composition of 4-5 w/w-% (Anifantakis, 1996) compared to approximately
4.5% fat and 3.5% protein in cow’s milk.
1.1.1
Manufacturing Process: Traditional and Modern
Feta is produced using pasteurized standardized sheep’s milk (or mixture of sheep’- and
goat’s milk) with a casein to fat ratio of 0.7-0.8 (Anifantakis, 1996; Litopoulou-Tzanetaki,
2007) and a pH >6.5 (Özer, 1999). The milk is cooled to 32°C, whereafter rennet is added
and the milk is inoculated with a starter culture containing a mix of lactic acid bacteria (LAB)
(Litopoulou-Tzanetaki, 2007) as shown in Figure 1.2. Rennet is a coagulating agent that
breaks down the casein molecules in the milk allowing them to aggregate and form a gel
network (Lucey, 2014). This process is traditionally dubbed curd formation. After this
coagulum is formed it is cut into smaller cubes, that are left to stand for 5-10 minutes to
increase cohesion. The curds are then transferred into moulds to drain off excess whey
with little or no weight at 14-16°C. The blocks are then dry salted to form a skin on the
exposed surface and afterwards placed in a brine solution of 6-8% NaCl where they are
2
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.2: Example of a flowchart of a feta cheese production.(Modified from Geronikou
et al. (2020))
3
==PAGE:16==
matured for at least 2 months traditionally. During the maturation period the starter culture
will ferment the cheese by digestion of the lactose present to a.o. lactic acid until a pH
of 4.5 is reached (Özer, 1999). During maturation the starter culture microbiome will also
release proteolytic enzyme that affect the flavour of the cheese (Nega & Moatsou, 2012).
Although traditional feta is still produced today in the mountainous regions of Greece,
many new alternatives are also present in the market. These products are very similar,
but as Feta has been registered as a protected designation of origin (PDO) since 2002
(European Commission, 2002) these are instead often labelled as ’salad cheese’. They
are also often produced from cow’s milk instead of sheep or goat’s milk and therefore
have a milder flavour profile. In recent years to accommodate the large demand for brined
cheeses in the market several technologies have been developed for mechanization of the
manufacturing process. One of the most prominent advances is the use of ultra filtrated
(UF) milk which can be used for the production of cast or structured salad cheese (El Soda
& Abd El-Salam, 2002). In the case of cast salad cheese the cow’s milk is concentrated
fivefold (approx. 17.5% protein) after pasteurization and homogenization. The UF-treated
milk is then added to cans along with starter culture and rennet to induce coagulation. The
rest of the manufacturing process, including coagulation, curd cutting, salt brining and
draining of whey, is then done directly in the packaging as the drained whey becomes the
salt brine.
1.1.2
Properties
Feta is a fresh cheese with a characteristic white colour from the sheep and goat’s milk
(Anifantakis, 1996). Besides the colour one of the properties associated with feta cheese,
is crumbliness, allowing the cheese to break down easily into small irregular shaped par-
ticles (Fox et al., 2017; Gunasekaran & Ak, 2002). This is particularly useful when the
cheese is used in salads and therefore feta cheeses are typically brittle. Furthermore the
cheese has a characteristic salty and acidic taste from the low pH of the cheese and salty
brine it is stored in (Fox et al., 2017).
The chemical composition of 19 commercial feta cheeses was studied by Nega and Moat-
sou (2012). The average values found in this study is presented in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1: Compositional analyis of commercial feta (n=19). Adopted from Nega and
Moatsou (2012). All values are in the unit w/w-%. FDM = fat composition of dry matter
weight.
Moisture
Fat
FDM
Protein
Ash
Salt
pH
Feta cheese
53.21±4.20
25.77±2.61
55.09±2.91
17.55±1.88
3.20±0.38
2.34±0.68
4.68±0.35
1.2
Milk Proteins and their Gelling Properties
Normal bovine milk contains around 3.5% protein. The proteins in milk can be fractioned
into two groups defined by their isoelectric point (pI). Approximately 80% of the proteins
precipitate out of solution at pH 4.6 and are phosphoproteins labelled as caseins. The rest
of the proteins that remain soluble are mostly referred to as non-casein nitrogen or whey,
which a.o. includes the protein β-lactoglobulin. The liquid expelled through syneresis
during cheese production, has traditionally been called by the same name. For this thesis
it is most interesting to look at the properties of casein proteins as these remain in the
cheese.
Casein proteins are small, amphipathic and randomly coiled structures (O’Regan et al.,
4
==PAGE:17==
2009). About 95% of the casein proteins in milk are organized in casein micelles, which
are heterogeneous spherical aggregates. The aggregastes contain four individual casein
proteins known as αs1-casein, αs2-casein, β-casein, and κ-casein and are clustered in
smaller submicelles of α- and β-caseins surrounded by κ-casein. The micelles further con-
tain around 6% colloidal calcium phosphate (CCP) on a dry matter basis, which is thought
to be what holds the micelles together (Gaucheron, 2005). In Figure 1.3 a representative
drawing of the casein micelle is seen with grey dots representing calcium phosphate in
the cell. The influence of physico-chemical conditions on the stability of the casein micelle
was studied by Gaucheron (2005) in relation to the mineral distribution. In Figure 1.3 a
few of the conclusions from the study have been included, showing the effect of acid ad-
dition, heat treatment, cooling and addition of chelants. It can be highlighted that heat
treatment of the casein micelles at 90°C for several minutes results in a decrease of solu-
bilized calcium which impacts rennet activity and thereby gelation of milk caseins as later
described.
Figure 1.3: Casein micelle. Adapted from Lima Nascimento et al. (2023) and Gaucheron
(2005). Red: α-casein, Blue: β-casein, Yellow: κ-casein, Dark dots: calcium phosphate.
1.2.1
Coagulation of Micellar Casein; Rennet and Acid Induced
As previously described when producing feta cheese both an enzymatic and acidification
treatment are used for gelation. Gelated milk can essentially be seen as a hydro colloidal
gel (Fang et al., 2021; O’Regan et al., 2009) due to the large water content. However, the
gels also contain fat, in large amounts in some cases, which is stabilized within the gel as
an emulsion which can greatly affect the textural properties of the gels (Dickinson, 1994).
This is true both for acid and enzyme induced gels and in this case the gels can also be
classified as emulsion gels.
Rennet induced gels are created by the addition of an enzyme with highly specific milk-
clotting activity. Traditionally rennet was sourced from the fourth stomach of calves that
contained the enzyme Chymosin. Chymosin clots milk by cleaving the Phe105Met-Ala
bond in the κ-casein molecule thereby splitting the caseinomacropeptide from the casein
micelles, inducing clotting (Haertlé, 2016). Today substitutes from microbial sources exist,
such as Microlant Classic 1050 NB by Chr. Hansen. Microlant is a murcorpepsin which
is produced by fermentation on vegetable substrate using the fungus Rhizomucor miehei.
The product contains milk-clotting enzymes which are active on the κ-casein in a similar
way as traditional Chymosin but has less specific proteolitic acitivity as specified by Chr.
Hansen. The process of rennet coagulation may be split into two steps: enzymatic hydrol-
ysis and aggregation although overlapping of the two does occur. Essentially the κ-casein
5
==PAGE:18==
are first cleaved to form para-κ-casein and thereby steric repulsion and negative charge
is lowered making the micelles susceptible to aggregation. First small linear chains of
micelles are formed which then continuously grow until eventually a gel network is formed
with a fractal-like appearance (Lucey, 2002). During the formation of this gel-network a
pressure is built up, which is called ”endogeneous syneresis pressure” (Fang et al., 2021),
which causes syneresis, expelling whey. The microstructure of rennet induced milk gels
can in general be defined as a highly concentrated matrix of a calcium phosphate para-
casein network with an encased fat phase and solvent phase comprised of water and
dissolved solutes entrapped in the matrix (Fox et al., 2017).
Acid induced milk gels are similarly formed by destabilization of the casein micelle but
unlike rennet they are not formed by cleavage of κ-casein. Instead they are formed by
charge neutralization of the micelles leading to reduction of electrostatic repulsion. This
results in aggregation, making the casein micelles form chains and clusters that are linked
together to form a larger network (Lucey, 2014). In comparison to the microstructure of
rennet induced gels the network is here comprised of casein instead of calcium phosphate
para-casein as the low pH results in solubilisation of colloidal calcium phosphate that is
drained off with the whey (Fox et al., 2017).
Mixed rennet and acid induced gels have been studied less, however as described by
Lucey (2014) some studies have shown that the final storage modulus of mixed gels are
higher than those of only acid induced gels. Further it has also been observed that micelle
fusion was faster compared to only acid induced gels. The rheological properties and
microstructure of these mixed gels are though complex and can be adjusted by varying
the rennet level and acidification rate.
1.3
Pea Proteins and their Gelling Properties
Pea (Pisum sativum) is part of the legume family and has in recent years gained inter-
est as an alternative protein source because of it’s high protein content (20-25%) with
an isoelectric point (pI) around pH 4-5, similar to that of caseins. Besides protein, pea
also has a high starch content (24-49%) and a large content of total fiber (60-65%) (Shan-
thakumar et al., 2022). The two major protein groups in pea are globulins and albumins,
representing 70-80% and 10-20% of the total protein as seen in Table 1.2. Albumins are
a heterogeneous group of proteins, that are considered water-soluble and are usually rich
in the essential amino acids. Globulins on the other hand are large salt-soluble storage
proteins and can be further split into groups of legumin and vicilin proteins and minor
amounts of convicillin (Farshi et al., 2024).
Table 1.2: Protein groups found in Pea Protein
Family
Species
Albumins
Globulins
Glutelins
Prolamins
Pulses
Pea
10-20%
70-80%
3-4%
4-5%
Peas is though not only popular due to their high protein content but also because they
contain all the essential amino acids, although deficient in sulfur-containing amino acids
(Shanthakumar et al., 2022). Pea sourced proteins further have great availability and are
cost effective. This all makes them a great candidate for substitution of milk proteins in
hybrid cheese.
However to replace a significant portion of the milk proteins, it is also important that the
6
==PAGE:19==
pea protein has some functional properties, such as solubility, emulsifying properties and
the ability to form soft gels. In general these properties look promising for pea protein,
even so multiple studies have shown that they are greatly dependent on the extraction
process used to isolate the proteins (Shanthakumar et al., 2022; Tanger et al., 2020).
1.3.1
Extraction Methods
Pea proteins are available as flours but often it is required to have a higher protein con-
centration and therefore pea protein concentrates and isolates are available. Isolates
typically have higher protein content compared to concentrates, however there is no set
limit of classification. To increase the protein concentration the pea protein undergoes an
extraction process that requires several techniques to maximize the yield. These can in-
clude but are not exclusive to wet extraction (under alkaline conditions), dry fractionation,
salt extraction, micellization and mild fractionation, and prior to this the pea have to go
through pre-treatment. This often leads the protein in the commercially available isolates
and concentrates to be highly aggregated, which has a great impact on the solubility of
the proteins. This was studied by Tanger et al. (2020) by comparing different laboratory
extraction methods with a commercially available product. Here it was seen that not only
did the solubility of the proteins differ between each extraction method but the influence
of different treatments (pH, salt concentration etc.) also affected the protein isolates dif-
ferently. Thus indicating that the extraction method influences the functional properties
of the pea proteins greatly. This was also backed by a study by Shanthakumar et al.
(2022), which showed that none of the extraction methods can be considered the best
for all applications, however it was found that alkaline extraction achieves high solubility
and high native protein product, thus making this more favourable for texture dependent
applications. The extraction method of commercially available isolates or concentrates is
though not always disclosed by the manufacturer and therefore the same is the case in
many research papers. This in general complicates further research on applications of
pea proteins.
1.3.2
Gelling Properties
Multiple studies have already investigated the gelling properties of pea protein. Many
of them focus on heat induced gelation (Janssen et al., 2024; Ren et al., 2024; Sun &
Arntfield, 2012; Wang et al., 2023) however some have also investigated cold set acid
induced gelation (Chihi et al., 2018; Masiá et al., 2022; Mession et al., 2017; Oliveira
et al., 2022; Xia et al., 2024). With the aim of gelling the pea proteins together with the
milk proteins for a feta type cheese product, acid induced gelation of the pea proteins is
most interesting. A general consensus from the studies is that cold gelation of pea protein
requires a two-step process, where protein denaturation and exposure of the hydrophobic
residues is nessecary to induce gelation by lowering of pH. Most of the studies agree that
this is best done by heat treatment of the proteins prior to gelation, however there is no
consensus on exact temperature and time required. From the study by Xia et al. (2024)
95°C is used for 30 minutes while in the study by Oliveira et al. (2022) only 85°C for 5
min was used and in the study by Masiá et al. (2022) instead it was 95°C for 5 min. It
is possible that the temperature and time span of this heat treatment could influence the
final gel strength. However, as far as the author is aware by the time of this thesis no
such study has been published. After the heat treatment the formed aggregates are then
linked to larger protein network by lowering the pH toward the pI of the proteins using acid
(Shanthakumar et al., 2022).
7
==PAGE:20==
Table 1.3: Summary of present studies investigating plant-based and hybrid cheese.
Ref.
Cheese
Type
Material
Key findings
Masiá et al. (2022)
NA
Plant
Pea
PPI emulsions were stable after 7h, fermentation time between 5.5 and 7h. Higher oil
content led to weaker gels, lower elastic modulus but no change in hardness over 7
days. Optimal matrix: 10% pea protein & 10% olive oil.
Masiá et al. (2023)
NA
Plant
Pea
The porosity of the protein networks in the pea gels decreased in the presence of trans
glutaminase (TG), the storage modulus increased and the textural characteristics were
significantly improved, resulting in harder and more springy gels.
Dobson and Marangoni (2023)
NA
Plant
Waxy starch, plant-protein,
coconut oil
18% plant protein, waxy starch enhance existing viscoelastic properties of plant-based
cheese.
Grasso et al. (2023)
NA
Plant
Chickpea,
Zein,
tapioca
starch, lecithin
Plant protein changed acidification profile, fortification with calcium led to decreased
meltability but increased stretching properties. In general calcium fortification affect
texture significantly.
Jeewanthi et al. (2015)
Mozzerella
Hybrid
Soy milk and cow’s milk
10-20% soy milk is acceptable. Higher decreases meltability.
Lee et al. (2015)
Yoghurt
cheese
Hybrid
Ultrafiltrated
cow’s
milk
and soy milk
Higher protein and lower fat with <20% soy milk; no significant effect on rheology.
Atia et al. (2004)
Cheddar
Hybrid
Soy protein isolate & cow’s
milk
Up to 7% soy protein, no effect on taste, microstructure less compact with soy.
Rani and Verma (1995)
Cheddar
Hybrid
Cow’s milk and soya milk
Cow’s milk can be replaced with <15% soy milk without impairing sensory qualities.
Rinaldoni et al. (2014)
Soft cheese
Hybrid
Cow’s milk and soy bean
proteins
5-15g/L soy protein to milk did not impact sensory experience too strongly.
K. F. Grasberger et al. (2021)
Cream
cheese
Hybrid
Pea protein, lupin protein,
oats protein, whey protein
and skim milk
All emulsion were stable, viscosity changed with protein source.
Khiabanian et al. (2022)
Feta
Hybrid
Soy protein isolate and milk
protein concentrate
Soy protein could be a good substitution for milk protein at a 2–3% concentration without
negative effects.
Moradi et al. (2021)
Feta
Hybrid
Cow’s milk and lentil milk
Too much lentil protein (>10%) disrupts the structure. Linulin could be successfully be
used as fat replacer.
Khiabanian et al. (2020)
Feta
Hybrid
Milk
protein
concentrate
and pea protein isolate
All properties of the cheeses were influenced by different levels of PPI. The use of high
concentrations of PPI resulted in a more open protein network, softer structure and
decreasing the storage and loss moduli in the cheeses.
Sipahioglu et al. (1999)
Feta
Hybrid
Cow’s milk, tapioca starch
and lecithin
The combination of modified tapioca starch and lecithin improved flavor, texture and
overall acceptability of reduced-fat and low-fat Feta cheeses.
8
==PAGE:21==
1.4
Plant-based Ingredients in Cheese alternatives and
Cheese Hybrids
Due to the aforementioned interest in more sustainable alternatives, there has been an
increase in research on plant-based alternative cheese and also a rising interest in hybrid
matrices and hybrid cheese. Recently two separate review papers were published by
Genet et al. (2023) and Lima Nascimento et al. (2023) focusing on hybrid food systems
of milk and plant proteins. The review by Genet et al. (2023) focuses specifically on hy-
brid cheeses, in where they define hybrid cheese as a cheese product made from milk
and plant-based ingredients with both ingredients retained in the final product in various
concentrations. The review by Lima Nascimento et al. (2023) does not include a defi-
nition like this as such, but focuses specifically of products which include both milk and
plant-based proteins as opposed to just ingredients. A common factor in both reviews is
though the discussion of benefits and disadvantages of hybrid cheese products. One of
the major advantages as previously touched upon is plant-based ingredients association
with low cost and low green house gas production (Clune et al., 2017) and when compar-
ing this to life cycle assessments of cheese (Finnegan et al., 2018) showing that 79-95%
of the total global warming potential (GWP) comes from the raw milk while production of
the cheese only accounts for 2-18%, then it is clear that some substitution could make
a major impact. Further, many researchers have also shown that substitution of animal
based protein with plant-based had a positive nutritional and health wise outcome. This
a.o. included a reduced glycemic index, reduced incidence of cardiovascular diseases,
obesity and metabolic syndromes (Budhathoki et al., 2019; Lonnie & Johnstone, 2020;
Qian et al., 2019). Despite the obvious advantages of using plant proteins some major
drawbacks can also be found. Although positive nutritional benefits have been shown for
plant-based proteins, using them as substitutes can also lead to negative health effects
as they do not provide the same nutritional properties as dairy ingredients. This is be-
cause dairy proteins are important sources of not only macronutrients (proteins and fat)
but also of micronutrients such as calcium, vitamin B2, B12, and D, and iodine (Michel
et al., 2021) which are lacking in the plant-based counterparts. The biggest issue, and
largest drawback, of using plant-based protein is though the associated sensory issues
as previously mentioned. For legume based alternatives a major sensory issues is the
beany flavour and grittiness of mouthfeel, however recent studies have shown that these
might be alleviated by the use of processing techniques and fermentation (Short et al.,
2021) and perhaps this could also be helped by mixing the plant-based ingredients with
traditional dairy ingredients.
To implement these products into diets of the consumers, it is though important to also
understand the consumers wants and needs. In a recent study by Drigon et al. (2023)
on French consumers’ attitudes towards mixed dairy and plan-based food products found
three types of consumers: First group have a mainly plant-based diet and negative con-
notations to milk, whereas the second group is highly traditional and strongly attached to
milk and does not consider environmental impact in their diet choice. The last group is
the most interesting for the development of hybrid cheese, as they label them self as om-
niwores but make altruistic and self-centered choices, and are more likely to change their
diet for a lower caloric choice or a product with less environmental impact. They are still
though attached to the emotional properties of traditional dairy which could be conserved
in hybrid products.
In the review paper by Genet et al. (2023) some studies are mentioned which have worked
on hybrid matrices and cheese. In Table 1.3 some of these studies are shown along side
other papers not mentioned in the review. From the literature review on the present stud-
9
==PAGE:22==
ies of hybrid matrices some important points can be highlighted. First of all proteins are
well known to be useful tools in food formulation and plays major roles in both emulsifi-
cation, foaming and gelling, which are all important aspects of cheese making. However,
not all proteins are made equally and milk and plant proteins have different composition
and structure, as previously described, which means they are not interchangeable. This
might be the reason why the present studies overall show a low threshold for how much
dairy protein can be replaced by plant proteins. Most of them report a negative impact
at concentrations >15% and only a few present results with concentrations up tom 20%.
Above this quantity they do not only report off-flavours and negative sensory experiences
but also collapse of structure and texture. In fact texture proves to be almost as equal an
issue as off-flavours when considering high plant-based fraction hybrids. From the studies
it was seen that the plant-to-dairy ratio influence significantly a.o. the onset gelling temper-
ature, decreasing with increasing plant protein fraction, increased acidification rate with
increasing plant proteins, impact on rheological properties, especially but not limited to
storage modulus and gel stiffness. Further some studies also observed that the two pro-
teins produced independent gel networks. It is though tough to draw any set conclusions
as this all also depends on the plant ingredients chosen and the processing conditions,
1.5
Hypothesis and Aim
This thesis will focus on textural challenges seen in previous studies and try to obtain a
higher fraction of plant-based ingredients in the hybrid matrix while still ensuring satisfac-
tory textural properties. At least the thesis aims to build an understanding on how the
textural properties are affected by higher fractions of plant-based ingredients by investi-
gating both the gelation properties of the hybrid matrices and the final textural properties.
These challenges will be explored through the use of PPI and MCI proteins and by incoor-
poration of rapeseed oil.
The hypotheis of the thesis is that creating a hybrid cheese product by implementation
of milk proteins can improve the textural properties of an otherwise plant-based cheese
made using pea protein. Further, it is expected that it is possible to create a co-gelation
network that retains both the pea and milk proteins with little proteins being expelled with
the whey. In addition, the hypothesis is that a change of protein matrix, from milk to plant-
based, will impact the gelation behaviour of the traditional treatments used for feta cheese
making. It is here expected that the plant-based proteins react well to the acidification
treatment while only the milk proteins are expected to react to renneting. The difference
is expected to also be reflected in the mixed matrices, however the hypothesis is still
that it is possible to get co-gelation of the two protein groups and that incorporation of
milk proteins will improve the textural properties in comparison to a 100% plant based
product.
10
==PAGE:23==
2
Materials & Methods
2.1
Materials
Pea protein isolate (PPI) (batch no. 00054-60511, protein 69.80%) was obtained from
Kerry Ingredients & Flavour (Kerry, Ireland) and micellar casein isolate (MCI) (Lacpro-
dan MicelPure, protein 86.7 % (Nx6.38)) was obtained from Arla Foods Ingredients (Arla
Foods Ingredients Group P/S, Viby, Denmark).
For all analytical analysis, ultra pure water, Milli-Q, (Synergy UV System, Merck Life Sci-
ence, Denmark) was used, while the the calcium chloride (CaCl2) solution was of analyt-
ical grade manufactured by VWR (Leuven, Belgium).
For acid induced gelation glucono delta-lactone (GDL) supplied from Sigma-Aldrich (St.
Louis, USA) was used while for renneting MICROLANT Classic 1050 NB (Chr. Hansen,
Hørsholm, Denmark) was used. The rapeseed oil was purchased from Coop (produced
by EOL Polska Sp. z.o.c, Polen)
2.2
Preparation of Solutions
Solutions of MCI and PPI were prepared from the powders. A protein concentration of
10 w/w-% was obtained by weighing out respectively 65.36 and 72.78 g seperately and
topping each up with demineralized water to a total weight of 500g. The solutions were
then mixed using a magnetic stirrer until a visually homogenous dispersion was created.
They were then kept at 4°C overnight under constant stir to rehydrate and solubilize the
powders. The solutions were afterwards stored for a maximum of 2 days. Before use the
solutions were stirred vigorously to ensure an even dispersion.
2.3
Preparation of Emulsions and Pre-Treatment
From the solutions five different emulsions were prepared following the ratios shown in
figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Ratios of PPI and MCI used to make the mixed emulsions stated in w/w-%.
The emulsions were prepared with a 15 w/w-% concentration of rapeseed oil. First 30
g of rapeseed oil was added and solutions were then weighed out in the ratios to give a
total of 200g. The amount of fat in the emulsions were decided based on the general fat
content of feta (25%, see subsection 1.1.2) and preliminary tests showing the amount of
liquid that the curds expel through syneresis. Although not technically correct this liquid
will throughout this report be labelled as whey.
The emulsions were then homogenized using a high shear laboratory mixer (Model L5M,
Silverson Machines, UK) with an emulsor screen attached at maximum speed (7600 -
11
==PAGE:24==
8300 rpm depending on the viscosity of the mixture) in a 400 mL beaker for a total of 5
min. Afterwards 90 mL of the emulsions in 100 mL blue cap bottle were submerged in
a waterbath at 95°C for 30 min inspired by Xia et al. (2024). The pre-treatment was per-
formed as multiple studies (see subsection 1.3.2) has shown that it is required to heat-treat
pea protein prior to gelation, which also was confirmed by pre-liminary testing of different
heat treatments including no heat treatment. The heat profile of the heat treatment can
be seen in Appendix B, Figure B.1.
After pre-treatment the emulsions were cooled down to 37°C in an ice bath and then
500 µL of 1M CaCl2 was added to the emulsions, followed by 1 min of stirring to evenly
distribute the calcium. Calcium is added to increase the enzyme activity of MICROLANT
and the amount was determined based on preliminary coagulation tests.
2.3.1
Preparation of MICROLANT
MICROLANT was prepared as described by the producer by diluting it 1:10 in tap water
which had been adjusted to pH 6.3 using HCL/NaOH.
2.4
Characterisation of Raw Material, Solutions and
Emulsions
2.4.1
Protein Concentration
The protein concentration of all samples was determined using the DUMAS combustion
method in an NRapid Max Exceed instrument (Elementar, Germany). To convert the
nitrogen content measured in the samples N-factors of respectively 5.36 and 6.15 for PPI
and MCI were used according to Mariotti et al. (2008). For the mixed matrices (containing
both PPI and MCI) the factor was estimated according to the ratio of the mixes.
2.4.2
Droplet Size Distribution of Emulsions
Lastly the droplet size distribution was investigated for the emulsions by laser diffraction
using a Mastersizer 3000 instrument (Malvern Instruments, UK). The emulsions were
tested after heat treatment as described in section 2.3. The emulsions were kept at 40
°C after heat treatment until they were analysed. Samples were added to a Hydro-MV
automatic wet dispersion unit gradually to a obscuration of approx. 10%. To analyse the
droplet size of the emulsion the refractive index of rapeseed oil, 1.469, was used, while
the refractive index of the dispersant (water) was set to 1.330.
2.5
Rheology of Curd Formation
The gelation behaviour of curd formation for all of the emulsions were tested using in
situ rheological measurements for acid and enzyme treatment separately. The measure-
ments were performed using a Discovery HR-2 Rheometer (TA Instruments, New Castle,
UK) with a sandblasted concentric cylinder geometry (S/N 113524, TA). During the mea-
surements the temperature was controlled using a Peltier element and a water circulation
system. Emulsions were prepared as described in section 2.3, and after the addition of
calcium chloride, either 1.5 w/w-
During the rheological measurements pH was simultaneously recorded of the leftover
sample in a water bath set to give a temperature of 37°C in the sample. This was done
using a SevenDirect SD23 (Mettler Toledo, Singapore) recording pH meter with an Inlab
Expert Pro-ISM probe attached.
The following rheological measurements were made for each of the gels: (Xia et al., 2022,
2024)
12
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.2: Flowchart of curd formation preparation for rheological tests
• Oscillation time sweep, 0.1% strain, 1.0 Hz frequency, 37°C, no soak time
• Oscillation temperature ramp, 0.1% strain, 1.0 Hz, 1.0 °C/min, start temperature:
37°C, end temperature: 18°C
• Oscillation frequency sweep, 18°C, 0.1% strain, frequency from 100.0 Hz to 0.01
Hz
• Oscillation amplitude strain sweep, 18°C, strain from 0.01% to 10000%
For each sample this was repeated three times.
2.6
Super Resolution Confocal Microscopy of Curd Structure
2.6.1
Preparation and Imaging
Super resolution confocal microscopy was used to investigate the protein network and
orientation around the fat globules in the formed curds of the five different emulsions from
the two treatments (Bonilla & Clausen, 2022; K. F. Grasberger et al., 2021; Masiá et al.,
2022, 2023; Xia et al., 2022, 2024).
For this an IX38 Olympus microscope was used with a pulsed stimulated emission deple-
tion (STED) laser at 775 nm built onto. This allowed for 2-colour confocal imaging.
To visualise the gel structure both the proteins and the fat was dyed. For protein visu-
alisation Abberior STAR RED was used (Abberior, USA). For contrast Nile RED (Sigma
Aldrich, USA) was used to dye the fat droplets.
The solutions were prepared as previously described in section 2.2. Then 2 mg/ 10 mL
of Nile Red was added to the rapeseed oil and mixed before the emulsions were created.
The emulsions were prepared similarly as described in section 2.3. However as a smaller
working volume of 20 mL was required the emulsions were prepared in 50 mL falcon tubes.
They were then homogenized using a T25 digital Ultra Turrax (IKA-Werke GmbH & Co.
KG, Staufen, Germany) with a S 25N - 10G probe. The emulsions were homogenized
at 25000 rpm for 5 min. Afterwards they were transferred to 50 mL blue cap bottles
13
==PAGE:26==
and heat treated in a waterbath at 95°C for 30 min. A temperature profile of the heat
treatment can be found in Appendix B, Figure B.1. Following this 2 mL of each emulsion
was transferred to eppendorfs. An equivalent of 7.14 mM CaCl2 and 0.1% of Abberiror
Star Red 1 ng/mL solutions was added and the emulsions were vortexed to mix. Then 50
IMCU/L of Microlant or 1.5% of GDL was added after which the emulsions were vortexed
for 1 min. 300 µL of the emulsions were then transferred into a µ-Slide 8 well with glass
bottom which is suitable for confocal microscopy. The emulsions were then covered and
left to gel for 2h at 37°C after which they were imaged.
For each gel a total of three overview images were taken, and from each of these three
additional zoomed in images were obtained. Both the overviews and the zoomed images
were of a set standard size. Three dimensional images were also obtained, which are not
shown in this report.
2.6.2
Image Processing
The images were processed using the software ImageJ with the Bio-Format add-on (Schin-
delin et al., 2012; Schneider et al., 2012). All images were contrast adjusted and the two
channels from the seperate dyes were assigned a colour. Red for protein (Abberior STAR
RED) and yellow for fat (Nile Red). The images were then merged and overlayed to cre-
ate a finale composite. To do this automated on all images a macro for the software was
created (see Appendix F). For images that needed extra correction this was done after
the automated process.
2.7
Preparation of Cheeses
For cheese preparation emulsions were prepared as previously described in section 2.3
in dublicates. Two times 70 g of each pre-treated emulsion was weighed out in a 100 mL
beaker resulting in four replicates of each sample in total. 50 IMCU/L of microlant was
first added and samples were stirred at vortex for 1 min. The samples were then left for 5
min before addition of GDL, to mimic the lag phase which would be observed with lactic
acid bacteria in the starte culture. Then 1.5 w/w-
After this the curds were cut and recovered in cylindrical cheese moulds, D: 5 cm H:
5 cm purchased from hjemmeproduktion.dk (Hygild, Ejstrupholm, Denmark). The whey
expelled from the cheeses was collected below the moulds in small containers. First 90g
of weight was added on top to help induce syneresis. After 1h an additional 50g was
added. This equivalates to a final added pressure of 750.19 Pa not accounting for the
pressure created by the weight of the cheese it self.
The small cheese samples were left over night to set at 18°C. After 20h the weight was
removed and the whey was recovered and saved at -20°C for later analysis. The cheeses
were covered in film and stored in the fridge until further analysis.
The whole cheese making process is visualized in a flow chart in Figure 2.3
2.8
Compositional Analysis and Characterisation of Cheeses
2.8.1
Yield
The cheese samples prepared as described in section 2.7 were weighed after removal
from the cheese moulds. The whey that had been collected in the cups beneath the
moulds were likewise also weighed.
Yield is then calculated based on the intial weight of emulsion used, 70g,
Y ieldc = mc
mi
· 100%
Y ieldw = mw
mi
· 100%
(2.1)
14
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.3: Flowchart of the cheese making process
where c indicates respectively the final mass and yield of the cheese and w likewise indi-
cates yield and mass of the whey. mi is the inital weight of the emulsion.
2.8.2
SDS-PAGE
To analyse the protein fractions which are expelled with the whey a Sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, SDS-PAGE, was conducted. Alongside the
whey from the cheeses produced, the profile of the protein solutions were also analyzed
for comparative purposes. Whey samples were chosen randomly among the replicates
from the cheeses. Several gels were made to ensure that the results were comparable.
Commercial 4-12% bis-tris NuPAGE gels (Invitrogen, California, USA) were used in com-
bination with a MES-SDS (20X) stock running buffer from Thermo Scientific (Kandel, Ger-
many). 25 µL 4x LDS sample buffer along with 10 µL 1M Dithiothreitol (DTT) reducing
agent was added to 65 µL of sample diluted by Milli-Q to give a final concentration of
around 1 mg/mL. The samples were then heated for 10 min at 85°C, 350 rpm using a
thermal mixer. 10 µL of sample was loaded in the wells respectively. The gels were run
in a Novex chamber at 100V until all of the samples had left the wells. Novex Sharp Pre-
Stained (Invitrogen, California, USA) protein standard, 3.5 to 260 kDa, was added to the
first and last well. Afterwards the gel was run at 150 V until the samples reached about 1
cm from the bottom.
The gel was rinsed after running and stained overnight on a rocking table using 1 mL
Coomassie Brilliant Blue + 100 mL equilibration buffer (2 mL concentrated phosphoric
acid + 15 g ammonium sulfate + 18 mL 96% Ethanol + 80 mL Milli-Q water). The next day
15
==PAGE:28==
the gel was de-stained similarly on a rocking table for 2h using Milli-Q water. Afterwards
the gel was scanned using a Epson Perfection V850 Pro scanner (Japan) in combination
with the SilverFast 8 software.
2.8.3
Nitrogen Content
The protein content of all the cheeses and collected whey was analysed using the same
DUMAS method as described in 2.4.1. However, as the protein ratio in this case was not
known it was only possible to determine the total Nitrogen content. An estimate of the
protein content is though made based on the relative N-factor of the emulsions used to
make the cheese calculated from the N-factors for MCI (6.15) and PPI (5.36).
For the whey the calculated protein concentrations were further multiplied by the yield of
whey to obtain a more accurate representation of mass of protein expelled in the whey.
This decision was made as the yield of whey was seen to vary a lot between the different
cheese samples.
2.8.4
Fat and Moisture Content
Fat and moisture content of the cheeses were measured using a SMART 6 moisture and
solids analyzer paired with an ORACLE NMR rapid fat analyzer (CEM, USA). Approx-
imately 2 g of each of the cheeses were weighed out and dried to reach a maximum
temperature of 105°C with an average drying time of 4 min 26 sec (± 63 sec) in the mois-
ture and solids analyzer. The samples were then transferred to the fat analyzer where
fat content was measured according to manufacturers instructions. Using this method
w/w-% of fat, moisture and total solids can be obtained.
2.8.5
Ash Content
The ash content was measured of the cheese samples using a muffle furnace oven
(Nabertherm, Germany). Approximately 2 g of each sample produced was weighed out in
crucibles. These were then transferred to the furnace and heated with a temperature ramp
of 1°C/min to 500°C. The furnace was then kept at this temperature overnight. Next day
the furnace was cooled to 100°and the crucibles were removed and stored in a desiccator
to cool down. Afterwards the produced ash was weighed.
2.8.6
Colour Analysis
L*a*b (CIELAB) (Luo, 2015) colour space values were measured for each cheese using
the colour guide 11 mm instrument from BYK-Gardner GmbH (Geretsried, Germany). The
colour was measured with contact to the product insuring no influence of day light. For
all samples the colour was measured a few times as to make sure that the measurement
was reproducible, then one measurement was recorded per sample.
From the recorded colour values, the Hunter whiteness (Zhu et al., 2009) of the cheeses
was calculated as
HW = 100 −
√
(100 −L)2 + a2 + b2
(2.2)
where W is the Hunter Whiteness of the sample, L is the lightness index, and a and b are
the chromaticity of the sample.
2.9
Texture Profile Analysis
To compare the texture properties of the cheeses after draining/pressing a texture pro-
file analysis was performed. Cheeses were prepared as described in section 2.7. The
16
==PAGE:29==
Table 2.1: Texture Profile Analysis (TPA) parameters and how they are deducted by the
software (Friedman et al., 1963; Peleg, 2019; Szczesniak, 1995)
Hardness
Highest peak force measured in the first compression.
Cohesiveness
Area of work during the second compression over the area of work
of the first compression.
Gumminess
Product of hardness and cohesiveness.
Springiness
Ratio of the distance/time of the second compression compared to
the first compression. Speaks of a products recovery to it’s original
height.
Resilience
Area of work of the first compression after peak force is achieved over
the area of work before peak force is achieved.
Adhesiveness
Area of work of the negative peak after first compression.
cheeses were first acclimated to 18°C. Then from the center of each cheese two cylinders
of d: 1.5 cm x h: 2 cm were cut using a core borer.
To perform the texture analysis a TA.XTplusC (Stable Microsystems, United Kingdom)
equipped with a 5 kg loading cell and a P75 compression platen was used. The cheese
cylinders were placed in the center and compressed two times to 40% strain with both
pre-test, test, and post-test speed set to 2.50 mm/s with a 5 s wait time in between each
compression.
From the two peaks a multitude of parameters were deducted by the software as seen in
Table 2.1.
2.10
Cryogenic Scanning Electron Microscopic Imaging
A cryogenic scanning electron microscope was used (cryo-SEM) to investigate the mi-
croscopic structural differences between the cheeses (Ong et al., 2011). A Quanta FEG
200 ESEM and CRYO was used with an Oxford X Max EDS detector. Attached to the
microscope was a CRYO prep chamber for cryogenic freezing and/or sample stabilisation.
Cheeses were prepared as described in section 2.7 and stored in the fridge in closed
containers for a maximum of 2 days before imaging.
From the center of the cheeses a rectangular slice was cut, approx 5x10x1 mm. The slices
were mounted on cryo-sem mounts and rapid frozen by plunging them into a nitrogen slush
under vacuum. The sample was then transferred to a vacuum chamber at -180°C and
fractured using a knife exposing the inside after which it was sublimated at -100°C for 10
min to remove any formed ice crystal. The sample was then sputter coated with platinum
for 60s before it was transferred to the SEM chamber. The samples were then imaged
under high vacuum using a secondary electron (SE) detector at a working distance (WD)
of approx. 10 mm with a 5 kV laser beam.
For each cheese three representative images at 10 000 x magnification and 6 000 x mag-
nification were taken. The images were afterward processed in ImageJ (Schindelin et al.,
2012; Schneider et al., 2012) to improve contrast.
17
==PAGE:30==
2.11
Statistical Analysis
All test measurements were made in at least triplicates, however for cheese production,
four cheeses in total from two batches of emulsions were created for each sample. All
measurements of these were conducted at least once per cheese, creating four replicates
per sample type. For the tests in which the gel inducing treatments (enzyme and acid)
were tested separately analysis of variance in the form of a two-way ANOVA test was
performed. For measurements on the emulsions and cheeses a one-way ANOVA was
instead used paired with a post-hoc Tukey’s HSD test. For all tests a confidence interval
(CI) if 95% was used. The tests were performed in python using the libraries statsmodels
(Seabold & Perktold, 2010), scipy.stats (Virtanen et al., 2020) and compactletterdisplay
(Bhalerao, 2023).
All graphs shown in this thesis were also created in python using the maplotlib library
(Hunter, 2007) alongside the pandas library (McKinney et al., 2010). For all tables values
are given as the mean ± standard deviation (SD).
18
==PAGE:31==
3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Material Characterisation
To better understand the protein ingredients which is used in this study, the ingredients are
characterised by protein content and the emulsion created using the solution is analyzed
for droplet size distribution.
3.1.1
Protein Content
The nitrogen content was measured for the powders and from this an estimate of the pro-
tein content was obtained. Using the same method the protein content was also estimated
for the rehydrated solutions of the powders and finally also for the emulsion. The results
of these tests can be seen in Table 3.1. It is chosen to include this in the thesis to account
for any batch to batch variation there might be in the commercial powders.
For both of the powders it is seen that the protein content is slightly lower than the reported
protein content of both MCI (86.7%) and PPI (69.80%). Especially for MCI a large devi-
ation is observed, which is noteworthy. The values which are reported here have been
used to calculate the amount of powder necessary to obtain a 10 w/w-% solution of each
of the powders. It can be seen from the results that, despite this, the protein content in
the solutions differ slightly from 10 w/w-%, which can be down to measuring errors.
Some error is also visible in the emulsions. By dilution calculation the protein content
should be 8 w/w-% as a result of fat addition, however for all cases it is above and for the
case of MCI it is observed to be closer to 10 w/w-%. This might be due to batch to batch
variation and could be connected to the variation observed between the protein content in
the MCI powder measured here and that stated by the manufacturer. At least it indicates
that the true protein content in the powder could be larger than what was measured here
and therefore the protein content of the MCI powders should be reanalyzed.
Table 3.1: Protein content analysed using the DUMAS method. (Average ± standard
deviation of triplicate samples)
Protein content (w/w-%)
PPI
PPI70
PPIMCI
MCI70
MCI
Powder
68.67 ± 0.06
-
-
-
76.50 ± 0.46
Solution
9.27 ± 0.13
-
-
-
10.17 ± 0.16
Emulsion
8.07 ± 0.19
8.30 ± 0.34
8.72 ± 0.23
8.27 ± 0.14
9.61 ± 0.22
3.1.2
Oil Droplet Size
Using laser diffraction the droplet size distribution of the rapeseed oil in the emulsions were
analysed. The measurement was performed right after emulsification and heat treatment
in triplicates with triplicate measurements. Figure 3.1a shows a representative distribution
plot for each emulsion while Figure 3.1b shows the size class at respectively 10% (D10),
50% (D50), and 90% (D90) volume density. In Figure 3.1c the Span factor of the droplet
size distributions is shown.
Span = D90 −D10
D50
(3.1)
19
==PAGE:32==
The SPAN factor indicates the width of the droplet size distribution normalized with the
median droplet size and is calculated using Equation 3.1 (Krstonošić et al., 2020; Singh
et al., 2018).
Figure 3.1: Droplet size distribution as analysed by laser diffraction. a) Size distribution
plot of representative replicate. b) Size class at respectively 10% (D10), 50% (D50), and
90% (D90) volume density. c) The normalized Span factor. PPI: 100% PPI , PPI70: 70%
PPI, PPIMCI: 50% PPI / 50% MCI, MCI70: 70% MCI, MCI: 100% MCI. Error bars show
the standard deviation of techincal and biological triplicates.
In Figure 3.1a it can be seen that none of the emulsions are monomodal, which is in
general desired for stable emulsions to avoid Ostwald ripening (Langevin, 2023). Instead
it is observed that the emulsion only containing MCI is bimodal while the introduction of just
0.3 fraction of PPI shifts the emulsion to have three peaks. This shift becomes even more
apparent when the fraction is increased to 0.5, 0.7, and 1, indicating that the emulsion
becomes less stable with increasing fraction of PPI. This makes sense considering that
in this case it is assumed that the proteins act as surfactants/emulsifiers of the emulsion.
Interestingly though, the most pronounced peak separation is seen for a fraction of 0.7
MCI, whereas the 0.5 MCI fraction emulsion is more similar to the emulsions with higher
PPI fraction. When comparing the size distribution plots to literature, it can be found that
the distribution seen for PPI is similar to what previous studies found for oil in water (o/w)
emulsions (Krstonošić et al., 2020; Qamar et al., 2019). The study by Krstonošić et al.
(2020) also found that pea protein created larger mean droplet size compared to whey,
potato or soy stabilized o/w emulsion. Similarly it is here observed that the median size
class (D50, see Figure 3.1b) is lowered by an increase in MCI fraction, indicating a general
lower droplet size in these emulsions and thus also a lower surface tension of the droplets,
which is known to increase emulsion stability. On the other hand it seems that a fraction of
>0.5 PPI make little difference to the median. Likewise it is seen for the Span factor (see
20
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.1c) that increasing MCI fraction also decrease the width of the size distribution,
which can also be important in limiting Ostwald ripening and thereby increasing stability.
As for the median droplet size class little difference is observed at PPI fraction >0.5.
The difference in droplet size and multimodality could though perhaps be improved by
improvement of homogenization method. Other studies have tested the effect of different
homogenization strategies and shown that treatments such as high pressure homogeniza-
tion (K. Grasberger et al., 2022; Masiá et al., 2022), microfluidisation and ultra sonication
(Qamar et al., 2019) can decrease the average droplet size but also the modality of the
distribution. The study by Qamar et al. (2019) even showed that the emulsion were sta-
ble during ultra high heat treatment treatment (UHT), which is positive considering heat
treatment seems to be a requirement for acid induced gelation of pea protein.
From Panthi et al. (2017) it is known that the fat globule size, at least in correlation to ca-
sein based cheeses, can affect the structural rigidity of the cheeses as the casein micelles
will pack around them, trapping them in a network. This results in less rigid gels for larger
fat droplets. Panthi et al. (2019) also further reported an effect of the fat globule size on
rennet coagulation ability, which could be due to exclusion of the interactive effects of
casein micelles. Similarly, it was also reported by Hu et al. (2024), that larger fat droplets
in pea protein gels led to a softening effect, stating that this could be due to disruption of
the protein gel network. Moreover, they explained this by the larger droplets being more
compressible due to Laplace pressure effects. Therefore it could be of interest to improve
the droplet size distribution of the emulsions.
3.2
Curd Formation: Gelation Properties and Microstructure
To better understand the impact of mixing PPI with MCI for hybrid cheese processing it is
worth investigating the first step of cheese production: curd formation. Here the goal is to
understand how the two traditional treatments, acid and enzyme, used for curd formation
of feta cheese affect the two protein ingredients separately. The study here is limited to
investigating the two treatments separately and does not explore the combined effect and
can therefore not draw any conclusions on any synergistic effect of the treatments.
3.2.1
Gelling Behaviour
To investigate the gelling behaviour of the five emulsions induced by the two treatments,
acid and enzyme, we can look at the development of the storage modulus (G’) and loss
modulus (G”) over time. As measurements were performed directly after adding the treat-
ment correlation between the rheological measurements and pH is possible. Further as
pH was recorded on the same sample simultaneously, it is possibly to also approximately
establish a connection between pH and the development of G’ and G”.
In Figure 3.2 the average evolution of G’ and G”, as well as measured pH for each treat-
ment and emulsion can be seen. In the plot the standard deviation of the measurements
are visualized as a shaded area. For all acid induced gels we see an initial rapid increase
of both G’ and G” whereafter they both plateau to a seemingly constant value. However
the same is not the case for all emulsions treated with enzyme. Here it is clear that the
higher fraction of pea protein is in the emulsion, the slower the increase in G’ and G” is.
In rheology, it is often of interest to look at the gel point of fluids and this is also often the
case when investigating food materials as it can then be used to deduct the effectiveness
of the treatment. The gel point is commonly defined as the time point of which the storage
modulus becomes larger than the loss modulus (G’ > G”), as here the elastic behaviour is
greater than the viscous behaviour in the fluid (Malkin et al., 2023). However, as can be
observed in Figure 3.2, in this case it is not as simple as for the gels with 100% PPI this
21
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.2: In situ gelation time sweep of acid (solid line) and enzyme (dashed line)
induced gelation of the different mixes respectively (blue= storage modulus, green = loss
modulus). Simultaneously measured pH is shown in red. Shadow showcases the error
of triplicates. Time = 0s, is from approx 2 min after addition of enzyme/acid. Enzyme
treatment was done using Microlant from Chr. Hansen while acidifcation was by 1.5%
GDL addition. Time sweep was performed at temp: 37°C, 1Hz, 0.1% strain.
22
==PAGE:35==
Table 3.2: Time to gel point, estimated graphically as the point at which G’ and G” cross.
Further the averagen measured pH at gel point is shown alongside the average final pH
measured for the time sweep, calculated from the last 10 measurements.
PPI
PPI70
PPIMCI
MCI70
MCI
Time to gel point (s)
Enzyme
540
870
720
500
300
Acid
0
60
160
400
623
pH at gel point
Enzyme
6.6
6.6
6.6
6.5
6.5
Acid
6.6
6.4
6.2
6.0
5.8
Final pH
Enzyme
6.49±0.08
6.57±0.06
6.57±0.03
6.53±0.07
6.54±0.06
Acid
4.96±0.10
4.94±0.03
5.03±0.02
5.08±0.05
5.19±0.02
point is already reached prior to the test. Nevertheless, the time at which gel point was
reached as well at the corresponding pH were graphically determined as the time point
at which G’ cross G” and are reported in Table 3.2. Further the final pH of each sample is
calculated based on the average of the last 10 measurements (each 10 sec apart) is also
reported here.
Here it is observed that for the acid induced gels the time it takes for the samples to reach
gel point increases with increasing fraction of MCI. Oppositely, but in correlation, pH at gel
point is observed to decrease with increasing MCI fraction. This is presumably related to
the fact that micellar caseins have been shown to possess a stronger buffering capacity
(Beghdadi et al., 2022) and similar trends in mixed MCI/PPI matrices without oil have been
observed by Xia et al. (2024).
For the enzyme induced gels it is observed that time to gel point shortens. This indicates
that the concentration of casein in the solutions has an effect on gelation time. Similar has
been reported by Panthi et al. (2019) for different concentrations of ultra filtrated (UF) milk
gelled using chymosin. For the pH at gel point of the enzyme treated gels, it is observed
that it is within the range of optimal activity for Microlant reported by the manufacturer
(Chr. Hansen, Denmark).
It is not only relevant to look at the gelation point in these graphs but also the final gel.
The final storage modulus of the gels can be found by taking the average value of the
last 100 measurements (approx. after 8300 s) for all replicates. Similarly can be done for
tan(δ), which is equal to G”/G’ and therefore describes the relationship between these two.
A two-way ANOVA was performed to analyze the statistical significance of the treatment
and the protein fraction on these two values. The test revealed that both the treatment and
the protein fraction had a significant impact on the final tan(δ). Further the test showed a
statistically significant interaction between them. Similarly was seen for the final storage
modulus.
In Figure 3.3 the final recorded modulus at the end of the time sweep as well as the final
tan(δ) value is shown for all emulsions and the two treatments. By first looking at the final
storage modulus it is observed that the two treatments create a cross-like symbol with the
highest G’ observed for each treatment at the two extremes, 100% MCI and 100% PPI
for enzyme and acid treatment respectively. Further it can be observed that while for the
enzyme treatment the modulus consistently increases with increasing ratio of MCI, it is
observed that the acid treatment results in the lowest values of modulus at the 50/50 ratio
23
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.3: Extrapolated Final storage modulus and tan(δ) value of the time sweep cal-
culated as the mean of the last 100 measurements (after time 8300s) of the triplicates.
Time sweep was performed at temp: 37°C, 1Hz, 0.1% strain.
mark. This indicates that the enzyme treatment works best on MCI, which is as expected
as the enzyme in case, Microlant, was specifically developed for casein-proteins. On the
other hand for the acid treatment we see that the moduli decreases as the two protein
groups are mixed. This could perhaps indicate that mixing the two protein groups hinders
the formation of a strong protein network and thus leads to a weakened gel. This is in
contrast to the previously mentioned study by Xia et al. (2024), where they showed a
decreasing trend for increasing ratio of MCI measured at similar temperature using the
same strain and frequency and having undergone a similar pre-treatment. The matrix
tough did not include oil. This suggests that the oil incorporation might have an impact
on the rheological parameters of the MCI gels, and fits with previous studies (Cho et al.,
1999) showing that homogenization of fat and casein matrices, have a reinforcing effect
on the gel micro structure and texture. This also cements the importance of including fat
and/or oil in the research of new plant alternatives.
As previously mentioned the tan(δ)-value describes the relationship between G” and G’. It
is observed that for all the ratios this value is < 1, which is what is expected of a gel, where
G’ > G”. However when comparing in between it is seen that for the acid treatment we
observed an increase with increasing MCI fraction, indicating a higher viscous modulus.
The opposite is observed for the enzyme treatment.
3.2.2
Gelling Properties under Small Deformation
After the time sweeps the gels were cooled to 18°C and thereafter a frequency and an
amplitude strain sweep were conducted. The strain sweep is first of all conducted to inves-
tigate the linear viscoelastic region (LVR), that is defined as the plateau region in which
the two moduli are observed to be approximately constant (Tunick, 2011). The critical
strain value (CSV) is then identified as the yield strain above which the gel breaks and
exits the LVR. This is often defined as the point where G’ decreases 5% from the initial G’
value. The initial G’ value is found by the average of the first 10 measurements. A two-
way ANOVA was again performed to analyze the statistical significance of the treatment
and the protein fraction (CI=95%). The test revealed that only the protein fraction and not
24
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.4: Extrapoilated values from strain sweep of the samples. a) Average storage
modulus (G’) in the linear viscoelastic region (LVR) of triplicate samples. b) Average
critical strain value (CSV) estimated as the time point of 5% decrease from average G’ of
triplicate samples. Strain sweep was performed at 18°C and 1Hz.
the treatment has a significant impact on CSV and thereby on the gel strength. However,
a significant interaction was also observed between the treatment and the protein frac-
tions. For the initial G’ in LVR the test showed that both treatments, protein fractions and
interaction had a statistically significant effect, similarly to what was seen for the final G’
in the time sweep. In Figure 3.4 both the intial G’ in LVR and the CSV are reported. It
can here be seen that the profile for the initial G’ value follows that of what was observed
from the final G’ values of the time sweep, however an increase in the individual values
from the final G’ of the time sweep to the initial G’ of the strain sweep is observed. This
could be due to the drop in temperature (from 37°C to 18°C), indicating that the material
is temperature dependent as also observed by Xia et al. (2024).
What is more interesting though is comparing the initial G’ value with the estimated CSV
as these two describe respectively the gels rigidity and strength. Here as described previ-
ously in subsection 3.2.1 it is seen that for acid- and enzyme induced gels respectively the
highest G’ was observed for 100% PPI and 100% MCI. However, the moduli is only one
measure of the strength of the gel. When looking at the CSV it can be observed that it is
strongly linked with the fraction of MCI, showing an increasing CSV with increasing MCI
fraction. Thus, it is observed that gels with higher MCI fraction can withstand more strain
before breaking. Similarly, has again been observed by Xia et al. (2024) for PPI and MCI
mixed gels without oil and is also in agreement with what was observed subjectively in the
lab. This difference could prove to be especially important in the cheese making process,
as the curds needs to be cut, transferred and handled as described in subsection 1.1.1.
The cheese is also often pressed, where strain is added on top to induce syneresis and
this could also be affected by lower CSV.
The frequency sweep helps explain the frequency dependency of the gels under small
strain (0.1%) and and can give an indication of the molecular bonds which make up the
gel. The data obtained from this experiment was fitted using the power law model (Stading
& Hermansson, 1990; Tunick, 2011; Xia et al., 2024).
25
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.5: Frequency sweep, 0.1% Strain, 18°C data. a) Fitted frequency dependency
constant, n, plotted against fraction of PPI/MCI. b) Change in G’ over frequency.
logG′ = n · logω + logK
(3.2)
where n is the degree of frequency dependency and K is a constant. In Figure 3.5 the fit-
ted frequency dependency, n, is modelled against the fraction of MCI/PPI. In Appendix A
in Table A.1, both the fitted constants n and K are shown for each emulsion and treatment.
A two-way ANOVA was again performed to analyze the statistical significance of the treat-
ment and the protein fraction (CI=95%). The test revealed that both treatment, protein
fractions and interaction had a statistically significant effect on the frequency depency
constant, n.
From Figure 3.5, it is observed that n ranges from 0.09 to 0.18 and thus for all cases n>0.
This indicates that G’ changes as a function of the applied frequency meaning that the
material is frequency dependent, which also can be observed when looking at Figure 3.5b.
However, as the n value is relatively low (<0.20) it shows a weak frequency dependency
that is typical for a cross-linked gel with covalent bonds. When comparing in between the
emulsions and the treatments, some difference is observed, especially between the acid
and enzyme treatment for high fraction PPI gels. Further it can be observed that for the
gels induced by acid, n increases with increasing amounts of MCI, which follows what has
previously been observed by Xia et al. (2024). In contrast for the gels induced by enzyme
addition, n decreases toward the 50/50 ratio gel, that is observed to be closest to 0 and
thus closest to the ideal covalently bound gel. The question is though if this difference is
significant not only statistically but also for the structure.
3.2.3
Microscopic Structure of the Curds
The curds formed by the five emulsions using the two different treatments were studied
under a STED confocal microscope to investigate and understand how the protein struc-
ture change by increasing the fraction of PPI in the casein gels under the two treatment
conditions. All the image files obtained were processed in ImageJ as described in subsec-
tion 2.6.2 and can be found in an attached folder. In Figure 3.6 a selection of represen-
tative overview images from the gels are shown where both the oil and protein is visible.
26
==PAGE:39==
In Figure 3.7 the same overview images with only the protein structure are presented to
better showcase the protein network.
In the images it is observed that the protein network (red colour) for the MCI gel is tight and
structured in both the case of acid and enzyme induced gels. With the increase in fraction
of PPI to 0.3, the gel network seems to open up as more void (black) areas are observed
creating a less tight look. In the case of the acid induced gels this trend continues as the
PPI fraction increases to 0.5 where the most void areas are observed. With the increase in
PPI fraction >0.5, the trend reverses as the structure becomes more tight with increase in
PPI. A similar trend was also observed by Xia et al. (2024) for the mixed protein matrices,
although quite a different image was observed for the MCI gel, which in the study had a
coarse heterogeneous structure with larger pores. However, the final pH of the MCI gel
in the study was higher (∼5.9) compared to what was found in this thesis, which together
with the lack of oil could have impacted the structure, thus giving a different result than
what is here observed.
The trend observed in this thesis though, follows the trends in gel rigidity as described
in subsection 3.2.2 indicating that perhaps a more tight protein structure leads to higher
rigidity. More importantly though, for the purpose of developing hybrid cheese it also
seems to indicate that there is a negative synergistic effect on the overall protein structure
leading to a decrease in rigidity. For the enzyme induced gels more non-structured protein
is visible with increasing fractions of PPI leading to a lack of visible structure network in the
PPI gel. This also follows the trend observed for the rigidity described in subsection 3.2.2
and indicates, that as expected, the enzyme treatment using Microlant, has little to no
effect on PPI in regards to creating a structure protein network. On the other hand larger
protein aggregates can be observed. It cannot be dismissed that these could be formed
by the enzyme treatment as they are not observed in the gels induced by acid. The
aggregates are though seen in other studies of acid induced PPI gels (Masiá et al., 2023)
and it is likely that the aggregates are formed during the heat treatment prior to gelation
instead as the main purpose of this treatment is to form aggregates of the PPI to induce
acid gelation.
Other than a change in protein structure with increasing fraction of PPI it is also very
noticable that the droplet size of the oil increases drastically from PPI fractions >0.3 PPI.
This follows the trends seen for the oil droplet size distributions in the emulsions prior to
gelation presented in subsection 3.1.2. However, it is contradictory that here for the acid
induced gels the largest droplets can be observed for the 0.5 fraction of PPI. This confirms
that the oil droplet size in the final gel is not only influenced by the size in the emulsion but
also by the created protein network. To further investigate this, it would be interesting to
quantitatively compare the droplet size distribution of the gels with those of the emulsions
and investigating if the gelation process has a significant impact on this.
27
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.6: Representative composite confocal images of the curd samples gelated either using enzyme (microlant) or acid (GDL). The images
show the protein structure (red) and fat droplets (yellow) after >1hr. White scale bar equals 10µm All samples were imaged the day of formation.
28
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.7: Representative composite confocal images of the curd samples gelated either using enzyme (microlant) or acid (GDL). The images
only show the protein structure in red to more clearly show the protein network structure.
29
==PAGE:42==
3.3
Cheese Formation: Composition and Texture
Previous studies on hybrid (Mession et al., 2017; Xia et al., 2022, 2024) or plant-based
(Masiá et al., 2022, 2023) gels and cheeses have been limited to investigating the curd
formations and mitigated other important areas of cheeses processing. One such is the
traditional method of curd cutting for induced syneresis followed by drainage with added
weight in cheese moulds. This section of the thesis will focus on the how the different
protein fractions affect the results of this process.
3.3.1
Appearance and Yield
PPI
PPI70
PPIMCI
MCI70
MCI
HW
68.67±0.30(c)
75.49±0.60(d)
75.46±0.83(d)
81.42±0.91(b)
84.13±1.35(a)
Figure 3.8: Say Cheese! Representative images (bottom) of the cheeses produced from
the different emulsions and their estimated hunter whiteness (HW) index (top). Compact
letter display based on Tukey’s HSD test (CI: 95%) indicating significant difference be-
tween the samples.
Using the method described in section 2.7 and as shown in Figure 2.3 cheeses were
prepared. These can be seen in Figure 3.8. The images were taken using a black box
light and with a phone camera. In the images visual differences can clearly be observed
between the cheeses as a higher MCI fraction leads to a more uneven exterior compared
to the cleaner exterior of the cheeses high in PPI. Here it can even be observed that the
cheeses show the drainage lines from the moulds. This difference in appearance corre-
lates with the difference in strength of the curds observed, leading the less firm curds to
take the shape of the surroundings. Further a small visual difference in colour can also
be noticed, which is supported by the whiteness index seen in Figure 3.8, that shows
whiteness to generally decrease with increasing PPI fraction. Little difference is though
observed between the 0.5 and 0.7 PPI fraction. Although colour seems arbitrary to inves-
tigate when focusing on the textural impact of the introduction of plant-based protein in
cheese, it is however highly important for the final product and the consumers perception
(Aydar, 2023; Short et al., 2021) therefore this is also explored in previous studies on
hybrid cheese (Khiabanian et al., 2020, 2022). Thus the slightly darker colour seen by
incorporation of PPI might influence the consumers perception, however to interpret the
significance of the this change a consumer study should be done as seen in the study by
Khiabanian et al. (2022).
From the images it is further observed that the cheeses containing a higher PPI fraction
are slightly larger. This is also observed from the measured yield as seen in Figure 3.9b.
Further it can be observed from the Figure 3.9a that it is not only the yield of cheese
which varies with the fraction of PPI but also the yield of whey varies greatly decreasing
with increasing PPI fraction. The decrease in whey is though not directly proportional to
the increase in cheese yield as it is also observed that the loss increases as well. The
30
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.9: Yield and compositional analysis of the cheese samples. a) Visual represen-
tation of yield of whey (blue), loss(grey) and cheese with composition (yellow nuances).
Protein content is calculated based on a relative N-factor from the assumed fraction of
PPI to MCI. b) Yield of cheese presented as average ± standard deviation. More detailed
values can be found in Appendix D.
loss is here defined as anything that has not been accounted for and includes both loss
when transferring the curds to moulds, excess cheese stuck in the moulds as well as any
evaporated water from the whey or cheese during drainage. For the cheese high in PPI
fraction it is thought that this loss is mostly transfer loss to and from the cheese moulds as
both the curds and the cheese itself were softer and more sticky leaving visual loss behind.
Even though, a relatively high loss is seen, when comparing the yield found in this study
to that of other studies (Khiabanian et al., 2020, 2022; Sipahioglu et al., 1999) that found
yields ranging from 10-38% it is seen that the yield found here is fairly high. The yield in
the studies also in general show an opposite trend than here where yield decreased with
increasing plant protein fraction.
Figure 3.9a also shows the composition of each cheese, however to have a closer look
the dry and wet based compositional values have been calculated. These can be found
in Table 3.3. When comparing these values it is seen that the protein content significantly
increases with increasing fraction of MCI, possibly due to the slightly higher protein content
measured in the MCI solution as compared to the PPI solution (see subsection 2.4.1). The
same trend is seen for the ash content where a significant difference is spotted when the
MCI fraction becomes 0.3 and then gradually for fractions >0.5. This could be explained by
the presence of calcium in the MCI powder as specified by the manufacture as opposed to
presumably none in the PPI powder. For fat a statistically significant difference is observed
between the samples, however these don’t seem to follow a trend and therefore theses
differences could be down to normal measuring error and variation. Lastly, for moisture
content no statistically significant difference is observed, which is surprising as previous
studies (Tang et al., 2023) have reported that the water holding capacity of pea protein is
greater than that of casein and therefore it would have been clear-cut to argue that the
moisture content would be higher in cheeses with higher PPI fraction.
31
==PAGE:44==
Table 3.3: Composition of the samples. Dry based composition is estimated from mea-
sured moisture/solids content of the cheeses. Protein content is estimated based on a
relative N-factor from the assumed fraction of PPI to MCI. Compact letter display based
on Tukey’s HSD test (CI: 95%) indicating significant difference between the samples.
PPI
PPI70
PPIMCI
MCI70
MCI
Dry based
Protein (%)
26.42±2.78(b)
28.10±1.06(b)
27.67±1.93(b)
29.05±2.03(ab)
32.81±2.41(a)
Fat (%)
61.16±4.81(b)
58.03±2.29(ab)
61.51±1.99(b)
55.41±0.36(a)
57.71±0.61(ab)
Ash (%)
1.397±0.19(c)
1.87±0.16(b)
1.98±0.30(b)
2.32±0.13(ab)
2.59±0.20(a)
Other (%)
11.02±4.45(ab)
12.00±1.72(ab)
8.85±2.67(ab)
13.22±1.68(b)
6.90±2.52(a)
Wet based
Moisture (%)
52.34±2.96(a)
51.82±0.81(a)
48.96±1.30(a)
51.01±1.93(a)
48.59±2.48(a)
Protein (%)
12.54±0.70(a)
13.53±0.40(b)
14.12±0.99(b)
14.26±1.52(b)
16.83±0.72(b)
Fat (%)
29.19±3.51(a)
27.98±1.57(a)
31.41±1.76(a)
27.14±0.91(a)
29.68±1.67(a)
Ash (%)
0.66±0.07(c)
1.90±0.07(d)
1.01±0.13(bd)
1.14±0.04(b)
1.33±0.04(a)
Other (%)
5.27±2.27(a)
5.77±0.75(a)
4.51±1.33(a)
6.46±0.60(a)
6.90±2.52(a)
The values can also be compared to the average compositional analysis of commercial
feta cheeses (see subsection 1.1.2), where it was reported that the average moisture con-
tent was 53.21±4.20 w/w-% and the average fat content was 55.09±2.91. Thus, all the
cheese samples have a moisture content within the right range as the average commer-
cial feta cheese. The same is not true for the fat content, which in general is higher for
the cheeses made in this thesis compared to that of the commercial ones. In contrast
the protein content is lower for all cheese compared to the reported wet-weight average
(17.55±1.88%). Thus the protein-to-fat ratio might be off for the cheese samples produced
here. Also the ash content is lower in the samples produced in this study compared to
the average. However, it must be kept in mind that the samples produced here has not
yet been brined, and therefore there is not added salt to the cheeses as would be the
case for the commercially available. Overall the compositions of the samples are though
deemed satisfactory and are also similar to compositions found in other hybrid cheese
studies (Khiabanian et al., 2022; Sipahioglu et al., 1999).
Table 3.4: Average pH measured of the cheese before (in emulsions) and after (in
cheeses). Compact letter display based on Tukey’s HSD test (CI: 95%) indicating sig-
nificant difference between the samples.
PPI
PPI70
PPIMCI
MCI70
MCI
Initial pH
6.75±0.01(c)
6.78±0.05(c)
6.89±0.03(a)
6.88±0.02(a)
6.91±0.02(a)
Final pH
4.57±0.03(b)
4.83±0.05(b)
4.92±0.31(ab)
4.85±0.14(ab)
5.22±0.15(ab)
The pH was also measured for the cheese samples, first in the emulsions (denoted initial)
and in the cheeses after drainage (denoted final). These are show in Table 3.4. Here
32
==PAGE:45==
it can be seen that the final pH is lowest for the cheeses with higher PPI fraction, which
can be explained by a difference in buffering capacity between the two protein groups
(Beghdadi et al., 2022). Furthermore when comparing the measured pH to the reported
average pH of commercial feta cheese (pH = 4.68±0.35 (Nega & Moatsou, 2012)) it is
noticeable that only the cheese sample containing a PPI fraction of 1, has a pH similar to
the reported average of commercial feta cheeses. In all the other samples the pH was
measured to be higher. It is though lower in the cheeses compared to the pH measured
of the curds (see Table 3.2) that could indicate a small pH drop during drainage, which
would be where the pH in the case of microbial acidification is expected to drop the most
(Geronikou et al., 2020). However, as the pH measured during curd formation only takes
one of the treatments (acid and not enzyme) into account it cannot be neglected that the
enzyme could also cause this lower pH as it was also observed that pH dropped slightly
during enzyme induced curd formation.
3.3.2
Whey
The whey of the cheeses is as previously described the liquid which is expelled from the
cheeses due to syneresis and in traditional cheeses this would contain the whey protein.
However, since the raw material containing milk proteins here is an isolate of caseins,
the assumptions is that little if any protein should be expelled with the whey. The reason
instead here for taking a closer look at the whey is to investigate first of all, which proteins
are expelled from the gel network created by the pea protein, and second of all to test what
happens when pea proteins are mixed with milk proteins and investigate if this has any
impact on expelled protein. In previous studies by Masiá et al. (2022, 2023), she describes
that it is the pea protein globulins that plays the major role in acid gelation. Therefore it
could be expected that mainly albumins will be expelled with the whey. In Figure 3.10
this is also observed in the lane with whey from the 100% PPI cheese samples. In the
SDS-PAGE, analysis of all the whey products from a randomly selected replicate of the
sample. On each side the rehydrated powder are shown for reference purposes. ImageJ
(Schindelin et al., 2012) has been used to identify the relative distance each band has
travelled in both the marker and the samples. This was then used to estimate the atomic
mass unit of the proteins. These are not shown here, but can be seen in Appendix E,
Table E.2. Instead the identified protein groups in the rehydrated powder solutions are
indicated in Figure 3.10. These have been found by comparison with previous studies
(O’Kane et al., 2004; Raak & Corredig, 2022; Tanger et al., 2020).
In Figure 3.10 it is observed that the whey expelled from the other cheeses containing
pea protein (PPI70, PPIMCI, MCI70) also contains some albumin. In contrast for MCI,
although a band is seen in the close range of where it is expected to see albumins it is
more likely that this band indicates the prescence of β-lactoglobulin as the same band is
vaguely see in the lane of the MCI solution. β-lactoglobulin is part of the protein group
labelled whey proteins and therefore it is not surprising that this protein is expelled with
the whey. The presumed band for β-lactoglobulin is also visible in the cheeses with higher
MCI fractions (≥0.5). Lastly, two bands around 30-35 kDA can also be seen in the whey
from PPIMCI and MCI. Nearly identical bands to those are observed for the MCI solution,
indicating that these are casein proteins that are present in the whey, which could be from
non-coagulated caseins. However, it is also more than likely, since no cheese cloth was
used, that small amounts of the coagulated cheese have spilled into the whey, during
transfer, resulting in the bands showing up here. Especially when coupling it with the fact
that visible aggregates was observed in the whey and the fact that these bands were less
visible on some of the other SDS-PAGE’s.
In addition to the SDS-PAGE the protein content of the whey was also analysed using
33
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.10: Whey Protein Characterisation. SDS-PAGE, 4-12% bis-tris NuPAGE show-
ing from left to right: Marker, MCI solution, whey of MCI-, MCI70,- PPIMCI-, PPI70-, and
PPI cheese, PPI solution. All diluted and reduced using DTT. Protein groups are indi-
cated on the left for milk proteins (Raak & Corredig, 2022) and on the right for pea protein
(O’Kane et al., 2004; Tanger et al., 2020). On the right the marker is shown and annotated
with the protein sizes in kDa.
Table 3.5: Analysis of Nitrogen in the whey of the cheeses measured using the DUMAS
method. The protein concentration is estimated using relative N-factors based on the
protein fractions. Protein mass is estimated using the average mass of whey for each
sample. Compact letter display based on Tukey’s HSD test (CI: 95%) indicating significant
difference between the samples. In Appendix E another table showing protein content
based on N-factor of either MCI or PPI can be found.
PPI
PPI70
PPIMCI
MCI70
MCI
Nitrogen (%)
0.27±0.10(b)
0.22±0.01(ab)
0.20±0.03(ab)
0.18±0.01(ab)
0.13±0.00(a)
Protein (%)
1.44±0.56(b)
1.25±0.08(ab)
1.15±0.16(ab)
1.06±0.05(ab)
0.81±0.03(ab)
Protein (g)
0.14±0.046(c)
0.22±0.024(a)
0.23±0.044(a)
0.26±0.014(a)
0.21±0.011(a)
34
==PAGE:47==
the DUMAS method. The results hereof is seen in Table 3.5. Here the results are repre-
sented as the Nitrogen content as mass fraction. The protein content can then be esti-
mated by multiplying it with the relative N-factor calculated from the presumed fraction of
each protein group and the N-factors of those. First we can compare these. Here it can
be observed that the protein and nitrogen content increases with increasing PPI fraction.
Although when comparing the data using Tukey’s HSD test, the difference between whey
from cheeses with any MCI fraction is not significant. However, since it was observed that
the amount of recovered whey increased with increasing MCI fraction (see Figure 3.9) to
really compare the amount of protein which is expelled with the whey, the protein fraction
is multiplied by the amount of recovered whey.
Protein(g) = Protein(%) · Whey(g)
(3.3)
The result of this is displayed last in Table 3.5 and in contrast we instead see that amount
of protein expelled is higher for the cheeses containing a fraction of MCI. However, still no
statistically significant difference is observed between these fractions, indicating that the
protein loss is not significantly impacted by replacing some of the MCI protein with PPI.
This is a promising result for hybrid cheese processing as the worry was that the mixed
matrix would have a negative effect, creating a lot of by-product by expulsion of protein.
3.3.3
Texture analysis
In figure Figure 3.11 the results of the TPA test are showcased. For some of the cheeses
the deviation in measurement (as seen by the boxplots) is rather large, which is a results
of differences in the structure of the cheese, where cracks/holes already existed would
weaken the overall structure. This was visually observed during the test which lead to
overall less hardness and thus also affecting the other parameters calculated from this
(see Table 2.1). As the test therefore also often produces outliers, the replicate with the
largest and smallest value have consequently been omitted to better describe the nature
of the product. A warning must further be made that no conclusions can be drawn from the
adhesiveness plot on the true adhesiveness of the samples as the samples were not glued
down during the test which resulted in some of the cheeses sticking to the compression
plate on return. However, it has been chosen to still include the values in this thesis to
discuss on the adhesive nature of the products as the results still somewhat correlate with
what was visibly observed.
From the plots in Figure 3.11 a clear trend with increasing MCI fraction can be observed for
both hardness, cohesivenes, gumminess and resilience. The overall trend seen in these
parameters is a significant increase with increasing fractions of MCI (>0.3) and most of
all a significant increase from MCI70 to MCI. That gumminess follows the same trend as
hardness is not surprising considering that gumminess id derived thereof. Hardness is a
measure of the peak force of the first compression (see Table 2.1). Therefore they both
describe how much force can be put onto the cheese to achieve 40% strain, however
gumminess also includes the area of work required, which is described by the cohesive-
ness. The cheeses which are harder and more gummy are often thought of as stronger
cheeses and therefore this trend correlates well with strength of the curds, which also
increased with increasing MCI fraction (see Figure 3.4). However, a stronger cheese is
not necessarily the goal and when comparing to the measurements of the the commer-
cial salad cheese (shown in red), it can be seen that the full MCI cheese is harder than
the commercial one. Likewise is seen for the gumminess. The 0.7 MCI fraction here fits
better the values of the commercial cheese. This begs the question, if the MCI fraction of
the cheese is too strong it perhaps does not matter that increasing the PPI fraction leads
35
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.11: Results of Texture Analysis. Average values obtained from the same test
performed on a commercial salad cheese by Arla, Puck, is shown as a red line for com-
parison purposes. As the test often produces outliers, the replicate with the largest and
smallest value have consequently been omitted to better describe the nature of the prod-
uct. CLD annotation show the results from a Tukey HSD test (CI=95%).
to a softer cheese. However, it is not only the hardness and gumminess parameters of
the cheese that are important, but also the springiness is important and here it is seen
that the MCI cheese is closest to the commercial while the PPI cheese almost have no
springiness. It is though promising to see that springiness is increased by addition of MCI
(although not significant according to Tukey’s HSD test). For resilience on the other hand
it is observed that although it follows the trend of gumminess and hardness, the same
is not true for the commercial cheese which is closest to the cheeses with higher PPI
fraction (≥0.7). Lastly, the adhesiveness can be commented on, although the results are
not accurate. Here it is observed that the mixed protein cheeses were in general more
sticky with greater adhesiveness, which follows what was visibly observed. This could be
an extremely important parameter as salad cheese is often used in tossed salads and in
some cases the stickiness is desired, however it can also be too much.
36
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.12: Cryo-SEM images of the cheeses at 6000x magnification using a secondary
electron detector under high vacuum. After cryo-freezing the images were all sublimated
at -100°C for 10 minutes to remove any formed ice crystals on the surface. The cheeses
are all sputter coated with aluminium.
When comparing to other previous studies, it can be tough to evaluate the data, as the
results of the TPA depends on the parameters used. Especially the hardness measured
can be sensitive to the compression the test is performed at resulting in lower values if
it is not above it’s macroscopic failure (Peleg, 2019). When comparing the results found
in this study to a previous study by Khiabanian et al. (2020), they in general measured a
higher hardness, however they at the same time found a lower cohesiveness. The study
though also found the same trend as observed here, where both parameters increased
with increasing MCI fraction (ranging from 6-12% MCI).
In general to better understand how important these parameters are for the sensory ex-
perience of the cheese it would be good to back up these tests with sensory or consumer
tests (Peleg, 2019). Further it would also be preferable to be able to compare the test
results with more commercial cheeses as there can be large variation in the salad and
feta cheeses available in stores and therefore some of the samples might fit some com-
mercial cheeses better than others. The commercial cheese chosen in this experiment is
by personal experience one of the more popular salad cheeses in Denmark, which was
the reason of the choice, however that does not mean that salad cheese with different
textural characteristics would not be acceptable. In general though the test shows that
it is possible to improve the texture of plant-based (in this case pea based) cheeses by
mixing them with milk protein which is promising for the development of hybrid cheeses.
3.3.4
Microstructure
Like for the curd formation, to better understand the textural difference between the frac-
tions of MCI/PPI the microscopic structure of the cheeses are investigated. In this case it
is done using cryogenic SEM imaging. Representative images can be seen in Figure 3.12.
When first comparing the two extremes (PPI and MCI) it is clear that while the structure
37
==PAGE:50==
Figure 3.13: Cryo-SEM images of MCI an PPIMCI cheeses which have been sublimated
additionally compared to the other images revealing spider-web like structure.
in the MCI cheese is more rounded and globular the structure in the PPI cheese is much
more angular and sharp. The roundness seen in the MCI cheese is similar to what previ-
ous studies have observed (Alghooneh et al., 2022; Kalab, 1995; Ong et al., 2011) and
does also correlate well with the protein network observed in the curds using confocal
microscopy (see Figure 3.6). However, the round voids observed here, which are pre-
sumably fat droplets or possibly air pockets, are larger compared to the small fat droplets
observed in the curds. With increasing fractions of PPI in the cheese, it is observed that
although the globular nature of the structure is initially preserved, less smooth aggregates
start to appear in the MCI70 sample. When the fraction is increased even more it is seen
that these aggregates start to become more angular in the PPIMCI sample, and eventually
the structure it self becomes more angular in the PPI70 sample. This is ultimately what
has previously also been found in other studies (Atia et al., 2004; Khiabanian et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2023; Xia et al., 2022), and shows that the addition of PPI fundamentally
changes the structure of the cheese on a microscopic level.
The samples shown in Figure 3.12 have all been prepared as described in section 2.10
where a sublimation at -100°C for 10 minutes was used to remove ice crystals formed on
the surface. However, for some of the samples the sublimation was prolonged revealing
the images seen in Figure 3.13. These images are very similar to the type found in many
of papers (Wang et al., 2023; Xia et al., 2022). The images in Figure 3.13 begs the
question whether or not the images in Figure 3.12 should have been sublimated more
to reveal more of the protein structure. However, with the longer sublimation the water
could evaporate completely from the structure, thereby risking to affect the structure and
ultimately risking collapse (Morrison, 2019). Thus it would not be possible to ensure it is
the true protein structure of the gel which would become visible.
Nevertheless, the more sublimated images support the conclusions from the images in
Figure 3.12, showing a more connected smooth, homogeneous network with large globu-
lar voids for MCI. While for PPIMCI the structure is more angular with still globular aggre-
gates seen. The structure of MCI further looks very similar to the protein network structure
observed in the curds using confocal microscopy (see Figure 3.6).
38
==PAGE:51==
4
Summary Discussion
4.1
Pre-trials and Choice Validation
The main aim of the work presented in this thesis was to investigate how a changing pro-
tein ratio of plant protein to milk protein, specifically pea to casein protein, in combination
with plant-based oil, would affect the gelation of the emulsion using traditional, or some-
what traditional, chesemaking processes. This was achieved by looking at rheological
properties of acid (GDL) vs. enzyme (Microlant) gelation and then further investigating
the textural properties of combining them. However, in order to reach the point where this
could be tested many pre-trials and choices had to be made.
It was among others chosen to work with a protein content of 10 w/w-% based on many
preliminary experiments which showed that increasing the protein content increased the
concentration of soluble proteins for the PPI solutions, which ultimately also led to better
gelling properties. It was in fact observed that protein concentrations lower than the cho-
sen one made it difficult to even get a structured gel as also previously shown by Mession
et al. (2017). Further, the choice of a high protein concentration was inspired by previous
studies (Khiabanian et al., 2020; Masiá et al., 2022; Xia et al., 2024) and was governed
by a wish to create less syneresis/whey and thereby less by-product from the production
as also seen in the industry with UF concentrated milks. It is though worth discussing
the use of powders for production itself. The choice of protein isolates in this thesis (MCI
and PPI) was made on the basis of the advantages such as protein concentration choice,
as well as the shelf stability of the powders throughout the study to produce reproducible
results. However, powders also come with major downsides such as the aforementioned
harsh processing conditions which they go through to isolate the powders and further this
process is also costly in energy often (Lie-Piang et al., 2021). This begs the question if
this solution is truly industry relevant or if here the choice instead would land on UF milk
and possibly also concentrated plant ”juice”.
The choice of using rehydrated powders, also meant that little to no fat was present in
the solutions and therefore the fat in the cheeses were solemnly based on the fat of
choice. In the thesis most gelation pre-trials were actually performed first on matrices
without fat, to make sure that a gel network could be formed. The ensuing addition of
fat to the matrix lead to ultimately a slight decrease in protein concentration (10% to 8%),
however by finger rheology this did not obviously affect the gels. Ultimately the choice
of fat also landed on rapeseed oil, which is a plant-based oil local to Denmark (country
of research). The choice of a plant oil in comparison to milk or any other animal based
fat, thus also increased the relative amount of plant ingredients, and means that even the
cheese that solemnly is based on MCI proteins by the definition by Genet et al. (2023) is a
hybrid cheese. However as the texture analysis showed that increasing plant protein frac-
tion significantly affected parameters such as hardness, cohesiveness and gumminess it
might be worth researching if better values could be achieved by use of butter fat instead
of oil. At least the hypothesis would be that it could improve hardness due to it’s higher
melting point. The downside of this would though be that the animal based fraction would
increase, but one could also wonder if perhaps a mixture of animal and plant-based fat
could be used.
Before fat addition an in-situ rheological time sweep was performed on three of the sam-
ples similarly to the data that has been presented as originally the idea was to also inves-
39
==PAGE:52==
tigate the effect of fat. However, due to time limits this was not realised. A graph of the
data from the time sweep on respectively a PPI, MCI and PPIMCI gel without oil can be
found in Appendix A (Figure A.3). The main highlight from this sweep was that essentially
a two step gelation curve was observed for the 50/50% fraction sample. The same two
step gelation was not observed after the addition of oil, but was observed by Xia et al.
(2024). Thus, this cements the previous statement in subsection 3.2.2 on the importance
and impact of fat on the structure, and therefore also the importance of performing tri-
als with emulsions. The amount of oil included in this study was also determined based
on pre-trials and the previously stated average fat content of commercial feta cheeses
(25.77%, Table 1.1). The goal was to get a similar composition in the cheeses as the
commercial ones, however as shown in the study the protein ratios impacted the synere-
sis of the cheeses and therefore potentially the fat content of the cheeses. Based on some
pre-trials it was found that 15% oil in the emulsion would give approximately similar fat
content, however this might be a parameter that could be optimized for each cheese and
thereby possibly improve the texture. Further as some studies have investigated (Moradi
et al., 2021; Sipahioglu et al., 1999) fat could also be replaced by other plant-based in-
gredients which could help in making a low fat product, that might fit the third consumer
group previously described in section 1.4.
A choice also had to be made on the calcium addition, amount of GDL and microlant, all of
which are parameters that also could impact the final textural properties and therefore also
should be optimized for the purpose of product development. In the end the choice of the
amount of calcium added was based on pre-trials showing that this gave a very firm curd.
The used amount is higher than the recommended added calcium by the manufacturer
for optimal enzyme activity, and therefore it might not be necessary to add as much as
what is used in this study. The amount of enzyme added is though on the other hand
on par with the manufacturers recommendations but could be further optimized for each
ratio. In the case of acid addition the choice was made based on pre-trials showing the
acidity profiles of different GDL concentrations (see Appendix C), and the choice was
made to stick to one concentration for all samples, although this lead to differences in the
final pH. Ultimately this should also be optimized for final product development for each
of the matrices, which might also slightly impact the structure. However, as the future aim
of development on the matrix studied here is to have a fermentation based acidification
where the largest drop in pH will appear after curd formation, then this might impact the
structure more in comparison.
4.2
Investigation of Curd Formation
The rheology of the curd formation is examined by small amplitude oscillatory shear
(SAOS) time sweeps and afterwards by further SAOS tests (strain and frequency sweep).
These are tests that are generally good for investigating the bonds of gels as they are
performed under small strain. However, this measurement can have limited resolution
when describing more complex materials which is often the case for food that consists
of e.g. linear or branched polymers (Hyun et al., 2011). Therefore it can be insufficient
in describing the true behaviour and more relevant here the true difference between the
samples. For further investigations it might therefore be relevant to perform large ampli-
tude oscillatory shear (LAOS) tests to truly describe and understand the influence of the
of increasing the PPI fraction as Xia et al. (2024) similarly tested for MCI/PPI gels without
oil.
For the curd formation it was chosen to investigate the treatments traditionally used for
feta cheese separately. As stated before this means that the study here cannot draw any
40
==PAGE:53==
conclusions on the synergistic effects of the two coagulation methods. Therefore it also
does not represent the true gelation behaviour, which for this thesis would have been more
ideal for comparison purposes with the cheese samples. However, it was not possible with
the time constraints of the thesis to find a method to do so, that would allow to first add
the rennet, start the measurement, then add GDL, stir and continue the measurement.
Likewise, the confocal images of the curds were also investigated separately to be able
to compare them to the rheological data. However, here it could be easily changed to
include both. The major drawback of this method is though that it was required to scale
down the process due to cost limitations of the protein dye. Therefore there is also some
uncertainties connected to the results of this test, which could possibly be tested by com-
parison of droplet size distribution of the emulsions created for the confocal images and
that of the emulsions prepared for the cheese samples. This was unfortunately though not
possible to achieve within the time constrains. However, since similar distributions were
seen in other studies using different high shear homogenizer (Krstonošić et al., 2020), the
assumptions is that there is little difference.
One aim of confocal imaging the curds was to truly visually investigate the protein network,
and a goal before imaging was to dye the pea proteins and casein separately similarly to
Li et al. (2023) and Xia et al. (2022). This was though difficult to obtain as this required the
proteins to be dyed prior to emulsification and heat treatments, and pretrials showed the
dye to be damaged from the heat treatment, thus fading. Therefor this was not obtained.
4.3
From Gels to Cheese
Although as previously described it is shown that curd formation can be obtained even
for the matrix containing only pea protein and that similar rigidity is observed between the
matrices, often in cheese making the curds will be cut and pressed afterwards to create
the final cheese. Most studies present, does not investigate this stage but focuses on
wheyless cheese in which the curds are not drained or pressed ((Khiabanian et al., 2020,
2022; Masiá et al., 2022, 2023). Only two studies on feta cheese hybrids were found
in which they too investigated the drainage and pressing of curds (Moradi et al., 2021;
Sipahioglu et al., 1999). In this study the aim was to explore how the hybrid curds would
behave when exposed to a traditional cheese making process and therefore the textural
parameters are explored after the curds have been pressed and drained here. However,
the study lacks an investigation into whether or not this extra step actually improved the
texture of the cheese, which could be interesting in the future to test, as the author is not
aware of similar studies. The hypothesis would here be that the processing could aid in
improving the textural parameters of the samples.
Although, in this study, a texture analysis was not performed on the curds and therefore
no direct comparison can be made, rheological analysis was performed instead. Here it is
interesting, that as previously described, the final rigidity of the curds are very similar when
comparing the PPI and MCI samples treated by acid and enzyme respectively. However,
when comparing the final PPI and MCI cheese samples, both vastly different hardness and
cohesiveness was observed and trend seen for the rigidity can actually not be observed
in any of the textural parameters found. On the other hand a linear correlation (r2 > 0.98)
is seen between the average critical strain value of the samples (across both treatments)
and the average measured hardness of the cheese samples with all of them increasing
with increasing MCI fraction. Thus, this indicates that CSV of the curds is important for
the final hardness of the cheese. Thus it seems that it is the protein fraction, and not the
treatment (acid or enzymatic), which dictates the hardness of the cheese.
41
==PAGE:54==
It can be speculated whether this correlation comes down to the visual differences in struc-
ture, which was both observed under the confocal lens for the curd samples and under
SEM for the cheeses. Here, in both cases a very clear distinctive differences were seen
between the samples, where for the curds is present as a loosening of the protein network
around larger oil droplets with increasing PPI fraction in the samples. In comparison in
the SEM images this difference is present as a more angular and less globular topology
with increasing PPI fraction.
42
==PAGE:55==
5
Conclusion and Perspectives
The rise of global warming and the looming environmental crisis has meant that a shift
towards a more plant-based diet seems unavoidable. The dairy industry is ripe for this
change, however many plant-based alternatives do not live up to the sensory criteria that
the ever-growing consumer base of flexitarians often have. The development of hybrid-
products such as hybrid cheese could accommodate both of these issues. It is found that
the largest GHG emission contribution from the cheese industry stems from the production
of milk and therefore even a small substitution of raw material could make an impact.
Nevertheless, the research area on these hybrid products is in its infancy stage and further
development is still necessary on multiple parameters. One such area is the textural
aspects of the hybrid cheeses, where a better understanding of the co-gelation of different
plant proteins with milk proteins is desired.
For this purpose the hybrid mix of pea proteins (PPI), caseins (MCI) and rapeseed oil was
investigated over a protein ratio from only plant-based to only milk-based with the aim
of producing a feta like product. It was found that for all protein ratios it was possible to
not only produce a curd coagulum but also possible to cut, press and drain the coagulum
in a mould. The coagulum was achieved by first rehydrating isolate powders overnight.
Then the solutions were mixed in different ratios together with rapeseed oil and emulsified,
before they were heat treated at 95°C and finally gelled using a mixture of acidic, GDL, and
enzymatic, Microlant, treatment to produce the coagulum. The final samples produced
all had a cheese like texture and could stand on their own regardless of the protein ratio
used. However, it was observed that the ratio of PPI in both the colour and appearance of
the samples. It was further found that the protein ratios significantly affected the protein
expelled with the whey but it did affect greatly the amount of whey expelled with higher
PPI fractions leading to expulsion of less whey.
In regards to the texture of the samples it was found that the ratio of PPI to MCI in the
cheese samples significantly affected parameters like hardness, cohesiveness, and gum-
miness. Here it was observed that overall a larger fraction of pea protein led to a softer
and less gummy cheese, with a measured hardness of < 100g for the 100%PPI based
cheese compared to the > 400g measured for the 100% MCI samples. However, it was
also found that just raising the fraction of MCI in the cheese sample to at least 0.5 had a
significant impact on all parameters, thus showing the benefits of hybrid cheese samples.
The texture of a commercial cheese was also tested and here it was found that on many
parameters the 100% MCI sample was above that and thus it could be less of an issue
that incorporation of pea protein seems to lower these parameters. In general from the
five ratios tested, it was actually the 0.7 MCI / 0.3 PPI cheese sample which seemed to fit
the commercial cheese the best. However, as previously stated more commercial cheese
should be tested for comparison.
In SEM images it was also found that the ratio of proteins had visual impact on the struc-
ture, with the samples high in MCI showing a more globular structure in comparison to
the more angular one observed with samples high in pea proteins. The samples in be-
tween were found to look more aggregated, however the globular nature of the structure
observed in the 100% MCI sample was preserved up to the 50% fraction sample. The
structures visually observed here could be connected to the strength of the samples as
more globular structures and networks often are found to be stronger.
43
==PAGE:56==
The gelling properties of the hybrid matrices were also tested using in situ SAOS rheology
where the two coagulation treatments were tested seperately. Here it was found that the
enzymatic treatment had little effect on the pea protein however with just 30% MCI in the
matrix it was possible to create a gel from enzymatic treatment, although the time to gel
point and the final rigidity was significantly affected by the fraction of MCI. For the acidic
treatment it was found that for all ratios tested it was possible to create a gel from the
100% PPI sample with the highest final rigidity (G’) and also the highest pH at the gelation
point. Unlike previous studies on PPI/MCI matrices, but without oil, the lowest rigidity was
found for the hybrid matrices. The critical strain value of the samples was also found and
here it was seen that there was a strong connection between the fraction of MCI and CSV
across the coagulation treatments, thus indicating that this influences the gel strength the
most. The values found here also correlate with the hardness observed in the cheese
samples.
Similarly, to what was found with the rheological measurements a visual difference could
also be observed with confocal microscopy. Here it was found that a higher fraction of MCI
lead to a more tight protein network with smaller oil droplets encased within, across both
treatments. In contrast higher PPI fractions lead to generally larger oil droplets which was
also observed in the emulsion before gelation. For the acidic treatment a looser network
could be observed while for the enzyme treatment no structured network was visible.
Although it is seen in the study that it is possible to create soft cheese like structure even
with high fractions of PPI, the incorporation of pea protein in the matrix still presents some
major drawbacks which could hinder the development of a hybrid cheese product. Not
only is the texture greatly affected but the colour also changes with increasing PPI frac-
tion. These parameters are two of the main characteristics of feta cheese and are there-
fore important for the consumers perception of the cheese and especially texture affects
whether or not the product can be used as intended by the consumer. This is a.o. textu-
ral properties like hardness and gumminess, which on the other hand is seen to improve
with increasing MCI fraction. Further, no excess loss of either protein group is observed,
which speaks to the purpose and aim of hybrid cheese development.
Further, this study has unlike other studies (Khiabanian et al., 2020, 2022; Moradi et al.,
2021; Sipahioglu et al., 1999) explored the possibilities of making high plant ingredient
fraction hybrid cheeses and shown that this is possible above the 20-30% previously in-
vestigated, although also here it is the 30% pea protein cheese which looks most promis-
ing. Nevertheless, this opens up options for product development on many parameters.
One such suggestion from the author to improve texture is tuning the processing in such
a way that the milk casein network compensates for the weakening created by the incor-
poration of plant protein such as what is seen for the hardness and cohesiveness in this
study.
It is though not only the textural parameters explored in this study that are important for
the development of a hybrid cheese product, but also the taste proves to be a drawback,
however as many has suggested before this could possibly be alleviated by fermentation
and therefore future research should be conducted on not only the ability of even ferment-
ing and acidifying this matrix but also with a focus on minimizing these off-flavours and
possibly creating new flavours with cheese-like association. This could be detrimental for
the success of hybrid cheese as ultimately it must be pleasant to consume. However,
switching from GDL to fermentation based acidification could also impact the texture and
therefore the development migth require an iterative developmental process.
44
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
Alghooneh, A., Behbahani, B. A., Taghdir, M., Sepandi, M., & Abbaszadeh, S. (2022). Un-
derstanding the Relationship between Microstructure and Physicochemical Prop-
erties of Ultrafiltered Feta-Type Cheese Containing Saturea bachtiarica Leaf Ex-
tract. Foods, 11(12). https://doi.org/10.3390/FOODS11121728
Anifantakis, E. (1996). Traditional feta cheese. Feta and Related Cheeses, 49–69. https:
//doi.org/10.1533/9781845698225.49
Aschemann-Witzel, J., Gantriis, R. F., Fraga, P., & Perez-Cueto, F. J. (2021). Plant-based
food and protein trend from a business perspective: markets, consumers, and the
challenges and opportunities in the future. Critical Reviews in Food Science and
Nutrition, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2020.1793730
Atia, M., Wenshui, X., & Guonong, Z. (2004). Effect of soy protein supplementation on
the quality of ripening Cheddar-type cheese. International Journal of Dairy Tech-
nology, 57(4), 209–214. https://doi.org/10.1111/J.1471-0307.2004.00107.X
Aydar, A. Y. (2023). An Overview of Plant-Based Food Alternatives (PBFAs): Classifica-
tion, Textural and Sensory Characteristics. Plant-Based Foods: Ingredients, Tech-
nology and Health Aspects, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 031- 27443-
5{\_}1
Beghdadi, A., Picart-Palmade, L., Cunault, C., Marchesseau, S., & Chevalier-Lucia, D.
(2022). Impact of two thermal processing routes on protein interactions and acid
gelation properties of casein micelle-pea protein mixture compared to casein micelle-
whey protein one. Food Research International, 155, 111060. https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.FOODRES.2022.111060
Bhalerao, S. (2023). Compact Letter Display in Python.
Bonilla, J. C., & Clausen, M. P. (2022). Super-resolution microscopy to visualize and quan-
tify protein microstructural organization in food materials and its relation to rheol-
ogy: Egg white proteins. Food Hydrocolloids, 124, 107281. https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.FOODHYD.2021.107281
Budhathoki, S., Sawada, N., Iwasaki, M., Yamaji, T., Goto, A., Kotemori, A., Ishihara, J.,
Takachi, R., Charvat, H., Mizoue, T., Iso, H., & Tsugane, S. (2019). Association of
Animal and Plant Protein Intake With All-Cause and Cause-Specific Mortality in a
Japanese Cohort. JAMA Internal Medicine, 179(11), 1509–1518. https://doi.org/
10.1001/JAMAINTERNMED.2019.2806
Chihi, M.-L. L., Sok, N., & Saurel, R. (2018). Acid gelation of mixed thermal aggregates of
pea globulins and β-lactoglobulin. Food Hydrocolloids, 85, 120–128. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.FOODHYD.2018.07.006
Cho, Y. H., Lucey, J. A., & Singh, H. (1999). Rheological properties of acid milk gels as
affected by the nature of the fat globule surface material and heat treatment of
milk. International Dairy Journal, 9(8), 537–545. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0958-
6946(99)00123-5
Clune, S., Crossin, E., & Verghese, K. (2017). Systematic review of greenhouse gas emis-
sions for different fresh food categories. Journal of Cleaner Production, 140, 766–
783. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2016.04.082
Dickinson, E. (1994). Emulsions and droplet size control. Controlled Particle, Droplet and
Bubble Formation, 191–216. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-7506-1494-8.50012-2
45
==PAGE:58==
Dobson, S., & Marangoni, A. G. (2023). Methodology and development of a high-protein
plant-based cheese alternative. Current Research in Food Science, 7, 100632.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CRFS.2023.100632
Drigon, V., Nicolle, L., Guyomarc’H, F., Gagnaire, V., & Arvisenet, G. (2023). Attitudes and
beliefs of French consumers towards innovative food products that mix dairy and
plant-based components. International Journal of Gastronomy and Food Science,
32, 100725. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJGFS.2023.100725
El Soda, M., & Abd El-Salam, M. (2002). CHEESE | Cheeses Matured in Brine. Encyclope-
dia of Dairy Sciences, 406–411. https://doi.org/10.1016/B0-12-227235-8/00082-1
Euromonitor. (2020). Post-Dairy Era: The Unstoppable Rise of Plant-Based Alternatives
(tech. rep.). https://www.euromonitor.com/article/the-unstoppable-rise-of-plant-
based-alternatives
European Commission. (2002). Commission Regulation (EC) No 1829/2002 of 14 October
2002 amending the Annex to Regulation (EC) No 1107/96 with regard to the name
”Feta” (Text with EEA relevance). Official Journal L 277, 10–14. http://data.europa.
eu/eli/reg/2002/1829/oj
Fang, Y., Zhang, H., & Nishinari, K. (2021). Food Hydrocolloids: Functionalities and Appli-
cations. Food Hydrocolloids: Functionalities and Applications, 1–524. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-981-16-0320-4/COVER
Farshi, P., Mirmohammadali, S. N., Rajpurohit, B., Smith, J. S., & Li, Y. (2024). Pea pro-
tein and starch: Functional properties and applications in edible films. Journal of
Agriculture and Food Research, 15, 100927. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JAFR.2023.
100927
Finnegan, W., Yan, M., Holden, N. M., & Goggins, J. (2018). A review of environmental
life cycle assessment studies examining cheese production. International Journal
of Life Cycle Assessment, 23(9), 1773–1787. https://doi.org/10.1007/S11367-017-
1407-7/TABLES/9
Fox, P. F., Guinee, T. P., Cogan, T. M., & McSweeney, P. L. H. (2017). Cheese: Structure,
Rheology and Texture. Fundamentals of Cheese Science, 475–532. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-4899-7681-9{\_}14
Friedman, H. H., Whitney, J. E., & Szczesniak, A. S. (1963). The Texturometer—A New
Instrument for Objective Texture Measurement. Journal of Food Science, 28(4),
390–396. https://doi.org/10.1111/J.1365-2621.1963.TB00216.X
Gaucheron, F. (2005). The minerals of milk. Reproduction, nutrition, development, 45(4),
473–483. https://doi.org/10.1051/RND:2005030
Genet, B. M., Sedó Molina, G. E., Wätjen, A. P., Barone, G., Albersten, K., Ahrné, L. M.,
Hansen, E. B., & Bang-Berthelsen, C. H. (2023). Hybrid Cheeses—Supplementation
of Cheese with Plant-Based Ingredients for a Tasty, Nutritious and Sustainable
Food Transition. Fermentation 2023, Vol. 9, Page 667, 9(7), 667. https://doi.org/
10.3390/FERMENTATION9070667
Geronikou, A., Srimahaeak, T., Rantsiou, K., Triantafillidis, G., Larsen, N., & Jespersen, L.
(2020). Occurrence of Yeasts in White-Brined Cheeses: Methodologies for Identi-
fication, Spoilage Potential and Good Manufacturing Practices. Frontiers in Micro-
biology, 11, 582778. https://doi.org/10.3389/FMICB.2020.582778/BIBTEX
Grasberger, K., Sunds, A. V., Sanggaard, K. W., Hammershøj, M., & Corredig, M. (2022).
Behavior of mixed pea-whey protein at interfaces and in bulk oil-in-water emul-
sions. Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies, 81, 103136. https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.IFSET.2022.103136
46
==PAGE:59==
Grasberger, K. F., Gregersen, S. B., Jensen, H. B., Sanggaard, K. W., & Corredig, M.
(2021). Plant-dairy protein blends: gelation behaviour in a filled particle matrix.
Food Structure, 29, 100198. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FOOSTR.2021.100198
Grasso, N., Roos, Y., Crowley, S., & O’Mahony, J. (2023). Physicochemical properties of
plant-based cheese alternatives fortified with calcium. LWT, 115657. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.LWT.2023.115657
Gregory, P. J., Ingram, J. S., & Brklacich, M. (2005). Climate change and food security.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 360(1463),
2139–2148. https://doi.org/10.1098/RSTB.2005.1745
Gunasekaran, S., & Ak, M. M. (2002). Cheese Rheology and Texture. https://doi.org/10.
1201/9781420031942
Haertlé, T. (2016). Enzymes: Analysis and Food Processing. Encyclopedia of Food and
Health, 524–531. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-384947-2.00257-9
Hu, X., Xiang, X., Ju, Q., Li, S., & Julian McClements, D. (2024). Impact of lipid droplet
characteristics on the rheology of plant protein emulsion gels: Droplet size, con-
centration, and interfacial properties. Food Research International, 191, 114734.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FOODRES.2024.114734
Hunter, J. D. (2007). Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment. Computing in science & en-
gineering, 9(3), 90–95.
Hyun, K., Wilhelm, M., Klein, C. O., Cho, K. S., Nam, J. G., Ahn, K. H., Lee, S. J., Ewoldt,
R. H., & McKinley, G. H. (2011). A review of nonlinear oscillatory shear tests: Anal-
ysis and application of large amplitude oscillatory shear (LAOS). Progress in Poly-
mer Science, 36(12), 1697–1753. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.PROGPOLYMSCI.
2011.02.002
Janssen, S. W., Pouvreau, L., & de Vries, R. J. (2024). Commercial plant protein isolates:
The effect of insoluble particles on gelation properties. Food Hydrocolloids, 154,
110049. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FOODHYD.2024.110049
Jeewanthi, R. K. C., Lee, N. K., Lee, K. A., Yoon, Y. C., & Paik, H. D. (2015). Compara-
tive analysis of improved soy-mozzarella cheeses made of ultrafiltrated and partly
skimmed soy blends with other mozzarella types. Journal of Food Science and
Technology, 52(8), 5172–5179. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / S13197 - 014 - 1542 -
0/FIGURES/3
Kalab, M. (1995). Practical aspects of electron microscopy in cheese research. Advances
in Experimental Medicine and Biology, 367, 247–276. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
1-4615-1913-3{\_}15/COVER
Khiabanian, N. O., Motamedzadegan, A., Naghizadeh Raisi, S., & Alimi, M. (2020). Chem-
ical, textural, rheological, and sensorial properties of wheyless feta cheese as influ-
enced by replacement of milk protein concentrate with pea protein isolate. Journal
of Texture Studies, 51(3), 488–500. https://doi.org/10.1111/JTXS.12508
Khiabanian, N. O., Motamedzadegan, A., Raisi, S. N., & Alimi, M. (2022). Structure–
rheology characterization of whey-less Feta cheese containing milk protein con-
centrate/soy protein isolate. Korea Australia Rheology Journal, 34(1), 35–49. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s13367-022-00020-3
Krstonošić, V. S., Kalić, M. D., Dapčević-Hadnađev, T. R., Lončarević, I. S., & Hadnađev,
M. S. (2020). Physico-chemical characterization of protein stabilized oil-in-water
emulsions. Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects,
602, 125045. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COLSURFA.2020.125045
Landbrug & Fødevarer. (2023). Analyse af danskernes syn på klima og baeredygtighed
(tech. rep.). https://lf.dk/media/5ubf0ssg/markedsanalyse- om- baeredygtighed-
marts-2023.pdf
47
==PAGE:60==
Landbrug & Fødevarer. (2024). Forbrugerne fokuserer på smagen, når de handler daglig-
varer (tech. rep.). https://lf.dk/tal-og-analyser/forbrugere-og-trends/forbrugerne-
fokuserer-paa-smagen-naar-de-handler-dagligvarer/
Langevin, D. (2023). Recent Advances on Emulsion and Foam Stability. Langmuir, 39(11),
3821–3828. https://doi.org/10.1021/ACS.LANGMUIR.2C03423/ASSET/IMAGES/
LARGE/LA2C03423{\_}0005.JPEG
Lassen, A. D., Christensen, L. M., Fagt, S., & Trolle, E. (2020). Råd om bæredygtig sund
kost - Fagligt grundlag for et supplement til De officielle Kostråd - DTU Findit (tech.
rep.). https://www.food.dtu.dk/english/-/media/Institutter/Foedevareinstituttet/
Publikationer/Pub-2020/Rapport-Raad-om-baeredygtig-kost.ashx?la=da&hash=
E3D5BD3F878A3C25C3DB48FD914A0AF7A55E8239
Lee, N. K., Mok, B. R., Jeewanthi, R. K. C., Yoon, Y. C., & Paik, H. D. (2015). Physico-
chemical and Microbiological Properties of Yogurt-cheese Manufactured with Ul-
trafiltrated Cow’s Milk and Soy Milk Blends. Food Science of Animal Resources,
35(2), 205–210. https://doi.org/10.5851/KOSFA.2015.35.2.205
Li, R., Ebbesen, M. F., Glover, Z. J., Jæger, T. C., Rovers, T. A., Svensson, B., Brewer,
J. R., Simonsen, A. C., Ipsen, R., & Hougaard, A. B. (2023). Discriminating be-
tween different proteins in the microstructure of acidified milk gels by super-resolution
microscopy. Food Hydrocolloids, 138, 108468. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FOODHYD.
2023.108468
Lie-Piang, A., Braconi, N., Boom, R. M., & van der Padt, A. (2021). Less refined ingre-
dients have lower environmental impact – A life cycle assessment of protein-rich
ingredients from oil- and starch-bearing crops. Journal of Cleaner Production, 292,
126046. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2021.126046
Lima Nascimento, L. G., Odelli, D., Fernandes de Carvalho, A., Martins, E., Delaplace,
G., Peres de sá Peixoto Júnior, P., Nogueira Silva, N. F., & Casanova, F. (2023).
Combination of Milk and Plant Proteins to Develop Novel Food Systems: What
Are the Limits? Foods 2023, Vol. 12, Page 2385, 12(12), 2385. https://doi.org/10.
3390/FOODS12122385
Litopoulou-Tzanetaki, E. (2007). Soft-ripened and fresh cheeses: Feta, Quark, Halloumi
and related varieties. Improving the Flavour of Cheese, 474–493. https://doi.org/
10.1533/9781845693053.4.474
Lonnie, M., & Johnstone, A. M. (2020). The public health rationale for promoting plant
protein as an important part of a sustainable and healthy diet. Nutrition Bulletin,
45(3), 281–293. https://doi.org/10.1111/NBU.12453
Lucey, J. A. (2002). Formation and Physical Properties of Milk Protein Gels. Journal of
Dairy Science, 85(2), 281–294. https://doi.org/10.3168/JDS.S0022- 0302(02)
74078-2
Lucey, J. A. (2014). Milk Protein Gels. Milk Proteins: from Expression to Food, Second
Edition, 493–523. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-405171-3.00017-9
Luo, M. R. (2015). CIELAB. Encyclopedia of Color Science and Technology, 1–7. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-27851-8{\_}11-1
Malkin, A. Y., Derkach, S. R., & Kulichikhin, V. G. (2023). Rheology of Gels and Yield-
ing Liquids. Gels 2023, Vol. 9, Page 715, 9(9), 715. https://doi.org/10.3390/
GELS9090715
Mariotti, F., Tomé, D., & Mirand, P. P. (2008). Converting Nitrogen into Protein—Beyond
6.25 and Jones’ Factors. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 48(2),
177–184. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408390701279749
48
==PAGE:61==
Masiá, C., Jensen, P. E., Petersen, I. L., & Buldo, P. (2022). Design of a Functional Pea
Protein Matrix for Fermented Plant-Based Cheese. Foods 2022, Vol. 11, Page 178,
11(2), 178. https://doi.org/10.3390/FOODS11020178
Masiá, C., Ong, L., Logan, A., Stockmann, R., Gambetta, J., Jensen, P. E., Rahimi Yazdi,
S., & Gras, S. (2023). Enhancing the textural and rheological properties of fermentation-
induced pea protein emulsion gels with transglutaminase. Soft Matter, 20(1), 133–
143. https://doi.org/10.1039/D3SM01001E
McKinney, W., et al. (2010). Data structures for statistical computing in python. Proceed-
ings of the 9th Python in Science Conference, 445, 51–56.
Mession, J. L., Roustel, S., & Saurel, R. (2017). Interactions in casein micelle - Pea protein
system (Part II): Mixture acid gelation with glucono-δ-lactone. Food Hydrocolloids,
73, 344–357. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FOODHYD.2017.06.029
Michel, F., Hartmann, C., & Siegrist, M. (2021). Consumers’ associations, perceptions and
acceptance of meat and plant-based meat alternatives. Food Quality and Prefer-
ence, 87, 104063. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FOODQUAL.2020.104063
Moradi, D., Ziarati, P., & Sawicka, B. (2021). Physicochemical and rheological properties
of lentil milk/inulin blend—A feta cheese analogue. Legume Science, 3(4), e80.
https://doi.org/10.1002/LEG3.80
Morrison, R. (2019). SEM Cryo-Stages and Preparation Chambers. Biological Field Emis-
sion Scanning Electron Microscopy: Volume I: Volume II, 1-2, 143–165. https://
doi.org/10.1002/9781118663233.CH8
Nega, A., & Moatsou, G. (2012). Proteolysis and related enzymatic activities in ten Greek
cheese varieties. Dairy Science and Technology, 92(1), 57–73. https://doi.org/10.
1007/S13594-011-0043-4
O’Kane, F. E., Happe, R. P., Vereijken, J. M., Gruppen, H., & Van Boekel, M. A. (2004).
Characterization of Pea Vicilin. 1. Denoting Convicilin as the α-Subunit of the
Pisum Vicilin Family. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 52(10), 3141–
3148. https://doi.org/10.1021/JF035104I
Oliveira, I. C., de Paula Ferreira, I. E., Casanova, F., Cavallieri, A. L. F., Lima Nascimento,
L. G., de Carvalho, A. F., & Nogueira Silva, N. F. (2022). Colloidal and Acid Gelling
Properties of Mixed Milk and Pea Protein Suspensions. Foods, 11(10). https://doi.
org/10.3390/FOODS11101383
Ong, L., Dagastine, R. R., Kentish, S. E., & Gras, S. L. (2011). Microstructure of milk gel
and cheese curd observed using cryo scanning electron microscopy and confocal
microscopy. LWT - Food Science and Technology, 44(5), 1291–1302. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.LWT.2010.12.026
O’Regan, J., Ennis, M. P., & Mulvihill, D. M. (2009). Milk proteins. Handbook of Hydrocol-
loids: Second Edition, 298–358. https://doi.org/10.1533/9781845695873.298
Özer, B. H. (1999). CHEESE | Microflora of White-brined Cheeses. Encyclopedia of Food
Microbiology, 397–403. https://doi.org/10.1006/RWFM.1999.0315
Panchal, B., & Bhandari, B. (2020). Butter and Dairy Fat Spreads. Dairy Fat Products and
Functionality, 509–532. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-41661-4{\_}21
Panthi, R. R., Jordan, K. N., Kelly, A. L., & Sheehan, J. J. (2017). Selection and Treatment
of Milk for Cheesemaking. Cheese: Chemistry, Physics and Microbiology: Fourth
Edition, 1, 23–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-417012-4.00002-8
Panthi, R. R., Kelly, A. L., Sheehan, J. J., Bulbul, K., Vollmer, A. H., & McMahon, D. J.
(2019). Influence of protein concentration and coagulation temperature on rennet-
induced gelation characteristics and curd microstructure. Journal of Dairy Science,
102(1), 177–189. https://doi.org/10.3168/JDS.2018-15039
49
==PAGE:62==
Peleg, M. (2019). The instrumental texture profile analysis revisited. Journal of Texture
Studies, 50(5), 362–368. https://doi.org/10.1111/JTXS.12392
Qamar, S., Bhandari, B., & Prakash, S. (2019). Effect of different homogenisation meth-
ods and UHT processing on the stability of pea protein emulsion. Food Research
International, 116, 1374–1385. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FOODRES.2018.10.028
Qian, F., Liu, G., Hu, F. B., Bhupathiraju, S. N., & Sun, Q. (2019). Association Between
Plant-Based Dietary Patterns and Risk of Type 2 Diabetes: A Systematic Review
and Meta-analysis. JAMA Internal Medicine, 179(10), 1335–1344. https://doi.org/
10.1001/JAMAINTERNMED.2019.2195
Raak, N., & Corredig, M. (2022). Kinetic aspects of casein micelle cross-linking by transg-
lutaminase at different volume fractions. Food Hydrocolloids, 128, 107603. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/J.FOODHYD.2022.107603
Rani, M., & Verma, N. S. (1995). Changes in organoleptic quality during ripening of cheese
made from cows and soya milk blends, using microbial rennet. Food Chemistry,
54(4), 369–375. https://doi.org/10.1016/0308-8146(95)00012-8
Ren, W., Xia, W., Gunes, D. Z., & Ahrné, L. (2024). Heat-induced gels from pea protein
soluble colloidal aggregates: Effect of calcium addition or pH adjustment on gela-
tion behavior and rheological properties. Food Hydrocolloids, 147, 109417. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/J.FOODHYD.2023.109417
Rinaldoni, A. N., Palatnik, D. R., Zaritzky, N., & Campderrós, M. E. (2014). Soft cheese-like
product development enriched with soy protein concentrates. LWT - Food Science
and Technology, 55(1), 139–147. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.LWT.2013.09.003
Schindelin, J., Arganda-Carreras, I., Frise, E., Kaynig, V., Longair, M., Pietzsch, T., Preibisch,
S., Rueden, C., Saalfeld, S., Schmid, B., Tinevez, J. Y., White, D. J., Harten-
stein, V., Eliceiri, K., Tomancak, P., & Cardona, A. (2012). Fiji: an open-source
platform for biological-image analysis. Nature Methods 2012 9:7, 9(7), 676–682.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2019
Schneider, C. A., Rasband, W. S., & Eliceiri, K. W. (2012). NIH Image to ImageJ: 25 years
of image analysis. Nature Methods 2012 9:7, 9(7), 671–675. https://doi.org/10.
1038/nmeth.2089
Seabold, S., & Perktold, J. (2010). statsmodels: Econometric and statistical modeling with
python. In 9th python in science conference.
Shanthakumar, P., Klepacka, J., Bains, A., Chawla, P., Dhull, S. B., & Najda, A. (2022).
The Current Situation of Pea Protein and Its Application in the Food Industry.
Molecules, 27(16). https://doi.org/10.3390/MOLECULES27165354
Short, E. C., Kinchla, A. J., & Nolden, A. A. (2021). Plant-Based Cheeses: A Systematic
Review of Sensory Evaluation Studies and Strategies to Increase Consumer Ac-
ceptance. Foods 2021, Vol. 10, Page 725, 10(4), 725. https://doi.org/10.3390/
FOODS10040725
Singh, V. K., Qureshi, D., Nayak, S. K., & Pal, K. (2018). Bigels. Polymeric Gels: Charac-
terization, Properties and Biomedical Applications, 265–282. https://doi.org/10.
1016/B978-0-08-102179-8.00010-7
Sipahioglu, O., Alvarez, V. B., & Solano-Lopez, C. (1999). Structure, physico-chemical
and sensory properties of feta cheese made with tapioca starch and lecithin as fat
mimetics. International Dairy Journal, 9(11), 783–789. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0958-6946(99)00150-8
Stading, M., & Hermansson, A. M. (1990). Viscoelastic behaviour of β-lactoglobulin gel
structures. Food Hydrocolloids, 4(2), 121–135. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0268-
005X(09)80013-1
50
==PAGE:63==
Sun, X. D., & Arntfield, S. D. (2012). Molecular forces involved in heat-induced pea protein
gelation: Effects of various reagents on the rheological properties of salt-extracted
pea protein gels. Food Hydrocolloids, 28(2), 325–332. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
FOODHYD.2011.12.014
Szczesniak, A. S. (1995). Letters. Journal of Food Science, 60(6), vii–vii. https://doi.org/
10.1111/J.1365-2621.1995.TB04547.X
Tang, Q., Roos, Y. H., & Miao, S. (2023). Plant Protein versus Dairy Proteins: A pH-
Dependency Investigation on Their Structure and Functional Properties. Foods,
12(2). https://doi.org/10.3390/FOODS12020368
Tanger, C., Engel, J., & Kulozik, U. (2020). Influence of extraction conditions on the con-
formational alteration of pea protein extracted from pea flour. Food Hydrocolloids,
107, 105949. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FOODHYD.2020.105949
Trolle, E., Christensen, L. M., & Lassen, A. D. (2024). Opdatering af det faglige grund-
lag for De officielle Kostråd i forhold til Nordiske Næringsstofanbefalinger 2023:
Planterig kost 2-70 år - DTU Findit (tech. rep.). https://www.food.dtu.dk/-/media/
institutter/foedevareinstituttet/publikationer/pub-2024/de-officielle-kostraad-ift-nnr-
2023.pdf
Tunick, M. H. (2011). Small-strain dynamic rheology of food protein networks. Journal of
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 59(5), 1481–1486. https://doi.org/10.1021/
JF1016237/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/JF-2010-016237{\_}0007.JPEG
Vermeulen, S. J., Campbell, B. M., & Ingram, J. S. (2012). Climate change and food sys-
tems. Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 37(Volume 37, 2012), 195–
222. https://doi.org/10.1146/ANNUREV-ENVIRON-020411-130608
Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., Haberland, M., Reddy, T., Cournapeau, D.,
Burovski, E., Peterson, P., Weckesser, W., Bright, J., van der Walt, S. J., Brett,
M., Wilson, J., Millman, K. J., Mayorov, N., Nelson, A. R. J., Jones, E., Kern, R.,
Larson, E., … SciPy 1.0 Contributors. (2020). SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms
for Scientific Computing in Python. Nature Methods, 17, 261–272. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2
Wang, Y., Kim, W., Naik, R. R., Spicer, P. T., & Selomulya, C. (2023). Tuning the pea protein
gel network to mimic the heterogenous microstructure of animal protein. Food
Hydrocolloids, 140, 108611. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FOODHYD.2023.108611
Willett, W., Rockström, J., Loken, B., Springmann, M., Lang, T., Vermeulen, S., Garnett,
T., Tilman, D., DeClerck, F., Wood, A., Jonell, M., Clark, M., Gordon, L. J., Fanzo,
J., Hawkes, C., Zurayk, R., Rivera, J. A., De Vries, W., Majele Sibanda, L., …
Murray, C. J. (2019). Food in the Anthropocene: the EAT–Lancet Commission on
healthy diets from sustainable food systems. The Lancet, 393(10170), 447–492.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31788-4
Xia, W., Czaja, T. P., Via, M., Zhang, H., Clausen, M. P., & Ahrné, L. (2024). Acid-induced
gels from mixtures of micellar casein and pea protein: Effect of protein ratio and
preheating route. Food Hydrocolloids, 153, 110045. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
FOODHYD.2024.110045
Xia, W., Zhu, L., Delahaije, R. J., Cheng, Z., Zhou, X., & Sagis, L. M. (2022). Acid-induced
gels from soy and whey protein thermally-induced mixed aggregates: Rheology
and microstructure. Food Hydrocolloids, 125, 107376. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
FOODHYD.2021.107376
Zhu, K., Kanu, P. J., Claver, I. P., Zhu, K., Qian, H., & Zhou, H. (2009). A method for
evaluating Hunter whiteness of mixed powders. Advanced Powder Technology,
20(2), 123–126. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APT.2008.04.001
51
==PAGE:64==
52
==PAGE:65==
List of Figures
1.1
Planetary Health Diet. From EAT-Lancet Report (Willett et al., 2019). . . . .
1
1.2
Example of a flowchart of a feta cheese production.(Modified from Geronikou
et al. (2020))
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Casein micelle. Adapted from Lima Nascimento et al. (2023) and Gaucheron
(2005). Red: α-casein, Blue: β-casein, Yellow: κ-casein, Dark dots: cal-
cium phosphate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1
Ratios of PPI and MCI used to make the mixed emulsions stated in w/w-%.
11
2.2
Flowchart of curd formation preparation for rheological tests . . . . . . . . . 13
2.3
Flowchart of the cheese making process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.1
Droplet size distribution as analysed by laser diffraction. a) Size distribu-
tion plot of representative replicate. b) Size class at respectively 10% (D10),
50% (D50), and 90% (D90) volume density. c) The normalized Span factor.
PPI: 100% PPI , PPI70: 70% PPI, PPIMCI: 50% PPI / 50% MCI, MCI70:
70% MCI, MCI: 100% MCI. Error bars show the standard deviation of tech-
incal and biological triplicates. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2
In situ gelation time sweep of acid (solid line) and enzyme (dashed line)
induced gelation of the different mixes respectively (blue= storage modu-
lus, green = loss modulus). Simultaneously measured pH is shown in red.
Shadow showcases the error of triplicates. Time = 0s, is from approx 2
min after addition of enzyme/acid. Enzyme treatment was done using Mi-
crolant from Chr. Hansen while acidifcation was by 1.5% GDL addition.
Time sweep was performed at temp: 37°C, 1Hz, 0.1% strain. . . . . . . . . 22
3.3
Extrapolated Final storage modulus and tan(δ) value of the time sweep
calculated as the mean of the last 100 measurements (after time 8300s) of
the triplicates. Time sweep was performed at temp: 37°C, 1Hz, 0.1% strain. 24
3.4
Extrapoilated values from strain sweep of the samples. a) Average storage
modulus (G’) in the linear viscoelastic region (LVR) of triplicate samples. b)
Average critical strain value (CSV) estimated as the time point of 5% de-
crease from average G’ of triplicate samples. Strain sweep was performed
at 18°C and 1Hz. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.5
Frequency sweep, 0.1% Strain, 18°C data. a) Fitted frequency dependency
constant, n, plotted against fraction of PPI/MCI. b) Change in G’ over fre-
quency.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.6
Representative composite confocal images of the curd samples gelated
either using enzyme (microlant) or acid (GDL). The images show the protein
structure (red) and fat droplets (yellow) after >1hr. White scale bar equals
10µm All samples were imaged the day of formation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.7
Representative composite confocal images of the curd samples gelated
either using enzyme (microlant) or acid (GDL). The images only show the
protein structure in red to more clearly show the protein network structure. . 29
3.8
Say Cheese! Representative images (bottom) of the cheeses produced
from the different emulsions and their estimated hunter whiteness (HW)
index (top). Compact letter display based on Tukey’s HSD test (CI: 95%)
indicating significant difference between the samples.
. . . . . . . . . . . . 30
53
==PAGE:66==
3.9
Yield and compositional analysis of the cheese samples. a) Visual repre-
sentation of yield of whey (blue), loss(grey) and cheese with composition
(yellow nuances). Protein content is calculated based on a relative N-factor
from the assumed fraction of PPI to MCI. b) Yield of cheese presented as
average ± standard deviation. More detailed values can be found in Ap-
pendix D. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.10 Whey Protein Characterisation. SDS-PAGE, 4-12% bis-tris NuPAGE show-
ing from left to right: Marker, MCI solution, whey of MCI-, MCI70,- PPIMCI-,
PPI70-, and PPI cheese, PPI solution. All diluted and reduced using DTT.
Protein groups are indicated on the left for milk proteins (Raak & Corredig,
2022) and on the right for pea protein (O’Kane et al., 2004; Tanger et al.,
2020). On the right the marker is shown and annotated with the protein
sizes in kDa.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.11 Results of Texture Analysis. Average values obtained from the same test
performed on a commercial salad cheese by Arla, Puck, is shown as a red
line for comparison purposes. As the test often produces outliers, the repli-
cate with the largest and smallest value have consequently been omitted to
better describe the nature of the product. CLD annotation show the results
from a Tukey HSD test (CI=95%).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.12 Cryo-SEM images of the cheeses at 6000x magnification using a secondary
electron detector under high vacuum. After cryo-freezing the images were
all sublimated at -100°C for 10 minutes to remove any formed ice crystals
on the surface. The cheeses are all sputter coated with aluminium. . . . . . 37
3.13 Cryo-SEM images of MCI an PPIMCI cheeses which have been sublimated
additionally compared to the other images revealing spider-web like structure. 38
A.1 Frequency sweep of the gels. Average of triplicates is shown with shaded
area to show standard deviation. The measurements were conducted at
18°C, 0.1% strain and for frequencies between 100.0 to 0.01 Hz. Enzyme
treatment was done using Microlant from Chr. Hansen while acidifcation
was by 1.5% GDL addition. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.2 Oscillatory amplitude strain sweep of the gels. Average of triplicates is
shown with shaded area to show standard deviation. The measurements
were conducted at 18°C, 1 Hz frequency and with strain from 0.01 to 10000%. 59
A.3 In situ gelation timesweep of solutions without added oil. Time = 0s, is
from approx 2 min after addition of acid. Acidifcation was done by 1.5%
GDL addition. Timesweep was performed at temp: 37°C, 1Hz, 0.1% strain.
60
B.1 Measured temperature profile of heat treatment (waterbath at 95°C, 30 min)
for PPI and MCI emulsion in respectively 100mL and 50mL blue cap bottle.
Temperature was measured using a digital probe and logged over time ev-
ery 10 seconds. The probe was placed in the middle of the blue cap bottle
and therefore represents the center temperature. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
C.1 Acidification curves of PPI and MCI solutions (without added rapeseed oil)
using varying amounts of GDL (from 0.5 - 2%). The graphs shown are
averages of triplicates. Measurements were conducted in falcon tubes us-
ing and iCinac (KPM, USA) for continuos multiple pH measurement in a
waterbath at 37°C. The trial was part of pre-trials to determine processing
conditions for the cheese samples. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
54
==PAGE:67==
List of Tables
1.1
Compositional analyis of commercial feta (n=19). Adopted from Nega and
Moatsou (2012). All values are in the unit w/w-%. FDM = fat composition
of dry matter weight. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Protein groups found in Pea Protein
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Summary of present studies investigating plant-based and hybrid cheese. .
8
2.1
Texture Profile Analysis (TPA) parameters and how they are deducted by
the software (Friedman et al., 1963; Peleg, 2019; Szczesniak, 1995) . . . . 17
3.1
Protein content analysed using the DUMAS method. (Average ± standard
deviation of triplicate samples)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Time to gel point, estimated graphically as the point at which G’ and G”
cross. Further the averagen measured pH at gel point is shown alongside
the average final pH measured for the time sweep, calculated from the last
10 measurements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.3
Composition of the samples. Dry based composition is estimated from mea-
sured moisture/solids content of the cheeses. Protein content is estimated
based on a relative N-factor from the assumed fraction of PPI to MCI. Com-
pact letter display based on Tukey’s HSD test (CI: 95%) indicating signifi-
cant difference between the samples.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.4
Average pH measured of the cheese before (in emulsions) and after (in
cheeses). Compact letter display based on Tukey’s HSD test (CI: 95%)
indicating significant difference between the samples.
. . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.5
Analysis of Nitrogen in the whey of the cheeses measured using the DU-
MAS method.
The protein concentration is estimated using relative N-
factors based on the protein fractions. Protein mass is estimated using
the average mass of whey for each sample. Compact letter display based
on Tukey’s HSD test (CI: 95%) indicating significant difference between the
samples. In Appendix E another table showing protein content based on
N-factor of either MCI or PPI can be found.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
A.1 Data from frequency sweep fitted using the power law model. Where n is
the frequency dependency, log(K) is the logarithmic value of G’ at 1Hz and
K is G’ at 1Hz. For each value the average (avg) and standard deviation
(std) of triplicates are shown.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
D.1 Weight fraction (w/w-%) of the initial weight used for production of the sam-
ples. Table includes the compositional elements of the cheese samples
(Protein, Ash, Fat, Moisture, Other) the dry matter of the cheese samples,
the total cheese yield, whey yield and the calculated loss. The table in-
cludes CLD annotation showing the results of a one-way ANOVA test paired
with Tukeys HSD test (CI95%). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
55
==PAGE:68==
E.1 Analysis of Nitrogen in the whey of the cheeses measured using the DU-
MAS method. The protein concentration is estimated using the N-factors
for respectively MCI (6.15) and PPI (5.36). Protein mass is estimated using
the average mass of whey for each sample. On the last line the moisture
content of each sample is shown. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
E.2 Estimated molecular weight of identified bands from SDS-PAGe. Analy-
sis was done using ImageJ(Schneider et al., 2012) software to analyse
band peaks and quantify travel distance. Distance travelled of bands in the
marker lane vs size in kDa was fitted using linear regression in the range
110-10 kDa (R2 = 0.9921). From this the size of the bands in the other
lanes were estimated. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
56
==PAGE:69==
A
Rheology of Curd Formation
Figure A.1: Frequency sweep of the gels. Average of triplicates is shown with shaded
area to show standard deviation. The measurements were conducted at 18°C, 0.1%
strain and for frequencies between 100.0 to 0.01 Hz. Enzyme treatment was done using
Microlant from Chr. Hansen while acidifcation was by 1.5% GDL addition.
57
==PAGE:70==
Table A.1: Data from frequency sweep fitted using the power law model. Where n is the
frequency dependency, log(K) is the logarithmic value of G’ at 1Hz and K is G’ at 1Hz. For
each value the average (avg) and standard deviation (std) of triplicates are shown.
n
log(K)
K
MCI
Acid
0.16±0.0037
3.44±0.03
2774.12±174.64
Enzyme
0.13±0.0008
3.77±0.01
5852.67±160.01
MCI70
Acid
0.16±0.0018
3.32±0.01
2079.86±71.02
Enzyme
0.13±0.0207
3.41±0.09
2609.31±524.04
PPI
Acid
0.09±0.0017
3.66±0.11
4720.51±1163.73
Enzyme
0.18±0.0271
1.75±0.11
57.17±15.58
PPI70
Acid
0.09±0.0058
3.30±0.06
2002.08±268.69
Enzyme
0.12±0.0136
2.53±0.06
341.43±46.90
PPIMCI
Acid
0.12±0.0045
3.27±0.05
1850.20±217.62
Enzyme
0.11±0.0027
2.98±0.06
960.57±130.85
58
==PAGE:71==
Figure A.2: Oscillatory amplitude strain sweep of the gels. Average of triplicates is shown
with shaded area to show standard deviation. The measurements were conducted at
18°C, 1 Hz frequency and with strain from 0.01 to 10000%.
59
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.3: In situ gelation timesweep of solutions without added oil. Time = 0s, is
from approx 2 min after addition of acid. Acidifcation was done by 1.5% GDL addition.
Timesweep was performed at temp: 37°C, 1Hz, 0.1% strain.
60
==PAGE:73==
B
Heat Treatment
Figure B.1: Measured temperature profile of heat treatment (waterbath at 95°C, 30 min)
for PPI and MCI emulsion in respectively 100mL and 50mL blue cap bottle. Temperature
was measured using a digital probe and logged over time every 10 seconds. The probe
was placed in the middle of the blue cap bottle and therefore represents the center tem-
perature.
61
==PAGE:74==
C
Acidification Profiles
Figure C.1: Acidification curves of PPI and MCI solutions (without added rapeseed oil)
using varying amounts of GDL (from 0.5 - 2%). The graphs shown are averages of tripli-
cates. Measurements were conducted in falcon tubes using and iCinac (KPM, USA) for
continuos multiple pH measurement in a waterbath at 37°C. The trial was part of pre-trials
to determine processing conditions for the cheese samples.
62
==PAGE:75==
D
Yield & Compositional Analysis
Table D.1: Weight fraction (w/w-%) of the initial weight used for production of the sam-
ples. Table includes the compositional elements of the cheese samples (Protein, Ash,
Fat, Moisture, Other) the dry matter of the cheese samples, the total cheese yield, whey
yield and the calculated loss. The table includes CLD annotation showing the results of a
one-way ANOVA test paired with Tukeys HSD test (CI95%).
Sample
PPI
PPI70
PPIMCI
MCI70
MCI
Protein (%)
7.42±0.37(b)
7.29±0.36(b)
7.69±0.55(ab)
7.46±0.67(b)
8.49±0.23(a)
Ash (%)
0.39±0.03(c)
0.48±0.04(d)
0.55±0.06(bd)
0.60±0.04(ab)
0.67±0.01(a)
Fat (%)
17.32±2.44(b)
15.07±0.91(ab)
17.12±1.13(ab)
14.21±0.46(a)
14.99±1.06(ab)
Moisture (%)
31.04±2.76(c)
27.91±0.70(bc)
26.66±0.46(ab)
26.73±1.62(ab)
24.51±0.98(a)
Other (%)
3.17±1.50(a)
3.11±0.38(a)
2.45±0.72(a)
3.39±0.41(a)
1.82±0.72(a)
Dry matter total (%)
28.30±3.05(a)
25.95±0.71(a)
27.81±0.98(a)
25.65±0.97(a)
25.97±1.69(a)
Cheese total (%)
59.34±4.63(c)
53.86±1.10(a)
54.47±0.57(ac)
52.38±1.72(a)
50.48±1.21(a)
Whey (%)
13.80±0.93(c)
24.66±2.10(b)
29.16±1.32(d)
35.38±3.13(a)
37.38±1.18(a)
Loss (%)
26.86±5.37(c)
21.48±1.73(cb)
16.38±1.57(ab)
12.24±2.44(a)
12.14±1.47(a)
63
==PAGE:76==
E
Analysis of Whey
Table E.1: Analysis of Nitrogen in the whey of the cheeses measured using the DUMAS
method. The protein concentration is estimated using the N-factors for respectively MCI
(6.15) and PPI (5.36). Protein mass is estimated using the average mass of whey for
each sample. On the last line the moisture content of each sample is shown.
PPI
PPI70
PPIMCI
MCI70
MCI
Nitrogen (%)
0.27±0.10(b)
0.22±0.01(ab)
0.20±0.03(ab)
0.18±0.01(ab)
0.13±0.00(a)
Protein (%):
N-factor 6.15
1.65±0.64
1.38±0.08
1.22±0.16
1.11±0.05
0.81±0.03
N-factor 5.36
1.44±0.56
1.20±0.07
1.07±0.14
0.96±0.05
0.70±0.02
Protein (m):
N-factor 6.15
0.16±0.053(b)
0.24±0.026(a)
0.25±0.044(a)
0.27±0.015(a)
0.21±0.011(ab)
N-factor 5.36
0.14±0.046
0.21±0.023
0.22±0.039
0.24±0.013
0.18±0.010
64
==PAGE:77==
Table E.2: Estimated molecular weight of identified bands from SDS-PAGe. Analysis was
done using ImageJ(Schneider et al., 2012) software to analyse band peaks and quantify
travel distance. Distance travelled of bands in the marker lane vs size in kDa was fitted
using linear regression in the range 110-10 kDa (R2 = 0.9921). From this the size of the
bands in the other lanes were estimated.
Molecular weight in kDA
MCI sol
MCI
MCI70
PPIMCI
PPI70
PPI
PPI sol
82.71
69.06
71.19
65.00
65.30
68.75
66.09
63.06
61.55
58.63
59.35
57.93
51.62
51.00
50.08
47.71
39.53
33.16
32.96
30.60
30.79
30.65
34.81
27.98
27.64
27.81
28.15
24.34
22.09
17.87
17.33
17.20
16.92
20.17
15.35
15.05
15.54
15.54
12.88
12.88
12.96
13.60
13.60
65
==PAGE:78==
F
ImageJ Macro for Processing of
Confocal Images
1
run("Bio-Formats Macro Extensions");
2
3
inputDirectory = getDirectory("Choose a Directory of Images");
4
5
filelist = getFileList(inputDirectory);
6
7
for (i=0; i < filelist.length; i++){
8
id = Ext.setId(inputDirectory + filelist[i]);
9
10
run("Bio-Formats Importer", "open=[" + inputDirectory + filelist[i] + "]
autoscale color_mode=Default series_1");
11
//run("Brightness/Contrast...");
12
run("Enhance Contrast", "saturated=0.35");
13
14
Name1 = getTitle();
15
16
run("Bio-Formats Importer", "open=[" + inputDirectory + filelist[i] + "]
autoscale color_mode=Default series_2");
17
//run("Brightness/Contrast...");
18
run("Enhance Contrast", "saturated=0.35");
19
20
Name2 = getTitle();
21
22
run("Merge Channels...", "c1=["+ Name1 + "] c7=[" + Name2 + "] create");
23
24
selectImage("Composite");
25
26
run("Scale Bar...", "width=10 height=5 thickness=6 font=20 bold overlay");
27
28
saveAs("Tiff", inputDirectory + filelist[i] + ".tif");
29
saveAs("Jpeg", inputDirectory + filelist[i] + ".jpg");
30
31
close("*");
32
33
}
66
==PAGE:79==
67
==PAGE:80==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Henriks Damms Allé, Building 202
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.food.dtu.dk
