==PAGE:1==
Brain­computer interface implemented on au­
thentication for cookie­session
Master Thesis
DTU Human­centered Artificial Intelligence
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Cheng­Liang Lu
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
Approval
Cheng­Liang Lu ­ s220034
Signature
Date
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This work explores a new approach for authentication using brainwave data, present­
ing a potential alternative to traditional cookie­based authentication methods. Given the
security vulnerabilities associated with cookie leakage, which can sometimes avoid Two­
Factor Authentication (2FA), this new method offers an innovative solution to enhance
security. The electroencephalogram (EEG) data were collected using a Muse S head­
band, with data acquisition through the Lab Streaming Layer (LSL) and Pental Metrics
software. The data were processed to obtain power spectral density (PSD) using the
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) on the comparison of power bands.
Utilized PSD measurements across various frequency bands—beta, alpha, theta, and
delta—to identify and analyze distinctive patterns. Several machine learning models were
employed, including Support Vector Machine (SVM), Fully Connected Network, Random
Forest, Extra Trees, Gradient Boosted Machine, and XGBoost, to discern and classify
these patterns. To evaluate models’ performance and handle diverse perspectives, multi­
classification models were initially used. The Extra Trees model emerged as the most
effective and was subsequently adapted into a binary classification model for practical
implementation.
The optimized binary Extra Trees classification model achieved an accuracy of 0.83, pre­
cision of 0.69, recall of 0.52, and an F1 score of 0.6 during the evaluation phase. As a first
prototype, the demo emphasizes functional integration and seamless incorporation into
website workflows, rather than solely focusing on maximizing performance metrics.
This project aligns with the increasing trend towards using headset devices and brain­
computer interfaces (BCIs). It underlines the significant potential of brainwave­based au­
thentication to transform traditional authentication methods, potentially reducing cookies
and session­based security with more secure and user­friendly alternatives.
ii
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Cheng­Liang Lu, MSc Human­centered Artificial Intelligence, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
Weizhi Meng, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science
The author wishes to express thanks to Professor Meng for the research guidance, sug­
gestions, and advice.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The problem face nowadays
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.4
Project in abbreviation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background and Literature Review
3
2.1
P300 Event­related Potential
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
SSVEP: Steady­State Visual Evoked Potential
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Brain­Computer Interface based User Authentication System for Personal
Device Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
The Rise of Power Bands in BCI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Multifactor Authentication System Using Simplified EEG Brain­Computer
Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Towards Brain­Computer Interface (BCI) and Gestural­ Based Authentica­
tion for Individuals who are Blind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.7
Motor Imagery and Mental Imagery for EEG­Based Authentication . . . . . 12
2.8
Conclution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Our Proposed Approach
15
3.1
Hardware ­ EEG measure device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Streaming and Receiving EEG data over LSL ­ Petal Metrics software . . . 17
3.3
The dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.4
Machine Learning models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4
Evaluation Results and Discussion
47
4.1
Multiclass classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.2
Binary class classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
4.3
Demo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
4.4
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5
Conclusion
73
Bibliography
75
A Appendix: Source code
79
A.1 Data preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
A.2 Multi­classification models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
A.3 Binary classification model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
B Appendix:Results
117
B.1 Multi­classification additional results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
B.2 Binary classification additional results (Extra Trees) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
The problem face nowadays
Brain­computer interfaces are the trend for the future. We could detect this from films,
technology exhibitions, and tech corporations. It is a strong tendency for our generation.
However, as new technologies’ equipment keeps updating, our security methods for those
cutting­edge technologies should also be caught up.
One of the most common causes of information leakage is cookie­session. In order to
make users’ experience convenient, many websites send cookies written in our local ter­
minals to smooth the switching process between multiple websites that are needed to log
in or sign up. However, if the cookie information gets leaked, the crackers have multiple
ways to misuse personal accounts. This result will surely be a disaster for users.
1.2
The hypothesis
As the research described [1], this thread has existed for many years. The higher the
quality of user experience requests, the higher the percentage of the information getting
leaked [2]. To build a highly confidential system connection between servers and users,
utilizing session IDs within SSL connections will offer significant benefits. However, re­
building a new connection with every switch between websites can lead to longer reload
times, negatively impacting the user experience. To address this, we propose an idea
about integrating a brain­computer interface system to authenticate users, taking about
20­25 seconds. This approach assumes allowing for convenience and concealed user
identification, maintaining high security while ensuring a smooth and efficient user expe­
rience.
1.3
Related Work
The field of brain­computer interfaces (BCIs) has witnessed considerable research, most
of which has been conducted in laboratory settings with sophisticated and costly equip­
ment. While these studies have yielded valuable insights and achievements, there re­
mains a significant gap in translating these findings into practical, everyday applications.
Recent research has begun to focus on commercial brainwave measurement headsets.
One notable study utilized binary tree models within its system, inspiring this project to
explore tree­based models for multi­classification tasks. This research incorporated Mi­
crosoft software tools to expedite the training process and model selection, ultimately ap­
plying the developed model to a picture­based authentication system. It assumed that the
ratio of different frequency bands in brainwave patterns might exhibit distinctive changes
when a person viewed familiar images. Despite the innovative approach, the results were
not highly reliable, though the concept holds considerable potential.
Another study investigated various authentication methods, including 4­digit PINs, facial
expressions, emotional states, mental commands, and mixed techniques, to assess their
performance. While the 4­digit PIN method was the fastest and most accurate, taking
only 1.455 seconds to complete the authentication process, emotion­based authentication
stood out among the other methods. It achieved the highest accuracy at 68% and was
notably efficient, requiring only 10.1 seconds. This finding underlines the relevance of
incorporating imaginative tasks into our project, as these can evoke a range of emotions
and provide rich data for authentication.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
1
==PAGE:10==
Despite advancements, research involving simpler measurement devices for authentica­
tion has yet to meet expectations in terms of performance. More opportunities remain
for refinement in this domain. In addition, existing devices often feature rigid structures,
contrasting with the Muse S’s soft, comfortable, and concealable headband design. This
highlights the significance and forward­looking nature of our research, as it aims to im­
prove both user experience and practical applicability in real­world settings.
1.4
Project in abbreviation
In this project, the device transmits electroencephalogram (EEG) data via the lab stream­
ing layer (LSL) back to the terminal. The system employs the Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT) to convert signals from the time domain to the frequency domain, subsequently
transforming them into Power Spectral Density (PSD). PSD data are categorized into four
distinct frequency ranges.
By analyzing the ratio differences across these four frequency ranges, the project aims
to train machine learning models to identify patterns that enable the system to accurately
predict the correct categories of commands or mental imagery during the authentication
process.
The first stage of analysis involves multi­classification, which determines whether the
models can differentiate between various commands and mental imagery based on power­
band ratios across different frequency ranges. This stage evaluates the performance and
limitations of several models.
In the second stage, the best­performing model from the multi­classification stage is se­
lected and adapted for binary classification. The dataset of the tasks used in this stage is
derived from the highest­scoring outcomes of the previous stage. The goal is to develop
a system suitable for the demo application and to assess the model’s capabilities in a
binary classification context.
The web page flow for the demo is quite fluent, but the authentication system still has
much room to improve. If the system achieves a huge improvement, this invention will
impact the field of brain­computer interfaces since no one has used the simple and low­
cost commercial headband brainwave device to implement a fast authentication system.
While the flow of the demo’s web pages is quite smooth, there is still significant room for
improvement in the authentication system. If future development achieves substantial en­
hancements in this system, it could have a profound impact on the field of brain­computer
interfaces, as it utilizes a simple and low­cost commercial headband device to implement
a rapid authentication system. This innovative approach has not been previously explored
in this context.
2
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:11==
2
Background and Literature Review
There is quite a lot of literature delving into using brain­computer interfaces implemented
in authentication, [3] so this chapter will review the famous methods utilized in those pa­
pers and journals and the analysis techniques.
2.1
P300 Event­related Potential
P300 (or P3) event­related potential is a prominent positive deflection in the brain’s elec­
trical activity, typically peaking around 300 milliseconds after a significant or unexpected
stimulus is presented[4]. Recorded via scalp electrodes, it reflects a subject’s attention,
detection, and recognition of the stimulus[5]. The P300 wave has emerged as a valuable
tool in brain­computer interface (BCI) research due to its ability to translate user intent
into control signals[6].
One of the most common methods for eliciting the P300 response is the ”oddball paradigm”[7].
In this paradigm, frequent, non­target stimuli are interspersed with infrequent target stim­
uli. The P300 wave is most pronounced when subjects actively detect and categorize the
target stimuli[8].
Recent studies have explored optimizing P300­based BCIs for communication and control
applications. For instance, Bianchi et al. [9] investigated the use of machine learning
algorithms to improve P300 classification accuracy and performance, leading to significant
improvements in usability and effectiveness. Moreover, R. Ma et al.[10] present a novel
approach to enhance the reliability and performance of P300­based BCIs by incorporating
Bayesian neural networks. By modeling uncertainty, the proposed method improves the
system’s robustness to variability in EEG signals. The study leverages deep learning
for effective feature extraction and classification, demonstrating significant improvements
and reliability in BCI operation.
The P300 wave’s distinct characteristics and its association with cognitive processing
make it a powerful tool for BCIs. As research progresses, advancements in signal pro­
cessing, machine learning, deep learning, and integration with other modalities hold sig­
nificant promise for further refining P300­based BCIs to empower users with more intuitive
and efficient communication and control interfaces.
2.2
SSVEP: Steady­State Visual Evoked Potential
Steady­state visually Evoked Potential (SSVEP) is a prominent technique within Brain­
Computer Interfaces (BCIs) that leverages visual stimulation for control purposes[11]. It
relies on the brain’s natural tendency to synchronize its electrical activity with the fre­
quency of flickering visual stimuli presented on a screen[12]. These stimuli can range
from a few Hertz (Hz) to even 80 Hz or higher, with each frequency corresponding to a
specific control command within the BCI system [13].
When a user focuses their gaze on a particular flickering light, the visual cortex generates
electrical activity that oscillates at the same frequency as the stimulus[14]. This syn­
chronized response, known as the steady­state response, serves as the foundation for
SSVEP­based BCIs. By detecting and analyzing these neural oscillations, the BCI sys­
tem can decode the user’s intended control signal and translate it into actions for external
devices or applications.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
3
==PAGE:12==
Recent advancements in SSVEP research have focused on optimizing its performance
and expanding its applications. For example, Albahri et al.[15] investigated the use of
deep learning, convolutional neural network(CNN), recurrent neural network (RNN), deep
neural network (DNN), and long short­term memory (LSTM) techniques to enhance signal
detection accuracy and system response time of SSVEP performance, leading to more
accurate and reliable BCI control.
Additionally, some studies explored employing hybrid BCIs that combine SSVEP with
other modalities like P300 ERP[16] and electrooculography (EOG)[17] to offer users a
wider range of control options and potentially improve communication speed.
The advantages of SSVEP include its noninvasive nature, minimal user training require­
ments, and relatively high information transfer rates compared to other BCI methods. As
research continues, further development in areas like stimuli design, signal processing
algorithms, and integration with other modalities holds promise for making SSVEP­based
BCIs even more user­friendly and effective for various applications.
The following section will introduce a document that is related to this project, BCI imple­
mented on authentication.
2.3
Brain­Computer Interface based User Authentication
System for Personal Device Security
Tabassum[18] proposed a method for unlocking personal devices using brainwaves to
generate passwords. The verification process consists of two stages:
In the first stage, a 3x3 matrix of flickering circles is displayed on the screen. The rows
blink randomly, and the subject mentally selects the row containing the circle they wish
to focus on. A P300 signal is generated when the desired row blinks. Once the row is
selected, the circles in that row begin to flicker at different frequencies: 8Hz, 12Hz, and
16Hz. Using the SSVEP method, the system detects which circle the subject is gazing
at by matching the SSVEP signal frequency from the subject’s occipital lobe of the visual
cortex with one of the flickering frequencies.
In the second stage, P300 signals are triggered by the numbers the subject hears through
headphones. This allows the computer or device to determine which number the subject
chose in the previous stage.
2.3.1
The advantages and the disadvantages
It shows that the experimenters employed three main methods for their experiments:
• Visualizing P300 to select one of three rows.
• Using SSVEP to select the desired circle.
• Employing an audio method to detect the P300 chosen by the subject.
The experiment tested these three methods and produced impressive results, especially
in the SSVEP method, which was implemented with the Canonical Correlation (CCA) al­
gorithm [19]. The classification accuracy, precision, sensitivity/recall, and specificity all
exceeded 90%. Furthermore, the miss rate was notably low, around 10%. These out­
standing results highlight the significant potential of this technique for future implementa­
tion in authentication systems, enhancing personal device security.
Despite the excellent results observed in this experiment, it is essential to consider the
drawbacks associated with P300 and SSVEP methodologies.
4
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:13==
The upsides and downsides for P300:
Advantage
Description
Ease of Elicitation
The P300 can be elicited using various stimuli, including vi­
sual, auditory, and tactile, which makes it a versatile tool.
Simplicity
The P300 paradigm is straightforward to set up and inter­
pret, often utilizing the oddball paradigm where subjects re­
spond to infrequent target stimuli among frequent non­target
stimuli.
Minimal User Training
As the P300 response is largely involuntary and does not
require extensive mental effort, minimal user training is nec­
essary.
Application Versatility
P300 is effective in diverse applications such as lie detec­
tion, cognitive workload assessment, and BCIs for commu­
nication in patients with severe motor disabilities.
Table 2.1: P300 Advantages
Disadvantage
Description
Lower Information
Transfer Rate (ITR)
P300 has a slower ITR compared to SSVEP, making it less
suitable for applications requiring rapid responses.
Vulnerability to Artifacts
P300 signals are sensitive to eye blinks, muscle activity,
and other physiological artifacts that can interfere with sig­
nal quality.
Inter­Subject Variability
Significant variability in P300 responses between individu­
als can affect the accuracy and reliability of detection.
Fatigue
and
Attention Dependency
The quality of the P300 signal can degrade with user fatigue
or lapses in attention.
Table 2.2: P300 Disadvantages
The upsides and the downsides for SSVEP:
Advantage
Description
High Information
Transfer Rate (ITR)
SSVEP offers a higher ITR, making it ideal for applications
that require fast and efficient communication, such as real­
time control systems.
Robust Signal
The SSVEP signal is generally more robust and less sus­
ceptible to noise and artifacts compared to other ERP sig­
nals.
Frequency Specificity
The ability to use different frequencies of visual stimuli si­
multaneously allows for multiple command channels.
Continuous Control
SSVEP facilitates continuous control, enhancing its usability
for various applications.
Table 2.3: SSVEP Advantages
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
5
==PAGE:14==
Disadvantage
Description
Visual Fatigue
Prolonged exposure to flickering stimuli can cause visual
fatigue and discomfort, particularly at higher frequencies.
User Training
Although less intensive than some other methods, SSVEP­
based systems may still require users to undergo training to
achieve optimal performance.
Dependency on
Visual Function
SSVEP heavily relies on the visual system, rendering it less
suitable for individuals with visual impairments.
timulus Interference
External visual stimuli or changes in lighting conditions can
interfere with the SSVEP signal, potentially reducing accu­
racy.
Table 2.4: SSVEP Disadvantages
An overview of the pros and cons reveals that even the highest­accuracy method, SSVEP
with Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA), has several limitations. SSVEP­based sys­
tems are prone to causing visual fatigue due to prolonged exposure to flickering stimuli
and are unsuitable for individuals with visual impairments or epilepsy, thereby excluding
a significant demographic. Additionally, the dependency on visual stimuli makes these
systems less versatile in various environments where visual distractions are present.
Similarly, P300­based systems, despite their simplicity and minimal training requirements,
suffer from a lower information transfer rate (ITR) compared to SSVEP, making them
less effective for applications requiring rapid responses. P300 signals are also highly
susceptible to artifacts from eye blinks, muscle activity, and other physiological noises,
which can compromise signal quality. There is also significant inter­subject variability
in P300 responses, affecting the accuracy and reliability of detection. Furthermore, the
quality of P300 signals can degrade with user fatigue or lapses in attention, limiting their
practical application in prolonged or demanding tasks.
2.4
The Rise of Power Bands in BCI
The field of Brain­Computer Interface (BCI) authentication has witnessed a surge in in­
terest in recent years, reflecting advancements in EEG­based security systems. Power
bands, specific frequency ranges within EEG signals, have emerged as a critical tool for
distinguishing unique neural signatures.
The foundation of power bands lies in the principle that distinct brain activities manifest
within different frequency ranges. These ranges are typically categorized as
• delta (1–3 Hz) waves are the slowest and typically have the highest amplitude.
These waves are predominant during deep, restorative sleep, also known as slow­
wave sleep. They are crucial for healing and regeneration, both physically and men­
tally. In the brain­computer interfaces field, monitoring delta waves can provide in­
sights into sleep quality and the detection of various sleep disorders.
• theta (4–7 Hz) waves are often associated with drowsiness, light sleep, and the early
stages of sleep. These waves are also linked to deep meditation and relaxation,
creativity, and intuition. In brain­computer interfaces, theta waves can be used to
assess relaxation levels, mental fatigue, and states of mind conducive to creativity
and problem­solving.
• low alpha (8–9 Hz) waves are indicative of a state of relaxed alertness.
This
6
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:15==
frequency band is often observed when a person is awake but in a calm, reflec­
tive state, such as during meditation or when relaxing with eyes closed. In brain­
computer interfaces, low alpha waves can help monitor stress levels and promote
relaxation techniques.
• high alpha (10–12 Hz) waves signify a similar state of relaxed alertness but with
a bit more cognitive engagement than low alpha waves. These waves are often
present when a person is relaxed yet attentively processing information, like during
quiet, focused tasks. High alpha waves in BCIs can be utilized to enhance focus
and concentration without stress.
• low beta (13–17 Hz) waves are associated with active thinking, concentration, and
problem­solving. When a person is engaged in logical reasoning, analysis, or other
cognitive activities, low beta waves are prominent. BCIs often use low beta waves
to assess cognitive workload and mental effort during tasks requiring sustained at­
tention.
• high beta (18–30 Hz) waves are linked to high levels of mental activity, stress, anxi­
ety, and excitement. These waves are prevalent when a person is highly alert or ex­
periencing intense mental focus. In BCI applications, high beta waves can indicate
stress levels, emotional states, and the mental intensity of tasks being performed.
• low gamma (31–40 Hz) waves are associated with higher­order cognitive functions,
including perception, consciousness, and memory processing. These waves are
thought to play a role in integrating sensory inputs and cognitive processing. In
brain­computer interfaces, low gamma waves can be analyzed to understand com­
plex cognitive functions and enhance cognitive performance.
• high gamma (41–50 Hz) waves are involved in the highest levels of cognitive pro­
cessing, such as problem­solving, learning, and conscious awareness. These waves
are believed to be crucial for neural synchrony and information integration across
different brain regions. Brain­computer interfaces can leverage high gamma waves
to study and improve advanced cognitive functions and mental clarity.
In the context of BCI authentication, these frequency bands provide a valuable avenue
for extracting unique EEG features that enable enhanced system performance for user
authentication.
Research has revealed that specific power bands hold greater efficacy in different sce­
narios. For example, Zhang et al.[20] utilized the β and α bands to evaluate frequency
variety in a BCI system. Prove that it is a brilliant technique to increase the possibility for
models to differentiate.
However, quite few experiments were mentioned or used the power band in the authen­
tication field. Only two documents have been seen in recent research. Since the two
researches are quite similar and have the same goals as this project, they will be de­
scribed in detail.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
7
==PAGE:16==
2.5
Multifactor Authentication System Using Simplified EEG
Brain­Computer Interface
Białas et al.[21] used the head measurement device called “Neurosky Mindwave” device
to detect the brainwaves.
Figure 2.1: The MindWave Mobile 2 headset device in ”Multifactor Authentication System
Using Simplified EEG Brain­Computer Interface”. Image resource: Amazon: NeuroSky
MindWave Headset
Unlike the normal Brain­computer interface experiment, applying P300, evoked poten­
tial(VEP), or rapid serial visual presentation(RSVEP). However, those methods depend
on more EEG electrodes, which are evenly distributed throughout the entire scalp to de­
tect evoked potentials, and the P300 is mostly detected at the parietal lobe, not in the
place where the NeuroSky MindWave electrode is placed. With the technical limitation of
the measurement device, NeuroSky Mindwave chose to measure with band power.
In the EEG recording segment, the device is connected to the recording software via Blue­
tooth and has a sampling rate of 512 Hz. However, the EEG power spectrum does not di­
rectly band frequency values in time. Without being reported as a normal power spectrum
of the EEG band, volts­squared Hz, the NeuroSky chipset performs data transformations
and rescaling operations, and simple linear correlation to volts is lost. This type of output
indicates whether each particular frequency band is decreasing or increasing over time
and the strength of the relation between one band and another. The frequency ranges
from the power band measured in this article were:
The dataset contains 6555 EEG data records from 4 volunteers, and in the experiment,
the data was recorded in two main types of scenarios: familiar activities and unfamiliar
8
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:17==
activities.
Type
Activities
Familiar
• Watching a well­known movie.
• Following known and repeated instructions.
• Logging into the social network portal.
• Repeated processing of a set of photos.
• Daily work at the computer.
• Playing a well­known computer game.
Unfamiliar
• Logging in for the first time on a new website.
• Watching origami folding instruction.
• Watching an instructional video from an unknown computer
game.
• Doing a quiz about an unknown topic.
Table 2.5: The activities the subjects did
Eventually, the dataset for the training section held 3948 samples marked as familiar
scenarios and 2607 samples with unfamiliar scenarios.
In the preprocessing section, Moving Average (MA) filter was used to clean and smooth
the dataset to prevent the influence of muscle movement or electrical interference, which
may affect the results. The basic idea behind a Moving Average filter is to replace each
data point in the signal with the average of its neighbors within a defined window size
(here, used 5 in the article). This process reduces noise and short­term fluctuations,
providing a clearer view of the underlying signal. The formula of the Moving Average filter
is represented as down below:
y[i] = 1
M
M−1
!
j=0
x[i + j]
where
• M windows size
• y is the filtered signal at time i.
• x is the input signal at time i.
• i is the iteration index.
• j is the iteration index.
The authors applied ML.Net, a Microsoft­developed open­source, cross­platform machine
learning framework. It enables .NET developers to integrate machine learning into their
.NET applications without learning Python or R. Users can train custom machine learning
models using their own data. Once trained, these models can be integrated into .NET
applications to make predictions. It also includes AutoML capabilities, which automate
the process of selecting algorithms and hyperparameters to produce the best model for a
given dataset. This reduces the need for deep machine­learning expertise. A wide range
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
9
==PAGE:18==
of machine learning algorithms and the GUI platform support tasks such as classification,
regression, clustering, anomaly detection, recommendation, and ranking, which makes
the researchers who do not know the coding skills or are unfamiliar with building models
able to utilize machine learning skills.
The authors used AutoML to train the model and select suitable models for their dataset.
In the end, LightGbm Binary, FastForest Binary, and FastTree Binary were chosen be­
cause they performed the best compared to other binary classification algorithms. In
abbreviation, those three algorithms are:
• LightGBM (Light Gradient Boosting Machine) is a gradient boosting framework
developed by Microsoft. It is designed for efficiency and is particularly effective for
large datasets. LightGBM uses a novel technique called Gradient­based One­Side
Sampling (GOSS) to handle large datasets faster.
• FastForest is a family of decision forest algorithms implemented in ML.NET. Deci­
sion forests are ensembles of decision trees, where each tree is built using a subset
of the features and training data, and the final prediction is made based on the av­
erage (for regression) or voting (for classification) of individual tree predictions.
• FastTree is another family of decision tree algorithms implemented in ML.NET. Like
FastForest, which builds decision trees using training data and feature subsets. It
is optimized for speed and can handle large datasets efficiently.
The initial results, without preprocessing, yielded accuracies of 67.74% and 67.67%, re­
spectively. However, significant improvements were observed after incorporating data
smoothing, a moving average filter, and extending the training duration. The highest ac­
curacy achieved was 86.73% using FastTree Binary algorithms.
Following the development of the application, the authors conducted an A/B testing pro­
cedure to evaluate the impact of prior knowledge on system performance. The aim was
to determine if user familiarity with the system influenced the authentication process.
In the first phase of the test, subjects picked from four possible images without any specific
validation and proceeded to the EEG­based authentication stage. As anticipated, this
approach generally resulted in a lower success rate.
In contrast, the second phase introduced a pre­authentication familiarization step. Sub­
jects were given 10 seconds to view a randomly selected image before the standard login
procedure. This duration was chosen based on Kumar’s study [22], which suggests it
is sufficient to evoke strong event­related potentials. The expectation was that familiar­
ization would enhance recognition during the authentication phase, leading to successful
access to the system.
Statistical analysis of the second experiment demonstrated superior results with the fol­
lowing metrics: Accuracy = 77.78%, False Acceptance Rate (FAR) = 11.11%, and False
Rejection Rate (FRR) = 11.11%. When examining the pure classifier performance, the
accuracy was 83.33%, with FAR = 11.11% and FRR = 5.56%
However, there are some concerns regarding the methodology in this article. In the sec­
ond experiment, the authors used data from four subjects who had previously participated
in the first experiment to validate the system’s reliability. This approach introduces con­
fusion regarding the authors’ intentions. Specifically, it is unclear whether the authors
intended to demonstrate consistent brainwave patterns across different individuals or if
they were suggesting that the brainwave patterns were similar within the same individuals
10
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:19==
across different tests. The mixing of datasets from different identities to train the models
complicates this issue.
Additionally, the article has several notable drawbacks:
• Neurosky Mind­mobile head device only on electrodes, making the parameters for
classifications less. Furthermore, it is hard to portable, has less quality for wearing
experience, and has low flexibility.
• As read in the article, the readers may find out that the participants in the second
experiment were informed of the possibility of retaking the test in case of hardware
or software problems. This can influence the final results and also make the readers
suspicious of the system’s reliability.
• Moreover, The login process that the users are not unfamiliar with may let the brain­
waves have different patterns, which makes them need to try multiple times to log
in, wasting their time.
• Pictures cannot be repeated; it may need to keep updating; otherwise, there is a
higher possibility of getting hacked by crackers since the familiar patterns.
Despite these limitations and leveraging AutoML from ML.NET, the article offers valuable
insights into time­saving techniques using machine learning models. The methods and
dataset forms employed in the second experiment provide useful references and inspira­
tion for this project’s experiment, particularly given the similarity in the head measurement
devices used.
2.6
Towards Brain­Computer Interface (BCI) and Gestural­
Based Authentication for Individuals who are Blind
Sidas Saulynas and Ravi Kuber[23] were dedicated to developing an off­the­shelf logging
system to authenticate real users. A system with diverse users embraces general people
and people who may have eyes or physical injuries that may not be able to see the screen,
recognized by the devices, and hard to use their hands to touch screens or keyboards.
In that experiment, they applied the Emotiv Epoc headset and accompanying software,
which claimed that mental commands, emotional states, and facial expressions (termed
“gestural cues”) can be obtained from the devices.
Figure 2.2: The headset device used in the experiment. Image resource: Humanoid robot
control with EEG brainwaves ­ Scientific Figure on ResearchGate
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
11
==PAGE:20==
The article did not provide a detailed account of the experimental procedures. However,
it did report on various aspects, including speed, accuracy, and user experience. The
study evaluated five different login methods, which included: 4­digit PIN (a traditional login
method), Facial Expression, Emotional State, Mental Commands, and Mixed Methods.
Besides the traditional 4­digit PIN login, the Emotional State and Facial Expression meth­
ods were outperformed in terms of accuracy. The Emotional State method achieved an
accuracy of 68.75%, while the Facial Expression method reached 62.50%. Additionally,
the Emotional State method required the shortest average authentication time, at 10.05
seconds.
In addition to the speed of authentication, the quality of user experience was a key con­
sideration. Notably, the highest user experience satisfaction was reported for both the
Facial Expression and Emotional State methods.
The study also highlighted that participants felt insecure using the 4­digit PIN method, as
there was a risk of nearby individuals observing and memorizing their PINs.
Based on these findings, the Emotional State method demonstrated the best overall per­
formance, which has inspired us to explore similar approaches for imagination­based test­
ing.
2.7
Motor Imagery and Mental Imagery for EEG­Based
Authentication
Motor imagery (MI), the mental rehearsal of movement without physical execution, has
emerged as a powerful technique in this domain. Studies by Valsaraj et al.[24] have made
significant contributions. Their work, titled ”Motor Imagery Based Multimodal Biometric
User Authentication System Using EEG,” explored a multimodal approach that integrates
EEG signals from motor imagery tasks with other biometric modalities. Their findings
suggest that combining EEG with additional traits, such as fingerprint or iris recognition,
significantly improves the overall accuracy and robustness of the authentication system.
Similarly, Wu et al.[25] presented advanced techniques for extracting and classifying EEG
signals during motor imagery.
Their work underscores the efficacy of this approach,
achieving better performance and reliability through the development of signal prepro­
cess, channel selection, and deep learning classification. These studies highlight the
potential of motor imagery as a potent paradigm for EEG­based authentication.
Beyond motor imagery, mental imagery, the act of visualizing specific images or scenar­
ios, offers another promising avenue for this technology. Mental imagery triggers brain­
wave patterns that can be captured and analyzed for user identification. Yousefi et al.[26]
introduced a novel approach. The research investigates the use of mental imagery to en­
hance the memorability of images and subsequently utilizes the associated EEG signals
as unique user identifiers. This approach demonstrates the versatility of mental imagery
in generating distinctive and secure EEG signatures for authentication purposes.
The methodologies presented in these studies provide valuable inspiration for this project,
which aims to develop a brand­new EEG­based authentication system by integrating sim­
ilar techniques from both motor imagery and mental imagery.
12
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:21==
2.8
Conclution
In summary, the majority of EEG­based biometric authentication systems leverage P300,
SSVEP, and power bands, often combining these signals and deep learning models to
enhance performance. While few studies focus solely on power bands for BCI authentica­
tion, the prevailing approach involves integrating multiple EEG signal types to distinguish
unique neural signatures associated with individual users. This paper diverges from the
traditional method of training models on individual datasets by exploring the potential of
mixed data from multiple users. The rationale behind this approach stems from practi­
cal considerations for real­world applications. Collecting long­term EEG data from each
user is impractical due to user patience, data collection accuracy, and substantial server
storage requirements.
Motor imagery tasks have significantly inspired our methodology and guided the explo­
ration of EEG­based authentication.
This project highlights the use of cost­effective,
portable, and soft headband EEG measuring devices, which offer greater comfort com­
pared to the bulky, precise laboratory equipment or rigid commercial devices typically
used in other studies.
Another crucial point is that this project aims to address limitations in current EEG­based
systems by minimizing visual dependency and enhancing accessibility. This approach
seeks to develop a balanced, effective, and inclusive biometric authentication system.
Additionally, given the absence of electrodes capable of detecting SSVEP and P300 in
our setup, analyzing power bands emerges as a practical and logical choice post data pre­
processing. This approach not only aligns with the inherent limitations of the device in this
project but also maintains the feasibility and effectiveness of EEG­based authentication.
By these aspects, the study aims to contribute to a new concept of EEG­based biometric
authentication, emphasizing the practicality and user­friendliness of the system for poten­
tial real­world deployment.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:23==
3
Our Proposed Approach
3.1
Hardware ­ EEG measure device
”Muse S” is the headset device that is used in this experiment to measure the subjects’
brainwaves. Although many headset devices exist in the modern commercial market, con­
sidering the price, portability, comfort, and convenience, this device has much potential
in this field. The common devices in BCI(Brain­computer interface) are:
• Mendi: It is a similar device to Muse’s. However, Muse S has improved its wearable
experience for comfort prospects. Muse S changed the headset to a soft texture
headband, which gives users a more comfortable experience in different positions.
Figure 3.1: Mendi’s headband device. Image resource: Mendi
• Neurosity: It is one of the most competitive devices on the market today, offer­
ing a wide range of applications beyond meditation, such as controlling mice, flying
drones, and creating music. Notably, the Canadian singer Grimes has collaborated
with them, showcasing the device’s potential. Neurosity has also developed a soft­
ware development kit (SDK) that allows developers to create new features and func­
tions, fostering a healthy development community and driving innovative projects.
However, the device is relatively expensive compared to other options. While it is
stylish and convenient to wear, it still remains somewhat bulky and conspicuous.
Figure 3.2: Neurosity’s brainwaves measuring device. Image resource: Neurosity
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
15
==PAGE:24==
• Sensei: Primarily used for meditation courses on its app, Sensei ows higher­quality
components, which is a significant advantage. However, it lacks specific features or
benefits for the development community, limiting its appeal for broader applications.
Figure 3.3: Sensei’s brainwaves measuring device. Image resource: SENS.AI
• Galea: The OpenBCI headset is renowned for its advanced capabilities and widespread
utility in today’s technology landscape. This device seamlessly integrates EEG,
EMG, EDA, PPG, and eye­tracking functionalities into a single headset. Moreover,
it is designed to be compatible with existing AR and VR head­mounted displays and
includes SDKs that facilitate the incorporation of rich, tightly time­locked biometric
data into 3D development engines, third­party applications, and various common
programming languages.
The robust developer community surrounding OpenBCI significantly contributes to
its applications and innovations, enhancing its utility and effectiveness. OpenBCI
also actively incorporates user feedback to refine and improve its products, which
positions it with immense potential for future advancements.
Besides these advantages, the device remains expensive, cumbersome to carry,
and impractical for everyday use. Wearing such a headset in public, for example,
would appear unusual and could be uncomfortable for long periods, especially for
the head and eyes.
Upon reviewing these products, it is evident that there is a lack of a lightweight, easily
portable, and soft headband device like the Muse S. While it may be simpler compared to
some of the other potential products mentioned, many of these alternatives are cumber­
some to carry around and conspicuous when worn in public. This could be undesirable
for users who prefer to remain inconspicuous. Furthermore, aligning with the minimal­
ist design principles in user experience, we prioritize essential elements and eliminate
unnecessary functions. In conclusion, the advantages of the Muse S headband device
make it an ideal choice for this project.
16
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:25==
(a) OpenBCI’s brainwaves measuring
device, Galea. Image resource: Open­
BCI
(b) Galea’s transparent figure. Image
resource: OpenBCI
Figure 3.4: Illustrations of the Galea device
Figure 3.5: Muse S’s flexible headband. Image resource: Muse S review: a meditation
coach you can wear, an article from appleinsider
3.2
Streaming and Receiving EEG data over LSL ­ Petal
Metrics software
Before learning about the software used to become a bridge between the headband de­
vice, Muse S, and the computer in this project, understanding a short background theory
is necessary.
3.2.1
LSL vs OSV
There are two main configurations to control the whole process and communication with
the headband device and the computer for the experiment, which are Lab Streaming
Layer (LSL) and Open Sound Control (OSC). Lab Streaming Layer (LSL) [27] is a com­
munication infrastructure specifically designed for real­time synchronization of streaming
data across diverse devices. Notably, LSL excels in its ability to synchronize multiple
data streams originating from various sensors, even when these streams possess differ­
ing sampling frequencies. This capability proves particularly valuable in research appli­
cations where EEG data is often combined with measurements from other sensors. By
employing LSL, researchers can ensure seamless synchronization of all relevant data
streams, facilitating a holistic understanding of the experimental data.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.6: An example configuration of LSL to show connections with various streams.
Open Sound Control (OSC) [28] is a protocol mostly utilized for sound­related applica­
tions, especially for video. OSC has been useful in a wide variety of domains beyond
musical contexts over the years. Timing accuracy and flexibility make it a solution for
any application that requires time­sensitive communication between software and hard­
ware endpoints. As EEG time series require microsecond precision, OSC can provide the
needed system for streaming.
Figure 3.7: An example configuration of OSC to use in the system.
18
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:27==
3.2.2
Pental Metrics
Figure 3.8: Pental Metrics software user interface
Pental Metrics is software designed to connect Muse headbands to computers. It works
with various operating systems, including Windows, Mac, and Linux. Although it costs
$19.99 USD, the connection quality and stability are much better than the other one,
uvicMuse.
In total, three software programs are usually used to be the connection between terminals
and Muse headband devices. The other two which did not use in this project were:
Software
Information
OS Support
uvicMuse
Created by Dr. Krigolson at the University of
Victoria, uvicMuse also provides all data types
from Muse devices and can additionally stream
data over UDP as well, adding support to Matlab
applications. The app can also apply filters to
the data being streamed (Highpass, Lowpass,
Notch).
Mac,
Windows,
and Linux
BlueMuse
An originated software among the Muse com­
munity, BlueMuse provides a super minimalist
and intuitive GUI for connecting with Muse de­
vices.
BlueMuse not only has the functional­
ity to stream EEG data from Muse devices but
also collects data from its other sensors concur­
rently, utilizing LSL’s full potential.
Windows 10
Table 3.1: The other two software to connect between terminals and Muse S headband
devices
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
19
==PAGE:28==
Pental Metrics is a relatively new software in the field, particularly when compared to
BlueMuse and uvicMuse. Despite its novelty, it offers significant advantages, including
the ability to stream via LSL and OSC and support for additional auxiliary electrodes.
It is compatible with three major operating systems and is frequently updated with new
features, which positions it as a highly promising tool. In contrast, both uvicMuse and
BlueMuse are relatively dated and lack the same level of ongoing development.
This project aims to demonstrate that Pental Metrics is superior to the other two soft­
ware options. There is evidence suggesting that uvicMuse may not function with current
operating systems or may have been abandoned by its developers, as the attempts to
connect it with the Muse S headband device were unsuccessful. The issue does not lie
with the headband device itself, as another headband also failed to connect. Regarding
BlueMuse, we opted not to use it due to its lack of support for Mac operating systems.
3.3
The dataset
In previous studies, many researchers have employed P300 and SSVEP for similar appli­
cations. However, there has been considerable interest in exploring simpler, more con­
venient, and potentially superior methods that do not share the previously mentioned lim­
itations.
A particularly intriguing article[29] described how band power differentiation was used to
detect letters based on the subject’s thoughts. The success of this demonstration inspired
me to consider how a similar system could be applied to our project. Additionally, the
Muse S headband, originally designed to monitor sleep conditions and facilitate meditation
activities and training, aligns well with the experiment discussed in the article. This device
measures band power and differentiates frequencies into four main brainwaves, which
could be leveraged for our purposes.
• β waves, which are between 14 ­ 100 Hz, represent the status of intense and sen­
sitive to the surroundings. The wave power will become strong while people are
thrilled, making it hard for a person to concentrate and easily feel tired.
– General people who are conscious will be active at this status.
• α waves, between 8 ­ 14 Hz, represent the status of relaxed and consciousness.
While the wave power is strong, people find it easier to focus and concentrate on
working and studying. The brain will not easily feel exhausted.
– General people need specific training to excite this status.
• θ waves, between 4 ­ 8 Hz, represent the status of light sleep and deeper relaxation.
While the wave power is strong, the brain will be in the high concentration zone.
Creativity and inspiration are boosted by this status.
– General people need specific training to excite this status.
• δ waves, between 0.5 ­ 4 Hz, represent deep sleep status.
– it will be strong in the sleep period.
Although the previous section provided insights into the activation of various frequencies
under specific conditions, it focused primarily on two types of waves: β and α. In contrast,
the approach seeks to broaden the scope beyond just β and α waves.
Aimed to explore the potential of θ and δ waves to enhance our classification tasks. It
is possible that including these additional wave types may either improve or obstruct the
20
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:29==
performance of the classification models. Therefore, the trials will adjust the number of
parameters in this project based on performance metrics to identify the optimal configu­
ration for classification.
In the dataset, 16 parameters in each data row.
Beta
Alpha
Theta
Delta
TP9,
AF7,
AF8,
TP10
TP9,
AF7,
AF8,
TP10
TP9,
AF7,
AF8,
TP10
TP9,
AF7,
AF8,
TP10
Besides measuring the 4 frequency ranges, each of them has the signal from specific
scalp placements through electrodes:
• TP (Temporoparietal): These electrodes are placed over the temporal and parietal
lobes of the brain.
– TP9 and TP10: Located on the left and right sides, respectively, behind the
ears.
• AF (Anterior Frontal): These electrodes are placed over the brain’s frontal lobe,
closer to the forehead.
– AF7 and AF8: Located on the left and right sides, respectively, in the front
mid­line scalp.
3.3.1
The data collection process
During the data collection process, subjects were seated in a chair and maintained a
relaxed posture throughout the session. To accommodate the subjects’ schedules, which
were often occupied with work or study, the experiment locations were selected to be
in close proximity to their work or study areas. Although the exact locations varied, the
experimental environments were kept quiet to minimize any distractions that could affect
the subjects’ focus.
The data collection tasks involved measuring the brainwaves of 13 subjects using four
electrodes. It was divided into two main sections: the command task with eyes closed,
the command task with eyes open, and the mental imagery task. In the command task
with eyes closed, subjects were instructed to close their eyes and repetitively visualize
a specific command, which was provided by the experimenter. The commands were as
follows:
Letter
Image
A
for
Arithmetic
B
for
Bounce
C
for
Catch
D
for
Deny
E
for
Eat
F
for
Fight
Table 3.2: The commands in dynamic words
Each of them took 1 minute and 35 seconds to measure for 50 samples at once. Every
command is measured separately. The break time between them is around 10 seconds.
This method originates from a previously mentioned intriguing project, which suggested
that applying concrete implications to users’ minds could enhance stability, reduce confu­
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
21
==PAGE:30==
sion, and improve the perception of letters. However, the aforementioned test focused on
dynamic words. To explore whether static words could yield similar effects, six commands
using static words are illustrated in Table 3.3.
Letter
Image
A
for
Apple
B
for
Ball
C
for
Cat
D
for
Dog
E
for
Earth
F
for
Feather
Table 3.3: The commands in static words
For the command task with eyes open, subjects were instructed to not only engage in the
same cognitive mode but also to open their eyes and focus on specific images related
to the experimenter’s commands. The 12 commands, encompassing both dynamic and
static words, remained consistent throughout the experiment. The selected images were
intentionally simple and clear, with minimal background complexity, to avoid distractions
that might influence the quality of the recorded brainwaves (Figure 3.15 3.22).
For the mental imagery task, imagination was selected as the primary factor, given its po­
tential to produce diverse brainwave interactions. Chałupnik et al.[30] utilized emotional
states as a critical element for classification tasks, demonstrating impressive results. Ac­
cording to the article ”Emotion in the Mind’s Eye: Imagination for Adaptive Cognition”[31],
imagination can significantly influence emotions. Therefore, employing various forms of
imagination holds greater potential for differentiation using Machine Learning and Deep
Learning techniques.
The 4 mental imagery scenarios are:
Mental Imagery
Explanation
Sit at a beach and look at the
peaceful sea.
Imagine sitting at Barcelona beach and looking at the
peaceful sea.
Lie on the grass and enjoy the
sunshine or rain.
Depends on the subject’s preferences.
Run in the forest from their
point of view.
The experimenter gave two examples:
jogging or
chased by a bear.
Swim in the sea
The experimenter gave two examples: chill swimming
or chased by a shark.
Table 3.4: Mental Imagery and the explanations to the subjects
The four scenarios also incorporated previously employed concepts. The dynamic status
scenarios include ”Sitting at a beach and looking at the peaceful sea” and ”Lying on the
grass and enjoying the sunshine or rain.” In contrast, ”Running in the forest from their
point of view” and ”Swimming in the sea” represent stative status. These scenarios
were designed to observe potential differences between various states and to determine
22
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.9: A for Arithmetic
Figure 3.10: B for Bounce
Figure 3.11: C for Catch
Figure 3.12: D for Deny
Figure 3.13: E for Eat
Figure 3.14: F for Fight
Figure 3.15: The corresponding pictures for the 6 dynamic words in the open eyes’ picture
test
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.16: A for Apple
Figure 3.17: B for Ball
Figure 3.18: C for Cat
Figure 3.19: D for Dog
Figure 3.20: E for Earth
Figure 3.21: F for Feather
Figure 3.22: The corresponding pictures for the 6 static words in the open eyes’ picture
test
24
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:33==
if the models could accurately distinguish between them.
3.3.2
Data Acquisition
For easier understanding, the code for data acquisition is distributed into distinct parts to
elaborate.
Algorithm 1 Experimental Parameters
1: Parameters:
2:
BUFFER_LENGTH ←10
3:
EPOCH_LENGTH ←1
4:
OVERLAP_LENGTH ←0.8
5:
SHIFT_LENGTH ←EPOCH_LENGTH −OVERLAP_LENGTH
6:
INDEX_CHANNEL ←[0, 1, 2, 3]
where,
• BUFFER_LENGTH: The buffer for calculation later. Here, the unit is second, so the
setting is 10 seconds.
• EPOCH_LENGTH: It will be used in the Fast Fourier transform.
• OVERLAP_LENGTH: The seconds will be overlapped between two epochs. Here,
it indicates 0.8 seconds.
• SHIFT_LENGTH: Shift duration for the start of each consecutive epoch. Hence, it
is epoch length −overlap length.
• Index channel: The electrodes of the EEG channels have been used. Here, it
indicates all of the electrodes.
The code used to retrieve the data is illustrated below. The Pental Metrics software cre­
ates a stream channel as an LSL frame. Consequently, the code first searches for any
EEG stream. Once the stream is identified, the variable ”inlet”, which stores the initialized
”StreamInlet” object, will begin to receive data. The ”stream[0]” represents the first stream
found. In this project, only a single Muse S headband device was utilized; therefore, mod­
ifications would be necessary for experiments involving multiple streams.
The sampling frequency is set to 256 Hz, which is adequate for the Muse device used in
this study.
Once the data is connected and retrieved, it needs to go through preprocessing before
storage. Direct storage of raw data is not feasible, necessitating the use of buffers for raw
data and band power values.
The eeg_buffer calculates the total number of samples the buffer will hold. The BUFFER_LENGTH
represents the duration in seconds, as previously mentioned. Therefore, fs (sampling
frequency) multiplied by BUFFER_LENGTH yields the total number of samples for that
period. The value 4 indicates the number of EEG channels being used (TP9, AF7, AF8,
TP10). Each column in the buffer corresponds to one channel, resulting in a buffer shape
of fs ∗BUFFER_LENGTH, 4, which provides sufficient space to store BUFFER_LENGTH
seconds of data for each of the four channels.
The n_win_test determines the number of epochs (time windows) that can fit into the
buffer, given the length of each epoch and the overlap between them. The formula com­
putes the number of non­overlapping epochs of length EPOCH_LENGTH that can be ac­
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
25
==PAGE:34==
Algorithm 2 Connect to EEG Stream
1: if is_main_module() then
2:
Search for active EEG streams
3:
Print ”Looking for an EEG stream...”
4:
streams = resolve_byprop(’type’, ’EEG’, timeout=2)
5:
if streams is empty then
6:
Raise RuntimeError: ”Can’t find EEG stream.”
7:
end if
8:
Print ”Start acquiring data”
9:
inlet = StreamInlet(streams[0], max_chunklen=12)
10:
eeg_time_correction = inlet.time_correction()
11:
Get the stream info and description
12:
info = inlet.info()
13:
description = info.desc()
14:
Get the sampling frequency
15:
fs = int(info.nominal_srate())
16:
Comment: This value represents the number of EEG data points collected
per second.
17:
Comment: For the Muse, this value should be 256.
18: end if
commodated in the buffer, considering that each epoch starts SHIFT_LENGTH seconds
after the previous one.
The band_buffer stores the computed band power values for each epoch. It is designed
to hold these values for each of the four frequency bands across all the epochs that fit
into the buffer.
Algorithm 3 Initialize Buffers
1: Initialize raw EEG data buffer
2: eeg_buffer ←np.zeros((int(fs * BUFFER_LENGTH), 4))
3: filter_state ←None
Comment: For use with the notch filter
4: Compute the number of epochs in ”buffer_length”
5: n_win_test ←int(np.floor((BUFFER_LENGTH - EPOCH_LENGTH) / SHIFT_LENGTH
+ 1))
6: Initialize the band power buffer (for plotting)
7: bands will be ordered: [delta, theta, alpha, beta]
8: band_buffer ←np.zeros((n_win_test, 4))
The counter represents how many loops in a round should be. It also shows how much
data will be received each round for each channel. In the following, EEG data from the
LSL stream is continuously acquired in chunks, and buffers are updated in order to get
new data consecutively.
26
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:35==
Algorithm 4 Acquiring Data and Calculating Neurofeedback Metrics
1: Initialize
2: counter ←0
Comment:Counter for collecting data
3: while True do
4:
guesses ←[””, ””, ””, ””, ””, ””, ””, ””, ””, ””]
5:
Comment: Acquire Data
6:
for i ←0 to 9 do
7:
Obtain EEG data from the LSL stream
8:
(eeg_data,
timestamp)
←
inlet.pull_chunk(timeout=1,
max_samples=int(SHIFT_LENGTH * fs))
9:
Keep only the channel we’re interested in
10:
ch_data ←np.array(eeg_data)[:, INDEX_CHANNEL]
11:
Update EEG buffer with the new data
12:
(eeg_buffer,
filter_state)
←
utils.update_buffer(eeg_buffer,
ch_data,
notch=True, filter_state=filter_state)
13:
end for
14: end while
Algorithm 5 Compute Band Powers and Make Predictions
1: Compute Band Powers
2: data_epoch ←utils.get_last_data(eeg_buffer, EPOCH_LENGTH * fs)
3: band_powers ←utils.compute_band_powers(data_epoch, fs).reshape(­1, 4)
4: (band_buffer, _) ←utils.update_buffer(band_buffer, band_powers)
5: smooth_band_powers ←np.mean(band_buffer, axis=0)
6: betaWaves ←band_powers[Band.Beta]
7: alphaWaves ←band_powers[Band.Alpha]
8: thetaWaves ←band_powers[Band.Theta]
9: deltaWaves ←band_powers[Band.Delta]
10: features_for_model ←[[betaWaves, alphaWaves, thetaWaves, deltaWaves]]
11: if args.mode == ”predict” and args.trial != ”” and args.model == ”svm” then
12:
if ’svmm_model’ not in globals() then
13:
(svmm_model, scaler, _) ←train_svmm_model(args.trial)
14:
end if
15:
if ’svmm_model’ in globals() then
16:
prediction ←predict_with_svmm_model(svmm_model, scaler, features_for_model)
17:
guesses[i] ←prediction
18:
end if
19: end if
20: if args.mode == ”predict” and args.trial != ”” and args.model == ”cnn” then
21:
if ’cnn_model’ not in globals() then
22:
cnn_model ←train_CNN_model(args.trial)
23:
end if
24:
if ’cnn_model’ in globals() then
25:
prediction ←predict_with_cnn_model(cnn_model, features_for_model)
26:
guesses[i] ←prediction
27:
end if
28: end if
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.23: The EEG data of frequency power band separated by the categories of image
sentences, frequency ranges, and the electrodes
data_epoch: Retrieves the most recent data from the EEG buffer for the duration of one
epoch.
utils.compute_band_powers: Computes the power in different frequency bands for the
epoch.
band_buffer: Updates the band power buffer with the newly computed band powers.
smooth_band_powers: Averages the band powers over all epochs in the buffer to smooth
out noise.
Afterward, the data is distributed to the target frequency range variables:
betaWaves, alphaWaves, thetaWaves, and deltaWaves. These are then concatenated
together to form a feature array for model input.
If the system is executed with the command­line argument “–mode predict” and a model
name is specified, it will predict based on the measured brainwaves and print the pre­
diction results. Alternatively, if the mode is set to “collect”, the received EEG data will
be stored as CSV files. These files will be categorized by image sentences, various fre­
quency ranges, and electrode data, ensuring organized data storage.
The utils is a Python file that contains various utility functions, including
compute_band_powers.
The compute_band_powers function computes the power spectral density (PSD) of EEG
data and extracts the mean power in specific frequency bands (Delta, Theta, Alpha, Beta).
The input parameters eegdata is a NumPy array containing the EEG data with dimensions
[number of samples, number of channels], and the fs is the sampling frequency of the
EEG data (256 Hz as it is suitable for Muse headband device).
Before doing the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), the Hamming window for signal pro­
cessing contains numerous advantages. Spectrum leakage occurs when the signal being
analyzed is not periodic within the window, causing the signal’s energy to spread into ad­
28
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:37==
Algorithm 6 Compute Band Powers from uti
1: function ComputeBandPowers(eegdata, fs)
2:
Comment: Extract the features (band powers) from the EEG
3:
Input:
4:
eegdata
Comment: Array of dimension [number of samples, number of
channels]
5:
fs
Comment: Sampling frequency of eegdata
6:
Output:
7:
feature_vector
8:
Comment: Feature matrix of shape [number of feature points, number of
different features]
9:
Comment: Compute the PSD
10:
winSampleLength ←number of samples in eegdata
11:
nbCh ←number of channels in eegdata
12:
w ←Hamming window of length winSampleLength
13:
dataWinCentered ←eegdata ­ mean of eegdata (axis=0)
14:
dataWinCenteredHam ←dataWinCentered × w
15:
NFFT ←next power of 2 greater than winSampleLength
16:
Y ←FFT of dataWinCenteredHam divided by winSampleLength
17:
PSD ←2× absolute value of Y from 0 to NFFT/2
18:
f ←fs
2 × frequencies from 0 to 1
19:
Comment: Spectral Features
20:
ind_delta ←indices where f < 4
21:
meanDelta ←mean of PSD at ind_delta (axis=0)
22:
ind_theta ←indices where 4 ≤f ≤8
23:
meanTheta ←mean of PSD at ind_theta (axis=0)
24:
ind_alpha ←indices where 8 ≤f ≤12
25:
meanAlpha ←mean of PSD at ind_alpha (axis=0)
26:
ind_beta ←indices where 12 ≤f < 30
27:
meanBeta ←mean of PSD at ind_beta (axis=0)
28:
feature_vector ←concatenate(meanDelta, meanTheta, meanAlpha, meanBeta)
29:
feature_vector ←log10(feature_vector)
30:
return feature_vector
31: end function
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
29
==PAGE:38==
jacent frequencies. The Hamming window minimizes this leakage better than rectangular
windows and many other types of windows. It also has a smoother roll­off compared to
the rectangular window. This means that the transition from the main lobe to the side
lobes in the frequency domain is more gradual, which helps in reducing the amplitude of
the side lobes.
Although the main lobe of the Hamming window is not as narrow as that of the rectangular
window, it is narrower than that of the Hann (Hanning) window. This balance provides
good resolution in the frequency domain while still effectively controlling the side lobes.
The Hamming window provides better side lobe attenuation compared to the rectangular
window. The side lobes are typically around −41 dB relative to the main lobe, which is a
significant improvement over the rectangular window’s side lobes, which are only about
−13 dB down.
The following description elaborates more details for the comparison with various types
of windows:
Window Type
Description
Rectangular Window
The rectangular window has the narrowest main lobe
but the highest side lobes (−13 dB). This leads to high
spectral leakage, making it less suitable for signals
where leakage is a concern.
Hann (Hanning) Window
The Hann window has slightly better side lobe attenu­
ation (−31 dB) compared to the Hamming window but
at the cost of a wider main lobe. This makes the Hann
window slightly better at reducing leakage but with a
slight loss in frequency resolution.
Blackman Window
The Blackman window has even better side lobe at­
tenuation (−57 dB) than the Hamming window, mak­
ing it very effective at reducing spectral leakage. How­
ever, the main lobe is wider, resulting in reduced fre­
quency resolution compared to the Hamming window.
Gaussian Window
The Gaussian window can be adjusted to control the
trade­off between main lobe width and side lobe lev­
els. However, it is computationally more complex and
might not provide significantly better performance for
a general use case compared to the Hamming win­
dow.
Table 3.5: Comparison of different window functions
This window achieves an optimal balance between spectral resolution and side lobe atten­
uation. It is relatively straightforward and efficient to compute, making it a popular choice
for various practical applications, including those in this project’s signal­processing tasks.
Its effectiveness in minimizing spectral leakage while maintaining a reasonably narrow
main lobe renders it suitable for scenarios where both frequency resolution and leakage
control are critical.
To implement the FFT, the data from the window processing should be centralized. If
30
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:39==
the mean value is not removed, it appears as a strong peak at the zero frequency in the
frequency spectrum. This peak can overshadow other important frequency components,
making it harder to analyze the signal accurately and ensure that the extracted features
are not biased by the mean value of the signal.
With the DC (direct current component) component removed, the FFT can focus on the
variations in the signal rather than the offset, leading to a more accurate representation
of the signal’s frequency content. It makes a more symmetric and cleaner frequency
representation, especially when dealing with real­valued signals. This symmetry can help
in better interpreting the results. In some cases, the mean value can be impacted by
low­frequency noise or slow trends in the data. Removing the mean can help focus on
the high­frequency components of the signal, which are often of more interest in many
applications.
The length of the FFT (called NFFT in the code) is chosen as the next power of 2 greater
than or equal to the parameter winSampleLength. This choice is made because FFT al­
gorithms are most efficient when the length of the transform is a power of 2. By padding or
truncating the data to the next power of 2, computational efficiency is maximized, allowing
for faster and more efficient computation of the FFT. When the input length is a power of
2, FFT operations can be performed in O(nlogn) time complexity, which is significantly
faster compared to non­power­of­2 lengths.
Before the elaboration for FFT, the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) should be men­
tioned first in order to understand the ground that FFT was selected to play a crucial role
in this project.
DFT is a mathematical technique used to transform a sequence of values (such as a
signal) from the time domain into the frequency domain. The DFT of a sequence x[n] of
length N is given by:
X[k] =
N−1
!
n=0
x[n]e−j2π kn
N ,
k = 0, 1, . . . , N −1
(3.1)
where,
• X[k] is the DFT coefficient at the frequency bin k.
• x[n] is the time­domain signal.
• N is the number of samples.
While the DFT requires O(N2) operations, the FFT reduces this to O(NlogN) by exploiting
the symmetry and periodicity properties of the Fourier transform, which is called ”twiddle
factor”.
Twiddle Factor
The original equation of DFT has illustrated the clues inside
W kn
n
= exp(−j ∗2π
N ∗kn)
This is obviously a periodic function because of Euler’s formula [32]. As
ejθ = cosθ + jsinθ
ejπ = cosπ + jsinπ = −1
ej π
2 = cosπ
2 + jsinπ2 = i
(3.2)
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
31
==PAGE:40==
Here, the i and j are the same.
Figure 3.24: Eular’s formula in graphic
There is an example for N = 4,
Figure 3.25: Periodicity explanation for FFT
So, the conclusion is described in below:
W k∗0
4
= W k∗4
4
W k∗1
4
= W k∗5
4
W k∗2
4
= W k∗6
4
(3.3)
32
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:41==
Hence, the original DFT formula could change from:
X(0) = [x(0) + x(2)W 0
4 ] + W 0
4 [x(1) + x(3)W 0
4 ]
X(1) = [x(0) + x(2)W 2
4 ] + W 1
4 [x(1) + x(3)W 2
4 ]
X(2) = [x(0) + x(2)W 4
4 ] + W 2
4 [x(1) + x(3)W 4
4 ]
X(3) = [x(0) + x(2)W 6
4 ] + W 3
4 [x(1) + x(3)W 6
4 ]
(3.4)
to
X(0) = [x(0) + x(2)W 0
4 ] + W 0
4 [x(1) + x(3)W 0
4 ]
X(1) = [x(0) + x(2)W 2
4 ] + W 1
4 [x(1) + x(3)W 2
4 ]
X(2) = [x(0) + x(2)W 0
4 ] + W 2
4 [x(1) + x(3)W 0
4 ]
X(3) = [x(0) + x(2)W 2
4 ] + W 3
4 [x(1) + x(3)W 2
4 ]
(3.5)
The identical values of W 0
4 and W 4
4 , W 2
4 and W 6
4 , contribute significantly to the system’s
efficiency by reducing the computational time and memory storage requirements. This
optimization minimizes redundant calculations and conserves memory space. In practi­
cal applications such as audio processing, communications, and biomedical signal pro­
cessing (e.g., EEG analysis), the ability to perform real­time processing is crucial. The
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) enables such real­time analysis and feedback due to its
computational speed. These advantages have led to widespread support and long­term
implementation of FFT in various scientific and engineering fields.
Power Spectral Density (PSD) is often written as:
PSD(f) = 1
N |Xk|2
(3.6)
However, the formula can be simplified for ease of use:
PSD(f) = 2 ∗
""""
1
winSampleLengthΣN−1
n=0 x(n)e−i2π
kn
NF F T
""""
(3.7)
The factor of 2 is applied due to the symmetry in the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), making
it unnecessary to include the mirrored half of the spectrum, which would otherwise take
up space and require redundant calculations. Additionally, for classification purposes,
the interest lies in the ratio between various frequency ranges, rendering the squaring of
values unnecessary and potentially distorting the data.
Following these preprocessing steps, the Power Spectral Density (PSD) data is sepa­
rated according to frequency ranges. The average values within each frequency band
are calculated, resulting in metrics such as meanDelta, meanTheta, meanAlpha, and
meanBeta. These values are then concatenated and logarithmically transformed to re­
duce their magnitude and improve manageability for subsequent analysis.
3.4
Machine Learning models
The study began with basic models: the Support Vector Machine (SVM), the Fully Con­
nected Network (FCN), and the Random Forest. For each model, the data parameters
were divided into four groups for training: 16, 8, 4, and 4. The 16 parameters represent
all the parameters in the dataset. The 8 parameters include data from all four electrodes
(β and α bands), chosen due to their high variance in power bands across different cat­
egories, which is beneficial for classification tasks [21]. Given the significant influence of
these two frequency ranges, additional training was conducted using only the β (4 param­
eters) and α (4 parameters) bands.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
33
==PAGE:42==
3.4.1
Supported Vector Machine (SVM)
Supported Vector Machines (SVM) perform excellently in classification tasks, efficiently
handling high­dimensional data and making them suitable for applications with many fea­
tures. Aim to find the hyperplane that best separates the classes, which helps reduce
overfitting in high­dimensional space especially.
SVMs can address various types of data by selecting different kernel functions. This ker­
nel trick allows SVMs to solve the non­linear classification problems by mapping the input
data into high­dimensional feature spaces without explicitly computing the transformation.
There are multiple kernels could be chosen. The common kernels frequently used are lin­
ear kernel, polynomial kernel, and Gaussian radial basis function kernel or Radial basis
function kernel(RBF).
Figure 3.26: Common kernels apply in the Supported Vector Machine (SVM)[33]
Kernal
Mercer’s theorem establishes a connection between symmetric, positive­definite func­
tions and reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS). It states that a symmetric, positive­
definite function k(x, y) can be represented as an inner product in an RKHS, induced by
a feature map φ(x):
k(x, y) = ⟨φ(x), φ(y)⟩H
(3.8)
where ⟨a, b⟩denotes the inner product in the RKHS.
This theorem provides a fundamental basis for kernel methods to operate in high­dimensional
feature spaces without explicitly computing the feature representations. Instead, kernel
methods rely on the kernel function k(x, y) to efficiently perform computations in the fea­
ture space.
It also offers a necessary and sufficient condition for a function k(x, y) to be a valid kernel
function. This condition, known as Mercer’s condition, states that for any finite set of
34
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:43==
points x1, ..., xn and any set of real numbers α1, ..., αn, the following inequality must hold:
Σn
i=1Σn
j=1αiαjk(xi, xj) ≥0
(3.9)
This condition ensures that the kernel function k(x, y) can be represented as an inner
product in an RKHS, justifying its use in kernel methods.
In theory, if the Kernel matrix(K, Gram matrix) is positive semi­definite, this K is a kernel
function.
Radial basis function kernel (RBF kernal)
In this project, the Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel was employed. The RBF kernel
utilizes the Taylor series, which is an infinite sum of terms representing a differentiable
function as a polynomial around a specific point. This series is a calculus method used to
approximate complex functions with simpler polynomial expressions.
f(x) = f(a) + f′(a)(x −a)
1!
+ f′′(a)(x −a)2
2!
+ f′′′(a)(x −a)3
3!
+ ...
= Σ∞
n=0
f(n)(a)(x −a)n
n!
(3.10)
It is used as
ex = Σ∞
n=0
xn
n!
(3.11)
in the RBF kernel.
The definition of RBF kernel is
k(x, y) = e−σ||x−y||2
(3.12)
Hence, the RBF formula decomposed the data into several dimensions. It has obviously
shown that the projection function possesses a pattern.
en(x) =
#
(2σ)n
n!
xne−σx2, n = 0, 1, 2, ...
(3.13)
To facilitate understanding, an example of projecting a 2­dimensional space into a 3­
dimensional space can be provided.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.27: RBFkernel explanation for the process to extend to the high­dimensional
feature spaces[34]
The gamma (γ) is a crucial parameter for the Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel. The γ
value determines the influence range of a single training sample on the decision boundary.
A larger gamma value means that each training sample has a smaller influence range,
leading the model to fit the training data more tightly, which may cause overfitting. Con­
versely, a smaller gamma value means that each training sample has a larger influence
range, which can make the model too smooth and result in underfitting.
The previous explanation used γ = σ. However, the RBF kernel should be illustrated in
the python packages,“scikit­learn”, should be:
k(x, y) = e−γ||x−y||2
(3.14)
Following the default settings in “scikit­learn”, “gamma” is set to “scale”. This means
“gamma” is automatically determined by the formula:
1
nfeatures · σ2
(3.15)
, where nfeatures is the number of features and σ2 is the variance of the training data fea­
tures. This adjustment tailors “gamma” to the specific characteristics of the data, providing
a balanced and effective parameter setting.
36
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:45==
3.4.2
Fully Connected Network
Deep learning technology is regarded as one of the most advanced topics within machine
learning due to its exceptional learning capabilities based on provided data [35]. There­
fore, it is logical to implement a basic fully connected network to evaluate its potential
performance in comparison to other machine learning models. If the basic model demon­
strates superior results, it would be advantageous to develop more sophisticated deep
learning models.
PyTorch, a highly regarded Python library for deep learning, is utilized in this project to
construct the experimental model. The structure of the fully connected network model is
illustrated below:
Algorithm 7 FullyConnectedModel Class
1: Class FullyConnectedModel
2: Attributes:
3:
input_size ←16
4:
num_classes ←6
5:
hidden_layers ←[64, 32]
6: Initialization:
7:
layers ←Empty List
8:
in_features ←input_size
9: for each hidden_units in hidden_layers do
10:
layers.append(Linear(in_features, hidden_units))
11:
layers.append(ReLU())
12:
in_features ←hidden_units
13: end for
14: layers.append(Linear(in_features, num_classes))
15: layers.append(Softmax(dim=1))
16: Layer fc_layers ←Sequential(layers)
17: Method forward(x):
18:
x ←x.view(x.size(0), ­1)
19:
x ←fc_layers(x)
20:
return x
Table 3.6 given that the hidden units and the number of layers may vary during train­
ing in order to identify the optimal parameters, the input parameters from the brainwave
electrodes, the number of classes, and the hidden layers are adjustable variables. This
flexibility allows testers to modify these parameters to achieve the best configuration.
The “trials” parameter includes several paths to CSV files for different concepts in the
thinking strategies. The data is typically processed in “64­batch sizes” due to a balance
between computational efficiency and the ability to make frequent parameter updates. A
batch size of 64 often fits well within the memory limits of many modern GPUs, allowing
for efficient training without causing out­of­memory errors. Larger batch sizes may require
more memory than is available, necessitating a reduction in batch size.
More frequent updates to the model parameters can facilitate faster initial convergence by
providing more optimizer steps, with the Adam Optimizer used in this project. However,
batch sizes that are too small can result in noisy gradient estimates, while excessively
large batch sizes can lead to more stable but slower updates. Thus, a batch size of 64
strikes a good compromise, balancing the noise in gradient estimates with the stability of
updates. Additionally, a batch size of 32 should be considered as a potential alternative.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
37
==PAGE:46==
All parameters
if __name__ == "__main__":
trials = ["without_individuals/imagination"]
paras = [16, 8, 4, 4]
batch_sizes = [32, 64]
epochs = [200, 300, 500]
learning_rates = [0.001, 0.01, 0.1]
hidden_layers = [
[256, 128, 64, 32],
[32, 64, 128, 256, 128, 64, 32],
[32, 64, 128, 256, 256, 128, 64, 32],
[128, 64, 32],
[32, 64, 128, 64, 32],
[32, 64, 128, 128, 64, 32],
[64, 32],
[32, 64, 32],
[32, 64, 64, 32],
[32, 32]]
best_params = {}
Table 3.6: All the parameters that are used in the fully connected network in order to
discover the best match.
The learning rates were selected to be suitable and adequate for many scenarios. Hidden
layers were chosen based on configurations frequently used in similar cases. Powers of
2, such as 32, 64, and 128, are often preferred because they align well with memory and
processing block sizes, leading to efficient memory access and utilization of computational
resources.
The code contains many outputs from the model, including the model itself, accuracy,
confusion matrix, precision, recall, F1 score, precision­recall curve points, and the classes
that the model is designed to classify. The metric used to compare the best parameters
is defined as score = 0.6 ∗f1 + 0.4 ∗acc.
In classification tasks, the F1 score is particularly significant. It is a composite measure
derived from precision and recall. Before delving into the F1 score, it is essential to first
understand precision and recall.
Precision
The precision metric determines the quality of positive predictions by measuring their
correctness. It is the number of true positive outcomes divided by the sum of true positive
and false positive predictions.
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(3.16)
Recall
On the other hand, Recall, also called sensitivity, measures the model’s ability to detect
positive events correctly. It is the percentage of accurately predicted positive events out
38
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:47==
of all actual positive events.
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(3.17)
F1 score
Precision is solely focused on the correctness of positive predictions, with no attention to
the correct detection of negative predictions, and the recall metric does not consider the
potential repercussions of false positives.
In order to get a trade­off, the F1 score or F­measure harmonic mean of the precision and
recall of a classification model. Unlike the arithmetic mean, which calculates the average
by summing the values and dividing by their count, the harmonic mean gives more weight
to smaller values. The F1 score is calculated by taking the reciprocal of the average
of the reciprocals of precision and recall. This approach is particularly advantageous
when precision and recall vary significantly, as it prevents the overestimation that can
arise from using the arithmetic mean, which might disproportionately represent the higher
value. By focusing on the reciprocal of the values, the F1 score ensures a more balanced
measurement that reflects the model’s overall performance more accurately.
Recall =
2
1
Recall +
1
Precision
= 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
(3.18)
Therefore, the F1 score plays a crucial role in the criterion. The best score, counted as
60%, depends on it, and 40% counts on accuracy in order to select suitable parameters
for this task.
3.4.3
Random Forest
When discussing classification tasks, the Decision Tree is frequently mentioned due to its
status as a classic method for handling various scenarios. To evaluate whether Decision
Trees are the most effective approach compared to other methods, the Random Forest
algorithm is employed. This algorithm enhances performance by aggregating the outputs
of multiple decision trees to produce a single, consolidated result.
The Random Forest algorithm operates by constructing an ensemble of decision trees.
Each tree in this ensemble is built using a bootstrap sample derived from the original
training set. Bootstrap sampling is a resampling technique where samples are drawn with
replacements from the dataset. In this process, each sample is selected independently,
and once selected, it is returned to the original dataset before drawing the next sample.
For classification tasks, the Random Forest algorithm determines the predicted class by
employing a majority vote mechanism. This approach involves aggregating the predic­
tions of all individual decision trees and selecting the most frequently occurring class la­
bel as the final prediction. This majority voting strategy ensures that the Random Forest
algorithm leverages the collective strength of the individual trees to improve overall clas­
sification accuracy.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.28: The configuration of Random Forest in classification tasks
In addition to 5 classification tasks and the EEG data parameters, the number of trees in
the random forest has been attempted from 1 to 200 each. This aims to determine whether
the statistical graphs exhibit a trend towards a maximum, saturation point, or asymptotic
behavior, indicating a potential ceiling in growth.
For the criterion part, there were two popular techniques to be tested: Gini Impurity and
Entropy.
Gini Impurity
Gini = 1 −Σn
i=1(pi)2
(3.19)
where,
• The range of value Gini Impurity can have is between 0 to 0.5.
• The lesser the Gini Impurity, the better the split is.
• A Gini Impurity of 0 denotes a pure node, and 0.5 denotes a most impure node.
In each decision tree, each node splits the data based on a condition, and the Gini Impurity
score is displayed in each node. It defines how well this node splits the data. If the score
is closer to 0, this means the branch is more “pure”. If the Gini Impurity is 0 for all the leaf
nodes, this means that these are “pure” nodes and need not be divided further without a
manual limitation setting in the function.
Entropy
Entropy, with a different formula, also measures the impurity of the node split. Eventually,
entropy is used to calculate information gain.
Entropy = −p(+) log2 p(+) −p(−) log2 p(−)
(3.20)
The range of values for Entropy is between 0 and 1. An Entropy of 0 denotes a pure node,
while an Entropy of 1 denotes the most impure node.
The formula for Entropy uses p(+) to represent the percentage of the positive class and
p(−) to represent the percentage of the negative class in the training dataset.
40
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:49==
Calculating Gini Impurity is computationally faster and requires fewer resources compared
to Entropy, which involves logarithmic calculations and thus consumes more computing
resources. Nevertheless, outcomes derived from Entropy are slightly more accurate, al­
though this slight advantage might not have a significant impact. Both methods were tried
in this training phase to identify which yields better performance.
Given that the random forest algorithm demonstrated the best performance among the
three basic methods, the subsequent models will be presented as enhanced versions
based on the random forest algorithm.
3.4.4
Extra Tree(Extremely Randomized Tree)
Extra Trees, also known as Extremely Randomized Trees, is a variant of the Random For­
est algorithm. It offers the advantage of reducing bias by sampling the entire dataset for
each decision tree, as opposed to using bootstrap samples like Random Forest. Addition­
ally, Extra Trees reduces variance by randomly splitting nodes within the decision trees,
preventing the algorithm from being overly influenced by specific features or patterns in
the dataset.
In this Algorithm 8, the Grid Search Cross­Validation method is a critical tool for evaluating
multiple parameter combinations and conducting several cross­validations to determine
the optimal model among various trials. Specifically, a 5­fold cross­validation is employed
during training.
The para_grid dictionary contains parameters for the grid search, including the number of
decision trees, the maximum depth of each tree, the minimum number of samples required
to split an internal node, and the minimum number of samples required to be at a leaf
node. Apart from the number of decision trees, these parameters were selected based
on their significant impact on model performance[36]. Previous experience and empirical
results indicate that increasing the number of decision trees beyond 75 tends to yield
diminishing returns in performance improvement. To optimize computational efficiency
and save significant training and validation time (approximately 13 hours), the number of
decision trees was limited to the values [75, 100, 200, 300].
3.4.5
Boosting in a nutshell
Before explaining the rest of the models utilized in the experiment, the boosting method
should be mentioned first, as the previous models belong to the Bagging (Bootstrap
Aggregating) method instead of the Boosting system, which the models down below
employed.
Bagging and Boosting are two distinct ensemble learning strategies. Bagging reduces
model variance by training multiple weak learners, such as decision trees, in parallel.
Each weak learner is trained independently, and the final prediction is obtained by av­
eraging for regression tasks or voting for classification tasks. Random Forest and Extra
Tree belong to the Bagging method. On the other hand, Boosting trains a series of weak
learners in sequence, with each new learner attempting to correct the errors of the previ­
ous one. This approach usually significantly reduces model bias. This method includes
the models that will be mentioned.
3.4.6
Gradient Boosted Tree
Gradient Boosted Tree does the inverse way. It also builds multiple decision trees; how­
ever, it builds sequentially since each tree attempts to rectify the errors from the previous
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
41
==PAGE:50==
Algorithm 8 Training Extra Trees Classifier with Hyperparameter Tuning
1: Function train_extra_trees()
2: Create an ExtraTreesClassifier model with random_state = 42
3: Define the parameter grid:
4:
param_grid ←{
5:
'n_estimators': [75, 100, 200, 300]
6:
'max_depth': [None]
7:
'min_samples_split': [2, 4, 6]
8:
'min_samples_leaf': [1, 2, 4]
9: }
10: Initialize GridSearchCV with:
11:
estimator ←model
12:
param_grid ←param_grid
13:
cv ←5
14:
scoring ←’accuracy’
15:
verbose ←2
16:
n_jobs ←­1
17: Fit GridSearchCV with X_train and y_train
18: Initialize all_results as an empty list
19: for each params, mean_test_score, std_test_score in
20: grid_search.cv_results_['params'],
21: grid_search.cv_results_['mean_test_score'],
22: grid_search.cv_results_['std_test_score'] do
23:
Create a new ExtraTreesClassifier model with random_state = 42 and params
24:
Fit the new model with X_train and y_train
25:
y_pred ←Predict on X_val
26:
y_score ←Predict probabilities on X_val
27:
classes ←Sort unique values in y_val
28:
accuracy ←Calculate accuracy using accuracy_score(y_val, y_pred)
29:
f1 ←Calculate F1 score using f1_score(y_val, y_pred, average='weighted')
30:
all_results.append((params, accuracy, f1))
31: end for
32: best_model ←grid_search.best_estimator_
33: y_pred ←Predict on X_val using best_model
34: y_score ←Predict probabilities on X_val using best_model
one. This technique reduces bias and improves the accuracy of the model. A signifi­
cant advantage of Gradient Boosted Trees is their ability to handle imbalanced datasets
and provide precise predictions for rare events. Additionally, they can effectively manage
missing data and outliers, making them robust for various real­world applications.
Despite these advantages, the algorithm has notable drawbacks. It requires substantial
computational resources and time, particularly for large datasets. Moreover, Gradient­
Boosted Trees are more susceptible to overfitting than Random Forests and Extra Trees.
In Algorithm 9, the model training employed Grid Search and 5­fold Cross­Validation to
optimize three common parameters: the number of decision trees, learning rate, and
maximum tree depth [37]. Various values for each parameter were tested to determine
the best combination.
42
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:51==
Algorithm 9 Training Gradient Boosted Machine Classifier with Hyperparameter Tuning
1: Function train_gb()
2: Create a GradientBoostingClassifier model with random_state = 42
3: Define the parameter grid:
4:
param_grid ←{
5:
'n_estimators': [75, 100, 200, 300]
6:
'learning_rate': [0.001, 0.01, 0.1]
7:
'max_depth': [3, 5, 7, 10]
8: }
9: Initialize GridSearchCV with:
10:
estimator ←model
11:
param_grid ←param_grid
12:
cv ←5
13:
scoring ←’accuracy’
14:
verbose ←2
15:
n_jobs ←­1
16: Fit GridSearchCV with X_train and y_train
17: Initialize all_results as an empty list
18: for each params, mean_test_score, std_test_score in
19: grid_search.cv_results_['params'],
20: grid_search.cv_results_['mean_test_score'],
21: grid_search.cv_results_['std_test_score'] do
22:
Create a new GradientBoostingClassifier model with random_state = 42 and params
23:
Fit the new model with X_train and y_train
24:
y_pred ←Predict on X_val
25:
y_score ←Predict probabilities on X_val
26:
classes ←Sort unique values in y_val
27:
accuracy ←Calculate accuracy using accuracy_score(y_val, y_pred)
28:
f1 ←Calculate F1 score using f1_score(y_val, y_pred, average='weighted')
29:
all_results.append((params, accuracy, f1))
30: end for
31: best_model ←grid_search.best_estimator_
32: y_pred ←Predict on X_val using best_model
33: y_score ←Predict probabilities on X_val using best_model
The parameters are tuned
Options
The number of decision trees
75, 100, 200, and 300.
Learning rate
0.001, 0.01, and 0.1.
maximum depth for each decision tree
3, 5, 7, and 10.
For the gradient­boosted tree, the final prediction is a weighted sum of all of the tree
predictions.
3.4.7
XGBoost
eXtreme Gradient Boosting, in abbreviation “XGBoost”, is an algorithm based on the
gradient boosting algorithm. However, a few differences of XGBoost push this model as
one of the best in terms of performance and speed.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
43
==PAGE:52==
Regularization:
The Gradient Boosting Method does not incorporate regularization in its algorithm, focus­
ing solely on minimizing the loss function. In contrast, XGBoost includes regularization
techniques to penalize overfitting. Specifically, XGBoost employs two types of regulariza­
tion:
• L1 Regularization (Lasso) adds the norm of the model parameters as a penalty
term, which is the sum of the absolute values of the coefficients. This tends to
push some coefficients towards zero, effectively removing them from the model.
This results in a sparse model with fewer non­zero coefficients, which can benefit
feature selection.
• L2 Regularization(Ridge) penalizes the sum of the squares of the coefficients. This
has a smoothing effect, pushing large coefficients towards smaller values but not
necessarily eliminating them altogether. This results in a non­sparse model with all
coefficients still present but reduced in magnitude.
The formula for regularization term in XGBoost has manifested beneath,
Ω(fk) = γT + 1
2λ
!
j
ω2
j + α
!
j
|ωj|
(3.21)
where
• Ω(fk) is the regularization term for the k­th tree.
• γ controls the number of leaves in the tree.
• λ is the L2 regularization term (Ridge), penalizing the squared sum of weights.
• α is the L1 regularization term (Lasso), penalizing the absolute sum of weights.
Thus, the loss function for the XGBoost is shown as,
L(φ) =
!
i
l( ˆyi, yi) +
!
k
Ω(fk)
(3.22)
where
ˆyi = φ(xi) =
K
!
k=1
fk(xi), fk ∈F
(3.23)
Parallelization:
Gradient Boosting Machines (GBMs) typically exhibit slower training times compared to
XGBoost. This discrepancy arises because XGBoost incorporates parallelization within
its algorithm, enhancing its efficiency during the training process. While the boosting
technique itself is inherently sequential, XGBoost optimizes performance by leveraging
parallelization techniques, thus accelerating the overall training time.
Missing Data Handling:
Handling missing data in a dataset can be quite challenging. However, XGBoost offers a
built­in solution for this issue, unlike the Gradient Boosting Machine. XGBoost’s missing
data handler is known as Sparsity­aware Split Finding. This method effectively learns
from the data and determines the optimal split for sparse datasets. During the splitting
process, the model strategically places the missing data in a way that minimizes loss.
This approach ensures that the model can effectively utilize all available data, even in the
presence of missing values.
44
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:53==
Tree Pruning:
The Gradient Boosting Machine (GBM) algorithm tends to split trees until reaching a point
of negative loss, which often results in suboptimal outcomes due to its reliance on local
optimization rather than considering the overall pattern. In contrast, XGBoost employs a
different approach. It constructs trees up to a specified maximum depth and then performs
pruning backward. During this process, splits that result in negative loss are typically
pruned. However, there are instances where a split with a negative loss may remain if
subsequent splits yield positive gains. Specifically, if a split results in a negative loss but
is followed by splits that are positive, the overall split may still be retained if the net result
is positive.
In­Built Cross­Validation:
In general, machine learning models require external mechanisms to implement cross­
validation during the training process. However, XGBoost inherently includes cross­validation
as part of its functionality.
Algorithm 10 Training XGBoost Classifier with Hyperparameter Tuning
1: Function train_xgboost()
2: Define the parameter grid:
3:
param_grid ←{
4:
'max_depth': [5, 8, 10]
5:
'learning_rate': [0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.3]
6:
'n_estimators': [75, 100, 200, 300]
7:
'subsample': [0.6, 0.75, 0.85, 1]
8:
'colsample_bytree': [0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1]
9:
'reg_alpha': [0, 0.25, 0.5, 1]
10:
'reg_lambda': [0.2, 0.6, 1]
11: }
12: Create an XGBClassifier model with random_state = 42
13: Initialize GridSearchCV with:
14:
estimator ←model
15:
param_grid ←param_grid
16:
cv ←5
17:
scoring ←’accuracy’
18:
verbose ←2
19:
n_jobs ←­1
20: Fit GridSearchCV with X_train and y_train
21: best_model ←grid_search.best_estimator_
22: y_pred ←Predict on X_val using best_model
23: y_score ←Predict probabilities on X_val using best_model
Here, the main parameters [38] have been tuned in the XGBoost experiment.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
45
==PAGE:54==
The parameters are tuned
Options
Maximum depth of a tree
5, 8, and 10
Learning rate
0.01, 0.05, 0.1, and 0.3
The number of decision trees
75, 100, 200, and 300
Subsample
The percentage of data samples to use for each tree.
Lowering the value can prevent overfitting by training
on a smaller subset of the data. The percentages here
for training are 0.6, 0.75, 0.85, and 1
Colsample_bytree
The percentage for data parameters to use for each
tree. Lowering the value can prevent overfitting by
training on a smaller subset of the features. The per­
centages here for training are 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, and 1
Reg_alpha
L1 regularization term on weights. Higher values in­
crease the regularization.
α
!
j
|ωj|
Reg_lambda
L2 regularization term on weights. Higher values in­
crease the regularization.
λ
!
j
ω2
j
The following section will focus on the analysis of model performance, detailing the ratio­
nale for the continued use of certain advantageous tree­based models.
46
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:55==
4
Evaluation Results and Discussion
In this chapter, the results of the discussed models will be presented, highlighting the
performance of each. The most effective model will be selected and adapted into a bi­
nary authentication system designed to authenticate user identity based on initial login
credentials.
The subsequent section will elucidate the development process of the prototype’s first
version and outline the steps users should follow during the authentication procedure.
Following this, the chapter will address the entire experimental process, identifying areas
for improvement, including material selection, model choices, and system enhancements
to increase accuracy and efficiency.
4.1
Multiclass classification
As previously described, the study involves 5 distinct tasks:
• The first two tasks require participants to think of a command related to a letter
connection, either with dynamic or static words, and then imagine the scenery as­
sociated with that word while their eyes are closed. These tasks are referred to as
”Command in Dynamic Words with Eyes Closed” and ”Command in Static Words
with Eyes Closed”, respectively.
• The next two tasks involve thinking of a command related to a letter connection with
dynamic or static words and visualizing the associated picture with their eyes open.
These are termed ”Command in Dynamic Words with Eyes Open” and ”Command
in Static Words with Eyes Open”, respectively.
• The final task requires participants to imagine various sceneries involving feelings
and circumstances. This task is referred to as “Imagination”.
The subsequent sections provide detailed clarifications and outcomes for each of these
tasks.
4.1.1
Basic models comparison
The evaluation graphs presented in Figure 4.1 indicate that the basic model structure,
without tuning, achieves its highest scores with 16 parameters. Despite this, the fully
connected network model, as shown in Figure(c) 4.1, exhibits high precision relative to
other models. However, its accuracy, recall, and F1 score are comparatively lower. This
discrepancy suggests that while the model is highly confident in its predictions, it is prone
to a significant number of false negatives. This implies that the model frequently misclassi­
fies correct samples as incorrect, leading to unreliable performance due to the imbalance
among the four evaluation metrics [39]. In contrast, the random forest model demon­
strates a superior trade­off among accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 scores when ample
EEG data parameters are available. This model consistently outperforms the others in
maintaining balanced evaluation metrics.
Figure 4.2, Figure 4.3, and 4.3 reveal a consistent pattern with the observations from
the previous subsection. The random forest model continues to excel in comparison to
the other models, with the fully connected network model exhibiting only higher precision.
Despite the similar patterns observed across these figures, subtle differences in the values
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
47
==PAGE:56==
(a) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Command in dy­
namic words with eyes closed” with 16 EEG
data parameters
(b) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Command in dy­
namic words with eyes closed” with 8 EEG
data parameters
(c) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Command in dy­
namic words with eyes closed” with 4 EEG
data parameters (Beta frequency range)
(d) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Command in dy­
namic words with eyes closed” with 4 EEG
data parameters (Alpha frequency range)
Figure 4.1: The comparison of accuracy, precision, recall, and f1 score for “Command in
dynamic words with eyes closed” but in various EEG data parameters, which are 16, 8, 4
for β frequency range, and 4 for α frequency range
are present. Generally, tasks performed with closed eyes yield better results than those
with eyes open. This phenomenon can be attributed to the impact of eye movements and
blinking on EEG signals. Previous studies have shown that muscle activity associated
with eye movements and blinking can interfere with EEG recordings [40]. To mitigate this
effect, some researchers use additional devices to monitor eye movements [41] or employ
machine learning techniques to analyze and remove these artifacts [42]. Additionally,
the presence of visual stimuli with eyes open increases susceptibility to distractions from
peripheral objects compared to the closed­eyed condition [43].
Interestingly, commands using dynamic words exhibit slightly better performance than
those with static words, although the results for commands performed with open eyes
display the opposite trend.
The Imagination task, surprisingly, yields the best performance in this section. The accu­
racy, precision, recall, and F1 scores are notably stable across different standard models,
without significant fluctuations. The random forest model, in particular, shows a clear ad­
vantage over the others, leading to the decision to focus on advanced tree­based models
for subsequent analyses in the project.
48
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:57==
(a) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Command in static
words with eyes closed” with 16 EEG data
parameters
(b) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Command in static
words with eyes closed” with 8 EEG data pa­
rameters
(c) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Command in static
words with eyes closed” with 4 EEG data pa­
rameters (Beta frequency range)
(d) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Command in static
words with eyes closed” with 4 EEG data pa­
rameters (Alpha frequency range)
Figure 4.2: The comparison of accuracy, precision, recall, and f1 score for “Command in
static words with eyes closed” but in various EEG data parameters, which are 16, 8, 4 for
β frequency range, and 4 for α frequency range
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
49
==PAGE:58==
(a) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Command in dy­
namic words with eyes open” with 16 EEG
data parameters
(b) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Command in dy­
namic words with eyes open” with 8 EEG
data parameters
(c) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Command in dy­
namic words with eyes open” with 4 EEG
data parameters (Beta frequency range)
(d) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Command in dy­
namic words with eyes open” with 4 EEG
data parameters (Alpha frequency range)
Figure 4.3: The comparison of accuracy, precision, recall, and f1 score for “Command in
dynamic words with eyes open” but in various EEG data parameters, which are 16, 8, 4
for β frequency range, and 4 for α frequency range
50
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:59==
(a) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Command in static
words with eyes open” with 16 EEG data pa­
rameters
(b) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Command in static
words with eyes open” with 8 EEG data pa­
rameters
(c) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Command in static
words with eyes open” with 4 EEG data pa­
rameters (Beta frequency range)
(d) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Command in static
words with eyes open” with 4 EEG data pa­
rameters (Alpha frequency range)
Figure 4.4: The comparison of accuracy, precision, recall, and f1 score for “Command in
static words with eyes open” but in various EEG data parameters, which are 16, 8, 4 for
β frequency range, and 4 for α frequency range
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
51
==PAGE:60==
(a) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Imagination” with 16
EEG data parameters
(b) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Imagination” with 8
EEG data parameters
(c) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Imagination” with
4 EEG data parameters (Beta frequency
range)
(d) The comparison of accuracy, precision,
recall, and f1 score for “Imagination” with
4 EEG data parameters (Alpha frequency
range)
Figure 4.5: The comparison of accuracy, precision, recall, and f1 score for “Imagination”
but in various EEG data parameters, which are 16, 8, 4 for β frequency range, and 4 for
α frequency range
52
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:61==
4.1.2
Random forest and the series of advanced tree models comparison
To further investigate tree­based models, the following algorithms will be examined: Ran­
dom Forest, Extra Trees, Gradient Boosted Trees, and XGBoost. These models have
undergone extensive tuning through both GridSearchCV from Scikit­learn and manual ad­
justments to ensure that the parameter settings presented in the visualization diagrams
represent the optimal configurations tested.
Random Forest
Since the Random Forest model has demonstrated superior performance compared to the
other two fundamental models—Support Vector Machine and Fully Connected Network—
it holds significant potential for further advancement. Consequently, the model has gone
through parameter tuning, specifically focusing on EEG data parameters, the criterion
used for splitting, and the number of decision trees.
The parameters
Options
EEG data parameters
16, 8, 4, and 4 electrodes data
Criterion
Gini or Entropy
The number of decision trees
1 to 200 each to investigate whether enormous num­
bers of decision trees in the model significantly en­
hance its performance
The five diagrams presented in Figure 4.6 reveal an intriguing observation. Specifically,
for two of the datasets—namely, ”Command in dynamic words with eyes closed” and
”Command in static words with eyes open”—the performance metrics exhibit a plateau
after approximately 100 decision trees, indicated on the x­axis as ”n_estimator”. Beyond
this point, the scores even show a tendency to decline. In contrast, for the dataset labeled
”Command in dynamic words with eyes open”, the performance reaches its peak around
25 to 50 decision trees, subsequently decreases after achieving the second­highest point,
and then stabilizes until the trial with 200 decision trees.
The ”Imagination” dataset displays a similar trend to the others, with a gradual increase
in performance up to 200 decision trees, though the growth remains modest compared
to the peak points observed in other datasets. Additionally, the graph clearly shows four
distinct divergence lines, corresponding to the EEG data parameters of 16, 8, 4, and 4
electrodes, respectively.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
53
==PAGE:62==
(a) The trend of increasing the number of
decision trees in the model from 1 to 200
for “Command in dynamic words with eyes
closed” dataset
(b) The trend of increasing the number of de­
cision trees in the model from 1 to 200 for
“Command in static words with eyes closed”
dataset
(c) The trend of increasing the number of
decision trees in the model from 1 to 200
for “Command in dynamic words with eyes
open” dataset
(d) The trend of increasing the number of de­
cision trees in the model from 1 to 200 for
“Command in static words with eyes open”
dataset
(e) The trend of increasing the number of de­
cision trees in the model from 1 to 200 for
“imagination” dataset
Figure 4.6: Overall trend of increasing the number of decision trees in the model from 1
to 200 in different tasks
54
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:63==
(a) The confusion matrix for the best perfor­
mance from the “Command in dynamic words
with eyes closed”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion ma­
trix for the best performance from the “Com­
mand in dynamic words with eyes closed”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best per­
formance from the “Command in dynamic words
with eyes closed”
Figure 4.7: The analysis of the best per­
formance from the “Command in dynamic
words with eyes closed”
(a) The confusion matrix for the best perfor­
mance from the “Command in static words with
eyes closed”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion ma­
trix for the best performance from the “Com­
mand in static words with eyes closed”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best perfor­
mance from the “Command in static words with
eyes closed”
Figure 4.8: The analysis of the best perfor­
mance from the “Command in static words
with eyes closed”
In Figure 4.7, the confusion matrices for the task ”Command in dynamic words with eyes
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
55
==PAGE:64==
closed” indicate that the model demonstrates superior discriminative ability for the com­
mands ”A for Arithmetic” and ”B for Bounce”. Notably, ”A for Arithmetic” exhibits a par­
ticularly low misclassification rate, with the majority of errors occurring only with the ”B
for Bounce” category. Furthermore, the number of incorrect predictions for ”A for Arith­
metic” is lower compared to other categories, suggesting that the model has a stronger
classification performance for this particular command.
This improved performance is further substantiated by the precision­recall curve analy­
sis. The blue curve, representing ”A for Arithmetic”, clearly shows the best performance
among the classes, followed by the orange curve for ”B for Bounce”, and finally, the red
curve for ”D for Deny”.
Eventually, the model achieves an accuracy of 0.45, a precision of 0.46, a recall of 0.45,
and an F1 score of 0.45. While these results are competitive relative to the performance
of other foundational models, they fall short of a threshold of 0.5, indicating that further
improvements are needed to enhance overall performance.
(a) The confusion matrix for the best perfor­
mance from the “Command in static words
with eyes closed”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Command in static words with eyes closed”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Command in static words with eyes closed”
Figure 4.9: The analysis of the best performance from the “Command in static words with
eyes closed”
56
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:65==
In Figure 4.9, the normalized confusion metrics and precision­recall curves reveal more
pronounced and clear distinctions among the categories. The percentages indicate that
the model’s classification performance across different categories is relatively similar.
However, the label ”F for Feather” demonstrates a slight advantage, as evidenced by
the precision­recall curve.
Despite the accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 scores all being equal at 0.47, this task
shows a marginal improvement over the previous one on average. Nevertheless, as pre­
viously noted, these results remain suboptimal overall.
(a) The confusion matrix for the best per­
formance from the “Command in dynamic
words with eyes open”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Command in dynamic words with eyes
open”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Command in dynamic words with eyes open”
Figure 4.10: The analysis of the best performance from the “Command in dynamic words
with eyes open”
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
57
==PAGE:66==
(a) The confusion matrix for the best perfor­
mance from the “Command in static words
with eyes open”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Command in static words with eyes open”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Command in static words with eyes open”
Figure 4.11: The analysis of the best performance from the “Command in static words
with eyes open”
The tasks performed with both eyes open did not yield satisfactory results, and as such,
the discussion will not focus on these outcomes. Nevertheless, intriguing patterns emerged.
The command ”A for Arithmetic” consistently exhibited clearer distinctions from other com­
mands in the dynamic word tasks. Conversely, the command ”F for Feather” demon­
strated greater dissimilarity from other static word commands. Furthermore, after tuning
the random forest model, the scores for the static word tasks surpassed those of the
dynamic word tasks under optimal settings.
In this task, “Imagination”, has better achievements than the other cases. Besides the best
indexes, four 0.57 scores, for the random forest model, both confusion matrices and the
precision­recall diagrams have superior results to the other tasks. In the confusion matri­
ces, the imagination sceneries, “peace_ocean” and “run_in_forest”, have stood out of the
four categories. Although the “peace_ocean” and “run_in_forest” are the two categories
easier to distinguish, the model’s prediction fits the recognizing the “swim_in_ocean” EEG
data more since there is least the false positive at the right side column, accumulating the
right column values without the true positive. However, the EEG data from this scenery is
58
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:67==
(a) The confusion matrix for the best perfor­
mance from the “Imagination”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Imagination”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Imagination”
Figure 4.12: The analysis of the best performance from the “Imagination”
also easily classified as “run_in_forest”, leading to the recall not having remarkable values
among them. Because of this reason, the precision­recall curves could observe the best
precision with moderate recall.
Extra Trees
In order to find a suitable tree model, the extra trees have been considered in one of the
potential models as well.
In a similar situation to the random forest model in Figure 4.14, a plateau is observed
in the trend, indicating no significant improvement in accuracy and F1 scores beyond a
certain point. Consequently, to optimize training time without sacrificing performance, the
parameter ”n_estimators” (the number of decision trees) is set to 75, 100, 200, and 300 for
further experimentation. This approach ensures efficient use of resources while achieving
consistent outcomes.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
59
==PAGE:68==
(a) The confusion matrix for the best perfor­
mance from the “Imagination”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Imagination”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Imagination”
Figure 4.13: The analysis of the best performance from the “Imagination”
Since the patterns observed are similar to those in the random forest model, most of the
confusion metrics and precision­recall curve results are placed in the appendix, except for
the best­performing task. The eyes­closed tasks outperform the eyes­open tasks, static
words are superior to dynamic words, and within the dynamic words task, the command
”A for Arithmetic” shows greater effectiveness. Similarly, in the static words task, the com­
mand ”F for Feather” demonstrates superior performance in the precision­recall curves.
The best task, ”Imagination,” illustrated in Figure 4.13, exhibits a similar pattern to the ran­
dom forest model. The scenarios ”peace_ocean” and ”run_in_forest” contain the highest
number of true positives. However, the best predictive performance is seen in distinguish­
ing ”swim_in_ocean” from the others, as indicated by the red line in the precision­recall
graph, demonstrating the highest effectiveness.
Although the accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 scores are comparable to those of the
random forest model, the Extra Trees model has the potential to surpass the random forest
model. Due to the increased focus on randomization in Extra Trees, which enhances
model stability and reduces the risk of overfitting compared to the random forest model.
60
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:69==
Figure 4.14: The performance trend for the number of decision trees in Extra Trees model
for “command in dynamic words with eyes closed”
Gradient­Boosted Machine
The model, as previously mentioned, utilizes the gradient boosting method with deci­
sion trees. While similar patterns were observed in earlier models, a notable difference
emerged in this case: commands given with eyes open in static words yielded slightly
better results than those given with eyes closed. Relevant graphs can be found in the
appendix. Figure 4.15 displays the confusion matrices and precision­recall curves for the
best­performing task.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
61
==PAGE:70==
(a) The confusion matrix for the best perfor­
mance from the “Imagination”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Imagination”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Imagination”
Figure 4.15: The analysis of the best performance from the ”Imagination”
In this chart 4.15, ”run_in_forest” stands out as having the highest percentage for the
True positive among the four categories. Nevertheless, the overall performance is not
on par with the Extra Trees model. In the precision­recall curves, the red line repre­
senting ”swim_in_ocean” and the orange line representing ”peace_ocean” demonstrate
better effectiveness compared to the other classes.
Notably, the overall precision of
”swim_in_ocean” is the highest, while the general recall of ”peace_ocean” is the best.
XGBoost
As the function for XGBoost has been described before, and the same conclusion for the
commands series tasks, this section will focus on discussing the results of the best task,
”Imagination”.
62
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:71==
(a) The confusion matrix for the best perfor­
mance from the “Imagination”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Imagination”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Imagination”
Figure 4.16: The analysis of the best performance from the XGBoost’s “Imagination” task
Similar patterns recur, providing crucial insights: the recall ratio is higher for the classes
”run_in_forest” and ”peace_ocean,” while the highest precision is achieved for the class
”swim_in_ocean.” This suggests that these trends are likely applicable across all tree
models. Although the accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 scores are slightly lower at 0.54
compared to the Extra Trees and Random Forest models, XGBoost demonstrates signifi­
cantly faster performance under the same training parameters. Conversely, the Gradient­
Boosted Machine (GBM) is the slowest model due to its boosted method, which lacks the
parallel computing capabilities of XGBoost or LightGBM, leading to greater memory con­
sumption.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
63
==PAGE:72==
4.2
Binary class classification
After extensive research on the models’ classification capabilities for different commands
and imaginative scenarios, transitioning to an application posed a significant challenge.
Ultimately, the decision was made to convert the suitable model into a binary classification
model for the initial demonstration. This approach aims to verify the system’s ability to
accurately identify EEG data corresponding to specific scenes or commands.
To accomplish this, a binary Extra Trees model was developed for the imagination task.
This involved splitting the four classes into four separate binary classification models.
Given the imbalance between each class and the rest, the SMOTE (Synthetic Minority
Over­sampling Technique) method was applied during the training stage.
There are two approaches to address class imbalance: undersampling and oversampling.
Undersampling involves deleting samples from the majority class in the training dataset.
In contrast, oversampling, specifically using SMOTE, involves selecting a minority class
sample xi and identifying its k­nearest minority class neighbors (with k = 5 as the default
used in the model). A new synthetic sample xnew is then generated by choosing one of
the k­nearest neighbors xneighbor and creating a point along the line segment joining xi
and xneighbor. The formula for generating the point can be expressed as:
xnew = xi + λ(xneighbor −xi)
(4.1)
where λ is a random number between 0 and 1. This method effectively increases the
number of minority class samples to the same as the class that has the most samples,
thereby balancing the dataset and improving the performance of machine learning mod­
els. Since this method was used in the training section, not evaluation, the evaluation
samples are the same, and the effect from SMOTE in the confusion matrices cannot be
observed. However, the impact of SMOTE is reflected in the significant increase in recall
and F1 scores, along with a slight decrease in accuracy and precision, thereby providing
a more accurate assessment of model performance.
64
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:73==
(a) The confusion matrix for the best per­
formance from the “Imagination,
class:
swim_in_ocean”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Imagination, class: swim_in_ocean”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Imagination, class: swim_in_ocean”
Figure 4.17: The analysis of the best performance from the binary Extra Trees model for
“Imagination, class:swim_in_ocean” this task and class
With high accuracy 0.83, moderate precision0.69, moderate f1 0.6, and the worst recall0.52,
the model seems to have a bias towards predicting ”no swim_in_ocean” cases, resulting
in high accuracy but moderate precision and lower recall for the ”swim_in_ocean” class.
This phenomenon can be proven by the confusion matrices. In the confusion matrix, 379
out of 408 (93%) have been separated to the correct one, ”no swim_in_ocean”, and only
29 samples separated to the ”swim_in_ocean” (7%), much lower than the False­negative
for ”swim_in_ocean” (48%). This represents the model that has the high ability to detect
the ”no swim_in_ocean” class and moderate capability to identify the ”swim_in_ocean”
class. Figure 4.17 has shown the overall best model from the previously discussed ex­
periment. The trial outcomes for the remaining tasks are detailed in the appendix.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
65
==PAGE:74==
4.3
Demo
Although the results may not be flawless and performance may not be optimal, the com­
pletion of the initial prototype remains a crucial milestone.
Figure 4.18: Empty Login page
Figure 4.19: Insert username and pass­
word to the Login page
Figure 4.20: Login Page
In Figure 4.20 and Figure 4.21, users initially encounter a standard login webpage. After
successfully logging in, they are redirected to the personal homepage. This page features
two buttons and a central text. Clicking the button located in the upper­left corner, marked
with an ”another page” icon, directs users to an additional page. Conversely, pressing
the button in the upper­right corner, which displays a ”log out” icon, returns users to the
previous login page.
Figure 4.21: Simple personal homepage with the reminder of the scenery code, which is
called ”fast pass” in the demo
When users navigate to another page after pressing the button in the top left corner and
66
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:75==
Figure 4.22:
Another Page with the
”Back” button to redirect to the Authenti­
cation Check web page.
Figure 4.23: Authentication Check be­
fore users would like to turn back to their
personal homepage.
Figure 4.24: Login Page
wish to return to their personal account, they must press the ”back” button to initiate an au­
thentication check, as depicted in Figure 4.23. Upon selecting the authentication check,
a dialog box will appear with instructions detailing the subsequent steps. As shown in
Figure 4.25, the dialog box first displays the message, ”Please close your eyes and pre­
pare for the authentication check,” for 5 seconds. This message is then replaced by a
countdown text, ”Starting in i seconds...”, which counts down from 5 seconds before the
authentication process begins.
Figure 4.25: Dialog box with the instruc­
tion notice to let the users know what
they should do in the next step.
Figure 4.26: Dialog box with 5 seconds
count down dynamic text, making the
users have time to prepare.
Figure 4.27: Login Page
Here, in Figure 4.26, a countdown from 5 to 1 is initiated before starting the measurement
of users’ brainwave data. During the 25­second data collection phase, the dialog box
displays a loading circle and the text ”waiting...” as shown in 4.28 4.29. During this time,
users are instructed to close their eyes and focus on visualizing a specific scene, as spec­
ified by the system. After the measurement period, the system will determine whether the
scene the users imagined matches the scene code displayed on their personal account
web page.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 4.28:
Loading circle while the
system measures users’ brainwaves
and produces predictions
Figure 4.29:
Loading circle while the
system measures users’ brainwaves
and produces predictions
Figure 4.30: Login Page
The system will analyze 60 samples of users’ brain wave data and determine the majority
class from these samples. Once this classification process is complete. If authentication
fails, a red text message reading ”Authentication Check Failed!!” will appear below the
authentication button on the authentication page (refer to Figure 4.31). Conversely, if au­
thentication is successful, the system will redirect the user back to their personal account
page.
Figure 4.31: While the users got denied from the authentication system, the web page
will stay on the authentication page with the red text: ”Authentication check Failed!!”
68
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:77==
4.4
Discussion
This experiment did not yield exceptional results or uncover outstanding innovations.
However, given additional time, there remains significant potential for further develop­
ment. Based on the previous chapters and the overall findings, several areas require
discussion to enhance the experiment and related work in the future.
4.4.1
Preparation and Limitation
Several studies have explored the use of power bands in brainwave authentication with­
out integrating SSVEP (Steady­State Visual Evoked Potential) and P300 methods. One
relevant study employed Microsoft’s Auto AI to rapidly test various models. However,
the complexity of this tool, which requires familiarity with the .NET framework, poses a
significant challenge for users who need to quickly adjust parameters and operations.
Consequently, Microsoft tools were not incorporated into the current project, though their
potential utility suggests that they may be considered for future AI­related endeavors to
streamline the exploration process.
The research area of brainwave­based authentication remains relatively novel compared
to more established fields such as Computer Vision, Natural Language Processing, Speech
Recognition, and Image Processing. Consequently, there is a scarcity of open resources
and a lack of opportunities to apply transfer learning due to the varied contexts and pur­
poses of existing studies. Much of the research is still confined to laboratory settings,
utilizing complex and specialized equipment that is not always accessible. This limitation
complicates development and exploration, as available resources are often fragmented
and lack comprehensive integration.
The primary goal of this experiment is to identify a cost­effective, user­friendly, and acces­
sible method for brainwave­based authentication. In this context, the Muse S headband
was selected due to its portability, comfort, and affordability. It is suitable for general use,
but its limitations impose constraints on the methods employed. Notably, the two most
widely used methods, P300 and SSVEP, are not compatible with this setup.
P300, known for its delayed response and sensitivity to noise, requires a quiet envi­
ronment for accurate detection. Furthermore, P300 signals are typically recorded from
electrodes positioned at locations such as P3, Pz, P4, C3, Cz, C4, F3, Fz, and F4 [44].
However, the Muse S headband, which has only four electrodes (TP9, TP10, AF7, AF8),
cannot detect signals from these critical locations [45]. The electrode positions are clearly
illustrated in Figure ??.
Similarly, SSVEP is unsuitable for this application due to its reliance on visual stimuli
that can cause user fatigue and the requirement for additional equipment to generate
flickering stimuli. Furthermore, SSVEP signals are typically recorded from electrodes
located at AFz, Cz, Pz, PO3, PO4, Oz, O9, and O10, which are not covered by the Muse
S electrodes.
Because of much research on these two methods, it was challenging to find a suitable
alternative. Ultimately, the project was inspired by a smaller study available online [29],
which provided valuable insights for developing a practical solution within the constraints
of the Muse S headband.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure 4.32: Electrodes of Muse S headband: TP9, TP10, AF7, AF8. Image resource:
DETECTION OF DRIVER DROWSINESS FROM EEG SIGNALS USING WEARABLE
BRAIN SENSING HEADBAND
4.4.2
Data Tasks and Data Processing
The study that served as inspiration for this project initially employed commands involv­
ing capital letters and dynamic words for mental imagery tasks. This project, however,
explores a broader range of approaches beyond those originally utilized.
A key distinction between the data handling in the inspired study and this project lies in
the treatment of brainwave samples. While the original approach involved training mod­
els on data from individual subjects separately, this project introduces a new method of
integrating data from all subjects into a single training set. This approach aims to iden­
tify whether there are overarching patterns in brainwave activity related to mental tasks
or imagery that are consistent across individuals. However, this methodology introduces
potential challenges, as it may obscure individual­specific brainwave patterns and neg­
atively impact performance. Consequently, before this project continues, an initial focus
will be placed on analyzing individual data to determine whether brainwave patterns are
unique to each person, akin to fingerprints. This individualized analysis will help ascertain
whether the observed patterns are specific to each individual or if generalized patterns can
be identified across different subjects.
4.4.3
Collect Data
One of the most challenging aspects of managing uncertainties in this study is data col­
lection. Each participant exhibits variability in mental states, concentration levels, and
periods, all of which can impact the data. Given that participants live and work in diverse
environments, it is often impractical to bring them to a controlled, quiet location for data
collection. Nevertheless, efforts were made to ensure that the testing environments were
as soundproof as possible. When external noise became unavoidable, participants used
noise­canceling headphones. While this approach could potentially introduce electromag­
netic interference, such issues were addressed during the data processing phase.
These variations in conditions may influence the outcomes; however, they closely reflect
real­world scenarios where users encounter a range of environmental and personal fac­
tors, making the findings more applicable to practical settings.
70
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:79==
On the software side, the tool used to receive the LSL (Lab Streaming Layer) data stream
experienced occasional instability and connection losses. When these disconnections
occurred, the affected trial needed to be repeated. Consequently, some classes, such as
”A for Arithmetic” and ”B for Bounce,” ended up with slightly more samples than others.
This imbalance might contribute to the higher recognition rates observed for these classes.
Interestingly, static word tasks, such as ”A for Apple” and ”B for Ball,” were not significantly
affected by the sample size discrepancy. To ensure more balanced and reliable results in
future studies, it is crucial to standardize the number of samples for each class, thereby
minimizing the impact of such inconsistencies.
4.4.4
Analysis tools
MNE­Python is a robust software library designed for the analysis of brain activity data
obtained through Magnetoencephalography (MEG) and EEG. Despite its significant po­
tential in advancing Brain­Computer Interface (BCI) research, time constraints and the
complexity of setting up Python environments and resolving hardware incompatibilities
prevented a thorough exploration and implementation of this tool in the current experi­
ment.
MNE­Python is a free and open­source library that offers a comprehensive suite of func­
tions tailored for MEG and EEG data analysis. Its key features include:
• Data Preprocessing and Cleaning: The library provides extensive tools for im­
porting, preprocessing, and cleaning brainwave data. This includes noise filtering,
artifact handling, and source localization, which are crucial for preparing data for
further analysis.
• Signal Analysis: MNE­Python supports various analytical techniques, including
time­domain analysis (such as ERPs), frequency­domain analysis (including PSD),
and source localization, which identifies the brain regions responsible for the ob­
served activity.
• Visualization: The tool offers a range of visualization options for brainwave data, in­
cluding time series plots, topographical maps (scalp maps), and source reconstruc­
tions. These visualizations facilitate the interpretation and presentation of complex
data.
• Statistical Analysis: It includes functionalities for performing statistical analyses
on brainwave data, enabling researchers to compare brain activity across different
groups or conditions.
• Extensibility: The platform is highly extensible, allowing developers to create cus­
tom functions and analysis pipelines tailored to specific research needs.
An initial glance of MNE­Python’s capabilities indicates that it is a valuable resource for
enhancing prediction accuracy and data analysis precision in brain­computer interface
projects. Familiarity with this tool prior to commencing a project could provide substan­
tial benefits, improving both the efficiency and effectiveness of BCI­related research and
development.
4.4.5
Results
Comparing the results across various tasks reveals distinct patterns. In summary, the
imagination task consistently yields the best overall results, while the eyes­open tasks
perform the worst. Static word tasks generally produce better outcomes compared to
dynamic word tasks. Notably, commands such as ”A for Arithmetic” and ”B for Bounce”
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
71
==PAGE:80==
achieve higher recognition rates, which can be attributed to a slightly larger sample size
in the dataset for these commands. However, the sample size for ”A for Apple” and ”B for
Ball” did not significantly impact the recognition rate of the ”F for Feather” class, indicating
that sample size alone does not substantially affect recognition performance.
When examining the binary classification case, as demonstrated in the initial request, it
is evident that the model performs better with a clear distinction between classes. The no­
table discrepancy in recognition rates between ”swim_in_ocean” and ”not swim_in_ocean”
arises because the latter category encompasses data from three other classes. To ad­
dress this imbalance, it might be beneficial to reduce the data from the other three classes
so that the number of samples aligns more closely with that of the target class. This ad­
justment is likely to improve the accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 scores, leading to a
more balanced and effective model.
4.4.6
Demo
The first demonstration utilizes Flet, a software framework designed to facilitate the de­
velopment of real­time web, mobile, and desktop applications using Python. This choice
emerged from a comparison with Flutter, a popular framework known for its versatility
across multiple platforms, including Android, iOS, Windows, macOS, Linux, Google Fuch­
sia, and the web.
While Flutter supports a broad range of platforms, it requires the use of Dart, a language
that, although similar to JavaScript, is less familiar to many developers who primarily work
with Python. For those who are proficient in Python but not necessarily in frontend or
backend development, learning Dart could significantly increase the time and complexity
of the project.
In contrast, Flet offers the advantage of leveraging Python, which aligns well with the de­
veloper’s existing skill set. Flet provides similar functionality to Flutter, allowing for the
rapid creation of web application prototypes without the need to master a new program­
ming language. This efficiency is crucial in speeding up the development process and
ensuring that the web application operates with the same functionality and user experi­
ence as traditional web pages.
The initial deployment of the web page has been successful, demonstrating the viability of
Flet in meeting project needs. However, for more advanced customization and decoration
of the web pages, it may be necessary to acquire additional knowledge in frontend and
backend technologies. Understanding HTML, CSS, JavaScript, SQL, and potentially Java
would be beneficial for implementing more complex features and enhancing the visual
appeal and functionality of the web application.
Flet has proven to be an effective tool for rapid development using Python, thus saving
time and simplifying the development process. Nevertheless, for future enhancements,
a deeper engagement with traditional web technologies will be necessary to fully realize
the project’s potential and refine the web application’s design and functionality.
72
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:81==
5
Conclusion
This project was inspired by a series of high­profile Instagram account hacking incidents in
Taiwan, where attackers employed phishing websites and emails to harvest account cre­
dentials. These cybercriminals further exploited vulnerabilities by accessing victims’ cook­
ies and session IDs and bypassing two­factor authentication (2FA) mechanisms through
rapid exploitation of known IP addresses. The increasing prevalence of virtual reality (VR)
headsets and brain­computer interfaces (BCIs), exemplified by Apple’s recent release of
the Apple Vision, underscores the growing relevance of this technology.
Denmark’s commitment to inclusivity and accessibility in technology highlights a broader
societal trend towards accommodating diverse needs. Brainwave­based authentication
offers significant advantages over traditional biometric methods, such as fingerprint and
facial recognition, particularly for individuals with physical disabilities. This technology
represents a transformative advancement, providing a means for enhanced participation
in societal activities.
Given the sharp rise in cyber­attacks, as documented by recent statistics [46], there is
a timely opportunity to integrate cybersecurity measures with brain­computer interfaces.
This project explores the potential for leveraging brainwave patterns to develop a novel
authentication method, aimed at mitigating vulnerabilities associated with cookie and ses­
sion management. Brainwave data, being inherently private and complex, poses signif­
icant challenges for model training and raises important privacy concerns for both indi­
viduals and governmental bodies. The acceptance of such personalized identification
systems may also be hampered by the general public’s preference for quicker and more
convenient solutions.
The results of this study indicate that tree­based machine learning models demonstrate
superior performance compared to other popular algorithms, with imagination­based tasks
yielding clearer distinctions between patterns. Despite this, the model exhibits limitations
in recognizing diverse brainwave patterns within the same class, as revealed by confusion
metrics.
In conclusion, while this project may not represent a groundbreaking advance, it rep­
resents a meaningful step toward integrating general brainwave authentication into cy­
bersecurity solutions. The use of a low­cost, portable, and comfortable headband of­
fers promising avenues for further research and development in both cybersecurity and
emerging technologies. This work paves the way for deeper exploration into the feasibility
of brainwave­based authentication systems and their potential impact on future techno­
logical advancements.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
73
==PAGE:82==
74
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
Guy Pujolle, Ahmed Serhrouchni, and Ines Ayadi. “Secure session management
with cookies”. In: 2009 7th International Conference on Information, Communica­
tions and Signal Processing (ICICS) (Dec. 2009), pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/ICICS.2009.
5397550.
[2]
Alex X. Liu, Jason M. Kovacs, and Mohamed G. Gouda. “A secure cookie scheme”.
In: Computer Networks 56 (6 Dec. 2012), pp. 1723–1730.
[3]
M. Aldayel et al. “Systematic Review of Brain­Computer Interface­Based User Au­
thentication System: Trends, Challenges, and Directions”. In: IEEE Access 12 (2024),
pp. 96848–96861. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3421264.
[4]
Terence W Picton. “The P300 wave of the human event­related potential”. In: Jour­
nal of Clinical Neurophysiology 9.4 (1992), pp. 456–479. doi: 10.1097/00004691-
199210000-00002.
[5]
John Polich. “Updating P300: an integrative theory of P3a and P3b”. In: Clinical
Neurophysiology 118.10 (2007), pp. 2128–2148. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2007.04.019.
[6]
JR Wolpaw et al. “Brain­computer interfaces for communication and control”. In:
Clinical Neurophysiology 113.6 (2002), pp. 767–791. doi: 10.1016/s1388-2457(02)
00057-3.
[7]
Emanuel Donchin. “Surprise!… Surprise?” In: Psychophysiology 18.5 (1981), pp. 493–
513. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1469 - 8986 . 1981 . tb01815 . x. eprint: https :
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1469-8986.1981.tb01815.x. url: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1469-8986.1981.tb01815.x.
[8]
John Polich and Albert Kok. “Cognitive and biological determinants of P300: an
integrative review”. In: Biological Psychology 41.2 (1995), pp. 103–146. doi: 10.
1016/0301-0511(95)05130-9.
[9]
L. Bianchi, C. Liti, G. Liuzzi, et al. “Improving P300 Speller Performance by Means
of Optimization and Machine Learning”. In: Annals of Operations Research 312
(2022), pp. 1221–1259. doi: 10.1007/s10479-020-03921-0.
[10]
Ronghua Ma et al. “Bayesian Uncertainty Modeling for P300­Based Brain­Computer
Interface”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering
31 (2023), pp. 2789–2799. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2023.3286688.
[11]
M. M. Müller, E. Tassi, and G. Blankertz. “Calibration­free SSVEP BCI using fre­
quency domain spatial filtering”. In: BioMedical Engineering Online 7.1 (2008), p. 1.
doi: 10.1186/1475-925X-7-1.
[12]
Brendan Z. Allison, Elizabeth W. Wolpaw, and Jonathan R. Wolpaw. “Brain­computer
interface systems: progress and prospects”. In: Expert Review of Medical Devices
4.4 (July 2007), pp. 463–474. doi: 10.1586/17434440.4.4.463.
[13]
M.S. Treder, N.M. Schmidt, and B. Blankertz. “Gaze­independent brain–computer
interfaces based on covert attention and feature attention”. In: Journal of Neural
Engineering 8.6 (2011), p. 066003. doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/8/6/066003.
[14]
E.L. Radtke, U. Martens, and T. Gruber. “The steady­state visual evoked potential
(SSVEP) reflects the activation of cortical object representations: evidence from
semantic stimulus repetition”. In: Experimental Brain Research 239 (February 2021
2021), pp. 545–555. doi: 10.1007/s00221-020-05992-8. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00221-020-05992-8.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
75
==PAGE:84==
[15]
A. S. Albahri et al. “A Systematic Review of Using Deep Learning Technology in
the Steady­State Visually Evoked Potential­Based Brain­Computer Interface Appli­
cations: Current Trends and Future Trust Methodology”. In: International Journal of
Telemedicine and Applications (2023), p. 7741735. doi: 10.1155/2023/7741735. url:
https://doi.org/10.1155/2023/7741735.
[16]
X. Bai et al. “A hybrid P300­SSVEP brain­computer interface speller with a fre­
quency enhanced row and column paradigm”. In: Frontiers in Neuroscience 17
(Mar. 2023), p. 1133933. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1133933.
[17]
Ximing Mai et al. “A hybrid BCI combining SSVEP and EOG and its application for
continuous wheelchair control”. In: Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 88
(2024), p. 105530. issn: 1746­8094. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bspc.2023.105530.
url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1746809423009631.
[18]
Tabassum Hossain, Arnab rakshit, and Amit Konar. “Brain­Computer Interface based
User Authentication System for Personal Device Security”. In: 2020 International
Conference on Computer, Electrical & Communication Engineering (ICCECE) (Oct.
2020), pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/ICCECE48148.2020.9223069.
[19]
Magnus Borga. Canonical correlation: a tutorial. Online tutorial. 2001. url: http://
people.imt.liu.se/magnus/cca (visited on 05/29/2024).
[20]
Hao­Yan Zhang et al. “Stress­Induced Effects in Resting EEG Spectra Predict the
Performance of SSVEP­Based BCI”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering 28.8 (2020), pp. 1771–1780. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2020.
3005771.
[21]
Katarzyna Białas et al. “Multifactor Authentication System Using Simplified EEG
Brain­Computer Interface”. In: IEEE Transactions on Human­Machine Systems 52.5
(2022), pp. 867–876. doi: 10.1109/THMS.2022.3196142.
[22]
P. Kumar et al. “Envisioned speech recognition using EEG sensors”. In: Personal
and Ubiquitous Computing 22.1 (Sept. 2017), pp. 185–199.
[23]
Sidas Saulynas and Ravi Kuber. “Towards Brain­Computer Interface (BCI) and
Gestural­Based Authentication for Individuals who are Blind”. In: Proceedings of the
19th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference. University of Maryland, Baltimore
County. Baltimore, MD, USA: ACM, Oct. 2017. doi: 10.1145/3132525.3134785.
[24]
Akshay Valsaraj et al. “Motor Imagery Based Multimodal Biometric User Authentica­
tion System Using EEG”. In: 2020 International Conference on Cyberworlds (CW).
2020, pp. 272–279. doi: 10.1109/CW49994.2020.00050.
[25]
Bingkun Wu, Weizhi Meng, and Wei­Yang Chiu. “Towards Enhanced EEG­based
Authentication with Motor Imagery Brain­Computer Interface”. In: Proceedings of
the 38th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference. ACSAC ’22. Austin,
TX, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2022, pp. 799–812. isbn: 9781450397599.
doi: 10.1145/3564625.3564656. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3564625.3564656.
[26]
Farnaz Yousefi, Hoshang Kolivand, and Thar Baker. “SaS­BCI: a new strategy to
predict image memorability and use mental imagery as a brain­based biometric
authentication”. In: Neural Computing and Applications 33 (2021), pp. 4283–4297.
doi: 10.1007/s00521-020-05247-1. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-020-05247-1.
[27]
The Qualcomm Institute. Demo 1 The Lab Streaming Layer. Aug. 2013. url: https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y1at7yrcFW0.
[28]
Jason Hockman, Marcelo M. Wanderley, and Ichiro Fujinaga. “Real­Time Phase
Vocoder Manipulation by Runner’s Pace”. In: New Interfaces for Musical Expres­
sion. 2009. url: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:8340832.
76
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:85==
[29]
Giselle Chan. How to Build an Instantaneous Keyboard Controlled by Thought (BCIxML).
[Medium blog post]. 2023. url: https://medium.com/@cctgiselle/how-to-build-an-
instantaneous-keyboard-controlled-by-thought-bcixml-94e8f7d196dd.
[30]
Rafał Chałupnik et al. “Using Simplified EEG­Based Brain Computer Interface and
Decision Tree Classifier for Emotions Detection”. In: Apr. 2022, pp. 306–316. isbn:
978­3­030­99586­7. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-99587-4_26.
[31]
Chantelle M. Cocquyt and Daniela J. Palombo. “Emotion in the mind’s eye: Imagina­
tion for adaptive cognition”. In: Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1526.1
(Aug. 2023). This article also appears in: The Year in Cognitive Neuroscience,
pp. 59–72. doi: 10.1111/nyas.14877. url: https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.14877.
[32]
Edward Nelson. Euler’s Formula. https://web.math.princeton.edu/~nelson/104/
euler.pdf. Accessed: 2024­07­09. 2001.
[33]
scikit­learn developers. scikit­learn — Machine Learning in Python — scikit­learn
1.5.1 documentation. The official explanation webpage from scikit­learn. 2024. url:
https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/svm.html#shrinking-svm.
[34]
Chih­Sheng Huang. Machine Learning: Kernel Function. 2018. url: https://chih-
sheng-huang821.medium.com/%E6%A9%9F%E5%99%A8%E5%AD%B8%E7%BF%
92-kernel-%E5%87%BD%E6%95%B8-47c94095171.
[35]
I.H. Sarker. “Deep Learning: A Comprehensive Overview on Techniques, Taxon­
omy, Applications and Research Directions”. In: SN COMPUT. SCI. 2.420 (2021).
doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s42979-021-00815-1.
[36]
Mohtadi Ben Fraj. InDepth: Parameter tuning for Decision Tree. Medium blog post.
2017. url: https://medium.com/@mohtedibf/indepth-parameter-tuning-for-decision-
tree-6753118a03c3.
[37]
Mohtadi Ben Fraj. In Depth: Parameter tuning for Gradient Boosting. Medium blog
post. 2017. url: https://medium.com/all-things-ai/in-depth-parameter-tuning-for-
gradient-boosting-3363992e9bae.
[38]
RITHP. Optimizing XGBoost: A Guide to Hyperparameter Tuning. Medium blog post.
2023. url: https : / / medium . com/@rithpansanga/optimizing- xgboost- a- guide- to -
hyperparameter-tuning-77b6e48e289d.
[39]
Sruthy Nath. Precision­Recall Trade­Off: Navigating the Delicate Balance in Imbal­
anced Datasets. Medium blog post. 2023. url: https://medium.com/@sruthy.sn91/
precision- recall- trade- off- navigating- the- delicate- balance- in- imbalanced- datasets-
66ad175ccf1e.
[40]
Narayan P Subramaniyam. Getting Rid of Eye Blink in the EEG. the article is from
Sapien labs. 2018. url: https://sapienlabs.org/lab-talk/getting-rid-of-eye-blink-in-
the-eeg/.
[41]
M. Plöchl, J. P. Ossandón, and P. König. “Combining EEG and eye tracking: iden­
tification, characterization, and correction of eye movement artifacts in electroen­
cephalographic data”. In: Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 6 (Oct. 2012), p. 278.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00278.
[42]
Meng Wang et al. “Eye blink artifact detection based on multi­dimensional EEG
feature fusion and optimization”. In: Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 83
(2023), p. 104657. issn: 1746­8094. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bspc.2023.104657.
url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1746809423000903.
[43]
Yi­Xuan Feng et al. “The acts of opening and closing the eyes are of importance
for congenital blindness: Evidence from resting­state fMRI”. In: NeuroImage 233
(2021), p. 117966. issn: 1053­8119. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.
117966. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1053811921002433.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
77
==PAGE:86==
[44]
TMSi. What is the P300 in Event­Related Potentials (ERPs)? [Electrophysiological
Research Blog, News & Events]. url: https://info.tmsi.com/blog/what-is-the-p300-
in-event-related-potentials-erps.
[45]
Khune Satt Nyein Chan et al. “DETECTION OF DRIVER DROWSINESS FROM
EEG SIGNALS USING WEARABLE BRAIN SENSING HEADBAND”. In: (Jan. 2021).
doi: 10.14456/jrame.2021.14].
[46]
Mariah St. John. Cybersecurity Stats: Facts And Figures You Should Know. July
2023. url: https://www.forbes.com/advisor/education/it-and-tech/cybersecurity-
statistics/.
78
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:87==
A
Appendix: Source code
This chapter includes the code used in this project.
A.1
Data preprocessing
1 # -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
2 """
3 Estimate Relaxation from Band Powers
4
5 This example shows how to buffer , epoch, and transform EEG data from a single
6 electrode into values for each of the classic frequencies (e.g. alpha, beta,
theta)
7 Furthermore , it shows how ratios of the band powers can be used to estimate
8 mental state for neurofeedback.
9
10 #!/usr/bin/env python3
11 The neurofeedback protocols described here are inspired by
12 *Neurofeedback: A Comprehensive Review on System Design , Methodology and
Clinical Applications* by Marzbani et. al
13
14 Adapted from https://github.com/NeuroTechX/bci-workshop
15 """
16
17 import numpy as np
# Module that simplifies computations on matrices
18 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
# Module used for plotting
19 from pylsl import StreamInlet , resolve_byprop
# Module to receive EEG data
20 import utils
# Our own utility functions
21 from ml import train_svmm_model , predict_with_svmm_model
22 from cnn_model import train_CNN_model , predict_with_cnn_model
23
24 import sys
25 import pandas as pd
26 import os
27 import argparse
28 parser = argparse.ArgumentParser(description='Know which condition state the
user is in.')
29 parser.add_argument('--mode', type=str, default='', help='The mode of the
program. Either collecting or predicting.')
30 parser.add_argument('--model', type=str, default='', help='The model to use
for prediction')
31 parser.add_argument('--image', type=str, default='', help='The name of the
image to show')
32 parser.add_argument('--trial', type=str, default='', help='The trial number')
33 args = parser.parse_args()
34
35 # Handy little enum to make code more readable
36
37 def most_frequent(List):
38
tuple_list = [tuple(item) for item in List]
39
return max(set(tuple_list), key=tuple_list.count)
40
41 class Band:
42
Delta = 0
43
Theta = 1
44
Alpha = 2
45
Beta = 3
46
47
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
79
==PAGE:88==
48 """ EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETERS """
49 # Modify these to change aspects of the signal processing
50
51 # Length of the EEG data buffer (in seconds)
52 # This buffer will hold last n seconds of data and be used for calculations
53 BUFFER_LENGTH = 10
54
55 # Length of the epochs used to compute the FFT (in seconds)
56 EPOCH_LENGTH = 1
57
58 # Amount of overlap between two consecutive epochs (in seconds)
59 OVERLAP_LENGTH = 0.8
60
61 # Amount to 'shift' the start of each next consecutive epoch
62 SHIFT_LENGTH = EPOCH_LENGTH - OVERLAP_LENGTH
63
64 # Index of the channel(s) (electrodes) to be used
65 # 0 = left ear, 1 = left forehead , 2 = right forehead , 3 = right ear
66 INDEX_CHANNEL = [0, 1, 2, 3]
67
68 if __name__ == "__main__":
69
70
""" 1. CONNECT TO EEG STREAM """
71
72
# Search for active LSL streams
73
print('Looking for an EEG stream...')
74
streams = resolve_byprop('type', 'EEG', timeout=2)
75
if len(streams) == 0:
76
raise RuntimeError('Can\'t find EEG stream.')
77
78
# Set active EEG stream to inlet and apply time correction
79
print("Start acquiring data")
80
inlet = StreamInlet(streams[0], max_chunklen=12)
81
eeg_time_correction = inlet.time_correction()
82
83
# Get the stream info and description
84
info = inlet.info()
85
description = info.desc()
86
87
# Get the sampling frequency
88
# This is an important value that represents how many EEG data points are
89
# collected in a second. This influences our frequency band calculation.
90
# for the Muse 2016, this should always be 256
91
fs = int(info.nominal_srate())
92
93
""" 2. INITIALIZE BUFFERS """
94
95
# Initialize raw EEG data buffer
96
eeg_buffer = np.zeros((int(fs * BUFFER_LENGTH), 4))
97
filter_state = None
# for use with the notch filter
98
99
# Compute the number of epochs in "buffer_length"
100
n_win_test = int(np.floor((BUFFER_LENGTH - EPOCH_LENGTH) /
101
SHIFT_LENGTH + 1))
102
103
# Initialize the band power buffer (for plotting)
104
# bands will be ordered: [delta, theta, alpha, beta]
105
band_buffer = np.zeros((n_win_test , 4))
106
107
""" 3. GET DATA """
108
109
# The try/except structure allows to quit the while loop by aborting the
80
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:89==
110
# script with <Ctrl-C>
111
print('Press Ctrl-C in the console to break the while loop.')
112
113
try:
114
counter = 0 #counter for collecting data
115
# The following loop acquires data, computes band powers , and
calculates neurofeedback metrics based on those band powers
116
while True:
117
guesses = ["","","","","","","","","",""]
118
""" 3.1 ACQUIRE DATA """
119
# Obtain EEG data from the LSL stream
120
for i in range(10):
121
eeg_data , timestamp = inlet.pull_chunk(
122
timeout=1, max_samples=int(SHIFT_LENGTH * fs))
123
124
# Only keep the channel we're interested in
125
ch_data = np.array(eeg_data)[:, INDEX_CHANNEL]
126
127
# Update EEG buffer with the new data
128
eeg_buffer , filter_state = utils.update_buffer(
129
eeg_buffer , ch_data , notch=True,
130
filter_state=filter_state)
131
132
""" 3.2 COMPUTE BAND POWERS """
133
# Get newest samples from the buffer
134
data_epoch = utils.get_last_data(eeg_buffer ,
135
EPOCH_LENGTH * fs)
136
137
# Compute band powers
138
band_powers = utils.compute_band_powers(data_epoch , fs).
reshape(-1, 4)
139
band_buffer , _ = utils.update_buffer(band_buffer ,
140
band_powers)
141
# Compute the average band powers for all epochs in buffer
142
# This helps to smooth out noise
143
smooth_band_powers = np.mean(band_buffer , axis=0)
144
betaWaves = band_powers[Band.Beta]
145
alphaWaves = band_powers[Band.Alpha]
146
thetaWaves = band_powers[Band.Theta]
147
deltaWaves = band_powers[Band.Delta]
148
features_for_model = [[betaWaves , alphaWaves , thetaWaves ,
deltaWaves]]
149
if args.mode == "predict" and args.trial != "" and args.model
== "svm":
150
if 'svmm_model' not in globals():
151
svmm_model , scaler, _ = train_svmm_model(args.trial)
152
if 'svmm_model' in globals():
153
prediction = predict_with_svmm_model(svmm_model ,
scaler, features_for_model)
154
guesses[i]=prediction
155
156
if args.mode == "predict" and args.trial != "" and args.model
== "cnn":
157
if 'cnn_model' not in globals():
158
cnn_model = train_CNN_model(args.trial)
159
if 'cnn_model' in globals():
160
prediction = predict_with_cnn_model(cnn_model ,
features_for_model)
161
guesses[i]=prediction
162
163
# print("{}".format(betaWaves))
164
if args.mode == "collect":
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
81
==PAGE:90==
165
166
#The section below is for collecting purposes
167
print(band_powers[Band.Beta])
168
print(band_powers[Band.Alpha])
169
print(band_powers[Band.Theta])
170
print(band_powers[Band.Delta])
171
print()
172
173
174
# Store them in the csv file
175
image_show = args.image
176
trial = args.trial
177
178
# Create a DataFrame
179
df = pd.DataFrame({
180
'Image': [image_show],
181
'Beta_TP9': [band_powers[Band.Beta][0]],
182
'Beta_AF7': [band_powers[Band.Beta][1]],
183
'Beta_AF8': [band_powers[Band.Beta][2]],
184
'Beta_TP10': [band_powers[Band.Beta][3]],
185
'Alpha_TP9': [band_powers[Band.Alpha][0]],
186
'Alpha_AF7': [band_powers[Band.Alpha][1]],
187
'Alpha_AF8': [band_powers[Band.Alpha][2]],
188
'Alpha_TP10': [band_powers[Band.Alpha][3]],
189
'Theta_TP9': [band_powers[Band.Theta][0]],
190
'Theta_AF7': [band_powers[Band.Theta][1]],
191
'Theta_AF8': [band_powers[Band.Theta][2]],
192
'Theta_TP10': [band_powers[Band.Theta][3]],
193
'Delta_TP9': [band_powers[Band.Delta][0]],
194
'Delta_AF7': [band_powers[Band.Delta][1]],
195
'Delta_AF8': [band_powers[Band.Delta][2]],
196
'Delta_TP10': [band_powers[Band.Delta][3]],
197
})
198
199
200
# Store DataFrame into CSV file
201
# Check if the file exists
202
if not os.path.exists(f'dataset/{trial}.csv'):
203
# If file does not exist, write header
204
df.to_csv(f'dataset/{trial}.csv', mode='a', index=False,
header=True)
205
else:
206
# If file exists , do not write header
207
df.to_csv(f'dataset/{trial}.csv', mode='a', index=False,
header=False)
208
209
counter += 1 #counter
210
if counter >=50:
211
exit()
212
elif args.mode == "predict":
213
#print(most_frequent(guesses))
214
215
if most_frequent(guesses)==('Arithmetic',):
216
print("A")
217
elif most_frequent(guesses)==('Bouncy',):
218
print("B")
219
elif most_frequent(guesses)==('Catch',):
220
print("C")
221
elif most_frequent(guesses)==('Deny',):
222
print("D")
223
elif most_frequent(guesses)==('Eat',):
224
print("E")
82
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:91==
225
elif most_frequent(guesses)==('Fight',):
226
print("F")
227
else:
228
print("Error")
229
else:
230
print("Invalid mode. Not collect or predict.")
231
sys.exit()
232
233
234
#TEST FOR DELTA, THEN GAMMA, THEN BETA
235
# should i do both delta and alpha?? or delta and gamma?? see
if each differs
236
237
# print('Delta: ', band_powers[Band.Delta], ' Theta: ',
band_powers[Band.Theta],
238
#
' Alpha: ', band_powers[Band.Alpha], ' Beta: ',
band_powers[Band.Beta])
239
240
""" 3.3 COMPUTE NEUROFEEDBACK METRICS """
241
# These metrics could also be used to drive brain-computer
interfaces
242
243
# Alpha Protocol:
244
# Simple redout of alpha power, divided by delta waves in
order to rule out noise
245
# alpha_metric = smooth_band_powers[Band.Alpha] / \
246
#smooth_band_powers[Band.Delta]
247
#print('Alpha Relaxation: ', alpha_metric)
248
249
# Beta Protocol:
250
# Beta waves have been used as a measure of mental activity
and concentration
251
# This beta over theta ratio is commonly used as neurofeedback
for ADHD
252
# beta_metric = smooth_band_powers[Band.Beta] / \
253
#
smooth_band_powers[Band.Theta]
254
# print('Beta Concentration: ', beta_metric)
255
256
# Alpha/Theta Protocol:
257
# This is another popular neurofeedback metric for stress
reduction
258
# Higher theta over alpha is supposedly associated with
reduced anxiety
259
# theta_metric = smooth_band_powers[Band.Theta] / \
260
#
smooth_band_powers[Band.Alpha]
261
# print('Theta Relaxation: ', theta_metric)
262
263
except KeyboardInterrupt:
264
print('Closing!')
Listing A.1: The code for collecting EEG data and predicting brainwave
1
2 # -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
3 """
4 Muse LSL Example Auxiliary Tools
5
6 These functions perform the lower-level operations involved in buffering ,
7 epoching , and transforming EEG data into frequency bands
8
9 @author: Cassani
10 """
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
83
==PAGE:92==
11
12 import os
13 import sys
14 from tempfile import gettempdir
15 from subprocess import call
16
17 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
18 import numpy as np
19 from sklearn import svm
20 from scipy.signal import butter, lfilter , lfilter_zi
21
22
23 NOTCH_B , NOTCH_A = butter(4, np.array([55, 65]) / (256 / 2), btype='bandstop')
24
25
26 def epoch(data, samples_epoch , samples_overlap=0):
27
"""Extract epochs from a time series.
28
29
Given a 2D array of the shape [n_samples , n_channels]
30
Creates a 3D array of the shape [wlength_samples , n_channels , n_epochs]
31
32
Args:
33
data (numpy.ndarray or list of lists): data [n_samples , n_channels]
34
samples_epoch (int): window length in samples
35
samples_overlap (int): Overlap between windows in samples
36
37
Returns:
38
(numpy.ndarray): epoched data of shape
39
"""
40
41
if isinstance(data, list):
42
data = np.array(data)
43
44
n_samples , n_channels = data.shape
45
46
samples_shift = samples_epoch - samples_overlap
47
48
n_epochs = int(
49
np.floor((n_samples - samples_epoch) / float(samples_shift)) + 1)
50
51
# Markers indicate where the epoch starts , and the epoch contains
samples_epoch rows
52
markers = np.asarray(range(0, n_epochs + 1)) * samples_shift
53
markers = markers.astype(int)
54
55
# Divide data in epochs
56
epochs = np.zeros((samples_epoch , n_channels , n_epochs))
57
58
for i in range(0, n_epochs):
59
epochs[:, :, i] = data[markers[i]:markers[i] + samples_epoch , :]
60
61
return epochs
62
63
64 def compute_band_powers(eegdata , fs):
65
"""Extract the features (band powers) from the EEG.
66
67
Args:
68
eegdata (numpy.ndarray): array of dimension [number of samples ,
69
number of channels]
70
fs (float): sampling frequency of eegdata
71
84
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:93==
72
Returns:
73
(numpy.ndarray): feature matrix of shape [number of feature points ,
74
number of different features]
75
"""
76
# 1. Compute the PSD
77
winSampleLength , nbCh = eegdata.shape
78
79
# Apply Hamming window
80
w = np.hamming(winSampleLength)
81
dataWinCentered = eegdata - np.mean(eegdata , axis=0)
# Remove offset
82
dataWinCenteredHam = (dataWinCentered.T * w).T
83
84
NFFT = nextpow2(winSampleLength)
85
Y = np.fft.fft(dataWinCenteredHam , n=NFFT, axis=0) / winSampleLength
86
PSD = 2 * np.abs(Y[0:int(NFFT / 2), :])
# With the convenience the PSD
is without squared
87
f = fs / 2 * np.linspace(0, 1, int(NFFT / 2))
88
89
# SPECTRAL FEATURES
90
# Average of band powers
91
# Delta <4
92
ind_delta , = np.where(f < 4)
93
meanDelta = np.mean(PSD[ind_delta , :], axis=0).reshape(-1, 1)
94
# Theta 4-8
95
ind_theta , = np.where((f >= 4) & (f <= 8))
96
meanTheta = np.mean(PSD[ind_theta , :], axis=0).reshape(-1, 1)
97
# Alpha 8-12
98
ind_alpha , = np.where((f >= 8) & (f <= 12))
99
meanAlpha = np.mean(PSD[ind_alpha , :], axis=0).reshape(-1, 1)
100
# Beta 12-30
101
ind_beta , = np.where((f >= 12) & (f < 30))
102
meanBeta = np.mean(PSD[ind_beta , :], axis=0).reshape(-1, 1)
103
104
feature_vector = np.concatenate((meanDelta , meanTheta , meanAlpha ,
105
meanBeta), axis=0)
106
107
feature_vector = np.log10(feature_vector)
108
109
return feature_vector
110
111
112 def nextpow2(i):
113
"""
114
Find the next power of 2 for number i
115
"""
116
n = 1
117
while n < i:
118
n *= 2
119
return n
120
121
122 def compute_feature_matrix(epochs, fs):
123
"""
124
Call compute_feature_vector for each EEG epoch
125
"""
126
n_epochs = epochs.shape[2]
127
128
for i_epoch in range(n_epochs):
129
if i_epoch == 0:
130
feat = compute_band_powers(epochs[:, :, i_epoch], fs).T
131
# Initialize feature_matrix
132
feature_matrix = np.zeros((n_epochs , feat.shape[0]))
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
85
==PAGE:94==
133
134
feature_matrix[i_epoch , :] = compute_band_powers(
135
epochs[:, :, i_epoch], fs).T
136
137
return feature_matrix
138
139
140 def get_feature_names(ch_names):
141
"""Generate the name of the features.
142
143
Args:
144
ch_names (list): electrode names
145
146
Returns:
147
(list): feature names
148
"""
149
bands = ['delta', 'theta', 'alpha', 'beta']
150
151
feat_names = []
152
for band in bands:
153
for ch in range(len(ch_names)):
154
feat_names.append(band + '-' + ch_names[ch])
155
156
return feat_names
157
158
159 def update_buffer(data_buffer , new_data , notch=False, filter_state=None):
160
"""
161
Concatenates "new_data" into "data_buffer", and returns an array with
162
the same size as "data_buffer"
163
"""
164
if new_data.ndim == 1:
165
new_data = new_data.reshape(-1, data_buffer.shape[1])
166
167
if notch:
168
if filter_state is None:
169
filter_state = np.tile(lfilter_zi(NOTCH_B , NOTCH_A),
170
(data_buffer.shape[1], 1)).T
171
new_data , filter_state = lfilter(NOTCH_B , NOTCH_A , new_data , axis=0,
172
zi=filter_state)
173
174
new_buffer = np.concatenate((data_buffer , new_data), axis=0)
175
new_buffer = new_buffer[new_data.shape[0]:, :]
176
177
return new_buffer , filter_state
178
179
180 def get_last_data(data_buffer , newest_samples):
181
"""
182
Obtains from "buffer_array" the "newest samples" (N rows from the
183
bottom of the buffer)
184
"""
185
new_buffer = data_buffer[(data_buffer.shape[0] - newest_samples):, :]
186
187
return new_buffer
Listing A.2: The functions perform the lower­level operations offer data preprocessing to
use. It includes in buffering, epoching, and transforming EEG data into frequency bands
86
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:95==
A.2
Multi­classification models
1 '''
2 # Load libraries
3 import pandas as pd
4 # from pandas import read_csv
5 # from pandas.plotting import scatter_matrix
6 # from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
7 # from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
8 # from sklearn.model_selection import cross_val_score
9 # from sklearn.model_selection import StratifiedKFold
10 # from sklearn.metrics import classification_report
11 # from sklearn.metrics import confusion_matrix
12 # from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score
13 # from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegression
14 # from sklearn.tree import DecisionTreeClassifier
15 # from sklearn.neighbors import KNeighborsClassifier
16 # from sklearn.discriminant_analysis import LinearDiscriminantAnalysis
17 # from sklearn.naive_bayes import GaussianNB
18 # from sklearn.svm import SVC
19 # import seaborn as sns
20
21
22 # Load dataset
23 data = pd.read_csv("./dataset/trial_James.csv")
24 data['Image'] = data['Image '].astype('category')
25 image_data = data.groupby("Image").mean().round(2)
26 print(image_data)
27 '''
28
29 from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
30 from sklearn.svm import SVC
31 from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler
32 from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score
33 import pandas as pd
34 import numpy as np
35 import os
36 from sklearn.metrics import confusion_matrix , precision_score , recall_score ,
f1_score , precision_recall_curve
37
38 #Just for checking if the data have some works
39 def check_if_data_works(base_dir):
40
data = pd.read_csv(base_dir + '/dataset/Pictures/e_close/motion/trial_1.
csv')
41
data['Image'] = data['Image'].astype('category')
42
image_data = data.groupby("Image", observed=True).mean().round(2)
43
print(image_data)
44
45
46 def train_svmm_model(trial, number_parameters=16, freq_range='Beta', kernel='
rbf', C=1.0, gamma='scale'):
47
base_dir = os.getcwd()
48
data = pd.read_csv(base_dir + f"/dataset/{trial}.csv")
49
50
# Assuming 'X' contains your features (The frequency ranges) and 'y'
contains corresponding labels
51
if number_parameters == 16:
52
X = data[['Beta_TP9', 'Beta_AF7', 'Beta_AF8', 'Beta_TP10',
53
'Alpha_TP9', 'Alpha_AF7', 'Alpha_AF8', 'Alpha_TP10',
54
'Theta_TP9', 'Theta_AF7', 'Theta_AF8', 'Theta_TP10',
55
'Delta_TP9', 'Delta_AF7', 'Delta_AF8', 'Delta_TP10']].values
56
y = data['Image'].values
57
elif number_parameters == 8:
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
87
==PAGE:96==
58
X = data[['Beta_TP9', 'Beta_AF7', 'Beta_AF8', 'Beta_TP10',
59
'Alpha_TP9', 'Alpha_AF7', 'Alpha_AF8', 'Alpha_TP10']].values
60
y = data['Image'].values
61
elif number_parameters == 4 and freq_range == 'Beta':
62
X = data[['Beta_TP9', 'Beta_AF7', 'Beta_AF8', 'Beta_TP10']].values
63
y = data['Image'].values
64
elif number_parameters == 4 and freq_range == 'Alpha':
65
X = data[['Alpha_TP9', 'Alpha_AF7', 'Alpha_AF8', 'Alpha_TP10']].values
66
y = data['Image'].values
67
else:
68
print("Invalid number of parameters or frequency range specified.")
69
return None
70
71
# Splitting the data into training and validation sets (adjust test_size
and random_state as needed)
72
X_train , X_val, y_train , y_val = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=0.2,
random_state=42)
73
74
# Normalizing the features (scaling between 0 and 1)
75
scaler = MinMaxScaler()
76
X_train_normalized = scaler.fit_transform(X_train)
77
X_val_normalized = scaler.transform(X_val)
78
79
80
# Initializing SVM classifier (you can experiment with different kernels
and parameters)
81
svm_classifier = SVC(kernel=kernel , C=C, gamma=gamma, probability=True)
#
Example with RBF kernel
82
83
# Training the SVM model
84
svm_classifier.fit(X_train_normalized , y_train)
85
86
# Making predictions on the validation set
87
predictions = svm_classifier.predict(X_val_normalized)
88
y_score = svm_classifier.predict_proba(X_val)
89
90
classes = np.sort(np.unique(y_val))
91
92
# Calculating metrics
93
accuracy = accuracy_score(y_val, predictions)
94
confusion = confusion_matrix(y_val, predictions , labels=classes)
95
confusion_nor = confusion_matrix(y_val, predictions , labels=classes ,
normalize='true')
96
precision = precision_score(y_val, predictions , average='weighted')
97
recall = recall_score(y_val, predictions , average='weighted')
98
f1 = f1_score(y_val, predictions , average='weighted')
99
precision_recall = {}
100
for i in range(len(classes)):
101
precision_p , recall_p , _ = precision_recall_curve(y_val == classes[i],
y_score[:, i])
102
precision_recall[classes[i]] = (precision_p , recall_p)
103
104
return svm_classifier , scaler, accuracy , confusion , confusion_nor ,
precision , recall, f1, precision_recall
105
106 # Remember to replace X and y with your actual feature and label data.
107 # Also, feel free to adjust the SVM parameters (kernel , C, etc.) and explore
different kernels (e.g., 'linear', 'poly', 'rbf') to find the best model
for your data.
108
109 # Assuming 'X_new' contains new samples of Beta and Alpha frequencies for
prediction
88
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:97==
110
111 def predict_with_svmm_model(svm_classifier , scaler, X_new):
112 #trial testing data
113
# Normalize the new data using the same scaler used for training/
validation data
114
X_new = np.array(X_new).reshape(1, -1)
# Reshape the data. In order to
change the shape of the data.
115
X_new_normalized = scaler.transform(X_new)
116
117
# Making predictions on the new data
118
new_predictions = svm_classifier.predict(X_new_normalized)
119
return new_predictions
120
# Displaying the predicted labels
121
# print("Predicted Labels for New Data:")
122
# for prediction in new_predictions:
123
#
print(prediction)
124
125 if __name__ == "__main__":
126
#Just for checking if the data have some works
127
base_dir = os.getcwd()
128
#print(base_dir)
129
130
check_if_data_works(base_dir)
131
132
#testing if code works:
133
trial_test = "Pictures/e_close/motion/trial_1"
134
svm_classifier , scaler = train_svmm_model(trial_test) #training the model
135
prediction = predict_with_svmm_model(svm_classifier , scaler , [1, 1, 1, 1,
1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1])
136
print(prediction)
137
#^^ testing the predictive model - replace 1, 1 with any betaValue ,
alphaValue , DeltaValue , and ThetaValue you wish
Listing A.3: The train and predict model of the SVM model
1 import torch
2 from torch import nn
3 import torch.nn.functional as F
4 import os
5 import pandas as pd
6 from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler
7 from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
8 from torch.utils.data import DataLoader , TensorDataset
9 from sklearn.metrics import confusion_matrix , precision_score , recall_score ,
f1_score , precision_recall_curve
10 from sklearn.metrics import ConfusionMatrixDisplay
11 from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
12 from tqdm import tqdm
13
14 class FullyConnectedModel(nn.Module):
15
def __init__(self, input_size=16, num_classes=6, hidden_layers=[64, 32]):
16
super(FullyConnectedModel , self).__init__()
17
layers = []
18
in_features = input_size
19
20
for hidden_units in hidden_layers:
21
layers.append(nn.Linear(in_features , hidden_units))
22
layers.append(nn.ReLU())
23
in_features = hidden_units
24
25
layers.append(nn.Linear(in_features , num_classes))
26
layers.append(nn.Softmax(dim=1))
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
89
==PAGE:98==
27
28
self.fc_layers = nn.Sequential(*layers)
29
30
31
def forward(self, x):
32
x = x.view(x.size(0), -1)
# Flatten the input
33
x = self.fc_layers(x)
34
return x
35
36 def train_FC_model(trial, number_parameters=16, freq_range='Beta', epochs=10,
batch_size=64, learning_rate=0.001, hidden_layers=[64, 32]):
37
38
base_dir = os.getcwd()
39
data = pd.read_csv(base_dir + f"/dataset/{trial}.csv")
40
41
# Assuming 'X' contains your features (The frequency ranges) and 'y'
contains corresponding labels
42
if number_parameters == 16:
43
X = data[['Beta_TP9', 'Beta_AF7', 'Beta_AF8', 'Beta_TP10',
44
'Alpha_TP9', 'Alpha_AF7', 'Alpha_AF8', 'Alpha_TP10',
45
'Theta_TP9', 'Theta_AF7', 'Theta_AF8', 'Theta_TP10',
46
'Delta_TP9', 'Delta_AF7', 'Delta_AF8', 'Delta_TP10']].values
47
48
elif number_parameters == 8:
49
X = data[['Beta_TP9', 'Beta_AF7', 'Beta_AF8', 'Beta_TP10',
50
'Alpha_TP9', 'Alpha_AF7', 'Alpha_AF8', 'Alpha_TP10']].values
51
52
elif number_parameters == 4 and freq_range == 'Beta':
53
X = data[['Beta_TP9', 'Beta_AF7', 'Beta_AF8', 'Beta_TP10']].values
54
55
elif number_parameters == 4 and freq_range == 'Alpha':
56
X = data[['Alpha_TP9', 'Alpha_AF7', 'Alpha_AF8', 'Alpha_TP10']].values
57
58
else:
59
print("Invalid number of parameters or frequency range specified.")
60
return None
61
62
y = data['Image'].values
63
y = pd.get_dummies(y).values
# One-hot encode labels
64
65
# Splitting the data into training and validation sets (adjust test_size
and random_state as needed)
66
X_train , X_val, y_train , y_val = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=0.2,
random_state=42)
67
68
# Normalizing the features (scaling between 0 and 1)
69
scaler = MinMaxScaler()
70
X_train_normalized = scaler.fit_transform(X_train)
71
X_val_normalized = scaler.transform(X_val)
72
73
# Reshape the data to fit the model
74
X_train_normalized = X_train_normalized.reshape(X_train_normalized.shape
[0], X_train_normalized.shape[1])
75
X_val_normalized = X_val_normalized.reshape(X_val_normalized.shape[0],
X_val_normalized.shape[1])
76
77
# Convert to torch tensors
78
X_train_tensor = torch.tensor(X_train_normalized , dtype=torch.float32)
79
y_train_tensor = torch.tensor(y_train , dtype=torch.float32)
80
X_val_tensor = torch.tensor(X_val_normalized , dtype=torch.float32)
81
y_val_tensor = torch.tensor(y_val, dtype=torch.float32)
82
90
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:99==
83
# Create Tensor datasets and Data loaders
84
train_dataset = TensorDataset(X_train_tensor , y_train_tensor)
85
train_loader = DataLoader(train_dataset , batch_size=batch_size , shuffle=
True)
86
87
# Our Fully Connected model
88
model = FullyConnectedModel(input_size=number_parameters , num_classes=
y_train.shape[1], hidden_layers=hidden_layers)
89
90
# Define the loss function and optimizer
91
loss_fn = nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
92
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=learning_rate)
93
94
# Train the model
95
model.train()
96
for epoch in range(epochs):
97
for X_batch , y_batch in train_loader:
98
optimizer.zero_grad()
99
outputs = model(X_batch)
100
loss = loss_fn(outputs , torch.max(y_batch , 1)[1])
101
loss.backward()
102
optimizer.step()
103
104
# Evaluate the model
105
model.eval()
106
with torch.no_grad():
107
outputs = model(X_val_tensor)
108
_, predicted = torch.max(outputs , 1)
109
_, y_val_classes = torch.max(y_val_tensor , 1)
110
111
classes = torch.unique(y_val_classes)
112
113
#Calculate the metrics
114
accuracy = (predicted == y_val_classes).sum().item() / len(
y_val_classes)
115
confusion = confusion_matrix(y_val_classes , predicted , labels=classes.
numpy())
116
confusion_nor = confusion_matrix(y_val_classes , predicted , labels=
classes.numpy(), normalize='true')
117
precision = precision_score(y_val_classes , predicted , average='macro',
zero_division=1)
118
recall = recall_score(y_val_classes , predicted , average='macro')
119
f1 = f1_score(y_val_classes , predicted , average='macro')
120
121
# Compute precision -recall curve for each class
122
precision_recall = {}
123
for i in range(len(classes)):
124
precision_p , recall_p , _ = precision_recall_curve(y_val_tensor[:,
i], outputs[:, i])
125
precision_recall[classes[i].item()] = (precision_p , recall_p)
126
# Debug: Print the shapes of the tensors
127
#print("outputs shape:", outputs.shape)
128
#print("y_val_tensor shape:", y_val_tensor.shape)
129
130
131
132
return model, accuracy , confusion , confusion_nor , precision , recall , f1,
precision_recall , classes
133
134
135
136 def predict_with_fc_model(fc_model , features_for_model):
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
91
==PAGE:100==
137
features_for_model = features_for_model.reshape(features_for_model.shape
[0], features_for_model.shape[1])
138
features_for_model = torch.from_numpy(features_for_model).float()
139
140
# Ensure the model is in evaluation mode
141
fc_model.eval()
142
with torch.no_grad():
143
outputs = fc_model(features_for_model)
144
_, predicted = torch.max(outputs , 1)
145
return predicted
146
147
148 # Plot confusion matrix
149 def plot_confusion_matrix(trial_name , paras, batch_size , hidden_layer ,
learning_rate , epoch, confusion , classes , accuracy , precision , recall, f1,
normalize=False):
150
151
plt.figure(figsize=(9, 8))
152
disp = ConfusionMatrixDisplay(confusion_matrix=confusion , display_labels=[
f'class {int(cls)}' for cls in classes])
153
disp.plot()
154
plt.suptitle(f"Confusion Matrix: {trial_name}", y=0.98, color='black',
fontsize=12, ha='center')
155
plt.title(f"parameters: {paras} ,
batch size: {batch_size}, h_layers: {
hidden_layer} ,\n lr: {learning_rate}, epoch: {epoch}", fontsize=8,
pad=15, ha='center')
156
157
plt.xticks(rotation=45)
158
159
# Adjust the subplot to make space for the stats text
160
plt.subplots_adjust(left=0.3, right=0.95, top=0.95, bottom=0.1)
161
162
# Add accuracy , precision , recall , f1 to the plot
163
stats_text = f"Accuracy: {accuracy:.2f}\nPrecision: {precision:.2f}\
nRecall: {recall:.2f}\nF1 Score: {f1:.2f}"
164
plt.text(-0.6, 0.98, stats_text , transform=plt.gca().transAxes , fontsize
=12, verticalalignment='top', bbox=dict(boxstyle='round', alpha=0.1))
165
166
# Save the plot to the "plots" folder
167
save_dir = "/Users/luchengliang/Brain-computer_interface_authentification/
plots/fc_new"
168
os.makedirs(save_dir , exist_ok=True)
169
plt.tight_layout()
170
171
hidden_layers_str = '_'.join(str(x) for x in hidden_layer)
172
if normalize:
173
filename = f"{trial_name}_{paras}_{batch_size}_{hidden_layers_str}_{
learning_rate}_{epoch}_confusion_matrix_normalized.png"
174
else:
175
filename = f"{trial_name}_{paras}_{batch_size}_{hidden_layers_str}_{
learning_rate}_{epoch}_confusion_matrix.png"
176
plt.savefig(os.path.join(save_dir , filename))
177
#plt.show()
178
179
180
181 # Plot precision -recall curves
182 def plot_precision_recall_curve(precision_recall , trial_name , paras,
batch_size , hidden_layer , learning_rate , epoch, accuracy , precision ,
recall , f1):
183
184
plt.figure(figsize=(13, 8))
92
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:101==
185
for label, (precision_p , recall_p) in precision_recall.items():
186
plt.plot(recall_p , precision_p , lw=2, label=f'class {label}')
187
188
plt.xlabel("Recall")
189
plt.ylabel("Precision")
190
plt.legend(loc="best")
191
plt.suptitle(f"Precision -Recall Curve for {trial_name}", y=0.95, color='
black', fontsize=12, ha='center')
192
plt.title(f"parameters: {paras}, batch size: {batch_size}, h_layers: {
hidden_layer},\n lr: {learning_rate}, epoch: {epoch}", fontsize=10,
pad=20, ha='center')
193
194
# Adjust the subplot to make space for the stats text
195
plt.subplots_adjust(left=0.3, right=0.95, top=0.85, bottom=0.1)
196
197
# Add accuracy , precision , recall , f1 to the plot
198
stats_text = f"Accuracy: {accuracy:.2f}\nPrecision: {precision:.2f}\
nRecall: {recall:.2f}\nF1 Score: {f1:.2f}"
199
plt.text(-0.2, 0.98, stats_text , transform=plt.gca().transAxes , fontsize
=12, verticalalignment='top', bbox=dict(boxstyle='round', alpha=0.1))
200
201
# Save the plot to the "plots" folder
202
save_dir = "/Users/luchengliang/Brain-computer_interface_authentification/
plots/fc_new"
203
os.makedirs(save_dir , exist_ok=True)
204
205
hidden_layers_str = '_'.join(str(x) for x in hidden_layer)
206
filename = f"{trial_name}_{paras}_{batch_size}_{hidden_layers_str}_{
learning_rate}_{epoch}_precision_recall_curve.png"
207
plt.savefig(os.path.join(save_dir , filename))
208
#plt.show()
209
210
211
212 if __name__ == "__main__":
213
214
trials = [
215
"without_individuals/imagination",
216
]
217
218
219
paras = [16, 8, 4, 4]
220
batch_sizes = [32, 64]
221
epochs = [200, 300, 500]
222
learning_rates = [0.001, 0.01, 0.1]
223
hidden_layers = [[256, 128, 64, 32], [32, 64, 128, 256, 128, 64, 32], [32,
64, 128, 256, 256, 128, 64, 32],
224
[128, 64, 32], [32, 64, 128, 64, 32], [32, 64, 128, 128,
64, 32],
225
[64, 32], [32, 64, 32], [32, 64, 64, 32],
226
[32, 32]]
227
best_params = {}
228
229
for trial in tqdm(trials):
230
# Get the last part of the path (the file name) and remove the ".csv"
extension
231
trial_name = os.path.splitext(os.path.basename(trial))[0]
232
best_score = -1
# Initialize with a low value
233
best_params[trial_name] = None
234
235
236
for epoch in tqdm(epochs):
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
93
==PAGE:102==
237
for learning_rate in tqdm(learning_rates):
238
for hidden_layer in tqdm(hidden_layers):
239
for batch_size in tqdm(batch_sizes):
240
for i in range(len(paras)):
241
if paras[i] == 4 and i == 2:
242
fc_model , acc, confusion , confusion_nor ,
precision , recall, f1, precision_recall ,
classes = train_FC_model(trial,
number_parameters=paras[i], freq_range='
Alpha', epochs=epoch, batch_size=
batch_size , learning_rate=learning_rate ,
hidden_layers=hidden_layer)
243
else:
244
fc_model , acc, confusion , confusion_nor ,
precision , recall, f1, precision_recall ,
classes = train_FC_model(trial,
number_parameters=paras[i], epochs=epoch,
batch_size=batch_size , learning_rate=
learning_rate , hidden_layers=hidden_layer)
245
246
# Composite score
247
score = 0.6 * f1 + 0.4 * acc
248
249
if score > best_score:
250
best_score = score
251
best_params[trial_name] = {
252
"params": paras[i],
253
"batch_size": batch_size ,
254
"hidden_layers": hidden_layer ,
255
"learning_rate": learning_rate ,
256
"epochs": epoch,
257
"model": fc_model ,
258
"confusion": confusion ,
259
"confusion_nor": confusion_nor ,
260
"classes": classes ,
261
"precision_recall": precision_recall ,
262
"accuracy": acc,
263
"precision": precision ,
264
"recall": recall ,
265
"f1": f1,
266
"score": score
267
}
268
269
best_trial = best_params[trial_name]
270
print(f"Best params for {trial_name}: {best_trial}")
271
272
# Plot confusion matrix
273
plot_confusion_matrix(
274
trial_name , best_trial["params"], best_trial["batch_size"],
best_trial["hidden_layers"], best_trial["learning_rate"],
best_trial["epochs"],
275
best_trial["confusion"], best_trial["classes"], best_trial["
accuracy"], best_trial["precision"], best_trial["recall"],
best_trial["f1"]
276
)
277
278
# Plot confusion matrix
279
plot_confusion_matrix(
280
trial_name , best_trial["params"], best_trial["batch_size"],
best_trial["hidden_layers"], best_trial["learning_rate"],
best_trial["epochs"],
281
best_trial["confusion_nor"], best_trial["classes"], best_trial["
94
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:103==
accuracy"], best_trial["precision"], best_trial["recall"],
best_trial["f1"],
282
normalize=True
283
)
284
285
# Plot precision -recall curves
286
plot_precision_recall_curve(
287
best_trial["precision_recall"], trial_name , best_trial["params"],
best_trial["batch_size"], best_trial["hidden_layers"],
best_trial["learning_rate"], best_trial["epochs"],
288
best_trial["accuracy"], best_trial["precision"], best_trial["
recall"], best_trial["f1"]
289
)
Listing A.4:
The fully connected network model with training, predicting, producing
confusion metrics, and precision­recall curves functions
1 import os
2 import pandas as pd
3 from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler , LabelEncoder
4 from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
5 from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier
6 from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score , ConfusionMatrixDisplay
7 from sklearn.metrics import confusion_matrix , precision_score , recall_score ,
f1_score , precision_recall_curve
8 import numpy as np
9 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
10 from tqdm import tqdm
11
12 class RandomForestModel:
13
def __init__(self, criterion='gini', n_estimators=100):
14
self.n_estimators = n_estimators
15
self.scaler = MinMaxScaler()
16
self.label_encoder = LabelEncoder()
17
self.model = RandomForestClassifier(criterion=criterion , n_estimators=
n_estimators , random_state=42)
18
19
def train(self, trial, number_parameters=16, freq_range='Beta', test_size
=0.2, random_state=42):
20
base_dir = os.getcwd()
21
data = pd.read_csv(base_dir + f"/dataset/{trial}.csv")
22
23
# Assuming 'X' contains your features (frequency ranges) and 'y'
contains corresponding labels
24
if number_parameters == 16:
25
X = data[['Beta_TP9', 'Beta_AF7', 'Beta_AF8', 'Beta_TP10',
26
'Alpha_TP9', 'Alpha_AF7', 'Alpha_AF8', 'Alpha_TP10',
27
'Theta_TP9', 'Theta_AF7', 'Theta_AF8', 'Theta_TP10',
28
'Delta_TP9', 'Delta_AF7', 'Delta_AF8', 'Delta_TP10']].
values
29
30
elif number_parameters == 8:
31
X = data[['Beta_TP9', 'Beta_AF7', 'Beta_AF8', 'Beta_TP10',
32
'Alpha_TP9', 'Alpha_AF7', 'Alpha_AF8', 'Alpha_TP10']].
values
33
34
elif number_parameters == 4 and freq_range == 'Beta':
35
X = data[['Beta_TP9', 'Beta_AF7', 'Beta_AF8', 'Beta_TP10']].values
36
37
elif number_parameters == 4 and freq_range == 'Alpha':
38
X = data[['Alpha_TP9', 'Alpha_AF7', 'Alpha_AF8', 'Alpha_TP10']].
values
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
95
==PAGE:104==
39
40
else:
41
print("Invalid number of parameters or frequency range specified."
)
42
return None
43
44
45
y = data['Image'].values
46
# Encode target variable
47
y_encoded = self.label_encoder.fit_transform(y)
48
49
# Split data into training and validation sets
50
X_train , X_val, y_train , y_val = train_test_split(X, y_encoded ,
test_size=test_size , random_state=random_state)
51
52
# Normalize features (scale between 0 and 1)
53
X_train_normalized = self.scaler.fit_transform(X_train)
54
X_val_normalized = self.scaler.transform(X_val)
55
56
# Train the model
57
self.model.fit(X_train_normalized , y_train)
58
59
# Evaluate the model
60
y_pred = self.model.predict(X_val_normalized)
61
y_score = self.model.predict_proba(X_val_normalized)
62
63
classes = np.sort(np.unique(y_val))
64
65
#The evluation in different ways
66
accuracy = accuracy_score(y_val, y_pred)
67
confusion = confusion_matrix(y_val, y_pred, labels=classes)
68
confusion_nor = confusion_matrix(y_val, y_pred , labels=classes ,
normalize='true')
69
precision = precision_score(y_val, y_pred, average='weighted')
70
recall = recall_score(y_val, y_pred, average='weighted')
71
f1 = f1_score(y_val, y_pred , average='weighted')
72
precision_recall = {}
73
for i in range(len(classes)):
74
precision_p , recall_p , _ = precision_recall_curve(y_val == classes
[i], y_score[:, i])
75
precision_recall[classes[i]] = (precision_p , recall_p)
76
77
return self.model, accuracy , confusion , confusion_nor , precision ,
recall, f1, precision_recall , classes
78
79
80
def predict(self, X_new):
81
# Normalize features (scale between 0 and 1)
82
X_new_normalized = self.scaler.transform(X_new)
83
84
# Predict
85
y_pred = self.model.predict(X_new_normalized)
86
y_pred_labels = self.label_encoder.inverse_transform(y_pred)
87
88
return y_pred_labels
89
90
91 # Plot confusion matrix
92 def plot_confusion_matrix(trial_name , paras, criterion , n_estimator , confusion
, accuracy , precision , recall, f1, labels , nor=False):
93
94
plt.figure(figsize=(9, 8))
96
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:105==
95
disp = ConfusionMatrixDisplay(confusion_matrix=confusion , display_labels=
labels)
96
disp.plot()
97
if nor:
98
plt.suptitle(f"Normalized Confusion Matrix: {trial_name}", y=0.98,
color='black', fontsize=12, ha='center')
99
else:
100
plt.suptitle(f"Confusion Matrix: {trial_name}", y=0.98, color='black',
fontsize=12, ha='center')
101
102
plt.title(f"parameters: {paras} ,
criterion: {criterion}, \n number of
estimators: {n_estimator}", fontsize=8, pad=15, ha='center')
103
plt.xticks(rotation=45)
104
105
# Adjust the subplot to make space for the stats text
106
plt.subplots_adjust(left=0.3, right=0.95, top=0.95, bottom=0.1)
107
108
# Add accuracy , precision , recall , f1 to the plot
109
stats_text = f"Accuracy: {accuracy:.2f}\nPrecision: {precision:.2f}\
nRecall: {recall:.2f}\nF1 Score: {f1:.2f}"
110
plt.text(-0.9, 0.98, stats_text , transform=plt.gca().transAxes , fontsize
=12, verticalalignment='top', bbox=dict(boxstyle='round', alpha=0.1))
111
112
# Save the plot to the "plots" folder
113
save_dir = "/Users/luchengliang/Brain-computer_interface_authentification/
plots/randomforest"
114
os.makedirs(save_dir , exist_ok=True)
115
plt.tight_layout()
116
117
if nor:
118
filename = f"{trial_name}_{paras}_{criterion}_{n_estimator}
_normalized_confusion_matrix.png"
119
else:
120
filename = f"{trial_name}_{paras}_{criterion}_{n_estimator}
_confusion_matrix.png"
121
plt.savefig(os.path.join(save_dir , filename))
122
#plt.show()
123
124
125
126 # Plot precision -recall curves
127 def plot_precision_recall_curve(precision_recall , trial_name , paras, criterion
, n_estimator , classes , accuracy , precision , recall, f1):
128
129
plt.figure(figsize=(13, 8))
130
for label in classes:
131
plt.plot(precision_recall[label][1], precision_recall[label][0], lw=2,
label=f'class {rf_model.label_encoder.inverse_transform([label])
[0]}')
132
133
plt.xlabel("Recall")
134
plt.ylabel("Precision")
135
plt.legend(loc="best")
136
plt.suptitle(f"Precision -Recall Curve for {trial_name}", y=0.95, color='
black', fontsize=12, ha='center')
137
plt.title(f"parameters: {paras}, criterion: {criterion}, n_estimator: {
n_estimator}", fontsize=10, pad=20, ha='center')
138
139
# Adjust the subplot to make space for the stats text
140
plt.subplots_adjust(left=0.3, right=0.95, top=0.85, bottom=0.1)
141
142
# Add accuracy , precision , recall , f1 to the plot
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
97
==PAGE:106==
143
stats_text = f"Accuracy: {accuracy:.2f}\nPrecision: {precision:.2f}\
nRecall: {recall:.2f}\nF1 Score: {f1:.2f}"
144
plt.text(-0.2, 0.98, stats_text , transform=plt.gca().transAxes , fontsize
=12, verticalalignment='top', bbox=dict(boxstyle='round', alpha=0.1))
145
146
# Save the plot to the "plots" folder
147
save_dir = "/Users/luchengliang/Brain-computer_interface_authentification/
plots/randomforest"
148
os.makedirs(save_dir , exist_ok=True)
149
150
filename = f"{trial_name}_{paras}_{criterion}_{n_estimator}
_precision_recall_curve.png"
151
plt.savefig(os.path.join(save_dir , filename))
152
#plt.show()
153
154
155 def n_estimator_trend(trial_name , plot_data):
156
# Create a new figure
157
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 8))
158
159
# Plot the data
160
for n_estimator , acc, f1, para, criterion in plot_data:
161
plt.plot(n_estimator , acc, 'o-', label=f'Accuracy ({para}, {criterion
})')
162
plt.plot(n_estimator , f1, 'o-',label=f'F1 ({para}, {criterion})')
163
164
165
# Add labels and a legend
166
plt.xlabel('n_estimator')
167
plt.ylabel('Accuracy and F1 Score')
168
plt.title(f"Trend of n_estimators from {trial_name}", fontsize=12, pad=15,
ha='center')
169
170
# Save the plot to the "plots" folder
171
save_dir = "/Users/luchengliang/Brain-computer_interface_authentification/
plots/randomforest"
172
os.makedirs(save_dir , exist_ok=True)
173
174
filename = f"{trial_name}_trend_of_n_estimators.png"
175
plt.savefig(os.path.join(save_dir , filename))
176
#plt.show()
177
178
179 if __name__ == "__main__":
180
trials = [
181
"without_individuals/pic_e_close_motion",
182
"without_individuals/pic_e_close_noun",
183
"without_individuals/pic_e_open_motion",
184
"without_individuals/pic_e_open_noun",
185
"without_individuals/imagination",
186
]
187
188
paras = [16, 8, 4, 4]
189
criterions = ['gini', 'entropy']
190
best_params = {}
191
num_estimators = 200
192
193
for trial in trials:
194
195
# Get the last part of the path (the file name) and remove the ".csv"
extension
196
trial_name = os.path.splitext(os.path.basename(trial))[0]
98
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:107==
197
best_score = -1
# Initialize with a low value
198
best_params[trial_name] = None
199
200
plot_trend_n_estimator = []
201
202
for k in tqdm(range(num_estimators)):
203
for criterion in criterions:
204
for i in range(len(paras)):
205
206
rf_model = RandomForestModel(criterion=criterion ,
n_estimators=k+1)
207
208
if paras[i] == 4 and i == 2:
209
model, acc, confusion , confusion_nor , precision ,
recall, f1, precision_recall , classes
= rf_model.
train(trial, number_parameters=paras[i],
freq_range='Alpha')
210
else:
211
model, acc, confusion , confusion_nor , precision ,
recall, f1, precision_recall , classes
= rf_model.
train(trial, number_parameters=paras[i])
212
#print(f"{trial_name} with {paras[i]} parameters =>
Accuracy: {acc}, Precision: {precision}, Recall: {
recall}, F1: {f1}")
213
214
# Add the data to the plot_data list
215
plot_trend_n_estimator.append((k+1, acc, f1, paras[i],
criterion))
216
217
# Composite score
218
score = 0.6 * f1 + 0.4 * acc
219
220
if score > best_score:
221
best_score = score
222
best_params[trial_name] = {
223
"params": paras[i],
224
"model": model,
225
"confusion": confusion ,
226
"confusion_nor": confusion_nor ,
227
"criterion": criterion ,
228
"n_estimator": k+1,
229
"classes": classes ,
230
"precision_recall": precision_recall ,
231
"accuracy": acc,
232
"precision": precision ,
233
"recall": recall ,
234
"f1": f1,
235
"labels": rf_model.label_encoder.classes_ ,
236
"score": score
237
}
238
239
best_trial = best_params[trial_name]
240
#print("\n")
241
#print(f"Best params for {trial_name}: {best_trial}")
242
243
# Plot confusion matrix
244
plot_confusion_matrix(trial_name , best_trial["params"], best_trial["
criterion"], best_trial["n_estimator"],
245
best_trial["confusion"], best_trial["accuracy"
], best_trial["precision"], best_trial["
recall"]
246
, best_trial["f1"], best_trial["labels"], nor=
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
99
==PAGE:108==
False)
247
248
# Plot confusion matrix
249
plot_confusion_matrix(trial_name , best_trial["params"], best_trial["
criterion"], best_trial["n_estimator"],
250
best_trial["confusion_nor"], best_trial["
accuracy"], best_trial["precision"],
best_trial["recall"]
251
, best_trial["f1"], best_trial["labels"], nor=
True)
252
253
# Plot precision -recall curves
254
plot_precision_recall_curve(best_trial["precision_recall"], trial_name
, best_trial["params"], best_trial["criterion"], best_trial["
n_estimator"],
255
best_trial["classes"],
best_trial["
accuracy"], best_trial["precision"],
best_trial["recall"],
256
best_trial["f1"])
257
258
259
#Plot the trend of n_estimators
260
n_estimator_trend(trial_name , plot_trend_n_estimator)
Listing A.5:
The random forest model with training, predicting, producing confusion
metrics, and precision­recall curves functions.
1 import os
2 import pandas as pd
3 from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler , LabelEncoder
4 from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split , GridSearchCV
5 from sklearn.ensemble import ExtraTreesClassifier , GradientBoostingClassifier
6 from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score , confusion_matrix , precision_score ,
recall_score , f1_score , precision_recall_curve , ConfusionMatrixDisplay
7 from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
8 from tqdm import tqdm
9 import numpy as np
10 import ast
11
12 class TreesModel:
13
def __init__(self, trial, n_estimators=100, number_parameters=16,
freq_range='Beta'):
14
self.n_estimators = n_estimators
15
self.trial = trial
16
self.number_parameters = number_parameters
17
self.freq_range = freq_range
18
self.base_dir = os.getcwd()
19
self.data = pd.read_csv(self.base_dir + f"/dataset/{self.trial}.csv")
20
self.X, self.y = self.prepare_data()
21
self.label_encoder = LabelEncoder()
22
self.y = self.label_encoder.fit_transform(self.y)
23
self.scaler = MinMaxScaler()
24
self.X_train , self.X_val, self.y_train , self.y_val = self.
split_and_scale_data()
25
26
def prepare_data(self):
27
if self.number_parameters == 16:
28
X = self.data[['Beta_TP9', 'Beta_AF7', 'Beta_AF8', 'Beta_TP10',
29
'Alpha_TP9', 'Alpha_AF7', 'Alpha_AF8', 'Alpha_TP10'
,
30
'Theta_TP9', 'Theta_AF7', 'Theta_AF8', 'Theta_TP10'
,
100
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:109==
31
'Delta_TP9', 'Delta_AF7', 'Delta_AF8', 'Delta_TP10'
]].values
32
elif self.number_parameters == 8:
33
X = self.data[['Beta_TP9', 'Beta_AF7', 'Beta_AF8', 'Beta_TP10',
34
'Alpha_TP9', 'Alpha_AF7', 'Alpha_AF8', 'Alpha_TP10'
]].values
35
elif self.number_parameters == 4 and self.freq_range == 'Beta':
36
X = self.data[['Beta_TP9', 'Beta_AF7', 'Beta_AF8', 'Beta_TP10']].
values
37
elif self.number_parameters == 4 and self.freq_range == 'Alpha':
38
X = self.data[['Alpha_TP9', 'Alpha_AF7', 'Alpha_AF8', 'Alpha_TP10'
]].values
39
else:
40
raise ValueError("Invalid number of parameters or frequency range
specified.")
41
42
y = self.data['Image'].values
43
return X, y
44
45
def split_and_scale_data(self):
46
X_train , X_val, y_train , y_val = train_test_split(self.X, self.y,
test_size=0.2, random_state=42)
47
X_train_normalized = self.scaler.fit_transform(X_train)
48
X_val_normalized = self.scaler.transform(X_val)
49
return X_train_normalized , X_val_normalized , y_train , y_val
50
51
def train_extra_trees(self):
52
model = ExtraTreesClassifier(random_state=42)
53
param_grid = {
54
'n_estimators': [75, 100, 200, 300],
55
'max_depth': [None],
56
'min_samples_split': [2, 4, 6],
57
'min_samples_leaf': [1, 2, 4]
58
}
59
grid_search = GridSearchCV(estimator=model, param_grid=param_grid , cv
=5, scoring='accuracy', verbose=2, n_jobs=-1)
60
grid_search.fit(self.X_train , self.y_train)
61
62
all_results = []
63
for params, mean_test_score , std_test_score in zip(grid_search.
cv_results_['params'], grid_search.cv_results_['mean_test_score'],
grid_search.cv_results_['std_test_score']):
64
best_model = ExtraTreesClassifier(random_state=42, **params)
65
best_model.fit(self.X_train , self.y_train)
66
y_pred = best_model.predict(self.X_val)
67
y_score = best_model.predict_proba(self.X_val)
68
69
classes = np.sort(np.unique(self.y_val))
70
71
accuracy = accuracy_score(self.y_val, y_pred)
72
f1 = f1_score(self.y_val, y_pred , average='weighted')
73
74
all_results.append((params, accuracy , f1))
75
76
77
best_model = grid_search.best_estimator_
78
y_pred = best_model.predict(self.X_val)
79
y_score = best_model.predict_proba(self.X_val)
80
81
classes = np.sort(np.unique(self.y_val))
82
83
accuracy = accuracy_score(self.y_val, y_pred)
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
101
==PAGE:110==
84
confusion = confusion_matrix(self.y_val, y_pred, labels=classes)
85
confusion_nor = confusion_matrix(self.y_val, y_pred , labels=classes ,
normalize='true')
86
precision = precision_score(self.y_val, y_pred, average='weighted')
87
recall = recall_score(self.y_val, y_pred , average='weighted')
88
f1 = f1_score(self.y_val, y_pred, average='weighted')
89
precision_recall = {}
90
for i in range(len(classes)):
91
precision_p , recall_p , _ = precision_recall_curve(self.y_val ==
classes[i], y_score[:, i])
92
precision_recall[classes[i]] = (precision_p , recall_p)
93
94
return best_model , accuracy , confusion , confusion_nor , precision ,
recall, f1, precision_recall , classes , all_results , grid_search
95
96
def train_gb(self):
97
model = GradientBoostingClassifier(random_state=42)
98
param_grid = {
99
'n_estimators': [75, 100, 200, 300],
100
'learning_rate': [0.001, 0.01, 0.1],
101
'max_depth': [3, 5, 7, 10]
102
}
103
grid_search = GridSearchCV(estimator=model, param_grid=param_grid , cv
=5, scoring='accuracy', verbose=2, n_jobs=-1)
104
grid_search.fit(self.X_train , self.y_train)
105
106
all_results = []
107
for params, mean_test_score , std_test_score in zip(grid_search.
cv_results_['params'], grid_search.cv_results_['mean_test_score'],
grid_search.cv_results_['std_test_score']):
108
best_model = GradientBoostingClassifier(random_state=42, **params)
109
best_model.fit(self.X_train , self.y_train)
110
y_pred = best_model.predict(self.X_val)
111
y_score = best_model.predict_proba(self.X_val)
112
113
classes = np.sort(np.unique(self.y_val))
114
115
accuracy = accuracy_score(self.y_val, y_pred)
116
f1 = f1_score(self.y_val, y_pred , average='weighted')
117
118
all_results.append((params , accuracy , f1))
119
120
121
best_model = grid_search.best_estimator_
122
y_pred = best_model.predict(self.X_val)
123
y_score = best_model.predict_proba(self.X_val)
124
125
classes = np.sort(np.unique(self.y_val))
126
127
accuracy = accuracy_score(self.y_val, y_pred)
128
confusion = confusion_matrix(self.y_val, y_pred, labels=classes)
129
confusion_nor = confusion_matrix(self.y_val, y_pred , labels=classes ,
normalize='true')
130
precision = precision_score(self.y_val, y_pred, average='weighted')
131
recall = recall_score(self.y_val, y_pred , average='weighted')
132
f1 = f1_score(self.y_val, y_pred, average='weighted')
133
precision_recall = {}
134
for i in range(len(classes)):
135
precision_p , recall_p , _ = precision_recall_curve(self.y_val ==
classes[i], y_score[:, i])
136
precision_recall[classes[i]] = (precision_p , recall_p)
137
102
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:111==
138
return best_model , accuracy , confusion , confusion_nor , precision ,
recall, f1, precision_recall , classes , all_results , grid_search
139
140
def predict(self, model, features_for_model):
141
features_for_model_normalized = self.scaler.transform(
features_for_model)
142
y_pred = model.predict(features_for_model_normalized)
143
y_pred_labels = self.label_encoder.inverse_transform(y_pred)
144
return y_pred_labels
145
146
147
148 # Plot confusion matrix
149 def plot_confusion_matrix(trial_name , treeName , paras, n_estimator , confusion ,
accuracy , precision , recall , f1, labels , nor=False):
150
151
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 8))
152
disp = ConfusionMatrixDisplay(confusion_matrix=confusion , display_labels=
labels)
153
disp.plot()
154
if nor:
155
plt.suptitle(f"Normalized Confusion Matrix: {trial_name}", y=0.98,
color='black', fontsize=12, ha='center')
156
else:
157
plt.suptitle(f"Confusion Matrix: {trial_name}", y=0.98, color='black',
fontsize=12, ha='center')
158
159
if treeName == "Extra_Trees":
160
plt.title(f"Model: {treeName}, parameters: {paras['number_parameters
']}, max_depth: {paras['max_depth ']}\n, min_samples_split: {paras
['min_samples_split ']}, min_samples_leaf: {paras['min_samples_leaf
']},\nnumber of estimators: {n_estimator}", fontsize=7, pad=15, ha
='center')
161
else:
162
plt.title(f"Model: {treeName}, parameters: {paras['number_parameters
']}, lr: {paras['lr']}\n, max_depth: {paras['max_depth ']}, number
of estimators: {n_estimator}", fontsize=7, pad=15, ha='center')
163
164
plt.xticks(rotation=45)
165
166
# Adjust the subplot to make space for the stats text
167
plt.subplots_adjust(left=0.3, right=0.95, top=0.95, bottom=0.1)
168
169
# Add accuracy , precision , recall , f1 to the plot
170
stats_text = f"Accuracy: {accuracy:.2f}\nPrecision: {precision:.2f}\
nRecall: {recall:.2f}\nF1 Score: {f1:.2f}"
171
plt.text(-0.9, 0.98, stats_text , transform=plt.gca().transAxes , fontsize
=12, verticalalignment='top', bbox=dict(boxstyle='round', alpha=0.1))
172
173
# Save the plot to the "plots" folder
174
save_dir = "/Users/luchengliang/Brain-computer_interface_authentification/
plots/Trees"
175
os.makedirs(save_dir , exist_ok=True)
176
plt.tight_layout()
177
178
if nor:
179
filename = f"{trial_name}_{treeName}_{paras}_{n_estimator}
_normalized_confusion_matrix.png"
180
else:
181
filename = f"{trial_name}_{treeName}_{paras}_{n_estimator}
_confusion_matrix.png"
182
plt.savefig(os.path.join(save_dir , filename))
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
103
==PAGE:112==
183
plt.close()
184
185
186 # Plot precision -recall curves
187 def plot_precision_recall_curve(precision_recall , trial_name , paras, treeName ,
n_estimator , classes , accuracy , precision , recall , f1, labels):
188
plt.figure(figsize=(13, 8))
189
for label in classes:
190
plt.plot(precision_recall[label][1], precision_recall[label][0], lw=2,
191
label=f'class {labels[label]}')
192
193
plt.xlabel("Recall")
194
plt.ylabel("Precision")
195
plt.legend(loc="best")
196
plt.suptitle(f"Precision -Recall Curve for {trial_name}", y=0.95, color='
black', fontsize=12, ha='center')
197
plt.title(f"Model: {treeName}, parameters: {paras},\nn_estimator: {
n_estimator}", fontsize=10, pad=20, ha='center')
198
199
# Adjust the subplot to make space for the stats text
200
plt.subplots_adjust(left=0.3, right=0.95, top=0.85, bottom=0.1)
201
202
# Add accuracy , precision , recall , f1 to the plot
203
stats_text = f"Accuracy: {accuracy:.2f}\nPrecision: {precision:.2f}\
nRecall: {recall:.2f}\nF1 Score: {f1:.2f}"
204
plt.text(-0.2, 0.98, stats_text , transform=plt.gca().transAxes , fontsize
=12, verticalalignment='top', bbox=dict(boxstyle='round', alpha=0.1))
205
206
# Save the plot to the "plots" folder
207
save_dir = "/Users/luchengliang/Brain-computer_interface_authentification/
plots/Trees"
208
os.makedirs(save_dir , exist_ok=True)
209
210
filename = f"{trial_name}_{treeName}_{paras}_{n_estimator}
_precision_recall_curve.png"
211
plt.savefig(os.path.join(save_dir , filename))
212
plt.close()
213
214
215 # Plot trend of n_estimators
216 def n_estimator_trend(trial_name , treeName , plot_data):
217
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 8))
218
219
for params , acc, f1 in plot_data:
220
n_estimators = params['n_estimators']
221
learning_rate = params.get('learning_rate', None)
222
max_depth = params['max_depth']
223
224
label_acc = f'Acc: n_estimators={n_estimators}, lr={learning_rate},
max_depth={max_depth}'
225
label_f1 = f'F1: n_estimators={n_estimators}, lr={learning_rate},
max_depth={max_depth}'
226
227
plt.plot(n_estimators , acc, 'o-', label=label_acc)
228
plt.plot(n_estimators , f1, 'o-',label=label_f1)
229
230
plt.xlabel('n_estimators')
231
plt.ylabel('Accuracy and F1 Score')
232
plt.title(f"Trend of n_estimators from {trial_name} in {treeName} model",
fontsize=12, pad=15, ha='center')
233
#plt.legend(loc='best')
234
104
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:113==
235
# Save the plot to the "plots" folder
236
save_dir = "/Users/luchengliang/Brain-computer_interface_authentification/
plots/Trees"
237
os.makedirs(save_dir , exist_ok=True)
238
239
filename = f"{trial_name}_{treeName}_trend_of_n_estimators.png"
240
plt.savefig(os.path.join(save_dir , filename))
241
plt.close()
242
243
244
245 if __name__ == "__main__":
246
trials = [
247
"without_individuals/imagination",
248
]
249
250
paras = [16, 8, 4, 4]
251
best_params_et = {}
252
best_params_gb = {}
253
254
255
for trial in tqdm(trials):
256
trial_name = os.path.splitext(os.path.basename(trial))[0]
257
best_score_et = -1
# Initialize with a low value
258
best_score_gb = -1
259
best_params_et[trial_name] = None
260
best_params_gb[trial_name] = None
261
262
#Collect data for plotting n_estimators trend
263
plot_data_et = []
264
plot_data_gb = []
265
266
267
# Extra Trees
268
269
for i in range(len(paras)):
270
if paras[i] == 4 and i == 2:
271
trainer = TreesModel(trial, number_parameters=paras[i],
freq_range='Beta')
272
else:
273
trainer = TreesModel(trial, number_parameters=paras[i])
274
model, acc, confusion , confusion_nor , precision , recall , f1,
precision_recall , classes , all_results_et , grid_search =
trainer.train_extra_trees()
275
#print(f"{trial_name} with {paras[i]} parameters => Accuracy: {acc
}, Precision: {precision}, Recall: {recall}, F1: {f1}")
276
277
plot_data_et.extend(all_results_et)
278
print(plot_data_et)
279
280
# Composite score
281
score = 0.6 * acc + 0.4 * f1
282
283
if score > best_score_et:
284
best_score_et = score
285
best_params_et[trial_name] = {
286
"params": {
287
"number_parameters": paras[i],
288
"max_depth": grid_search.best_params_['max_depth'],
289
"min_samples_split": grid_search.best_params_['
min_samples_split'],
290
"min_samples_leaf": grid_search.best_params_['
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
105
==PAGE:114==
min_samples_leaf']
291
},
292
"model": model,
293
"confusion": confusion ,
294
"confusion_nor": confusion_nor ,
295
"n_estimator": trainer.n_estimators ,
296
"classes": classes ,
297
"precision_recall": precision_recall ,
298
"accuracy": acc,
299
"precision": precision ,
300
"recall": recall ,
301
"f1": f1,
302
"labels": trainer.label_encoder.classes_ ,
303
"score": score
304
}
305
306
best_trial = best_params_et[trial_name]
307
308
309
# Plot confusion matrix
310
plot_confusion_matrix(trial_name , "Extra_Trees", best_trial["params"],
best_trial["n_estimator"],
311
best_trial["confusion"], best_trial["accuracy"
], best_trial["precision"], best_trial["
recall"]
312
, best_trial["f1"], best_trial["labels"], nor=
False)
313
314
plot_confusion_matrix(trial_name , "Extra_Trees", best_trial["params"],
best_trial["n_estimator"],
315
best_trial["confusion_nor"], best_trial["
accuracy"], best_trial["precision"],
best_trial["recall"]
316
, best_trial["f1"], best_trial["labels"], nor=
True)
317
318
319
# Plot precision -recall curves
320
plot_precision_recall_curve(best_trial["precision_recall"], trial_name
, best_trial["params"], "Extra_Trees",
321
best_trial["n_estimator"], best_trial["
classes"], best_trial["accuracy"],
best_trial["precision"],
322
best_trial["recall"], best_trial["f1"],
best_trial["labels"])
323
324
# Plot trend of n_estimators for Extra Trees
325
n_estimator_trend(trial_name , "Extra_Trees", plot_data_et)
326
327
328
# Gradient Boosting
329
330
plot_data = []
331
for i in range(len(paras)):
332
if paras[i] == 4 and i == 2:
333
trainer = TreesModel(trial, number_parameters=paras[i],
freq_range='Beta')
334
else:
335
trainer = TreesModel(trial, number_parameters=paras[i])
336
model, acc, confusion , confusion_nor , precision , recall , f1,
precision_recall , classes , all_results_gb , grid_search =
trainer.train_gb()
106
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:115==
337
#print(f"{trial_name} with {paras[i]} parameters => Accuracy: {acc
}, Precision: {precision}, Recall: {recall}, F1: {f1}")
338
339
# Composite score
340
score = 0.6 * f1 + 0.4 * acc
341
342
plot_data_gb.extend(all_results_gb)
343
344
if score > best_score_gb:
345
best_score_gb = score
346
best_params_gb[trial_name] = {
347
"params": {
348
"number_parameters": paras[i],
349
"lr": grid_search.best_params_['learning_rate'],
350
"max_depth": grid_search.best_params_['max_depth']
351
},
352
"model": model,
353
"confusion": confusion ,
354
"confusion_nor": confusion_nor ,
355
"n_estimator": trainer.n_estimators ,
356
"classes": classes ,
357
"precision_recall": precision_recall ,
358
"accuracy": acc,
359
"precision": precision ,
360
"recall": recall ,
361
"f1": f1,
362
"labels": trainer.label_encoder.classes_ ,
363
"score": score
364
}
365
366
367
best_trial = best_params_gb[trial_name]
368
369
370
# Plot confusion matrix
371
plot_confusion_matrix(trial_name , "Gradient_Boosting", best_trial["
params"], best_trial["n_estimator"], best_trial["confusion"],
372
best_trial["accuracy"], best_trial["precision"],
best_trial["recall"], best_trial["f1"],
best_trial["labels"], nor=False)
373
plot_confusion_matrix(trial_name , "Gradient_Boosting",
best_trial["
params"], best_trial["n_estimator"], best_trial["confusion_nor"],
374
best_trial["accuracy"], best_trial["precision"],
best_trial["recall"], best_trial["f1"],
best_trial["labels"], nor=True)
375
376
# Plot precision -recall curves
377
plot_precision_recall_curve(best_trial["precision_recall"], trial_name
, best_trial["params"], "Gradient_Boosting", best_trial["
n_estimator"],
378
best_trial["classes"], best_trial["
accuracy"], best_trial["precision"],
best_trial["recall"], best_trial["f1"
], best_trial["labels"])
379
380
381
# Plot trend of n_estimators for Gradient Boosting
382
n_estimator_trend(trial_name , "Gradient_Boosting", plot_data_gb)
Listing A.6:
The extra trees and gradient­boosted models with training, predicting,
producing confusion metrics, and precision­recall curves functions. Use GridSearchCV
to find the best parameters match.
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
107
==PAGE:116==
1 import os
2 import pandas as pd
3 from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler , LabelEncoder
4 from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split , GridSearchCV
5 from xgboost import XGBClassifier
6 from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score , confusion_matrix , precision_score ,
recall_score , f1_score , precision_recall_curve
7 from sklearn.metrics import ConfusionMatrixDisplay
8 from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
9 from tqdm import tqdm
10 import numpy as np
11
12 class XGBoostModel:
13
def __init__(self, trial, number_parameters=16, freq_range='Beta'):
14
self.trial = trial
15
self.number_parameters = number_parameters
16
self.freq_range = freq_range
17
self.base_dir = os.getcwd()
18
self.data = pd.read_csv(self.base_dir + f"/dataset/{self.trial}.csv")
19
self.X, self.y = self.prepare_data()
20
self.label_encoder = LabelEncoder()
21
self.y = self.label_encoder.fit_transform(self.y)
22
self.scaler = MinMaxScaler()
23
self.X_train , self.X_val, self.y_train , self.y_val = self.
split_and_scale_data()
24
25
def prepare_data(self):
26
if self.number_parameters == 16:
27
X = self.data[['Beta_TP9', 'Beta_AF7', 'Beta_AF8', 'Beta_TP10',
28
'Alpha_TP9', 'Alpha_AF7', 'Alpha_AF8', 'Alpha_TP10'
,
29
'Theta_TP9', 'Theta_AF7', 'Theta_AF8', 'Theta_TP10'
,
30
'Delta_TP9', 'Delta_AF7', 'Delta_AF8', 'Delta_TP10'
]].values
31
elif self.number_parameters == 8:
32
X = self.data[['Beta_TP9', 'Beta_AF7', 'Beta_AF8', 'Beta_TP10',
33
'Alpha_TP9', 'Alpha_AF7', 'Alpha_AF8', 'Alpha_TP10'
]].values
34
elif self.number_parameters == 4 and self.freq_range == 'Beta':
35
X = self.data[['Beta_TP9', 'Beta_AF7', 'Beta_AF8', 'Beta_TP10']].
values
36
elif self.number_parameters == 4 and self.freq_range == 'Alpha':
37
X = self.data[['Alpha_TP9', 'Alpha_AF7', 'Alpha_AF8', 'Alpha_TP10'
]].values
38
else:
39
raise ValueError("Invalid number of parameters or frequency range
specified.")
40
41
y = self.data['Image'].values
42
return X, y
43
44
def split_and_scale_data(self):
45
X_train , X_val, y_train , y_val = train_test_split(self.X, self.y,
test_size=0.2, random_state=42)
46
X_train_normalized = self.scaler.fit_transform(X_train)
47
X_val_normalized = self.scaler.transform(X_val)
48
return X_train_normalized , X_val_normalized , y_train , y_val
49
50
def train_xgboost(self):
51
param_grid = {
108
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:117==
52
'max_depth': [5, 8, 10],
53
'learning_rate': [0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.3],
54
'n_estimators': [75, 100, 200, 300],
55
'subsample': [0.6, 0.75, 0.85, 1],
56
'colsample_bytree': [0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1],
57
'reg_alpha': [0, 0.25, 0.5, 1],
58
'reg_lambda': [0.2, 0.6, 1],
59
}
60
model = XGBClassifier(random_state=42)
61
grid_search = GridSearchCV(estimator=model, param_grid=param_grid , cv
=5, scoring='accuracy', verbose=2, n_jobs=-1)
62
grid_search.fit(self.X_train , self.y_train)
63
best_model = grid_search.best_estimator_
64
y_pred = best_model.predict(self.X_val)
65
y_score = best_model.predict_proba(self.X_val)
66
67
classes = np.sort(np.unique(self.y_val))
68
69
accuracy = accuracy_score(self.y_val, y_pred)
70
confusion = confusion_matrix(self.y_val, y_pred, labels=classes)
71
confusion_nor = confusion_matrix(self.y_val, y_pred , labels=classes ,
normalize='true')
72
precision = precision_score(self.y_val, y_pred, average='weighted')
73
recall = recall_score(self.y_val, y_pred , average='weighted')
74
f1 = f1_score(self.y_val, y_pred , average='weighted')
75
precision_recall = {}
76
for i in range(len(classes)):
77
precision_p , recall_p , _ = precision_recall_curve(self.y_val ==
classes[i], y_score[:, i])
78
precision_recall[classes[i]] = (precision_p , recall_p)
79
80
return best_model , accuracy , confusion , confusion_nor , precision ,
recall, f1, precision_recall , classes , grid_search.best_params_
81
82
def predict(self, model, features_for_model):
83
features_for_model_normalized = self.scaler.transform(
features_for_model)
84
y_pred = model.predict(features_for_model_normalized)
85
y_pred_labels = self.label_encoder.inverse_transform(y_pred)
86
return y_pred_labels
87
88 # Plot confusion matrix
89 def plot_confusion_matrix(trial_name , paras, dataparas , confusion , accuracy ,
precision , recall, f1, labels, nor=False):
90
#print(paras.items())
91
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 8))
92
disp = ConfusionMatrixDisplay(confusion_matrix=confusion , display_labels=
labels)
93
disp.plot()
94
if nor:
95
plt.suptitle(f"Normalized Confusion Matrix: {trial_name}", y=0.98,
color='black', fontsize=11, ha='center')
96
else:
97
plt.suptitle(f"Confusion Matrix: {trial_name}", y=0.98, color='black',
fontsize=11, ha='center')
98
99
# Split parameters into two lines, four per line
100
paras_items = list(paras.items())
101
paras_str_1 = " ".join([f"{key}: {value}" for key, value in paras_items
[:2]])
102
paras_str_2 = " ".join([f"{key}: {value}" for key, value in paras_items
[2:4]])
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
109
==PAGE:118==
103
paras_str_3 = " ".join([f"{key}: {value}" for key, value in paras_items
[4:6]])
104
paras_str_4 = f"{paras_items[6][0]}: {paras_items[6][1]}"
105
106
title = (f"Model: XGBoost , data parameters: {dataparas}\n"
107
f"parameters:\n{paras_str_1}\n"
108
f"{paras_str_2}\n"
109
f"{paras_str_3}\n"
110
f"{paras_str_4}")
111
112
plt.title(title, fontsize=8, pad=15, ha='center')
113
plt.xticks(rotation=45)
114
plt.subplots_adjust(left=0.3, right=0.95, top=0.95, bottom=0.1)
115
116
stats_text = f"Accuracy: {accuracy:.2f}\nPrecision: {precision:.2f}\
nRecall: {recall:.2f}\nF1 Score: {f1:.2f}"
117
plt.text(-0.9, 0.98, stats_text , transform=plt.gca().transAxes , fontsize
=12, verticalalignment='top', bbox=dict(boxstyle='round', alpha=0.1))
118
119
save_dir = "/Users/luchengliang/Brain-computer_interface_authentification/
plots/XGBoost"
120
os.makedirs(save_dir , exist_ok=True)
121
plt.tight_layout()
122
123
if nor:
124
filename = f"{trial_name}_XGBoost_{dataparas}_{paras}
_normalized_confusion_matrix.png"
125
else:
126
filename = f"{trial_name}_XGBoost_{dataparas}_{paras}_confusion_matrix
.png"
127
plt.savefig(os.path.join(save_dir , filename))
128
plt.close()
129
130 # Plot precision -recall curves
131 def plot_precision_recall_curve(precision_recall , trial_name , paras, dataparas
, classes , accuracy , precision , recall , f1, labels):
132
#print(paras.items())
133
plt.figure(figsize=(13, 8))
134
for label in classes:
135
plt.plot(precision_recall[label][1], precision_recall[label][0], lw=2,
label=f'class {labels[label]}')
136
137
plt.xlabel("Recall")
138
plt.ylabel("Precision")
139
plt.legend(loc="best")
140
plt.suptitle(f"Precision -Recall Curve for {trial_name}", y=0.97, color='
black', fontsize=11, ha='center')
141
142
# Split parameters into two lines, four per lines
143
paras_items = list(paras.items())
144
paras_str_1 = " ".join([f"{key}: {value}" for key, value in paras_items
[:3]])
145
paras_str_2 = " ".join([f"{key}: {value}" for key, value in paras_items
[3:]])
146
147
title = (f"Model: XGBoost , data parameters: {dataparas}\n"
148
f"parameters: {paras_str_1}\n"
149
f"{paras_str_2}")
150
151
plt.title(title, fontsize=9, pad=20, ha='center')
152
153
plt.subplots_adjust(left=0.3, right=0.95, top=0.85, bottom=0.1)
110
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:119==
154
155
stats_text = f"Accuracy: {accuracy:.2f}\nPrecision: {precision:.2f}\
nRecall: {recall:.2f}\nF1 Score: {f1:.2f}"
156
plt.text(-0.2, 0.98, stats_text , transform=plt.gca().transAxes , fontsize
=12, verticalalignment='top', bbox=dict(boxstyle='round', alpha=0.1))
157
158
save_dir = "/Users/luchengliang/Brain-computer_interface_authentification/
plots/XGBoost"
159
os.makedirs(save_dir , exist_ok=True)
160
161
filename = f"{trial_name}_XGBoost_{dataparas}_{paras}
_precision_recall_curve.png"
162
plt.savefig(os.path.join(save_dir , filename))
163
plt.close()
164
165 if __name__ == "__main__":
166
trials = [
167
"without_individuals/pic_e_close_motion",
168
"without_individuals/pic_e_close_noun",
169
"without_individuals/imagination",
170
]
171
172
paras = [16]
173
best_params = {}
174
175
for trial in tqdm(trials):
176
trial_name = os.path.splitext(os.path.basename(trial))[0]
177
best_score = -1
# Initialize with a low value
178
best_params[trial_name] = None
179
180
for i in range(len(paras)):
181
trainer = XGBoostModel(trial, number_parameters=paras[i])
182
model, acc, confusion , confusion_nor , precision , recall , f1,
precision_recall , classes , best_params_ = trainer.
train_xgboost()
183
184
score = 0.6 * acc + 0.4 * f1
185
186
if score > best_score:
187
best_score = score
188
best_params[trial_name] = {
189
"params": best_params_ ,
190
"dataParas": paras[i],
191
"n_estimator": model.n_estimators ,
192
"confusion": confusion ,
193
"confusion_nor": confusion_nor ,
194
"precision_recall": precision_recall ,
195
"classes": classes ,
196
"accuracy": acc,
197
"precision": precision ,
198
"recall": recall ,
199
"f1": f1,
200
"labels": trainer.label_encoder.inverse_transform(classes)
201
}
202
203
for trial in trials:
204
trial_name = os.path.splitext(os.path.basename(trial))[0]
205
plot_confusion_matrix(
206
trial_name ,
207
best_params[trial_name]["params"],
208
best_params[trial_name]["dataParas"],
209
best_params[trial_name]["confusion"],
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
111
==PAGE:120==
210
best_params[trial_name]["accuracy"],
211
best_params[trial_name]["precision"],
212
best_params[trial_name]["recall"],
213
best_params[trial_name]["f1"],
214
best_params[trial_name]["labels"],
215
nor=False
216
)
217
plot_confusion_matrix(
218
trial_name ,
219
best_params[trial_name]["params"],
220
best_params[trial_name]["dataParas"],
221
best_params[trial_name]["confusion_nor"],
222
best_params[trial_name]["accuracy"],
223
best_params[trial_name]["precision"],
224
best_params[trial_name]["recall"],
225
best_params[trial_name]["f1"],
226
best_params[trial_name]["labels"],
227
nor=True
228
)
229
plot_precision_recall_curve(
230
best_params[trial_name]["precision_recall"],
231
trial_name ,
232
best_params[trial_name]["params"],
233
best_params[trial_name]["dataParas"],
234
best_params[trial_name]["classes"],
235
best_params[trial_name]["accuracy"],
236
best_params[trial_name]["precision"],
237
best_params[trial_name]["recall"],
238
best_params[trial_name]["f1"],
239
best_params[trial_name]["labels"]
240
)
Listing A.7: The XGBoost model with training, predicting, producing confusion metrics,
and precision­recall curves functions. Use GridSearchCV to find the best parameters
match.
A.3
Binary classification model
1 import os
2 import pandas as pd
3 from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler , LabelEncoder
4 from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
5 from sklearn.ensemble import ExtraTreesClassifier
6 from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score , ConfusionMatrixDisplay ,
precision_score , recall_score , f1_score , precision_recall_curve ,
confusion_matrix
7 from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
8 import numpy as np
9 from imblearn.over_sampling import SMOTE
10 import joblib
11
12 class TreesModel:
13
def __init__(self, trial, n_estimators=100, number_parameters=16,
freq_range='Beta'):
14
self.n_estimators = n_estimators
15
self.trial = trial
16
self.number_parameters = number_parameters
17
self.freq_range = freq_range
18
self.base_dir = os.getcwd()
19
self.data = pd.read_csv(self.base_dir + f"/dataset/{self.trial}.csv")
20
self.X, self.y = self.prepare_data()
112
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:121==
21
self.label_encoder = LabelEncoder()
22
self.y = self.label_encoder.fit_transform(self.y)
23
self.scaler = MinMaxScaler()
24
self.X_train , self.X_val, self.y_train , self.y_val = self.
split_and_scale_data()
25
26
27
def prepare_data(self):
28
if self.number_parameters == 16:
29
X = self.data[['Beta_TP9', 'Beta_AF7', 'Beta_AF8', 'Beta_TP10',
30
'Alpha_TP9', 'Alpha_AF7', 'Alpha_AF8', 'Alpha_TP10'
,
31
'Theta_TP9', 'Theta_AF7', 'Theta_AF8', 'Theta_TP10'
,
32
'Delta_TP9', 'Delta_AF7', 'Delta_AF8', 'Delta_TP10'
]].values
33
34
else:
35
raise ValueError("Invalid number of parameters or frequency range
specified.")
36
37
y = self.data['Image'].values
38
return X, y
39
40
41
def split_and_scale_data(self):
42
X_train , X_val, y_train , y_val = train_test_split(self.X, self.y,
test_size=0.2, random_state=42)
43
X_train_normalized = self.scaler.fit_transform(X_train)
44
X_val_normalized = self.scaler.transform(X_val)
45
return X_train_normalized , X_val_normalized , y_train , y_val
46
47
48
def train_extra_trees_binary(self, target_class):
49
sm = SMOTE(random_state=42)
50
51
cls = self.label_encoder.transform([target_class])[0]
52
#print(cls)
53
54
binary_y_train = (self.y_train == cls).astype(int)
55
binary_y_val = (self.y_val == cls).astype(int)
56
X_train_res , y_train_res = sm.fit_resample(self.X_train ,
binary_y_train)
57
58
model = ExtraTreesClassifier(n_estimators=self.n_estimators , max_depth
=None, min_samples_split=2, min_samples_leaf=1, random_state=42)
59
model.fit(X_train_res , y_train_res)
60
y_pred = model.predict(self.X_val)
61
y_score = model.predict_proba(self.X_val)[:, 1]
62
63
accuracy = accuracy_score(binary_y_val , y_pred)
64
confusion = confusion_matrix(binary_y_val , y_pred)
65
confusion_nor = confusion_matrix(binary_y_val , y_pred , normalize='true
')
66
precision = precision_score(binary_y_val , y_pred)
67
recall = recall_score(binary_y_val , y_pred)
68
f1 = f1_score(binary_y_val , y_pred)
69
precision_p , recall_p , _ = precision_recall_curve(binary_y_val ,
y_score)
70
71
72
results = {
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
113
==PAGE:122==
73
"model": model,
74
"accuracy": accuracy ,
75
"confusion": confusion ,
76
"confusion_nor": confusion_nor ,
77
"precision": precision ,
78
"recall": recall,
79
"f1": f1,
80
"precision_recall": (precision_p , recall_p)
81
}
82
83
return results , cls
84
85
86
def predict(self, model, features_for_model):
87
features_for_model_normalized = self.scaler.transform(
features_for_model)
88
y_pred = model.predict(features_for_model_normalized)
89
y_pred_labels = self.label_encoder.inverse_transform(y_pred)
90
return y_pred_labels
91
92
93
94 # Plot confusion matrix
95 def plot_confusion_matrix(trial_name , treeName , paras, n_estimator , confusion ,
accuracy , precision , recall, f1, labels , nor=False):
96
97
plt.figure(figsize=(30, 15))
98
disp = ConfusionMatrixDisplay(confusion_matrix=confusion , display_labels=
labels)
99
disp.plot()
100
if nor:
101
plt.suptitle(f"Normalized Confusion Matrix: {trial_name}", y=0.98,
color='black', fontsize=12, ha='center')
102
else:
103
plt.suptitle(f"Confusion Matrix: {trial_name}", y=0.98, color='black',
fontsize=12, ha='center')
104
105
plt.title(f"Model: {treeName} binary , {paras}, \nnumber of estimators: {
n_estimator}", fontsize=7, pad=15, ha='center')
106
plt.xticks()
107
108
# Adjust the subplot to make space for the stats text
109
plt.subplots_adjust(left=0.4, right=0.943, top=2.0, bottom=1.3)
110
111
# Add accuracy , precision , recall , f1 to the plot
112
stats_text = f"Accuracy: {accuracy:.2f}\nPrecision: {precision:.2f}\
nRecall: {recall:.2f}\nF1 Score: {f1:.2f}"
113
plt.text(-0.9, 0.98, stats_text , transform=plt.gca().transAxes , fontsize
=12, verticalalignment='top', bbox=dict(boxstyle='round', alpha=0.1))
114
115
# Save the plot to the "plots" folder
116
save_dir = "/Users/luchengliang/Brain-computer_interface_authentification/
plots/swim_in_ocean"
117
os.makedirs(save_dir , exist_ok=True)
118
119
if nor:
120
filename = f"{trial_name}_{treeName}_binary_{labels[1]}_{paras}_{
n_estimator}_normalized_confusion_matrix.png"
121
else:
122
filename = f"{trial_name}_{treeName}_binary_{labels[1]}_{paras}_{
n_estimator}_confusion_matrix.png"
123
114
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:123==
124
plt.tight_layout()
125
plt.savefig(os.path.join(save_dir , filename))
126
plt.close()
127
128
129 # Plot precision -recall curves
130 def plot_precision_recall_curve(precision_recall , trial_name , paras, treeName ,
n_estimator , accuracy , precision , recall , f1, labels):
131
plt.figure(figsize=(13, 8))
132
133
plt.plot(precision_recall[1], precision_recall[0], lw=2, label=f'class {
labels[1]}')
134
135
plt.xlabel("Recall")
136
plt.ylabel("Precision")
137
plt.legend(loc="best")
138
plt.suptitle(f"Precision -Recall Curve for {trial_name}", y=0.95, color='
black', fontsize=12, ha='center')
139
plt.title(f"Model: {treeName} binary , parameters: {paras}, n_estimator: {
n_estimator}", fontsize=10, pad=20, ha='center')
140
141
# Adjust the subplot to make space for the stats text
142
plt.subplots_adjust(left=0.3, right=0.95, top=0.85, bottom=0.1)
143
144
# Add accuracy , precision , recall , f1 to the plot
145
stats_text = f"Accuracy: {accuracy:.2f}\nPrecision: {precision:.2f}\
nRecall: {recall:.2f}\nF1 Score: {f1:.2f}"
146
plt.text(-0.2, 0.98, stats_text , transform=plt.gca().transAxes , fontsize
=12, verticalalignment='top', bbox=dict(boxstyle='round', alpha=0.1))
147
148
# Save the plot to the "plots" folder
149
save_dir = "/Users/luchengliang/Brain-computer_interface_authentification/
plots/swim_in_ocean"
150
os.makedirs(save_dir , exist_ok=True)
151
152
filename = f"{trial_name}_{treeName}_binary_{labels[1]}_{paras}_{
n_estimator}_precision_recall_curve.png"
153
plt.savefig(os.path.join(save_dir , filename))
154
plt.close()
155
156 if __name__ == "__main__":
157
trial = "without_individuals/imagination"
158
paras = 16
159
target_class = "swim_in_ocean"
160
161
trial_name = os.path.splitext(os.path.basename(trial))[0]
162
163
trainer = TreesModel(trial, number_parameters=paras)
164
results , cls = trainer.train_extra_trees_binary(target_class)
165
166
class_name = trainer.label_encoder.inverse_transform([cls])[0]
167
print(f"{trial_name} for class '{class_name}' with {paras} parameters =>
Accuracy: {results['accuracy ']}, Precision: {results['precision ']},
Recall: {results['recall ']}, F1: {results['f1']}")
168
169
plot_confusion_matrix(
170
trial_name ,
171
"Extra_Trees",
172
{"number_parameters": paras},
173
trainer.n_estimators ,
174
results['confusion'],
175
results['accuracy'],
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
115
==PAGE:124==
176
results['precision'],
177
results['recall'],
178
results['f1'],
179
labels=[f"not {class_name}", class_name]
180
)
181
182
plot_confusion_matrix(
183
trial_name ,
184
"Extra_Trees",
185
{"number_parameters": paras},
186
trainer.n_estimators ,
187
results['confusion_nor'],
188
results['accuracy'],
189
results['precision'],
190
results['recall'],
191
results['f1'],
192
labels=[f"not {class_name}", class_name],
193
nor=True
194
)
195
196
plot_precision_recall_curve(
197
results['precision_recall'],
198
trial_name ,
199
paras,
200
"Extra_Trees",
201
trainer.n_estimators ,
202
results['accuracy'],
203
results['precision'],
204
results['recall'],
205
results['f1'],
206
labels=[f"not {class_name}", class_name]
207
)
208
209
#Save the best model
210
model_path = "/Users/luchengliang/Brain-
computer_interface_authentification/models/model.pkl"
211
joblib.dump(results['model'], model_path)
212
joblib.dump(trainer.scaler, "/Users/luchengliang/Brain-
computer_interface_authentification/models/scaler.pkl")
213
joblib.dump(trainer.label_encoder , "/Users/luchengliang/Brain-
computer_interface_authentification/models/label_encoder.pkl")
214
215
print(f"Model saved to {model_path}")
Listing A.8: The binary extra trees model with training, predicting, producing confusion
metrics, and precision­recall curves functions. In addition, store the model in order to use
this in the demo
116
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:125==
B
Appendix:Results
The other outcomes in the analysis stage.
B.1
Multi­classification additional results
B.1.1
Full Connected Network
(a) The confusion matrix for the best perfor­
mance from the “Imagination”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Imagination”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Imagination”
Figure B.1: The analysis from the fully connected model of the best performance from the
“Imagination”
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
117
==PAGE:126==
B.1.2
Extra Trees
(a) The confusion matrix for the best per­
formance from the “Command in dynamic
words with eyes closed”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Command in dynamic words with eyes
closed”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Command in dynamic words with eyes closed”
Figure B.2: The analysis from the extra trees model of the best performance from the
“Command in dynamic words with eyes closed”
118
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:127==
(a) The confusion matrix for the best perfor­
mance from the “Command in static words
with eyes closed”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Command in static words with eyes closed”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Command in static words with eyes closed”
Figure B.3: The analysis from the extra trees model of the best performance from the
“Command in static words with eyes closed”
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
119
==PAGE:128==
(a) The confusion matrix for the best per­
formance from the “Command in dynamic
words with eyes open”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Command in dynamic words with eyes
open”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Command in dynamic words with eyes open”
Figure B.4: The analysis from the extra trees model of the best performance from the
“Command in dynamic words with eyes open”
120
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:129==
(a) The confusion matrix for the best perfor­
mance from the “Command in static words
with eyes open”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Command in static words with eyes open”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Command in static words with eyes open”
Figure B.5: The analysis from the extra trees model of the best performance from the
“Command in static words with eyes open”
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
121
==PAGE:130==
B.1.3
Gradient­Boosted Machine
(a) The confusion matrix for the best per­
formance from the “Command in dynamic
words with eyes closed”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Command in dynamic words with eyes
closed”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Command in dynamic words with eyes closed”
Figure B.6: The analysis from the gradient­boosted machine of the best performance from
the “Command in dynamic words with eyes closed”
122
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:131==
(a) The confusion matrix for the best perfor­
mance from the “Command in static words
with eyes closed”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Command in static words with eyes closed”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Command in static words with eyes closed”
Figure B.7: The analysis from the gradient­boosted machine of the best performance from
the “Command in static words with eyes closed”
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
123
==PAGE:132==
(a) The confusion matrix for the best per­
formance from the “Command in dynamic
words with eyes open”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Command in dynamic words with eyes
open”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Command in dynamic words with eyes open”
Figure B.8: The analysis from the gradient­boosted machine of the best performance from
the “Command in dynamic words with eyes open”
124
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:133==
(a) The confusion matrix for the best perfor­
mance from the “Command in static words
with eyes open”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Command in static words with eyes open”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Command in static words with eyes open”
Figure B.9: The analysis from the gradient­boosted machine of the best performance from
the “Command in static words with eyes open”
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
125
==PAGE:134==
B.1.4
XGBoost
(a) The confusion matrix for the best per­
formance from the “Command in dynamic
words with eyes closed”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Command in dynamic words with eyes
closed”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Command in dynamic words with eyes closed”
Figure B.10: The analysis from the XGBoost model of the best performance from the
“Command in dynamic words with eyes closed”
126
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:135==
(a) The confusion matrix for the best perfor­
mance from the “Command in static words
with eyes closed”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the best performance from the
“Command in static words with eyes closed”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the best performance from the
“Command in static words with eyes closed”
Figure B.11: The analysis from the XGBoost model of the best performance from the
“Command in static words with eyes closed”
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
127
==PAGE:136==
B.2
Binary classification additional results (Extra Trees)
(a)
The
confusion
matrix
for
the
per­
formance from the “Imagination,
class:
peace_ocean”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the performance from the “Imagi­
nation, class: peace_ocean”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the performance from the “Imagi­
nation, class: peace_ocean”
Figure B.12: The analysis of the performance from the binary Extra Trees model for “Imag­
ination, class:peace_ocean” this task and class
128
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:137==
(a)
The
confusion
matrix
for
the
per­
formance from the “Imagination,
class:
lie_on_grass”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the performance from the “Imagi­
nation, class: lie_on_grass”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the performance from the “Imagi­
nation, class: lie_on_grass”
Figure B.13: The analysis of the performance from the binary Extra Trees model for “Imag­
ination, class:lie_on_grass” this task and class
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
129
==PAGE:138==
(a)
The
confusion
matrix
for
the
per­
formance from the “Imagination,
class:
run_in_forest”
(b) The normalized (True labels) confusion
matrix for the performance from the “Imagi­
nation, class: run_in_forest”
(c) The precision­recall curve for the performance from the “Imagi­
nation, class: run_in_forest”
Figure B.14: The analysis of the performance from the binary Extra Trees model for “Imag­
ination, class:run_in_forest” this task and class
130
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
==PAGE:139==
Braincomputer interface implemented on autentication for cookie­session
131
==PAGE:140==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
