==PAGE:1==
Autonomous Robotic System for
Component Sorting using Molded
Cavity Numbers
MSc Thesis - DTU | NN
Student
Juan Cervera Bustamante (s184462)
==PAGE:2==
Master of Science in Autonomous Systems Engineering
Civilingeniør, cand. polyt. (Autonome systemer)
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Project title:
Autonomous Robotic System for Component Sorting
using Molded Cavity Numbers
Author:
Juan Cervera Bustamante (s184462)
Supervisor:
Professor Lazaros Nalpantidis, Group Leader, Depart-
ment of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Techni-
cal University of Denmark (DTU)
External Supervisor:
Dimitrios Arapis, Advanced Robotics and AI Engineer,
Novo Nordsik (NN)
Project Period:
1 February 2024 - 16 July 2024
Project ECTS:
32.5
Pages:
55
Submission Date:
29 June 2024
Synopsis:
This project aims to create
an automated solution to man-
ual task carried out in Novo
Nordisk,
namely component
sorting
in
trays,
based
on
molded cavity numbers.
It
achieves this using computer
vision, state-of-the-art image
text recognition methods and
a
robust
software
architec-
ture, developed with modular-
ity and efficiency in its core.
The project combines different
domains of Robotics and AI,
incorporating research, devel-
opment, implementation and
analysis of results in each of
the areas of expertise.
Report submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science in
Autonomous Systems Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:3==
MSc Thesis
Preface and Aknowledgements
This project has been conducted over the period of five months both at Novo Nordisk
and the Technical University of Denmark, as a partial fulfillment of the degree of Master
of Science in Autonomous Systems Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU. The work done during the project was equivalent to 32.5 ECTS, from February 1,
2024, until July 16, 2024.
The project was proposed internally at Novo Nordisk with the goal of providing a viable
automated proposal for component sorting tasks related to the metrology processes. This
project was further tailored for a master’s thesis project thanks to the guidance of Pro-
fessor Lazaros Nalpantidis, from the Electrical and Photonics Engineering Department at
DTU, and my external supervisor, Dimitris Arapis, Advanced Robotics and AI Engineer
at Novo Nordisk. I would like to also thank Milad Jami, Head of Robotics at the De-
partment in NN where most of the thesis was carried out, for providing the space and
materials that were used throughout the project.
I would like to express my deepest appreciation to both Lazaros and Dimitris for their
mentorship, encouragement, and dedication, which significantly contributed to the suc-
cessful completion of this thesis. I especially want to fondly remember those late evenings
with Dimitris in the lab, tackling the most complex problems and dodging the occasional
surprise from the UR arm like true trial-and-error engineers. Your insightful guidance
and camaraderie made all the difference.
ii
==PAGE:4==
MSc Thesis
Abstract
In response to the evolving landscape of industrial automation, this master’s thesis ad-
dresses the manual process of component sorting within pharmaceutical device manu-
facturing. Despite advancements in automation, the initial sorting of components based
on molded cavity numbers remains a labor-intensive task. This thesis proposes an auto-
mated solution leveraging computer vision, advanced text recognition techniques, robotic
manipulation, and robotics software development.
The project aims to design and develop an autonomous modular system capable of ac-
curately sorting components into designated tray cells based on their cavity numbers.
The system integrates technologies for 3D localization of trays using fiducial markers,
precise robotic arm manipulation, using designed fixtures and gripper fingers, AI-driven
text image recognition, and a robust software architecture developed to coordinate these
elements to ensure efficient task execution and adaptability. Each aspect of the system is
explained across individual chapters.
The results demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of the automated sorting system,
highlighting the individual domains of Robotics and AI that were implemented, and the
innovative solutions that had to be developed, tailored to the problem at hand. Tray
localization was robustly stabilized to adapt to the camera resolution and the tag sizes,
utilizing auxiliary triangulation methods, and an ensemble method was created for cavity
number decoding, incorporating state-of-the-art STR models and sequence matching algo-
rithms. Accurate robotic manipulation and fixture design, alongside the efficient software
application devised, based on a scheduling architecture, allowed for a reliable autonomous
system operation.
The modular design facilitates future enhancements and scalability, while discussions on
limitations and possible refinements provide proposals for continued research. The devel-
oped system not only enhances operational efficiency in pharmaceutical device production
but also sets a foundation for broader applications in automated quality control and lo-
gistics.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Project Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Methodological Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Structure of Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Component Handling
4
2.1
Gripper Fingers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Component Fixtures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
UR5e and Robotiq Hand-E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Tray Localization
11
3.1
Camera Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Localization through Apriltags . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.1
Corner Detection and PnP Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.2
Single-tag Tray System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.3
Multi-tag Tray System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Cavity Number Recognition
20
4.1
Optical Character Recognition (OCR)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Scene Text Detection (STD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Scene Text Recognition (STR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3.1
ABINet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.2
PARSeq . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.3
TRBA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Sequence Matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4.1
Ratcliff-Obershelp Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4.2
Smith-Waterman Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5
Implementation for Cavity Number Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5.1
Original Uncropped Images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5.2
Cropped Images and Prediction Refinement
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Ensemble Method Incorporating Lexicon Similarity . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Software Application
39
5.1
Architecture and Middleware
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.1
ROS2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.2
Scheduling-based Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
System Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2.1
Task Processing and Action Servers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2.2
Routine Scheduler and Action Clients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
iv
==PAGE:6==
MSc Thesis
5.2.3
Cavity Sorting Exercise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Conclusion
49
6.1
Complete System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Reflection on Results and Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
References
54
v
==PAGE:7==
MSc Thesis
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
In recent years, the industrial sector has witnessed a significant transformation due to
advancements in automation, robotics, and artificial intelligence. These technologies have
revolutionized the way manufacturing processes are carried out, leading to increased effi-
ciency, reduced human error, and enhanced production quality. Particularly in the field
of pharmaceutical device manufacturing, precision and reliability are of great importance,
relying on the adoption of sophisticated automation solutions. Despite these advance-
ments, there are still numerous procedures within the different processes that are still
performed manually, primarily because these procedures require intricate handling and
decision-making.
An example of a manual process that occurs in Novo Nordisk, is the component sorting
that takes place in the Metrology Lab. The metrology lab, as the name suggests, is an
area of quality inspection that measures injection molded components, to analyze the
quality and status of the cavities of molds in the production lines. If components are
found to be deformed or not meet the standards, after being subject to the series of
measuring procedures in the metrology lab, it suggests that the mold cavities where they
were formed could be faulty. Each cavity in the mold includes an identification number
that is molded onto the components, which is used to identify the cavity and mold of origin
for that specific component. When the metrology lab receives a batch of components to
inspect, they come unordered inside a bag. It is the task of the operators to inspect the
components one by one to find and identify the cavity number of the component and sort
them in trays, which contain cells with a cavity number corresponding to each component.
This task is done as a preliminary step for the series of metrology procedures that follow,
which are not the focus of this project. It is important to note, however, that all following
procedures have been automated, which remarks the need to automate the only remaining
task, namely component sorting, which is still performed manually. Since cavity numbers
are molded on components, they tend to be very small relative to what the human eye can
see. The biggest cavity number for the specific medical device of this project measured
2mm in length, while the smallest can be less than 1mm. This means that operators need
to use specific lighting and equipment such as microscopes and tweezers to handle and
inspect the components.
This task strains operators’ eyes and hands, leading to fatigue and potential errors over
time. Additionally, the manual inspection and sorting process is time-consuming, slowing
down the overall workflow in the metrology lab. Automating this process is crucial because
it can significantly enhance accuracy, reduce operator fatigue, and increase throughput.
This not only improves operational efficiency but also frees up operators to focus on more
complex tasks that require human judgment and expertise.
Page 1 of 55
==PAGE:8==
MSc Thesis
1.2
Goal
This MSc thesis project proposes designing and developing an automated modular solu-
tion to carry out the task of component sorting, using computer vision, advanced text
recognition methods, a robust software architecture, and robotic manipulation.
1.3
Project Requirements
The system should carry out the aforementioned task of sorting components in the specific
tray cells, according to their cavity number. To achieve this, the solution should:
• Determine the position and orientation of the newly arrived tray. Extract informa-
tion about the component type and expected cavity numbers in each cell.
• Pick up components from the fixtures, ensuring that the arm and gripper do not
cover the cavity number.
• Capture an image of the cavity number of the picked-up component and read/decode
the number from this image.
• Place the component in the designated cell of the tray that corresponds to said
number.
• Repeat the process until all components are placed in the tray.
1.4
Methodological Approach
To meet these requirements, the following domains are researched and implemented.
• 3D Localization of tray using fiducial markers and triangulation techniques.
• Accurate manipulation using robotic arm and gripper.
• Artificial intelligence for image text recognition and sequence matching for lexicon
similarity.
• Robust and modular software architecture for decision-making and task scheduling.
1.5
Structure of Work
This project combines different domains in the realm of robotics and AI. Each chapter
of this report is dedicated to one of these areas, which can be understood as subprojects,
and contribute to the overall solution proposed. In each section, an initial planning and
research phase is carried out. In this phase, an analysis of the background problem was
performed, to understand the requirements, the current and previous state-of-the-art pro-
cedures, and the overall specific task at hand. It is then followed by a methodological
development approach, in which a chronological explanation of implementing several pos-
sible methods is explained, detailing the analysis of results from each approach. In several
Page 2 of 55
==PAGE:9==
MSc Thesis
chapters, an innovative solution had to be developed, incorporating the aforementioned
knowledge gained from the planning phase and the initial method’s results. These propos-
als are designed to fit the problem at hand more specifically and to solve the issues that
arose. Finally, the results are analyzed and explained for the final proposal and the holistic
importance of the chapter (or subproject) in the overall system. The concluding chapter
includes discussions regarding the system as a whole and contains ideas for improving
each pillar on which the project stands, as future work. This discussion targets individual
subprojects but also the complete system. Figure 1 depicts a schematic overview of the
four domains and subprojects that make up the complete system, and which will be ex-
plained in detail in each of the corresponding chapters. Component Handling is explained
in chapter 2, Tray Pose Localization in chapter 3, Cavity Number Recognition in chapter
4, and Software Application in chapter 5.
Figure 1: Schematic overview of the thesis project domains and chapters
Page 3 of 55
==PAGE:10==
MSc Thesis
2
Component Handling
The plastic components that make up the auto-injectible medical device, vary in sizes and
shapes. However, they are all relatively small, which made handling and placing them
accurately a crucial task. These components are also delicate, they can deform, scratch,
and even break when they experience certain forces. Taking into consideration the nature
of this system, which is succeeded by a number of metrology techniques to measure correct
molding, these components had to be handled with specific care, as deforming them would
lead to erroneous measurements further down the process.
When handling these components several constraints and assumptions had to be met:
The pose of the component was fixed and known at pick-up, the griping method had to
leave the cavity number exposed such that this could be seen by the digital microscope
while holding the component in the gripper, and finally, there should not be tool changes
or auxiliary fixtures to achieve so. Naturally, with these initial constraints, the system
would not be able to handle all the components in the device. Two components were
chosen at first to test the system’s capabilities. These two components were chosen due
to their manageable size, similarities in shape, and cavity number’s position and size.
Other sections of the system assume compatibility with all components, however, the
physical constraints allowed only the aforementioned components to be picked up and
handled. The following sections detail the methods applied to design appropriate fixtures
and gripper fingers. These components were 3D printed in micro carbon-fiber-filled nylon,
using a Mark Two Markforged 3D printer.
2.1
Gripper Fingers
The primary consideration in designing the gripper fingers is the need to handle small
plastic components reliably. The reverse grip mechanism was applied when grasping the
components, which involves the gripper fingers expanding outward once inserted into the
component’s opening. This was chosen to minimize the obstacles that the gripper and
arm would cause when taking images of the external cavity numbers. This method is also
particularly effective for hollow cylindrical shapes, as it leverages the internal surface area
for a firm grasp. Figure 2 depicts a diagram of the method applied. Given the dimensions
and fragility of these components, the gripper fingers are intentionally designed to be
short and thin. This specific sizing is critical for accessing the narrow openings of the
components, ensuring they can be gripped from the inside without causing damage.
Page 4 of 55
==PAGE:11==
MSc Thesis
Figure 2: Diagram of the reverse grip method applied, optimizing the gripper fingers and
silicone strips
Figure 3: Robotiq Gripper fitted with a Realsense camera in the wrist, as well as the 3D
printed gripper fingers with silicone strips
During operation, the components had to be grasped firmly, as they would be lifted out of
their fixtures and moved towards the camera and tray at high speeds. The accelerations
that the component would experience would cause forces that could ultimately pull the
component out of the grip. However, to improve the grasp of the fingers on the component,
a larger force could not be applied. These forces could deform the shape of the component.
Page 5 of 55
==PAGE:12==
MSc Thesis
Therefore, the outer part of the gripper fingers, which come into contact with the internal
surface of the component, were layered with silicone strips. The silicone has a high friction
coefficient, improving the grasp of the component without needing to apply additional
force. These 1 mm thick strips are also flexible, allowing them to conform to and grip
components with intricate interior designs effectively. Figure 3 shows the robotic arm
gripper used, with the camera and 3D-printed fingers.
2.2
Component Fixtures
The pose of components when gripped by the fingers must remain consistent with minimal
deviation. Due to the high magnification of the camera, even small deviations of just 1
mm can cause the cavity number text to lie outside the image plane. To address this,
accurate fixtures were designed to ensure that components are fixed in a specific, known
pose at the time of pick-up.
The fixture was designed with specific clearances such that the component would fit
tightly inside the fixture to not deviate from the desired pose while leaving enough room
for it to slide out when picked up by the gripper.
To further fix the orientation of
the component in the fixture, the component’s asymmetries were used when designing
these, such that the component would only fit in a specific orientation.
To ease the
process of inserting components in these fixtures, auxiliary structures were put in place,
to funnel the component into the correct pose.
If the component is inserted with a
slight deviation, these structures would correct the orientation as the component slides
downwards. This mechanism will also help operators insert the components into fixtures,
as high precision is unnecessary for the component to end in the desired pose.
The
mechanism in which the fixtures automatically adjust the pose of the component using its
anatomy is shown in Figure 4. Note that the components are not shown throughout the
report, due to confidentiality, therefore when demonstrating components, a similar less
complex representation is used. The mechanism is shown for what will be referred to as
Component A. Figure 5 shows the two of the component fixtures that were designed.
Page 6 of 55
==PAGE:13==
MSc Thesis
Figure 4: Diagram of the funnel mechanism which fixtures use to adjust and correct the
pose of components. Example using Component A and its fixture.
Figure 5: Fixture design for Components A and B
Furthermore, a system of adapter pieces was designed, taking advantage of the module’s
top-plate layout. This top-plate has a 10 x 10 grid layout of 8M screw holes placed at
40 mm distance from each other. The adapter pieces are designed to screw on top of the
top-plate, using 8M screws. The fixtures are connected to these adapters, which allows
for quick layout changes, depending on the task at hand. These component fixtures and
adapters are designed in such a way that the center of the component will be aligned with
Page 7 of 55
==PAGE:14==
MSc Thesis
the center of the screw hole in which they are mounted, making the process of calibrating
the fixtures’ world positions seamless. Figure 6 shows the CAD model of the adapter
piece used to attach the fixtures onto the top-plate in a modular manner.
Figure 6: Base adapter piece to attach fixtures onto top-plate
This grid system also allows for programmatic configuration of the pick-up routines. A
pick-up routine, as shown in Figure 2 is a sequence of tasks carried out by the arm and
gripper. Firstly the arm moves towards an intermediate point above the fixture, with a
closed gripper. Then the arm moves downwards to insert the closed gripper fingers into
the component. Opening the gripper will create a grasp between the gripper and the
component. At this point, the arm can move upwards to the first intermediate point.
These poses can be determined as a function of a center point, determined by the cell, or
hole, in the grid. To implement this system, a matrix representation of the grid is used,
where each element of the matrix defines the state of the corresponding cell in the grid. In
this matrix, a "0" indicates an empty cell or a screw hole without a fixture, while values
such as "1", "2", etc., indicate the different types of component fixtures, corresponding
to a specific component type. This matrix is used to programmatically define the layout
and type of each fixture on the top-plate.
When a new layout of fixtures is placed in the top-plate, the toolbox developed allows
the user to specify the placement of these fixtures in the grid. Once this is defined, the
system will generate the sequence of routines for each fixture, by taking routine skeletons
and adjusting the pose of the different actions with respect to their position in the grid.
This is done before the cavity exercise, and the pick-up routines are saved as config files,
which will be explained when discussing the software architecture. In the example shown
in Figure 7, the system will generate 8 pick-up routines, 4 for each component type, in
the respective files named: pick_up_i_routine.yml. These will be used by the scheduler
when picking up components iteratively. This ensures that the components are picked up
Page 8 of 55
==PAGE:15==
MSc Thesis
accurately and consistently, reducing the need for manual adjustments and minimizing
errors.
Figure 7: Modular layout configuration for programmatic pick-up routine creation
By leveraging this grid and matrix system, the overall flexibility and efficiency of the
component handling process are greatly improved. Users can easily reconfigure the setup
for different tasks by simply changing the layout of the top-plate and updating the matrix
representation, making it a versatile solution for various applications.
2.3
UR5e and Robotiq Hand-E
For manipulation, a UR5e robotic arm was used. The UR5e robotic arm, manufactured
by Universal Robots, is a versatile and robust solution for precise automation tasks in
industrial scenarios. It is designed for flexibility and ease of integration and is renowned
for its collaborative capabilities, making it suitable for environments where it can work
alongside human operators without the need for safety guarding. The UR5e has a payload
capacity of up to 5 kilograms and a reach radius of 850 millimeters. It counts with six
degrees of freedom, which enables the arm to have sufficient dexterity, enabling it to
maneuver in complex workspaces and access components from various angles.
It has
a repeatability of 0.1 mm, which is ideal for the accuracy requirements of placing a
component in front of the digital microscope.
At the end of the arm, the UR5e is able to mount a wide range of tools. This modularity
ensures adaptability across different tasks, from simple pick-and-place operations to more
intricate assembly processes. In the case of this project, a Robotiq Hand-E gripper was
used, for its modularity and adaptive gripping mechanism. The Hand-E Gripper includes
built-in sensors that provide real-time feedback on grip force and part presence, which
allows for a firm but delicate grip on components, without damaging or dropping them.
However, it was noted that the minimum force of the gripper was still too strong, and a
lower force would be required for the components used. However, components were not
greatly deformed and this was not a substantial problem.
Page 9 of 55
==PAGE:16==
MSc Thesis
Thanks to the modularity of the UR systems, both the gripper and the arm were able to be
controlled from the same UR ethernet connection. This was done using a software SDK,
namely UR-RTDE which created an interface for controlling and receiving data from the
UR robot using the Real-Time Data Exchange (RTDE). This package was developed for
use with C++ language, however, it also provided respective Python bindings.
Page 10 of 55
==PAGE:17==
MSc Thesis
3
Tray Localization
To obtain the position and orientation of the tray within the predefined drop-off area
of the module’s top plate, a RealSense was mounted on the robotic arm’s wrist, and
Apriltags were printed on the tray’s sheet.
This can be seen in Figure 8.
This was
done to ensure the accurate placing of the components in the cells, without requiring
a fixed tray placement by the operators or mobile robot. A RealSense ROS2 package
was used to communicate the image data from the camera and the intrinsic parameters.
These topics (/image_data and /camera_info) are published continuously and received
and processed by the Apriltag node, which will be explained further in the Software
Architecture chapter. The package provided accurate intrinsic parameters for the specific
camera model used. Thus calibrating the camera through the use of i.e. checkerboard
patterns or other methods, to find the camera matrix was not necessary. However, when
mounting the camera on the robotic arm, a new calibration procedure was necessary in
order to find the frame transform between arm and camera.
Figure 8: 3D-printed camera mount (left) and empty tray with Apriltags (right)
3.1
Camera Calibration
When finding the Apriltag position and orientation, they are first obtained with respect
to the camera frame. However, the system requires this pose to be given with respect
to the world frame. Several frame transforms are required, but the transform between
the camera and the tool center point (TCP) was the most complicated to derive. The
most common approach is to obtain a data sheet from the manufacturer that contains
specific measurements to obtain the position of the camera sensor inside the camera. By
calculating the position and orientation of the camera sensor with respect to the TCP pose
Page 11 of 55
==PAGE:18==
MSc Thesis
(taking into consideration the camera fixture), a transform frame can be derived between
these two components. However, the physical setup introduces slight deviations from the
CAD models and data sheets, which can cause erroneous assumptions when calculating
the frame transform. Therefore, a more robust approach was taken, only considering the
physical components after mounting.
The computation to derive the pose of the tag w.r.t. world (represented as origin 0) is as
follows:
T tag
0
= T tcp
0
· T cam
tcp · T tag
cam
(1)
The TCP frame w.r.t. world, can be obtained from the UR communication, by finding
the position and orientation of such. The tag frame w.r.t. camera, is what we obtain
when scanning for Apriltags. By fixing a tag in a known position and orientation in the
world, we can compute its transform w.r.t. the world frame, which allows us to compute
the unknown camera frame w.r.t. the TCP, applying simple linear algebra.
T cam
tcp
=
 T tcp
0
−1 · T tag
0
·
 T tag
cam
−1
(2)
This was repeated a total of 10 times, moving the TCP to different poses, and an average
frame was found, which led to more accurate results than the previous measurements.
3.2
Localization through Apriltags
Apriltags [1] are the ideal fiducial marker to use in this scenario, for being able to be
localized in the camera frame (granted that the intrinsic parameters are known). Another
important factor was to uniquely identify each tray, which could be achieved by using the
squares pattern inside the tags. The Apriltags used were from the 36h11 family and 16 x
16 mm in size. A 36h11 tag contains 10 x 10 pixels, including an outer border of all white
pixels and an inner border of all black pixels, which can hold up to 587 unique ID codes.
3.2.1
Corner Detection and PnP Algorithm
Detecting Apriltags relies mainly on computer vision corner detection and the Perspective-
n-Point algorithm. The objective is to find the pose of the camera w.r.t. the tag’s frame
using the corners and pattern of the tag. This relation between camera and tag pose
can later be inverted to find the tag’s pose w.r.t. the camera frame and consequently
w.r.t. the world, when the camera pose w.r.t the world is known. Using corner detection,
the four corners of the Apriltag can be found in the image matrix, and with the help of
the square pattern inside, these four points can each be identified to represent a specific
corner of the tag. Given that the size of the tag’s edges is known, these four points can
be represented in 3D space, w.r.t. the tag’s frame, for a given tag size s as:
Page 12 of 55
==PAGE:19==
MSc Thesis
P1 =

−s
2, −s
2, 0

(bottom-left corner)
P2 =
s
2, −s
2, 0

(bottom-right corner)
P3 =
s
2, s
2, 0

(top-right corner)
P4 =

−s
2, s
2, 0

(top-left corner)
Using the camera’s intrinsic parameters, the various versions of the PnP algorithm use
different techniques to derive the rotation matrix and the translation vector of the tag. The
specific procedure of the algorithm will not be discussed, but rather the implications that
inaccurate corner detection has in tag localization. For each 3D point Pi = [Xi, Yi, Zi]T
and its corresponding 2D point ui = [ui, vi]T.
si


ui
vi
1

= K[R|t]


Xi
Yi
Zi
1


Where K is the camera matrix, si is the scale factor (accounting for the depth of the
projection), and R and t are the rotation matrix and translation vector. This can be
further expanded as:
si


ui
vi
1

=


fx
0
cx
0
fy
cy
0
0
1




r11
r12
r13
tx
r21
r22
r23
ty
r31
r32
r33
tz




Xi
Yi
Zi
1


Two main issues affect and unstabilize this process: camera vibrations, and poor image
quality (blurred edges). When the image is blurry, the corner detection can be unstable,
since the corner is dispersed and rather a gradient is formed. Therefore, finding the exact
edge line can be complicated, leading to different frames computing different corners for
the same tag image. Furthermore, small camera vibrations can deviate the pixels selected
as the corners from frame to frame. These issues are magnified when the tag size is small.
Figure 9 shows a close-up of the tag in the image plane, which exemplifies the difficulty
with which corner detection can identify tag corners.
Page 13 of 55
==PAGE:20==
MSc Thesis
Figure 9: 16 x 16 mm tag projected on the 1920 x 1080 px image plane, at 0.5 m distance.
If we take the right-most image and take a closer look at the corner in Figure 10, it
becomes clear how different pixels might be selected across frames.
Figure 10: Tag corner projected in image plane close-up
These deviations have a larger impact on the orientation component of the localization,
more than the position. To explain this, an example of tag detection will be used, using
a hypothetical camera with no distortion and the following camera matrix, which has a
similar focal length to that of a RealSense:
Kexample =


1300
0
860
0
1300
540
0
0
1


In this example, the 16 x 16 mm tag will be placed at a distance of approximately 0.5
m, aligned with the z-axis of the camera, and parallel to the image plane. The tag’s
projection will be in the center of the 1920 x 1080 px image plane and will be 30 x 30
pixels in size. When the tag plane is parallel to the image plane, the four corners should
create a perfect equilateral square, since there is no distortion in this hypothetical camera.
To reproduce an incorrect tag localization, we will simulate an inaccurate corner detection
Page 14 of 55
==PAGE:21==
MSc Thesis
due to slightly blurry tag corners, which will lead to the 4 corners of the tag being deviated
by 1 pixel in any direction. Figure 11 depicts how this deviation would look in the image
plane.
Figure 11: Side by side of a correctly localized tag, and a deviated tag due to inaccurate
corner detection
We now calculate the position and orientation of the tag in these two scenarios, using
the PnP algorithm from the open-cv Python library. We obtain the total error between
the translation vectors t and rotation vectors r. As shown, the error between correctly
detected tag corners and a deviation of 1 pixel in these corners, affects the rotation
significantly more than the translation vector.
errorpos = ||tB −tA||2 = 0.0483
erroror = ||rB −rA||2 = 0.3279
3.2.2
Single-tag Tray System
Initially, only one tag was used.
However, the localization of this tag was poor and
unstable, for the reasons stated above.
This can be seen in Figure 12, by measuring
approximately 3 seconds, of 24 FPS image data. The average position (translation vec-
tor) and orientation (rotation vector) were obtained from all these measurements, and
an absolute deviation from this average is plotted for each unique frame’s localization
computation. It can be seen that the orientation of the tag is significantly more unstable
than that of the position.
Page 15 of 55
==PAGE:22==
MSc Thesis
Figure 12: Pose stability without auxiliary triangulation
At a distance of 0.5 m, 16 x 16 mm tags were represented by 900 pixels in the image
plane (30 x 30 px approximately). Using larger tags, was not a possibility, since the tag
should fit in one cell. Expanding the tag over multiple cells would affect the detection
process due to the acrylic dividers of the cell distorting the tag’s pattern projection in the
image. Furthermore, the camera could not be placed at a shorter distance from the tray.
The camera image needs to cover the whole area where the tray drop-off will take place.
Shortening the height of the camera would inevitably crop the image to cover a smaller
area could lead to issues where the tray tags are outside of the image. To solve these
issues, with the constraint of not changing the trays that the operators used regularly,
and not introducing disruptive changes in the layout, a new procedure was designed.
3.2.3
Multi-tag Tray System
Further tags were printed on the tray to obtain orientation information by triangulating
positions, to mitigate these obstacles. The primary tag, located in the top left of the
Page 16 of 55
==PAGE:23==
MSc Thesis
printed sheet, contains a value from 3 to 586. This tag is used as the origin of the tray
and the ID allows for the system to read the information from the database for this specific
tray. There are an additional 3 tags, numbered from 0 to 2. Tag 0 is placed on the top
right, 1 on the bottom left, and 2 on the bottom right. All trays have these additional 3
tags, thus IDs 0 - 2, are not represented in the database.
Although only 2 more tags would have been sufficient to triangulate the orientation of
the tag w.r.t. the camera’s frame, an additional one was added, in case any one of the 3
auxiliary tags was occluded by reflections or the dividers. The direction vector between
the position of the primary tag and the position of the auxiliary tag with ID 0, defines
the positive x-axis direction. If tag 0 is occluded, it will take the direction vector between
tags 1 and 2. The y-axis is computed using the inverse of the direction vector between the
primary tag and tag 1. Similarly, if tag 1 is occluded, the direction vector will be taken
by the inverse direction vector between tag 0 and tag 2. When all three auxiliary tags
are visible, the system will calculate the average of all the possible orientations, in order
to get a more stable localization. In the event that 2 or more auxiliary localization tags
are occluded, the system will default to obtaining the position and orientation from the
primary tag alone, as in the initial scenario. Figure 13 depicts the computation of these
axes, using a primary tag with ID 100 and the three auxiliary tags, IDs 0 to 2. In this
figure, the contents of the tray cells (expected cavity numbers) are also projected onto
the image. This is done for operators to identify visually the internal information of this
tray in the database.
Figure 13: Tray localization and contents
In this way, the orientation of the primary tag is calculated using the position of the tags,
avoiding calculating orientation based on one tag alone. Furthermore, the z component
of the tag position w.r.t. the world frame was fixed to stabilize the localization. The
Page 17 of 55
==PAGE:24==
MSc Thesis
reasoning behind this assumption is that the tray will always be placed on top of the
top-plate surface, which has a fixed height, and is parallel to the world ground plane.
This will also have a significant improvement in position localization. Since the camera
is practically parallel to the surface, the depth measurement from the camera aligns with
the world height. Depth is the most susceptible measurement when computing the tag’s
position w.r.t. the camera. Therefore, the z component of the world position calculated
for the tag accounts for the majority of instability, and thus fixing z, reduces the stability
issues significantly more than the other two components, x and y. This is shown in Figure
14.
Figure 14: Pose stability with auxiliary triangulation and height assumption
The following Figure 15 depicts the improvement in stability for both the position and
orientation. The measurements were taken simultaneously, by recording the predicted
position and orientation of the primary tag with the default procedure, and the improved
procedure through auxiliary tags and triangulation. This is also represented numerically
in Table 1, with the average, minimum, and maximum absolute error, where position
Page 18 of 55
==PAGE:25==
MSc Thesis
stability (measured in absolute deviation from the mean of all translation vector readings
from each frame) is improved by a factor of around 5. Orientation stability is improved
by a factor of 103.
Figure 15: Pose stability comparison
Localization
Mean AD
Max AD
Min AD
Position
9.62 · 10−4
3.37 · 10−3
2.85 · 10−5
Position w/ aux
2.04 · 10−4
7.19 · 10−4
1.17 · 10−5
Orientation
5.21 · 10−2
1.27 · 10−1
1.5 · 10−2
Orientation w/ aux
5.19 · 10−5
2.80 · 10−4
5.24 · 10−7
Table 1: Mean, Max and Min Absolute Deviation (AD) for the original pose and corrected
pose
Page 19 of 55
==PAGE:26==
MSc Thesis
4
Cavity Number Recognition
An instrumental part of the system for autonomous component sorting is reading the
cavity number molded on the component. This is the core for identifying components and
sorting them in their corresponding cell. To understand the complexity of this seemingly
straightforward task, we will provide a detailed background on the challenges it presents.
4.1
Optical Character Recognition (OCR)
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) is a technology that converts images containing
text into machine-encoded text, essentially "reading" text on an image. This technology
dates back to the first half of the 20th century, when it was used mostly for helping
visually impaired people and later introduced into the automation industry.
Nowadays, OCR is widely used to convert printed paper data records into digital formats.
This includes passport documents, invoices, bank statements, receipts, business cards,
mail, and other suitable documentation.
By digitizing printed texts, OCR allows for
electronic editing, searching, compact storage, online display, and use in machine processes
such as cognitive computing, machine translation, text-to-speech, and data mining. OCR
is a significant field of research in pattern recognition, artificial intelligence, and computer
vision. However, OCR models are heavily constrained by several limitations:
• High Contrast Between Text and Background. Text should be easily distin-
guishable from the background without any blending, allowing the system to isolate
and recognize characters without interference from background patterns or colors.
There should also be a significant difference in color or brightness between the text
and its background, which enhances OCR performance by making the text stand
out more clearly for accurate extraction. Typically, the text is dark and on clear
backgrounds.
• Non-Distorted Text. Text lines should be horizontally aligned and not tilted,
skewed, or distorted. Depending on the model, it expects text to be written from
left to right or vice-versa. It should have appropriate spacing between characters
and lines to prevent characters from merging or overlapping, which can lead to
misinterpretation and errors.
• Sharp Image and Minimal Noise. Text must be clear and sharp rather than
blurred. The image should be free from noise, such as speckles, compression arti-
facts, extraneous marks, shapes, or graphics that can be mistaken for text characters.
• Legible and Standard Fonts. Using legible and commonly recognized fonts im-
proves OCR accuracy, as unconventional or overly stylized fonts can be difficult for
OCR models to interpret correctly.
When analyzing the cavity numbers molded on the plastic components, we can see that
the text does not satisfy the requirements for OCR to work in this case. Since the text
Page 20 of 55
==PAGE:27==
MSc Thesis
is molded from the same material, it has the same color as the background. It is only
slightly distinguished from the background due to the relief from the molding process,
creating areas where the material is in shadow or direct light. Furthermore, the digital
microscope used to take magnified images of these numbers has a small depth of field.
When the number is placed slightly outside the focus point, the text projection in the
image becomes blurry and out of focus. Depending on the component, some numbers are
molded following the shape of the component, making them curved or skewed. Figure 16
shows an example of a cavity number image used in this project, and how different it is
from an input image that OCR models would typically expect and excel at decoding.
Figure 16: Images taken with the digital microscope of a cavity number compared to a
scanned image of a document containing the same number.
Using traditional OCR methods to read the text from the images would lead to erroneous
predictions due to the unfavorable conditions in which the text is represented in the image.
Therefore, more complex techniques need to be studied.
4.2
Scene Text Detection (STD)
With the fast development and advancement of deep learning, computer vision has un-
dergone significant transformation. As a crucial research area within computer vision,
scene text detection and recognition have been impacted by this revolution, consequently
entering the era of deep learning.
Scene Text Detection (STD), is the task of detecting text in images.
Similar to ob-
ject detection, these methods identify features in images and create a bounded region
of interest in text-containing images. However, text can vary in sizes, fonts, colors, and
shapes significantly more than other objects, that traditional object detection models
deal with. Furthermore, "white space" in text regions, such as spaces or linebreaks, are
also considered text elements, therefore segmentation of text objects needs to account
Page 21 of 55
==PAGE:28==
MSc Thesis
for "non-character" elements and features. Given these constraints, most state-of-the-art
models [2] [3] create multi-point bounding polygons that define explicit areas of text-
related features in an image. Figure 17 depicts these bounded regions created by the
model TextFuseNet [3].
Figure 17: Example results of TextFuseNet on different datasets.
Sample images are
selected from ICDAR 2013 [4], ICDAR 2015 [5], Total-Text [6] and CWT-1500 [7].
In our specific scenario, the images of the cavity numbers were taken by picking up
components from fixtures and positioning and orientating them in front of the camera
such that the cavity number remained in focus when the image was taken. This allowed
us to preprocess the image fed into the model, and crop out all irrelevant information
that was not text related. Furthermore, the distortion by curvature or other shapes that
these cavity numbers had, was not deemed as sufficient for requiring an undistorting
preprocessing to take place. Therefore, a bounding box was defined per component type,
with which all images taken of components belonging to that type would be cropped by.
However, at such a small magnitude, slight deviations of the arm or component would
result in large displacements of the text in the image, therefore some extra "padding" was
left when cropping the images for these slight deviations. This simplified the process, since
instead of having to run another model to first segment the text regions, to then recognize
the text, we could use more robust STR models that would account for distortions and
extra information when decoding text from images.
4.3
Scene Text Recognition (STR)
Scene Text Recognition (STR) utilizes these advancements in technology, to read text
in segmented areas of images from natural scenes (which have been previously detected
by Scene Text Detection models) and recognize the text within those regions. This task
enables the reading of road signs, paper bills, product labels, logos, engraved and molded
labels, and more. STR has practical applications in self-driving cars, augmented reality,
Page 22 of 55
==PAGE:29==
MSc Thesis
robotics, and automated production lines. Unlike Optical Character Recognition (OCR)
in documents, where text attributes are more uniform, STR must handle varying font
styles, orientations, text shapes, illumination, levels of occlusion, and inconsistent sensor
conditions. Additionally, images captured in natural environments can be noisy, blurry,
or distorted, making STR an important yet very challenging problem.
While STR is mainly a vision field, the complex task of decoding irregular and distorted
text from images, solely based on visual features, is sometimes not enough. This has
led many state-of-the-art models to incorporate language semantics to make accurate
inferences. As documented in the survey by [8], these models are often categorized based
on their use of language semantics in STR.
• Context/Language-free STR. These methods rely solely on image features, and
predict characters by matching these image features directly. The separate charac-
ters that are predicted, are conditionally independent from each other. Methods in
this category often use Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) models [9] to
map image features directly to sequences of characters. Features, typically extracted
from a CNN, are fed in RNNs which capture temporal dependencies (sequences of
characters) and finally are outputted as probabilities of all possible characters for
each time-step (or previous character). Some utilize self-attention to pool features
from the entire image to predict each character position [10]. This allows the model
to determine which parts of the image (key positions) are most relevant to each
character position (query), creating contextualized character features. On the other
hand, other methods approach the task as a multi-instance classification [11], where
the features are used to identify separate instances of characters, which are then
used to classify each segment as a character. Since context-free methods depend
only on image features for prediction, they are more vulnerable to text distortion
or occluded characters. This drove the community to research a new domain of
models, which utilize language context to enhance predictions.
• Context/Language-aware STR. Context-aware STR methods incorporate lan-
guage semantics learned from data, making the recognition process more robust and
accurate. The simplest methods that incorporate language semantics, use dictio-
naries or "lexicons" [12] to find similarities between predictions and the available
word base, using techniques such as the Levenshtein distance (or edit distance),
to find the closest match. More complex methods range from using RNNs [13] or
Transformers [14] (which process sequences in parallel, unlike RNNs) with attention
mechanisms to simultaneously learn internal Language Models (LMs) that aid in
creating cohesive text predictions. These however are limited by monotonic AR
decoding (one token at a time, normally left to right), which encounters: sequen-
tial dependency, the possible propagation of errors, and the fixed order/direction
dependency. To overcome these limitations other methods use external LMs with
bidirectional decoding, for prediction refinement [15]. The issue with external LMs
is that they are only used for refinement, with no conditional dependency between
Page 23 of 55
==PAGE:30==
MSc Thesis
the image features and the predicted sequence of characters, which can lead to er-
roneous rectification while introducing overhead in computation time. The latest
advancements in the field, revisit the idea of having internal LMs, but combat the
limitation of monotonic AR decoding, by training an internal LM through Masked
Language Modeling (MLM) [16] or Permutation Language Modeling (PLM) [17].
Out of the models that exist and pertain to these two main categories, a clear shift towards
incorporating language semantics to help in predictions can be seen in most state-of-the-
art models. Therefore, for this project, three language-aware models were researched,
implemented, and tested to further understand their capabilities in our specific scenario.
These models are: ABInet [15], PARSeq [17], and TRBA [18] The following sections will
cover their internal architecture and characteristic features that differentiate them from
the others.
4.3.1
ABINet
ABInet (Autonomous Bidirectional Iterative Network) was developed to tackle the chal-
lenge of integrating linguistic rules into end-to-end deep networks. It does so by tack-
ling three main limitations in traditional language models: implicit language modeling,
unidirectional feature representation, and noise-prone input. ABInet introduces an Au-
tonomous, Bidirectional, and Iterative approach for STR. The model is divided into two
main sections, the vision model and the external language model. Figure 18 shows a
schematic overview of the model.
Figure 18: Schematic overview of ABInet
The vision model extracts and processes visual features from text images to recognize
characters. It does so by using a Residual Network (ResNet) + Transformer backbone and
a Position Attention Module. The ResNet network captures deep features of the input
images by utilizing residual connections that mitigate the vanishing gradient problem,
Page 24 of 55
==PAGE:31==
MSc Thesis
enabling the network to train deeper layers more effectively. The Transformer units are
used for sequence modeling to extract the sequence of characters. The module of position
attention transcribes visual features into character probabilities in parallel.
The language model (LM) is used as an independent spelling correction model. As can be
seen in Figure 18 is completely autonomous from the vision model. This means that it can
be trained independently of the vision model, or even replaced fully. It uses a Bidirectional
Cloze Network (BCN) to capture the full context of a text sequence by considering both
past and future information for each character while using cloze-like attention masks so
that characters do not regard their own position but others relative to it. It can iterate
through this process to correct the vision prediction iteratively.
4.3.2
PARSeq
PARSeq (Permuted Autoregressive Sequence Model) employs a Transformer-based archi-
tecture designed for efficient and flexible sequence modeling for STR. It attempts to tackle
the issues that can arise from having an external LM, specifically its conditional indepen-
dence from the input image, which makes it error-prone. Therefore, it explores earlier
methods of having internal LMs. It combines the strengths of Vision Transformers (ViTs)
for feature extraction and a Visio-Lingual decoder mechanism to handle text sequence
prediction. Figure 19 shows a schematic overview of the model.
Figure 19: Schematic overview of PARSeq
PARSeq follows a classic encoder-decoder framework, which is commonly used in sequence
modeling tasks. The Vision Transformer (ViT) encoder, is responsible for extracting fea-
tures from the images, by dividing them into smaller patches, each of which is trans-
formed into a token. These tokens are processed through multiple layers of self-attention
mechanisms, to understand the spatial relationships and features within the image. The
Visio-Lingual decoder converts the image tokens into a sequence of characters. It does
so by using context and position tokens. During training, PARSeq uses various permuta-
tions in the input sequence, effectively learning multiple AR models simultaneously, with
Page 25 of 55
==PAGE:32==
MSc Thesis
shared weights and architecture. This allows it to overcome the limitations of monotonic
AR decoding.
4.3.3
TRBA
TRBA (TPS-ResNet-BiLSTM-Attn) uses a sequence of architectures, namely Thin-Plate
Spine, Residual Network, Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory, and Attention Mecha-
nisms to carry out the task of STR. Figure 20 shows a schematic overview of the model.
Figure 20: Schematic overview of TRBA
Using TPS, the input image is mapped to a rectified image with the text aligned hori-
zontally, reducing the complexity of the variations in the text’s geometry. ResNet is then
used to extract robust visual features from the rectified input image, using residual con-
nections that help mitigate the vanishing gradient problem. To capture the contextual
information within the sequence of features extracted, TRBA uses BiLSTM, which is able
to process the sequence of features in both forward and backward directions. Finally, an
attention mechanism is used to determine which parts of the BiLSTM output are most
relevant, for each character in the sequence.
4.4
Sequence Matching
Several methods will be discussed in the implementation sections of the cavity number
recognition sections that will follow.
A brief introduction to some of the algorithms
used in sequence matching is discussed in this section. Sequence matching, also known as
string matching or sequence alignment, is a fundamental concept in computer science that
involves identifying similarities between sequences of characters or elements. Sequence
matching is rooted in combinatorial algorithms and dynamic programming techniques,
which are designed to compare sequences and identify common subsequences, patterns,
or motifs. At its core, sequence matching aims to solve problems such as finding exact
or approximate occurrences of a pattern within a sequence, and detecting regularities
in sequential data. In regards to this project and STR prediction refinement, sequence
matching is used to compare similar "strings" or sequences of characters to a given lexicon.
Two main concepts were studied.
Page 26 of 55
==PAGE:33==
MSc Thesis
4.4.1
Ratcliff-Obershelp Algorithm
Also known as Gestalt pattern matching [19], this algorithm is based on the idea of finding
the longest contiguous matching subsequence between two strings and recursively applying
the same method to the remaining non-matching segments. It emphasizes the importance
of longer matching substrings with importance in global alignment. It identifies the longest
common substring, removes it, and then recursively compares the remaining segments of
the strings. This process continues until no more common substrings are found. It is
often used in spell checkers, DNA sequence analysis, and natural language processing.
The similarity of two strings S1 and S2 is defined by the following formula, where Km is
the number of matching characters.
Dro =
2 · Km
|S1| + |S2|
where
0 ≤Dro ≤1
For the following example strings "WIKIMEDIA" and "WIKIMANIA", seen in Figure
21 the similarity ratio is calculated as such:
Figure 21: Gesalt Pattern Matching for 2 similar strings
2Km
|S1| + |S2| = 2 · (| "WIKIM" | + | "IA" |)
|S1| + |S2|
= 2 · (5 + 2)
9 + 9
= 14
18 = 0.7
(3)
4.4.2
Smith-Waterman Algorithm
The Smith-Waterman algorithm [20] is a dynamic programming method designed for lo-
cal sequence alignment, primarily used in bioinformatics to identify regions of similarity
between biological sequences such as DNA, RNA, or proteins. Unlike global alignment
algorithms that attempt to align entire sequences, the Smith-Waterman algorithm fo-
cuses on finding the optimal alignment within subsections of the sequences, allowing for
mismatches, insertions, and deletions. The algorithm constructs a scoring matrix to eval-
uate alignment possibilities and uses a traceback procedure to determine the best local
alignment, maximizing the alignment score.
The algorithm works as follows. For two sequences A = a1, a2, ..., an and B = b1, b2, ..., bm,
with length n and m respectively,
Page 27 of 55
==PAGE:34==
MSc Thesis
1. Determine the substitution matrix and the gap penalties. The similarity score s(a, b)
of the elements that constituted the two sequences. The penalty of a gap Wk that
has length k
2. Construct a scoring matrix H and initialize its first row and first column. The size
of the scoring matrix is (n + 1) · (m + 1).
Hk0 = H0l = 0
for
0 ≤k ≤n
and
0 ≤l ≤m
3. Fill the scoring matrix with the following equation
Hij = max







Hi−1,j−1 + s (ai, bj) ,
maxk≥1 {Hi−k,j −Wk} ,
maxl≥1 {Hi,j−l −Wl} ,
0
(1 ≤i ≤n, 1 ≤j ≤m)
where Hi−1,j−1 + s (ai, bj) is the score of aligning ai and bj, Hi−k,j −Wk is the score
if ai is at the end of a gap of length k, Hi,j−l −Wl is the score if bj is at the end of
a gap of length l, 0 means there is no similarity up to ai and bj.
4. Starting at the highest score in the scoring matrix and ending at a matrix cell that
has a score of 0, traceback based on the source of each score recursively.
For two example sequences A = "TGTTACGG" and B = "GGTTGACTA", the scoring
matrix and traceback procedure is shown in Figure 22.
Figure 22: Smith-Waterman Algorithm for two example string sequences
Page 28 of 55
==PAGE:35==
MSc Thesis
In this case, the similarity score would be 13. We can normalize this similarity score to
create a ratio between 0 and 1 by dividing by the maximum possible match score.
4.5
Implementation for Cavity Number Prediction
Creating a robust method of decoding the characters molded onto the component’s sur-
face, is required to go forward from traditional OCR into state-of-the-art STR methods,
previously described in earlier sections.
As mentioned, STD was not required in this
specific scenario, since the images could be cropped generously to contain as little non-
text related image features. The images were taken using a high-magnification digital
microscope, which rendered a clear image of the cavity numbers. The digital microscope
incorporated an LED ring light around the sensor which cast light on the cavity number,
allowing for further distinction of the text features due to light and shadow regions.
4.5.1
Original Uncropped Images
A compilation of some of the images taken from the digital microscope can be seen in
Figure 23 for the three different components that were tested. For the following sections,
the navy blue component will be named Component A, the orange component will be
named Component B and finally, the light blue component will be called Component C.
The sample size of physical components that were available to test was not large. There-
fore, some components were pictured at different times with different lighting settings, to
sum up the total of images to 127, 22 for Component A, 53 for Component B, and 52 for
Component C.
Figure 23: Subset of images from each component (original/uncropped)
The three main models described earlier, ABInet, PARSeq, and TRBA were tested ini-
tially without cropping the images, to understand how external visual features could affect
the predictions. All predictions have a confidence score per character predicted plus an
end-of-sequence (EOS) confidence score. Note that for that this initial test, if predictions
contained any non-alphanumerical characters, the prediction as a whole was invalidated.
As shown in Figure 24, and Table 2, the correct predictions were very low.
Page 29 of 55
==PAGE:36==
MSc Thesis
Figure 24: Prediction results per model for all components (original/uncropped)
Model
Component A
Component B
Component C
Total
ABInet
18 (81.82%)
21 (39.62%)
1 (1.92%)
40 (31.50%)
PARSeq
18 (81.82%)
46 (86.79%)
5 (9.62%)
69 (54.33%)
TRBA
16 (72.73%)
0 (0.00%)
3 (5.77%)
19 (14.96%)
Table 2: Number of Correct Predictions for Each Model by Component
By taking a closer look at some of the predictions, in Figure 25, we can see that many were
invalidated for containing non-alphanumerical characters, while others "hallucinated"
text, which seems from the training data, like "STARBUCKS" or "MARKET". This
was especially noticeable in TRBA. Since all models were trained on the same datasets
(mainly [4] [5] [7] [6], among other datasets, both synthetic and real), the issue can be
explained from the internal architecture of TRBA. PARSeq uses Permutation Language
Modeling (PLM) and dynamic attention masks, allowing it to generalize better across
different types of input sequences. ABINet separates vision and language models, using
the LM only for post-refinement. However, in TRBA, the bidirectional nature of BiLSTM
can create strong dependencies on context, leading the model to predict entire words if
part of the input resembles a known pattern. This can be particularly problematic if the
input is ambiguous or noisy which was the case in this scenario, given that the text was
not cropped, and images contained substantial background noise. However, overall the
images that contained fewer background features and the text was more clearly separated
from the rest of the features, saw better results from the models, such as Component A.
Page 30 of 55
==PAGE:37==
MSc Thesis
Figure 25: Subset of model predictions (original/uncropped)
This poor performance was expected as these three STR models are designed to recognize
and decode text from images containing only text that have been previously segmented
by STD methods. Therefore, the next tests were done with pre-cropped images.
4.5.2
Cropped Images and Prediction Refinement
The following test was done with pre-processed images, which were cropped to contain as
little non-text information as possible. It is important to note that the cropping area for
Component A was quite generous, given that some components had been damaged and
therefore experienced deviations when grabbed by the robotic gripper. In this specific
scenario, since this component presents a very clear distinction between background and
text, it did not pose many difficulties. However, this will be discussed further in later
sections.
Furthermore, it was observed that many of the predictions from the models were inval-
idated for containing non-alphanumerical characters.
This was due to the number of
similar features that were extracted from the borders of the cavity numbers or other arti-
facts and scratches on the surface of the component, which led to erroneous predictions.
A post-process mechanism was devised to refine the predictions from the models, and
Page 31 of 55
==PAGE:38==
MSc Thesis
instead of invalidating predictions that contained non-alphanumerical characters, these
characters would instead be selectively removed. The corresponding confidence scores for
those specific characters were also removed accordingly. For example, if the prediction
was "58.07/", with confidences [0.99, 0.98, 0.76, 0.89, 0.76, 0.79, 0.85] (last confidence
for EOS), the characters "." and "/" will be filtered alongside their confidence values,
obtaining the prediction "5807" with confidences [0.99, 0.98, 0.89, 0.76, 0.85]. With these
new measures in place and using cropped images, the results improved considerably, as
can be seen in Figure 26 and Table 3.
Figure 26: Prediction results per model for all components (cropped images + prediction
refinement)
Model
Component A
Component B
Component C
Total
ABInet
20 (90.91%)
52 (98.11%)
37 (71.15%)
109 (85.83%)
PARSeq
18 (81.82%)
53 (100.00%)
39 (75.00%)
110 (86.61%)
TRBA
20 (90.91%)
52 (98.11%)
39 (75.00%)
111 (87.40%)
Table 3: Correct Predictions for Each Model by Component (cropped images + prediction
refinement)
By inspecting some of the results, we can see that the performance went up overall. It can
also be noted that all three models perform very similarly and have almost identical results
on each component. The main factor that this performance increase can be attributed to,
is image cropping. However, the refinement process proved successful as well, since many
of the false character predictions from noise in the images, were filtered. As expected,
Component C still witnesses less accuracy with the models, given that the text is slightly
Page 32 of 55
==PAGE:39==
MSc Thesis
distorted, and the physical cavity number bounding box creates reflections in the edges
that are sometimes mistaken for characters. Figure 27 contains a subset of these new
results, on cropped images and with prediction refinement.
Furthermore, by utilizing
the confidence scores to further analyze the models’ predictions, it can be seen that the
characters that are erroneously predicted, tend to have low confidence scores. However,
this is not always the case.
Figure 27: Subset of model predictions (cropped images + prediction refinement)
4.6
Ensemble Method Incorporating Lexicon Similarity
One key information that until now has been unused, is the range of possible numbers. As
mentioned in the introduction to this project, when components arrive at the metrology
lab for cavity inspection, they come in plastic bags that contain information about the
cavity numbers of the components inside. This information, among other things, is a
list of all the numbers that are inside. Similar to the simplest methods of incorporating
dictionaries for multi-classification scene text recognition [12], mentioned in the theoret-
Page 33 of 55
==PAGE:40==
MSc Thesis
ical section of this chapter, we can adapt our method to incorporate one last layer of
classification. To achieve this, the similarity between the final prediction of the model is
measured between all possible numbers, in what we will refer to as our lexicon. Initially,
the Gestalt or Ratcliff-Obershelp Algorithm was used to calculate the sequence similarity
between a predicted cavity number and the lexicon possibilities. This was in an attempt
to find similarity scores between the predicted numbers and possible numbers. Let us
assume for this example that our lexicon is the following: ["5843", "5844", "5845"] and
the prediction from a model is "5B45". By calculating the similarity score of each lexicon
possibility, and obtaining the highest, we can determine the most similar option. The
similarity score from the Ratcliff-Obershelp algorithm DroLn is calculated between each
lexicon possibility, Ln = ["5843", "5844", "5845"], and input sequence S = "5B45".
DroL1 =
2 · Km
|L1| + |S| =
2 · (|”5”| + |”4”|)
|”5843”| + |”5B45”| = 2 · (1 + 1)
4 + 4
= 0.5
DroL2 =
2 · Km
|L2| + |S| =
2 · (|”5”| + |”4”|)
|”5844”| + |”5B45”| = 2 · (1 + 1)
4 + 4
= 0.5
DroL3 =
2 · Km
|L3| + |S| =
2 · |”5”| + |”45”|
|”5845”| + |”5B45”| = 2 · (1 + 2)
4 + 4
= 0.75
However, this alone was not an accurate computation for the following flaw. To explain
this, we will use as example the first results image from Component C, in Figure 27 (last
row, first sample), with the number "5841". We will use the prediction from PARSeq,
"158411". As previously mentioned, the edges of the physical bounding box create re-
flections, which the model has understood as "1" characters on either side of the cavity
number. We will assume that our lexicon is only composed of "5841" and "5811". By
using the Ratcliff-Obershelp algorithm, we obtain that the similarity scores of the input
sequence are the same for both lexicon possibilities. The similarity score DLn is calcu-
lated between each lexicon possibility, Ln = ["5841", "5811"], and input sequence S =
["185411"].
DroL1 =
2 · Km
|L1| + |S| = 2 · |”5841”|
|L1| + |S| = 2 · (4)
4 + 6 = 0.8
DroL2 =
2 · Km
|L2| + |S| = 2 · |”58”| + |”11”|
|L2| + |S|
= 2 · (2 + 2)
4 + 6
= 0.8
This is because the Ratcliff-Obershelp algorithm does not account for local alignment
of sequences, and rather has a global overview of which snippets of sequences match
throughout the whole sequence. Therefore, an additional score was factored in for local
Page 34 of 55
==PAGE:41==
MSc Thesis
alignment, using the Smith-Waterman algorithm. The similary score DswLn is calculated
between each lexicon possibility, Ln = ["5841", "5811"], and input sequence S = "185411".
We use a Python package called minineedle, to compute the scores using this algorithm
and then normalize by the maximum possible score to obtain a ratio between 0 and 1. We
use a match score of 3, a mismatch score of -3, and a gap penalty of -2. We obtain that
DswL1 = 1.0 and DswL2 = 0.83. This is because in the predicted sequence "185411", we
can see that the first lexicon possibility L1 is embedded inside, which renders a "complete"
match using this algorithm for local alignment. We then average the Ratcliff-Obershelp
and the Smith-Waterman distances, to obtain the following global and local match.
DL1 = DroL1 + DswL1
2
= 0.9
DL2 = DroL2 + DswL2
2
= 0.816
With this new method, the lexicon possibility with the highest score is chosen as the
prediction from each model. We can see that by implementing this last layer of sequence
matching (SM) in our models, the new results are improved drastically in Figure 28 and
Table 4.
Figure 28: Prediction results per model for all components (cropped images + prediction
refinement + similarity to lexicon options)
It can be seen that PARSeq achieves a 98.43% of accuracy rate for our samples. When
inspecting the two images that all models predicted erroneously, it was seen that they
belonged to Component A, shown on the right side of Figure 29. The number "4108" was
being predicted as "4103". A small test was performed, where the image was cropped
further only to contain the number (seen on the left of Figure 29), and the results from
all models became unanimous and correct. As previously mentioned many of the samples
Page 35 of 55
==PAGE:42==
MSc Thesis
Model
Component A
Component B
Component C
Total
ABInet
20 (90.91%)
52 (98.11%)
49 (94.23%)
121 (95.28%)
PARSeq
20 (90.91%)
53 (100.00%)
52 (100.00%)
125 (98.43%)
TRBA
20 (90.91%)
52 (98.11%)
52 (100.00%)
124 (97.64%)
Table 4: Correct Predictions for Each Model by Component (cropped images + prediction
refinement + similarity to lexicon options)
from this component were damaged, and cropping the images appropriately was impos-
sible. However, it can be theorized that if the samples were not as deformed as the ones
used in these tests (which would be the case when coming straight from the molds), the
position of the cavity number in the image would not vary greatly, and thus appropriate
and more accurate cropping would be performed. If this were to be the case, PARSeq
would achieve 100% accuracy.
Figure 29: Prediction results per model, for both images containing "4108"
Lastly, to test the limits of the knowledge gained from these methods, an ensemble method
was devised that incorporated the combined predictions from all models. The average
computation time of each model including prediction filtering and lexicon matching, which
can be seen in Table 5, was not much of a concern, therefore the method devised for the
Page 36 of 55
==PAGE:43==
MSc Thesis
last experiment, incorporated all predictions from the three models, while also performing
non-alphanumeric filtering and lexicon similarity calculation.
Model
Component A
Component B
Component C
Total
ABInet
0.18 ± 0.01
0.24 ± 0.18
0.20 ± 0.04
0.21 ± 0.11
PARSeq
0.14 ± 0.01
0.16 ± 0.07
0.15 ± 0.05
0.15 ± 0.05
TRBA
0.15 ± 0.01
0.18 ± 0.06
0.16 ± 0.05
0.16 ± 0.05
Ensemble
0.47 ± 0.02
0.58 ± 0.2
0.51 ± 0.08
0.16 ± 0.13
Table 5: Average computation times for each model and component (in s).
The similarity scores are calculated between each model prediction and the lexicon pos-
sibilities, as explained previously.
Each of the three models selects the most similar
possibility in the lexicon, given by the highest score. Out of the three chosen lexicon
possibilities (one for each model) and their scores, the final lexicon possibility is selected,
from the list of chosen lexicons by each model Lm, where m is the model A, P or T
for ABInet, PARSeq, and TRBA respectively. The final score of the chosen lexicon op-
tion SLm is computed for each model as follows, by also taking into account the average
confidence for each model’s prediction Cm.
SLA =
CA
1 −DLA
SLP =
CP
1 −DLP
SLT =
CT
1 −DLT
The maximum of these scores Sm will determine which lexicon possibility Lm will be
chosen at last, in the newly devised voting scheme. A schematic overview of the final
devised ensemble method can be seen in Figure 30.
Figure 30: Schematic overview of ensemble method devised
With this new ensemble method, all predictions are correct, except for the aforementioned
Page 37 of 55
==PAGE:44==
MSc Thesis
images corresponding to Component A, specifically the cavity number "4108". Figure 31
and Table 6 contain the last results of this ensemble method.
Figure 31: Prediction results for ensemble method (cropped images + prediction refine-
ment + similarity to lexicon options + model voting)
Model
Component A
Component B
Component C
Total
Ensemble
20 (90.91%)
53 (100.00%)
52 (100.00%)
125 (98.43%)
Table 6: Correct Predictions for Each Model by Component (cropped images + prediction
refinement + similarity to lexicon options)
Although PARSeq achieved the same results on the samples, the new method devised is
more robust given that it incorporates a voting mechanism for all models to input their
lexicon choices and scores. In this manner, we combine the strengths and weaknesses of
all three models, so that the ensemble method can reliably predict the component’s cavity
number from the possible options.
Page 38 of 55
==PAGE:45==
MSc Thesis
5
Software Application
The primary focus of this project was to develop a software architecture that would be
robust, fast to develop, and scalable. In the realm of robotics, these qualities are key to
ensure that systems can withstand the demands of real-world applications, adapt quickly
to new requirements, and grow without significant overhauls. This ensures that as the
system grows or the tasks it needs to perform become more complex, the architecture can
accommodate these changes without necessitating a complete redesign. By prioritizing
these attributes, the software solution expects not only to meet current needs but also to
be prepared for future challenges and expansions.
5.1
Architecture and Middleware
5.1.1
ROS2
ROS2 was used as the underlying framework, for its renowned use in research and academia-
related development, and its renovated outlook into real-world and production-ready ap-
plications. The second generation of the Robot Operating System, ROS2, was redesigned
from the ground up, inspired by its predecessor ROS1, which, although lacking a se-
curity and production-use focus, still witnessed a mass adoption for robotic systems.
As described in [21], Modularity, Security, and Product readiness are among the design
principles and requirements of this middleware. Integrated security systems including
authentication, encryption, and access control, as well as objective implications such as
Apex.AI’s functional safety (ISO 26262) certification of their ROS2-based autonomous
vehicle software, define a growing interest in the use of ROS2 for industrial processes.
Therefore, the software developed for this system was built on top of ROS2’s framework,
utilizing the communication and deployment components of this middleware. Particu-
larly, ROS2 Actions play a major role within the software architecture developed for this
project.
Actions provide a communication protocol for long-running tasks, by extending the func-
tionality of more typical ROS Topics and Services. They consist of three parts: a goal,
feedback, and a result. Their functionality is similar to services, in that they use a client-
server model, except actions are preemptable (you can cancel them while executing). The
diagram in Figure 32 depicts the communication flow between the client and server.
Page 39 of 55
==PAGE:46==
MSc Thesis
Figure 32: Communication Graph: Action Server - Client
This communication protocol can be understood as two ROS services and a ROS topic. An
"action client" node sends a "goal" request to an "action server" node that acknowledges
the goal, returning a respective response to said goal. Once the initial service returns,
the action server sends a second "result" request to the client. When this occurs, the
server opens a temporary channel, or topic, through which messages will be published
by the server and subscribed to by the client. This stream is denoted as "feedback",
and is used to update the client about the executing task. Once the server finishes the
action, the feedback topic is closed, and finally the result response returns to the client.
This mechanism is optimal for cases when a specific process requires time to complete.
Using standard synchronous services would block the client and server nodes between the
request and response.
As with the rest of ROS communication protocols, actions use specific data structures to
send and receive data. This structure is specified in ROS-specific configuration files, in
this case, with a .action file extension, and use ROS data types, for input, and output.
They follow the following structure:
# Goal
---
# Result
---
# Feedback
5.1.2
Scheduling-based Architecture
Scheduling-based software architecture is a design structure where the execution of tasks is
organized in a predefined, sequential manner to ensure systematic and efficient operation.
Page 40 of 55
==PAGE:47==
MSc Thesis
This architecture is particularly crucial in robotic systems, where precise timing and
order of actions can significantly impact performance and reliability. In a scheduling-
based approach, tasks are scheduled to run at specific times or under certain conditions,
allowing for synchronized and coordinated actions, and avoiding conflicts. Scheduling can
be managed through various mechanisms, such as finite state machines, behavior trees,
or task queues, each offering different advantages in terms of flexibility, complexity, and
ease of implementation. By adopting a scheduling-based software architecture, robotic
systems can achieve higher levels of predictability, efficiency, and robustness, making them
well-suited for both research applications and industrial deployment.
This type of architecture was specifically useful for this application for the following
reasons:
• Intuitiveness. The sequence of tasks model is intuitive and easy to understand for
operators. It aligns well with the way humans naturally think about tasks in terms
of steps or sequences of events.
• Flexibility and Modularity. Defining programs as sequences of actions allows
for modular programming. Each task can be a self-contained unit or module, which
can be easily reused, modified, or replaced without affecting the rest of the program.
This modularity enhances the maintainability and scalability of robot programs.
• Development and Maintenance. A sequence of tasks model facilitates step-by-
step execution and debugging. Individual actions or tasks can be run to test and
troubleshoot specific parts of the program, making it easier to identify and correct
errors. Programs can be developed incrementally, adding and testing one action
at a time. This approach reduces the likelihood of introducing errors and helps in
building complex behaviors gradually.
Moreover, these architectures are optimal for multi-component applications [22] which
are sets of applications whose resource requirement needs come from multiple resource
clusters (databases, computing platforms, physical actuators and sensors, etc.)
5.2
System Design
To explain the scheduling-based software architecture developed in this project, three main
elements will be introduced, which will be used throughout this chapter and capture the
essence of the robotics software application that was developed. These are Tasks, Routines
and Exercises.
• Tasks. Tasks refer to a procedure to carry out, that requires a specific component.
These can be hardware or software components. Tasks are carried out synchronously
(in a sequential manner). However, they depend on asynchronous communication
through ROS2 action servers, which encapsulate the protocols and logic to com-
municate with the respective "external" component, in action server nodes. This
was done in such a way so that when executing tasks, the nodes would not block
Page 41 of 55
==PAGE:48==
MSc Thesis
synchronously, but would rather asynchronously send feedback regarding the status
of the executing task. Tasks have a name, which is used to identify the component
and action server node involved; and parameters, used to specify the component’s
behavior further when processed. An example of a task is "move_arm_pose". This
task, as its name implies, will move the robotic arm. The parameters expected in
this task are between others: pose, speed, acceleration, etc. The following depicts
how this specific task type is represented in configuration files.
--------------------
type: move_arm_pose
params:
motion_type: linear
pose: [-0.101, -0.339, 0.17, -2.216, -2.216, 0.0]
speed: 1.0
acceleration: 0.5
orientation_type: axis_angle
pose_alias: above_fixture_0
--------------------
• Routines. Routines are a set of tasks that are processed consecutively. They are
also defined externally to the system with identifiable names in .yml configuration
files, which makes them easy to create, modify, and access. They are processed by
a Routine Scheduler, a node responsible for managing all the task action clients
that communicate to their respective servers. An example of a routine would be:
"pick_from_fixture_0". This routine is an example of a routine that combines
two different task types, move_arm_pose and grip, to create a routine.
--------------------
- type: move_arm_pose
params:
[...]
- type: move_arm_pose
params:
[...]
- type: grip
params:
[...]
- type: move_arm_pose
params:
[...]
--------------------
• Exercises. Exercises are the highest in the abstraction and complexity hierarchy
Page 42 of 55
==PAGE:49==
MSc Thesis
of these elements. They use routines to propagate the system process forward, by
specifying to the scheduler the specific set of tasks that should be carried out. An
example of an exercise would be the "cavity_sorting_exercise". This exercise
uses; the "pick_from_fixture_0" routine (after finding out which fixture is re-
quired), "find_component_number" routine (knowing the component type), and
finally "place_in_tray" routine (according to the component number found and
component type).
These three building blocks use ROS2 and custom-developed components to process and
perform the required behavior. This architecture provides the flexibility to easily adapt
to changing requirements and conditions by simply modifying configuration files rather
than rewriting code. The modular nature of Tasks and Routines allows for independent
development and testing of individual components, enhancing robustness and maintain-
ability. Note that throughout this chapter, when referring to the modules responsible
for cavity number recognition, they are referenced using OCR naming. As mentioned in
the cavity number recognition chapter, OCR was not used but rather advanced ensemble
methods of STR and sequence matching. However, as with much of this project, several
foundational elements were developed parallelly, leading to the initial naming of elements
becoming deprecated as new advancements on other fronts of this project were made.
This is similar to the case of tray localization. Some modules refer to QR detection,
however, Apriltags were used finally. In summary, some naming conventions used in the
software architecture have been deprecated, but this does not affect the overall system
operation.
5.2.1
Task Processing and Action Servers
There are in total 5 different task types in the system: move_arm_pose, grip, capture_frames,
ocr_predict and qr_scan. Each has its corresponding action server node that handles
the action goal, feedback, and result.
Furthermore, there is also an action client for
each of the tasks, which encapsulates and extends the base ROS2 action client model.
These action clients will be instantiated and utilized by the scheduler, explained in the
following subsection. The data structure that these components use to communicate with
each other are stored in specific action files. Servers, clients, and data structures share a
naming convention that makes the development of new tasks seamlessly integrable to the
system.
As an example of task action servers, we will again use the move_arm_pose task. The
action server node responsible for handling this task is strictly designed to work with
UR robotic arms. This node however could be easily replicated and modified to adjust
to different robotic arms, so long as they have a respective Python SDK that can bind
the communication from the arm to the Python-based logic.
This node sets up the
communication to the UR via the ethernet IP, as stated in the arm config file. It then
creates an instance of an action server, which provides an action service, described in the
.action file as follows:
Page 43 of 55
==PAGE:50==
MSc Thesis
# Goal
geometry_msgs/Pose goal_pose
std_msgs/Float64 speed
std_msgs/Float64 acceleration
std_msgs/String move_type
---
# Result
std_msgs/Bool success
std_msgs/String message
geometry_msgs/Pose end_pose
---
# Feedback
std_msgs/Bool is_moving
When an action service is received, the action server node will initially check the param-
eters, and accept the goal once the parameters meet the requirements. It then uses the
Python UR-RTDE library and the implemented logic, to move the UR arm as defined in
the goal. Consequently, while the arm is moving toward the desired goal pose, the node
will send feedback to the client regarding the status of the arm, checking in every itera-
tion of feedback publishing if the arm has arrived. Once the arm has stopped, the node
can return a result safely to the client, which will determine the task to be completed.
The rest of the tasks work similarly; setting up communication channels with hardware,
preprocessing input data, loading models and performing forward passes on data, calling
binding functions for hardware control, collecting data, and most importantly, using task
input parameters to determine all this behavior.
Other tasks have no feedback, due to the nature of the event that takes place.
One
example of this is the task ocr_predict, which is defined by its .action file as follows:
# Goal
sensor_msgs/Image frame
std_msgs/String component_type
---
# Result
std_msgs/String prediction
std_msgs/Bool success
std_msgs/String message
---
# Feedback
This task has no feedback since the forward pass of the OCR model is a synchronous
event. The task action server node responsible for this task previously loaded the model
in memory when deployed. When the image is received along the component type string,
this node preprocesses the image received, based on the component type, and performs
a forward pass.
Once the model finalizes, there is also a returned string parameter,
Page 44 of 55
==PAGE:51==
MSc Thesis
"prediction", which is then used by the exercise controller, to determine the next routine
to carry out.
Certain tasks like this one, return extra information additional to the success boolean and
message string. These task output parameters will be sent back to the scheduler, where
they will be stored throughout the routine and used as input parameters by other tasks in
the routine. This task requires an image as an input parameter, which itself is returned
as an output parameter from a required previous task in the routine (capture_frame),
and stored in the routine buffer. In summary, task nodes handle deployment logic when
initialized, then they wait for an action client to use a specific data structure to request
an event, send feedback while this is processed, and some return further parameters to be
stored in the scheduler buffer. This functionality is shown in Figure 33.
Figure 33: Schematic overview of Task Action Server Nodes
5.2.2
Routine Scheduler and Action Clients
The routine scheduler was developed to ensure that tasks were carried out sequentially.
This node initially instantiates all action clients that will be used throughout the exercise,
which are paired with their respective action servers. The scheduler receives the path
to a configuration file that contains a routine, which is ultimately a sequence of tasks
with their respective parameters. Once it finds and converts this sequence, it fills the
scheduler with the routine. To execute tasks in the routine, the node will use the action
clients instantiated when deployed, after parsing the parameters into the respective action
services data structures. These modified action clients, will handle the communication
between the scheduler and the task nodes.
Throughout the execution of the task, the scheduler will wait asynchronously for the
action client to receive a finished state from the server. As previously mentioned, this
can vary from task server to task server. In the meantime, it will update the agent which
Page 45 of 55
==PAGE:52==
MSc Thesis
sent the routine config path, with the current executing task. Once the task action server
completes the task, the client instance will notify the scheduler of the task completion,
at which point the routine scheduler node will update the schedule, removing the now
completed task. If a task action server node returns parameters, the task action client
will add these parameters to a specific buffer in the routine scheduler node. The buffer
contains a key-value structure, where keys are used to identify the task, and the values
are the returned parameters. Some tasks depend on other tasks’ returned parameters as
input. When the scheduler arrives to these tasks, the buffer parameters needed will be
added to the input parameters and the client will parse them to send them to the server
in the action goal. A diagram of the logic structure and data flow of the scheduler can be
seen in Figure 34.
Figure 34: Schematic overview of the Routine Scheduler Node
Additionally, the node acts as an action server, for the "submit_routine" action service,
through which the path to a routine can be submitted to the routine scheduler to be
handled. This action service is as follows:
# Goal
std_msgs/String routine_config_path
---
# Result
std_msgs/Bool success
std_msgs/String message
std_msgs/String params
---
# Feedback
std_msgs/Int16 num_tasks_left
Page 46 of 55
==PAGE:53==
MSc Thesis
When no more tasks are in the scheduler, the routine is finished and the action server
returns the routine parameters buffer. These are all the parameters that were returned
and used by different tasks throughout the routine. Some, like the prediction from the
OCR model, will be used at later stages of the exercise when choosing the cell to place
the component in.
5.2.3
Cavity Sorting Exercise
The exercise section is responsible for handling the behavior of the whole system. This
last block is intended to be developed in a non-modular fashion. If a new system were
to be created, the task and routine functionality would still be used, granted that if new
tasks need to be made, they would be developed following the design of the existing
ones. This node is responsible for creating routines, managing the routines that will be
processed, and using the returned routine parameters for decision-making. It is divided
into the following main phases.
1. Tray Scanning. Firstly, the system will scan in a predefined area for the tray.
As described previously, the tray has four different Apriltags, three that are used
both to locate the tray in space and one ID Apriltag to identify the tray to obtain
information about the layout, component type, and required cavity numbers for the
cells. This is done by sending the "scan_tray" routine to the scheduler, which will
move the arm to the predefined pose to scan, and start scanning frames from the
camera to find Apriltags. This routine, will return the pose of the tray in space,
alongside two matrices, the first is a representation of the tray cells and the cavity
number expected in each cell. The second, also represents each cell in the tray,
but this time each cell in the matrix is the position of that cell with respect to the
position of the tray, or in other words, the ID Apriltag. Other information such as
component type and orientation of cells is returned.
2. Place in Tray Routine Creation. Once the tray has been located, the system
will create a different routine to place components in their respective cells. This
is done using a skeleton "place in tray" config, which is unique to each compo-
nent. This skeleton routine indicates the sequence of movements that the arm and
gripper need to carry out to place a component in a cell with an arbitrary posi-
tion and orientation, adjusting to the shape and size of both the component and
the cell. Using the information obtained previously regarding each cell’s position,
the skeleton routine is adjusted and saved as separate routine files that will later
be used. For example, for number "1234", the routine config file will be saved as
"place_1234_in_tray_routine.yml", and will account for the world position and
orientation of the cell (i, j) with 1234 as designated cavity number.
3. Pick from Fixtures.
To start sorting components, the cavity sorting exercise
node will begin a loop of picking a component from a fixture, finding the cavity
number, and placing into the correct cell in the tray. It will start by sending "pick
Page 47 of 55
==PAGE:54==
MSc Thesis
from fixture i" routines to the scheduler node, where i corresponds to the fixture
number. These routines where created before the exercise began when saving the
fixture layout. These routines where also made from a skeleton "pick from fixture"
config, which accounted for the fixture type (unique to the component type) and its
position on the UR Arm’s module top plate. There is as many routines as fixtures.
When the routine is sent, the arm and gripper will move to the fixture, grab the
component, and move toward a reference point above the fixture.
4. Finding the Component Number.
Once the UR grabs the component, the
arm will move toward the digital microscope, such that the cavity number is in
focus and visible in the image plane. Since the digital microscope’s position and
orientation are fixed, one individual routine is required per component type. The
"find_component_number routines will always take a picture with the digital mi-
croscope that will then be preprocessed (according to the component type) and
passed through the OCR model. This routine will return the prediction from the
OCR model.
5. Placing the Component in Cell.
The OCR model’s prediction will first be
assessed by considering the possible cell numbers that the tray expects, previously
obtained in the scanning phase. If the number is in the list, the specific routine
file (created previously) will be sent to the scheduler, matching the predicted cavity
number. The arm and gripper will therefore carry out the sequence of moves required
to place the component in the specific tray cell that expects said cavity number.
Once the individual sorting of one component is finished, the system will loop back and
carry out the same procedure for all the rest of the components (steps 2 through 5). If the
tray expects more components than there are fixtures, it will loop through the fixtures,
expecting an operator to replenish the empty fixtures with new components in every itera-
tion. Note that this procedure expects the tray not to be moved throughout the exercise.
The software developed became the foundation of the project.
Its efficient, modular,
and robust aspects made testing and debugging a seamless task. Fast communication was
achieved with all external software and hardware components while maintaining reliability
throughout the processes.
Page 48 of 55
==PAGE:55==
MSc Thesis
6
Conclusion
To summarize the project, the complete system will be explained and each of the four main
components that make up this system will be discussed. This will be done by reflecting
on the obtained results, discussing the challenges of each subproject and the project as a
whole, as well as proposing future work that would further improve the system.
6.1
Complete System
The complete system developed can be summarized to carry out the task of sorting com-
ponents according to their cavity numbers, by the following steps:
Pre-sorting
1. A new fixture layout is created for a given module by an operator, by mounting
component fixtures in a given arrangement on the module’s top-plate.
2. The fixture layout is stored with a specific identifiable name, and entered in the
database.
3. Once the new layout enters the database, a series of pick_i_from_fixture routine
files are auto-generated, for every fixture i, and synced to the specific layout name.
Note that steps 1 to 3 are required only once every new layout. To reuse a layout,
the pre-sorting section will start at step 4.
4. A new batch is received in the metrology lab. The operator records the data of the
new batch, and assigns it to a tray ID which is currently empty in the database.
5. The operator places the empty tray, fitted with its corresponding identification sheet,
on the drop-off area next to, or on, the module.
Sorting
1. The UR robotic arm moves such that the Realsense camera, which is mounted on
the wrist, is able to capture the entirety of the drop-off area.
2. The tag scanning process is executed, which captures a series of frames, searching
for Apriltags in the given family, size and range.
3. Once the primary tag and the auxiliary triangulation tags are found, the system
will begin to compute the tray pose w.r.t. the world frame, utilizing the TCP pose.
If the auxiliary tags are not found, the system will resort to single-tag localization.
6. The tray’s information (tray type, expected component type, expected cavity num-
bers per cell, etc.) is obtained by using the primary tag’s ID, to search in the live
database.
Page 49 of 55
==PAGE:56==
MSc Thesis
7. According to the tray type, the local positions of the cells are found w.r.t. the
tray frame and consequently w.r.t. the world frame. This, alongside the expected
component type and cavity numbers per cell, is used to generate the series of
place_i_in_cell routines, for each expected component i.
8. The system executes the initial pick from the fixture routine. This also corresponds
to the given component type, and the previously stored fixture layout, in step 3 of
the "pre-sorting" section.
9. The arm and gripper collaboratively pick up the component from the fixture and
move it toward the digital microscope. This is carried out such that the cavity
number is positioned in the digital microscope’s focus point and projected in the
middle of the image plane.
10. The digital microscope captures a frame which is sent to the cavity number recogni-
tion module (or OCR module). The image is pre-processed (rotated and/or cropped)
according to the component specifications.
11. The ensemble of models generates initial predictions, which are then matched to the
available cavity number range (or lexicon) and through the scoring voting scheme,
a final cavity number is selected.
12. If a place_i_in_cell routine is available, for the newly decoded cavity number
i, the system will schedule this routine. Otherwise, the place_unknown_in_cell
routine will be scheduled.
13. The arm and gripper move towards the specific cell expecting said cavity number.
The component is placed in the cell and the arm moves to a safe reference point to
finish the routine.
14. Steps 8 to 13 are repeated for the consecutive components until all the components
are in their respective cells.
Post-sorting
1. Once the sorting exercise is finalized, an operator takes the tray and performs a
visual inspection, to identify the components’ placement in the cells.
2. If there is a component in the "unknown" cell, the operator must place it in the
remaining empty cell.
3. In the event of there being multiple components in the unknown cell, the operator
must then inspect the components to read the cavity numbers and allocate them to
their respective cells.
Figure 35 shows an image of the module setup, with all physical components involved in
the solution proposed. The Jeston used, is inside the module, therefore the solution is
modular and only needs one power plug connection, as deploying the system can be done
through SSH.
Page 50 of 55
==PAGE:57==
MSc Thesis
Figure 35: Final proposed solution (physical setup)
6.2
Reflection on Results and Challenges
Overall, the evidence from the results show that a complex task such as component sort-
ing into trays, can be successfully automated. Starting from the manipulation, it was
demonstrated for two of the components, that fixtures can be designed for several com-
ponents that exploit the anatomy of the components in order to narrow the position and
orientation of the component to a specific pose. The gripper fingers were also successful
in maintaining a constant grip throughout the manipulation. The addition of silicone
strips was crucial in ensuring this firm grip. However, as will be discussed in the future
work section, further iterations in the design need to take place in order to adapt to more
components, both for fixtures and grasping mechanisms, due to their size.
Page 51 of 55
==PAGE:58==
MSc Thesis
Tray localization was stabilized robustly, such that small tags can be used, without com-
promising the stability of the localization. This was possible due to auxiliary tags, which
can be easily added to the tray sheets before printing. The biggest challenge encountered
in this part of the project was the fact that the tray was highly reflective, due to the
transparent acrylic plastic. Occasionally, this caused the sheet, which lay inside the tray
and thus behind the first layer of plastic, to be partially covered by light reflections. When
these reflections interfered with the tags, the localization process was interrupted and the
system failed. Although this was not frequent, it was a substantial challenge due to the
constraint of not being able to modify the tray.
Perhaps the most important part of the project was correctly identifying the cavity num-
ber on the components. This was successfully achieved using an ensemble method in-
corporating several state-of-the-art STR models and implementing sequence matching
algorithms, to identify lexicon similarities, ultimately ending in a voting scheme decod-
ing. This method was robust and reliable, resulting in accurate cavity number predictions
which enabled the system to complete the task. The challenging aspect of this section
was identifying the correct methodology based on the vast domain of text and charac-
ter recognition. Since the problem at hand was very specific, a new solution had to be
developed to fit the problem more specifically. It was a challenging process of research-
ing, understanding individual architectures, implementing, testing, and modifying various
models and methods. Given the tight timeline to carry out this task, alongside the rest
of the project, a substantial amount of improvements were discussed but unable to be
carried out. This will be discussed further in the future work section.
The most complex and challenging part of this project was developing a robust, mod-
ular, and efficient software application, capable of orchestrating all tasks autonomously
and programmatically. The resulting software application devised, achieved high levels
of modularity, based on interchangeable modules, capable of incorporating several hard-
ware and software components, and easily modifiable configuration files. Utilizing the
scheduling-based architecture and ROS2 as middleware, made the software communica-
tion, task handling, and decision-making aspects robust and reliable. Naturally, when
designing such a complex software application from the ground up, the most challenging
aspects were to make every component compatible with the system, especially accounting
for the fact that it had to be deployed in an edge device such as a Jetson. One specific
challenge that arose from the software development part, was successfully matching the
rate at which the signal was sent to the physical actuators, namely the UR arm and
RobotiQ gripper. Ensuring fast and reliable communication with these components was
instrumental in scheduling tasks since they were conditionally dependent on each other.
Ultimately, the complete system worked as expected, and functioned reliably and accu-
rately, for the specific subset of tested components. Due to a lack of time, several ideas
were not implemented. However, these proposals are of interest for future iterations of
this system and thus will be discussed in the following section.
Page 52 of 55
==PAGE:59==
MSc Thesis
6.3
Future Work
Starting from the component manipulation, a key aspect that would improve the grasp-
ing is having gripper mechanisms that are designed for one or a reduced set of similar
components. Since these vary substantially in shape and size, having a one-size-fits-all
gripper solution, is a complicated task. A way to solve this would be to develop a set
of interchangeable gripping tools, which the robotic arm can mount and dismount de-
pending on the specific component to sort, which have been tailored to grasp a specific
component. These component-specific tools would allow for firm grasping but also ensure
that the component can be positioned such that the cavity number is visible to the digital
microscope.
To enhance the tray localization reliability, a key area of improvement would be to ensure
that the tags cannot be occluded by reflections or other artifacts. This would involve
placing the tags either on top of the tray (instead of inside) or in a specific protruding
section of the tray. As mentioned previously, with the current camera resolution, the tags
are almost at their minimum size in the image plane. This means that, to minimize the
amount and size of protruding elements that would be added to the tray, a camera with
higher resolution could be used, that allowed correct localization of the tray, with smaller
tags or perhaps no auxiliary tags.
In terms of the methods used for cavity number recognition, there are many possible routes
to continue exploring. None of the models were fine-tuned on component images since the
amount of samples available was small. However, using high fidelity and photorealistic
simulation software, a large amount of synthetic data could be generated to train or fine-
tune these models. This could potentially improve the visual feature extraction of these
models to adjust to the specific component types that can be expected, reducing the
amount of noise and artifacts that influence the predictions. Furthermore, the internal
and external language models would be fine-tuned to only expect alphanumeric characters,
reducing the amount of necessary post-processing.
Finally, an area of possible future work regarding the software application would be to
create an interactive interface that operators could use to modify, access, and execute
specific aspects of the system. This would make the complete system a fully self-contained
support tool for operators to use for component sorting.
Page 53 of 55
==PAGE:60==
MSc Thesis
References
[1] E. Olson, “Apriltag: A robust and flexible visual fiducial system,” in 2011 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2011, pp. 3400–3407.
[2] Y.-X. Zeng, J.-W. Hsieh, X. Li, and M.-C. Chang, “Mixnet: Toward accurate detec-
tion of challenging scene text in the wild,” 2023.
[3] J. Ye, Z. Chen, J. Liu, and B. Du, “Textfusenet:
Scene text detection with
richer fused features,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-20, C. Bessiere, Ed.
International
Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 7 2020, pp. 516–522, main
track. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2020/72
[4] D. Karatzas, F. Shafait, S. Uchida, M. Iwamura, L. G. i. Bigorda, S. R. Mestre,
J. Mas, D. F. Mota, J. A. AlmazĂ n, and L. P. de las Heras, “Icdar 2013 robust
reading competition,” in 2013 12th International Conference on Document Analysis
and Recognition, 2013, pp. 1484–1493.
[5] M. Villegas, J. A. SĂĄnchez, A. H. Toselli, V. Romero, and E. Vidal, “ICDAR 2015
Competition HTRtS: Handwritten Text Recognition on the tranScriptorium Dataset
Rerelease,” Jan. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1136294
[6] C.
K.
Chng
and
C.
S.
Chan,
“Total-text:
A
comprehensive
dataset
for
scene
text
detection
and
recognition,”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1710.10400
[7] L. Yuliang,
J. Lianwen,
Z. Shuaitao,
and Z. Sheng,
“Detecting curve text
in
the
wild:
New
dataset
and
new
solution,”
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.02170
[8] S. Long, X. He, and C. Yao, “Scene text detection and recognition: The deep learning
era,” 2020.
[9] B. Shi, X. Bai, and C. Yao, “An end-to-end trainable neural network for image-based
sequence recognition and its application to scene text recognition,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 2298–2304,
2017.
[10] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner,
M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, J. Uszkoreit, and N. Houlsby, “An
image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale,” 2021.
[11] H. Cai, J. Sun, and Y. Xiong, “Revisiting classification perspective on scene text
recognition,” 2021.
[12] N. Nguyen, T. Nguyen, V. Tran, M.-T. Tran, T. D. Ngo, T. H. Nguyen, and M. Hoai,
“Dictionary-guided scene text recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
Page 54 of 55
==PAGE:61==
MSc Thesis
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2021, pp. 7383–
7392.
[13] C.-Y. Lee and S. Osindero, “Recursive recurrent nets with attention modeling for ocr
in the wild,” 2016.
[14] M. Bleeker and M. de Rijke, “Bidirectional scene text recognition with a single de-
coder,” 2020.
[15] S. Fang, H. Xie, Y. Wang, Z. Mao, and Y. Zhang, “Read like humans: Autonomous,
bidirectional and iterative language modeling for scene text recognition,” 2021.
[16] Y. Wang, H. Xie, S. Fang, J. Wang, S. Zhu, and Y. Zhang, “From two to one: A
new scene text recognizer with visual language modeling network,” 2021. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.09661
[17] D. Bautista and R. Atienza, “Scene text recognition with permuted autoregressive
sequence models,” 2022.
[18] J. Baek, G. Kim, J. Lee, S. Park, D. Han, S. Yun, S. J. Oh, and H. Lee, “What is
wrong with scene text recognition model comparisons? dataset and model analysis,”
2019.
[19] Ratcliff, J. W., Metzener, and David, “Pattern matching: The gestalt approach,” Dr.
Dobb’s Journal, vol. 46, July 1988.
[20] T. Smith and M. Waterman, “Identification of common molecular subsequences,”
Journal of Molecular Biology, vol. 147, no. 1, pp. 195–197, 1981. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0022283681900875
[21] S. Macenski, T. Foote, B. Gerkey, C. Lalancette, and W. Woodall, “Robot operating
system 2: Design, architecture, and uses in the wild,” Science Robotics, vol. 7, no. 66,
May 2022. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.abm6074
[22] A. Ezugwu, M. Frincu, and S. Junaidu, “Architectural pattern for scheduling multi-
component applications in distributed systems,” International Journal of Grid and
High Performance Computing, vol. 8, pp. 1–22, 01 2016.
Page 55 of 55
