==PAGE:1==
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
João Luís Mena
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months and three weeks at the Department of
Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science and
programming.
This thesis endeavors to innovate by proposing an approach for constructing a new tool
or complementing existing frameworks utilized in the analysis and verification of ROS
applications. It aims to enhance the capability of conducting runtime assessments, incor-
porating dynamic verification methodologies.
The thesis consists of an overview of the current state-of-the-art in software testing and
verification methods, in particular the ones used for ROS applications, as well as some in-
sights regarding the benefits of incorporating these tools in CI/CD pipelines. The literature
review will be followed by a section describing the design and requirements specification
of the proposed tool, it’s implementation, integration with the existing pipelines and vali-
dation in real-world industrial robots.
Finally, a reflection evaluating the work developed will be presented and the contributions
of the resulting tool will be argued.
The project was carried out from January 22nd 2024 to July 13th 2024, and represents a
workload of 30 ECTS points.
João Luís Mena - s223186
Signature
Date
ii
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
13/07/2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The Robot Operating System, also known as ROS, is currently the de facto framework
for developing applications in the industrial robotics domain. However, rigorous testing of
ROS applications is not consistently practised. This need for testing becomes particularly
evident when addressing the development of highly dynamic and asynchronous systems,
as typified by ROS-based applications. Employing methodologies like unit tests and static
code analysis proves immensely valuable to ensuring the expected functionality of an ap-
plication. Notably, tools such as the HAROS framework already exist that evaluate the
code quality of ROS packages using static code analysis techniques. Moreover, incorpo-
rating these tools into Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment (CI/CD) pipelines
offers a critical benefit when deploying applications onto actual robots, as it raises the
probability that the deployed product will behave as expected.
Due to their intricate nature, certain aspects of ROS applications, such as real-time sensor
data integration, complex inter-node communication, and adaptive behaviour in dynamic
environments, may not be fully assessable using only techniques for static code analy-
sis. To ensure the robustness of a ROS application, evaluating its behaviour at runtime
becomes imperative. The aim of this thesis is to develop a software tool capable of as-
sessing, at runtime, a specific ROS application’s adherence to a set of provided functional
requirements. Functional requirements, presented in a human-readable, readily under-
standable format, either pre-existing or custom-tailored for this thesis, will serve as the
tool’s input, and it will output a report detailing the application’s behaviour. This tool will
possess the capacity to assess complex temporal interactions between requirements,
such as precedence and temporal sequencing.
A combined approach using static code analysis techniques with real-time assessments
of the ROS application within the same CI/CD pipeline, not only streamlines the process
but also sets a robust foundation for indispensable real-world tests with actual physical
robots. These tests remain crucial in validating the application’s performance and relia-
bility in practical scenarios, cementing the deployment product’s alignment with expected
behaviour.
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors, Rafael Arrais, PhD, Se-
nior Researcher at Institute for Systems and Computer Engineering, Technology and Sci-
ence (INESC TEC) and Invited Assistant Professor at Faculty of Engineering University
of Porto (FEUP), and Xenofon Fafoutis, PhD, Associate Professor at Technical University
of Denmark (DTU) for their invaluable guidance, support, and encouragement throughout
this thesis journey, as well as to the Researcher Pedro Melo, who also provided a lot of
help throughout this project.
I am immensely grateful to my incredible friends Sofia, Tiago, Tomás, Silvério, Marombal,
Zé, and many others who have stood by me through the challenges and successes of this
endeavor. Their unwavering support, camaraderie, and willingness to brainstorm ideas
have been a constant source of motivation and inspiration.
A special thanks also goes to my family, particularly my parents and my sister for all the
support they have given me throughout my life and all the sacrifices they have made that
helped me be in this position.
iv
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Challenges and Statement of Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Objectives and Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Document Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
4
2.1
Software Assessment Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Static Code Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Software Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
DevOps and CI/CD
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Robotic Operating System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Robotic Operating System Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Topics and Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.4
Actions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.5
Simulation Environments in Robotic Operating System (ROS) . . . .
9
2.3
Property Specification Languages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3.1
High-Level Property Specification Language
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
State of the Art
12
3.1
Assessment of ROS applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
Current Tools and Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2.1
Mining Usage Patterns
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2.2
High Assurance Robotic Operating System (HAROS)
. . . . . . . . 14
3.2.3
Formal Verification in ROS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2.4
Schema-guided testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
DevOps for Industrial Robotics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3.1
Assessment of ROS repositories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3.2
Containerization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3.3
Containerization in ROS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3.4
Cloud Simulation and Continuous Integration and Deployment
. . . 20
4
Methodology
22
4.1
Design and Specification of Functional Requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.1.1
Inspiration from Ansible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
v
==PAGE:8==
4.1.2
Comparison between the developed PSL and High-Level Property
Specification Language (HPL)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.1.3
Features and Syntax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2
Development and Testing of Runtime Assessment Tool
. . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2.1
Runtime Configuration Class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2.2
Runtime Assessment Class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2.3
Instantiation of AssessmentObjects objects in RuntimeAssessment.
32
4.2.4
Assessment Objects Class
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2.5
Requirements Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5
Evaluation and Results
37
5.1
Validation of the Assessment Tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.1.1
Implementation of Turtle Movement Classes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.1.2
Assessment Specifications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.1.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.1.4
Results format
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6
Discussion and Future Work
43
Bibliography
I
A Appendix
IV
A.1 Specification File . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV
A.2 Results Log Files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . VII
vi
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
2.1
Representation of the communication between ROS nodes [8]. . . . . . . .
7
2.2
ROS Action Interface [9].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Behaviour of Controller nodes in HPL [12]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1
Workflow of the HAROS static analysis framework [14].
. . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2
Architecture of the HAROS safety plug-in for ROS [12].
. . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Network of two timed automata, modeling a sender and a receiver [18].
. . 16
3.4
Diagram depicting the workflow of the Rigel framework and its core capa-
bilities [24]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.5
Proposed improved CI/CD pipeline for robotics [18].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.1
Fundamental Workflow of the Runtime Assessment Tool.
. . . . . . . . . . 28
4.2
Class diagram of the developed tool. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.3
Runtime Assessment state machine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.4
Runtime Assessment workflow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.5
Workflow of AssessmentObjects integration in the tool.
. . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.6
Sequence diagram showing the lock-based access mechanism.
. . . . . . 35
5.1
Class diagram of the simulation ROS applications. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.2
Simulation environment’s Nodes and Topics interactions.
. . . . . . . . . . 39
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
vii
==PAGE:10==
Acronyms
API
Application Programming Interface
AST
Abstract Syntax Tree
AWS
Amazon Web Services
CD
Continuous Delivery
CI
Continuous Integration
CI/CD
Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
FEUP
Faculty of Engineering University of Porto
HAROS
High Assurance Robotic Operating System
HPL
High-Level Property Specification Language
IaC
Infrastructure as Code
INESC TEC Institute for Systems and Computer Engineering, Technology and Science
iiLab
Industry and Innovation Laboratory
PBT
Property-based Testing
PSL
Property Specification Language
QA
Quality Assurance
ROS
Robotic Operating System
RPC
Remote Procedure Call
SBT
Specification-based Testing
SCA
Static Code Analysis
SDLC
Software Development Life Cycle
TCTL
Timed Computation Tree Logic
VM
Virtual Machine
viii
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The rapid growth of ROS1 has revolutionized the development of industrial robotics ap-
plications. These applications, characterized by their dynamic and asynchronous nature,
often integrate real-time sensor data, complex inter-node communication, and adaptive
behaviors in response to ever-changing environments. Ensuring the robustness and reli-
ability of such applications presents a significant challenge, as traditional testing method-
ologies like unit tests and static code analysis may need to fully capture the intricacies of
their runtime fully behavior.
However, the very features that make ROS applications so versatile - their modular and
asynchronous nature, which often lead to highly dynamic and complex systems - present
significant challenges regarding ensuring their reliability and robustness. Traditional test-
ing methods, such as unit tests, examine individual code components, and static code
analysis that scrutinizes the structure of the code are insufficient to fully evaluate how
these complex applications behave in real-world scenarios. These methods often strug-
gle to capture the intricate interplay of real-time data processing, asynchronous commu-
nication, and the complex decision-making processes used by ROS applications.
1.1
Challenges and Statement of Purpose
The primary challenge is verifying that the behavior of ROS applications aligns with their
functional requirements during operation. This thesis addresses this challenge by devel-
oping a tool that evaluates ROS applications’ runtime behavior against its human-readable
functional requirements. The proposed tool comprehensively assesses the applications’
functionality, including complex temporal interactions like precedence and sequencing.
However, several challenges impede the development of such a tool. Firstly, there is a
scarcity of related work in the area of runtime verification for ROS, particularly concern-
ing the assessment of temporal properties. Existing research primarily focuses on static
code analysis or simulation-based testing, which may not fully capture the complexities of
real-world deployments. Secondly, there is a lack of dynamic verification tools tailored ex-
plicitly for ROS. While general-purpose runtime verification frameworks exist, they often
require significant adaptation and customization to apply to ROS applications effectively.
Besides that, the domain-specific requirement specification languages for ROS are lim-
ited in their expressiveness, especially when it comes to specifying complex temporal
relationships between events and actions. This makes it difficult to formally capture the
intended behavior of ROS applications in a way that can be easily verified. Moreover, an-
other challenge surrounding the integration of runtime verification into existing Continuous
Integration and Continuous Delivery (CI/CD) pipelines for ROS applications presents the
1https://www.ros.org/
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
1
==PAGE:12==
need for specialized tools and infrastructure to interact with the simulation environment
and access the behavior.
This thesis aims to address these challenges by developing a novel runtime verification
tool specifically designed for ROS applications. The tool will provide an easy-to-use,
human-readable property specification language for developers to effortlessly translate
functional requirements into dynamic assessments that support any topic events, as well
as temporal properties and runtime metrics. It will also incorporate efficient monitoring and
analysis mechanisms to evaluate the application’s behavior and provide a result report.
1.2
Research Objectives and Approach
The core objective of this research is to create a testing framework that seamlessly in-
tegrates static code analysis with real-time assessments within a unified CI/CD pipeline.
This combined approach aims to streamline the testing process and establish a robust
foundation for validating the application’s performance and reliability in real-world sce-
narios. While the framework’s potential extends to various fields, including agriculture,
service robotics, healthcare, logistics, and more, this thesis specifically focuses on indus-
trial robotics, as it is the field that better aligns with the research context of the laboratory at
INESC TEC in which this thesis is inserted in, Industry and Innovation Laboratory (iiLab),
and its primary vision of advancing the state-of-the-art within production technologies. By
focusing on aligning operational behavior and functional requirements, this thesis seeks to
ensure that ROS applications deployed onto physical robots perform as expected. This
research aims to contribute to the advancement of testing methodologies for ROS ap-
plications, addressing the unique challenges posed by their dynamic and asynchronous
nature. Ultimately, the goal is to enhance ROS-based systems’ usability, dependability,
and real-world applicability in industrial settings.
The research will first establish a structured methodology for transforming human-
readable requirements into a machine-readable format that the tool can understand and
utilize to achieve this overarching goal. It will also design and implement mechanisms
for monitoring the real-time behavior of ROS applications, capturing relevant events,
messages, and timestamps. On top of this, it will develop algorithms and techniques
for comparing the observed runtime behavior of the ROS application with the formalized
requirements, identifying any discrepancies, violations, and potential failures. The ef-
fectiveness of the proposed testing framework will be evaluated and validated through
experiments and case studies. This will involve testing the framework on sample ROS
applications and assessing its ability to detect different types of failures and violations of
the specified requirements.
1.3
Document Structure
This thesis is organized to provide a comprehensive and structured exploration of the
research problem, methodology, and findings. The subsequent chapters are outlined as
follows:
• Chapter 1: Introduction: Establishes the research context, highlighting the signif-
icance of robust testing for ROS applications in various robotics domains. It delves
into the specific challenges posed by these applications’ dynamic and asynchronous
nature, motivating the need for a specialized runtime assessment tool. The chapter
concludes by outlining the research objectives and the approach taken to address
2
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:13==
them.
• Chapter 2: Background: Provides the foundational knowledge necessary to un-
derstand the research. It covers essential software assessment techniques, includ-
ing static code analysis and software testing, and introduces the concepts of De-
vOps and CI/CD pipelines. The chapter then delves into the architecture and com-
munication mechanisms of ROS, providing a comprehensive overview of its core
components. Finally, it introduces the HPL2 property specification language, which
serves as a basis for formalizing functional requirements.
• Chapter 3: State of the Art: Surveys the existing literature on assessing ROS
applications, examining current tools, frameworks, and methodologies. It critically
analyzes their strengths and weaknesses, identifying gaps in the current state of the
art that this thesis aims to address. The chapter also explores the application of De-
vOps principles in industrial robotics, highlighting the potential benefits of integrating
runtime assessment into CI/CD pipelines.
• Chapter 4: Methodology: Details the research methodology employed in this the-
sis. It outlines the process of designing and specifying functional requirements for
ROS applications using the HPL language or a suitable alternative. The chapter then
describes the development and testing of the runtime assessment tool, including the
algorithms and techniques used for monitoring and analyzing the application’s be-
havior. Finally, it explains how the tool is integrated into a CI/CD pipeline to enable
continuous and automated testing.
• Chapter 5: Evaluation and Results: Presents the empirical evaluation of the run-
time assessment tool. It describes the testing scenarios, the metrics used to as-
sess the tool’s performance, and the results obtained. The chapter also discusses
the fine-tuning and optimization of the tool based on the evaluation results and its
validation on physical robots to ensure its real-world applicability.
• Chapter 6: Discussion and Future Work: Interprets the research’s key findings
and discusses their implications. It also addresses any research limitations and sug-
gests potential paths for future research. It concludes by reiterating the importance
of robust testing for ROS applications and highlighting the potential impact of the
proposed runtime assessment tool on developing reliable and dependable robotic
systems.
Finally, the thesis includes a bibliography listing all cited references and an Appendix with
additional information. Note that Gemini [1] and Grammarly [2] were used to refine the
language and improve the fluency of the text.
2https://github.com/HAROS-framework/hpl-rv-ros
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
3
==PAGE:14==
2
Background
The development of dependable and robust software systems is crucial across various
domains, including robotics. This chapter provides background knowledge on essential
topics regarding software assessment techniques that play a vital role in ensuring software
quality throughout the development lifecycle. It covers static code analysis and software
testing methodologies commonly employed in software development. Furthermore, this
chapter introduces ROS, a prevalent framework for building robotic software systems, ex-
posing the core architecture of ROS, its communication paradigms, and the mechanisms
for interaction between components. Finally, it also covers the concept of Property Spec-
ification Language (PSL) and respective examples. Having an understanding of these
concepts is essential for the development of the runtime assessment tool proposed in this
thesis.
2.1
Software Assessment Techniques
Software assessment is crucial in ensuring software systems’ quality, reliability, and main-
tainability throughout the development lifecycle. These techniques encompass a range
of methodologies and practices aimed at evaluating software artifacts, identifying de-
fects, and improving overall software quality [3]. This section discusses some assess-
ment methodologies used in modern software development, such as static code analysis,
testing, and continuous integration and deployment [4].
2.1.1
Static Code Analysis
Static Code Analysis (SCA) is a software development technique that analyzes source
code without executing the program. It involves examining the code for potential errors,
security vulnerabilities, coding standards violations, and other issues. Automated static
analysis tools, also known as linters, parse the source code and flag issues such as syntax
errors, semantic errors, dead code, and code duplication. By detecting issues early in the
development process, static code analysis helps maintain code quality and reduces the
likelihood of defects reaching production [5].
SCA operates on the principle of examining code at rest, typically performed during the
development phase before the code is compiled or executed. It involves parsing the
source code to identify patterns, structures, and potential problems based on predefined
rules, heuristics, or algorithms. Some of the most used techniques employed to analyze
code include Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) traversal, data flow and control flow analysis,
and pattern matching [5]. These techniques enable the detection of a wide range of issues
across large codebases with different programming languages.
There are advantages for software development teams and organizations in practicing
static code analysis, such as early bug detection, improved code quality by enforcing
4
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:15==
coding standards, enhanced security by identifying vulnerabilities, assistance in code re-
views, and support for continuous integration. However, it also presents challenges and
requires some considerations, as there is the possibility for false positives and false neg-
atives, the overhead of configuring and tuning the analysis tools, the performance impact
on build times, and the varying levels of language and tool support across different devel-
opment environments.
2.1.2
Software Testing
Software testing is another essential technique for assessing software quality. It is con-
sidered a critical component of the software development process, as it involves execut-
ing software components or systems to validate that they meet specified requirements
and behave as expected under different conditions. Testing encompasses various ap-
proaches, including unit testing, integration testing, system testing, end-to-end testing,
and acceptance testing. Through rigorous testing, developers can identify defects, vali-
date functionality, and ensure that software meets user expectations [3].
Unit testing is the process of testing individual software application components in isolation
from the rest of the system. A unit of code refers to the smallest testable part of an
application, which could be a function, method, procedure, or class. The primary objective
of unit testing is to validate that each unit of the software performs as designed on its own
[4]. This type of testing is typically conducted by the developers during the coding phase,
and they help identify issues early in the development cycle, thereby reducing the cost
and effort required to fix errors.
On the other hand, integration testing involves combining individual software modules
and testing them as a group to, contrarily to unit tests, identify issues that may arise
when different units of code interact with each other. This type of testing ensures that the
components work together as intended and that data flows correctly between them [4].
Integration testing is usually done by Quality Assurance (QA) engineers and can be per-
formed using various strategies, such as top-down, bottom-up, and sandwich approaches,
depending on the complexity and architecture of the software system.
Moreover, end-to-end testing is a method that tests the entire software application from
start to finish to ensure that the flow of data and control between different components
works as expected. This type of testing simulates real use-case scenarios and user inter-
actions and validates the software’s interactions with external systems such as Application
Programming Interface (API), databases, and interfaces [4]. End-to-end testing is crucial
for identifying issues that may not be apparent in isolated tests, such as the ones men-
tioned above. It ensures that the software functions correctly in a production-like environ-
ment, providing a holistic view of the system’s performance and reliability.
In addition to these core testing techniques, specialized testing approaches may be em-
ployed to address specific aspects of software quality, such as performance testing, se-
curity testing, and usability testing. Nowadays, test automation plays a critical role in
increasing the efficiency, repeatability, and coverage of the software testing process. Au-
tomated testing tools and frameworks enable developers to automate the execution of
tests, streamline test case management, and integrate testing into a process known as
CI/CD.
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
5
==PAGE:16==
2.1.3
DevOps and CI/CD
CI/CD is usually described as the process of automating the build, test, and deployment
processes of software development. This concept often goes hand in hand with the term
DevOps. At its core, DevOps emphasizes the collaboration between development (Dev)
and operations (Ops) teams, promoting principles such as shared responsibility, automa-
tion, and continuous feedback [6]. These are key components of modern software de-
velopment practices, and many consider that they have revolutionized the field of soft-
ware engineering by promoting collaboration, automation, and efficiency across the entire
Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC).
Continuous Integration (CI) is a key practice within DevOps, consisting of the automated
integration of code changes from multiple developers into a shared repository. This allows
developers to commit code changes frequently, triggering automated build and test pro-
cesses to validate the changes and detect integration issues early on, reducing the risk of
merge conflicts, improving code quality, and accelerating the feedback loop for developers
[6]. Furthermore, Continuous Delivery (CD) extends CI by automating the deployment of
code changes to production environments, enabling organizations to quickly and reliably
deliver new features, updates, and fixes to users with minimal manual intervention. The
tools used in these practices include configuration management libraries, Infrastructure
as Code (IaC) tools, and orchestration frameworks that facilitate the automation of provi-
sioning, deployment, and scaling of infrastructure and applications, improving efficiency
and reliability [6].
Moreover, DevOps practices help organizations to adapt quickly to changing requirements
and market conditions. Continuous monitoring, metrics, and feedback loops allow teams
to identify opportunities for improvement and optimize software delivery processes over
time.
2.2
Robotic Operating System
ROS stands at the forefront of robotics research and development, serving as a founda-
tional framework for building, simulating, and deploying robotic systems across various
domains [7]. Over the years, ROS has evolved into a sophisticated ecosystem of tools,
libraries, and best practices, enabling researchers and engineers to accelerate innovation
in robotics. This section will dive into the state-of-the-art capabilities and advancements
within the ROS ecosystem.
One of ROS’ greatest strengths lies in its active and engaged global community. The
open-source nature of ROS fosters collaboration, knowledge sharing, and continuous
improvement by contributing community-developed packages, libraries, and tools. It’s
also worth noting that ROS was designed to be language-neutral with the diversity of the
developer’s preferences in mind [7]. It currently supports four different languages: C++,
Python, Octave, and LISP, with the most common ones being C++ and Python, which
provide very rich and stable client libraries that provide APIs for ROS communications:
roscpp and rospy, respectively [8].
2.2.1
Robotic Operating System Architecture
The architecture of ROS is characterized by its decentralized and distributed nature, facili-
tating the development of complex robotic systems composed of modular, interconnected
components [7]. At its core, ROS employs a peer-to-peer communication model wherein
6
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:17==
individual software components, referred to as nodes, communicate with each other in
a loosely coupled manner. This decentralized architecture enables nodes to be highly
modular and distributed across multiple computing nodes or hardware platforms.
Communication between ROS nodes is facilitated through a publish-subscribe messaging
paradigm, where nodes publish messages containing information such as sensor read-
ings or control commands to named topics while other nodes subscribe to these topics
to receive and process messages asynchronously, enabling interaction without explicit
knowledge of node identities or locations. When a publisher sends a message to a topic,
the ROS master node ensures that all subscribers to that topic receive the message, mak-
ing it a push-based message delivery system. This delivery is immediate, meaning that
as soon as the message is published, it is pushed to all subscribers.
Messages exchanged between ROS nodes are defined using a flexible message-passing
interface, encompassing predefined message types for common data structures as well
as support for custom message definitions to represent domain-specific data structures.
Figure 2.1: Representation of the communication between ROS nodes [8].
The ROS computation graph [8] serves as a central organizing principle for managing the
relationships between nodes, with nodes registering themselves with a master node that
maintains a directory of available nodes, topics, and services. The master node facilitates
node discovery, topic resolution, and communication negotiation while allowing nodes to
operate autonomously.
In addition to message passing, ROS supports Remote Procedure Call (RPC) functionality
through services and actions. Services enable synchronous request-response communi-
cation, while actions support asynchronous, goal-oriented communication, facilitating the
execution of complex, long-running tasks.
ROS provides a parameter server consisting of a centralized key-value store for storing
and sharing configuration parameters across nodes, simplifying system-wide parameter
management and promoting modularity by decoupling configuration settings from individ-
ual nodes.
This architecture is complemented by a rich ecosystem of tools and infrastructure, in-
cluding tools for managing ROS nodes, launching multiple nodes simultaneously, and
visualizing ROS data. Integration with simulation, testing, and visualization tools enables
comprehensive development and validation of robotic applications.
2.2.2
Topics and Messages
Messages in ROS represent structured data formats that encode information exchanged
between nodes via topics. A message defines the structure and content of data payloads
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
7
==PAGE:18==
communicated between nodes, specifying the types and fields of data elements included
in a message instance [7].
ROS provides a diverse set of predefined message types for common data structures en-
countered in robotic applications, such as sensor readings, robot position and orientation,
odometry information, and control commands. These standard message types facilitate
interoperability and code reusability across different ROS packages and systems.
Messages exchanged between nodes via topics adhere to a strict serialization format,
ensuring compatibility and interoperability across different programming languages and
platforms. ROS provides serialization and deserialization mechanisms for encoding and
decoding messages into a platform-independent binary format, facilitating seamless com-
munication between nodes written in different languages or running on different hardware
architectures [8].
2.2.3
Services
ROS services provide a mechanism for synchronous communication between nodes, en-
abling one node to request a specific operation or task from another node and receive a
corresponding response [7]. Unlike topics, which facilitate asynchronous data exchange,
services can execute RPCs by establishing a direct point-to-point connection between
client and server nodes [8].
ROS services adhere to a client-server architecture, wherein nodes assume distinct roles
as either service clients or service servers. A service client node initiates a request by
sending a service call to a designated service server node, specifying the desired opera-
tion and any accompanying parameters. The service server node processes the request,
executes the requested procedure, and returns a response to the client node upon com-
pletion.
ROS services facilitate synchronous communication between nodes, meaning that the
client node blocks execution until it receives a response from the server node. This syn-
chronous behavior ensures that the client node can rely on completing the requested op-
eration before proceeding with subsequent tasks, providing deterministic and predictable
behavior in scenarios where strict timing constraints and eventual consistency depen-
dencies exist. Clients can also set a connection as persistent in order to achieve higher
performance, but that comes at the cost of being more vulnerable to connectivity issues
if the service provider changes [8].
ROS services are commonly used in robotics applications to implement operations that
require explicit invocation and synchronous execution, such as querying sensor data,
performing complex calculations, or controlling actuators, as they are particularly useful
for tasks that involve stateful interactions or require immediate feedback, enabling nodes
to coordinate closely and exchange information in real-time.
2.2.4
Actions
In ROS, actions provide a flexible and asynchronous mechanism for executing complex,
long-running tasks and monitoring their progress. Actions extend the capabilities of ROS
beyond simple request-response interactions, enabling nodes to perform goal-oriented
actions and provide feedback on their execution status over time [9].
ROS actions are designed around a goal-oriented communication model, where a client
node sends a goal request to an action server node, specifying the desired task or ob-
8
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:19==
jective to be achieved. The action server node receives the goal request and executes
the corresponding action, typically involving computations, motion planning, or interaction
with external systems.
During the execution of an action, the action server node provides periodic feedback to the
client node, informing it of the current progress and status of the action. Feedback mes-
sages convey information about intermediate milestones, task completion percentages,
or any relevant state changes occurring during the execution process.
Upon completion of the action, the action server node sends a final result message to the
client node, indicating the outcome or completion status of the task. The resulting mes-
sage typically includes the final stage of the action, any relevant data or outputs produced
during execution, and an indication of success or failure based on predefined criteria.
Figure 2.2: ROS Action Interface [9].
ROS actions support asynchronous execution, allowing client nodes to continue perform-
ing other tasks or processing incoming messages while waiting for action results [9]. This
asynchronous behavior enables nodes to handle multiple concurrent actions simultane-
ously, providing flexibility and efficiency in managing complex robotic behaviors and work-
flows. It also includes support for cancellation and preemption, allowing client nodes to
interrupt and terminate ongoing actions if necessary by sending cancellation requests to
action server nodes and instructing them to halt the execution of the current action and
return to an idle state. This feature enables the handling of unexpected events, user
interventions, or changes in mission priorities during action execution.
ROS actions are commonly used in robotics applications requiring long-running tasks or
behaviors, such as motion planning, navigation, manipulation, and task execution. By
leveraging the goal-oriented communication model and asynchronous execution capabil-
ities of ROS actions, developers can design robust and responsive robotic behaviors that
showcase high-level autonomy in dynamic and uncertain environments.
2.2.5
Simulation Environments in ROS
Simulation environments play a pivotal role in developing, testing, and validating robotic
systems. Within the context of ROS, simulation environments provide a virtual platform
where developers can model, simulate, and analyze the behavior of robotic systems under
various conditions without the need for physical hardware. This capability is particularly
valuable for early-stage development, where iterative testing and debugging are essential
for refining algorithms and system architectures.
Gazebo1 is one of the most widely used simulation environments in the ROS ecosys-
tem. It offers a robust and high-fidelity simulation platform that integrates seamlessly
1https://gazebosim.org/
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
9
==PAGE:20==
with ROS, enabling the simulation of complex robotic systems in realistic environments.
Gazebo supports modeling various physical phenomena, including rigid body dynamics,
sensor data generation, and environmental interactions. This allows developers to cre-
ate detailed simulations that closely mimic real-world conditions, facilitating the testing of
control algorithms, sensor fusion techniques, and navigation strategies.
The integration of Gazebo with ROS is facilitated through a set of ROS packages that pro-
vide interfaces for communication between the simulation environment and ROS nodes
and enable the seamless exchange of messages, services, and actions, allowing simu-
lated robots to interact with ROS-based software components as if they were operating in
a physical environment. This tight integration supports a wide range of use cases, from
simple sensor data visualization to complex multi-robot coordination and autonomous
navigation.
2.3
Property Specification Languages
PSL are formal languages used to describe the properties and behaviors that a software
system must exhibit. These languages provide a precise and unambiguous way to specify
requirements, constraints, and expected behaviors, which can then be used for verifica-
tion, validation, and testing purposes. PSL are essential in the development of complex
systems, particularly in safety-critical domains such as aerospace, automotive, and med-
ical devices, where ensuring correctness and reliability is paramount.
One of the primary uses of PSL is in model checking, a formal verification technique that
systematically explores the state space of a system model to verify whether it satisfies
specified properties. By expressing properties in a formal language, developers can au-
tomatically check for compliance with these properties, identify potential violations, and
ensure that the system behaves as intended.
ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148-2018 [10] and IEEE 830 [11] are two crucial standards that should
be considered when developing a PSL to ensure its effectiveness and alignment with in-
dustry best practices. The former focuses on ensuring that the PSL is comprehensive
and provides effective communication of requirements throughout the entire SDLC. This
includes promoting clarity, traceability, consistency, and the ability to validate and verify
requirements, ultimately reducing ambiguity and misinterpretation [10]. Meanwhile, align-
ment with IEEE 830 guarantees that the PSL generates well-structured, complete, and
accurate requirement specifications that are easy to understand, modify, and maintain.
When designing a PSL, keeping these standards in mind should lead to an end product
that promotes effective communication and high-quality requirements.
For the purpose of this thesis, the aim is for the ROS developers to translate requirements
for the behavior of a certain application in a way that can be parsed and assessed by the
tool that will be developed.
2.3.1
High-Level Property Specification Language
The HPL is, as the name indicates, a property specification language designed and devel-
oped at INESC TEC with the purpose of specifying functional requirements in message-
passing systems, particularly in the context of publisher-subscriber architectures, such as
the one present in ROS applications [12]. Its primary strengths lie in its ability to reason
about message exchanges and data contents while maintaining readability and leveraging
established patterns.
10
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:21==
The language draws inspiration from the property specification patterns proposed by
Dwyer et al.[13], which provide a structured approach to capturing common system behav-
iors. HPL incorporates a subset of these patterns, including Absence, Existence, Prece-
dence, and Response, along with their associated scopes: Global, After, and After-Until.
However, HPL goes beyond the original framework by introducing two key extensions:
the Until scope and the Prevention pattern. The Until scope allows for the specification of
properties that hold until a certain event occurs, while the Prevention pattern enables rea-
soning about the absence of specific behaviors following message observations. These
additions cater to the specific needs of safety-critical cyber-physical systems, where pre-
venting undesired actions and ensuring timely responses are paramount.
Figure 2.3: Behaviour of Controller nodes in HPL [12].
HPL’s ability to reference message contents and impose real-time constraints further
strengthens its suitability for specifying functional requirements. Predicates can be formu-
lated to filter messages based on data field values, enabling the expression of properties
that depend on the content of exchanged messages. Additionally, temporal operators
allow for the specification of deadlines and reaction times within properties.
By combining these features, HPL empowers users to define functional requirements in
a way that directly aligns with message-based communication. Properties can dictate the
expected message flow, the validity of message contents, and the temporal relationships
between message observations. This directly translates to system behaviors that can be
assessed at runtime using appropriate tools.
For instance, consider a mobile robot system where a property might state that ”globally:
no /cmd_vel linear.x > 1.0” (every message on the /cmd_vel topic must have a linear.x
value less than or equal to 1.0). This property translates to a functional requirement
that the robot’s linear velocity never exceeds 1 meter per second [14]. An assessment
tool could monitor message content on the /cmd_vel topic and raise a flag whenever a
message violates this property, indicating a potential functional failure.
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
11
==PAGE:22==
3
State of the Art
3.1
Assessment of ROS applications
The assessment of ROS applications is a complex task due to the inherent intricacies of
the system. ROS is a flexible and highly configurable framework, providing many func-
tionalities and primitives that can be used in different contexts. This flexibility, while ben-
eficial for the development of diverse robotic systems, poses significant challenges when
it comes to the assessment of ROS applications.
Static analysis is one of the primary techniques used for assessing ROS applications. In
the context of ROS, static analysis is particularly challenging due to ROS’s high degree
of freedom in design. This makes it difficult to reverse-engineer the architecture of the
system [15]. In particular, the content of ROS launch files, which are used to deploy a
robot, can be fully customizable from environment variables, command-line arguments,
or configuration files. This high degree of customization adds another layer of complexity
to the static analysis of ROS applications.
Another technique used for assessing ROS applications is mining ROS repositories to
detect common usage patterns of ROS functionalities and primitives [16]. This involves
analyzing both configuration files and source code to identify patterns in how ROS func-
tionalities are used. This technique can provide valuable insights into the most frequent
usage patterns, which can help tool developers identify where to invest their efforts best.
However, mining ROS repositories for typical usage is a relatively new area of research,
and as such, there are no established techniques specifically tailored to this task. Existing
methods for mining software repositories, such as those used for extracting typical API
or call usage patterns, are not necessarily suitable for analyzing ROS repositories due to
the specificities of ROS, such as using launch files.
In addition to static analysis and repository mining, the assessment of ROS applications
also involves the evaluation of software quality. This includes assessing the maintainabil-
ity of the software, its compliance with coding standards, and the impact of various metrics
on the overall quality of the software [17]. However, research on the quality of robotic soft-
ware systems is scarce and does not typically target ROS systems specifically.
3.2
Current Tools and Frameworks
The assessment of applications developed using ROS is a complex task that requires
specialized tools and frameworks. These tools are designed to handle the unique chal-
lenges posed by ROS, such as its high degree of flexibility, customization, and complexity,
as well as the use of multiple programming languages, most commonly Python and C++.
12
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:23==
This section provides an in-depth overview of the current tools and frameworks used in
ROS assessment.
3.2.1
Mining Usage Patterns
Several unique challenges have been identified in the development of tools specifically
designed for ROS. The hardships of breaking down the structure of a ROS application
are particularly true for the content of ROS launch files, which are used to deploy a robot
and can be fully customizable from environment variables, command-line arguments, or
configuration files.
Additionally, ROS provides a myriad of primitives, which are used to manage the commu-
nication and synchronization between nodes. These primitives embody different commu-
nication paradigms and can be called freely by a ROS system throughout its lifespan.
Moreover, the inherent complexity of the languages of choice for developing ROS sys-
tems adds another layer of difficulty. For instance, the rosgraph tool, which constructs
the computation graph for a ROS system in runtime, would be handy if it could be de-
termined in static time. However, due to the potential complexity of the source code and
configuration files, this task would be exceedingly complex to implement for an arbitrary
ROS system.
Despite these challenges, such a task could be feasible or even straightforward under a
controlled subset of ROS features. According to the work of Santos et al.[16], to quantify
the impact of the first two challenges, a considerable sample of ROS repositories was
mined to detect common usage patterns of ROS functionalities and primitives in its de-
velopment. The mining process consisted of collecting data on the usage of features
from ROS feature models within analyzed applications. This included identifying which
features were used and gathering additional information about specific attribute values
within those features to provide a more comprehensive characterization of the applica-
tions. This experiment [16] aimed to answer the following questions:
• What kind of features are typically used in ROS launch files to deploy applications?
• Which, and how frequently, are ROS communication primitives used?
• In which context are these primitives effectively used, and how are their arguments
defined?
• How is the parameter server used in ROS applications?
• Is there any correlation between message and service types and other ROS fea-
tures?
Regarding the language complexity challenge, the focus was on ROS robots implemented
in C++. Santos et al.[16] also analyzed 400 packages featuring over 300 launchable
applications, mainly building blocks for larger, more complex robotic systems.
The main outcome of this study[16] is ranking the most frequent usage patterns, which
will aid future tool developers in identifying where to invest their efforts best. In particular,
it is expected to provide a glimpse of the potential coverage of future static analysis tools
depending on which ROS functionalities would be supported. Therefore, tools are growing
needed to provide architectural analysis at compile time, enhancing static-time support.
In response to this need, Santos, Cunha, and Macedo [15] proposed a metamodel to de-
scribe the software architecture of ROS systems, known as the ROS Computation Graph,
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
13
==PAGE:24==
providing a level of abstraction close to that adopted in the ROS documentation while still
being traceable to the source code artifacts. They also developed model extraction and
visualization tools for these architectural models. This approach allows users to specify
custom-made queries over these models, enabling the static verification of relevant prop-
erties that previously had to be manually checked at runtime. Adding to this, Santos et
al.[15] also developed components for the static-time extraction, visualization, and anal-
ysis of models conforming to this metamodel, fully integrated into the core capabilities of
HAROS [14], a ROS static analysis framework.
The authors argue that recovering the ROS Computation Graph at compile time would
be ideal, as it would make the architecture immediately available to the developer without
interrupting the development flow, and argue that the ability to perform advanced analysis
over architectural models is vital to comprehend the system and its potential shortcomings.
This approach not only enhances the understanding of the system’s architecture but also
aids in detecting potential issues, thereby contributing to the development of higher-quality
software [15].
3.2.2
HAROS
One of the most notable tools for ROS assessment is HAROS. HAROS1 is a plugin-
based framework designed for the quality assessment of ROS software. It automates
code retrieval, analysis, and reporting for ROS repositories in continuous integration.
HAROS provides two plugin entry points for analyzing ROS repositories: one for packages
and source files and another for architectural models per launch configuration, which are
automatically extracted from the source code. The architectural meta-model of HAROS
is designed to highlight the elements relevant to this technique, essentially the ROS com-
putation graph.
Figure 3.1: Workflow of the HAROS static analysis framework [14].
1https://github.com/HAROS-framework/
14
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:25==
The framework supports behavioral specifications for maintained repositories to be used
by the plugins. These specifications must be defined by domain experts for each config-
uration and node, but they can be reused between applications.
HAROS also includes a query engine that checks user-defined structural rules, a model
checker to verify system-wide behavioral properties in ROS applications, and a testing
plugin that generates runtime monitors and property-based tests.
Figure 3.2: Architecture of the HAROS safety plug-in for ROS [12].
The main goal of HAROS is to integrate with the ROS development process and provide
a unified reporting interface. It allows for formalizing the architecture and behavior of
ROS applications and translates HAROS artifacts into Electrum2, a formal specification
language based on first-order linear temporal logic [14].
3.2.3
Formal Verification in ROS
Formal verification is a crucial aspect of ensuring the correct behavior of real-time sys-
tems. One of the most effective methods for achieving this is through the use of timed
automata, which are mathematical models that extend finite automata with a set of real-
valued variables, or clocks, that measure the passage of time. This allows for the speci-
fication and verification of real-time systems [12].
In timed automata, transitions between states are governed by constraints defined on
clock variables, known as clock constraints. These constraints serve to restrict the be-
havior of the automaton. All clocks in an automaton are initialized to zero at the system’s
start and increase synchronously as time progresses. Individual clocks may be reset to
zero when specific transitions occur.
Timed automata are specified using a set of clocks and a clock constraint over the set of
clocks. A clock constraint can be a simple condition, such as ”x > n,” or a more complex
one involving multiple clocks and conditions, such as ”x - y > n” [18].
2https://haslab.github.io/Electrum/
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
15
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.3: Network of two timed automata, modeling a sender and a receiver [18].
The UPPAAL3 model checker is a widely used tool based on the theory of timed au-
tomata. It performs forward analysis with extrapolation and provides additional features
such as bounded integer variables and broadcast channels. UPPAAL uses a temporal
logic named Timed Computation Tree Logic (TCTL) as a query language to describe the
desired properties of timed automata.
In the context of ROS-based robotic applications, formal verification using timed automata
involves modeling the system as a network of timed automata, specifying the desired
properties in TCTL, and then using UPPAAL to check whether the system satisfies these
properties. This approach allows for identifying problematic parameter combinations and
helps ensure the system’s correct behavior. This state-of-the-art method provides a robust
and reliable means of verifying the behavior of real-time systems [18].
Verifying system-wide safety properties of ROS applications is critical to ensuring the
functional safety of robots, especially those deployed in safety-critical domains. This is
particularly important in ROS, where robots are built by composing third-party modules,
making them highly configurable and complex.
The work of Carvalho et al. [12] proposes a technique to automatically verify system-wide
safety properties of ROS-based applications at static time. This technique is based on the
formalization of ROS architectural models and node behavior in Electrum, a lightweight
formal method. System-wide specifications are subsequently model-checked over these
formalized models. To automate the analysis, the technique is deployed as a plug-in for
HAROS, and it was validated on a real robot, AgRob V164, which yielded positive results.
The verification process involves analyzing ROS applications from source code as they
are developed, deploying the analysis by typical ROS developers, and quickly reporting
clear feedback. The analysis is split into two stages: one analyzing the behavior of the
individual components and the other the end-to-end system behavior, assuming the cor-
rectness of the components.
Verifying modular systems such as ROS applications is challenging due to their complex-
ity and the use of general-purpose programming languages, but it has been shown that
lightweight formal analyses are effective, especially in middlewares like ROS that promote
highly configurable applications [18].
3.2.4
Schema-guided testing
Schema-guided testing of message-oriented systems is a relatively novel approach to
software testing that combines principles from Specification-based Testing (SBT) and
Property-based Testing (PBT). This approach is beneficial for distributed systems where
components communicate asynchronously through message-passing [19].
3https://uppaal.org/
4http://agrob.inectec.pt/
16
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:27==
The main idea behind schema-guided testing is to describe the expected behavior of
the system and the causality relations between messages using formal specifications
based on temporal logic. These specifications are used to generate tests that match
well-understood specification patterns automatically.
The process begins with the user providing a high-level declarative specification of the
expected behavior of the system. This specification then identifies test schemas likely to
falsify the property. These schemas correspond to abstract classes of execution traces,
which can be refined by introducing assumptions about the system.
At the low level, concrete traces are successively produced for each schema using
property-based testing principles. These traces are then used to test the system, with the
validity of the tests being automatically evaluated by comparing the output traces against
the specification.
This approach has been applied to robotic systems implemented with the popular ROS
middleware [19]. The results show that schema-guided testing is both more effective and
more efficient than a pure PBT approach, even when using minimal schemas.
The schema-guided testing approach has several advantages. It allows for the automatic
generation of relevant trace inputs by inspecting the specifications, sparing the devel-
oper from having to understand the underlying formalisms. It also provides a mechanism
to guide the input generation and discard many irrelevant message traces, making the
testing process more efficient.
However, there are also areas for future research and improvement [19]. These include
exploring further boosting performance by partitioning minimal schemas into several spe-
cialized schemas, improving the automatic schema refinement process, and improving
the specification language to support other property patterns or full-blown state machines.
Another interesting advancement would be to develop a schema-guided testing tool spe-
cialized in assessing ROS applications at runtime, and it is one of the main objectives we
are trying to reach with this project.
3.3
DevOps for Industrial Robotics
Industrial robotics involves complex software engineering practices, including program-
ming, testing, and deployment.
Testing robotic applications is critical to ensure their
safety, reliability, and performance. However, the testing process can be time-consuming,
labor-intensive, and error-prone, especially when dealing with complex robotics applica-
tions. This can lead to delays in software releases and increased costs associated with
the development process.
DevOps practices can help address these challenges by enabling the continuous inte-
gration and delivery of robotics software applications. This allows for the automation of
the testing process and the deployment of software to simulated environments for test-
ing. By automating the testing process, DevOps can improve the quality and reliability
of robotics software while reducing the time and resources required for testing. This can
result in faster software releases, reduced costs associated with development, and im-
proved safety and performance of robotics applications.
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
17
==PAGE:28==
3.3.1
Assessment of ROS repositories
In software development, evaluating the quality of repositories is crucial for ensuring the
reliability and robustness of the software. There have been significant advancements in
the robotics field, with various frameworks proposed to assess and enhance the quality
of software repositories [17].
One such framework was developed at the High-Assurance Software Laboratory and pre-
sented by Santos, Cunha, Macedo, and Lourenço [17]. This framework, created by San-
tos, uses automated tools to inspect code and identify key properties that impact the
occurrence of defects in the final product. The HAROS framework has been used to as-
sess several publicly available ROS repositories, providing a comprehensive overview of
the internal quality of the software being developed in the ROS community.
Another noteworthy tool in this field is SonarQube5, an open-source platform that enables
teams to manage, track, and improve the quality of their projects. Supporting multiple
languages, SonarQube integrates with continuous integration tools to offer real-time feed-
back on code quality. It includes a wide range of features, including static code analysis,
complexity measures, duplication detection, and code unit tests.
In the realm of GitHub6 repositories, Ray et al. [20] conducted a large-scale study in which
they gathered various process metrics to understand how these metrics influence the
quality of projects and how this relates to the chosen programming language. This study
provides valuable insights into the factors influencing code quality in public repositories.
Despite the progress in the field, there are still challenges. Many existing tools do not take
into account the specificities of certain systems, like ROS. Additionally, most of these tools
only focus on individual aspects of quality, such as code complexity or adherence to coding
standards, without providing a comprehensive assessment of overall quality. Therefore,
there is a need for more comprehensive and adaptable frameworks that can meet the
specific needs of different software systems and provide a more complete assessment of
their quality.
3.3.2
Containerization
Containerization is a lightweight virtualization method that encapsulates an application
and its dependencies into a portable, isolated unit known as a container. This unit includes
the application’s code, runtime environment, system tools, libraries, and settings, ensuring
consistent execution across diverse computing environments [21]. Unlike a traditional
Virtual Machine (VM), which virtualizes an entire operating system, containers share the
underlying operating system kernel, making them significantly lighter and faster to start
[22].
The portability of containers enables applications to run seamlessly across various plat-
forms and infrastructures without modifications, addressing the common issue of software
not functioning consistently in different environments while also being remarkably efficient
in their resource utilization, consuming minimal resources and resulting in faster startup
times, lower overhead, and the ability to run more containers on a given host compared
to virtual machines [21].
Moreover, containerization provides agility and scalability in software development and
deployment, making it an essential tool in CI/CD processes. The lightweight nature of
5https://www.sonarsource.com/
6https://github.com/
18
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:29==
containers allows for rapid application creation, testing, and deployment, accelerating the
development lifecycle. Containers can be easily scaled up or down to meet fluctuating
demand. This also enhances fault tolerance and resilience by operating in isolated envi-
ronments, ensuring that issues or failures within one container do not impact others. This
isolation minimizes the risk of cascading failures and facilitates troubleshooting and recov-
ery. Additionally, containerization contributes to improved security by providing a layer of
isolation between applications and the host system, restricting the potential attack surface
and mitigating the risk of unauthorized access or malicious activity.
Docker7, an open-source platform, has emerged as a leading technology for containeriza-
tion. Docker provides a comprehensive suite of tools and services for building, shipping,
and running containerized applications. It simplifies the creation and management of con-
tainers through its user-friendly interface and extensive ecosystem of tools and resources.
With its vast community of users and contributors, Docker has become a de facto standard
for containerization [21].
All these factors also contribute to the emergence of containers as a transformative
force in cloud computing, revolutionizing how applications are developed, deployed, and
scaled. The portability it provides, coupled with the ability to scale effortlessly to meet
varying demands, makes containers an ideal choice for cloud-native and microservices-
based architectures [23].
3.3.3
Containerization in ROS
Containerization applied to robotics allows ROS applications, which typically consist of
many integrated modules, to be executed in a consistent environment across different
machines. This consistency is crucial in collaborative workflows, where different develop-
ment teams work on the same application. It also addresses the issue of the lack of stan-
dard development practices for containerizing ROS applications. It provides a common
standard way to work with containerized ROS applications, which can increase collabo-
ration among development teams, facilitate the reuse of existing solutions, and automate
the development of new ones.
The ROS community has seen a significant shift towards adopting container technolo-
gies in recent years, driven by the need for reproducible and easily deployable robotics
solutions. However, despite this trend, a common procedure or tool suite for creating,
testing, and deploying containerized ROS packages is still lacking. This gap in the de-
velopment process has led to the creation of a container-based framework for developing
ROS applications called Rigel8 [24].
This framework is designed to support the development of ROS applications using Docker
containers across all stages of the development process. It not only assists in container-
izing packages but also aids in deploying these solutions. Furthermore, it facilitates the
creation of complex simulation environments for testing purposes. Rigel’s extensible de-
sign featuring external plugins that interface with services such as Amazon Web Ser-
vices (AWS) RoboMaker9 provides a foundation for this thesis’s core objective: the de-
velopment of a runtime assessment tool that seamlessly integrates as a Rigel plugin. This
integration will empower developers to leverage Rigel’s existing capabilities for container-
ization and automation, while incorporating the runtime assessment features presented in
7https://www.docker.com/
8https://github.com/rigel-ros/rigel
9https://aws.amazon.com/pt/robomaker/
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
19
==PAGE:30==
this work. The ultimate goal is to enhance the testing and validation of ROS applications
within cloud simulation environments, such as AWS RoboMaker, thereby streamlining the
development process and ensuring the reliability and robustness of robotic systems.
Figure 3.4: Diagram depicting the workflow of the Rigel framework and its core capabilities
[24].
3.3.4
Cloud Simulation and Continuous Integration and Deployment
Cloud simulations for CI/CD in robotics is an emerging field that is gaining traction due
to the increasing complexity of robotic systems and the need for efficient and reliable
testing methodologies. The advent of Industry 4.0 has led to the introduction of innovative
technologies in the manufacturing ecosystems, including advanced robotic systems that
are autonomous and capable of operating in unstructured environments. These systems
are fully integrated with production systems, leading to complex issues and challenges in
how robotic software applications are developed, tested, and deployed.
CI/CD in the robotics domain is still underutilized when compared to other fields of soft-
ware development [25]. Conventional testing techniques used in CI/CD pipelines are
usually not enough to fully test a robotic project in its entirety. Therefore, there is a need
for a novel approach in the scope of CI/CD, making use of cloud-based technologies to
add additional automated simulation tests to the pipeline and integrate them with ease in
the development of robotic software.
Cloud simulations provide a platform for testing robotic software in a controlled environ-
ment, allowing for the detection and rectification of errors before deployment. This ap-
proach is particularly beneficial in the robotics domain, where the cost of errors can be
high. Even though the majority of repositories use some form of CI pipeline, less than half
of them make use of unit or other types of tests [25]. This reinforces the need for a more
structured approach to systematically and continuously analyze code.
Cloud-based robotic simulations, particularly those using Gazebo, play a crucial role in
enhancing CI for ROS applications. Gazebo, a widely used open-source robotics simula-
tor, provides a realistic simulated environment where robotic software can be thoroughly
tested before deployment on physical robots. One of the platforms that enable this is AWS
RoboMaker, a cloud-based robotics development service that seamlessly integrates with
Gazebo, offering a scalable and efficient platform for running these simulations. Devel-
opers can create robot and simulation application bundles using colcon, a ROS build tool,
20
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:31==
and upload them to AWS RoboMaker. The platform then executes these bundles within
a cloud-based Gazebo instance, allowing for automated testing and validation of robotic
software in a controlled environment.
Cloud simulations in CI/CD pipelines can also help improve the quality and reliability of
robotic software, reduce the time and resources required for testing, and result in faster
software releases. It can also lead to reduced costs associated with development and
improved safety and performance of robotics applications. However, the use of all these
techniques is not yet very prominent in robotics, indicating a significant potential for further
research and development in this area.
Upon all this, Teixeira, Arrais, and Veiga [25] proposed an improved CI/CD pipeline for
robotics that features the integration of a cloud-based testing infrastructure:
Figure 3.5: Proposed improved CI/CD pipeline for robotics [18].
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
21
==PAGE:32==
4
Methodology
This methodology chapter details the systematic development of a comprehensive run-
time assessment framework for ROS applications. It begins by introducing a novel PSL
inspired by Ansible’s intuitive declarative syntax. This PSL aims to simplify the process of
specifying assessment requirements for ROS developers, ensuring clarity, conciseness,
and ease of use. By aligning with the standards defined by ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148-2018 [10]
and IEEE 830 [11] standards, it aims at providing unambiguous, complete, and verifiable
requirement specifications, thus promoting a robust assessment process at runtime.
Following the development of the PSL, it elaborates on the development of an accom-
panying assessment tool. This tool is designed to parse the requirements specified in
the PSL and execute runtime assessments on ROS applications based on the parsed
input. The tool’s architecture, implementation details, and assessment mechanisms will
be discussed in depth, highlighting its ability to monitor and evaluate the behavior of ROS
applications against the specified requirements. The goal of this integrated approach is
a resulting tool that supplies ROS developers with a streamlined and effective means of
specifying and validating the runtime properties of their applications.
Python1 was chosen as the primary programming language for developing the runtime
assessment tool due to its extensive ecosystem of libraries and frameworks that facilitate
ROS development, such as rospy, as well as the fact that certain tools such as Rigel,
for which integration with this tool was envisioned, only support Python plugins. Not only
that, but also the fact that Python has a concise and readable syntax that enables rapid
prototyping and iterative refinement, and its growing adoption in the robotics community
made it a very pertinent tool to carry out this project. Additionally, its robust and easy-to-
use libraries for asynchronous programming and error-handling mechanisms, along with
comprehensive debugging tools, further solidified its suitability for creating a reliable and
maintainable runtime assessment tool.
The development of the runtime assessment tool and accompanying PSL was conducted
in an open-source environment, adhering to principles of transparency and collaboration.
Git [26], a widely adopted distributed version control system, was employed to manage
the project’s source code. The entire codebase, along with documentation, is publicly
accessible on GitHub at https://github.com/joaomena17/runtime_assessment, promoting
the free consultation and further development and enhancement of the tool. This open-
source approach democratizes access to the tool and encourages contributions from the
broader ROS community, potentially leading to improvements, extensions, and novel use
cases that can benefit the entire robotics ecosystem [27].
1https://www.python.org/
22
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:33==
4.1
Design and Specification of Functional Requirements
Following an analysis of existing PSLs, a significant gap was identified in the field of
robotics: the lack of efficient and developer-friendly methods for specifying properties
within ROS applications. While HPL, mentioned in Section 2.3, addresses some of these
challenges, it falls short in certain critical aspects. Notably, its emphasis on eventual con-
sistency and formal verification techniques may not fully cater to the diverse requirements
that may need to be assessed in ROS applications, as developers often need to spec-
ify functional properties related to application execution or performance characteristics of
simulations. Furthermore, the steep learning curve associated with becoming efficient in
the use of HPL presents a barrier to its widespread adoption, restricting its potential to
enhance developer productivity and the overall quality and reliability of ROS applications.
Given these limitations, a decision was made to develop a novel PSL from scratch. This
new PSL aims to bridge the aforementioned gap by offering a streamlined and intuitive
approach to property specification, specifically tailored for the ROS ecosystem. By ad-
dressing the shortcomings of existing solutions, the developed PSL seeks to empower
ROS developers with a versatile tool that facilitates the specification of a wide range of
requirements, from functional correctness to performance benchmarks, without compro-
mising ease of use or productivity.
4.1.1
Inspiration from Ansible
The design of the PSL draws substantial inspiration from the declarative YAML2 syntax
employed by Ansible3, a widely adopted automation tool. Ansible’s syntax, renowned for
its simplicity, readability, and ease of use, served as a guiding principle in shaping the
PSL’s structure. By adopting YAML as its foundation, the PSL empowers developers to
articulate assessment requirements in a format that is both concise and human-readable,
even for those without extensive programming expertise.
In Ansible, playbooks act as collections of tasks aimed at achieving specific objectives.
Analogously, the developed PSL employs configuration files as repositories for expressing
assessment criteria. Each requirement within these configuration files parallels an Ansible
task, delineating the target topic or metric, the desired outcome (e.g., existence, absence,
numerical constraints), and supplementary parameters such as time windows or tolerance
thresholds.
4.1.2
Comparison between the developed PSL and HPL
While the PSL shares a conceptual proximity with Ansible’s declarative style, it diverges
significantly from HPL in several key dimensions.
In contrast to HPL, which presents a higher overhead to adoption due to its intricate struc-
ture and specialized terminology, the PSL prioritizes accessibility and ease of use. Its
syntax is deliberately crafted to be intuitive, catering to developers with varying levels of
experience and minimizing the barrier to entry.
Furthermore, the PSL’s primary focus lies in the realm of runtime assessment, specifi-
cally targeting the monitoring and evaluation of ROS applications during their operational
phase. Conversely, HPL is primarily oriented towards formal verification, employing rigor-
2https://yaml.org/
3https://www.ansible.com/
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
23
==PAGE:34==
ous techniques such as model checking to verify the adherence of ROS systems to formal
specifications.
Another distinguishing factor is the PSL’s emphasis on dynamic properties, such as mes-
sage frequencies and temporal relationships between events. Although HPL can express
temporal properties, its core strength lies in verifying static properties inherent to the sys-
tem’s architecture and design.
Additionally, the PSL is seamlessly integrated into a comprehensive runtime assessment
framework that offers data collection, analysis, and reporting mechanisms. This inte-
gration fosters a holistic approach to assessing ROS applications, whereas HPL, as a
standalone language, necessitates integration with external tools to perform verification
and analysis tasks.
4.1.3
Features and Syntax
The developed PSL offers a comprehensive and flexible framework for specifying runtime
assessment requirements in ROS applications. The syntax is structured into two primary
sections: setup and specifications.
Setup
The setup section encompasses global parameters that govern the overall assessment
process. Key parameters include:
• target_node: The name of the ROS node whose behavior will be assessed.
• logger_path: The directory path where log files generated during the assessment
will be stored.
• topics: A dictionary mapping ROS topics to their corresponding message types,
enabling the PSL to interpret the data flowing through these channels.
• rate: Rate, in Hertz, at which the assessment tool runs.
To improve the developer experience, not all parameters’ presence is required for the
execution of the assessment do not need to be specified and will be interpreted as default
values. In this case, if the parameter logger_path is missing, it will be interpreted as
"log", or if the rate attribute is not specified, it defaults to 10Hz. The following snippet
demonstrates how a real setup section for an assessment could be specified:
1
setup:
2
target_node: /snake_game
3
logger_path: /home/user/assessment_logs
4
topics:
5
/turtle1/pose: turtlesim/Pose
6
/turtle1/cmd_vel: geometry_msgs/Twist
Here, the specification indicates that the activity of the node /snake_game on the topics
/turtle1/pose and /turtle1/cmd_vel should be assessed at the default rate, and that
the resulting report should be logged to the path /home/user/assessment_logs.
24
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:35==
Specifications
The specifications section comprises a list of individual assessment requirements, each
defining a specific property or behavior to be monitored. Each requirement is represented
as a dictionary with the following key-value pairs. There are two possible assessment
types:
• topic (optional): The name of the ROS topic to which the requirement applies. If
omitted, the requirement is assumed to be a global metric assessment.
• metric (optional): The name of the global metric to be assessed (e.g., execu-
tion_time, number_of_messages). This key is used only for metric-based assess-
ments and is mutually exclusive to the topic key
For each of these types of assessments,
• target: Specifies the term of comparison for an assessment. This is represented as
a key-value pair or list of key-value pairs. For a topic assessment, the key on each
key-value pair always specifies the attribute within that topic’s message objects that
should be assessed for that requirement. Then, depending on the overall structure
of the particular specification, the value field can be either a single value or, for
numeric types, a range.
• mode (optional): The assessment mode, which can be one of the following (defaults
to "exists"):
– exists: Verifies the existence of a specific message or list of messages.
– absent: Verifies the absence of a specific message or list of messages.
– max: Indicates that the maximum value of a topic’s message attribute should
be evaluated against the target.
– min: Indicates that the minimum value of a topic’s message attribute should be
evaluated against the target.
– average: Indicates that the average value of a topic’s message attribute should
be evaluated against the target.
– metric: Assesses an internal metric specific to that topic’s assessment. For
topic assessments using the metric mode, the key value for the target param-
eter specifies the metric that should be evaluated instead of an attribute of a
topic’s message.
• tolerance (optional): The allowed deviation from the target value for numerical
assessments. Defaults to 0.05, a 5% tolerance.
• comparator (optional): The comparison operator to be used for numerical assess-
ments. Defaults to "=".
• timein (optional): The starting time (in seconds) for the assessment window of a
particular requirement. Defaults to a null value.
• timeout (optional): The ending time (in seconds) for the assessment window of a
particular requirement. Defaults to a null value.
• temporal_consistency (optional): A boolean flag indicating whether the order of
events within the assessment window should be considered. Defaults to "False".
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
25
==PAGE:36==
The following listings represent an example of a couple of topic requirements. The first
specification indicates that the assessment tool should consider messages published in
the time window between 5.0 and 15.0 seconds from the start of the assessment and
verify that there exists events in the /turtle1/pose topic indicating positions where the
pair of attributes x and y is equal to (10, 8) and (10, 10.5), with a default tolerance of 5%,
respectively. It also specifies that assessment should check that the events happened in
the order they are written in the requirement.
1
- topic: turtle1/pose
2
temporal\_consistency: true
3
timein: 5.0
4
timeout: 15.0
5
target:
6
- { x: 10, y: 8 }
7
- { x: 10, y: 10.5 }
Listing 4.1: Example of topic assessment specification for ordered events.
The subsequent listing represents a different assessment. Instead of targeting a particular
point or group of points, it evaluates a numerical value extracted from the data published
to the topic against a target. The specification translates the requirement that the average
value of the linear.x attribute in all of the messages published in the turtle/cmd_vel
topic should be lesser than 1.5:
1
- topic: turtle1/cmd_vel
2
mode: average
3
comparator: "<"
4
target:
5
- linear.x: 1.5
Listing 4.2: Example of topic assessment specification for numerical value.
To also demonstrate the structure of a global metric assessment specification, the require-
ments below specify that the execution time for the whole assessment should take less
than 60.0 seconds to complete and that the total number of messages published to the
topics that are being monitored should be within the range of 1000 to 10000 messages,
respectively.
1
- metric: "execution_time"
2
comparator: "<"
3
target: 60.0
4
5
- metric: "number_of_messages"
6
target:
7
- min: 1000
8
- max: 10000
Listing 4.3: Example of global metric assessments.
Through an iterative refinement process driven by the principles of ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148-
2018 [10] and IEEE 830 [11], the PSL has evolved into a mature tool that effectively ad-
dresses the outlined objectives. The resulting PSL offers a clear and concise syntax for
expressing diverse assessment requirements, as demonstrated in the provided code snip-
pet. In line with ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148-2018, the PSL enables the unambiguous definition
of the target topic or metric and the specific properties to be assessed. The inclusion of
parameters like temporal_consistency and a defined time window (timein and timeout)
26
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:37==
further enhances the precision and clarity of the requirements, facilitating traceability and
validation of eventual consistency within a topic throughout the assessment process.
Moreover, the PSL’s structure aligns with IEEE 830’s [11] recommendations for well-
structured requirements specifications. The clear organization of the code, with its dis-
tinct subsections for the target topic, assessment parameters, and expected values, con-
tributes to the readability and maintainability of the specification. The ability to only provide
the parameters that are vital to an assessment also improves the developer experience
and ensures that the intended assessment is clearly communicated. Additionally, the use
of optional tolerance settings for numerical values allows for flexibility and accuracy in
specifying the desired system behavior. These characteristics embody the principles of
completeness, correctness, and consistency advocated by IEEE 830 [11], ensuring that
the specifications are comprehensive, accurate, and free of ambiguities.
This PSL not only meets the immediate needs of runtime assessment for ROS applica-
tions but also lays a solid foundation for its future expansion. The modular design of the
PSL, coupled with its compliance with established standards, creates a framework that
can readily accommodate the addition of new features and adapt to the evolving land-
scape of ROS development. This adaptability is crucial for ensuring the PSL’s long-term
relevance and applicability in the field of robotics.
4.2
Development and Testing of Runtime Assessment Tool
Building upon the established PSL, developing a corresponding runtime assessment tool
is essential for realizing the practical application of the specified requirements. This tool,
designed to integrate with the ROS ecosystem, performs the crucial tasks of parsing the
specifications and executing the corresponding assessments at runtime during the oper-
ation of ROS applications. The subsequent sections will tackle the intricacies of this tool’s
architecture, its implementation details, and its efficacy in evaluating the runtime behavior
of ROS-based systems against the specified requirements.
By automating the assessment process and providing a standardized framework for eval-
uating ROS applications, this tool aims to enhance the development workflow, improve
code quality, and ultimately contribute to creating more reliable and robust robotic sys-
tems. Integrating the PSL and the assessment tool thus forms a cohesive and powerful
solution for addressing the challenges associated with runtime verification and validation
in the ROS domain.
The developed tool was engineered to facilitate the runtime assessment of ROS applica-
tions, offering a structured methodology to monitor and evaluate the behavior of ROS
nodes during operation. A central class, RuntimeAssessment, orchestrates the entire
assessment process, relying on a configuration file to determine the target node and
specific requirements to be evaluated. This configuration file, written in YAML and fol-
lowing the structure of the PSL described in Section 4.1, is parsed and validated by the
RuntimeAssessmentConfig class. It encompasses setup parameters such as the target
node’s name, topics of interest, assessment frequency, and logging paths. Additionally,
it specifies detailed assessment requirements, which include topic existence verification,
metric thresholds, and temporal consistency checks.
The RuntimeAssessment class acts as the core of the assessment process, initializing
a ROS node and setting up necessary variables according to the configuration file. It
manages the assessment lifecycle, initiating when the target node becomes active and
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
27
==PAGE:38==
concluding upon its termination. For each individual topic included in the assessment
specifications, it initializes an object of the class AssessmentObjects with all its respec-
tive parameters. It runs each of these objects concurrently throughout the application’s
execution and publishes global events to a shared memory queue to synchronize the ac-
tions of the individual assessment objects. Moreover, it maintains a detailed log of the
assessment process, reporting all results in a clear and insightful manner. Global metric
assessments, however, are handled internally by the RuntimeAssessment class.
Integral to the assessment framework are the AssessmentObjects instances, each re-
sponsible for tasks of a specific assessment ROS topic. These objects subscribe to rel-
evant topics, meticulously recording incoming messages with precise timestamps. They
remain attentive to global events, adjusting their monitoring and assessment behavior
accordingly. The culmination of the assessment involves evaluating the recorded data
against the pre-defined requirements, determining whether each requirement has been
met or violated, and documenting the results in the log.
Figure 4.1 illustrates the fundamental envisioned workflow of this tool:
YAML specification
file
write
specifcations
ROS Developer
Runtime Assessment Tool
RuntimeAssessmentConfig
RuntimeAssessment
AssessmentObjects
Figure 4.1: Fundamental Workflow of the Runtime Assessment Tool.
To ensure loose coupling, clean code [28] and a class design aligned with certain princi-
ples such as the Single Responsibility Principle [29], a utils.py module was also devel-
oped with the objective of housing helper functions that are not specific to a class’s primary
responsibility outside of the class definition. Despite not being part of the classes’ primary
responsibilities, the classes still perform essential tasks like checking values against spec-
ified requirements, filtering data records by time windows, and calculating various met-
rics, such as event frequencies and maximum/minimum values of a topic’s messages’
attributes. These utilities streamline the assessment process, providing a robust founda-
tion for data analysis and interpretation.
In essence, this tool embodies an event-driven architecture. Its adaptability to diverse
assessment scenarios stems from its configurable nature and capacity to handle both
topic-specific and metric-based requirements.
Employing distinct AssessmentObjects
instances ensures modularity and maintains a clear separation of concerns, facilitat-
ing code maintenance and expansion.
The level of abstraction implemented in the
AssessmentObjects class, explained in detail in Section 4.2.4, also enables a smooth
translation of specifications for any type of topic and message class into an assessment,
providing great versatility. Furthermore, the event-driven approach ensures responsive-
ness to changes in the target node’s state, enabling synchronized assessment activities
that comprehensively evaluate the ROS application’s runtime behavior.
The following subsections go into detail about the design choices and implementation of
this tool, which is illustrated by Figure 4.2.
28
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:39==
Labels:
- Class
- Enumeration
Figure 4.2: Class diagram of the developed tool.
4.2.1
Runtime Configuration Class
The RuntimeAssessmentConfig class serves as the first step of the assessment tool,
handling the crucial task of loading and interpreting the configuration parameters that dic-
tate the assessment process. It reads a YAML configuration file, which can be specified
when instancing a RuntimeAssessmentConfig object, or named specifications.yaml
by default, which encapsulates both the broader setup instructions and the specific as-
sessment criteria. The configuration file is structured into two main sections: setup and
specifications.
The setup section encompasses parameters that influence the overall assessment initial-
ization and behavior. These parameters typically include the name of the target_node
to be assessed, a list of relevant topics to monitor, the rate at which the assessment
should run, and the logger_path specifying the directory for storing log files.
The
RuntimeAssessmentConfig class ensures the presence of these essential keys and
assigns default values if any are missing, thereby ensuring a robust and predictable
assessment setup.
The specifications section includes a list of individual assessment requirements,
each targeting either a specific ROS topic or a global metric. For topic-based assess-
ments, the requirements might include checks for the existence of certain messages
within a specified timeframe, temporal consistency verification, or evaluation of message
content against predefined thresholds. Metric-based assessments, on the other hand,
could involve verifying if aggregated metrics like message frequency or execution time
conform to the expected ranges. Similarly to what happens for the setup section, the
RuntimeAssessmentConfig class assigns default values if any non-vital parameters are
missing.
Upon initialization,
the RuntimeAssessmentConfig class meticulously parses the
specifications section, transforming the raw YAML data into a structured dictionary
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
29
==PAGE:40==
for convenient access and manipulation during the assessment process. It categorizes
the requirements based on their assessment type (topic or metric), enabling streamlined
processing and targeted evaluation later on. For topic-based assessments, it also groups
all requirements by topic, facilitating the initialization of topic-specific AssessmentObjects
later in the process.
Beyond parsing and structuring the configuration data, the RuntimeAssessmentConfig
class also performs validation to ensure the integrity and correctness of the configuration
file. It checks for the presence of mandatory keys and flags any invalid keys or value
types, thereby preventing erroneous configurations from compromising the assessment
process.
4.2.2
Runtime Assessment Class
The RuntimeAssessment class serves as the central orchestrator of the runtime evalua-
tion process for ROS applications. Upon instantiation with a RuntimeAssessmentConfig
object, it processes that configuration and saves some key configuration details, such as
the target node to be evaluated, the relevant topics to monitor, the assessment rate, and
the designated log file directory, as well as the specification requirements. It also declares
internal state variables and creates a global event queue, which will be used for message
passing and a respective lock to ensure thread-safe access.
During the initialization process, a multi-level logger is also set up. The logger accesses
or creates a logging directory based on the provided configuration and sets up handlers,
each responsible for directing log messages to specific destinations. The logger employs
various logging levels (e.g., INFO, ERROR) to categorize log messages based on their sever-
ity, enabling granular filtering and analysis. Multiple log handlers, including FileHandler
for persistent storage and StreamHandler for console output, are utilized to direct log
messages to appropriate destinations.
Log messages are meticulously formatted, incorporating timestamps, logger names, log
levels, and message content, thereby enhancing readability and streamlining automated
parsing for subsequent analysis. By customizing the logging setup with specific file paths
and formatters, the RuntimeAssessment class ensures that the assessment process is
transparently documented, aiding in debugging, analysis, and reporting [30].
Once the variables and data structures are initialized and the logger is set up, the con-
structor initializes a ROS node, establishes connections with the specified target node,
and creates a pool of AssessmentObjects objects that are instantiated with the parame-
ters derived from the parsed configuration data.
The assessment process follows a state machine composed of an idle state and a run-
ning state. In the idle state, the program awaits the activation of the target node. The
transition to the running state is triggered by the detection of the target node, upon which
the class publishes a NODE_ADDED global event. This event signals the commencement of
the assessment, prompting the instantiation of AssessmentObjects instances, each re-
sponsible for monitoring specific aspects of the target node’s behavior. The running state
performs continuously monitors the target node’s status and the workflow of assessment
object activities, which are executed concurrently.
To optimize the assessment of concurrent processes, the asyncio4 library was used to
streamline asynchronous programming. This approach allows for concurrently executing
4https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio.html
30
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:41==
multiple tasks without the need for explicit thread management. The asynchronous nature
of the framework proves particularly advantageous in scenarios involving a multitude of
assessment objects operating concurrently, as it mitigates the overhead of thread creation
and context switching.
The assessment culminates with the target node’s termination, which, when detected by
the assessment node, leads to the publishing of a NODE_REMOVED event and is followed by
the aggregation and analysis of the collected data.
Figure 4.3: Runtime Assessment state machine.
Central to the RuntimeAssessment class is its role as a communication medium. It em-
ploys a thread-safe event queue to disseminate global events, facilitating coordination
among the assessment objects. These events signal crucial state changes, ensuring a
synchronized and coherent evaluation process. Additionally, the class meticulously logs
the assessment’s progression, capturing pertinent information like the initiation and ter-
mination times, the number of processed messages, and the frequency of events.
As showcased in Figure 4.2, the runtime assessment tool utilizes an enumeration for
global events, defined in the GlobalEvents class, to provide a structured and type-safe
approach for defining and managing the events that drive the assessment process.
Employing an enum with named constants like NODE_ADDED and NODE_REMOVED makes
the code more readable and easier to maintain. The enum’s type safety prevents errors
caused by invalid event values, enhancing the system’s robustness [31].
Moreover,
enums streamline event handling within the code, making it cleaner and more concise.
This approach even facilitates future extensibility by allowing for the easy addition of new
events.
The RuntimeAssessment class also contains methods for calculating and assessing global
metrics. Upon the conclusion of the assessment, it aggregates data from the individual
assessment objects, computes metrics like total execution time and message frequency,
and evaluates these metrics against the global metric requirements specified in the con-
figuration. The final assessment results, gathering both topic-specific and metric-based
evaluations, are then logged, providing a comprehensive overview of the target node’s
runtime behavior.
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
31
==PAGE:42==
Runtime Assessment Tool
/runtime_assessment
(assessment node)
RuntimeAssessmentConfig
Parse and validate
configurations
RuntimeAssessment
- Initialize assessment node
- Monitor target node and inputs
- Orchestrate global workflow
- Collect data and metrics
setup instructions
functional requirements
Multi-level
logger
Assessment
Objects
Assessment
Objects
Assessment
Objects
/topic1
/topic2
/topic3
Figure 4.4: Runtime Assessment workflow.
4.2.3
Instantiation of AssessmentObjects objects in RuntimeAssessment.
The RuntimeAssessment class demonstrates a high degree of versatility and adaptabil-
ity through its dynamic importation of message classes for ROS topics. The underlying
mechanism leverages the configuration file, which is parsed by the RuntimeAssessment-
Config class, to obtain a mapping of topic names to their respective message types. This
mapping is a crucial reference for the RuntimeAssessment class, informing it about the
structure and content of messages traversing each topic.
During the initialization of AssessmentObjects instances, the RuntimeAssessment class
dynamically imports the requisite message class by invoking the import_message_type
utility function, which is shown below. This function, upon receiving the topic name and
its corresponding message type as input, extracts the package and message name. It
then employs Python’s inherent module import mechanism to load the relevant message
class definition during runtime.
1
def import_message_type(topic_tuple: Tuple[str, str]) -> Any:
2
"""
3
Import message types from a dictionary of topic names to message types
4
:param topic_types: A tuple mapping topic names to message types
5
:return: Imported class
6
"""
7
topic, msg_type = topic_tuple
8
9
package_name , message_name = msg_type.split('/')
10
package_name = package_name + '.msg'
11
12
try:
13
message_module = import_module(package_name)
14
message_class = getattr(message_module , message_name)
15
return message_class
16
17
except (AttributeError , ModuleNotFoundError) as e:
18
raise ValueError(f"Failed to import message type for topic '{topic}': {e}")
Listing 4.4: import_message_type utility function.
This dynamic import strategy enables the assessment tool to seamlessly accommodate
a wide array of ROS message types without requiring any manual code modifications or
imposing predefined assumptions about message structures. By adapting to the diverse
32
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:43==
landscape of ROS messages, the tool ensures that any ROS topic can be effectively eval-
uated, provided that the topic and its associated message type are accurately specified
within the configuration file. This eliminates the need for maintaining separate assess-
ment logic for different message types, thereby simplifying the codebase and enhancing
its maintainability.
Moreover, this approach aligns with the principles of modularity and extensibility [32],
as new message types introduced into the ROS ecosystem can be readily incorporated
into the assessment tool without requiring any alterations to its core logic. This inherent
adaptability ensures that the tool remains relevant and effective in the face of evolving
ROS technologies and use cases. In essence, the dynamic import of message classes
based on configuration information certifies the runtime assessment tool with the ability to
assess any ROS topic, irrespective of its associated message type. This feature, rooted
in Python’s flexible import mechanism, significantly enhances the tool’s versatility and
robustness, making it a valuable asset for evaluating a diverse range of ROS applications.
4.2.4
Assessment Objects Class
The AssessmentObjects class constitutes the fundamental unit of assessment within the
runtime evaluation framework. Each instance of this class is responsible for monitoring
and evaluating a specific aspect of the ROS application’s behavior.
Upon instantiation, an AssessmentObjects receives a reference to the parent Runtime-
Assessment instance, the name of the target topic, the message class associated with
the topic, and a list of requirements that the object must verify. In conjunction with this,
a dedicated logger is configured for the assessment object, ensuring that log messages
pertaining to its specific assessment task are clearly distinguished from other log entries
generated by the overall assessment framework.
The initialization process then proceeds with the declaration and initializing of various
assessment-related variables. These variables include the start time of the assessment,
metrics such as the number of messages received and their frequency, the name of the
ROS topic being monitored, the message class associated with the topic, the specific
requirements to be evaluated, and a subscriber object for receiving messages on the
topic. A list data structure to store the sequence of events observed on the topic is also
initialized.
The constructor also assigns initial values to internal state variables, including a flag indi-
cating whether the assessment is complete, as well as variables to track the latest global
event and the latest topic event recorded. These state variables facilitate the object’s
interaction with the RuntimeAssessment class and enable it to respond appropriately to
events that occur during the assessment process. Through this complex initialization pro-
cess, the AssessmentObjects class is equipped for effectively monitoring and evaluating
the specified ROS topic or metric in a structured and efficient manner.
Paramount to the functionality of the AssessmentObjects class is its subscription to the
target topic. Through this subscription, the object constantly records incoming messages
along with their precise timestamps, facilitating subsequent analysis and evaluation. Fig-
ure 4.5 demonstrates how the assessment objects are integrated into the tool’s workflow
and interact with external nodes’ topics.
The class also incorporates a mechanism for receiving and responding to global events
published by the RuntimeAssessment class to a shared memory data structure. Access to
this shared memory requires the use of locks, implemented in the form of asyncio.Lock
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
33
==PAGE:44==
/pose
/cmd_vel
/turtlesim
(simulation node)
/turtle_bot
(robot node)
Simulation Environment
Monitor target node
Subscribe to relevant topics
and collect data in real-time
RuntimeAssessment
Workflow
/runtime_assessment
(assessment node)
Assessment
Objects
Assessment
Objects
Assessment
Objects
/pose
/cmd_vel
/checkpoint
Assessment
Objects
/tf2
/checkpoint
/tf
Subscribe
Publish
Logs
Monitor Status
Figure 4.5: Workflow of AssessmentObjects integration in the tool.
objects, since different AssessmentObjects instances, as well as the RuntimeAssessment,
will attempt to access it from different threads. If not handled correctly, this can lead to
race conditions, data corruption, inconsistent states, deadlocks, and thread starvation
[33]. The locks ensure that only one task can access a shared resource at any given
moment, preventing conflicts and maintaining data integrity.
The events published to the shared memory queue serve as synchronization signals,
instructing the assessment object to initiate or terminate its monitoring and assessment
activities. Figure 4.6 shows a sequence diagram illustrating the mechanism implemented
to access the global_event_queue.
Upon receiving a NODE_ADDED event, the AssessmentObjects commences its assessment
by subscribing to the relevant topic and recording incoming messages. Conversely, a
NODE_REMOVED event triggers the conclusion of the assessment. At this point, the object
extracts relevant metrics, such as the total number of messages received and their fre-
quency, which are then meticulously logged for further scrutiny.
A key responsibility of the AssessmentObjects class is the validation of the recorded
data against the predefined requirements. The class meticulously checks whether spe-
cific messages are present within designated time windows, whether the temporal order
of events adheres to expectations, and whether numerical values fall within acceptable
ranges. In cases where requirements are not met, the object logs corresponding error
messages, highlighting discrepancies between expected and observed behavior.
34
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.6: Sequence diagram showing the lock-based access mechanism.
4.2.5
Requirements Evaluation
The AssessmentObject class is pivotal in the runtime assessment framework, as it en-
capsulates the logic for evaluating individual requirements against the observed behavior
of ROS applications. Upon receiving a NODE_REMOVED event, the check_requirements()
method is invoked, triggering a comprehensive analysis of the collected data against the
specifications defined in the configuration file. The evaluation process is multifaceted,
accommodating diverse assessment modes and criteria tailored to specific requirements.
In the exists mode, the assessment object verifies the presence of specific messages
or values within a designated time window. It filters the recorded topic events based on
the timein and timeout parameters, then checks if the target values match the recorded
data. A tolerance parameter accounts for minor variations in numeric values, ensuring ro-
bustness against numerical imprecision. The temporal_consistency flag further refines
this assessment by allowing the assessment to verify the temporal order of the events. It
dynamically selects either the ordered_points or unordered_points function based on
the value of the temporal_consistency flag. If temporal_consistency is set to True,
the ordered_points function is called, which meticulously checks for the occurrence of
the specified events in the exact sequence as defined in the requirements. Conversely, if
temporal_consistency is False, the unordered_points function is invoked, which veri-
fies the presence of the events without considering their order.
Contrarily, the absent mode evaluates the absence of specified messages or values within
the given time window. This mode is particularly useful for detecting undesirable or erro-
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
35
==PAGE:46==
neous behavior in ROS applications. Similar to the exists mode, the timein and timeout
parameters delimit the assessment window, and the temporal_consistency flag can be
used to enforce the order of absence.
The assessment framework also supports quantitative assessments through modes like
max, min, and average. In these modes, the assessment object calculates the maximum,
minimum, or average value of a specified attribute within the time-filtered dataset. The
calculated value is then compared against the target value, incorporating the tolerance
parameter to account for potential variations.
The metric mode enables the quantitative evaluation of internal metrics of that topic by
comparing it to the target value or range, utilizing the specified comparator and tolerance
for precise evaluation. Each AssessmentObject instance maintains its own set of inter-
nal metrics, which are populated during the assessment process. These metrics typically
include the number_of_messages received on the topic and the frequency at which mes-
sages are published. By capturing these fine-grained details, internal metrics enable the
evaluation of topic-specific requirements, such as verifying the existence of certain mes-
sages within a specified time window or ensuring that a topic’s publishing rate meets a
predefined threshold.
Global metrics, on the other hand, provide a holistic view of the assessed ROS applica-
tion by aggregating information from all AssessmentObject instances. These metrics are
calculated within the RuntimeAssessment class and encompass the execution_time of the
assessment, the cumulative number_of_messages received across all monitored topics,
and the overall message frequency. By consolidating data from individual topics, global
metrics facilitate the assessment of system-level requirements that pertain to the overall
performance and resource utilization of the application. For instance, global metrics can
be used to verify whether the total execution time remains within acceptable limits or to
determine if the cumulative message traffic adheres to predefined constraints.
The RuntimeAssessment class orchestrates the interplay between these two types of met-
rics by collecting internal metrics from all AssessmentObject instances and aggregating
them to compute the global metrics. This aggregation process allows for a holistic eval-
uation of the ROS application’s runtime behavior, considering both granular topic-level
details and overarching system-level characteristics.
For all assessment modes, the check_value_params function is a utility function that per-
forms quantitative evaluations, enabling flexible comparison of values using different op-
erators (e.g. ’=’, ’>’, ’<’, ’>=’, ’<=’, ’!=’) and tolerances. This function encapsulates the
logic for numerical comparisons, ensuring that the assessment results are accurate and
reliable. Besides performing the evaluation, the function also performs a series of checks
to validate the inputs and verify that the targeted topic’s messages have the attributes
being evaluated. It is also equipped with robust error handling and logging, contributing
to the resilience of the overall system.
Throughout the evaluation process, the AssessmentObject class diligently logs the out-
come of each requirement check, indicating whether it passed or failed, and in case of
the latter, providing feedback about what went wrong. This logging mechanism provides
a detailed record of the assessment results, facilitating post-assessment analysis and
identification of potential issues or anomalies in the ROS application’s behavior.
36
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:47==
5
Evaluation and Results
The developed runtime assessment framework was evaluated through a series of ex-
periments conducted within a controlled simulation environment. A set of dummy ROS
applications was designed to simulate diverse scenarios using the TurtleSim simulator, a
widely adopted tool for testing and debugging ROS nodes. By manipulating the TurtleSim1
node to traverse predefined trajectories with varying geometric shapes and subjecting it
to a range of assessment specifications, the versatility, accuracy, and effectiveness of
the assessment tool were thoroughly examined. The subsequent section will elaborate
on the experimental setup, the particular assessment specifications employed, and the
results obtained, providing evidence of the tool’s performance and practical applicability
in real-world ROS development scenarios.
The assessment framework was deployed within the ROS ecosystem, leveraging the
communication and infrastructure capabilities provided by ROS. The dummy ROS appli-
cations, specifically designed for this evaluation, included nodes that published messages
to designated topics at controlled rates and with predetermined content. This controlled
environment facilitated the precise simulation of various runtime behaviors, ensuring the
reproducibility of experimental results.
5.1
Validation of the Assessment Tool
As mentioned, a series of dummy ROS applications were crafted, each designed to ma-
nipulate the TurtleSim node into tracing distinct geometric paths within the simulation en-
vironment.
Each dummy application was subjected to a tailored set of assessment requirements
meticulously defined within the developed PSL. These requirements encompassed a
wide spectrum of criteria, ranging from fundamental checks for the existence or absence
of specific messages on designated topics to more sophisticated evaluations of temporal
consistency, adherence to numerical thresholds for position and velocity, and analyzing
global metrics such as message frequency and execution time.
A comprehensive understanding of the tool’s capabilities was achieved by deliberately
crafting scenarios that both satisfied and violated the specified requirements. Success-
ful assessments validated the tool’s ability to accurately detect and report adherence to
desired behaviors, while failed assessments highlighted its capacity to identify deviations
and anomalies in the runtime execution. This systematic approach, involving the eval-
uation of diverse geometric paths and a wide range of requirements, provided a holistic
picture of the tool’s performance, accuracy, and potential for real-world application in as-
sessing complex ROS-based systems.
1https://wiki.ros.org/turtlesim
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
37
==PAGE:48==
5.1.1
Implementation of Turtle Movement Classes
The TurtleSim environment provided a controlled testing ground for the assessment tool.
Three Python classes, namely TurtleShape, TurtleSquare, and TurtleRectangle, were
implemented to manipulate the TurtleSim node’s movement and generate data for evalu-
ation.
• TurtleShape: The TurtleShape class serves as a Base Class, the foundation for
all turtle movement behaviors. It encapsulates fundamental functionalities such as:
– Subscribing to the /turtle1/pose topic to obtain the turtle’s current pose.
– Publishing velocity commands to the /turtle1/cmd_vel topic to control its
movement.
– A publisher for the /turtle1/checkpoint topic to signal the completion of each
side of the square.
– A publisher for the /tf topic to broadcast the turtle’s transform information.
– Defining methods for linear and rotational motion.
These methods leverage ROS time and geometry concepts to ensure precise and
controlled movements.
• TurtleSquare: The TurtleSquare class inherits from TurtleShape and extends
its capabilities to enable the turtle to trace a square trajectory. It introduces the
move method in this class, which directs a sequence of linear and rotational motions
to achieve the desired square path, with checkpoints and transforms published at
strategic intervals.
• TurtleRectangle: Similar to TurtleSquare, the TurtleRectangle class inherits
from TurtleShape and specializes in generating a rectangular path with the move
method, while publishing checkpoints and transforms.
Labels:
- Class
- Enumeration
Figure 5.1: Class diagram of the simulation ROS applications.
38
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:49==
By implementing these three classes, the evaluation setup gained the flexibility to gener-
ate diverse movement patterns for the TurtleSim node. The TurtleShape class provided a
reusable foundation for movement control, while the derived classes TurtleSquare and
TurtleRectangle specialized in creating specific geometric trajectories. This modular
approach allowed for easy extension and modification of the simulated behaviors, en-
abling a thorough evaluation of the runtime assessment tool’s capabilities under varying
conditions.
/pose
/cmd_vel
/turtlesim
(simulation node)
/turtle_bot
(robot node)
Simulation Environment
/checkpoint
/tf
Subscribe
Publish
Monitor Status
Figure 5.2: Simulation environment’s Nodes and Topics interactions.
5.1.2
Assessment Specifications
A diverse set of assessment specifications was elaborated to evaluate the runtime assess-
ment tool’s capabilities comprehensively. These specifications were designed to test the
tool’s ability to monitor and evaluate various aspects of ROS application behavior, rang-
ing from basic message existence checks to complex temporal and metric-based require-
ments.
For the tf topic, which provides transform information in the ROS ecosystem, specifica-
tions were created to assess the temporal consistency of published transforms, ensuring
that the turtle followed a predefined square trajectory with specific coordinates. Additional
specifications checked for the absence of certain transforms within defined time windows,
validating the tool’s ability to detect missing or delayed messages. Finally, a metric-based
assessment was included to verify that the number of messages published on the tf topic
remained within a certain range.
In the case of the turtle1/pose topic, which reports the turtle’s position and orientation,
specifications focused on verifying the existence of specific poses within the square tra-
jectory, ensuring that the turtle reached the intended positions. Similar to the tf topic,
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
39
==PAGE:50==
checks for the absence of certain poses were implemented to detect deviations from the
expected path. Furthermore, metric-based assessments were used to validate the fre-
quency of pose updates and the total number of messages published on the topic.
For the turtle1/cmd_vel topic, responsible for velocity commands, specifications were
tailored to assess the turtle’s average and maximum linear and angular velocities. These
assessments ensured that the turtle’s movement remained within safe and acceptable lim-
its. Additionally, a check for the minimum linear velocity was included to detect situations
where the turtle might come to a complete stop.
Furthermore, the turtle1/checkpoint topic, used to signal the completion of specific
waypoints in the trajectory, was assessed to verify the correct order and timing of check-
point messages. This assessment ensured that the turtle followed the intended path and
reached each checkpoint in the expected sequence by analyzing non-numeric attributes.
The global metric assessments allowed for requirements to be set on the overall runtime of
the application, the total number of messages across all assessed topics, and the average
frequency of messages throughout the execution. In these cases, comparators were used
to verify if these metrics were above or below certain thresholds.
To rigorously assess the accuracy and reliability of the runtime assessment tool, each
geometric path traced by the TurtleSim node was subjected to a series of tests with vary-
ing expectations. This involved deliberately introducing valid and invalid scenarios within
each shape’s trajectory, specifically aimed at inducing passing and failing assessments.
By intentionally crafting test cases that were expected to trigger both positive and negative
outcomes, the robustness of the assessment tool could be thoroughly scrutinized. This
approach aimed to uncover potential false positives, where the tool incorrectly reported a
failure, or false negatives, where it failed to detect a genuine violation of the specified re-
quirements. This careful testing methodology systematically validated the reliability of the
tool’s assessment capabilities, ensuring its capacity to accurately discern between com-
pliant and non-compliant behaviors in a wide range of operational scenarios. Appendix
A.1 provides an example of a specifications file used in evaluating the tool.
The assessment specifications provided a rigorous testing ground for the runtime assess-
ment tool by testing a wide range of requirements across different ROS topics. The results
of these evaluations, presented in the following section, demonstrate the tool’s effective-
ness in detecting both correct and incorrect behaviors in ROS applications, validating its
potential for real-world deployment and application.
5.1.3
Results
The experimental evaluation of the runtime assessment tool yielded overwhelmingly posi-
tive results. Across all dummy ROS applications and their respective assessment specifi-
cations, the tool consistently and accurately identified both passing and failing scenarios,
aligning perfectly with the expected outcomes. This precise alignment not only substan-
tiates the tool’s efficacy in evaluating various runtime properties and behaviors but also
underscores its potential for broader applicability in real-world ROS development.
The tool’s ability to assess the tf topic is particularly noteworthy, as this topic is widely
used in real-world robots to keep track of coordinate frames and transform data between
different sensors and actuators [34].
The tf topic’s data structure, characterized by
nested lists and complex data types, presented a unique challenge for the assessment
tool. However, it resulted in the successful parsing and evaluation or the tf messages, ac-
curately determining their adherence to the specified requirements, which included tempo-
40
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:51==
ral consistency checks, numerical thresholds, and message frequency constraints. This
successful assessment of the tf topic in simulation environments is of great value as it
serves as a proxy for real-world scenarios, allowing developers to verify the correctness
and reliability of their tf configurations before deploying them on physical robots.
The consistent alignment between the expected and observed outcomes of the assess-
ments bolsters confidence in the tool’s reliability and accuracy. This, coupled with its ability
to handle diverse assessment specifications and complex message types, positions the
tool as a valuable asset for ROS developers seeking to enhance the robustness, reliabil-
ity, and overall quality of their applications. The positive results obtained in this evaluation
not only validate the tool’s effectiveness but also underscore its potential to streamline the
development process, facilitate early detection of errors, and ultimately contribute to the
creation of more dependable and performant robotic systems.
5.1.4
Results format
The runtime assessment tool’s output is structured to provide comprehensive and inter-
pretable insights into the evaluated ROS application’s behavior. Upon completion of the
assessment process, the tool generates detailed log files that serve as a repository of
essential information, enabling both real-time monitoring and post-hoc analysis. The log
files initiate by capturing the initialization process of the RuntimeAssessment class and the
subsequent creation of individual AssessmentObject instances. For each object, the log
records its name, the associated ROS topic under analysis, the corresponding message
class, and the number of requirements it evaluates.
Furthermore, the logs demarcate the temporal boundaries of the assessment process.
They indicate the precise moment when the target node becomes active and the instant
when the node terminates, signaling the conclusion of the monitoring. This temporal de-
marcation facilitates the analysis of the application’s behavior within a well-defined time-
frame. The logs also offer a chronological account of global events published by the
RuntimeAssessment class and their corresponding handling by the AssessmentObject
instances. These events, such as the addition or removal of the target node provide valu-
able insights into the interactions between its constituent components.
Upon completion of the assessment, the RuntimeAssessment class appends to the log
a summary of the computed global metrics, consisting of the total execution time, the
cumulative number of messages received across all monitored topics, and the average
message frequency. This summary is a high-level overview of the application’s overall
performance and resource utilization. The log also details the assessment results for
each global metric requirement, indicating whether they have been successfully met or if
deviations have been detected.
The logs also document the results of individual requirement checks performed by each
AssessmentObject instance. For each requirement, the log entry specifies its unique iden-
tifier, the assessment mode employed, and the final outcome of the evaluation, classified
as either PASSED or FAILED. If there is an error, the log provides additional informa-
tion, such as the specific reason for the failure and a traceback to the source, aiding in
diagnosing and rectifying potential issues. The structured format of the log messages,
coupled with the inclusion of timestamps, node names, and topic information, results in a
developer-friendly experience in analyzing the results.
For reference, Appendix A.2 contains the logs for two test runs of the assessment tool
for the same specification file, the one mentioned in 5.1.2, with each execution assess-
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
41
==PAGE:52==
ing a distinct trajectory for the robot. The specification file was tailored to align with the
events generated by a square-shaped path, which one of the robots followed. In contrast,
the other robot traversed a rectangular path. Despite the divergent shapes, the paths
partially overlapped, and the assessed metrics exhibited similarities. Consequently, the
logs reveal that all requirements were successfully met for the robot following the square
path, while the other robot’s assessment resulted in a mixture of passed and failed re-
quirements. This outcome is attributed to the overlap in paths and the inherent similarity
in the evaluated metrics.
Developers can leverage these detailed logs to gain a deep understanding of their ROS
applications’ runtime behavior, facilitating the identification of bottlenecks, anomalies, and
deviations from expected functionality.
42
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:53==
6
Discussion and Future Work
The empirical evaluation of the runtime assessment tool, as detailed in the preceding sec-
tions, has yielded promising results, demonstrating its capability to accurately evaluate the
behavior of ROS applications within simulated environments. The consistent alignment
between expected and observed outcomes, particularly in scenarios involving the intricate
tf topic, underscores the tool’s potential for broader applicability in real-world robotic sys-
tems. However, this evaluation represents merely an initial foray into the realm of runtime
assessment, and several avenues for future work have been identified to enhance the
tool’s capabilities further and address its inherent limitations.
A primary direction for future research involves extending the tool’s scope beyond the
assessment of individual nodes to encompass multi-node ROS systems. This expansion
would enable a more comprehensive evaluation of system-level behavior, encompass-
ing intricate interactions between nodes, such as communication patterns, timing syn-
chronization, distributed eventual consistency, and dependencies. By analyzing these
inter-node dynamics, the tool could potentially uncover latent issues arising from syn-
chronization problems, message loss, or unforeseen dependencies, thereby contributing
to the development of more robust and resilient robotic systems.
A promising avenue for future work also lies in the integration of the runtime assess-
ment tool as a plugin for the Rigel framework [24], a container-based solution designed
to streamline the development and deployment of ROS applications. This integration
would seamlessly incorporate runtime assessment capabilities into Rigel’s existing suite
of tools, enabling automated and scalable evaluation of ROS applications within cloud
simulation environments, such as AWS RoboMaker. By leveraging Rigel’s containeriza-
tion and orchestration features, developers could readily deploy the assessment tool in
diverse cloud-based settings, thereby expanding its reach and practicality.
Furthermore, this integration would streamline the entire development and testing work-
flow for ROS applications. Developers could leverage Rigel’s existing CI/CD pipeline
capabilities to automatically trigger runtime assessments within cloud simulations, ensur-
ing that their applications meet the specified requirements before deployment [25]. This
would significantly reduce the reliance on manual testing and accelerate the development
cycle, ultimately leading to more reliable and robust ROS-based systems.
While the current evaluation has focused on simulated scenarios using the TurtleSim envi-
ronment, it is imperative to extend the tool’s capabilities to real-world robotic systems op-
erating in more complex and dynamic environments. Real-world deployments introduce
a myriad of challenges, including sensor noise, communication delays, and hardware lim-
itations, which can significantly impact the behavior of ROS applications. By subjecting
the tool to rigorous testing in real-world scenarios, its robustness, adaptability, and overall
effectiveness can be further validated, paving the way for its widespread adoption in the
robotics community.
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
43
==PAGE:54==
In conclusion, the runtime assessment tool, while demonstrating promising results in its
current form, possesses significant potential for further development and refinement. By
addressing the aforementioned limitations and exploring new approaches for research,
the tool can evolve into a sophisticated and advantageous asset for the ROS community,
empowering developers to create robust and reliable robotic systems that can operate
effectively in real-world scenarios.
44
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
Gemini AI. Gemini AI. https://geminiai.ai/. Accessed: 2024-07-13. 2024.
[2]
Grammarly Inc. Grammarly. https://www.grammarly.com/. Accessed: 2024-07-13.
2024.
[3]
Jiantao Pan. Software Testing — ece.cmu.edu. https://ece.cmu.edu/~koopman/
des_s99/sw_testing/. [Accessed 11-07-2024]. 1999.
[4]
Abid Jamil et al. “Software Testing Techniques: A Literature Review”. In: Nov. 2016,
pp. 177–182. DOI: 10.1109/ICT4M.2016.045.
[5]
P. Louridas. “Static code analysis”. In: IEEE Software 23.4 (2006), pp. 58–61. DOI:
10.1109/MS.2006.114.
[6]
Leonardo Leite et al. “A Survey of DevOps Concepts and Challenges”. In: ACM
Comput. Surv. 52.6 (Nov. 2019). ISSN: 0360-0300. DOI: 10.1145/3359981. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3359981.
[7]
Morgan Quigley et al. “ROS: an open-source Robot Operating System”. In: ICRA
workshop on open source software. Vol. 3. 3.2. Kobe, Japan. 2009, p. 5.
[8]
ROS/Concepts - ROS Wiki — wiki.ros.org. https://wiki.ros.org/ROS/Concepts.
[Accessed 11-07-2024].
[9]
actionlib - ROS Wiki — wiki.ros.org. https://wiki.ros.org/actionlib. [Accessed 11-07-
2024].
[10]
“ISO/IEC/IEEE International Standard - Systems and software engineering – Life
cycle processes – Requirements engineering”. In: ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148:2018(E)
(2018), pp. 1–104. DOI: 10.1109/IEEESTD.2018.8559686.
[11]
“IEEE Recommended Practice for Software Requirements Specifications”. In: IEEE
Std 830-1998 (1998), pp. 1–40. DOI: 10.1109/IEEESTD.1998.88286.
[12]
Renato Carvalho et al. “Verification of system-wide safety properties of ROS ap-
plications”. In: 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS). 2020, pp. 7249–7254. DOI: 10.1109/IROS45743.2020.9341085.
[13]
Rahul Purandare et al. “Extracting conditional component dependence for dis-
tributed robotic systems”. In: 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems. 2012, pp. 1533–1540. DOI: 10.1109/IROS.2012.6385719.
[14]
André Santos, Alcino Cunha, and Nuno Macedo. “The High-Assurance ROS
Framework”. In: 2021 IEEE/ACM 3rd International Workshop on Robotics Software
Engineering (RoSE). 2021, pp. 37–40. DOI: 10.1109/RoSE52553.2021.00013.
[15]
André Santos, Alcino Cunha, and Nuno Macedo. “Static-Time Extraction and Anal-
ysis of the ROS Computation Graph”. In: 2019 Third IEEE International Conference
on Robotic Computing (IRC). 2019, pp. 62–69. DOI: 10.1109/IRC.2019.00018.
[16]
André Santos et al. “Mining the usage patterns of ROS primitives”. In: 2017
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
2017, pp. 3855–3860. DOI: 10.1109/IROS.2017.8206237.
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
I
==PAGE:56==
[17]
André Santos et al. “A framework for quality assessment of ROS repositories”.
In: 2016 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). 2016, pp. 4491–4496. DOI: 10.1109/IROS.2016.7759661.
[18]
Raju Halder et al. “Formal Verification of ROS-Based Robotic Applications Using
Timed-Automata”. In: 2017 IEEE/ACM 5th International FME Workshop on Formal
Methods in Software Engineering (FormaliSE). 2017, pp. 44–50. DOI: 10.1109/
FormaliSE.2017.9.
[19]
André Santos, Alcino Cunha, and Nuno Macedo. “Schema-guided testing of
message-oriented systems”. In: Proceedings of the 17th International Confer-
ence on Evaluation of Novel Approaches to Software Engineering (2022). DOI:
10.5220/0010976100003176.
[20]
Baishakhi Ray et al. “A large-scale study of programming languages and code qual-
ity in GitHub”. In: Commun. ACM 60.10 (Sept. 2017), pp. 91–100. ISSN: 0001-0782.
DOI: 10.1145/3126905. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3126905.
[21]
David Bernstein. “Containers and Cloud: From LXC to Docker to Kubernetes”. In:
IEEE Cloud Computing 1.3 (2014), pp. 81–84. DOI: 10.1109/MCC.2014.51.
[22]
Qi Zhang et al. “A Comparative Study of Containers and Virtual Machines in Big
Data Environment”. In: July 2018, pp. 178–185. DOI: 10.1109/CLOUD.2018.00030.
[23]
David Bernstein. “Containers and Cloud: From LXC to Docker to Kubernetes”. In:
IEEE Cloud Computing 1.3 (2014), pp. 81–84. DOI: 10.1109/MCC.2014.51.
[24]
Pedro Melo et al. “A Container-Based Framework for Developing ROS Applica-
tions”. In: 2022 IEEE 20th International Conference on Industrial Informatics (IN-
DIN). 2022, pp. 280–285. DOI: 10.1109/INDIN51773.2022.9976083.
[25]
Sérgio Teixeira, Rafael Arrais, and Germano Veiga. “Cloud Simulation for Continu-
ous Integration and Deployment in Robotics”. In: 2021 IEEE 19th International Con-
ference on Industrial Informatics (INDIN). 2021, pp. 1–8. DOI: 10.1109/INDIN45523.
2021.9557476.
[26]
John D Blischak, Emily R Davenport, and Greg Wilson. “A quick introduction to
version control with Git and GitHub”. In: PLoS computational biology 12.1 (2016),
e1004668.
[27]
Steven Weber. The Success of Open Source. Cambridge, MA and London, Eng-
land: Harvard University Press, 2004. ISBN: 9780674044999. DOI: doi:10.4159/
9780674044999. URL: https://doi.org/10.4159/9780674044999.
[28]
Robert C. Martin. Clean Code: A Handbook of Agile Software Craftsmanship. 1st ed.
USA: Prentice Hall PTR, 2008. ISBN: 0132350882.
[29]
Robert Martin. “Design Principles and Design Patterns”. In: ().
[30]
Marco Alves and Hugo Paula. “Identifying Logging Practices in Open Source Python
Containerized Application Projects”. In: Proceedings of the XXXV Brazilian Sympo-
sium on Software Engineering. SBES ’21. Joinville, Brazil: Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, 2021, pp. 16–20. ISBN: 9781450390613. DOI: 10.1145/3474624.
3474631. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3474624.3474631.
[31]
Jim Giles. “Enumerated data types”. In: SIGPLAN Fortran Forum 20.1 (Apr. 2001),
pp. 11–15. ISSN: 1061-7264. DOI: 10.1145/375738.375750. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1145/375738.375750.
[32]
Bertrand Meyer. Object-oriented software construction (2nd ed.) USA: Prentice-
Hall, Inc., 1997. ISBN: 0136291554.
[33]
Vineet Kahlon, Franjo Ivančić, and Aarti Gupta. “Reasoning About Threads Commu-
nicating via Locks”. In: Computer Aided Verification. Ed. by Kousha Etessami and
Sriram K. Rajamani. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 505–
518. ISBN: 978-3-540-31686-2.
II
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:57==
[34]
Tully Foote. “tf: The transform library”. In: 2013 IEEE Conference on Technologies
for Practical Robot Applications (TePRA). 2013, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/TePRA.2013.
6556373.
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
III
==PAGE:58==
A
Appendix
A.1
Specification File
1
setup:
2
target_node: /snake_game
3
logger_path: /home/joaomena/catkin_ws/src/runtime_assessment/src/log
4
topics:
5
turtle1/pose: turtlesim/Pose
6
turtle1/cmd_vel: geometry_msgs/Twist
7
turtle1/checkpoint: std_msgs/String
8
tf: tf2_msgs/TFMessage
9
10
specifications:
11
12
- topic: tf
13
temporal_consistency: true
14
tolerance: 0.05
15
target:
16
- { "transforms[0].transform.translation.x": 10, "transforms[0].
transform.translation.y": 5.5 }
17
- { "transforms[0].transform.translation.x": 5.5, "transforms[0].
transform.translation.y": 5.5 }
18
- { "transforms[0].transform.translation.x": 5.5, "transforms[0].
transform.translation.y": 10.5 }
19
- { "transforms[0].transform.translation.x": 10, "transforms[0].
transform.translation.y": 10.5 }
20
21
- topic: tf
22
timein: 1.0
23
timeout: 30.0
24
target:
25
- { "transforms[0].transform.translation.x": 10, "transforms[0].
transform.translation.y": 5.5 }
26
27
- topic: tf
28
mode: absent
29
timein: 10.0
30
target:
31
- { "transforms[0].transform.translation.x": 10, "transforms[0].
transform.translation.y": 5.5 }
32
33
- topic: tf
34
mode: absent
35
timeout: 5.0
36
target:
37
- { "transforms[0].transform.translation.x": 10, "transforms[0].
transform.translation.y": 10 }
38
39
- topic: tf
IV
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:59==
40
mode: metric
41
comparator: "<"
42
target:
43
- number_of_messages: 10
44
45
46
- topic: turtle1/pose
47
mode: exists # default value // or max, min, exists, absent, average ,
metric
48
target:
49
- { x: 10, y: 5.5 }
50
- { x: 5.5, y: 5.5 }
51
- { x: 5.5, y: 10.5 }
52
- { x: 10, y: 10.5 }
53
54
55
- topic: turtle1/pose
56
temporal_consistency: true
57
tolerance: 0.05
58
target:
59
- { x: 10, y: 5.5 }
60
- { x: 5.5, y: 5.5 }
61
- { x: 5.5, y: 10.5 }
62
- { x: 10, y: 10.5 }
63
64
- topic: turtle1/pose
65
timein: 1.0
66
timeout: 30.0
67
target:
68
- { x: 10, y: 5.5 }
69
70
- topic: turtle1/pose
71
mode: absent
72
timein: 10.0
73
target:
74
- { x: 10, y: 5.5 }
75
76
- topic: turtle1/pose
77
timein: 5.0
78
timeout: 15.0
79
target:
80
- { x: 10, y: 8 }
81
82
- topic: turtle1/pose
83
mode: absent
84
timeout: 5.0
85
target:
86
- { x: 10, y: 10 }
87
88
- topic: turtle1/pose
89
mode: metric
90
comparator: ">"
91
target:
92
- number_of_messages: 1000
93
94
- topic: turtle1/cmd_vel
95
mode: average
96
comparator: "<"
97
target:
98
- linear.x: 1.5
99
100
- topic: turtle1/cmd_vel
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
V
==PAGE:60==
101
mode: max
102
comparator: ">"
103
target:
104
- angular.z: 0.2
105
106
- topic: turtle1/cmd_vel
107
mode: max
108
target:
109
- linear.x:
110
- min: 0.5
111
- max: 1.5
112
113
- topic: turtle1/cmd_vel
114
mode: min
115
comparator: "!="
116
target:
117
- linear.x: 0.1
118
119
- topic: turtle1/cmd_vel
120
mode: metric
121
target:
122
- frequency:
123
- min: 55
124
- max: 65
125
126
- topic: turtle1/checkpoint
127
target:
128
- data: "reached 1"
129
- data: "reached 2"
130
- data: "reached 3"
131
- data: "reached 4"
132
133
- topic: turtle1/checkpoint
134
temporal_consistency: true
135
target:
136
- data: "reached 1"
137
- data: "reached 2"
138
- data: "reached 3"
139
- data: "reached 4"
140
141
- topic: turtle1/checkpoint
142
timein: 2
143
timeout: 6
144
target:
145
- data: "reached 1"
146
147
- topic: turtle1/checkpoint
148
mode: absent
149
target:
150
- data: "reached 5"
151
152
- topic: turtle1/checkpoint
153
mode: metric
154
comparator: "<"
155
target:
156
- number_of_messages: 5
157
158
- metric: "execution_time"
159
comparator: "<"
160
target: 60.0
161
162
- metric: "number_of_messages"
VI
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:61==
163
target:
164
- min: 1000
165
- max: 10000
166
167
- metric: "frequency"
168
comparator: ">"
169
target: 60
Listing A.1: Specifications file example.
A.2
Results Log Files
1
2024-07-13 11:41:43,472 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO -
------------
RUNTIME ASSESSMENT ------------
2
2024-07-13 11:41:43,544 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Assessment object
created for topic tf.
3
2024-07-13 11:41:43,544 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Assessment
object created for topic 'tf' with message class <class 'tf2_msgs.msg.
_TFMessage.TFMessage '> and 5 requirements.
4
2024-07-13 11:41:43,544 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Assessment
object created for topic turtle1/pose.
5
2024-07-13 11:41:43,544 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Assessment
object created for topic 'turtle1/pose' with message class <class '
turtlesim.msg._Pose.Pose'> and 7 requirements.
6
2024-07-13 11:41:43,544 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Assessment
object created for topic turtle1/cmd_vel.
7
2024-07-13 11:41:43,544 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Assessment
object created for topic 'turtle1/cmd_vel ' with message class <class '
geometry_msgs.msg._Twist.Twist'> and 5 requirements.
8
2024-07-13 11:41:43,544 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Assessment object created for topic turtle1/checkpoint.
9
2024-07-13 11:41:43,545 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Assessment
object created for topic 'turtle1/checkpoint ' with message class <class '
std_msgs.msg._String.String'> and 5 requirements.
10
2024-07-13 11:41:46,636 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Target node
started. Initializing assessment...
11
2024-07-13 11:41:46,641 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Global event received:
NODE_ADDED
12
2024-07-13 11:41:46,642 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Handling NODE_ADDED
event.
13
2024-07-13 11:41:46,644 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Subscriber created for
topic tf.
14
2024-07-13 11:41:46,645 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Global event
received: NODE_ADDED
15
2024-07-13 11:41:46,645 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Handling
NODE_ADDED event.
16
2024-07-13 11:41:46,648 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Subscriber
created for topic turtle1/pose.
17
2024-07-13 11:41:46,648 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Global
event received: NODE_ADDED
18
2024-07-13 11:41:46,648 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Handling
NODE_ADDED event.
19
2024-07-13 11:41:46,651 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Subscriber
created for topic turtle1/cmd_vel.
20
2024-07-13 11:41:46,652 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO - Global
event received: NODE_ADDED
21
2024-07-13 11:41:46,652 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Handling NODE_ADDED event.
22
2024-07-13 11:41:46,655 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Subscriber created for topic turtle1/checkpoint.
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
VII
==PAGE:62==
23
2024-07-13 11:41:46,686 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Receiving
data.
24
2024-07-13 11:41:46,689 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Receiving
data.
25
2024-07-13 11:41:51,592 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Receiving data.
26
2024-07-13 11:41:51,595 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Receiving data.
27
2024-07-13 11:42:24,223 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Global event received:
NODE_REMOVED
28
2024-07-13 11:42:24,224 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Handling NODE_REMOVED
event.
29
2024-07-13 11:42:24,224 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Number of events
recorded: 8
30
2024-07-13 11:42:24,224 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Frequency of events:
0.2453552829864447 Hz
31
2024-07-13 11:42:24,224 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Checking requirements.
32
2024-07-13 11:42:24,224 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Requirement 1 of 5
PASSED.
33
2024-07-13 11:42:24,224 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Requirement 2 of 5
PASSED.
34
2024-07-13 11:42:24,224 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Requirement 3 of 5
PASSED.
35
2024-07-13 11:42:24,224 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Requirement 4 of 5
PASSED.
36
2024-07-13 11:42:24,224 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Requirement 5 of 5
PASSED.
37
2024-07-13 11:42:24,224 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Unregistering
subscriber.
38
2024-07-13 11:42:24,226 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Assessment ended.
39
40
2024-07-13 11:42:24,226 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Global event
received: NODE_REMOVED
41
2024-07-13 11:42:24,227 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Handling
NODE_REMOVED event.
42
2024-07-13 11:42:24,228 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Number of
events recorded: 2311
43
2024-07-13 11:42:24,228 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Frequency of
events: 61.57987131411903 Hz
44
2024-07-13 11:42:24,228 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Checking
requirements.
45
2024-07-13 11:42:24,231 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Requirement 1
of 7 PASSED.
46
2024-07-13 11:42:24,233 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Requirement 2
of 7 PASSED.
47
2024-07-13 11:42:24,234 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Requirement 3
of 7 PASSED.
48
2024-07-13 11:42:24,238 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Requirement 4
of 7 PASSED.
49
2024-07-13 11:42:24,239 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Requirement 5
of 7 PASSED.
50
2024-07-13 11:42:24,240 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Requirement 6
of 7 PASSED.
51
2024-07-13 11:42:24,240 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Requirement 7
of 7 PASSED.
52
2024-07-13 11:42:24,240 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Unregistering
subscriber.
53
2024-07-13 11:42:24,243 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Assessment
ended.
54
55
2024-07-13 11:42:24,244 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Global
event received: NODE_REMOVED
VIII
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:63==
56
2024-07-13 11:42:24,245 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Handling
NODE_REMOVED event.
57
2024-07-13 11:42:24,245 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Number of
events recorded: 2239
58
2024-07-13 11:42:24,245 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Frequency
of events: 59.693276455053415 Hz
59
2024-07-13 11:42:24,245 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Checking
requirements.
60
2024-07-13 11:42:24,247 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO -
Requirement 1 of 5 PASSED.
61
2024-07-13 11:42:24,249 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO -
Requirement 2 of 5 PASSED.
62
2024-07-13 11:42:24,250 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO -
Requirement 3 of 5 PASSED.
63
2024-07-13 11:42:24,252 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO -
Requirement 4 of 5 PASSED.
64
2024-07-13 11:42:24,253 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO -
Requirement 5 of 5 PASSED.
65
2024-07-13 11:42:24,253 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO -
Unregistering subscriber.
66
2024-07-13 11:42:24,254 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Assessment
ended.
67
68
2024-07-13 11:42:24,254 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO - Global
event received: NODE_REMOVED
69
2024-07-13 11:42:24,254 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Handling NODE_REMOVED event.
70
2024-07-13 11:42:24,255 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO - Number
of events recorded: 4
71
2024-07-13 11:42:24,255 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Frequency of events: 0.1418319861172984 Hz
72
2024-07-13 11:42:24,255 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Checking requirements.
73
2024-07-13 11:42:24,256 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Requirement 1 of 5 PASSED.
74
2024-07-13 11:42:24,256 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Requirement 2 of 5 PASSED.
75
2024-07-13 11:42:24,256 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Requirement 3 of 5 PASSED.
76
2024-07-13 11:42:24,256 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Requirement 4 of 5 PASSED.
77
2024-07-13 11:42:24,256 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Requirement 5 of 5 PASSED.
78
2024-07-13 11:42:24,257 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Unregistering subscriber.
79
2024-07-13 11:42:24,258 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Assessment ended.
80
81
2024-07-13 11:42:24,359 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Target node
removed. Finishing assessment...
82
2024-07-13 11:42:24,359 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Execution
time: 37.72231888771057 seconds.
83
2024-07-13 11:42:24,359 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Total number
of messages: 4562
84
2024-07-13 11:42:24,359 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Frequency:
120.93636166906586
85
2024-07-13 11:42:24,359 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Assessing
metric 'execution_time ' with 1 requirements.
86
2024-07-13 11:42:24,359 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Requirement 1
of 1 of metric 'execution_time ' PASSED.
87
2024-07-13 11:42:24,359 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Assessing
metric 'number_of_messages ' with 1 requirements.
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
IX
==PAGE:64==
88
2024-07-13 11:42:24,359 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Requirement 1
of 1 of metric 'number_of_messages ' PASSED.
89
2024-07-13 11:42:24,359 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Assessing
metric 'frequency ' with 1 requirements.
90
2024-07-13 11:42:24,360 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Requirement 1
of 1 of metric 'frequency ' PASSED.
91
2024-07-13 11:42:24,360 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO -
----------------- END OF ASSESSMENT -----------------
Listing A.2: Results Log file for Square path.
1
2024-07-13 11:45:42,946 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO -
------------
RUNTIME ASSESSMENT ------------
2
2024-07-13 11:45:42,972 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Assessment object
created for topic tf.
3
2024-07-13 11:45:42,972 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Assessment
object created for topic 'tf' with message class <class 'tf2_msgs.msg.
_TFMessage.TFMessage '> and 5 requirements.
4
2024-07-13 11:45:42,972 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Assessment
object created for topic turtle1/pose.
5
2024-07-13 11:45:42,972 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Assessment
object created for topic 'turtle1/pose' with message class <class '
turtlesim.msg._Pose.Pose'> and 7 requirements.
6
2024-07-13 11:45:42,973 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Assessment
object created for topic turtle1/cmd_vel.
7
2024-07-13 11:45:42,973 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Assessment
object created for topic 'turtle1/cmd_vel ' with message class <class '
geometry_msgs.msg._Twist.Twist'> and 5 requirements.
8
2024-07-13 11:45:42,973 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Assessment object created for topic turtle1/checkpoint.
9
2024-07-13 11:45:42,973 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Assessment
object created for topic 'turtle1/checkpoint ' with message class <class '
std_msgs.msg._String.String'> and 5 requirements.
10
2024-07-13 11:45:46,244 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Target node
started. Initializing assessment...
11
2024-07-13 11:45:46,249 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Global event received:
NODE_ADDED
12
2024-07-13 11:45:46,250 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Handling NODE_ADDED
event.
13
2024-07-13 11:45:46,255 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Subscriber created for
topic tf.
14
2024-07-13 11:45:46,255 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Global event
received: NODE_ADDED
15
2024-07-13 11:45:46,256 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Handling
NODE_ADDED event.
16
2024-07-13 11:45:46,258 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Subscriber
created for topic turtle1/pose.
17
2024-07-13 11:45:46,259 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Global
event received: NODE_ADDED
18
2024-07-13 11:45:46,259 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Handling
NODE_ADDED event.
19
2024-07-13 11:45:46,261 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Subscriber
created for topic turtle1/cmd_vel.
20
2024-07-13 11:45:46,262 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO - Global
event received: NODE_ADDED
21
2024-07-13 11:45:46,262 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Handling NODE_ADDED event.
22
2024-07-13 11:45:46,269 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Subscriber created for topic turtle1/checkpoint.
23
2024-07-13 11:45:46,278 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Receiving
data.
24
2024-07-13 11:45:46,285 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Receiving
X
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:65==
data.
25
2024-07-13 11:45:50,169 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Receiving data.
26
2024-07-13 11:46:27,871 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Global event received:
NODE_REMOVED
27
2024-07-13 11:46:27,873 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Handling NODE_REMOVED
event.
28
2024-07-13 11:46:27,873 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Number of events
recorded: 0
29
2024-07-13 11:46:27,873 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Frequency of events: 0
Hz
30
2024-07-13 11:46:27,873 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Checking requirements.
31
2024-07-13 11:46:27,873 - AssessmentObject.tf - ERROR - Requirement 1 of 5
FAILED - list index out of range
32
2024-07-13 11:46:27,873 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Unregistering
subscriber.
33
2024-07-13 11:46:27,875 - AssessmentObject.tf - INFO - Assessment ended.
34
35
2024-07-13 11:46:27,875 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Global event
received: NODE_REMOVED
36
2024-07-13 11:46:27,876 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Handling
NODE_REMOVED event.
37
2024-07-13 11:46:27,876 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Number of
events recorded: 2575
38
2024-07-13 11:46:27,876 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Frequency of
events: 61.91365909840794 Hz
39
2024-07-13 11:46:27,877 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Checking
requirements.
40
2024-07-13 11:46:27,879 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Requirement 1
of 7 FAILED.
41
2024-07-13 11:46:27,883 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Requirement 2
of 7 FAILED.
42
2024-07-13 11:46:27,885 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Requirement 3
of 7 FAILED.
43
2024-07-13 11:46:27,887 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Requirement 4
of 7 PASSED.
44
2024-07-13 11:46:27,888 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Requirement 5
of 7 FAILED.
45
2024-07-13 11:46:27,889 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Requirement 6
of 7 PASSED.
46
2024-07-13 11:46:27,889 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Requirement 7
of 7 PASSED.
47
2024-07-13 11:46:27,889 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Unregistering
subscriber.
48
2024-07-13 11:46:27,891 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/pose - INFO - Assessment
ended.
49
50
2024-07-13 11:46:27,891 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Global
event received: NODE_REMOVED
51
2024-07-13 11:46:27,892 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Handling
NODE_REMOVED event.
52
2024-07-13 11:46:27,892 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Number of
events recorded: 2493
53
2024-07-13 11:46:27,892 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Frequency
of events: 60.059409051455745 Hz
54
2024-07-13 11:46:27,893 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Checking
requirements.
55
2024-07-13 11:46:27,895 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO -
Requirement 1 of 5 PASSED.
56
2024-07-13 11:46:27,896 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO -
Requirement 2 of 5 PASSED.
57
2024-07-13 11:46:27,897 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO -
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
XI
==PAGE:66==
Requirement 3 of 5 FAILED.
58
2024-07-13 11:46:27,899 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO -
Requirement 4 of 5 PASSED.
59
2024-07-13 11:46:27,899 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO -
Requirement 5 of 5 PASSED.
60
2024-07-13 11:46:27,899 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO -
Unregistering subscriber.
61
2024-07-13 11:46:27,900 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/cmd_vel - INFO - Assessment
ended.
62
63
2024-07-13 11:46:27,900 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO - Global
event received: NODE_REMOVED
64
2024-07-13 11:46:27,901 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Handling NODE_REMOVED event.
65
2024-07-13 11:46:27,901 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO - Number
of events recorded: 4
66
2024-07-13 11:46:27,901 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Frequency of events: 0.10631512993167656 Hz
67
2024-07-13 11:46:27,901 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Checking requirements.
68
2024-07-13 11:46:27,901 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Requirement 1 of 5 FAILED.
69
2024-07-13 11:46:27,902 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Requirement 2 of 5 FAILED.
70
2024-07-13 11:46:27,902 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Requirement 3 of 5 PASSED.
71
2024-07-13 11:46:27,902 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Requirement 4 of 5 PASSED.
72
2024-07-13 11:46:27,902 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Requirement 5 of 5 PASSED.
73
2024-07-13 11:46:27,902 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Unregistering subscriber.
74
2024-07-13 11:46:27,903 - AssessmentObject.turtle1/checkpoint - INFO -
Assessment ended.
75
76
2024-07-13 11:46:28,004 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Target node
removed. Finishing assessment...
77
2024-07-13 11:46:28,004 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Execution
time: 41.76076912879944 seconds.
78
2024-07-13 11:46:28,004 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Total number
of messages: 5072
79
2024-07-13 11:46:28,004 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Frequency:
121.45370178304981
80
2024-07-13 11:46:28,005 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Assessing
metric 'execution_time ' with 1 requirements.
81
2024-07-13 11:46:28,005 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Requirement 1
of 1 of metric 'execution_time ' PASSED.
82
2024-07-13 11:46:28,005 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Assessing
metric 'number_of_messages ' with 1 requirements.
83
2024-07-13 11:46:28,005 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Requirement 1
of 1 of metric 'number_of_messages ' PASSED.
84
2024-07-13 11:46:28,005 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Assessing
metric 'frequency ' with 1 requirements.
85
2024-07-13 11:46:28,005 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO - Requirement 1
of 1 of metric 'frequency ' PASSED.
86
2024-07-13 11:46:28,005 - RuntimeAssessment./snake_game - INFO -
----------------- END OF ASSESSMENT -----------------
Listing A.3: Results Log file for Rectangle path.
XII
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
==PAGE:67==
Runtime assessment of ROS applications
XIII
==PAGE:68==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
