==PAGE:1==
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded
Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical De-
vices
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-
Free Wearable Medical Devices
Master Thesis
August, 2024
By
Junaid Qazi
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Brovej, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis was prepared over six months at the Embedded Systems Engineering research
group at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, DTU, in partial
fulfilment of the degree Master of Science in Engineering, M.Sc Eng.
Junaid Qazi - s213267
Signature
Date
ii
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
August 10, 2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Wearable medical devices have become a focal point of research and development, par-
ticularly for the long-term monitoring of patients with chronic illnesses. These devices
offer significant advantages, including the early detection of complications, reduced hos-
pital readmission rates, and overall lower healthcare costs by enabling a more proactive
approach to patient care. In recent years, the integration of artificial intelligence (AI) into
wearable technology has gained considerable attention, further enhancing the capabilities
of these devices. However, a notable challenge associated with AI-driven wearables is the
increased power consumption, which can limit their practicality for continuous use.
This thesis presents a novel approach that combines neuromorphic computing with a
particular focus on Spiking Neural Network (SNN) and intermittent computing.
This
method is applied to an Electromyography (EMG) dataset for the classification of various
hand gestures.
Our findings demonstrate that intermittent computing, specifically through the use of
checkpointing, can be effectively integrated within SNNs. Moreover, we observe that the
overhead, frequency, and optimal placement of checkpointing are highly dependent on
the architecture of the SNN model and the associated inference overhead.
While the
introduction of checkpointing in the processing of our EMG dataset results in a relatively
low energy overhead, it leads to a significant latency overhead.
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my appreciation towards everyone who assisted me through this
project. Specifically, Emil, Haris, Jens and Fontas, for their great insights and supervision.
Lastly, I would like to thank Maratuneski for the support and ideation.
iv
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Electromyography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Neuromorphic Computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Spiking Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Related Works
7
3.1
EMG Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
EMG SNN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Intermittent Computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Feasibility Study
10
4.1
Phase 1 - ImC SNN Dynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.2
Phase 2 - ImC SNN vs SNN Trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
Phase 3 - ImC SNN Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
SNN-EMG Case Study
21
5.1
SNN Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2
Intermittent EMG SNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Discussion
33
6.1
General Intermittent Computing (ImC) SNN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.2
ImC SNN EMG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.3
Future Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7
Conclusion
35
References
36
A Inference Energy Calculations
39
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
v
==PAGE:8==
Acronyms
AI Artificial Intelligence.
ANN Artificial Neural Network.
CSNN Convolutional Spiking Neural Network.
EEG Electroencephalogram.
EMG Electromyography.
FRAM Ferroelectric Randam Access Memory.
ImC Intermittent Computing.
IMU Inertial Measurement Unit.
Mem Membrane Potential.
NVMe Non-Volatile Memory.
SNN Spiking Neural Network.
SOP Synaptic Operation.
Spk Spiketrain.
Syn Synaptic Current.
ts Timestep.
vi
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
There has been a large ongoing effort in researching and developing wearable medical de-
vices for long-term monitoring of chronically ill patients. There are many advantages to
long-term monitoring using wearables, such as early detection of complications, reduced
hospital readmission (and thus lower overall healthcare costs), and a more proactive ap-
proach to healthcare. In recent years, there has been a major increase in research on
using artificial intelligence in wearable medical devices. A major advantage of AI in med-
ical wearables is its ability to predict certain complications (e.g. strokes, arrhythmia).
However, its increased power consumption is a major disadvantage of integrating AI in
wearables.
Different solutions to this problem have been proposed over the years. However, there
is no general consensus yet on the best approach for medical AI wearables. This thesis
proposes a potential solution that combines neuromorphic computing, with a specific focus
on SNN, and intermittent computing. This approach is applied to an Electromyography
dataset, where different gestures are classified.
The event-based nature of SNNs makes them multiple orders of magnitude more energy
eﬀicient than conventional AI architectures. On the other hand, Intermittent Computing
allows devices to run on non-continuous power sources (e.g., energy harvesters). Combin-
ing SNNs with an Intermittent Computing algorithm could result in a wearable that can
run off energy harvesting while still having the same AI capabilities that conventional,
less energy-eﬀicient AI architectures have.
Objectives and Scope
The main objectives of the project are:
• Assessing the possibility of making an SNN intermittent
• Assessing the trade-offs between a non-intermittent and intermittent SNN
• Evaluating the effects of the intermittent SNN on the Electromyography dataset
Due to the project’s exploratory nature, the scope will be mostly limited to the theoretical
aspects of the proposed concept. This entails creating algorithms and then evaluating the
performance quantitatively.
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
1
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Electromyography
EMG is a technique for measuring electrical activity generated by voluntary or involuntary
muscular activation. At rest, a muscle fibre maintains a resting membrane potential at
-80 mV, resulting from different concentrations of ions between the intracellular and the
extracellular space. The muscle fibre is activated when a voltage threshold is crossed. The
threshold is reached after action potentials from the spinal cord cause a positive influx
of ions to the intracellular space and make the membrane potential more positive. This
depolarization propagates along the muscle fibre and is followed by subsequent repolar-
ization.
EMG signals are measured by electrodes placed on the skin over the muscles (surface
EMG) or by inserting a needle electrode into the muscle (intramuscular EMG). The signal
obtained represents the voltage generated in this muscular activation between at least two
electrodes. Commonly, one of the electrodes acts as a reference and is placed in a neutral
position, such as a tendon or bone. The voltage obtained from an electrode placed on
top of the muscle fibre groups results from the summation of the individual motor unit
(neuron cell and innervations) action potentials, which can vary depending on the fibre
orientation relative to the electrode.
The amplitude of the action potential increases with the magnitude of muscular activation.
Figure 2.1 illustrates two EMG signals at a low (10%) and high (40%) maximum voluntary
contraction (MVC) of a muscle group. At the low MVC, action potentials are more easily
distinguishable than at higher MVC levels due to the increased motor unit action potentials
that are summed at more time steps [1] [2].
The recorded signals are amplified, filtered, and sampled, after which they either become
part of a control loop or are stored for later analysis.
EMG signals can provide information about local motor activation and be used to assess,
for example, the count of motor units activated or activation/relaxation timings. In this
way, EMG can be used as a diagnostic tool for medical conditions that affect the muscles
and nerves, such as Parkinson’s Disease and Multiple Sclerosis.
In recent years, efforts have been made to use artificial intelligence to classify EMG signals,
commonly using temporal or spectral features.
2
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1: Surface EMG signals at a low force level (10% of MVC) and a higher force
level (40% MVC) in the first dorsal interosseous muscle (Tr = 0.25 s). Adopted from [1].
2.2
Neural Networks
Neural networks (NN) are systems of interconnected neurons that transmit information,
enabling learning processes. This concept has been digitally adapted to create ’artificial’
neural networks, which can similarly learn from a given input set of data. The most basic
neural network is given by three layers, the input layer, the hidden layer, and the output
layer. The input data is connected to the hidden layer, that can be composed of just
one neuron unit, to which is given the input data that is weighted and biased. In the
neural unit, these data undergo an activation that allows for decision-making and pattern
detection and is commonly a function such as a sigmoid or a rectified linear unit [3].
Several types of neural networks have emerged since they were introduced by Rosenblatt
in 1958 [4]. The networks can differ in several aspects, such as the type of learning, the
layer architecture type, and the type of activation.
Feedforward networks (FNN) are the archetype of NN. In the forward pass, data flows
from input to output, where a prediction is made. The success of this prediction can
inform other forward passes. The network learns via backpropagation, which is a method
that works backward from the output layer to the input layer, calculating the gradient of
the loss function with respect to each weight and bias in the network. The weights and
biases are updated iteratively in each backward pass by minimizing the loss function [5].
Deep neural networks (DNN) are an umbrella term that includes model architectures with
multiple hidden layers.
A deep structure enables complex learning and comes with a
computational and overfitting cost.
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) are a type of DNN and a variation of FNN, in which the
forward pass is composed of multiple steps, instead of just one. The output of a certain
current cell informs the input of the next and since the cells have built-in memory this
architecture allows for learning in sequence.
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) convolve kernels of input data, making them ap-
propriate for identification of spacial patterns.
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
3
==PAGE:12==
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) consist of two competing neural networks: a
generator and a discriminator. The generator’s task is to create data samples, while the
discriminator’s role is to predict whether these samples are real (from the training data) or
generated. The discriminator’s success in making accurate predictions provides an error
gradient that guides the generator in improving its outputs. GANs are used in applications
such as image synthesis and data augmentation.
The autoencoders learn by compressing (encode) and regenerating (decode) the data.
The autoencoder first compresses the input data into a lower-dimensional representation,
a bottleneck output. The network then attempts to reconstruct this output through a
decoder. The loss function measures how closely the reconstructed output matches the
original input. Autoencoders are used in dimensionality reduction, data denoising and
feature learning.
Both Hopfield networks and Boltzmann machines are associative memory models and work
by clamping desired patterns in input neurons, representing a pattern the network should
learn. During training, the network adjusts its weights and stores this pattern for future
recall. In Hopfield networks, the model adjusts the weights so that the pattern clamped
becomes a stable state. In Boltzmann machines, the weights are adjusted to model the
probability distribution of the input data [5].
In spiking neural networks (SNN), the activation of a neural unit occurs when a threshold
is reached, much like what is seen when a membrane potential reaches a threshold and
activates the biological neuron. Further details on this NN are provided in future sections.
2.3
Neuromorphic Computing
Neuromorphic computing is a paradigm inspired by the structure of the brain, closely
related to the field of brain-inspired computing research. Unlike traditional computing
systems, neuromorphic computers do not rely on the Von Neumann or Harvard architec-
tures. Instead, they use neurons and synapses for memory and processing, mimicking the
behaviour of biological neurons. This approach offers advantages such as greater energy
eﬀiciency and enhanced parallelism. Active research in neuromorphic computing spans
both hardware design and algorithm development [6].
Among the algorithms developed for neuromorphic computing are SNNs, echo state net-
works, liquid state machines, and synaptic plasticity models.
This project focuses on
SNNs, as they are more commonly used in the context of medical devices, which is the
primary application area of this research. From this point on, neuromorphic computing
and SNN will be used interchangeably.
2.4
Spiking Neural Networks
Spiking Neural Networks (SNN) are neural networks that more closely mimic the behaviour
of the brain compared to traditional neural networks. As the name suggests, SNNs use
spikes instead of continuous numerical values. These spikes are discrete events, and the
timing of these spikes is incredibly important for the SNN. This is another difference
between SNNs and traditional neural networks, as SNNs leverage the temporal dynamics
of the input spikes. In a more practical sense, an SNN consists of three main parts:
• Input Encoding
• Neuron Model
• Output Decoding
4
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2 shows a general overview of an SNN with input encoding and output decoding
2.4.1
Input Encoding
Oftentimes, the dataset used by an SNN is the same dataset that is used for traditional
neural networks. To be able to fully use the temporal dynamics of the SNN, the dataset
needs to be converted into spikes. This is done using input encoding techniques, which
convert continuous numerical values into spikes. The three most common input encoding
techniques are:
• Rate Encoding: Converts the magnitude of a continuous input signal into the fre-
quency of spikes generated within a specified time window
• Latency Encoding: Converts the magnitude of a continuous input signal into a timing
delay of the first spike generated by a neuron - higher magnitudes result in a neuron
firing its spike quickly, while lower magnitudes have the opposite results
• Delta Encoding: Represents changes in input signals, and thus only fires a spike
when the difference between two input signals is above a certain threshold
2.4.2
Neuron Model
The neuron model in an SNN determines how neurons process incoming spikes and when
they decide to fire a spike. This simulates the electrical behaviour of a biological neuron
by integrating incoming spikes over time and firing when a certain threshold is reached.
Neuron models in an SNN replace the activation function of a traditional neural network,
which is another major difference between these two networks. There are different types of
neuron models, such as the Leaky-Integrate and Fire neuron model (LIF), which represents
a simple RC circuit. The LIF neuron model has the following hidden states:
• Membrane Potential: Represents the electrical state of the neuron and determines
whether the neuron will fire a spike. If a neuron receives a spike from a presynaptic
neuron, it will increase its membrane potential.
• Threshold: Determines when a neuron membrane potential is high enough to fire a
spike
• Voltage Decay: After a neuron receives a spike from a presynaptic neuron, and thus
its membrane potential has been increased, it will decay at a certain rate.
• Spike Train: Spikes that are created by a neuron reaching its membrane potential
A Synaptic-LIF model is an enhanced version of the standard LIF model, incorporating
greater biological realism. In addition to the membrane potential dynamics present in the
LIF model, the Synaptic-LIF also accounts for synaptic currents. Unlike the LIF model,
where the membrane potential experiences an immediate jump upon receiving a spike, the
Synaptic-LIF model introduces synaptic currents that cause the membrane potential to
increase more gradually. This gradual increase better mimics the temporal dynamics of
real synaptic transmission.
2.4.3
Output Decoding
While the input data of an SNN had to be converted into spikes, the output of an SNN
needs to do the exact opposite. While traditional neural networks select the class with the
highest probability for its classification, neural networks use the dynamics of the output
spikes of its final layer as a classification. The most common methods for output decoding
are:
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
5
==PAGE:14==
• Rate Decoding: Measure the number of spikes produced by a neuron over a period
of time, the neuron with the largest number of spikes is the predicted class
• Temporal Decoding: Use the exact timing of when spikes were received to decode
classification, the neuron that spikes first indicates the predicted class
• Latency Decoding: Use the latency between multiple spikes to determine its class
Figure 2.2: General overview of input encoding and output decoding in an SNN [7]
6
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 3
Related Works
3.1
EMG Deep Learning
EMG signals have been used with deep learning techniques to perform several tasks,
including classifications on hand gestures, classification of postures and angles of other
body parts, force estimation, disease diagnoses, fall detection, and, combined with other
data types, sign language recognition.
Focusing on EMG signals and hand gesture classification, the input data to the classifier
is typically the time-domain data of superficial EMG signals.
Electrodes are typically placed on the forearm, or on the hand with a glove. The latter
is commonly applied with the Cyberglove that is used in the publicly available NinaPro
databases, which are used in several records [8].
The Ninapro DB2 is one of the most common public datasets used and contains 50 hand
gestures from 40 subjects. Using this dataset, Ding et al. [9] achieved a maximum average
recognition accuracy of 78.86%, using the EMG time series as input to a CNN with two
parallel blocks. With the same dataset, Hu et al. [10] created an attention-based hybrid
CNN-RNN architecture that is fed with a time and frequency domain feature set that
achieves 82.2% of classification accuracy.
Under the same context, Atzori et al.
[11]
obtained an average accuracy of 60.27% with an architecture constituted by 4 CNN layers
which was fed with time-domain EMG data.
The power consumption of a deep learning model while in training and deployment is
relevant for applications such as wearables, portable medical devices and prosthetics. Tam
et al. [12] developed an embedded online convolutional neural network to classify hand-
muscle contractions sensed at the forearm with 32 surface channels. Only one participant
was recorded and the EMG signals were preprocessed with a frequency-time-space cross-
domain method. The embedded CNN classifies 8 gestures with an accuracy average of
98.15%. The sensor subsystem (including the wireless communication) consumes 49.5 mW.
During continuous inference, the microcontroller NVidia Jetson Nano that received the
signals consumes 3.055 W.
Zanghieri et al. [13] also proposed a real-time embedded EMG classification method. The
architecture was composed of three blocks (each with 2 convolutional and one pooling
layer), followed by two fully connected layers. Two datasets were used, the Ninapro DB6
(14 channels, 8 classes) with which an average accuracy of 49.6% was achieved, and a
self-acquired dataset (8 channels, 8 classes, 20 sessions) obtaining an accuracy of 93.7%.
Considering the classification energy, each 15 ms time window cost 0.90 mJ per inference
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
7
==PAGE:16==
on a multicore low-power GAP8 processor, which yielded an average power consumption
of 60 mW.
3.2
EMG SNN
Several studies have explored the implementation of SNNs for EMG applications.
Vitale et al. [14] developed an SNN for gesture classification using EMG signals from
the Ninapro DB5 dataset. They evaluated two types of models: fully connected SNNs
and convolutional SNNs. Multiple architectures were tested for each model type, with
the best-performing convolutional SNN achieving a test accuracy of 70%, and the best
fully connected SNN achieving a test accuracy of 74%. Additionally, Vitale et al. [14]
implemented their model on an Intel Loihi neuromorphic chip, finding that the most
successful model had a total power consumption of 41 mW and a latency of 5.7 ms.
Bezugam et al. [15] developed an SNN for gesture classification using EMG signals from
the Roshambo EMG dataset. They designed a recurrent SNN that achieved test accuracy
ranging from 84.7% to 90%. Similar to the work of Vitale et al. [14], this SNN was also
implemented on the Intel Loihi neuromorphic chip, with an energy consumption rate of
0.37 mJ per inference. Although no specific latency value was provided, it was noted that
the latency was reportedly lower than that of CPU and GPU implementations for EMG
datasets.
Ceolini et al. [16] developed an SNN for gesture classification using a self-acquired dataset.
For this dataset, they utilized five surface EMG electrodes and an event-based camera.
The SNN achieved a test accuracy of 96%. Implemented on an Intel Loihi neuromorphic
chip, the model exhibited a total energy consumption of 1104 uJ and a latency of 7.75 ms.
3.3
Intermittent Computing
Intermittent computing is an emerging paradigm that operates on non-continuous energy
resources, such as those provided by energy harvesting.
This approach is particularly
relevant for devices requiring low power, including those used in the Internet of Things and
wearables. As the demand for such devices grows, research within intermittent computing
has expanded across multiple domains, including the development of specialized hardware,
algorithms, and programming languages [17] [18]. This field continues to evolve, addressing
energy-constrained environments’ unique challenges and opportunities.
3.3.1
Checkpointing
In the context of intermittent computing, checkpointing refers to the process of saving
a device’s state so that it can resume from that point after a power loss. Traditionally,
devices are designed to operate on a continuous energy source. However, with the advent
of intermittent computing and energy harvesting, devices often face interruptions in power
supply, leading them to revert to their initial state after a failure. Checkpointing addresses
this challenge by enabling the device to return to an intermediate state instead of restarting
from the beginning, thereby improving eﬀiciency and reducing redundancy [19].
Jayakumar et al. [20] proposed a checkpointing method that employs Ferroelectric RAM
(FRAM) as a non-volatile memory (NVM) solution, known for its lower latency and higher
energy eﬀiciency compared to other NVM technologies. They evaluated this method using
16- and 32-bit cyclic redundancy checks, achieving a total latency overhead of just 12.6
ms. This result marked a significant advancement at the time, with performance that was
orders of magnitude faster than traditional NVM solutions.
8
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:17==
Maeng et al. [21] introduced ”Chinchilla,” a compiler designed to insert checkpoints into
standard C code automatically. Chinchilla employed an adaptive checkpointing mecha-
nism, adjusting the checkpointing frequency based on varying energy conditions. This
approach resulted in Chinchilla being 125% faster than other checkpointing compilers.
Colin et al. [22] developed a tool designed to detect and prevent non-terminating paths in
task-based intermittent programs. Non-terminating paths are defined as sequences within
a task that consume more energy than the device’s energy storage can supply before
depletion (e.g. when a supercapacitor drops below its threshold voltage). The tool proved
to be faster and more eﬀicient than manually identifying these paths.
3.3.2
Intermittent Learning
Intermittent learning is an up-and-coming field within ImC that explores intermittent
machine- and deep-learning models. In this case, the general principles of checkpointing
are applied to these models so that a previous state can be returned after power loss
instead of restarting during inference. In terms of research areas, intermittent learning is
the closest area to our project.
Lee et al. [23] proposed an intermittent computing scheme tailored for semi-supervised
and unsupervised machine learning models. They distinguished between two application
types of intermittent learning: real-time and semi-real-time. In real-time systems, sensor
data is sporadic, whereas in semi-real-time systems, sensor data is relatively constant,
allowing the intermittent learning algorithm to operate in a best-effort manner. Lee et
al. [23] implemented their proposed scheme in three applications: solar-harvesting-based
air quality monitoring, RF-harvesting-based human presence detection, and piezoelectric-
harvesting-based vibration detection. The results showed an increase in energy eﬀiciency
of up to 100% compared to existing methods. Notably, the study also provided valuable in-
sights into the dynamics of semi-supervised and unsupervised learning within intermittent
computing.
Islam et al. [24] introduced Zygarde, an imprecise computing-based scheduling algorithm
for neural networks. This algorithm divides deep learning tasks into mandatory and op-
tional components, enabling the system to prioritize and execute critical parts of tasks
when energy is available, thereby ensuring task deadlines are met. Additionally, the algo-
rithm models the energy harvesting pattern to predict available energy, which is then used
to optimize task scheduling. The results demonstrated that Zygarde reduced execution
time by up to 26% compared to other scheduling algorithms.
Gobieski et al. [25] introduced ”SONIC,” a software system designed to manage deep learn-
ing models on intermittent systems. The approach began with significant compression of
the deep learning models to reduce their memory footprint, making them suitable for
low-power microcontrollers. Subsequently, SONIC introduced a method for dynamically
resizing tasks based on the available energy, ensuring that computation could continue
even in the face of intermittent power. Unlike traditional checkpointing, SONIC tracks
the completion of individual loop iterations, allowing the system to resume from the ex-
act point of interruption after a power failure, thereby minimizing redundant work and
ensuring error-free re-execution. In terms of performance, SONIC demonstrated a twofold
improvement in execution time compared to other frameworks, such as Alpaca. Addition-
ally, SONIC’s dynamic task resizing minimized stalling and ensured consistent forward
progress.
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
9
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 4
Feasibility Study
To the best of our knowledge, no previous studies have explored the implementation of
ImC within SNNs. This gap highlights the need for a feasibility study to examine the
interaction between SNNs and ImC. The scope of this feasibility study can be divided into
three phases:
ImC SNN
Dynamics
ImC SNN vs SNN
Trade-offs
ImC SNN Strategy
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 3
Low-Level
High-Level
Figure 4.1: Overview of the research scope within intermittent computing
These phases examine ImC and SNNs across different levels of abstraction. In Phase 1, we
investigate the overall dynamics of an SNN and identify critical elements relevant to ImC.
The primary goal of this phase is to assess the feasibility of making an SNN intermittent.
If the results from Phase 1 are favourable, we proceed to Phase 2, where we compare
an intermittent SNN with a non-intermittent SNN. This phase focuses on identifying the
trade-offs in implementing intermittency in an SNN. Finally, in Phase 3, the insights
gained from Phases 1 and 2 are used to develop a comprehensive ImC strategy.
Overall, this approach follows a bottom-up methodology, starting with a low level of
abstraction and progressively moving towards higher levels of abstraction.
4.1
Phase 1 - ImC SNN Dynamics
Based on the literature in Chapter 3, checkpointing is identified as the most relevant ImC
method for our research. The primary objective of checkpointing is to regularly save the
model’s state, allowing the system to resume inference from the last checkpoint in the
event of a power loss.
To assess the feasibility of integrating checkpointing into an SNN and identify which
dynamics within SNNs are crucial for this process, the following approach is taken: First,
a critical component analysis is conducted to explore the general structure of an SNN
and identify the key components necessary for checkpointing. A critical component is
defined as a part of the SNN architecture that is vital for creating a checkpoint. Next,
each essential component is analyzed in detail, and the impact of the SNN architecture
10
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:19==
on these components is examined. This leads to a general definition of what constitutes
a checkpoint in an SNN. Following this, a method for calculating checkpoint overhead is
investigated. Finally, the checkpointing process is validated, confirming the feasibility of
an intermittent SNN.
Critical
Component
Analysis
Identify SNN
Architecture
Effects
SNN Checkpoint
Definition
Checkpoint
Overhead
Evaluation of
Feasibility
Figure 4.2: Overview of methodology within Phase 1
4.1.1
Critical Component Analysis
The first step in analyzing the critical components of an SNN within an ImC context is to
identify which parts of the SNN are most relevant. This is accomplished by defining the
scope and then examining the fundamentals of both SNNs and ImC.
This project focuses on the inference phase of a supervised SNN, making the forward pass
of the SNN the primary area of interest. The general structure of an SNN within this
context can be described as follows:
General Neural
Network Layer
Neuron Model
General Neural
Network Layer
Neuron Model
Input Decoding*
....
Output Decoding
Final Timestep?
False
True
Classification
Input Data
Figure 4.3: General structure of inference of an SNN, assuming data needs to be input
decoded
Encoded data is processed through a general neural network layer, such as a convolu-
tional layer. This is followed by a neuron model, which replaces the traditional activation
function. After the final layer, the resulting spikes are decoded to produce the final clas-
sification.
The focus of this project is on evaluating the feasibility of checkpointing rather than
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
11
==PAGE:20==
improving an existing checkpointing strategy.
The general structure of checkpointing
within the forward loop of a neural network can be described as follows:
Layer A
Layer B
Checkpoint X
Power
Failure
Return to Checkpoint
...
Figure 4.4: General representation of the checkpointing principle
The model’s state is saved at specific points, allowing it to resume inference from the latest
checkpoint rather than restarting from the beginning in the event of a power failure.
Given that our focus is on the forward pass during inference in a supervised model, we
assume that the model’s weights remain constant. Additionally, we assume the input data
is already encoded and that inference is performed on a single batch. Since checkpoints
only need to save state changes, we can disregard input encoding and the general neural
network layers (model weights) and instead focus on the neuron model, timesteps, and
output decoding.
Neuron Model
Section 2.4.2 describes the different neuron models and their functionalities. To limit the
scope of this project, only two neuron models are considered:
• Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF)
• Synaptic Conductance-Based Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (Synaptic-LIF)
The key difference between these two models lies in their complexity: the synaptic-LIF
model is a more advanced neuron model compared to the standard LIF model. While the
LIF model only considers a neuron’s membrane potential, the synaptic-LIF model also
accounts for the synaptic currents between neurons. As a result, each LIF neuron model
processes two parameters—membrane potential and spike trains—whereas the synaptic-
LIF model includes an additional third parameter, the synaptic current. Additionally,
both membrane potential and synaptic current are associated with a decay rate. The
threshold of a neuron model, which determines the membrane potential level at which the
neuron fires and outputs a spike, is another crucial aspect
Within a neuron model, the decay rates and thresholds are considered hyperparameters,
which are either set manually or trained together with the model weights. In other words,
these parameters are set during training, do not change during inference, and thus do not
need to be saved within a checkpoint.
On the other hand, membrane potentials, spike trains and synaptic currents continuously
change during the forward pass. This means that these three parameters do need to be
saved within a checkpoint.
Timesteps
Timesteps are discrete moments in time when the network’s activities are updated. While
traditional neural networks process information instantaneously, SNNs process information
in intervals, simulating how neurons in the brain fire spikes of activity at separate times.
12
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:21==
Timesteps help model the timing of spikes and the network’s dynamic behaviour.
In
practice, a timestep of X means that the forward pass of the input data takes place X
times, and the classification is only made after the final timestep.
During each forward pass, or in other words, a singular timestep, the input data, which
is converted into spikes goes through all layers. If a layer receives spikes from a previous
layer, it increases the membrane potential and synaptic current because of this spike. It
decides to fire an output spike, only if the membrane potential is above a certain threshold.
We defined in 4.1.1 that within an SNN, the membrane potentials, synaptic currents (for
Synaptic-LIF neuron models) and spiketrains change during a forward pass.
Since a timestep represents one forward pass through the model, increasing the number
of timesteps means that the membrane potentials, synaptic currents, and spike trains
change multiple times. During the first timestep, the model layers’ membrane potentials
and synaptic currents remain unchanged because the data has not yet passed through
them. Therefore, there is no need to save these variables within a checkpoint at this stage.
However, after the first timestep, the states of these variables have been altered, making
it necessary to save them in subsequent checkpoints. Conversely, in the final checkpoint,
saving these variables is unnecessary since the data will not pass through the model again.
Additionally, it is essential to consider the input data itself. Once converted into the spike
domain, the data propagates as spikes firing through each layer. As a result, a checkpoint
must also save the latest spike train, as this represents the input data in its most recent
state.
Output Decoding
Output decoding transforms the spike-based data into a final classification. The method
used for this classification depends on the type of output decoding employed, as does the
timing of when the classification occurs.
Since this parameter changes during the forward pass, it must be saved within a checkpoint.
To narrow the project’s scope, we will focus on two types of output decoding: rate decoding
and temporal decoding.
Overview of Critical Components
The analysis in the previous sections concluded that the following SNN components are
essential for checkpointing:
Table 4.1: Overview of Identified Essential Components
Parameter
Options to Explore
Neuron Model
LIF, Synaptic LIF
Timesteps (ts)
ts = 1st, ts = last, ts > 1
Output Decoding
Rate Decoding, Temporal Decoding
4.1.2
SNN Architecture Effects
The results from section 4.1.1 show that the neuron model, timesteps and output decoding
are relevant to checkpointing. Each type of these parameters results in a different variable
that must be saved within a checkpoint. Using general knowledge regarding SNNs from
section 2.4 and 3.2, the following variables are identified:
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
13
==PAGE:22==
Table 4.2: Overview of model parameters and variables that were identified
Parameter
Option
Variables
Neuron Model
LIF
Membrane Potentials (Mems)
Neuron Model
Synaptic
Synaptic Currents (Syns), Mems
Output Decoding
Rate
spkz · Timestep(ts)
Output Decoding
Temporal
spkz · tscl
Timestep
ts = 1 or ts = last
Dominant Spkcp∗
Timestep
ts > 1
Spkcp
The variables in Table 4.2 show which specific things to save within a checkpoint for a
certain part of an SNNs architecture (i.e. Neuron Model, LIF). These variables are selected
based on the observations made in the critical component analysis. Other parts of the SNN
architecture are not considered, as we found in the critical component analysis that they
did not change during inference and thus were irrelevant. The different parameters in table
4.2 can be each considered a block that is part of an ’SNN Stack’, where combining these
blocks (together with the parameters that were deemed unnecessary for checkpointing)
results in a different SNN architecture.
The synaptic neuron model saves both synaptic currents (Syns) and membrane potentials
(Mems), while the LIF neuron model saves only the membrane potentials. The key dif-
ference between the two types of output decoding lies in their updating processes: rate
decoding updates the final output spike, spkz, at every timestep, while temporal decoding
follows a similar process but only up until the classification timestep,tscl. In contrast, rate
decoding continues through all timesteps.
At the first or last timestep, there is no need to save anything beyond the state of the
input data at that checkpoint (spkcp). The concept of stacking variables, similar to how
parameters are stacked to build an SNN architecture—becomes irrelevant at these points.
We refer to this as a ’dominant spkcp’.
However, at any other timestep, the stacking
principle still applies, and the current state of the input data spkcp must be added to the
rest of the variable stack.
Given that Table 4.2 defines each parameter option as comprising different variables that
need to be saved, we can infer that different model stacks will lead to different types of
checkpoints:
Table 4.3: Overview of checkpointing variable stacks for different architectures
Architecture
Model Stack
Checkpointing Variables Stack
1
Any, ts=1 or ts=last
spkcp
2
LIF, Rate , ts>1
spkcp, mema . . . memz, spkz · ts
3
LIF, Temporal , ts>1
spkcp, mema . . . memz, spkz · tscl
4
Synaptic, Rate, ts>1
spkcp, mema . . . memz, syna . . . synz, spkz · ts
5
Synaptic, Temporal, ts>1
spkcp, mema . . . memz, syna . . . synz, spkz · tscl
4.1.3
Checkpoint Overhead
Table 4.3 identified the types of checkpoints for different model architectures. However,
the overhead of a checkpoint is an essential factor to consider when evaluating its per-
formance. A checkpoint is essentially an array of variables, and thus, the overhead of a
14
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:23==
checkpoint is the act of writing and reading this array. In ImC, this act of reading and
writing checkpoints is mostly with Non-Volatile Memory (NVMe) [18]. In NVMe, the
total overhead in both latency and energy consumption can be calculated by multiplying
the total amount of bytes written or read by the overhead per singular byte.
Spike trains are stored as binary variables, represented by either a 1 or 0, and are therefore
saved as integers. In contrast, synaptic currents and membrane potentials are non-integer
values and are stored as floats (e.g., float16). Based on these observations and the results
in Table 4.3, a general formula for checkpoint overhead in bytes can be defined:
Overheadcp = spkcp · D + spkz · ts
8
+ D · Nm
8
×
z
∑
layer=a
(Ln)
(4.1)
In which:
• Overheadcp: Total overhead in bytes for a specific checkpoint
• spkcp: Size of the spike train within the checkpoint layer
• spkz: Size of the spike train in the last layer
• ts: Amount of timesteps (>1)
• D: Amount of bits within mem and syn datatype
• Nm: Amount of variables within the neuron model
• Ln: Total amount of output neurons in the layer
• layer = a to z: All layers within the model
Equation 4.1 has an exception at the first and last timesteps of the model:
Overheadcp = spkcp · D
8
(4.2)
In which:
• Overheadcp: Total overhead in bytes of a checkpoint when the model is either at the
first or last timestep
• spkcp: Size of the spike train within the checkpoint layer
• D: Amount of bits within mem and syn datatype
However, it is important to note that some models operate with a single timestep, which
is another use-case of equation 4.2.
To figure out which components within equation 4.1 are dominant, a sensitivity analysis
can be performed. The following base magnitudes were used for this sensitivity analysis
of the equation:
The magnitude of each of these variables is either doubled or halved, and the resulting
overhead is compared with the base model. Using this method, we can see how much each
variable within 4.1 affects the total overhead. The normalized results are:
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
15
==PAGE:24==
Table 4.4: Identified variables and their magnitude used within the sensitivity analysis
Variable
Magnitude
spkcp
500
spkz
10
ts
25
D
16
Nm
1
Ln
1500
Figure 4.5: Sensitivity analysis results
The results of the sensitivity analysis show that Nm, Ln and D have the most significant
impact on total checkpoint overhead.
4.1.4
Evaluation of Feasibility
To validate the feasibility of checkpointing, each model architecture and its corresponding
checkpointing variable stack (Table 4.3) must be evaluated. We accomplished this by using
pre-trained models that align with the architectures in Table 4.3 and verifying that their
output accuracy remained unchanged. The results indicate that our methodology did not
significantly impact model accuracy, confirming its feasibility.
4.2
Phase 2 - ImC SNN vs SNN Trade-offs
In the following section, we will examine the trade-offs between an intermittent SNN and
a non-intermittent SNN. However, to define this trade-off, we need to establish the factors
for evaluating an intermittent SNN and develop methods for measuring its performance.
First, we need to create a general methodology for evaluating and comparing intermittent
and non-intermittent SNNs. Next, we need to establish a process for calculating the overall
checkpoint overhead, followed by a comparable approach for determining the inference
overhead.
16
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:25==
4.2.1
Checkpoint Location
As the checkpoint location has not yet been defined, we will evaluate all options for
potential checkpoint locations. A potential spot of the checkpoint is after a model layer
(i.e. checkpoint 1 is after layer 1). Inter-layer checkpoints will not be considered in this
project.
4.2.2
Energy Evaluation
To evaluate if an intermittent SNN is worth it compared to a non-intermittent SNN, the
total energy consumption of an intermittent SNN has to be compared to the total energy
consumption of a non-intermittent SNN. There is no need to checkpoint if the total non-
intermittent energy consumption, or Einference, is higher than the intermittent energy
consumption. In that case, it makes more sense to run inference from the beginning after
system power loss.
The total energy consumption of an intermittent SNN consists of two parts. First, the
energy consumption of the checkpoint itself, Ecp, and second, the energy consumption
to finish inference after the checkpoint. The energy consumption before the checkpoint
is irrelevant, as this does not influence the reasoning checkpointing.
This can be all
summarized in the following equation:
The total energy consumption of an intermittent SNN comprises two components: first,
the energy consumed by the checkpoint itself (Ecp), and second, the energy required
to complete the inference after the checkpoint (Econt). The energy consumed before the
checkpoint is irrelevant, as it does not impact the decision to checkpoint. This relationship
can be summarized by the following equation:
Ecp + Econt < Einf
(4.3)
In which:
• Ecp: Energy consumption of a checkpoint
• Econt: Energy consumption to finish inference after a checkpoint
• Einf: Total inference energy consumption
Checkpointing is deemed unnecessary if the sum of Ecp and Econt exceeds Einf. Alterna-
tively, checkpointing is justified when this sum is lower than Einf
4.2.3
Latency Evaluation
The same logic in Equation 4.3 cannot be applied to latency evaluation. In an intermittent
SNN, higher latency compared to a non-intermittent SNN does not necessarily mean that
checkpointing is not worth it. This is especially relevant because latency in an intermittent
SNN will inherently be higher due to the need for energy harvesting during system power
failures.
However, latency can still be a useful metric for determining if critical events are missed,
especially if the system is stalled while creating checkpoints. This concern is especially rele-
vant for medical devices, where missing events could have serious consequences. Therefore,
the latency of a single checkpoint (Tcp) should be compared against the overall inference
latency (Tinf) to identify any potential limitations introduced by checkpointing latency.
4.2.4
Checkpoint Energy Consumption (Ecp)
Equation 4.1 in section 4.1.3 defined the overhead of a checkpoint in Bytes. The results of
this equation can be used to calculate the Energy consumption of a checkpoint in Joules:
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
17
==PAGE:26==
Ecp = Overheadcp × ENV Me
(4.4)
In which:
• Ecp: Energy consumption of a checkpoint
• Overheadcp: Total overhead in bytes for a specific checkpoint
• ENV Me: Energy consumption of NVMe for a single byte
This is the energy consumption for a single read or write to NVMe.
4.2.5
Checkpoint Latency (Tcp)
Similarly to energy consumption, using the results of equation 4.1, the checkpoint latency
can be calculated:
Tcp = Overheadcp × TNV Me
(4.5)
In which:
• Tcp: Latency of a checkpoint
• Overheadcp: Total overhead in bytes for a specific checkpoint
• LNV Me: Latency of NVMe for a single byte
This is the latency for a single read or write to NVMe.
4.2.6
Inference Energy Consumption(Einf)
Due to time limitations, it was not possible to attain hardware for this project, meaning
the inference energy needs to be estimated. Multiple papers in the literature describe
quantitative methods for calculating the energy and latency of SNNs. Gamage et al. [26]
describe summing up all spikes that triggered a Synaptic Operation (SOP) and multiplying
this with the energy consumption of a single SOP:
E = SOP × ESOP
(4.6)
In which:
• E: Energy consumption of an SNN
• SOP: Total amount of Synaptic Operations
• ESOP : Energy consumption of a single SOP
Gamage et al. [26] use the Intel Loihi SOP power consumption in their calculations and
estimate that their SNN is 65-135 times more energy eﬀicient than an Artificial Neural
Network (ANN).
Lemaire et al. [27] refute this method for energy consumption calculations, as they believe
that SOP play only a small part within the total energy consumption of an SNN. Lemaire
et al.
[27] also describe how other literature similarly doubted the methodology used
in Gamage et al. [26], as the power eﬀiciency results were deemed unreasonably high.
Lemaire et al. [27] propose their own method, which supposedly is a more realistic power
estimation:
18
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:27==
Einf = Emem + Eops+addr
(4.7)
In which:
• Einf: Energy consumption of an SNN
• Emem: Energy consumption of memory access
• Eops+addr: Energy consumption of synaptic operations and addressing mechanisms
In this project, the methodology proposed by Lemaire et al. [27] is chosen for energy
consumption estimations due to its extensive nature and relatively realistic results.
4.2.7
Inference Latency (Tinf)
The inference energy estimation method by Gamage et al. [26] has been implemented
for latency estimations as well. However, we assume that the reported unrealistic estima-
tion of inference energy by this method most likely leads to unrealistic inference latency
estimations.
Unfortunately, the method described by Lemaire et al. [27] does not account for latency.
It might be possible to adjust this method to account for latency as well, however, this
is outside of the scope of this project. No other viable method for estimating inference
latency was found.
As an alternative, we will use the inference latency of an SNN model from the literature
as Tinf.
Ideally, this reference model should use the same dataset and have a similar
architecture.
4.2.8
Continued Inference Energy (Econt)
Section 4.2.2 defined the continued inference overhead (Econt) as the energy cost to finish
inference after a checkpoint. Assuming that the total inference energy is evenly spread
over all timesteps, the inference energy for a single timestep can be defined as:
Ets = Einf
ts
(4.8)
Where:
• Ets is the total energy consumption of a single timestep
• Einf is the total inference energy consumption
• ts is the number of timesteps
Using equation 4.8, the inference after a checkpoint, Econt, can be calculated:
Econt = ERem + tsRem × Ets
(4.9)
Where:
• Econt is the total energy consumption after a checkpoint
• ERem is the energy consumption of the remaining layers after a checkpoint within
the same timestep
• tsRem is the timesteps remaining after the checkpoint
• Ets is the inference energy consumption for a single timestep
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
19
==PAGE:28==
4.2.9
Overview of Energy Consumption and Latency Estimation
Table 4.5: Overview of all evaluation factors that were identified, and its corresponding
evaluation method
Evaluation Factor
Evaluation Method
Checkpoint Energy (Ecp)
Ecp = Overheadcp × ENV Me
Checkpoint Latency (Tcp)
Tcp = Overheadcp × TNV Me
Inference Energy (Einf)
Einf = Emem + Eops+addr
Inference Latency (Tinf)
Literature Comparison
Continued Inference Energy (Econt)
Econt = Erem + tsrem × Ets
Total Energy ImC SNN (Etot)
Etot = Ecp + Econt
Total Latency ImC SNN (Ttot)
Ttot = Tinf + Tcp
4.3
Phase 3 - ImC SNN Strategy
Based on the energy and latency evaluation in 4.2, an ImC SNN strategy can be created.
This consists of defining the location of checkpoints, and the frequency of checkpointing.
4.3.1
Checkpointing Location
Using the results from Equation 4.3, it is possible to estimate the optimal checkpointing
locations for a specific SNN model. By applying Equation 4.3 at different checkpointing
locations and timesteps, potential checkpointing points can be identified whenever Ecp +
Econt < Einf.
4.3.2
Checkpointing Frequency
To determine the checkpointing frequency, or the number of times to create a checkpoint
during a timestep or forward pass, the following method can be used :
Ecp < Ebeforecp
(4.10)
In which:
• Ecp: Energy consumption of the checkpoint
• Ebeforecp: Energy consumption of the model between the current checkpoint and the
previous checkpoint
Equation 4.10 compares the energy consumption between the current checkpoint and the
previous checkpoint Ebeforecp with the energy required for checkpointing Ecp. If Ebeforecp
exceeds a checkpoint should be added. Otherwise, checkpointing is not beneficial as it
would result in a net energy loss.
20
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 5
SNN-EMG Case Study
In this case study, we will build upon the findings from the feasibility study and apply
them to an EMG SNN model. The objective is to further evaluate the results from Chapter
4 using real-world data.
5.1
SNN Model
5.1.1
Dataset
Ninapro DB2 was selected as the dataset for the SNN model. In this dataset, surface
EMG signals are recorded using 12 electrodes placed on the subject’s forearm. An Inertial
Measurement Unit (IMU) sensor is also placed on the subject’s wrist; however, this data
is not included within the SNN model.
This dataset consists of 40 patients, of whom 29 are males and 11 are females.
The
median age for males is 29 years ±3.99, while the median for females is 30 years ±2.87.
In this dataset, subjects participated in three different exercises. Each exercise consisted
of multiple hand/arm movements that the patient had to repeat 6 times, each lasting
5 seconds. To limit the scope and decrease time spent working on optimizing the SNN
model, the first 12 movements from exercise B were chosen as the dataset of this project.
Figure 5.1 shows the selected hand movements.
The distribution of samples between the 12 gestures in the data is plotted in Figure 5.2.
There is a slight imbalance in the distribution of samples among gestures. Gesture 1 is
overrepresented, while gestures 6 and 8 are underrepresented.
5.1.2
Preprocessing
The process behind the data acquisition of the Ninapro DB2 dataset is described by Atzori
et al.[28]. This dataset is not raw EMG data but has instead been filtered to remove power-
line interference using a Hampel filter. Furthermore, the data streams of all electrodes
were synchronised using high-resolution timestamps.
The dataset goes through a preprocessing pipeline outlined in Figure 5.3. As mentioned
in Section 5.1.1, the first twelve gestures are selected, and any resting periods between
gestures are eliminated so that only the gestures themselves are included in the dataset.
Finally, the samples are divided into segments of 200 ms, following the suggestion of Atzori
et al. [28].
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 5.1: Overview of the selected hand movements
200 ms Segments
Take first 12
gestures
Remove Resting
State
DB2 Data
Preprocessed
Data
Figure 5.3: Proposed preprocessing pipeline
5.1.3
Multi People vs Single Person EMG Model
The Ninapro DB2 dataset consists of sub-datasets, each representing a specific patient.
This differs from other biomedical datasets, such as electroencephalogram (EEG), where
all patient data is combined into a single dataset. Separating patients allows for patient-
specific model training, which is useful, for example, in robotic prosthetics.
An argument can be made that the general approach, where all individual datasets are
combined into a general dataset, is the correct method for this project since it is not
patient-specific.
However, a significant counterpoint would be that creating a general
dataset would also result in a much bigger dataset, which leads to a much longer time
to train the model.
This is impractical, and since the main objectives of this project
are regarding the intersection of intermittent computing and SNNs, a general dataset is
considered unnecessary.
Instead, the model will be based on the data of a randomly
selected patient.
22
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5.2: Distribution of samples between gestures
5.1.4
SNN Platform
This project was accepted by the Intel Neuromorphic Research Community, which should
have given us access to the Intel Loihi Neuromorphic Chip. Unfortunately, we could not
figure out the legalities of this agreement with Intel in time. As a result, this project
was completed without the use of neuromorphic hardware. We chose SNNTorch as the
platform to train and evaluate the SNN. SNNTorch was selected over other platforms,
such as SpikingJelly or Norse, because of its extensive documentation.
5.1.5
Input Encoding
Input Encoding in SNNs is a critical research area [29][30], as the choice of encoding
directly impacts both the accuracy and power eﬀiciency of the network. In this project,
we focus exclusively on the influence of input encoding on accuracy, deliberately excluding
considerations of its effect on ImC due to time constraints.
The literature we found lacks a standardized methodology for evaluating the performance
of different input encoding schemes. However, our observations during model optimization
suggest that the initial performance of an untrained model can significantly vary depending
on the chosen input encoding. This implies that selecting an appropriate encoding scheme
is a crucial step that should precede model training.
In this study, we explored three encoding methods: rate encoding, temporal encoding, and
delta encoding. For the Ninapro DB2 dataset, rate encoding demonstrated the highest
performance, followed by delta encoding. This indicates that rate encoding may be more
suitable for this specific dataset and task, though further exploration and validation are
necessary to generalize these findings.
5.1.6
Model Architecture
This project aims to better understand the applicability of intermittent behaviour within
SNNs. To keep the project scope manageable, the goal for the SNN model to be developed
is to achieve a test accuracy of at least 55%. In section 3, we found that non-SNN models
that used this dataset had accuracies ranging from 60.27% to 82.2%.
The development of the SNN model began with a review of the architectures used in
similar models, as described in Chapter 3. This was followed by an iterative process of
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
23
==PAGE:32==
experimenting with different architectures.
Ultimately, the following architecture was selected:
Table 5.1: Proposed model layers and their corresponding size
Layer
Size
Layer 1 - Convolution
64 Filters, kernel size (60,1)
Flattening
-
Layer 2 - Fully Connected
256 Units
Layer 3 - Fully Connected
128 Units
Layer 4 - Fully Connected
12 Units
The neuron model used in our SNN was a synaptic-LIF, with ten timesteps and rate
decoding employed as the output decoding method.
5.1.7
Model Performance
The final model was evaluated over 100 epochs and achieved a testing accuracy of 60.76%,
as illustrated in Figure 5.4.
The confusion matrix in Figure 5.5 reveals that classes 0 (gesture 1), 6 (gesture 7), and 11
(gesture 12) demonstrate relatively strong performance, with minimal misclassification.
Conversely, classes 1 (gesture 2), 4 (gesture 5), and 8 (gesture 9) exhibit poorer perfor-
mance, with a higher degree of misclassification. This could be attributed to the similarity
between certain gestures, leading to confusion by the model.
Interestingly, classes 5 (gesture 6) and 7 (gesture 8) did not perform as poorly as expected
despite having the fewest samples in the dataset. This suggests that the quantity of data
may not significantly influence model performance as much as the complexity or similarity
of the gesture types, indicating that some gestures are inherently more challenging to
classify.
Figure 5.4: Train and test accuracy of the SNN model over 100 epochs
24
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:33==
Figure 5.5: Confusion matrix, representing misclassifications of the SNN model
5.2
Intermittent EMG SNN
5.2.1
Checkpointing Overhead
In Section 5.1.6, the SNN model architecture was defined. Using Equation 4.1, the check-
point overhead for our SNN model can be computed:
Table 5.2: Overhead of each checkpoint
Checkpoint
Overhead
(Bytes)
1
4797
2
4733
3
4717
4
4703
The overhead for each checkpoint is computed, with checkpoints placed sequentially after
each model layer (e.g., checkpoint 1 follows the convolutional layer, and checkpoint 2 fol-
lows the first fully connected layer). Overall, the difference in overhead between checkpoint
1, which has the highest overhead, and checkpoint 4, which has the lowest, is relatively
minor, amounting to approximately 1.96%.
Using the methodology outlined in Section 4.2.4 and Equation 4.1, the general overhead
in bytes can be converted into energy overhead in joules. Equation 4.4 requires the en-
ergy needed to write or read a single byte to NVMes. Since we did not have access to
hardware during this project, we selected NVMes based on criteria we would use when
designing a system. We began by defining the device requirements, which, in our case,
include suﬀicient capacity to store our checkpoints and maximise energy eﬀiciency. We
then selected an NVMes device by reviewing datasheets for various devices that meet these
requirements.
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
25
==PAGE:34==
Table 5.2 shows that the largest checkpoint size we need to store is 4797 bytes, which sets
the minimum storage capacity for the NVMe device we select. After exploring various
types of NVMe devices, we identified FRAM NVMe devices as particularly energy-eﬀicient,
often used in ImC applications [18]. We searched different electronics distributors and
found the Fujitsu MB85RC256V FRAM module [31], which offers a total capacity of 32
kB, suﬀicient for our needs. Using the datasheet of the MB85RC256V FRAM module, we
can calculate ENV Me:
Given:
• Operating Voltage, V = 5.5 V
• Maximum Operating Current, I = 200 µA = 200 × 10−6 A
• Clock Frequency, f = 1 MHz = 1 × 106 Hz
• Bits per Byte = 8
tbit = 1
f
tbit =
1
1 × 106 Hz = 1 × 10−6 s/bit
Energy per Bit (Ebit):
Ebit = V × I × tbit
Ebit = 5.5 × 200 × 10−6 × 1 × 10−6 s
Ebit = 1.1 × 10−9 J/bit
Energy per Byte (Ebyte):
Ebyte = Ebit × 8
Ebyte = 1.1 × 10−9 J/bit × 8
Ebyte = 8.8 × 10−9 J/byte
Ebyte = 0.0088 µJ/byte
Time per Bit (tbit)
tbit = 1
f
tbit =
1
1 × 106 Hz = 1 × 10−6 s/bit
Time per Byte (tbyte)
tbyte = tbit × 8
26
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:35==
tbyte = 1 × 10−6 s/bit × 8
tbyte = 8 × 10−6 s/byte
Using the calculated values of ENV Me and TNV Me, along with Equation 4.4, we compute
Ecp and Tcp:
Table 5.3: Overhead in E and T for each checkpoint
Checkpoint
Ecp
(uJ)
Tcp
(ms)
1
42.2
38.4
2
41.7
37.9
3
41.5
37.7
4
41.4
37.6
5.2.2
Architecture Checkpoint Overhead Comparison
Table 5.2 outlines the checkpoint overhead in bytes at various locations within our SNN
model, as discussed in Section 5.1.6. Our SNN model most closely aligns with architecture
4 in Table 4.3. We apply the same model layers detailed in Table 4.3 to estimate the
overhead for other architectures listed in Table 5.1. This approach provides an estimation
of the overhead for each architecture type:
Table 5.4: Overhead in bytes for different architectures
Checkpoint
Overhead
(Bytes)
Architecture 1
Overhead
(Bytes)
Architecture 2
Overhead
(Bytes)
Architecture 3
Overhead
(Bytes)
Architecture 4/Base
Overhead
(Bytes)
Architecture 5
1
768
2439
2439*
4797
4797*
2
256
2375
2375*
4733
4733*
3
128
2359
2359*
4717
4717*
4
12
2345
2345*
4707
4707*
Using Equation 4.4, the energy consumption for each checkpoint across different architec-
tures can be calculated as follows:
Table 5.5: Overhead in terms of energy and latency for different architectures
Checkpoint
E
(uJ)
Archt.1
T
(ms)
Archt.1
E
(uJ)
Archt.2
T
(ms)
Archt.2
E
(uJ)
Archt.3
T
(ms)
Archt.3
E
(uJ)
Archt.4
T
(ms)
Archt.4
E
(uJ)
Archt.5
T
(ms)
Archt.5
1
6.76
6.14
21.5
19.5
21.5*
19.5*
84.4
76.8
84.4*
76.8*
2
2.25
2.05
20.9
19.0
20.9*
19.0*
83.4
75.8
83.4*
75.8*
3
1.13
1.02
20.8
18.9
20.8*
18.9*
83.0
75.4
83.0*
75.4*
4
0.106
0.096
20.6
18.8
20.6*
18.8*
82.8
75.2
82.8*
75.2*
The results in Table 5.5 indicate that architectures 4 and 5 have the highest energy con-
sumption and latency. In contrast, architecture 1 exhibits significantly lower overhead
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
27
==PAGE:36==
compared to the other architectures. It is important to note that architectures 3 and 5
utilize temporal decoding, meaning that all overhead calculations assume the worst-case
scenario, where classification occurs at the final timestep.
5.2.3
Inference Energy
In Section 4.2.6, we adopted the method proposed by Lemaire et al. [27] to estimate the
inference energy consumption of our SNN model. This approach calculates the energy
consumption for each model layer individually and then sums these values to determine
the total inference energy consumption. The detailed calculation of inference energy con-
sumption is provided in Appendix A A. The results for each layer are as follows:
Table 5.6: Total energy for each model layer in 5.1
Layer
Emem
(uJ)
Eops+addr
(uJ)
Total Energy
(uJ)
1
401.41
0.30
401.70
2
194.27
4.21
198.48
3
37.52
3.20
40.72
4
2.25
0.094
2.34
We assume that the average energy per timestep remains constant. Thus, if the total
energy Etotal is known, the energy per timestep can be calculated as Etotal/total timesteps.
Using this assumption and the results from Table 5.6, we can determine the continued
inference energy,Econt, as defined in Equation 4.9 in Section 4.2.8:
Table 5.7: Continued energy consumption, Econt, for each checkpoint over all 10 timesteps
Timesteps
Econt
Checkpoint 1
Econt
Checkpoint 2
Econt
Checkpoint 3
Econt
Checkpoint 4
1
603.07
583.22
579.15
578.92
2
538.75
518.90
514.83
514.59
3
474.42
454.57
450.50
450.27
4
410.10
390.25
386.18
385.94
5
345.77
325.93
321.85
321.62
6
281.45
261.60
257.53
257.30
7
217.13
197.28
193.21
192.97
8
152.80
132.95
128.88
128.65
9
88.48
68.63
64.56
64.32
10
24.154
4.306
0.234
0.00
28
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.6: Change of Econt over 10 timesteps
5.2.4
Inference Latency
In Section 4.2.7, we noted the absence of a method to accurately calculate the inference
latency of our model. Consequently, we proposed using inference latency data from existing
literature as a reference point. However, we could not find any spiking neural network
(SNN) models for EMG data that also utilized the Ninapro DB2 dataset. To address this,
we expanded our search to include studies using different datasets but with similar model
architectures.
Vitale et al. [14] developed both a convolutional SNN and a fully connected SNN using the
Ninapro DB5 dataset. They reported an inference latency of 5.7 ms, which we will use as an
estimate for our model’s inference latency. This value represents the total inference latency,
which means that the latency per timestep can be calculated by dividing this by the total
amount of timesteps, 600 in this case, which results in a latency per inference timestep,
TTS, of 0.0095 ms. Furthermore, we have to assume that the latency in each checkpoint
is the same since we have no method to calculate latency for individual checkpoints.
5.2.5
Checkpointing Feasibility - Energy
The feasibility of checkpointing regarding energy was established using Equation 4.3. Ap-
plying this methodology, along with the results from Sections 5.2.1 and 5.2.3, allows us to
assess the feasibility of checkpointing within our SNN model. By combining checkpoint
energy consumption,Ecp, with continued inference energy consumption, Econt, we obtain
the following results:
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
29
==PAGE:38==
Table 5.8: Econt+Ecp for each checkpoint over 10 timesteps
Timestep
Econt+Ecp
Checkpoint 1
Econt+Ecp
Checkpoint 2
Econt+Ecp
Checkpoint 3
Econt+Ecp
Checkpoint 4
1
609.83
585.47
580.28
579.02
2
580.95
560.60
556.33
555.99
3
516.62
496.27
492.00
491.67
4
452.30
431.95
427.68
427.34
5
387.97
367.63
363.35
363.02
6
323.65
303.30
299.03
298.70
7
259.33
238.98
234.71
234.37
8
195.00
174.65
170.38
170.05
9
130.68
110.33
106.06
105.72
10
30.90
6.56
1.36
0.106
Plotting the remaining timesteps against Econtinue+Ecp results in the following graph:
Figure 5.7: Combined energy consumption of Ecp and Econt over 10 timesteps
The total inference energy is represented by a dotted red line. Any checkpoint falling below
this line meets the condition specified in Equation 4.3 and is therefore deemed worthwhile
for checkpointing.
5.2.6
Checkpointing Feasibility - Latency
Using the results in section 5.2.4 and 5.2.2, we can evaluate the effect of checkpointing on
the total latency of the system.
In comparison to the inference latency (Tinf) of 0.0095 ms, the checkpointing latency (Tcp)
is significantly higher at 38.4 ms. As shown in Figure 5.8, this disparity causes the total
latency to increase substantially over ten timesteps, reaching 307.74 ms. This represents
a significant increase in overall system latency, driven by the checkpointing process.
30
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:39==
Table 5.9: Change in inference latency, and combined inference and checkpoint latency
over ten timesteps
Timestep
Inference Latency
(us)
Inference + CP Latency
(us)
1
9.50
15.64
2
19.00
38434.64
3
28.50
76863.14
4
38.00
115301.14
5
47.50
153748.64
6
57.00
192205.64
7
66.50
230672.14
8
76.00
269148.14
9
85.50
307633.64
10
95.00
307734.79
Figure 5.8: Change in inference latency and total latency over ten timesteps
5.2.7
Checkpointing Strategy
Based on the results of the checkpointing feasibility calculations in section 5.2.5, it is
possible to create a checkpointing strategy for our SNN model. The results in Table 5.8
show that it is not always worth checkpointing at early timesteps. However, at higher
timesteps, the potential energy savings by a checkpoint increase substantially. For our
specific model, the strategy would be:
Based on the checkpointing feasibility calculations in Section 5.2.5, we can develop a check-
pointing strategy for our SNN model. The results in Table 5.8 indicate that checkpointing
may not always be beneficial at early timesteps. However, as timesteps increase, the po-
tential energy savings from checkpointing rise significantly. For our specific model, the
recommended strategy would be:
• For all checkpoints, it is advantageous to checkpoint at every timestep
• At earlier timesteps, total potential energy gain is much less than in later timesteps
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
31
==PAGE:40==
5.2.8
Checkpointing Frequency
Section 4.3.2 introduced Equation 4.10 to determine the optimal checkpointing frequency
during each forward pass (or timestep). Using the findings from Sections 5.2.1 and 5.2.3:
Table 5.10: Testing if increasing checkpointing frequency is worth it for all four checkpoints
Checkpoint
Ecp
Ebeforecp
Ecp < Ebeforecp
1
42.2
40.41
False
2
41.7
19.85
False
3
41.5
4.72
False
4
41.4
0234
False
The results in Table 5.10 indicate that in our SNN model, multiple checkpoints within a
single forward pass (or timestep) are not beneficial.
32
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 6
Discussion
6.1
General ImC SNN
In Chapter 4, we demonstrated the feasibility of implementing intermittent SNNs using
checkpointing techniques. We also introduced a method for quantifying checkpoint over-
head in terms of both accuracy and latency. Applying this methodology to our SNN EMG
model, as discussed in Chapter 5, we assessed the energy and latency overheads specific
to this model. Subsequently, we utilized the feasibility criterion from Equation 4.3 to
determine the optimal timesteps and checkpoints for implementing checkpointing. Our
analysis indicated that for our SNN model, checkpointing is advantageous at all evaluated
checkpoints.
However, the analysis reveals a distinct pattern: the potential energy savings from check-
pointing are minimal at earlier timesteps. For instance, checkpointing at timestep one
yields only a marginal reduction in total energy overhead compared to rerunning inference
from the start after a power failure. This observation suggests that a dynamic check-
pointing strategy should be implemented for intermittent SNNs employing checkpointing,
where the frequency of checkpointing adapts based on the current timestep. This approach
aligns with the dynamic checkpointing frequency algorithm proposed by Maeng et al.[21].
Different model types are expected to result in different checkpointing frequencies and
locations.
Additionally, our findings in Section 4.1.3 indicate that the layer size primarily influences
checkpoint overhead. For example, a convolutional layer with 64 filters incurs significantly
higher checkpoint overhead than one with 32 filters. Conversely, the overhead difference
between models with one timestep and those with 100 timesteps is negligible.
6.2
ImC SNN EMG
In Chapter 5, we determined that the worst-case scenario for total energy and latency
overheads in our system were 609.83 µJ and 307.73 ms, respectively, resulting in a power
requirement of 187.67 µW. Literature on the energy harvesting capabilities of devices
suggests that the available power typically ranges from micro to milliwatts [32] [33]. Given
this, the power requirements of our SNN EMG model appear within a feasible range,
making it plausible from an energy standpoint.
However, the latency observed is considerably high, which poses a significant concern given
that our application is intended for medical use. Such high latency could result in the loss
of critical input data, rendering the system unsuitable for many medical applications.
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
33
==PAGE:42==
Nevertheless, it may be possible to mitigate this issue by selecting a different type of
NVMe, potentially reducing the latency to acceptable levels.
6.3
Future Works
This project focused on the early development stages of an intermittent SNN. However,
several aspects of this topic remain unexplored. Our results suggest that different SNN
architectures may necessitate distinct checkpointing frequencies and locations. We hypoth-
esize that each architecture has its optimal ”sweet spot” for checkpointing. This hypothesis
requires further investigation through the design and testing of additional architectures
to confirm its validity.
Moreover, this project’s scope was intentionally limited to a narrow range of SNN archi-
tectures. To determine our findings’ generalizability, exploring other architectures, such
as SNNs employing the Integrate-and-Fire neuron model and population decoding mech-
anisms is essential.
Another important consideration is the impact of various ImC dynamics, such as capacitor
size and the characteristics of energy harvesting devices, within the context of intermittent
SNNs. Developing an energy harvesting forecasting model akin to the approach of Islam
et al. [24] could be a valuable next step.
Additionally, this project primarily focused on supervised learning. Future research could
explore the potential of semi-supervised and unsupervised learning approaches, as demon-
strated by Lee et al. [23], to enhance the robustness and applicability of intermittent
SNNs.
Lastly, this project was developed using SNNTorch without any neuromorphic hardware.
To validate the results presented in this report, it is necessary to implement the developed
EMG SNN on neuromorphic hardware and verify the calculated inference overheads are
accurate.
34
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The overall objectives of this project were to assess the possibility of making an SNN
intermittent, define its trade-offs and then evaluate its effect on an SNN EMG model.
Our results show that our simulations and data show that it is possible to create an
intermittent SNN. Furthermore, we found the trade-off to be primarily a medium increase
in energy consumption and an incredibly large increase in latency. Lastly, we found that
altering the architecture of an SNN (i.e. creating a different model) results in different
checkpointing overhead, frequency and location.
Overall, due to time limitations, this project only scratched the surface of intermittent
SNNs, and further work is needed to both confirm this project’s results and better under-
stand the general dynamics between ImC and SNNs.
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
35
==PAGE:44==
References
[1]
Lara McManus et al. “Consensus for experimental design in electromyography (CEDE)
project: Terminology matrix”. In: Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology 59
(2021), p. 102565.
[2]
John Hopkins Medicine. Electromyography (EMG). Accessed: 2024-07-30. url: https:
/ / www . hopkinsmedicine . org / health / treatment - tests - and - therapies /
electromyography-emg.
[3]
Charu C. Aggarwal. “An Introduction to Neural Networks”. In: Neural Networks
and Deep Learning: A Textbook. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2018,
pp. 1–52. isbn: 978-3-319-94463-0. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-94463-0_1. url:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-94463-0_1.
[4]
Frank Rosenblatt. “The perceptron: a probabilistic model for information storage
and organization in the brain.” In: Psychological review 65 6 (1958), pp. 386–408.
url: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:12781225.
[5]
Stefan Leijnen and Fjodor van Veen. “The Neural Network Zoo”. In: Proceedings
47.1 (2020). issn: 2504-3900. doi: 10.3390/proceedings2020047009. url: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2504-3900/47/1/9.
[6]
Catherine D. Schuman et al. “Opportunities for Neuromorphic Computing Algo-
rithms and Applications”. English. In: Nature Computational Science 2 (2022), pp. 10–
19. issn: 2662-8457. doi: 10.1038/s43588- 021- 00184- y. url: https://www.
nature.com/articles/s43588-021-00184-y.
[7]
Jason K. Eshraghian et al. “Training Spiking Neural Networks Using Lessons from
Deep Learning”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 111.9 (2023), pp. 1016–1054. issn:
15582256 and 00189219. doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2023.3308088.
[8]
Dezhen Xiong et al. “Deep Learning for EMG-based Human-Machine Interaction:
A Review”. In: IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica 8.3 (2021), pp. 512–533.
doi: 10.1109/JAS.2021.1003865.
[9]
Zhen Ding et al. “sEMG-Based Gesture Recognition with Convolution Neural Net-
works”. In: Sustainability 10.6 (2018). issn: 2071-1050. doi: 10.3390/su10061865.
url: https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/10/6/1865.
[10]
Yu Hu et al. “A novel attention-based hybrid CNN-RNN architecture for sEMG-
based gesture recognition”. In: Pattern Recognition 122 (2022), p. 108228.
[11]
Manfredo Atzori, Matteo Cognolato, and Henning Müller. “Deep Learning with Con-
volutional Neural Networks Applied to Electromyography Data: A Resource for the
Classification of Movements for Prosthetic Hands”. In: Frontiers in Neurorobotics 10
(2016), p. 9.
[12]
Simon Tam et al. “A Fully Embedded Adaptive Real-Time Hand Gesture Classifier
Leveraging HD-sEMG and Deep Learning”. In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Circuits and Systems 14.2 (2020), pp. 232–243. doi: 10.1109/TBCAS.2019.2955641.
36
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:45==
[13]
Marcello Zanghieri et al. “Robust Real-Time Embedded EMG Recognition Frame-
work Using Temporal Convolutional Networks on a Multicore IoT Processor”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems 14.2 (2020), pp. 244–256.
doi: 10.1109/TBCAS.2019.2959160.
[14]
Antonio Vitale et al. “Neuromorphic Edge Computing for Biomedical Applications:
Gesture Classification Using EMG Signals”. In: IEEE Sensors Journal 22.20 (2022),
pp. 19490–19499. issn: 15581748 and 1530437x. doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2022.3194678.
[15]
Sai Sukruth Bezugam, Ahmed Shaban, and Manan Suri. “Low Power Neuromorphic
EMG Gesture Classification”. English. In: (2022). Available at: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2206.02061. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2206.02061.
[16]
Enea Ceolini et al. “Hand-Gesture Recognition Based on EMG and Event-Based
Camera Sensor Fusion: A Benchmark in Neuromorphic Computing”. In: Frontiers in
Neuroscience 14 (2020), p. 637. issn: 1662453x and 16624548. doi: 10.3389/fnins.
2020.00637.
[17]
Saad Ahmed et al. “The Internet of Batteryless Things”. In: Communications of the
ACM 67.3 (2024), pp. 64–73. issn: 15577317 and 00010782. doi: 10.1145/3624718.
[18]
Sumanth Umesh and Sparsh Mittal. “A survey of techniques for intermittent com-
puting”. In: Journal of Systems Architecture 112 (2021), p. 101859. issn: 1873-6165,
1383-7621. doi: 10.1016/j.sysarc.2020.101859.
[19]
Brandon Lucia et al. “Intermittent Computing: Challenges and Opportunities”.
In: Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics, Lipics. Vol. 71. 2nd Summit
on Advances in Programming Languages, SNAPL 2017. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-
Zentrum für Informatik, 2017, p. 8. isbn: 3959770324 and 9783959770323. doi:
10.4230/LIPIcs.SNAPL.2017.8.
[20]
Hrishikesh Jayakumar, Arnab Raha, and Vijay Raghunathan. “QUICKRECALL:
A Low Overhead HW/SW Approach for Enabling Computations Across Power Cy-
cles in Transiently Powered Computers”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on VLSI Design. 27th International Conference on VLSI Design, VLSID
2014 - Held Concurrently with 13th International Conference on Embedded Sys-
tems Design. IEEE, 2014, pp. 330–335. isbn: 1479925128, 1479925136, 1479925144,
9781479925124, 9781479925131, 9781479925148. doi: 10.1109/VLSID.2014.63.
[21]
Kiwan Maeng and Brandon Lucia. “Adaptive Dynamic Checkpointing for Safe Eﬀi-
cient Intermittent Computing”. In: Proceedings of the 13th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation. USENIX Association, 2018, pp. 129–
144. isbn: 1939133084, 9781939133083.
[22]
Alexei Colin and Brandon Lucia. “Termination Checking and Task Decomposition
for Task-Based Intermittent Programs”. In: CC 2018 - Proceedings of the 27th
International Conference on Compiler Construction, Co-located with CGO 2018.
Association for Computing Machinery, Inc, 2018, pp. 116–127. isbn: 1450356443,
9781450356442. doi: 10.1145/3178372.3179525.
[23]
Seulki Lee et al. “Intermittent Learning: On-Device Machine Learning on Inter-
mittently Powered Systems”. In: Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile,
Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 3.4 (2019), p. 141. issn: 24749567. doi: 10.
1145/3369837.
[24]
Bashima Islam and Shahriar Nirjon. “Zygarde: Time-Sensitive On-Device Deep In-
ference and Adaptation on Intermittently-Powered Systems”. In: Proceedings of the
ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 4.3 (2020), p. 82.
issn: 24749567. doi: 10.1145/3411808.
[25]
Graham Gobieski, Nathan Beckmann, and Brandon Lucia. “Intermittent Deep Neu-
ral Network Inference”. In: SysML. 2018.
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
37
==PAGE:46==
[26]
Udayanga K. N. G. W. Gamage et al. “Event-Based Classification of Defects in Civil
Infrastructures with Artificial and Spiking Neural Networks”. In: Lecture Notes in
Computer Science. Vol. 17. Springer, 2023, pp. 629–640.
[27]
Edgar Lemaire et al. “An Analytical Estimation of Spiking Neural Networks En-
ergy Eﬀiciency”. In: 29th International Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing, ICONIP 2022. Vol. 13623. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Virtual Event:
Springer, 2023, pp. 574–587. isbn: 9783031301056. doi: 10.1007/978- 3- 031-
30105-6_48.
[28]
Manfredo Atzori et al. “Electromyography data for non-invasive naturally-controlled
robotic hand prostheses”. In: Scientific Data 1.1 (2014), p. 140053. doi: 10.1038/
sdata.2014.53.
[29]
Catherine D. Schuman et al. “Non-traditional input encoding schemes for spiking
neuromorphic systems”. In: 2019 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–10. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.2019.8852139.
[30]
Daniel Auge et al. “A Survey of Encoding Techniques for Signal Processing in Spiking
Neural Networks”. In: Neural Processing Letters 53.6 (2021), pp. 4693–4710. doi:
10.1007/s11063-021-10562-2.
[31]
Fujitsu Semiconductor. MB85RC256V 256 Kbit (32K × 8) I²C FRAM. Accessed:
2024-07-14. 2017. url: https://www.fujitsu.com/uk/Images/MB85RC256V-
20171207.pdf.
[32]
Ivaylo Pandiev et al. “Analysis of the Methods for Realization of Low-Power Piezo-
electric Energy Harvesting Circuits for Wearable Battery-Free Power Supply De-
vices”. In: Applied Sciences 14.11 (2024), p. 4792. doi: 10.3390/app14114792. url:
https://doi.org/10.3390/app14114792.
[33]
F.R. Pathan. “Kinetic Energy Harvesting from Human Hand Movement by Mount-
ing micro Electromagnetic Generator”. In: E3S Web of Conferences. Vol. 115. Pub-
lished online: 02 September 2019. The 2nd International Conference on Electrical En-
gineering and Green Energy (CEEGE 2019). 2019, p. 02005. doi: 10.1051/e3sconf/
201911502005. url: https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/201911502005.
38
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:47==
Appendix A
Inference Energy Calculations
Layer 1 parameters:
• θl−l = 348
• Cout = 64
• Wkernel = 1
• Hkernel = 60
• Hkernel = 60
• Wout = 12
• Hout = 1
• Noutput = 4
• T = 10
• S = 1
• θ = 8068
Energy Consumption memory access (Emem):
Emem = (RdIn + RdParam + RdPot) × ERdRAM + (WrOut + WrPot) × EWrRAM
RdIn = θl−l RdIn = 348
RdParam = θl−l × Cout × Wkernel × Hkernel + Cout × Wout × Hout
RdParam = 348 × 64 × 1 × 60 + 64 × 12 × 1
RdParam = 1337088
RdPot = θl−l × Cout × Wkernel × Hkernel + Cout × Hout × Wout
RdPot = 348 × 64 × 1 × 60 + 64 × 1 × 12
RdPot = 1337088
ERdRAM = 100 ∗10−12 [Lemaire et al.]
WrOut = Noutput WrOut = 90
WrPot = θl−l × Cout × Wkernel × Hkernel + Cout × Hout × Wout
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
39
==PAGE:48==
WrPot = 348 × 64 × 1 × 60 + 64 × 1 × 12
WrPot = 1337088
EWrRAM = ERdRam
Emem = (348 + 1337088 + 1337088) × 100 ∗10−12 + (90 + 1337088) × 100 ∗10−12
Emem = 0.0004011702(J)
Emem = 401.17(uJ)
Energy Consumption memory access (Eops+addr):
Eops+addr = (EAdd + EMul) × MACOps+Addr + EAdd × ACCOps+Addr
EAdd = 0.1 ∗10−12 [Lemaire]
EMul = 3.1 ∗10−12 [Lemaire]
MACAddr = θl−l × 2 MACAddr = 348 × 2 MACAddr = 696
MACOps = T × Cout × Hout × Wout MACOps = 10 × 64 × 1 × 12 MACOps = 7680
ACCops = θl−l × (Hkernel/S) × (Wkernel/S) × Cout + T × Cout × Hout × Wout + θl
ACCops = 348 × (60/1) × (1/1) × 64 + 10 × 64 × 1 × 12 + 8068
ACCops = 1352068
ACCAdr = θl−l × Cout × Hkernel × Wkernel ACCAdr = 348 × 64 × 60 × 1
ACCAdr = 1336320
Eops+addr = (0.1 ∗10−12 + 3.1 ∗10−12) × (7680 + 696) + 0.1 ∗10−12 × (1352068 + 1336320)
Eops+addr = 0.000000295642(J) Eops+addr = 0.295642(uJ)
E = Emem + Eops+Addr E = 401.17 + 0.295642 E = 401.47uJ
40
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
==PAGE:49==
Towards Intermittent Neuromorphic and Embedded Computing for Battery-Free Wearable Medical
Devices
41
==PAGE:50==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
