==PAGE:1==
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of
GOAP and Utility AI
Master Thesis
Enrique José Aguado Andrés
2024
DTU ELECTRO
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
By
(s22930) Enrique José Aguado Andrés
Advisor(s)
Thomas Bolander , Professor at the Institut for Mathematics and Computer Science De-
partment of DTU
Education
Master Thesis
Programme
Autonomous Systems
Period
12 February 2024 to 12 July 2024
ECTS
30
Copyright:
Enrique José Aguado Andrés 2024
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Christian Andersen, 2018
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering,
Elektrovej 326, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.electro.dtu.dk
Remark
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for grad-
uation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Goal-Oriented Action Planning (GOAP) is a widely used planning technique in artificial
intelligence (AI), providing a structured approach for agents to achieve specific goals by
selecting and executing actions. Utility AI (UAI), on the other hand, focuses on evaluat-
ing the desirability of different actions or states, enabling agents to make more informed
decisions in dynamic environments. This thesis presents Utility-Guided Goal-Oriented
Action Planning (UGOAP), a framework that integrates the strengths of both GOAP and
UAI. By enriching the state representation with contextual information relevant to utility
evaluation and employing a utility-driven planning algorithm, UGOAP allows AI agents
to make more context-aware decisions. A proof of concept UGOAP is demonstrated in a
game scenario using the Godot engine, showcasing its potential to enhance the autonomy
of AI agents.
ii
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
AI agents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Knowledge representation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Game AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
GOAP (Goal Oriented Action Planning) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Agent architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Utility theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6.1
Normalized utility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6.2
Preferences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6.3
Utility, desires and goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6.4
Utility-based AI in games
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
System overview
19
3.1
UGOAP: Integrating UtilityAI Concepts into GOAP Planning
. . . . . .
20
4
Design
23
4.1
State representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1.1
State mutation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Agent components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.1
Desire component
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3.1.1
Utility of a state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3.2
Behaviour component
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.2.1
Heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3.2.2
Replanning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Result
33
5.1
Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.1
Smart objects and entities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.1.2
Agents (NPCs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Behavioural results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
iii
==PAGE:6==
6
Future work
37
6.1
Test scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Planner
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3
Performance benchmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.4
Reduce design complexity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.5
Multi-agent support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.6
Reinforcement learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
43
A Appendix
45
A.1
Pseudocode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
A.2
Specific class implementations in C# . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
iv
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) has become increasingly prevalent in various domains, from
gaming, to robotics and autonomous systems. A critical aspect of AI development is cre-
ating agents who can make intelligent decisions and act autonomously in complex environ-
ments. Traditional planning approaches, such as Goal-Oriented Action Planning (GOAP),
can adapt to dynamic situations and consider the context in which a suitable sequence of
actions is chosen. Alternatively, Utility AI (UAI) offers a robust framework for decision-
making by evaluating the utility of different actions or states. We think it is interesting to
bring these two frameworks together.
This thesis explores the potential of integrating GOAP and UAI to create a more robust and
adaptable planning system for AI agents. By combining the structured planning of GOAP
with the decision-making of UAI, we aim to develop agents that can reason about their
actions, consider the consequences of their choices, and make more intelligent decisions
in complex environments.
1.1
Objectives
The primary objectives of this thesis are:
1. Design and implement a planning system, that integrates GOAP and UAI concepts.
2. To develop an enriched state representation to support decision-making during plan-
ning.
3. To design and implement a utility-driven planning algorithm that evaluates the util-
ity of potential action sequences and selects the most promising one.
4. To evaluate the apppropietness of such an approach in various scenarios and whether
it is feasible.
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
1
==PAGE:8==
1.2
Thesis outline
This thesis is organized as follows:
• Chapter 2: Theory: Provides an overview of relevant concepts and technologies,
including GOAP, UAI, and belief-desire-intention (BDI) agent architecture.
• Chapter 3: System overview: Introduces a brief overview of the system we labeled
UGOAP (Utility-Guided Goal Oriented Action Planning).
• Chapter 4: Design: Presents the detailed design and implementation of the UGOAP
system, including the enriched state representation, utility-driven planning algo-
rithm, and overall system architecture.
• Chapter 5: Results: Evaluate UGOAP in a simulated game environment.
• Chapter 6: Future Work: Discusses the implications of the research and outlines
potential directions for future work.
• Chapter 7: Conclusion: Summarizes the key findings of the thesis.
2
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:9==
2
Theory
This chapter reviews the main topics concerned with the research for this thesis, specifi-
cally in the context of behavior for AI agents and the use of Utility theory for decision-
making.
The following paper and book were the main inspiration behind this thesis. First, the paper
from Jeff Orkin [1] describes a decision-making architecture for goal-oriented agents to
make agents in a game environment more autonomous. Second, the book ”Behavioural
Mathematics for Game AI” by Mark [2] explains how to apply concepts from Decision
Theory to AI agents to achieve more realistic behavior. In this thesis, we design a system
that combines the main concepts from these sources.
2.1
AI agents
Since this thesis is about achieving more autonomous behaviour for our agents we proceed
to define what an agent is:
Definition 2.1.1. An agent is anything that can be viewed as perceiving its environment
through sensors and acting upon that environment through actuators.[3]
2.2
Knowledge representation
Knowledge representation is one of the first topics to consider when designing AI agents.
It is the process of formalizing information that agents use for their decision-making pro-
cess.
Each AI agent needs to know certain things about the world and themselves to decide
and act. Not only is the information we need important but so is how such information
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
3
==PAGE:10==
is represented. Some algorithms might need a particular representation for them to work.
[4].
Knowledge representation is a multidisciplinary subject that applies theories and tech-
niques from three other fields [5]:
1. Logic provides the formal structure and rules of inference.
2. Ontology defines the kinds of things that exist in the application domain and the
relations between things.
3. Computation supports the applications that distinguish knowledge representation
from pure philosophy.
This thesis will use state representation where agents can describe their beliefs about
themselves and the world. The planning and decision-making components will use the
agents’ beliefs to plan and execute the corresponding behavior. We will rely on first-order
logic to describe the state of the agents. Therefore, we now define the main concepts to
form a first-order logic-based knowledge representation for our agents.
In their seminal work, Peter Norvig and Stuart J. Russell [3] explain that the language of
first-order logic is built around objects and relations. They explain that nouns express ob-
jects in the world (doors, keys, trees, ...) and verbs, verb phrases, adjectives, and adverbs
form relations among objects (is open, is close, has, open, close). Some of these relations
are functions-relations in which there is ”only” one ”value” for a given ”input”.
The basic syntactic elements of first-order logic are:
• Constant symbols: which stand for objects.
• Predicate symbols: which stand for relations.
• Function symbols: which stand for functions. Certain kinds of relationships are
best considered as functions, in that a given object must be related to exactly one
object in this way. For example, each person has one left leg, so the model has a
unary “left leg” function—a mapping from a one-element tuple to an object [3].
Definition 2.2.1. A Model in ﬁrst-order logic consists of a set of objects and an interpreta-
tion that maps constant symbols to objects, function symbols to functions on those objects,
and predicate symbols to relations [3].
Definition 2.2.2. A Term is a logical expression that refers to an object. Terms can refer
to constant symbols as well as function symbols.
Definition 2.2.3. An atomic sentence (also called atom) is formed from a predicate symbol
optionally followed by a parenthesized list of terms. To state facts we use atomic sentences.
For example:
IsOpen(Door)
This states that the object Door is open. As mentioned by [3], it is important to note that,
an atomic sentence is true in a given model if the relation referred to by the predicate
symbol holds among the objects referred to by the arguments.
4
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:11==
We can form complex sentences using logical connectives. For Example:
¬IsOpen(Door) ∧HasKey(Agent)
Which would translate as ”The door is not open and the agent has a key”.
Definition 2.2.4. In knowledge representation, a Domain is just some part of the world
about which we wish to express some knowledge.
Definition 2.2.5. A fluent refers to an aspect of the world that changes.
With all these definitions in place we can start to describe how our agents represent their
knowledge.
Definition 2.2.6. A state is a set of fluents F that represents the facts the agent knows
about the world.
A state then can be thought of as a model of the world that an agent holds.
2.3
Game AI
There is an important distinction between game AI and traditional AI [6]. Both are inter-
ested in agent-based modeling. However, where traditional AI focuses on rational behav-
ior and optimal decision-making, AI in games is usually more concerned with game-play
feel. If a simple solution works for the intended behavior, then that is favored over a more
formal and correct approach that would require more development time. Usually, agents
in game AI are model-based reflex agents; they hold some internal state about the world
and react according to some rules.
This thesis will focus on goal-based and utility-based agents. The main application for this
thesis is in game environments, particularly in the context of NPCs (non-player characters)
behavior. However, since we are dealing with agent-based modeling, most concepts and
ideas can be applied to other fields like robotics.
2.4
GOAP (Goal Oriented Action Planning)
The leading architecture this thesis is based on is GOAP, and the structure of our system
and planning algorithm will be drawn from it. GOAP is based on STRIPS (Stanford Re-
search Institute Problem Solver) and is a planning architecture for goal-based agents. It
allows AI agents to formulate plans to attain specific goals. To achieve such goals, the
agent performs actions. A sequence of actions is what is called a plan. Formulating plans
leads to less repetitive, predictable behavior than using a pre-planned sequence of actions
or state machines. If the environment changes, the agent can adapt his actions to his cur-
rent situation [1]. We now define what a strips planning problem entails in the context of
GOAP:
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
5
==PAGE:12==
Definition 2.4.1. A GOAP problem is formulated as a tuple P = (F, I, G, A) where F
is a set of fluents, I ⊆F is the initial agent state, G ⊆F is the goal state, A is a set of
actions a with preconditions and effects Pre(a) and Eff(a). Preconditions and effects
are atomic sentences (2.2.3).
Actions change the state and therefore the knowledge domain of the agent. For an action
to be applicable its set of Preconditions must be satisfied by the preceding state Ci−1 |=
Pre(ai). By applying the Effects of the action we mutate the state of the agent.
The are two main differences between GOAP and a traditional STRIPS planner:
1. GOAP planning is driven by a heuristic (using A*). The original author, Jeff Orkin,
emphasizes the advantages of using a backwards planning algorithm[1] where in-
stead of moving from the initial state I towards the goal state G we move backwards
from G until G ⊆I. Backwards search is generally more efficient and suitable for
real-time applications due to the heuristic guidance.
2. GOAP introduces procedural actions which contain the step-by-step instructions
on how to perform the action. For example, the action PickUpItem might have a
function that describes the process of moving towards the item, taking it, and adding
it to the inventory which can include conditional statements and loops. This allows
for more adaptable behavior in real-time scenarios.
Definition 2.4.2. An acceptable plan to a GOAP problem P = (F, I, G, A), is then
reached when we find a suitable sequence of actions π ∈{(a1, a2, ..., an)|ai ∈A∀i}
that achieves the goal G. Doing a backwards search the plan π determines a sequence of
states from the goal state:
G0, G1, ..., Gn
where,
G0 = G
and,
Gi = (Gi−1 \ Eff(ai)) ∪Pre(ai) for 1 ≤i ≤n
a plan is acceptable then if and only if,
Gn ⊆I
Example 2.4.1. Consider a case where an agent needs to collect a key to open a door.
The set of constant symbols S would be:
S = {Key, Door, Agent}
(2.1)
We define the following predicates each of which is a partial function on S:
6
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:13==
• Has(): may only be applied to evaluate whether the Agent has the Key to open the
Door, written as Has(Key, Agent) 1.
• IsOpen(): may only be applied to evaluate wheter the Door is open.
We define the set of actions A:
Name
Preconditions
Effects
PickUpKey
¬Has(Key, Agent)
Has(Key, Agent)
OpenDoor
Has(Key, Agent)
IsOpen(Door)
Table 2.1: Set of available actions
The goal state G:
G = {IsOpen(Door)}
The current state of the agent C:
C = {}
A plan that reaches the goal is then:
π = (PickUpKey, OpenDoor)
These are the main advantages of GOAP:
1. It is modular and reusable.
2. NPCs get access to a pool of actions, which allows for a richer and varied behavior.
Having more actions available to fulfill the same goals means the behavior of our
agents can be more unpredictable.
3. It allows a degree of reasoning for our agents. They decide their behavior based on
available knowledge and a set of rules.
These are the main aspects this thesis aims to address with the integration of utility theory
2.6:
1. GOAP only plans for one goal at any given time.
2. GOAP does not allow for partial completion of goals.
3. If a set of actions supports completing the same goal, GOAP will always choose
the action with the lowest cost. Choosing the same action causes agents to exhibit
repetitive behavior.
1In the actual implementation we use λ-expressions (lambda expressions) where function symbols are
constructed “on the ﬂy.” For example, the function that squares its argument can be written as (λx : x × x)
and can be applied to arguments just like any other function symbol. A λ-expression can also be deﬁned
and used as a predicate symbol. Any sentence that includes a λ-expression can be rewritten by “plugging
in” its arguments to yield an equivalent sentence. [3]
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
7
==PAGE:14==
2.5
Agent architecture
Agent architectures are blueprints of control systems of agents, depicting the arrangement
of basic control components and, hence, the functional organization of the overall agent
control system [7]. There already exists multiple agent architectures that fulfil different
needs. To support the behaviour of our agents we will design an architecture inspired by
the BDI (Belief-Desire-Intention) architecture.
Designing complex agents able to act in a believable way is a difﬁcult task, in particular
when their behaviour is led by many conﬂicting needs and desires. A paradigm like BDI
can help with this [8].
Figure 2.1: Structure of a BDI model [9]
BDI agents have a set of beliefs (information it gets by perception of communication) and
intentions (what it wants to execute), and ways to manage these two sets [10]. The BDI
architecture ties well and what we want to accomplish with our agents. For this reason it
will be the main architecture that our NPCs will be based on.
We will now describe the main components of our architecture and how it fits with what
we have already discussed.
Definition 2.5.1. Beliefs are represented as facts - essentially, as atoms of first-order logic
[9].
For the system we have designed we make use of the closed world assumption: if some-
thing is not explicitly stated to be true, then it is assumed false [9]. See Algorithm 8
Definition 2.5.2. Events are triggers for reactive activity by the agent. An event may
update beliefs or trigger plans. We will denote triggers as t. Each trigger has a set of
conditions (atoms) that need to be true for it to be triggered.
8
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:15==
Definition 2.5.3. Goals g are objectives that the agent is actively pursuing. They are
considered for planning. Each goal has a weight w and a evaluation function E():
• Weight w: determines how important the goal is.
• Evaluation function E(): determines how satisfied the goal is for a given state s.
E(s) →[0, 1]
where:
0 means the goal is unsatisfied.
1 means the goal is satisfied.
Definition 2.5.4. Desires are top level objectives that define the general behaviour of the
agent. A desire can be formally represented as a set of ordered pairs, where each pair
consists of a trigger t and a corresponding set of goals:
D = {(t1, {g10, g11, . . . , g1n}) , (t2, {g20, g21, . . . , g2m}) , . . . , (tk, {gk0, gk1, . . . , gkp})}
Each desires has also a weight value w (that can be dynamic, can be influenced at run-
time), and is used to determine how desirable it is[4].
Both the goal and desire weight are used to determine the utility of an action or plan
respectively.
Definition 2.5.5. Intentions are the plans π that the agent has chosen to do.
These are the main differences between the traditional BDI architecture and the one we
use:
• There is no plan library. In BDI plans are manually constructed, in advance, by the
agent programmer [9]. In our system we will use a GOAP planner to formulate
plans at run-time.
• Goals can be concurrent. In BDI there is only one goal active at a time. For our
system we would like to be able to pursue multiple goals at the same time. The best
example to illustrate this will be showed in the next chapter once we introduce the
use of utility.
2.6
Utility theory
To address some of the aspects discussed in 2.4 about GOAP we will use the concept of
utility theory.
In economics, utility is a measure of the relative satisfaction from or desirability of con-
sumption of goods [2]. For the purpose of our agents we can use utility to express how
useful a given state is based on the satisfaction of their desires. The agent’s preferences
are captured by a utility function, U(s), which assigns a single number to express the
desirability of a state [3].
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
9
==PAGE:16==
2.6.1
Normalized utility
The main objective of assigning a utility value to states is to decide between possible states.
The utility of a state can depend on multiple values. For example, the amount of health
or energy can determine the utility, but how does the agent decide or compare health to
energy? Is the utility value of having 75 health better than having 200 energy?
It is important to normalize the utility values to solve the issue of comparing values that
come from different criteria. If we do not normalize these values, we might end up compar-
ing apples to oranges, so to speak, which can lead to incorrect decisions. For our design,
we decided to map all utility values to the space [0, 1]. By normalizing utility values, we
can more easily use the resulting value in various comparisons and calculations that are
not directly dependent on the potentially variable components that make up the utility [2].
Many decisions combine one or more factors where one factor might be more important.
Normalized utility values allow us to use a weighted mean to balance each factor’s signif-
icance. If the utility values are in the range [0, 1], the result of the weighted mean will
also be in the range [0, 1], allowing us to compare the results to other values. This is the
general formula for a weighted mean of n factors:
¯v =
∑n
i=1 wi · vi
∑n
i=n wi
(2.2)
Where:
w is the weight for factor i
v is the utility value for factor i
In our design we use weighted sums to balance the importance between goals and desires.
2.6.2
Preferences
By introducing the concept of utility for the desires and actions of our NPCs we can mod-
ify their behaviour. This utility can change based on personality or the context of the
situation [11]. Giving our agents their own personality allows them to determine what
useful means to them and therefore, their behaviour becomes more varied. Agents could
have the same desires and the same action pool but different preferences that make them
behave differently.
We will use the following notation (presented by [3]) to describe agent preferences:
A ≻B
the agent prefers A over B.
A ∼B
the agent is indifferent between A and B.
A ⪰B the agent prefers A over B or is indifferent between them.
Example 2.6.1. Lets consider the case where we have three agents A1, A2 and A3. They
both have the following desire:
10
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:17==
Desire
Trigger
Goals
ToEat
IsHungry(Ai)
{Eat}
Table 2.2: Desires of agents Ai
We have the following objects in the world organized by categories:
Category
Symbol
Object/Thing
Fruits
f
{Apple, Banana}
Meat
m
{ChickenBreasts, Steak}
Targets
t
{Chicken, Cow}
Agents
A
{A1, A2, ..., An}
Table 2.3: Objects in the world
The following action set:
Name
Preconditions
Effect
Gather(f)
{Has(f, Ai)}
Eat(f)
Has(f, Ai)
{Eat()}
Eat(m)
Has(m, Ai)
{Eat()}
Hunt(t)
{Has(m, Ai)}
Table 2.4: Action set
And this are the agents preferences:
Agent
Preferences
A1
{f ≻m}
A2
{m ≻f, Steak ≻ChickenBreasts}
A3
{m ≻f}
Table 2.5: Agent preferences
This will be the acceptable plans for each agent according to their preferences:
Agent
Plans π
A1
{(Gather(Apple), Eat(Apple)), (Gather(Banana), Eat(Banana))}
A2
(Hunt(Cow), Eat(Steak))
A3
{(Hunt(Cow), Eat(Steak)), (Hunt(Chicken), Eat(ChickenBreasts))}
Table 2.6: Plan π for each agent according to their preferences
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
11
==PAGE:18==
Plans shown in table 2.6 are the plans whose utility function U(π) is strictly higher that
the rest of acceptable plans.
If we have a set of acceptable plans Π and the agent has preferences there is at least a
plan πi such that:
∀πj ∈Π, πj ̸= πi ⇒U(πi) ≥U(πj)
Incorporating utility to our agents allows us to build agents with the exact same desires
and actions but have them behave differently.
We can use utility values to influence the decisions made by the GOAP system that our
NPCs will use. It is rare that any given decision will only rely on a single piece of data
[11]. Our agents could have multiple preferences that influence their decisions as seen in
example 2.6.1.
2.6.3
Utility, desires and goals
In our system, the final utility of a state is composed of multiple layered utility functions
U(s). The lowest level U(s) corresponds to the evaluation function of a goal E(g). The
next level can optionally be the goal weight wg. The final level is the desire weight wd.
This layering multiple utility function approach is known as multi-attribute utility theory
[2]. For simplicity, we only factor E(g) and weights wg, wd. However, we could add other
factors from a plan π and add a utility function that depends on those factors, such as the
total cost of a plan π or the total distance the agent would need to travel following the
plan.
We use the following utility function (two weighted means) to determine how useful a
resulting state from a plan π is:
U(πi) =
∑|Di|
i=1 wdi ·
( ∑|Gi|
j=1 wgj ·E(gj)
∑|Gi|
j=1 wgj
)
∑|Di|
i=1 wdi
(2.3)
Equation 2.3 is the one currently used in our implementation. However, if we want to
add additional factors parallel to desires, we need to add an overall desire weight wD.
Additionally, let us denote equation 2.3 as ED(πi) standing for desire evaluation. In the
following equation, we can see how a utility calculation would look like with additional
factors:
U(πi) = wD · EE(πi) + wC · EC(πi) + ... + wN · EN(πi)
wD + wC + ... + wN
(2.4)
Where:
wC and EC() stand for both the weight and evaluation function of a factor related
to the total cost of the plan πi.
wN and EN() stand for both the weight and evaluation function of an arbitrary factor
related to the plan πi.
12
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:19==
As long as each Evaluation function E() outputs a normalized value, there is no limit to
how many layered functions we add to the overall utility computation.
Sloan [12] also points out how utility can address some shortcomings of GOAP. In our
system, these are the ways we can use utility theory to address some of the GOAP short-
comings:
1. GOAP only plans for one goal at any given time: With both the use of the BDI
architecture 2.5 and utility theory we can pursue multiple goals at a time. We can
evaluate the usefulness or satisfaction of the desires of the NPCs based on the output
state of a plan. For example, if a given plan π increases the satisfaction of multiple
desires D then its utility value U(π) will be higher and will in turn be favored by
the decision algorithm.
Consider the case were we have an agent with a set of desires D = {d1, d2, ..., dn}
and a set of active triggers T we will then have acceptable plans Π = {π1, ..., πn}
for each goal gijk where g122 means the second goal of desire d1 of active trigger t2:
Π = {π|d ∈D ∧t ∈d ∧g ∈t ∧P(g)}
(2.5)
where P() is an abstract function that generates a plan π for an input goal g. Each
plan π then is associated with a specific goal g, but it can be the case that a plan
fulfills the requirement of multiple goals or partially fulfills other goals. If that is
the case then U(π) will be higher and therefore the agent will chose the plan that
fulfils the largest amount of its desires.
2. GOAP does not allow for partial completion of goals: according to our definition
2.5.3, each goal has an evaluation function that outputs a satisfaction value v ∈[0, 1].
It can be the case that a selected plan fulfills a specific goal, but some of the actions
in its sequence also increase the satisfaction of other goals. It makes sense then that
the planner selected this particular plan since it increases the v values for multiple
goals, and even if it does not entirely fulfill them, it still increases the final utility of
the plan. This point will become more clear in the following example, in particular
with the goal MaintainEnergy(K).
Example 2.6.2. To explain the previous two points, we can use an example. Let’s consider
a combat scenario with a knight agent K that does not like goblins G. Our knight happens
to be lazy and if he can save his energy he will do so. He has the following desires:
Desire
Weight
Trigger
Goal
D1: KillGoblins
1
GoblinSeen(Gi)
KillGoblin(Gi)
D2: KeepEnegyHigh
2
IsEnergyLow(K)
DrinkEnergyPotion(K, P)
-
MaintainEnergy(K)
Table 2.7: Desires of the kinght K. In this case for the knight, since wd2 = 2·wd1 keeping
his energy up is twice as important as killing goblins
It is important to note that the trigger GoblinSeen(Gi) will create a goal to kill a goblin
for each Gi that the knight sees. If the knight has seen three goblins, his set of goals will
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
13
==PAGE:20==
look like {Kill(G1), Kill(G2), Kill(G3)}. We also assume that all goblins are equally
important to kill. Therefore, the goal weight is the same for all wg = 1.0.
These are the evaluation functions for the following goals:
(a) For killing the goblins we use a simple
linear function E(Gi) = 1.0 −Health(Gi)
100.0
.
We assume that the maximum health is 100
(b) For maintaining energy we can use a
more complex shape to better describe how
much the K cares to maintain his energy:
E(K) = 1.0 −e−5.0 Energy(K)
100.0
.
Figure 2.2: Evaluation functions for KillGoblin and MaintainEnergy goals.
For simplicity, we assume that actions like attacking a goblin or drinking a potion have
their preconditions fulfilled, such as range checks or whether the agent has the potion.
With these assumptions, in Table 2.8 we can see the available actions:
Action
Precondition
Effect
SingleTargetAttack(Gi)
{InRange(Gi, K),
EnoughEnergy(K)}
{DecreaseHealth({Gi}, SwordDamage),
DecreaseEnergy(K, STACost)}
AOEAttack({G1, ..., Gn})
{InRange({Gi, ..., Gn}, K),
EnoughEnergy(K)}
{DecreaseHealth({G1, ..., Gn}, AOEDamage),
DecreaseEnergy(K, AOECost)}
DrinkEnergyPotion(K)
HasPotion(K)
IncreaseEnergy(K, PotionV alue)
Table 2.8: Available attacks
Let’s now define the values needed to illustrate what utility allows us to do.
Damage
Energy Cost
Energy Restored
SingleTargetAttack
100
25
-
AOEAttack
50
60
-
Energy potion
-
-
30
Table 2.9: Values for attack actions and potion
Our lazy knight is resting in his guard post. He likes the silence that comes with the night
when everyone is already sleeping. However, tonight, three goblins have decided to get
too close to the city, looking for something valuable to get their hands on.
14
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:21==
Goblins are not that intelligent, unfortunately. When they see only one knight in the guard
post, they immediately assume they have an advantage. After all, three is more than one.
So now, our knight finds himself against three goblins who have decided to perturb his
guard. Now, he must decide: ”How can I dispatch these goblins while maintaining my
energy?”
The knight looks at his action pool, and he has two options. Attack every goblin individu-
ally or attack all of them in one swing. In Figure 2.3 we can see what is the most useful
course of action for him given his preferences:
Figure 2.3: Kinght K actions state tree2. STA stands for SingleTargetAttack(Gi).
AOE
stands
for
AOESwordAttack({G1, G2, G3}).
P
stands
for
DrinkEnergyPotion(K).
U(si) is the resulting utility for the particular state s.
The knight will choose the action sequence π that leads him to the red states.
For this particular knight his most reasonable course of action according to his desires
is:
π = {STA(G1), STA(G2), P(K), STA(G3)}
However, just by changing the desire weights w we could have a knight with a completely
different behaviour as seen in Figure 2.4:
2Depending on the graph search algorithm used, the tree could look different. In the example above, the
search algorithm is greedy best-first search driven by a utility heuristic. We show the dashed states for
illustration purposes, but the algorithm does not explore them.
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.4: Knight actions state tree with desire weights changed.
The two knights have the same desires and actions. Changing how much they prefer a
desire over another completely changes their behavior. This change, driven by the concept
of utility, highlights the influence of preference on decision-making.
This example illustrates how we can address the two previous points and what utility al-
lows us to do:
• The knight follows multiple goals at a time.
• During planning, there are states with partially complete goals. An AOE action
does not immediately fulfill the goal of killing a goblin but partially fulfills multiple
goals at a time. Additionally, the maintain energy goal is not completely satisfied
in the final state.
• Just changing the weights w of the desires affects the states’ utility and, therefore,
the behavior of the knights. However, we can change not only the weights but
also the evaluation function of a goal E(g) or the weight of a goal. For example,
there could be a type of goblin that is a high priority, which can be expressed by
increasing the weight to kill that particular goblin. This change alone would also
affect the overall behavior of the knight.
We can use utility theory to support already existing architectures or systems like BDI and
GOAP. In the context of this thesis utility can allow us to achieve more varied behaviour
for our NPCs.
16
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:23==
2.6.4
Utility-based AI in games
Current games like The Sims or Dragon Age Inquisition use the term Utility-based AI to
describe approaches that, rather than using purely Boolean logic, use a heuristic function
to evaluate the appropriateness of each option given the moment-to-moment situation in
the game and base their decision on the resulting score [13].
We mention The Sims, because we will adopt some of their utility-based AI approach. In
the Sims, NPCs know about their own state s, which holds the parameters of the sim, like
their fun or hunger meters. The action that the sims choose is based purely on how useful
the outcome state is based on the sim parameters. The environment is formed by smart-
objects that determine the actions available to the sim and how those actions affect the sim
state [14].
A smart object is an abstraction that encapsulates some arbitrarily complex logic behind
a simple interface and ties this logic to a particular location or entity. Smart objects are
a way to embed knowledge in the world instead of the agent [15]. For example, let us
suppose there is a chair in the world . We have an agent that can sit down in the chair. If
the chair is a smart object, it will give the agent the logic for using it. So, instead of the
agent needing to know that the chair needs to be free to sit in, the chair can provide the
agent with this information.
In Dragon Age, smart objects hold behavior snippets, which tell the agent how the smart
object can be used and how to evaluate the utility of the action [16]. Each agent has a
Behaviour Decision System (BDS), which consists of an evaluation tree that expands the
available behavior snippets and is driven by a utility heuristic to choose the next action.
This behaviour snippets are akin to our ActionBuilders which we will introduce in the
design chapter.
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
17
==PAGE:24==
18
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:25==
3
System overview
In this section we will present a brief overview of the system we have dubbed UGOAP,
short for Utility-Goal-Oriented Action Planning. UGOAP represents an approach that
aims to enhance the traditional GOAP framework by incorporating key concepts from
UtilityAI. Figure 3.1 shows a high-level overview of how the system that drives the NPCs
behaviour works.
Figure 3.1: System diagram
The behaviour architecture consists of four phases:
The sensing phase is where the NPC updates its state. The desire system has a set
of triggers based on the NPC’s beliefs; when the desire’s condition is met, it injects
the corresponding goals into the NPC.
The planning phase main objective is to generate plans that fulfil the current goals
of the NPC.
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
19
==PAGE:26==
The decision phase takes all the output plans and expected state of the NPC. In
this phase a utility value is assigned to each state based on different criteria, and the
decision phase outputs the plan that leads to the highest utility state.
The action phase takes care of the execution of the plan. It executes the sequence
of actions and updates the beliefs of the NPC correspondingly.
In the diagram from figure 3.1, the phases follow a sequence to make it easier to understand.
However, the Sensing and Action phases are concurrent in the actual implementation. At
any given moment the NPC is performing a plan to fulfill its desires. While performing
the plan, the NPC updates its beliefs and desires based on his actions and the environment.
When a plan is finished, the NPC starts the Planning and Decision phase to choose a new
plan. Then, the Sensing and Action phase start again. If a Desire is triggered during
execution of a plan and the Desire has a sufficiently high weight the decision component
triggers a re-planning.
3.1
UGOAP: Integrating UtilityAI Concepts into GOAP
Planning
The goal of UGOAP is to include decision-making within the planning process. To achieve
this, UGOAP aims for:
Enriched State Representation
While standard GOAP primarily focuses on action preconditions and effects, UGOAP
expands this to include contextual information relevant to utility evaluation.
Let us go back to the knight 2.6.2 combat scenario:
• Traditional GOAP: The action ”AttackEnemy” has the effect ”KillEnemy” with as-
sociated preconditions.
• UGOAP: The ”AttackEnemy” action is refined into specific attacks based on the
equipped weapon (e.g., ”SingleTargetAttack,” ”AOEAttack”). Each attack action
includes data like damage dealt, energy cost, and potential effects on both the at-
tacker and the enemy.
This enriched state representation gives the planner more information about the conse-
quences of each action, enabling utility-driven decision-making.
Utility-Guided Planning
UGOAP uses utility functions to guide the planning process. Instead of simply select-
ing actions to satisfy goal preconditions, UGOAP evaluates the utility of potential action
sequences based on the current state information. In our knight example 2.6.2, the planner
could determine that a sequence of π = {STAttack(Gi), STAttack(Gi), AOEAttack(Gi)}
is necessary to eliminate goblin Gi. However, if the knight’s energy is low, the planner
20
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:27==
might insert an action like DrinkEnergyPotion(K) before the STAttack(Gi) to maxi-
mize the utility of the sequence.
This utility-driven approach allows for more context-aware planning, leading to optimized
action sequences considering various factors like health, energy, and resource availability.
While the Knight scenario illustrates UGOAP’s capabilities, its application extends to
other domains. Imagine managing a farm where crop yields, resource levels, and market
conditions could determine the utility. UGOAP could guide decision-making regarding
planting, harvesting, and resource allocation, trying to maximize the farm’s overall utility.
In conclusion, with an enriched state representation and utility-driven planning, UGOAP
aims to make agents make more intelligent and contextually appropriate decisions with
multiple factors to increase their autonomy.
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
21
==PAGE:28==
22
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:29==
4
Design
In this chapter we will go over the design of the main components of our system. Figure 4.1
shows a detailed overview of how the different components of an agent interact between
each other.
Figure 4.1: System architecture
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
23
==PAGE:30==
4.1
State representation
In section 2.2 we explained the reasons why having a way to represent the knowledge of
our agents is necessary. To explain how our system implements state representation for
our agents we need to introduce new concepts.
Definition 4.1.1. A parameter p is a real number that describes specific data about the
agent. For example, the health or energy of the agent would be described as a parameter.
To refer to the health parameter we use the notation phealth.
Definition 4.1.2. A trait t is an enumerable value to express agent preferences. If a trait is
relevant for a particular goal, it increases the goal weight wg during the utility calculation
(see Equation 2.3). For example, if we have an agent who needs to hunt but prefers Cow
meat over chicken, he will have the trait ”LikesCows”.
Definition 4.1.3. A entity E is an object/thing in the world. An agent can have specific
knowledge about entities. An entity has a collection of parameters that an agent can read
through his senses. For example, in the knight example 2.6.2, goblins are entities with
health; therefore, the knight can express in his state that he knows goblin Gi with phelath =
100. The knight is an entity himself, so he always knows about his penergy.
A state s for an agent A is a tuple s = (B, P, T) where:
• B = {b1, b2, ..., bn} is a set of beliefs to describe the beliefs the agent has about
himself, his environment and other entities.
• P = {phealth, penergy, ..., pn} is a set of parameters to describe the data of the agent
himself.
• T = {t1, t2, ..., tn} is a set of traits to describe general preferences of the agent.
In our design beliefs can be of two types:
• Simple beliefs: these belief are the ones we defined in 2.5.1. They state facts about
the world. For example the agent can express the following belief:
IsHungry(s) ⇒P.phunger ≤25.0
Listing 4.1: Expressing a simple belief in code
• Entity beliefs: these beliefs are more complex and require a new definition.
Definition 4.1.4. An entity fluent is a tuple FE = (E, F) where E is the entity the
fluent is about, and F is a set of fluents about that entity.
24
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:31==
Entity beliefs contain an entity fluent. They are used to describe and hold data about
other entities and form beliefs based on that data. For example, if we have an entity
with health our agent can form the belief:
IsHealthy(sE) ⇒E.P.phealth > 0
Listing 4.2: Expressing a belief about another entity in code
4.1.1
State mutation
For the planning algorithm that drives the agent decisions, the actions available to the
agent must be able to mutate the current state to a new one. The way actions interact with
a state is through preconditions and effects.
Preconditons
Preconditions are atoms and are defined the same way as simple beliefs. For an action to
be applicable its preconditions need to be met.
Effects
As with agent beliefs, there are two kinds of effects:
• Simple effects: modify the state of the agent performing the action with facts (atoms).
For example, the action to ChopTree(tree) will update the state of the agent with
the fact HasWood(A).
• Entity effects: handle the case where an effect affects the state of another entity.
An entity effect is a tuple eff = (FE, M) where FE is the entity fluent about
the particular entity, and M = {mhelath, mhunger, ..., mn} is a set of modifiers that
describe how the parameters of the entity fluent state will change after the action
application. For example, an attack action will reduce the health of the attacked
entity.
Entity effects can also include a conditional effect.
Definition 4.1.5. A conditional effect is an effect that is only applied if a specific
condition is met, as the name implies. This effect is useful when an action should
modify the state under certain situations, and that change needs to be reflected dur-
ing planning.
Algorithm 10 shows how this is done. However, let us use an example to illustrate better
how handling these types of effects is necessary. The following example is part of the
actual implementation discussed in Chapter 6.
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
25
==PAGE:32==
Example 4.1.1. In the test implementation, we have an NPC that gets hungry and needs
to hunt in order to eat. He has a weapon that provides the attack action Attack(Ei) that
deals 50 damage to an entity, and the world is filled with chickens C (a type of entity) with
100 health. When he gets hungry, he aims to use the action Eat(food), but Eat() has the
precondition HasFood(Ai), so the agent also aims to Hunt(Ci). Now, for the planner to
be able to output the correct sequence of actions to eat, he needs to know that attacking
a chicken deals 50 damage to the chicken, and if the attack action kills the chicken, the
agent now has food.
The attack action effect is an entity effect with a conditional effect that completely de-
scribes how the action affects the state. We would use the entity effect to describe how
the attack action Attack(Ci) would decrease the chicken’s health. The decreased health
would be reflected in the mutated state, influencing the evaluation function of the goal
associated with hunting the chicken. Therefore, the utility value from that state would
change, and the action to attack the chicken would be favored.
The conditional effect would express that if the chicken is dead after the action application,
then the agent now has food. So, after applying Attack(Ci) two times, the output state
would include HasFood(Ai), which fulfills the precondition to Eat(food).
The following Figure shows how this type of effect is expressed in the actual implementa-
tion:
Figure 4.2: Fluent effect with conditional effect in code
Overall, accommodating utility inside the planning algorithm complicates the state repre-
sentation for UGOAP. We argue that there is a tradeoff between the added complexity and
what utility adds to regular GOAP.
The scenario in the example above is straightforward, but what if the agent faces a situation
like the one exposed in the knight example 2.6.2? Where the knight might need to consider
recovering energy between attacks. Of course, GOAP uses procedural actions, allowing
the agent to handle the logic for recovering energy inside the logic of the attack action.
However, what if the agent has multiple ways to attack and recover energy? The logic
would have to be repeated in multiple attacks for multiple recovery options.
UGOAP allows NPCs to consider multiple decisions during planning without making as-
sumptions. The tradeoff is the added complexity of the state because, to aid in those
26
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:33==
decisions, the agent needs more knowledge about how the world works.
4.2
Environment
Our agents must interact with the environment; in our design, all interactions happen be-
tween smart objects. We can think of these interactions as actions that our agents can
perform. We now introduce some new definitions to understand how interactions are han-
dled in our design.
Definition 4.2.1. An action builder is a blueprint that defines the rules and logic of an
interaction. An agent uses an action builder to create an action for himself.
Definition 4.2.2. A smart object is a thing in the world that provides agents with the logic
and knowledge to use or interact with it. Every smart object has a set of action builders.
When an agent registers or sees a smart object, it will receive the set of action builders and
add the actions to its set of available actions.
A smart object can have a state of its own and handle itself. For example, if we have a
”smart” fruit tree in the world, it will handle the following aspects:
• Provide the action builder to agents to add the action to gather fruit for this particular
tree.
• Know how much fruit is left.
• Allow agents to gather fruit if there is fruit available; otherwise, prevent agents from
trying to gather fruit.
4.3
Agent components
Agents must manage their state and desires and perform plans to fulfill them. Since an
agent can have multiple desires active at any time but can only perform one plan simultane-
ously, we use two separate components to manage the interaction between all the desires
and plan formulation. We will detail how these two components interact in the following
sections, but the agent also has other components whose functions we will mention briefly
here:
• State component: holds all the beliefs the agent has. It allows the agent to update
and share its beliefs with other components or agents. See Algorithms 8 - 7.
• Parameter manager component: holds both the parameters and traits of the agent.
It updates parameters like health or energy and provides the agent’s traits so other
components can check whether the agent has preferences. See Appendix for the
class implementation A.2.
• Sense component: is the FOV the agent has. Within that FOV, any smart object that
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
27
==PAGE:34==
can update beliefs will update the agent’s beliefs with the corresponding informa-
tion.
• Action manager component: is responsible for registering the actions provided by
smart objects using their action builders. It also deregisters the corresponding ac-
tions when a smart object is unavailable.
• Plan execution component: handles action execution logic and ensures the action
sequence π is executed. When a plan is interrupted in favor of another plan, it
handles the stopping logic for actions.
4.3.1
Desire component
The desire component only manages the agent’s set of desires. It has the following func-
tions:
• When a desire is triggered, it creates and injects the corresponding goal into the
agent and notifies the behavior component in case a re-planning is needed.
• Continuously checks the active goals. When an active goal is fulfilled, the desire
component removes it from the agent’s goals.
4.3.1.1
Utility of a state
The overall satisfaction of the agent’s desires determines the utility of a state. A plan has
an output state that will result from the plan application. When the agent needs to decide
between multiple plans, the output states are passed to the desire component, which then
computes the states’ utility against the desires according to Equation 2.3. Currently, our
primary and only factor to consider is the agent’s desires. For this reason, the utility com-
putation starts with Algorithm 1, calling the DesireComponent, which holds the agent’s
set of desires D. This call starts a chain of calls for each d ∈D (Algorithm 2) and g ∈d
(Algorithm 3) that computes the utility of each step.
Algorithm 1: DesireComponent::GetSatisfaction
Data: D set of desires
Input
:state s
Output :utility value v
valueWeightSum ←0
weightSum ←0
for d ∈D do
valueWeightSum += d.Weight * d.GetSatisfaction(s)
weigthSum += d.Weight
end
v ←valueWeightSum / weigthSum
return v
28
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:35==
Algorithm 2: Desire::GetSatisfaction
Data: G set of active goals
Input
:state s
Output :utility value v
valueWeightSum ←0
weightSum ←0
for g ∈G do
valueWeightSum += g.Weight * g.GetSatisfaction(s)
weigthSum += g.Weight
end
v ←valueWeightSum / weigthSum
return v
Algorithm 3: Goal::GetSatisfaction
Data: E() evaluation function
Input
:state s
Output :satisfaction v
v ←E(s)
return v
4.3.2
Behaviour component
The behavior component is the main component that drives the overall behavior of the
agent. It holds the agent’s state and handles the communication between other components.
Algorithm 4 shows how a plans are created according to equation 2.5.
Definition 4.3.1. A plan node is a tuple Pnode = (π, s) where π is the plan itself (sequence
of actions) and s is how the state looks like after applying π to the original state.
In the Theory chapter we said Π is a set of plans π. Since the algorithms need more
information to work than just the plan π, Π actually holds plan nodes so other algorithms
have acces to the outcoming state si associated to the plan πi ∈Π.
Algorithm 4: BehaviorComponent::ComputeNewPlan
Data: D set of desires
Output : plan π
Π ←∅
for d ∈D do
for g ∈d do
Π.Insert(ComputePlan(g))
end
end
π ←GetBestPlan(Π) // call to Alg. 12
return π
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
29
==PAGE:36==
To formulate a plan for each goal, we use a greedy Best-first-search as shown in Algorithm
5. The utility of the states drives the heuristic search which corresponds to the result from
applying equation 2.3.
Algorithm 5: UtilityGBFS::ComputePlan
Input
: actions A, goal G, state s, utility heuristic utilityRater
Output : plan π
goalState ←new State(G.DesiredEffects)
openSet ←∅
closedSet ←∅
rootNode ←(goalState)
openSet.Enqueue(rootNode, utilityRater.RateUtility(newNode.s))
while openSet is not empty do
currentNode ←openSet.Dequeue()
closedSet ←currentNode
if G.GetSatisfaction(s) ≥0.95 then
return π ←ReconstructPath(currentNode)
end
for a ∈A do
if not PreconditionsMet(a, currentNode.s)
/* call to Alg. 11 */
then
continue
end
newState ←currentNode.s.Copy()
a.AppyEffects(newState)
AddPreconditions(newState, a)
newNode ←(newState, currentNode, a)
if newNode not in closedSet then
openSet.Enqueue(newNode, utilityRater.ComputeUtility(newNode.s))
end
end
end
4.3.2.1
Heuristic
The original GOAP implementation uses A* as its search algorithm with a state heuristic,
where the heuristic value is the sum of the unsatisfied beliefs of the goal state[1]. This
heuristic works for the state representation used in GOAP because it is based on boolean
logic, so a state atom is either true or false. However, in our implementation, some beliefs
can be expressed with a degree of completeness, so the sum of unsatisfied beliefs is more
complex to describe.
Since we have a way to describe how desirable a given state is with a utility value, it is
reasonable to consider that value when driving the graph search. For our implementation,
we chose a GBFS search algorithm to prioritize actions closest to achieving the goal based
on our utility heuristic. GBFS is fast but not guaranteed to find the optimal plan. However,
30
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:37==
we think it is reasonable to trade guaranteed optimality for speed and implementation
complexity in our design.
A final consideration of this approach is that the quality of the heuristic will depend on the
utility functions we use. This aspect of our design adds another layer of complexity.
4.3.2.2
Replanning
Sometimes, the environment changes while the agent is performing a plan. These changes
can make the current plan invalid or undesirable, so a replanning is needed.
We handle replanning according to the agent’s desires. Agents have a minimum desire
weight; if the triggered desire weight is higher than this value, the behavior component
must reconsider whether the current plan is still relevant. The following algorithm shows
how a replanning is handled:
Algorithm 6: Replanning
Data: current plan π0
/* Recalculate utility of current plan because environment
changed
*/
v0 ←ComputeUtility(π0)
π1 ←ComputeNewPlan()
v1 ←ComputeUtility(π0)
if v0 ≤v1 then
Stop(π0)
π0 ←π1
end
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
31
==PAGE:38==
32
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:39==
5
Result
We will now show an example scenario implemented in the Godot engine. Unfortunately,
testing whether this type of system accomplishes the goal of giving NPCs more autonomy
is challenging. Additionally, integrating Utility AI with GOAP and making an actual
implementation in an engine proved to be more difficult than expected. As a result, we
will discuss what an ideal test would look like in the future work section since we feel the
current test scenario could have been more thorough.
The project is available on GitHub to try out. The Godot engine can be downloaded from
Godot.org. It is important to download the .NET version since the implementation is done
in C#.
5.1
Scenario
The world can be seen in Figure 5.1. In this environment, we have two different NPCs
and multiple smart objects that provide interactions to those NPCs. Both NPCs have the
desire to sit down and react to rain (which can be toggled by the user). However, the white
NPC will also try to keep a firepit lit by chopping trees. In contrast, the purple NPC can
get hungry, and when he is hungry, he will hunt his preferred prey to eat.
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.1: World for test scenario
5.1.1
Smart objects and entities
The following Table 5.1 lists all the smart objects currently present in the environment
with their symbol and the interactions they provide to agents. We currently only have the
Animal entity, which the Weapon smart object uses as a target Ti for the attack actions.
Note that here we use Ai to refer to an agent (e.g NPC).
Object
Symbol
Actions
Preconditions
Effects
ConditionalEffects
Tree
Treei
ChopTree(Treei)
-
HasWood(Ai)
-
-
FirePit
Fi
LightFire(Fi)
HasWood(Ai)
-
-
Chair
Ci
SitDown(Ai)
-
SittingDown(Ai)
-
-
House
Hi
CoverFromRain(Ai)
IsRaining()
IsCovered(Ai)
-
-
Weapon
Wi
AttackTarget(Ti)
-
EntityEffect:
Ti.phealth ←Ti.phealth −Wi.Damage
Condition:
Ti.phealth ≤0
Effect:
HasFood(Ai)
Table 5.1: Smart objects in the world and their actions supplied
5.1.2
Agents (NPCs)
The agents structure follows the design philosophy of the Godot engine where objects are
composed of Nodes. In figure 5.2, we can see the scene tree for a basic NPC. The tree is
composed of the components we introduced in the previous chapter. Most of the compo-
nents do everything for themselves. However, we can interact with the DesireComponent,
Desires and the TraitManager in the editor:
34
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.2: NPC scene tree structure inside the engine
• DesireComponent: This component reads its child nodes in the tree which have
to be Desires. At any point we can add or remove Desires from our NPCs through
their scene tree and modify the overall behaviour of the NPC.
Figure 5.3: Each indented node is a child of the desire component. Each child is a desire
the NPC will try to fulfil
• Desire and TraitManager: we can edit theses two nodes to alter the behaviour of
the NPC. We can modify the desire weight wd for each Desire and add or remove
traits (a.k.a preferences in our system) through the TraitManager.
(a) Desire inspector in the editor where we
can modify the wd of the specific desire.
(b) TraitManager inspector which shows an
editable array of traits.
Figure 5.4: Desire and TraitManager editor inspectors
The following two tables, 5.2 and 5.3, show the desires the NPCs have in common and
their individual desires.
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
35
==PAGE:42==
Desires
Trigger
Goal
SitDown
-
SitDown(Ai)
ToReactToRain
IsRaining(A) ∧¬LikesRain(A)
CoverFromRain(Ai)
Table 5.2: Common desires for the NPCs
NPC
Desires
Trigger
Goal
White
ToMaintainFirePitLit
¬IsFirepitLit(Fi)
LitFirePit(Fi)
Purple
ToEat
IsHungry(A) ∧HasFood(A)
Eat()
IsHungry(A) ∧¬HasFood(A)
{Hunt(Ti), Eat()}
Table 5.3: Specific desires for the NPCs
The white NPC is relatively simple. GOAP or a FSM could easily handle its behavior. It
showcases the replanning that happens when the user toggles the rain. However, we can
change its behavior by playing around with its traits and desire weights.
On the other hand, the purple NPC showcases more aspects of what UGOAP can do. This
NPC has a hunger parameter phunger and the belief IsHungry(Ai) ⇒P.phunger ≤25.0.
The behavior of this NPC exhibits exactly the one showcased in Example 4.1.1. Addition-
ally, he holds a SmartWeapon and has a TargetSenseComponent that senses entities
that can be targeted. When the sensor registers a target, the SmartWeapon creates the ac-
tion to attack the target with the required information to make the utility-driven planner
work. In this case, it would register an Animal with phealth and then create an entity ef-
fect with the modifier mhealth = −Weapon.Damage and the conditional effect shown in
Table 5.1.
5.2
Behavioural results
The main idea behind integrating Utility with GOAP was to increase the autonomy of
NPCs. With utility integration, we aim to make GOAP planning more context-aware of
how actions affect the environment. We also aim for more varied behavior, which UGOAP
quickly provides by changing something simple like weights or more complex like an
evaluation function.
We think the system’s current state can make more context-aware decisions. The pur-
ple NPC showcases this behavior with the hunt action. Instead of assuming that a single
Attack(Ti) action will fulfill the HasFood(Ai) condition, the planner is capable of out-
putting a correct sequence of two attacks to fulfill HasFood(Ai).
The current test scenario serves as a proof of concept of what UGOAP can do. However,
a more thorough test would lead to more interesting behavioural results, as we think the
current one fails to show how UGOAP would handle more complex scenarios.
36
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:43==
6
Future work
6.1
Test scenario
As mentioned in the results section, the design of the system, particularly state represen-
tation and integrating utility during planning, required a lot of time for iteration, testing,
and debugging within the engine. We think the current test scenario has the minimum
requirements to show a proof of concept of what can be done with UGOAP. However, it
would be interesting to implement a more complex scenario like the one presented in the
Knight example 2.6.2. We think a test like that would better showcase the capabilities of
UGOAP.
6.2
Planner
It would be interesting to reconsider the planner algorithm. We currently use GBFS with
the utility heuristic, which is suitable for the implementation. However, in the case of
multiple similar goals, like in the knight example 2.6.2, where we have three goals to kill
three goblins, it would be interesting to combine them during planning. With the planner
implementation that we have right now, each plan is formulated for each goal, which
means the exact same search needs to be computed three times. By combining similar
goals, we could reduce the overall computations needed.
6.3
Performance benchmark
For this thesis, we did not have the time to make a performance benchmark between our
system and other approaches like regular GOAP or a purely utility-based system. Even
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
37
==PAGE:44==
though UGOAP allows for more varied behavior between NPCs, the extra computation
complexity the system adds might not be worth it for situations with multiple NPCs. Nev-
ertheless, it would require testing before making such assumptions.
6.4
Reduce design complexity
As mentioned, once UGOAP is set up, we can quickly create more NPCs with differ-
ent behaviors by tweaking desire weights, adding traits, or modifying evaluation curves.
However, the initial setup has a very steep design complexity. The game’s overall design
would need to benefit significantly from what UGOAP offers to consider using it. With the
current implementation, the design complexity must be lowered to justify using UGOAP
over other approaches like a regular GOAP system.
Currently, using UGOAP requires to design carefully the following aspects:
• Introducing utility functions to evaluate the desirability of states makes designing
the desired behavior of the NPCs more complex. The planning algorithm chooses
actions depending on the utility of their outcoming state. This utility then depends
on multiple layered functions, requiring iteration to get the desired behavior.
• State representation is very complex. To properly use utility functions during plan-
ning, the state representation must reflect the factors that influence such functions.
Every time we want to introduce a new decision factor, it must be introduced in the
state. Additionally, expressing beliefs about other entities in the game, how actions
affect such entities’ parameters and how such effects are reflected in the overall util-
ity adds complexity to the overall design of the state representation and the planning
algorithm.
We can compare UGOAP to other approaches:
1. Utility-based AI, like in The Sims, means that the NPCs do not pursue goals. In-
stead, they have a state and a pool of actions; when an action is finished, they select
the following action that will yield the maximum utility to their state.
This type of design is more straightforward than our implementation. Agents or
sims, in this case, have a set of parameters, actions, and predefined utility functions.
When the sim finishes an action, it goes through all its actions and rates the outcom-
ing state against the utility functions. The sim then chooses the one that outputs the
highest utility as his following action (although in the actual implementation, there
is some randomness involved).
The approach from the Sims is purely reaction-based, and no planning is involved,
making the implementation less complex. It achieves interesting behavior and gives
its NPCs autonomy. We could argue that this approach is unsuitable for situations
where a chain of actions is needed; for example, in a combat scenario, the NPCs
might need to plan the best course of attack by planning a sequence of actions. Nev-
ertheless, opting for a purely utility-based approach over a more complex one like
GOAP or our UGOAP would simplify the overall design in most situations.
38
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:45==
2. Regular GOAP has been used in multiple games already, like FEAR, Hitman, or
Horizon Zero Down, so it is already stable in the game industry. It is easy to under-
stand, and the hierarchical structure of goals, actions, and preconditions in GOAP
makes it relatively easy to implement. Additionally, GOAP can lead to more inter-
esting and believable AI behavior by allowing agents to dynamically select the best
actions to achieve their goals. All this is already enough in most scenarios. The
main drawback of GOAP is that it can be computationally expensive, especially in
complex scenarios with many possible actions, which UGOAP makes even more
complex by adding utility on top of it.
6.5
Multi-agent support
The UGOAP architecture’s ability to represent agent beliefs and effects on other entities
has a solid foundation for considering multi-agent cooperation. While beyond the scope
of this thesis, future work could research how multiple UGOAP agents could collaborate
to achieve shared desires. We list here some potential research lines:
• Multi-agent planning: Investigating how UGOAP’s planning process can be dis-
tributed across multiple agents, allowing them to coordinate actions and share infor-
mation to achieve complex objectives. For example, two knights could coordinate
their attacks to eliminate targets more efficiently.
• Smart Object Integration: Examining how UGOAP agents can interact using
”smart objects” (e.g., tools, resources).
Such research could expand the applicability of UGOAP to domains requiring coordinated
decision-making, such as swarm robotics, collaborative game AI, and resource manage-
ment systems.
6.6
Reinforcement learning
UGOAP’s agent behavior is highly influenced by the combination of desire and goal
weights and the evaluation functions that determine utility. Future research could explore
the potential of reinforcement learning (RL) to optimize these parameters and fine-tune
agent behavior to achieve specific objectives.
For instance, in combat scenarios, RL could be employed to adjust weights and evalua-
tion functions to maximize agent survivability iteratively. The RL algorithm could learn
from the outcomes of numerous simulations, gradually refining the parameters to produce
agents that show effective combat strategies.
Besides combat scenarios, RL could be applied to various domains. By defining appro-
priate reward functions aligned with desired outcomes, RL could guide the system toward
optimal parameters, resulting in agents that demonstrate improved performance in specific
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
39
==PAGE:46==
tasks or environments. RL could make more adaptive and context-aware agents within
UGOAP.
40
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:47==
7
Conclusion
This thesis has looked at designing a system that integrates UtilityAI techniques into
GOAP. We started by introducing the concepts needed to provide knowledge to our agents.
We adopted an agent architecture based on BDI to aid with the design of our system. We
presented how GOAP, the leading architecture on which our system is based, works. We
introduced the concept of utility theory to aid in decision-making. Finally, after the intro-
duction chapters had been finished, we explained how our system, UGOAP (Utility Goal
Oriented Action Planning), integrates these concepts. UGOAP aims to include decision-
making within the planning process to allow agents to make more context-aware decisions,
improving their autonomy.
Unlike GOAP, UGOAP uses a state representation that allows the integration of utility
decisions during and after planning. As a tradeoff, the state representation and behavior
design are more complex. However, UGOAP:
• Enables agents to make richer decisions. Since the state representation incorporates
more information about how actions affect the state, the planner outputs a more
refined sequence of actions.
• Allows the creation of varied behavior by simply adjusting parameters, weights,
evaluation functions, or desires. This flexibility enables us to have multiple agents
with the same set of desires yet exhibit diverse behaviors.
It still needs to be further researched whether the added complexity of integrating utility
with GOAP is worth it over less complex approaches such as FSM, BT or regular GOAP.
Nevertheless, we still think it is interesting to introduce a system that combines GOAP
and Utility AI where each system would describe:
• GOAP (the How?): Used to determine an AI agent’s sequence of actions to achieve
a specific goal.
• Utility AI ( the What?): Used to decide which plan, goal, or action an AI agent
should pursue at a given moment (e.g., should they attack, defend, or heal).
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
41
==PAGE:48==
Overall, this thesis contributes to AI planning by presenting a framework that integrates
GOAP and UtilityAI. While further research is needed to evaluate its effectiveness in
specific scenarios fully, UGOAP demonstrates the potential to create more autonomous,
adaptable, and context-aware AI agents.
42
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
Jeff Orkin and Monolith Productions. “Applying Goal-Oriented Action Planning to
Games” ().
[2]
Dave Mark. Behavioral Mathematics for Game AI. Boston, Mass: Course Technol-
ogy, 2009. 459 pp. ISBN: 978-1-58450-684-3.
[3]
Stuart J. Russell et al. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. Fourth edition,
global edition. Pearson Series in Artificial Intelligence. Harlow: Pearson, 2022.
1166 pp. ISBN: 978-1-292-40113-3.
[4]
Phil Carlisle. “A Simple and Robust Knowledge Representation System” ().
[5]
John Sowa. “Knowledge Representation: Logical, Philosophical, and Computational
Foundations”. Jan. 1, 2000.
[6]
Ian Millington. AI for Games. Third edition, first issued in paperback. Boca Raton,
Fla. London New York: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, 2020. 1010 pp. ISBN:
978-1-138-48397-2 978-0-367-67056-6.
[7]
Matthias Scheutz and Virgil Andronache. “The APOC Framework for the Compar-
ison of Agent Architectures” ().
[8]
Michael Bratman. Intention, Plans, and Practical Reason. Cambridge: Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1987.
[9]
Michael Wooldridge. “An Introduction to MultiAgent Systems, 2nd Edition | Wiley”
().
[10]
Philippe Caillou et al. A Simple-to-Use BDI Architecture for Agent-Based Modeling
and Simulation. Jan. 1, 2017.
[11]
. “Introduction to Utility Theory”. GameAIPro 9 ().
[12]
Colm Sloan. “Drive-Based Utility-Maximizing Computer Game Non-Player Char-
acters” (2015).
[13]
Chapter 3 - Dual-Utility Reasoning - Game AI Pro 2 [Book]. https://www.oreilly.
com/library/view/game-ai-pro/9781482254792/K23980_C003.xhtml (visited on
05/25/2024).
[14]
Yoann Bourse. “Artificial Intelligence in The Sims Series” ().
[15]
Daniel Brewer. “Knowledge Is Power, an Overview of AI Knowledge Representa-
tion in Games”. GameAIPro ().
[16]
Sebastian Hanlon and Cody Watts. “Dragon Age Inquisition’s Utility Scoring Ar-
chitecture”. GameAIPro ().
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
43
==PAGE:50==
44
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:51==
A
Appendix
A.1
Pseudocode
Algorithm 7: BeliefComponent::UpdateBelief
Input
:belief b
Data: beliefs B
B[b.predicate] ←b
Algorithm 8: BeliefComponent::GetBelief
Input
:predicate p
Output :belief b
Data: beliefs B
if p ∈B then
return B[p]
end
return b ⇒false
Algorithm 9: SimpleEffect::ApplyEffect
Input
:state s
Data: belief effect eff
s.BeliefComponent.UpdateBelief(eff)
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
45
==PAGE:52==
Algorithm 10: FluentEffect::ApplyEffect
Input
:state s
Data: entity fluent FE, modifiers M, conditional effect eff
b ←s.BeliefComponent.GetBeliefAboutEntity(FE.entity)
foreach modifier m ∈M do
currentValue ←EF[m.name]
newValue ←currentValue + m.value
b.EF[m.name] ←newValue
if eff.condition(newValue) = true then
s.BeliefComponent.UpdateBelief(eff)
end
end
Algorithm 11: UtilityPlanner::PreconditionsMet
Input
:action a, state s
foreach precondition p ∈a.P do
stateBelief ←s.BeliefComponent.GetBelief[p.predicate]
if stateBelief.Evaluate() ̸= p.Evaluate() then
return false
end
return true
end
Algorithm 12: UtilityRater::GetBestPlan
Input
:set of plan nodes Π
Output : plan π
Π ←∅
vmax ←0
πmax ←0
for s, π ∈Π do
v ←RateUtility(s)
if v ≥vmax then
vmax ←v
πmax ←π
end
end
return πmax
46
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:53==
A.2
Specific class implementations in C#
Here, we explicitly show code from important classes where showing pseudocode is not
helpful. Hopefully, it might aid in understanding how the underlying system works if
needed.
Belief class
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
47
==PAGE:54==
Belief effect class and Fluent effect class
48
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
==PAGE:55==
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
49
==PAGE:56==
SmartObject and an action builder example
Paramater Manager
50
Enhancing Autonomy of NPCs via integration of GOAP and Utility AI
