==PAGE:1==
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule
drying industrial process
Nicola Frizziero
Master Thesis
DTU Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Thermal Energy section
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Author
Nicola Frizziero
Supervisors
Brian Elmegaard
Jonas Kjær Jensen
Nasrin Arjomand Kermani
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Thermal Energy section, Koppels Allé, Building 404, 2800 Kgs. Lyn-
gby Denmark
www.mek.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Indoor Climate, Depart-
ment of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Nicola Frizziero - s236925
Signature
Date
ii
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Drying of plastic granules is an essential process for moulding industry, it is energy inten-
sive but fundamental for the quality of final products. Grundfos is a company working in
the water treatment sector and owns multiple plants for granules drying in their production
lines. This study focuses on one of its plants whose equipment is produced by Labotek. It
consists of 7 drying hoppers and one desiccant flexible dryer unit treating up to 450 m3/h
of air. The average elaborated mass of plastic is 80 kg/h and it has an initial moisture con-
tent of 1% on mass basis. The continuous drying process is carried out in a closed loop
circuit where the air is dried down to a dew point of -40 °C by means of a molecular sieve
placed in a desiccant bed. The thermal energy stream requirements involve both heating
and cooling and a heat pump would be capable of cooling the waste stream by extracting
and promoting the heat. The plant currently relies on electrical heaters and chilled water
cooling coils. The hoppers air temperature requirements go from 80 °C to 140 °C. Sev-
eral models using EES (engineering equation solver) have been developed to study the
possibility for the integration of a CO2 heat pump (HP) in the system to fulfill the heating
and cooling needs of the drying phase . A fist simplified design approach aimed to de-
couple the heat exchangers capacities to face the energy balance challenges and deeply
analyze the system. The study then, passing through a third design model, addresses
to an hybrid layout with the heat pump supported by an additional cooler and electrical
heaters. The final heat pump proposed solution was investigated with the components
model where the system relies on Bitzer 4PTE-7k compressor. This solution shows a
heat pump configuration working with an evaporating temperature of 15 °C and a gas
cooler optimized pressure of 122.1 bar. The air temperature are 20 °C for the bed inlet
and 80.77 °C for the main supply air. The gas cooler capacity is 6.88 kW and the HP has
a COP of 4.151. The calculated potential reduction of electrical energy consumption is
17.60 % and the SMER is 0.05181 kWh/kg resulting in an increase of 21.36 % compared
to the existing configuration. This system would cover 59.8 % of the cooling load and 66.6
% of the heating load for drying operations. The study analyzes also how different mass
flow rates of plastic and different volume flow rates of air can affect the performance of
the integrated system showing that a high plastic load carries to poor overall performance
and that high air flow rates produced small increases of the COP.
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
This thesis has been conducted over five months at the Section for Thermal Energy, De-
partment of Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in the
context of Erasums + exchange program between DTU and University of Padova. The
thesis has been carried out together with the Thermal Energy group at DTU, Grundfos,
Labotek and DTI. The thesis was carried out from February 1st, 2024 to July 1st, 2024
and represents a workload equal to 30 ECTS points. It is assumed that the reader has a
basic knowledge in the areas of thermodynamics.
I want to express my gratitude to everyone that took part on this project starting from my
supervisors at DTU Nasrin Arjomand Kermani, Brian Elmegaard and Jonas Kjær Jensen,
I really appreciate your support and commitment for this project. I want to thank also my
supervisor from Padova Anna Stoppato that gave me the opportunity for this beautiful ex-
perience. Thank you to Peter Jessen Jürgensen and Alex Berg from Labotek, to Gunnar
Hans Konradsson from Grundfos and to Jóhannes Kristófersson and Frederik Dupond
Holdt from DTI.
This Erasmus gave me the opportunity to meet some fantastic people, some real friends
that supported me every day. Thanks to Paul’s Barbecue and Co group, you are authentic
and amazing people and I am really looking forward for the first reunion. Thanks to Los
Italianos group for the dinner all together whit delicious food.
Last but not least, a big thank you to my family, you are my biggest fans and none of
this would have been possible without you, I love you!
iv
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Drying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Energy efficiency in industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Heat pump
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.6
Refrigerants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.7
CO2 heat pumps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.8
Industrial heat pumps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.9
Heat Pump Dryers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
1.10 Labotek equipment for plastic drying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
1.11 The plant in Grundfos
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
1.12 State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2
Methodology
23
2.1
Integration idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.2
Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.3
Design model A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.4
Compressor selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
2.5
Design model B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
2.6
Design model C
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
2.7
Components model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
2.8
Data collection and measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
2.9
Performance evaluations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
3
Results
43
3.1
Results design model A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
3.2
Compressor selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
3.3
Results design model B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
3.4
Results design model C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
3.5
Results components model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
3.6
Results from humidity measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
4
Conclusion
69
5
Discussion
71
A Appendix
77
A.1 Design model A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
A.2 Design model B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
A.3 Design model C
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
A.4 Components model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
Symbol
Unit
Description
∆T
K
Temperature difference
˙m
kg/s
Mass flow rate
˙q
kW
Heat transfer rate
˙W
kW
Electric power
CFC
-
Chlorofluorocarbon
COP
-
Coefficient of performance
cp
kJ/(kg·K)
Specific heat capacity at constant pressure
db
-
Dry basis
EV
-
Evaporator
GC
-
Gas Cooler
GWP
CO2eq
Global Warming Potential
HFC
-
Hydrofluorocarbon
HFO
-
Hydrofluoroolefin
HI
-
Heat Integration
HTHP
-
High Temperature Heat Pump
HP
-
Heat Pump
HPD
-
Heat Pump Dryer
IEA
-
International Energy Agency
KPI
-
Key Performance Indicators
NZE
-
Net Zero Energy
ODP
R11eq
Ozone Depletion Potential
PET
-
Polyethylene Terephthalate
P
bar
Pressure
h
kJ/kg
Enthalpy
RH
%
Relative Humidity
ρ
kg/m3
Density
s
J/(kg·K)
Entropy
SMER
kWh/kgH2O
Specific Moisture Extraction Rate
SMER
J/kgH2O
Specific Moisture Extraction Rate
ηis
-
Isentropic efficiency
ηvol
-
Volumetric efficiency
ω
-
Humidity ratio
T
◦C
Temperature
R744
-
Carbon Dioxide
PI
-
Process Integration
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The fight against climate change is probably one of the biggest challenges that the mankind
will face in the near future. Climate change effects are multiple, they might be immediately
visible and relatable to the change itself or the impact is going to be visible just in a long
or medium term time frame. The effect is not only in the ecosystem and the wild nature
but also closer than we could think to our lives.
Climate change, and its impacts on the socioeconomic system, is one of the major issues
that the world will have to manage in the twenty-first century [1]. The impacts on the envi-
ronment are directly related to the well-being of the population and strong changes might
carry to heavy social diseases. In this framework, the fight against climate change is not
only related to ethical principles but evidently linked to the humans with the social and
economic drawbacks that this phenomenon is creating.
World economies are so challenged since being stuck to old polluting technologies is no
longer sustainable from a social point of view in the very next years. The International
Energy Agency (IEA) suggests that the transformation of our energy system is for sure
an enormous challenge but also a huge opportunity with the potential to boost the eco-
nomic growth, moreover, energy efficiency improvements help to reduce the vulnerability
of businesses and consumers to potential disruptions to electricity supply [2]. With refer-
ence to some industrial processes, the necessity of a step change is so the opportunity
to build more sustainable and resilient economic fabrics.
In 2021, he number of counties that have pledged to achieve net-zero emissions has
grown and covers around 70% of global emission of CO2. The global carbon neutrality
pathway forecast that the world economy in 2030 is 40% larger than year 2020 but uses
7% less energy. Europe committed to become carbon Neutral across all sectors by 2050,
to achieve this target lots of effort in research is necessary since 60% of the emission
reduction for 2050 are achieved by technologies that are under development today [2].
Industry plays a big role in terms of emissions and so it comes the necessity to improve
many industrial process.
Many studies have tried to asses the social cost of CO2 which can be defined as the eco-
nomic cost of an additional ton of CO2 emitted to the atmosphere or the value of damages
associated with an incremental unit of carbon emission [3]. Action for CO2 emission re-
duction has to be carried out at different levels, policy makers have been taken action
through several driving policies establishing a carbon price. In the short run, a carbon
price provides an incentive for households, firms, and governments to reduce emissions
cost-effectively. In the long run, the prospect of continuing and rising carbon prices also
provides an incentive for innovations to lower the cost of cutting emissions [4]. In this
framework, many industrial players may decide to invest in the energy efficiency.
The energy dedicated to heat production can be up to half of the total energy consumption
of industry [5]. In 2016 7.5 Gt of CO2 where emitted to produce industral process heat [6].
As a consequence, decarbonize the heat is one of the target that industry should set to
become more sustainable [6].
Industrial heat pump is a technology is becoming more and more competitive as enabling
technology to recover low temperature waste it and upgrade it to usable process heat.
This technology can play a major role in improving the energy performance of many in-
dustrial processes.
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
1
==PAGE:12==
1.2
Scope of the study
In many industrial processes related to plastic molding, the starting raw material are the
plastic granules. The companies buy plastic in the form of granules and use them in loco
to cast the most varied objects. In order have high quality products and set up a control-
lable process, it is fundamental to dry these granules to very low humidity content. This
process is essential but particularly energy intensive, the aim of this study is to develop
a strategy to reduce the energy consumption due to plastic granule drying. The idea is
upgrading the waste heat coming from the process itself with a heat pump and feed new
heat to the process.
Gurunfos [7] is a Danish company producing a very wide range of components related to
the water treatment sector. This work is based on a dying plant that is currently existing
in one its facilities. The drying equipment of that plant is produced by Labotek [8] which
is a Danish company specialized in building several produces for plastic treatment and
manipulation. The project involves the Danish Technological Institute [9] and Denmark
Technical University (DTU).
The question from which this project starts from is the feasibility to integrate a heat pump
in a system for plastic granule drying, the case study developed and presented in the
following pages focuses on the real plant currently running in Grundfos that rely on tradi-
tional eclectic heaters and chilled water cooling to fulfill the thermal requirements.
The second step addressed in this study is the optimization of this integrated solution by
analyzing different possible configuration and exploring which of those is the most effec-
tive considering all the theoretical and technological drivers involved in this design. The
optimization phase is carried out building a model capable of predicting the behaviour of
the system changing the operating conditions.
Finally, it is carried out the selection of the components necessary to build the heat pump
unit.
This report aims to investigate how the integration of a heat pump affects the plastic gran-
ule drying process from an energy point view tailoring the best possible configuration for
an existing plant.
1.3
Drying
Drying describes the process of thermally removing volatile substances (usually moisture)
to obtain in most of the cases a solid product [10]. Thermal drying has been recognized
as an important unit operation as it is energy intensive and has a decisive effect on the
quality of most products that are dried commercially [11]. Drying is a relevant process for
many industries, some examples of the sectors concerned can be: food, pulp and paper,
pharmaceutical, chemical, plastic, textile, minerals and many others.
Moisture held in loose chemical combination, present as a liquid solution within the solid
or even trapped in the micro structure of the solid, which exerts a vapor pressure less
than that of pure liquid, is called bound moisture. Moisture in excess of bound moisture
is called unbound moisture[10]. As a process of thermal drying occurs, two phenomenon
can be underlined: transfer of energy (heat) form the surroundings to evaporate the water
and transfer of internal moisture to the surface of the solid to be then evaporated. The
heat can be supplied fundamentally with three different mechanism[12]:
• Convection
A carrier gas (usually air) supplies the heat to the matter for the evaporation of the
liquid, sensible heat is converted into latent heat. The carrier gas then entrails the
volatile matter.
• Conduction
2
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:13==
The heat is supplied indirectly and the carrier gas serves only to remove the evapo-
rated the liquid, the quantity of gas required is around 10 % the case of convection
• Radiation
The heat is supplied by radiation, this mechanism can be classified in penetrating
and non-penetrating. A carrier gas is again necessary to remove the evaporated
vapour.
1.3.1
Drying polymers
Drying is essential in polymer production, and, although it is the oldest and most com-
monly encountered of all unit operations of chemical engineering, it is one of the most
complex and least understood operations [10]. The selection of dryers for polymer drying
depends to a large extent on the upstream operations, the polymerization reaction affects
the properties of the resulting polymer which can vary greatly according to the type of
system in which the polymerization reaction is carried out [10]. The dryers can be classi-
fied according to the heat transfer mode between direct and indirect and according to the
residence time of the polymer in the unit.
Hygroscopic resins have to be dried before a spinning or molding process. Usually, these
polymers are shipped in the form of small pellets and introduced into a dryer before being
processed. The presence of residual moisture above some critical thresholds can carry to
a finished product with unsatisfactory surface finish and properties. The dryness require-
ment depends on the nature of each converting operation; some require more critical
moisture control than others. As an example, PET in normal storage conditions contains
about 0.15 % moisture (db). It must be dried to a level of 0.005% (db) or lower for process-
ing. Differently, some nylons can be processed satisfactorily with 0.1%–0.15% moisture
in the material. Another important driver in the dryer design is the temperature that the
material can be exposed to without being damaged [10].
All these parameters together determine how a certain material have to be handled and
dried, in addition, considering that many industries have the necessity to work with many
different polymers in the same facility, flexibility is a key requirement a drying system.
1.4
Energy efficiency in industry
In the frame of the Net Zero Emission (NZE) by 2050 scenario [2], energy efficiency has
a central role in many sectors: building, transport and industry as well have to invest in
efficiency to reach the decarbonization targets.
IEA mentions that in the industry sector, most manufacturing stock is already quite effi-
cient, but there are still opportunities for energy efficiency improvements [2]. The major
interventions should be carried out implementing energy management systems, best-in-
class industrial equipment (electric motors, variable speed drives, heaters, grinders etc)
and working to improve the process integration options such as waste heat recovery.
The term Process Integration (PI) refers to a methodology designed and developed back
to the 1970s to face to the oil crisis and the consequent effect on price and scarcity of
fuel. Heat Integration (HI) is the first field where developments occurred targeting energy
efficiency and savings. This methodology is still the pillar for the design of Combined
Heat and Power systems, refrigeration, air conditioning and heating with pump systems.
The concept of PI is equally applicable for small, medium and large industrial sites and,
moreover, it is possible to state that this approach is transversal across many different pro-
cesses involving heating and cooling. The complexity of Energy and Power Integration
needs to be faced starting from the mapping of the whole process or site and the streams
involved. The target is to efficiently couple heating and cooling resources exploring the
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
3
==PAGE:14==
complexity of a system in order to reduce energy consumption and so the emissions.
In the frame of process integration and efficiency of industrial process, heat pumps can
have a decisive role. Having the capability to upgrade waste heat to higher temperature
process heat using potentially carbon neutral electrical energy, HP technology can help to
extend the concept of HI to a more general idea of efficiency of a process from a thermal
point of view enabling to exploit (at a very low energy cost) heat that differently would be
classified as ”waste” helping to further reducing the overall energy intensity.
1.4.1
Desiccant dryers
Desiccant dryers are suitable for drying application where the air dew point requirements
are particularly strict, the air is used as heat transfer medium and is fully recirculated
during drying operations.
The additional treatment to the air, capable to make it achieve dew points up to −50 °C, is
carried out in a bed or in a wheel where a molecular sieve adsorb the moisture. The low
dew point air is then blown from the bottom of a desiccant chamber through the plastic
granules and collected from the top.
Once the sieve is saturated with moisture, it requires to be regenerated, this happens
continuously in the case of a desiccant wheel or simply swapping to another dry sieve in
the case of beds layout. In desiccant bed systems, two beds alternate in drying operations:
while one is working, the other is regenerated blowing hot air through it.
1.5
Heat pump
A heat pump (HP) is a technology that transfers heat from a cold source to a hot sink,
this process, according to the second law of thermodynamics, is not spontaneous. Con-
sequently, it requires a thermodynamic input of either heat or work, in simplified terms
it is possible to say that transferring heat from low to high temperature requires energy
citesecond law.
Commercial heat pumps are based on the vapour compression cycle or the absorption
cycle are operational in numerous applications in various industries [13].
New HP technologies such as the adsorption cycle or the chemical reaction cycle are
emerging rapidly, although they have yet to find major industrial applications [10]. The
most widespread technology of heat pumps relies on the vapour compression cycle and
this work analyzes a HP relying on this technology, in the following lines, the cycle and
the working principle are briefly recalled.
1.5.1
Vapour compression cycle
A vapour compression cycle can be classified as subcritical or transcritical depending
on its operating range in the working fluid aggregation state domain. In the subctitical
scenario, the a working fluid, named refrigerant, extracts heat from a cold source as it
evaporates, than it enters the compressor suction where by means of electric power, it is
pressurized up to the condensation pressure where the refrigerant releases heat while is
subject to phase change. The refrigerant is finally expanded to evaporation pressure.
The vapour compression cycle is an inverse Rankine cycle, as reference case to better
depict the working principle, the ideal inverse Carnot cycle can be presented.
The refrigerant, is isentropically compressed (b to c in figure 1.1a), than it undergoes a
isothermal compression process (c to d in figure 1.1a) followed by a isentropic expansion
(d to a in figure 1.1a) and a isothermal expansion (a to b in figure 1.1a), this fluid is then
ready to be pressurized again [14].
While the isentropic transformations take place without any heat transfer, the isothermal
expansion and compression occur with heat gain from the cold source and heat released
4
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:15==
to the sink, respectively.
Depending on the application it can be defined which is the useful effect of the cycle, it can
be either at the heat source and in this case the case would be refrigeration application or
at the heat sink defining the heat pump case. The performance of a vapour compression
cycle are assessed with the coefficient of performance (COP), that is defined according
to the useful effect of the cycle. In the case of a ideal inverse Carnot cycle, the COP with
reference to the case of a HP is expressed in equation 1.1.
COPCarnot =
TC
TH −TC
+ 1
(1.1)
The Carnot COP depends only on the temperature of the source TC and the sink TH
expressed in Kelvin and defines theoretical upper limit for efficiency at some given value
of operating temperatures.
A more general definition of an ideal vapor compression cycle can be achieved by in-
troducing the Lorenz cycle 1.1b. This latter includes a fluid temperature glide during the
heat exchange phases. In this context, two mean temperatures are defined, one for heat
rejection THm and another one for heat absorption TCm. In general Tm is defined with
equation 1.2 where Ta and Tb are the temperatures at the beginning and at the end of the
glide.
Tm = Ta −Tb
ln Ta
Tb
(1.2)
(a) Carnot cycle
(b) Lorentz cycle
Figure 1.1: Ideal inverse vapour compression cycle
Consequently, it is possible to define the Lorenz COP that is a generalization of the Carnot
COP, practically the Lorenz cycle is equivalent to an infinite multi-stage Carnot cycle [15].
The Lorenz COP for a HP is presented in equation 1.3
COPLorenz =
TCm
THm −TCm
+ 1
(1.3)
The performance of a real vapour compression cycle are strictly correlated to the thermo-
dynamic properties of the refrigerant, the working fluid undergoes a non-ideal cycle com-
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
5
==PAGE:16==
posed by compression, condensation, expansion and evaporation where several losses
happens [14]. Moreover, differently from the ideal cycle, the heat transfer imposes a min-
imum temperature pinch between refrigerant and the other fluid which introduces some
further losses. Given this, in the case of a real heat pump application the COP is defined
as the ratio between the heat transfer rate exchanged with the sink Q1 and the electrical
power absorbed by the compressor W as presented in equation 1.4.
Figure 1.2: Scheme of a heat pump
COP = Q1
W
(1.4)
In practice, due to the losses present, the actual COP is just a fraction of the Lorentz COP
value, An efficiency term, which relates these two COP values can be defined in equation
1.5 as ηLorenz.
ηLorenz =
COP
COPLorenz
(1.5)
The physical meaning of the COP can be summed up as: ”given an unitary electric power
input, the thermal capacity obtained is COP-times the electrical power”. This concept is
not against the thermodynamics laws but it expresses the fact that the COP −1 sharing
of the energy is extracted from the cold source. So, for instance, assuming a COP for
heating of 4, the 75% of the thermal energy is completely renewable and in most of the
cases free. Having said that, a HP has the potential to provide 100% renewable heat if it
is powered by renewable energy sources.
Subcritical and transcritical cycle
As already mentioned, a vapour compression cycle can be subcritical or transcritical,
moreover, in some cases, also fully supercritical cycles are designed. The distinction
is determined by the operating condition of the system and by the critical point of the re-
frigerant. If in the high pressure and temperature phase, the fluid is beyond the critical
point, the heat rejection process is no longer a condensation but a gas cooling, the super-
critical fluid undergoes an isobaric cooling. In the case of a subctitical cycle, the critical
point is never exceeded so the heat rejection process is carried out as a condensation
6
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:17==
that takes place under the saturation dome.
The transcritical cycle, compared to the subcritical one, brings to technical complications,
however, it carries also some potential advantaged that can be exploited in case of an
proper design of the system. A visual representation of the difference between these two
type of cycle can be seen in figure 1.3.
(a) p-h diagram subcritical cycle
(b) p-h diagram transcritical cycle
Figure 1.3: Subcritical vs transcritical
1.6
Refrigerants
The working fluid in a vapour compression cycle determines the operation window and
the compatibility of a cycle with the considered application. The refrigerant has not to
cause injury in case of leaks and its chemical, physical and thermodynamical properties
have to be suitable for the system in the working condition, at the lowest cost [14]. Some
reference parameters can be defined in order to assess the suitability of a certain fluid
to be a refrigerant and later with a specific application. Some key figures to frame the
operating areas of a fluid are the volumetric refrigerating effect, critical temperature and
pressure, molecular mass and the latent heat of vaporization.
However, in considering a refrigerant and its suitability, some more parameters have to
be taken into account. The refrigerants are synthetic or natural fluids that are classified in
the safety classes represented in Figure 1.4. Their characteristics are assessed testing
the toxicity expressed with the categories A and B, and the flammability ranging from 1 to
3 depending on the flame propagation behaviour in case of combustion.
Another more and more important parameter to classify a refrigerant is the its environmen-
tal impact. Refrigeration and heat pumps system are subject to leaks and the dispersion
of these substances in the atmosphere might be polluting and dangerous. Two indexes
have been adopted to quantify how much is a refrigerant is hazardous for the environment,
the ODP (Ozone Depletion Potential) and the GWP (Global Warming Potential). The first
one compares the effect on atmospheric ozone layer of a kilogram of the substance in
object with a kilogram of R11, the second measure the impact to global warming given by
a unit mass of refrigerant compared with CO2.
The first document to take action on the environmental impact of the refrigerant and im-
pose some limitation was the Montreal protocol in 1987 [17]. Since then, following amend-
ments [18] as new regulation for example at European level, imposed strict boundaries
on the typologies of refrigerant allowed in the market. The last update of the European
regulation on fluoridated gases [19] shows as a pathway the progressive phase out of
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) towards the fast adoption of natural refrigerant in all the sec-
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
7
==PAGE:18==
Figure 1.4: Safety group classification credits [16]
tors where this alternative is available. This regulation gives a strong push to the industry
to invest and work with progressively bigger effort on producing systems based on natu-
ral refrigerants. Some examples of natural refrigerants are hydrocarbons (HCs), carbon
dioxide CO2, and ammonia NH3. In the refrigerants scene, some other fluids that suits
the upcoming environmental constrains are the hydrofluroolefines (HFOs). These are
synthetic products that combines good environmental features with superior thermody-
namics properties but they are in general characterized by an high cost.
1.6.1
CO2 as a refrigerant
Carbon dioxide is a gas naturally present in our atmosphere with a concentration around
400 ppm [20]. It is a natural refrigerant that combines good properties in terms of safety,
environmental friendliness and thermodynamics. CO2 (R744) is a promising natural re-
frigerant with an ODP of zero, and a GWP of one that is only inferior to ammonia [21].
It is one of the first refrigerant used in the refrigeration history, the first air conditioners
working with R744 where available at the beginning of the 20th century. In the following
decades the invention of clorofluorocarbons (CFCs), coupled with a lack of technologi-
cal improvements from the CO2 refrigeration industry, caused the decline in the use of
R744 [22]. Starting in the late 80s, following the work of professor Gustav Lorentzen from
NTNU [21], Carbon Dioxide is now living a second youth. R744 has an ODP is equal to
zero while its GWP is one, its good thermodynamic properties are now exploitable with
new technological improvements.
R744 is non-toxic and non-flammable ant it is classified as an A1 class refrigerant 1.4
which is the safest class in accordance to ASHRAE [16]. This refrigerant is characterized
by a critical temperature of 31.1°C and a critical pressure of 73.3 bar [23]. As visible in
Figure 1.5, comparing CO2 with other refrigerants it has a low critical temperature and a
high critical pressure, this feature carries to the fact that for many application the vapour
compression cycle working with R744 is transcritical. The condenser is replaced by a gas
8
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:19==
Figure 1.5: logP-h diagram Carbon dioxide
cooler where CO2 is in supercritical phase. This, together with the high pressure involved,
not only carries to some technical challenges but also to some unique properties that may
be exploited as an advantage for optimization. A brief representation o a logP-h diagram
of a transcritcal cycle can be observed in Figure 1.3b
Compared with the condensation process in a traditional subcritical cycle, the gliding
temperature profile associated to an isobaric gas cooling in a supercritical state is more
matched to the temperature profile of the heat exchange fluid [24]. In Figure 1.6 it is
possible to see an example of heat transfer process in a gas cooler.
CO2 is characterized by a high latent heat given by the high pressures involved, low vis-
cosity that promotes turbulent flow in the heat exchanges, small liquid to vapour density
that promotes uniform and homogeneous fluid distribution in the heat exchanger chan-
nels.R744 has a big volumetric refrigerating effect (that is defined as the ratio between
the refrigerating capacity and the specific volume of refrigerant at the compressor inlet).
Taking as reference an ideal cycle working with source and sink temperature of -30°C and
30°C respectively, both the volumetric vaporization heat and the volumetric refrigerating
effects are 5 times bigger than R404A’s ones All these properties allows to use smaller
equipment and producing more compact units relying on R744 [22]. As already men-
tioned, the working pressure of a transcritical CO2 vapour compression cycle is high in
comparison with other refrigerants, however the pressure ratio handled by the compressor
doesn’t grow since both evaporator and gas cooler pressure remains high.
1.7
CO2 heat pumps
Referring to CO2 heat pumps, besides the features related the thermodynamic properties
of R744, safety is a very strong point of this technology: CO2 is neither explosive nor toxic
while ammonia - for instance- is both flammable and poisonous [22]. Carbon dioxide low
critical temperature causes a drastic reduction of the enthalpy of vaporization close to the
critical point, it is hard to achieve a good heating performance operating in a temperature
range close to the bottom part of the saturation dome [24]. As a consequence, a CO2
vapour compression cycle targeted to heat pump purposes operates in transcritical cycle.
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
9
==PAGE:20==
Figure 1.6: heat tranfer for isobaric gas cooling
The heat rejection process is no longer a condensation but a gas cooling and, in the
supercritical region, temperature and pressure are two independent variables. For every
working condition, the gas cooler pressure can be optimized to achieve the maximum
COP. Rising the high pressure, isotherms become more and more steep which means that
the heat capacity will decrease. Oppositely, the isentropic lines becomes nearly straight
lines, causing the compressor power consumption to increase linearly. So, when other
parameters remain constant, as the high pressure changes, there will be a maximum COP
point [25]. For a fixed value of gas cooler outlet temperature an optimal value of pressure
exists. Increasing the pressure, increases the COP initially however the added capacity
no longer able to compensate compressor additional work thus the COP value decreases
[26].
Another parameter which severely affects the COP of the cycle is the gas cooler outlet
temperature. In general, given value of gas cooler pressure, the lower the gas cooler
outlet temperature, the higher the COP of the cycle and at a given pressure COP and gas
cooler outlet temperature are correlated almost linearly [26].
The optimization of the working point of a R744 HP carries to not negligible improvement
to the performance of the system.
1.7.1
Air to air CO2 heat pump
An air-to-air CO2 heat pump relies both as heat sink and source on air. This solution
is suitable to supply heat to process where the heat carrier fluid is air, they can be for
example domestic heating system or industrial process where the heat rejected from the
gas cooler can be directly utilized for air heating for various purposes [24].
Some examples of those kind of units can be found in the literature an in the market. A
prototype of a transcritical CO2 heat pump air dryer with operating temperatures between
-20 °C and 90 °C was developed by Eikevik et al [27]. The system is able to work in three
cycle conditions: subcritical, transcritical and supercritical. In the market Eco Sirocco unit
produced by Mayekawa is available, it provides hot air up to 120 °C or over, it has a rated
heating capacity of 110 kW and a COP of 3.43 [28].
10
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:21==
1.8
Industrial heat pumps
Industrial heat pump is a technology that is in rapid development and growth. Zühlsdorf
el al. [29], in the context of the technology collaboration program by IEA, suggest that
decarbonizing the process heating by electrification and energy efficiency is a top priority
for industries with respect to reaching their climate ambitions towards 2030 and beyond.
IEA study also assesses that industry is the largest final sector in terms of heat consumed.
In 2011 this consumption accounted for the 46% of the total energy dedicated to heat pro-
duction along the year [5].
An industrial heat pump is a technology that aims to increase the efficiency of industrial
process by the use of heat pumps. The implementation process is not straight forward
since it does not consist of the simple substitution of a heating system with a heat pump
but it has to consider a wider frame to assess the feasibility of this technological shift. The
heat temperature levels and the capacity involved are not the only KPI (key performance
indicators) to take into consideration. In the topic of industrial heat pumps, the process
integration is a fundamental project driver and, moreover, the complexity of the industrial
systems in object is not only a challenge but also an opportunity for the integration. Hav-
ing said that, the heat pump installation feasibility for an industrial process or system has
to start from an analysis of the heat streams and the requirements involved.
The adoption of industrial heat pumps for process heating supply is potentially emission
free and ensures high efficiency, which is making them a key technology for decarbonizing
industrial process heat [28]. Heat pumps are capable of using waste heat energy streams
as a heat source to produce new process heat at higher temperature. The waste heat can
be defined as a valuable heat source at relatively high temperature level of about 30 to
70 °C, which is significantly higher than outdoor air, ground heat, or ground water [30].
This waste product accumulates in the form of cooling liquid in chillers, waste water, warm
compressed air, or moist exhaust air [31]. Within the topic of heat pumps, a classification
can be made depending on the sink temperature that the system can handle. A device
that recovers heat from a certain heat source for heating from 80 °C to 120 °C can ac-
cordingly be defined as a High Temperature Heat Pump (HTHP) [29]. The temperature at
which the heat has to be supplied is an important driver for heat pump compatibility with
the requirements of industry. Stetting a maximum of 140°C as heat sink temperature,
German industry could cover up to 32% of its industrial demand with HTHP [15]. Some
other sources states that within the EU27, 22% of the heating demand in industry is below
100°C [32].
Many studies and reports have tried with different approaches to asses which are the
heat demand figures for industry in different countries together with its possible coverage
with the existing or future heat pump technologies. Quantify the application potential of
heat pumps for the whole industry and its sectors is essential. Marina et al. [33] sug-
gested that there are two main approaches to evaluate application potential: a top-down
approach and a bottom-up approach.
The top-down approach usually starts with the total energy use of a sector and deter-
mines which part is used for heating purposes. This method manages to achieve quick
estimates but it lacks of specific information about the different processes. The bottom-up
approach starts from individual processes and then produces comprehensive numbers at
higher level. So, this methodology can provide information on the heat pump capacity
and temperature ranges [29].
Marina et al. [33], using a bottom up methodology, state that the potential cumulative
heating capacity of industrial heat pumps in EU28 is 23 GW, consisting of more than
4000 HP units with a median COP of 2.77 which can cover 641 PJ/a of process heat de-
mand. Kosmadakis et al. [34] assess that the potential of industrial heat pumps in Europe
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
11
==PAGE:22==
by matching the heat requirements with the waste heat available. The result present that
1.5% of the total heat consumption, and about 15% of the heat in the band between 100
and 200°C could be provided by heat pumps by upgrading some waste heat. This waste
heat recovered would be 7% of the total waste heat potential in EU industries. Marina
et al. [33] also present that the largest number of heat pump units is concentrated at ca-
pacities <10 MW and that the industrial sectors with the highest potential for HP capacity
penetration are chemical, pulp and paper and food. Kosmadakis et al. [34] report that with
reference to EU, non-ferrous metal industries could cover 100% of the heat consumption
at temperatures in the range between 100 and 200°C by upgrading its own waste heat
with heat pumps. Arpagaus et al. [15] calculate that for the European heat pump mar-
ket, a technical potential of about 113 PJ of process heat between 100 and 150 °C can
be assumed realizable with industrial HTHPs. Moreover, they stated that many industrial
processes as for example pre-heating and pasteurization can already be supplied with
industrial heat pumps already available on the market for temperature up to 100°C.
1.9
Heat Pump Dryers
A heat pump dryer (HPD) is a device whose objective is drying, its thermal requirements
are fulfilled by means of a heat pump which is capable to exploit the waste heat from the
process and provide cooling and heating simultaneously. In addition to the ability of the
heat pumps to recover energy from the exhaust gas, HPD can have a fine control on the
drying gas temperature and humidity. Many researchers have demonstrated the impor-
tance of producing a range of precise drying conditions to dry a wide range of products
and improve their quality [10]. The first HPD patent applications were started in 1973 and
the first HP drying studies in the literature were done in the sixties [35].
A convective dryer usually blows warm air into a drying chamber in order to evaporate and
trap the moisture contained in the target product. A heat pump dryer is capable to heat up
the air through the condenser, subsequently, the moist air can be cooled sensibly to its
dew point and further cooling ensure the condensation of the moisture. The sensible and
latent heat is absorbed by the refrigerant and supplied to the cold and dehumidified air as
process heat. The ability of heat pump dryers to convert latent heat of condensation into
sensible heat at the hot condenser makes them unique heat recovering devices for dry-
ing applications [10]. Moreover, controlling the heat pump means the ability of controlling
the evaporating process temperature and so predict the humidity ratio of the air used for
drying purpose, consequently, one of the main advantage of HPDs is the ability to control
drying temperature and air humidity. This creates the possibility of a wide range of drying
conditions [36]. Between the HP drying system, many different typologies are available
[10] [37]:
• Air source heat-pump drying systems
• Ground source heat-pump drying systems
• Chemical heat-pump drying systems
• Hybrid heat-pump drying systems
Regarding the first two methodologies what changes is simply the heat source, in some
cases, the air temperature may not be suitable for an efficient operation mode, ground
source heat pumps exploit a heat source which is at an almost constant temperature level
[38]. However, as a drawback, this system requires more technical complexity and in-
vestment costs [39]. Differently, the chemical heat-pump drying system can store thermal
energy (coming for example from waste process heat from dryer exhaust, solar energy,
geothermal energy, and many others) in the form of chemical energy via an endothermic
12
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:23==
reaction in a suitably designed reactor and release the energy at various temperature lev-
els during the heat-demand period by exothermic or endothermic reactions [37]. Finally,
hybrid HPDs systems, combines several heat sources, for example, in places where very
rich sources of solar energy are available, the incorporation of a solar heating system to
HPD may further improve the energy efficiency of the overall drying system [10]. Other
hybrid technologies improve the process by assisting it by providing additional sensible
heat by infrared radiation being capable of increasing the overall performance of the dryer
[40].
Among the hybrid HPD, the desiccant heat pump system has to be mentioned, it is mostly
spread in the house scale systems and shows better performance compare to conven-
tional heat pump in term of dehumidifier (drying) and space heating and cooling control
[41].
As previously mentioned, a heat pump dryer shows better energy performance thanks to
the capability to exploit waste heat from the process, the main figures to compare and
express the performance of a HPD are the COP and the specific moisture extraction rate
(SMER). The COP has already been introduced in paragraph 2.2.1 while the SMER can
be defined as the ratio between the mass flow rate of moisture extracted and the en-
ergy consumption of the system. So the resulting number is espressed in kgH2O/kWh or
kgH2O/kJ
Conrad et al. [42] say that for a HPD the SMER values is in the range of 1 to 4 kgH2O/kWh,
while for a standard air dryer it is between 0.12 and 1.28 kgH2O/kWh. Abasi et al. [43],
conducting a study on the incorporation of a rotary desiccant wheel unit into an air recir-
culated convective dryer and testing it by drying corn kernels and comparing solutions
with and without the desiccant wheel at air temperatures of 50, 60, and 70°C, found
SMER values from 0.026 up to 0.039 kgH2O/kWh without the desiccant wheel and 0.029
to 0.048 kgH2O/kWh including the wheel in the system. Shanmugam et al [44], assessing
the performance of an indirect forced convection and desiccant integrated solar dryer ex-
perimenting the dying behaviour of the system working with green peas, found value of
SMER ranging from 0.55 to 0.82 kgH2O/kWh.
1.10
Labotek equipment for plastic drying
In plastic molding industry, the starting raw materials are the plastic granules. The com-
panies buy plastic in the form of granules and use them in loco to cast the most varied
objects. In order have high quality products and set up a controllable process, it is funda-
mental to dry these granules to very low humidity content.
The present work focuses on the real case study of a drying plant operating in Grundfos.
The drying process is carried out with in specific plastic treatment equipment provided
by Labotek which is a company that works on the production of devices for the plastic
treatment and manipulation.
The original system of the case in object is composed by two main devices: a Drying
hopper (DH) and a Desiccant flexible dryer (DFD).
Inside the DH is where the granules are actually dried and more units are connected in
parallel to the same dry air duct and humid exhaust duct coming from and going to the
DFD. In the original configuration, the dry air arrives in a pipe in the rear part of every
hopper, then, the air is heated up to the temperature required for the correct drying of the
plastic polymer filled in the DH.
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
13
==PAGE:24==
Figure 1.7: Example of Drying hopper layout in a plant
(a) Drying hoppers in the production line back
side
(b) Drying hoppers in the production line front
side
Figure 1.8: Drying hoppers
The DFD is the unit where the air is dehumidified, the final humidity content requirement
for plastic drying purpose is very demanding (e.g 0.04 % on mass basis).
To perform a dying process down to those values of moisture content, the dry air coming
14
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:25==
out from this desiccant unit needs a dew point of -40°C or lower. In order to achieve such
demanding state, the process of air dehumidification is carried out making the air passing
through a molecular sieve. In the sieve the adsorption process takes place, the adsorbant
interacts physically with the adsorbate (moisture) reducing the moisture content of the air
resulting in dehumidify the air.
Figure 1.9: DFD unit inside
The DFD unit model is defined by the air volume flow rate that it can elaborate, in the
present case is the DFD 450 which means that the blower is sized to process 450 m3/h
of air. This unit is also connected to a chilled water circuit that is available in the site and
to the compressed air system.
The chilled water is necessary for cooling the air in some steps of the process while the
compressed air is necessary for the pneumatic control of the valves of the circuit. The data
acquired from Labotek catalog assumes a chilled water temperature of 20°C which is also
the maximum water temperature acceptable from the DFD unit. Smaller temperatures
carries to lower water flow rates requirements, the flow can be controlled with an optional
water regulator. For bigger temperatures of the chilled water, the heat exchangers are
undersized.
This type of desiccant flexible dryer has two sieves that are also named desiccant beds.
The beds are not used at the same time, the aim of this redundancy is to ensure a con-
tinuous dying process. When after some time one bed is saturated with moisture and is
no longer capable to adsorbe water, the beds are swapped and the second one starts to
dehumidify the air. In the meantime, the saturated bed is regenerated by blowing hot air
through it. This air is again heated using some electrical heaters that are placed either
before or inside the bed depending on the dimensions of the unit. The air circuit, during
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
15
==PAGE:26==
Figure 1.10: Cooling coils inside a DFD unit
drying operation, is a closed loop circuit and the process is continuous: the air is blown
across the plastic granules in the hoppers, dehumidified from the moisture it has adsorbed
and then recirculated. The air circuit can is explained in picture 1.11.
In the original system the dry air arrives to the hoppers where it is heated up by an elec-
trical heater and blown from the bottom across the plastic granules. The colder and moist
contaminated air is collected from the top of this device and sent back to the DFD unit,
then, in this device, the air is cooled down in an air water heat exchanger (the additive
trap) to condensate the additives present in the plastic and collected by the air flow, this
process takes place in a device that couple a heat exchanger with a filter that collects the
additives.
Subsequently, the air is blown through the bed where is subjected to dehumidification and
temperature increase due to the transfer of the adsorption heat, this dry air is finally sent
to the hoppers. The regeneration process is carried out by blowing hot air through the
saturated bed, the moisture is so desorped and the bed is dried.
By passing through the bed, the air is subject to a temperature decrease given by the
heat of adsorption necessary to extract the moisture from the sieve, this temperature de-
crease is so a parameter that is measured to asses when all the moisture trapped in the
bed is completely desorped. When the process is completed a significant temperature
difference across the bed will no longer be measured.
The moist air coming from the regeneration is partially rejected to the ambient in the first
phase of the process, in the following phases it is recirculated and dehumidified. When
the moisture is fully desorbed, the bed is cooled down to a temperature around 40/60 °C
recirculating some air cooled in a proper coil. After the bed is taken to the desired tem-
perature, it will be ready to operate in desiccant mode again.
16
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:27==
Figure 1.11: Schematic of the sir circuit for a DFD unit connected to a hopper. Bed 1 in
operation bed 2 in regeneration
1.11
The plant in Grundfos
Every system designed by Labotek is tailored to the requirements of every company. In
the specific case of Grundfos, a DFD450 unit is connected to 7 Hoppers of different sizes
1.12.
The volume flow rate of air going into every unit is proportional to the volume of the hopper,
the air distribution is tuned when the plant is installed and the control is made controlling
the pressure drops and the flow thanks to pipe restriction and dampers. In the current
configuration of the system, the air flows into every hopper independently from the pres-
ence of granule to dry in the DH. Only recently in the biggest hoppers a gate vale has
been installed so not to have any air flowing through them while they are not in operation.
Before entering the DH, the air is heated up by heat provided by an electric heater and
each DH units has its own heater which is adjusted according to the set point raccomended
for each polymer
In the case study considered, during the drying mode, the air is not cooled inside the
DFD unit using the cooling coil shown in picture 1.10 but in an additional device added
on top of the unit as shown in figure 1.13. This is named additive trap and its aim is to
cool down the air and condensate the additives drained by the air in the DHs, they have
to be removed to avoid the risk of deposition on the pipe, poisoning of the sieves and the
consequent reduction of the performance of the system.
Heat streams involved
The system in object has multiple heat and cold streams involved in different phases of
the process. Both the drying and the regeneration phase requires heat and cold.
In order to frame the problem in a more effective way, a list for the energy streams involved
in the existing plant can be made.
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
17
==PAGE:28==
Figure 1.12: Plant in Grundfos, DFD unit and Hoppers
• heat for dry air during drying phase
• cold for the additive trap in drying operations
• heat for regeneration process
• cold for regeneration process
In the following paragraphs, further details on these heating and cooling requirements will
be provided.
1.11.1
Drying
In this phase, the air has to be heated up to be at the correct temperature before entering
the hopper where the plastic granules are fed. This air temperature is currently regulated
individually in every of the hoppers connected to a the DFD unit, each of the drying units
has its own electrical heaters placed before the air inlet.
The heating demand depends on the type of plastic, the DFD outlet air temperature and
the amount of air flowing from the DFD unit. Any polymer has a specific temperature
requirement established to achieve the maximum final product quality. In table 1.1 are
presented the drying temperature from the Labotek catalog and the suggested drying
time, moreover, it is presented the maximum mass flow rate of that specific polymer that
the DFD450 can handle if just that material is dried in the hoppers relying on the DFD450
unit.
18
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:29==
Figure 1.13: Additive trap
Table 1.1: Requirements table from Labotek catalog
Polymer
Temperature (°C)
Time (h)
Plastic Mass Flow Rate (kg/h)
PA.6.6
75
3
210
PET-G
70
4.5
180
PSU
120
3
210
For this same drying phase, also cooling is required. Entering the additive trap, the air
needs to be cooled down to a temperature that ensures the condensation of the additives
trapped in the air flow as a consequence of the drying phase in the hoppers. This tem-
perature is dependent on the type of substance that needs to be removed. It was not
possible to retrieve precise information about these industrial requirements because they
are different for every polymer and in most of the case they are classified as trade secrets.
In order for the adsorption process to be properly performed, the air needs to be colder
than the DHs outlet one. The personnel of Labotek mentioned that the lower the bed
inlet temperature is, the better the air dehumidification process evolve. In a DFD unit the
air is cooled down before entering the desiccant bed independently from the presence of
an additive trap. The trap is an additional device that can be installed, in this device the
mandatory air cooling phase is coupled with an efficient removal of additives. In every
configuration the cold fluid flowing in the heat exchanger is chilled water.
It is important to mention that no condensation of moisture happens during the cooling
process. The air to be dehumidified in this process, has a low humidity content and the
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
19
==PAGE:30==
coolant temperature in the coil is far from dew point temperature. The dehumidification
process is entirely carried out by absorption in the molecular sieve. The coil in charge
to diminish the air temperature uses as cooling fluid some chilled water and in Labotek
catalog it is mentioned that the cooling water temperature can not be above 20°C oth-
erwise the cooling phase can not fulfill the air temperature requirements. The cooling
water, in the Grundfos case, is already available in the facility thanks to the chilled water
circuit of the factory. A schematic layout of the systems during drying operation with some
temperature values measured in the ducts are presented in picture 1.14.
Figure 1.14: Schematic layout with the system with some temperature values
In the existing plant the air volume flow rate is constant over time no matter the quantity of
plastic in the hoppers, so, the heating demand is reasonably constant over time. For this
specific case, it ranges from 9 to 6 kWh considering all the hoppers together. The peak
electrical absorption for this plant is around 10 kW.
Further data on energy consumption will be presented in the following sections.
1.11.2
Regeneration
The regeneration phase aims to extract the moisture adsorbed in the desiccant bed so
to get it dry and ready to come to absorption operation again. The data from the plant in
Grundfos shows that regeneration is carried out every two hours. This interval is not the
same for every drying plant, the regeneration requirements are strictly dependent on the
moisture content of the raw material that is shipped to the plant, moreover, the same DFD
unit is connected to several hoppers where different polymers are dried, so they have
impact on the final humidify collected to be collected by the sieves.
Depending on the moisture content of the plastic granules handled, after a certain time
interval, the bed is saturated with moisture and it can’t carry out anymore its duty of ad-
sorbing water. This moment determine when the beds need to be swapped. From the
profile in Figure 1.15 the heating period lasts about 30 min long. In the DFD450 unit, the
heating is currently provided by 3 electrical heaters of 3.5 kW peak each. From picture1.15
it is visible that the air is heated up to 200 °C for regeneration.
Moreover, after desorption is completed, the bed is cooled down to a temperature suitable
for dying operation. The cooling demand of this phase is not well established but, from
20
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:31==
the data available, it contributes to form the 5 kW average heat emission mentioned as
data sheet feature of the DFD450 unit.
Figure 1.15: DFD control panel plot. Red line is the temperature of the bed not in opera-
tion, green line is the temperature of the bed in operattion
1.12
State of the art
The objective of this study is the investigation of the feasibility and the performance of the
integration of a CO2 heat pump in a industrial plastic continuous dryer for plastic granule
plant.
To author’s knowledge this type of solution seems not to yet been thoroughly explored in
the existing literature. The common heat pump dryers absorb latent heat at the evaporator
performing dehumidification of the air, in the case study in object the dehumidification of
the air is not possible by condensation in the evaporator due to the very low due point of
what in the process is considered to be humid air. From an energy energy perspective,
the necessity of air with dew point at least -40 °C is a very demanding requirement that
can be fulfilled using molecular sieves or analogous systems.
As a consequence, comparing the performance of a HPD in with the solution analyzed
in this work, is not very meaningful. The SMER values that literature presents for HPDs
refers to configuration that presents many differences compared to the system on this
study.
Some studies tried to investigate the performance of a HPD working with a desiccant
dryers, Çerçi et al. [45] investigated the performance of a heat pump assisted rotary
desiccant dryer for peanut and the study involves drying temperatures around 35°C. Kai-
Shing Yang el al. [46] performed comparative study on the performance a closed loop heat
pump dryer: the different configurations were an original reference design, a modified
drying chamber, and an external desiccant wheel design and they achieved maximum
COP at lower test loads with the desiccant wheel. This study is investigating on a system
where the air drying temperature is never above 55 °C. Minxia Li et al [47] analyzed the
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
21
==PAGE:32==
performance of a CO2 transcritical cycle Heat Pump Dryer for vegetable seeds working
on with temperature up to 60 °C not to affect the germination potential of the seeds. Single
and multiple stages configuration where compared and the air is directly dehumidified in
the evaporator, the paper assessed that the two-stages drying configuration carries to the
best performance. Sun et al. [48] investigated the quality of the final dried banana slices
by combining a rotary dehumidification unit with a CO2. They proved the capability of
maintaining a high drying rate and high drying quality, the best results where obtained for
3 mm thick banana slices and dried by CO2 closed heat pump drying system with rotary
dehumidification at 43 °C.
As a conclusion, none of the studies cited combines all the features in terms of system
layout and drying set points that this work aims to investigate.
22
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:33==
2
Methodology
2.1
Integration idea
The system for plastic dying has shown to be energy intensive and to combine heating and
cooling of the same air in a closed loop, these steps are fundamental for the process itself
but from a mere energy point of view this seems very dispersive in terms of resources.
Considered the requirement for heating and cooling together in the same process, the
idea of this project is to integrate a heat pump into the system so to use waste heat as
heat source while cooling the air itself, heat is than promoted to process heat. The heat
source is free and, by extracting heat, the cooling effect result in a useful contribution to
the process.
In this perspective, a heat pump is capable of providing together heating and cooling
resulting in a reduced energy consumption.
This project focuses on fulfilling with the a heat pump the heating and cooling requirement
of the drying phase. This choice has been made to exploit an almost steady state heating
and cooling demand resulting from a constant air flow rate. As a consequence, the design
point of the heat pump can be better optimized and minor control should be necessary.
Moreover, working very close to design conditions, higher yearly performance can be
potentially achieved.
The regeneration process, differently, due to its own discontinuous nature, has a variable
pattern along time depending on the type of plastic and on the humidity condition of the
material. The understanding and the data acquisition from the drying process is more
easy and reliable than the regeneration phase. In conclusion, the heating and cooling
demand for the regeneration process are not object of this study.
However, there can be room for further integration opportunities going more into the details
of the regeneration process. It is important to remember that the thermal energy needs
of the regeneration phase over time depend on the bed swapping interval, this parameter
not only is different from plant to plant but, for the same facility can be different from time
to time due a to different moisture content of the material delivered.
In the in existing system, every hopper has its own temperature set point which is defined
depending on the temperature requirement of every single polymer. Such a fine and
differentiated regulation is very difficult to achieve using just the heat pump. The idea of
this integrated system is so to heat the air up to a certain temperature level (80-90 °C)
and than grant the final heating stage to the correct set point to an electrical heater. This
solution would still ensure energy savings without compromising the flexibility which is for
sure a strong point of the existing system. From the cooling point of view, the air-to-water
heat exchanger that is currently installed in the trap is replaced by a coil in whose tube is
flowing the heat pump refrigerant.
The major challenge of this project is to respect the energy balance boundaries, the heat
pump is capable of transferring a certain capacity from the source to the sink, this amount
must be tuned so the energy balance is respected to avoid overheating or over cooling
causing unstable functioning. A further challenge is to verify the feasibility to have a
fulfilled balance with the addition of extra heating to the hoppers. This is carried out by
trying to find an equilibrium point with the further heat and cold streams in the process
which depends on the physics of the process itself and on the losses of the system.
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
23
==PAGE:34==
2.1.1
The choice of CO2 as a refrigerant
The refrigerant selected for this unit is Carbon Dioxide (R744) and this choice was driven
by multiple factors.
The possible adoption of a natural refrigerant was a strong requirement to respect for the
heat pump because this is what industry and the market is moving to, HFOs are compet-
itive in terms of thermodynamic performance but not for the price.
The main reason why CO2 was selected are its features in terms of safety: as a A1 re-
frigerant is is considered neither toxic nor flammable and this a crucial driver in case of
systems that are installed in industries with many different contexts. In taking this decision
the focus was not only on the case of Grundfos, but also, with a wider perspective, the
aim is picturing of building a unit having a great market potential independently from the
site of installation. Hydrocarbons are flammable and so their adoption has to be designed
together with the constrains that must be respected in the case of explosive atmosphere
[49] carrying to potential additional cost for the drying system. This scenario has strongly
been discouraged from the stakeholders of the project.
Focusing on performance, it is known that HCs can achieve high COP even if the con-
denser temperature is relatively high, or better, given the different nature of a subcritical
cycle, the condensing temperature is directly given by the compressor outlet pressure. In
the case of a gas cooler and so of a transcritical cycle, the gas cooler outlet temperature
sensibly affect the COP of the cycle.
The sink temperature glide that in our case is defined by the air outlet temperature from
the DFD unit, the trend of this temperature is an object of this specific study. From pre-
liminary calculation it emerges as if this temperature can be lowered, the performance in
terms of COP of a heat pump with CO2 as a refrigerant, are comparable to a cycle relying
on HCs.
In conclusion, due to its strong safety advantages and given the theoretical feasibility of
lowering the gas cooler outlet temperature, CO2 was the final choice.
2.2
Modelling
2.2.1
EES
The main instrument used in this project to perform analysis and obtain a model of the
system is EES (Engineering equation solver) [50]. EES is a software capable of numeri-
cally solve coupled non-linear algebraic and differential equations. The program can also
be used to perform optimization, uncertainty analyses, convert units, check unit consis-
tency, and generate accurate plots. Moreover, a powerful and well integrated tool of EES
is the thermodynamic and transport property database that is provided for hundreds of
substances. It is possible to get the substance properties by calling a function directly
from the script.
The complete version of the scripts is available in the Appendix chapter.
2.2.2
EES models
In order to study and optimize the system in object, it has been created in EES a model
which aims to predict the better as possible the behaviour of the real system.
All the models created and analyzed rely on the steady state system assumption. This
assumption is not representative of the real evolution of the system but is well suitable
with the nature of the plant object of the study.
A bottom up approach was used in the modelling phase. The starting point was to build
two separate models: one for the heat pump and one for the air circuit. The following
phase aims to combine the two models so to obtain a unique set of equations capable
of predicting the entire system behaviour. Moreover, all the improvements to the model
were performed in subsequent steps by adding small modification on every version of the
24
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:35==
code. A schematic drawing of the integration idea is visible in picture 2.1, moreover, the
reference numbers in the system are used in the whole report.
Figure 2.1: Integration layout
1 DFD inlet /EV outlet
2 DFD inlet / GC inlet
3 DH inlet main pipe/GC outlet
4 DH outlet main pipe/ EV inlet
5 compressor inlet/ evaporator outlet
6 compressor outlet /gas cooler inlet
7 gas cooler outlet /throttling valve inlet
8 throttling valve outlet/ evaporator inlet
HP side and air side alone
Concerning the HP side model, a four components system has been taken as reference.
With ”four components system” is meant a structure made of evaporator, compressor, gas
cooler and throttling device. Each component performs a thermodynamic transformation,
on each point of the cycle, mass and energy balance equations model the behaviour of
the system.
The HP side model were produced in a simple and schematic way, the heat transfer rate
in the evaporator and gas cooler was defined in advance and the fluid mass flow rate was
calculated by solving the equation given some temperature set points as inputs.
In the air side model, a simple air closed loop circuit has been represented. The model
was based on fixed temperatures in some specific points and the heating and cooling
capacities came from the available data of the air mass flow rate. Considering a volume
flow rate of 450 m3/h and some fixed values of temperature along in the crucial points of
the plant, the model manages to run and fulfill the general mass and energy balance of
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
25
==PAGE:36==
the circuit. In this occasion the processes inside the DH and the DFD where not modelled
following the physics behind their working principle but just following some temperature
values coming from engineering assumptions and some measurements in the plant, more-
over, the additive removal process has been neglected both for the energy and the mass
balance.
2.3
Design model A
Design model A is the first version of a combined air side and heat pump model which
has been produced. As reference for the thermodynamic properties, the EES database
has been used.
This model starts from the data abut the plant available from the Labotek calculation 2.2
Figure 2.2: Sizing calculation from Labotek
The model simplifies the system reducing the multiple hoppers to a single one, neglecting
losses and fixing the same temperature set point for all the hoppers T3 = 90 °C. For this
model the assumed volume flow rate of air is 450 m3/h, the mass flow rate of water is
1.8 kg/h and plastic mass flow rate of 316 kg/h.
Preliminary calculations
In the first section of the code some inital parameter has been calculated. These are the
specific heat at constant pressure of the air, the density of the air and the specific heat at
constant pressure of the water. The cp of the air and the density have been calculated for
the mixture air and water with a dew point of -40 °C and at atmospheric pressure, while
the cp of the water is calculated at 25 °C and 1 bar.
26
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:37==
Evaporator
The equation involved in the evaporator consist of the definition of the evaporation process
in the heat pump side and than the modelling of the heat exchange that impacts the air
side. The selected superheat (SH) in 5 K and as regarding the heat exchange, the outlet
temperature of the air T1 is defined equal to the refrigerant outlet temperature T5. The
evaporating pressure is the saturation pressure of the CO2 at T8 and is it calculated calling
a function from the EES data base. The superheating process is assumed isobaric 2.2
and the final temperature of the refrigerant at the outlet of the heat exchange is calculated
in equation 2.3. The heat exchange is modelled with equation 2.1. Given the amount
of fixed input temperatures that this model has, the variable ”share” has been introduced
in order to obtain a correct energy balance. This variable represents the sharing of the
available evaporator capacity that is effectively necessary to cool the air down to T1. The
temperature T1 is fixed and ˙m3 is the mass flow rate of air outgoing from the hopper.
The humidity ratio ω1 is calculated as the ratio between the mass flow rate of adsorbed
moisture and the mass flow rate of air in the loop, it does not change across the evaporator
because the dew point is too low to have moisture condensation, consequently, ω1=ω4.
Air mass is conserved as expressed in equation 2.4
(h4 −h1) · ˙m3 = (h5 −h8) · ˙mref · share
(2.1)
p5 = psat
(2.2)
T5 = T8 + SH
(2.3)
˙m4 = ˙m1
(2.4)
Compressor
For the compressor, the discharge temperature T6 is determined by the isotropic efficiency
which, for this first simulation was assumed to be 70% which is a reasonable average
value. The value of h6 is consequently calculated in equation 2.5.
h6 = (h6,is −h5)
etais
+ h5
(2.5)
Gas cooler
The cooling process in the high pressure side has been assumes as isobaric p6 = p7.
The heat exchange is governed by equation 2.6 and the pinch is controlled by assuming
T7 = T2 + 5 and fixing along all the heat exchange process a minimum pinch of 5 K.
Air mass is conserved as expressed in equation 2.7.
(h2 −h3) · ˙m3 = (h6 −h7) · ˙mref
(2.6)
˙m2 = ˙m3
(2.7)
Throttling device
Throttling process is modelled as an isenthalpic process as expressed in equation 2.8
down to evaporation pressure 2.9
h7 = h8
(2.8)
p8 = p5
(2.9)
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
27
==PAGE:38==
Desiccant Flexible Dryer
The DFD unit is a key component of the system, it dries the air so to enable the system
to remove effectively the moisture from the plastic granules.
The air drying is performed using some molecular sieves which work with the principle of
adsorption.
Adsorption is a process that can involve physical or chemical mechanisms. In the pre-
sented case study, a physical phenomena involving a hydrophilic adsorbent is involved.
In general, sorption processes are characterized by a specific heat of adsorption hads, the
adsorption process is characterized by heat emission while desorption by heat absorp-
tion.
The specific heat of water adsorption is usually a slightly bigger than the latent latent heat
of vaporization of water, in this work, hads has been assumed as 3000 kJ/kg which is in
the order of 1.2 times the latent heat of vaporization hfg.
The temperature change across the DFD unit is modeled with the term ˙qgain that is equal
to ˙qads which is calculated in equation 2.10. This creates an temperature lift as explained
in equation 2.11.
The mass flow rate of air changes across the DFD unit losing the amount of water that is
trapped in the adsorption bed 2.12.
˙qads = ˙mH2O · hads
(2.10)
T1 = T2 +
˙qads
˙m2 · cp,air
(2.11)
˙m2 = ˙m1 −˙mH2O
(2.12)
Drying Hopper
The drying hopper is the device where the moisture is removed form the plastic granules.
The process can be defined as continuous as the hoppers are filled with a certain quantity
of plastic that is removed after a predefined drying time without stopping the process.
As already mentioned, the hoppers are multiple, but in this specific case, they are grouped
in a single hopper feed with polyammyde (PA. 6.6.) This choice has been made following
some data available from Labotek calculations 2.2.
The air temperature drop from point 3 to point 4 is due what has been defined as ˙qplast.
This term includes three different contributions: sensible and latent heat taken by the
moisture and sensible heat going to heat up the plastic granule itself. This behaviour is
explained in equation 2.13
˙qplast = ˙mH20 · (∆Hsensible + hfg) + ˙mplastic · cpplastic · ∆Tplastic
(2.13)
T4 = T3 −
˙qplast
˙m3 · cp,air
(2.14)
The temperature delta of the plastic material ∆Tplastic is assumed to be 50 K and the spe-
cific heat at constant pressure of the granule has been aquired from Labotek documents
to be cp,plastic =1.67 kJ/kgK. The temperature drop is then calculated with equation 2.14
Regarding the mass balance, the air carries some moisture across the DH as explained
in equation 2.15
˙m4 = ˙m3 + ˙mH2O
(2.15)
28
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:39==
Final calculations
Some further calclation and vaiables definitions are performed in the last rows of the
model. The heat transfer rate in the gas cooler is named ˙qheat while the the evaporator it
is defined as ˙qcool.
The electrical power adsorbed in the compressor is defined in equation 2.16
power = (h6 −h7) · ˙mref
(2.16)
The coefficient of performance are defined as follow:
COP1 =
˙qheat
power
(2.17)
COP2 =
˙qcool
power · share
(2.18)
As COP1 in equation 2.17 is meant the coefficient of performance where the useful effect
is at the heat sink while in the definition of COP2 in equation 2.18 the useful effect is at
the evaporator.
In the following pages, for simplicity, whenever COP is mentioned, the reference is to what
in the code is named COP1.
Pressure optimization
All the models are run using the ”Min/Max” calculation button. This functionality allows
to maximize or minimize a variable selecting (and so varying) one or more independent
variables.
As explained in section 1.7, a CO2 HP is characterized by and optimized discharge pres-
sure that carries to maximum COP of the cycle.
The model is run maximizing COP1 selecting p6 as the independent variable.
2.4
Compressor selection
The final purpose of this project is to build the heat pump unit, test an mount it in the
existing plant in Grundfos. So, it will be also possible to validate the model presented in
the previous chapters. Even if this report does not include the result coming from the test
unit due to time incompatibility, one of the objectives of this work was the selection of the
components to build the test unit.
The compressor is the core of a heat pump system, the choice of this component has to
be carried out with attention and precision.
2.4.1
Condensing unit
The choice, made together with the stakeholders, is buying a condensing unit and substi-
tute then the heat exchanges for this specific system. This idea is motivated by the fact
that the size of the heat pump designed in this project is considered very small by the
market. So, in order for simplicity on the realization of the system and time saving this
was the design choice of the project instead of building a heap pump from scratch.
Among the options available on the market, the decision was to select a refrigeration con-
densing unit produced by SCM frigo [51] and then adapt it to heat pump purpose. The
compressor selection is carried out scouting between SCM frigo catalogs.
The first constrain to face during this task was to find a compressor and so a unit that could
face the pressure requirements. The second constrain to consider are the heating and
cooling capacity rangers of the unit. Compared to the heat pump units for industrial pur-
poses currently available in the market, the capacity involved are relatively small (around
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
29
==PAGE:40==
8kW). That was the main driver that brought to the decision of taking a refrigeration unit
and adapt it to heat pump purpose.
Some of the units taken into consideration were Cubo 2 smart and Cubo 2 aqua since
their size is compatible with the requirements of the system analyzed. However, the lat-
ters are equipped with compressors models made by Toshiba which could not handle the
optimized gas cooler pressure predicted by the simulations.
Consequently, the decision was to adopt the Cubo 2 plus condensing unit that is equipped
with either Dorin or Bitzer compressors capable to reach pressures up to 140 bar and able
to provide thermal capacity in the range of interest.
2.4.2
Options available
Investigating thought the catalog of the Cubo 2 plus unit, considering the middle temper-
ature (MT) application, three groups of compressor where available
• Dorin [52] compressor with inverter regulation
• Bitzer [53] compressor with inverter regulation
• Bitzer compressor with VARISTEP CRII regulation module
The main difference to point out is between the units with inverter regulated capacity and
the compressor equipped with mechanical VARISTEP CRII technology. The latter allows
to very wider range of operation that is a very suitable feature for the application in object.
2.4.3
VARISTEP CRII
Varistep technology belongs to a Bitzer patent and is a mechanical regulation technology.
The capacity can be adjusted to the demand over a wide range from 100% to 10%. The
CRII system for capacity control is based on the principle of cylinder switch-off. In this
process, the suction-side gas flow to the individual cylinder banks is blocked by means of
a control piston and the fast response of the cylinder produce a quasi-stepless capacity
control system
In full-load operation, the compressor delivers on all cylinders. A magnetic coli is de-
energized The bypass channel is closed, inflow and compression take place.
In part-load operation, the magnetic coil is energized. By means of a servo valve, a con-
trol piston is lifted and a bypass channel opened. This interrupts gas delivery from the
switched-off cylinder bank, since the gas is flowing from the discharge gas side to the
suction side. A return of refrigerant from the gas cooler/condenser is prevented by an in-
ternal check valve on the valve plate. The integrated control algorithm ensures minimum
heating of the compressor.
2.4.4
Selection
The selection focuses on finding the right compressor in terms of capacity and pressure
limits. The results from design model A 2.3 where used to make these evaluations.
Regarding the capacity, in the catalog 2.3 are mentioned the capacity ranges for each
unit at variable evaporating temperature and ambient temperature (with reference with
the gas cooler outlet temperature). The heating capacity was so obtained by considering
the declared value of COP and the cooling capacity with equation 2.19.
˙qGC = (COP2 + 1) ·
˙qEV
COP2
(2.19)
30
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:41==
Moreover, these data were crossed with the numbers calculated using the compressor
selection software available in the manufacturers website. The compatibility in terms of
Figure 2.3: Example of data available in SCM frigo Cubo 2 plus catalog, credits [51]
pressure was investigated analysing the compressor envelope diagram available in the
technical documentation.
2.5
Design model B
Model B follows the principles mentioned in model A, the changes lies in the inputs given
to the model related especially to the mass flow rate of plastic and its humidity content.
While in Model A the assumptions related to the amount of plastic dried and the humidity
content came from the catalogs and documents availabe from Labotek, in this version
of the model these data are updated with some insights coming directly from the plant
installed in Grundfos.
The site personnel revealed that the total amount of plastic the plant is dealing with is
usually 80 kg/h. The plastic feeding and removal system is completely automatic and re-
motely operating. The mass flow rate of plastic is a projection made by the site personnel
since it can be adjusted according to the mould injection machine needs.
The humidity content of the granules, from the information given by the plant manager,
is around 1 % in mass compared to the plastic flow rate of the dried plastic. The air flow
rate is kept at 450 m3/h.
As a consequence of how the model is defined, these parameters changes the behaviour
of the system, requiring some adjustments.
The main changes were carried out in the equation of the heat exchange: equation 2.6 is
replaced with equation 2.21, and 2.1 with 2.20
(h4 −h1) · ˙m3 = (h5 −h8) · ˙mref
(2.20)
(h2 −h3) · ˙m3 = (h6 −h7) · ˙mref · shareh
(2.21)
Moreover, the calculation of the coefficient of performance is affected by the new defini-
tion of the heat exchange equation, consequently equation 2.17 is replaced by equation
2.22 and equation 2.18 by number 2.23.
COP1 =
˙qheat
power · shareh
(2.22)
COP2 =
˙qcool
power·
(2.23)
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
31
==PAGE:42==
2.6
Design model C
The assumption made in model A and B where just a sharing of the heat exchangers
capacities are exploited, can be practically translated with either losses or multiple heat
heat exchangers configurations where in general some of the heat pump capacity is not
exploited by the system itself.
In model C, the aim is to analyze the system behaviour in the case where all the heating
and cooling capacities available are conveyed in the system. So the code has been
updated setting share = 1.
This constrain put forward the request to eliminate one of the fixed inputs inserted in the
previous versions of the model. In particular, the value of T3 is removed.
2.7
Components model
The target of the components model is to create a simulation environment the closest as
possible to a faithful representation of the functioning of the plant. The aim is to produce
some results involving the real functioning of the main components to be installed in the
system.
Three main tasks are carried out in building model the components model:
• Implementing a realistic representation of the hoppers functioning through modelling
the air stream in every single hopper tailoring the variables to each DH unit.
• Insert some equations capable to predict the real efficiencies trend of the compres-
sor.
• Calculate the ”UA” value for each exchanger so to contribute to the HEs selection
phase. With ”UA” is meant the product between the overall heat transfer coefficient
”U” and the heat transfer area ”A”.
Hopppers modelling
In order to perform task number one, some information about the hoppers has to be de-
fined. The data has been acquired directly in a technical visit in the plant. The voulme
of each hopper, the type of polymer inside and the temperature set point are exposed in
table 2.1. Moreover, different plastic load reference cases can be defined in accordance
with the info collected in the plant and are presented in table 2.2, the cases are standard
load (std), full load (full) and low load (low).
Table 2.1: Hoppers Description
Hopper
Volume (l)
Polymer Name
Temperature Setpoint (°C)
1
300
RM 2023
140
2
300
RM 3215
80
3
75
RM 2484
140
4
40
RM 5844
140
5
40
RM 2484
140
6
300
RM 2383
100
7
300
RM 3840
140
32
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:43==
Table 2.2: Hoppers specification on working load
Hopper
std (kg/h)
full (kg/h)
low
1
25
48
15
2
16
48
10
3
8
15
5
4
2.5
7
1
5
2.5
7
1
6
10
48
5
7
15
48
5
The type of polymer and so the temperature set point in each hopper are most likely the
same for a long period of time. The procedure for changing the material dried in a specific
unit require a deep cleaning of the hopper. During the analysis time of this project, no
polymer type were changed inside the hoppers.
The distribution of the air flow rate between the hoppers is performed by changing the
size of the orifice for each unit, In the components model, it has been assumed that the
flow rate of air in each hopper is just a weighted subdivision dictated by the volume of the
hopper. This assumption has been suggested by the plant manager in Grundfos
The moisture content in each DH is assigned according to the mass flow rate of plastic
elaborated in each unit. The assumption of around 1% moisture content on mass basis is
still valid and the distribution criteria consist of assuming equal moisture content in every
polymer and so subdivide the water according to the mass of plastic in the i-th DH.
Regarding the real temperature set points for each hopper, as a design choice, in or-
der to reach the temperature set point requirement for each hopper, the additional heat
is provided with electrical heaters. This step is implemented in the model with equation
2.24 where ∆Ti is the difference between main supply temperature and temeprature set
point and the total additional heat provided by th electrical heaters is calculated in with
equation 2.25.
˙qadd,i = ˙mair,i · cpair,i · ∆Ti
(2.24)
˙qadd,TOT =
∑
˙qaddi
(2.25)
The energy balance across the hopper is than completed with the contribution of qplasti.
The physical principle is the same used in equation 2.13 but the value is calculated with
the parameter referred to each hopper and not the whole amount of air and plastic to-
gether. The procedure is explained in equation 2.26
˙qplasti = ˙mH20i · (∆Hsensiblei + hfg) + ˙mplastici · cpplastici · ∆Tplastici
(2.26)
The value of cpplastici can potentially be assigned depending on the material inside the
hopper, however, considered the lack of information, it has been assumes a value of
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
33
==PAGE:44==
1.67 kJ/kgK as suggested by Labotek data sheet for polyammyde.
The heat balance on reach hopper is so composed of a outgoing heat flow rate qplasti and
an entering one qaddi. These two mainly depends on the temperature set point and the
properties of cpplastici = 1.67 kJ/kgK for each polymer. Regarding the temperature delta,
∆Tplastic is assumed to be the difference between a the temperature set point in table 2.1
and 30°C assumed as ambient temperature in a warm scenario
The hoppers are connected in parallel, so the temperature in the main duct comes from
the mixing of the air streams.
The complete energy balance comprehensive of all the streams is the sum of all the con-
tribution of qaddi and qplasti. In the code is calculated with equation 2.27.
˙qplast =
∑
˙qplasti −˙qaddi
(2.27)
The term ˙qplast refers to the total heat transfer rate that causes the air temperature change
between points 3 and the final temperature in the main air duct. The temperature change,
if not further assumptions are made, would be calculated with equation 2.28, Thp is the
final temperature neglecting the losses.
Thp = T3 −
˙qplast
˙m3 · cp,air
(2.28)
From the visit in the plant, it has been measured that the air temperature T4 just before
the additive trap is a value ranging between 70 and 75 °C.
As a consequence, the approach used in the model is fixing a the value of T4 assuming
that the temperature drop between the lossless ideal scenario and the real measurements,
comes from either temperature losses or extra cooling provided by a heat exchanger. As a
conservative assumption, in the calculation of energy performance, the temperature drop
has been assumed to be performed using a finned coil cooled with chilled water at 20°C.
Consequently, the value of ˙qextra is calculated with equation 2.29, for all the simulations
it has been assumed T4= 70 °C
T4 = T3 −˙qplast + ˙qextra
˙m3 · cp,air
(2.29)
The motivation behind the hypothesis of installing an extra heat exchanger to obtain T4
in the order range between 70 and 75 °C comes from the functioning of the heat pump.
The objective is the necessity of avoiding a entirely supercritical cycle which would carry
to technical issues and thermodynamic complication.
In the following chapters this choice will also be discussed with reference to the type of
refrigerant used. In any case, the hypothesis of an extra air to air cooler installed is totally
feasible from an engineering point of view.
A sketch of the final layout is presented in figure 2.4.
2.7.1
Compressor polynomial
The objective of task number 2 is to implement in the model some realistic value of isen-
tropic and volumetric efficiencies for the compressor. Many compressor manufacturers
provides some polynomial correlations which, given a value of the superheat (SH) are
capable of calculating some figures concerning the compressor behaviour from both a
thermodynamics and energy point of view. These polynomials have as independent vari-
ables the compressor discharge pressure (in this case study is named after p6) expressed
34
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:45==
Figure 2.4: Final layout representation
in bar and the evaporating temperature (T8) expressed in °C.
The procedure used to achieve a correlation between the compressor load and the ef-
ficiencies ηis and ηvol consist of calculating this value for many working condition char-
acterized by different pressure ratio and than obtain a correlation that expresses these
efficiencies as a function of the pressure ratio. This methodology relies on the fact that
isentropic and volumetric efficiencies are mainly affected by the compressor ratio and just
in minor part by other parameters.
This procedure has been performed in excel and rely on the thermophysiscal properties
database Refprop [23]. The equation used for the the calculation of property ”y” is 2.30.
y = c1+c2·T8+c3·p6+c4·T 2
8 +c5·T8·p6+c6·p2
6+c7·T 3
8 +c8·p6·T 2
8 +c9·T8·p2
6+c10·p3
6 (2.30)
The coefficient for each of the values to be calculated are reported in table 2.3. ˙m is the
mass flow rate of refrigerant, P is the eclectic power absorbed at the compressor and I
the current. The values refer to a 5 K superheat.
In this specific case the value of interest are P and ˙m, these two, together with the prop-
erties calculated using Refprop, have been used to calculate the compressor efficiencies
depending on the pressure ratio. The efficencies are calculated with equations 2.31 and
2.32.
ηis = (h6,is −h5)
h6 −h5
(2.31)
ηvol = ( ˙mref · v5)
disp
(2.32)
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
35
==PAGE:46==
c1
c2
c3
c4
c5
P [W]
-3.77E+03
-1.55E+02
1.59E+02
-1.34E+00
1.87E+00
˙m [kg/h]
4.31E+02
1.36E+01
-1.80E+00
2.21E-01
-2.07E-02
I [A]
1.95E+00
-1.02E-01
1.05E-01
-3.61E-04
4.08E-04
c6
c7
c8
c9
c10
P [W]
-8.74E-01
-5.39E-03
-4.02E-03
-1.65E-03
2.16E-03
˙m [kg/h]
2.93E-03
2.92E-03
-2.08E-04
-1.21E-05
2.16E-06
I [A]
-2.48E-04
-4.87E-06
-1.87E-05
8.14E-06
3.30E-07
Table 2.3: Polynomial coefficients for Bitzer 4PTE-7K compressor
In equation 2.32, v5 is the specific volume of the refrigerant at the compressor suction and
”disp” is the displacement which has been gathered from the compressor catalog to be
4.3 m3/h.
The contribution of the volumetric efficiency in the performance of the compressor is taken
into account in this model considering the difference between the theoretical mass flow
and the real one elaborated by the compressor, the equation representing this is number
2.33
˙mref = ˙mref,th · ηvol
(2.33)
Heat exchange
Task number three consist of going deeper into the details of the heat exchange. The
model aims to calculate the UA value of the evaporator and the gas cooler. The UA value
is the product of the overall heat transfer coefficient U and the heat transfer area A.
This methodology relies on equation 2.34.
˙q = UA · ∆Tml
(2.34)
The mean logarithmic temperature difference ∆Tml,EV is defined, in case of an air to
refrigerant evaporator, and assuming counter current flow, with equations 2.35 2.36 and
2.37.
∆1EV = T1 −T8
(2.35)
∆2EV = T4 −T5
(2.36)
∆Tml,EV = ∆1EV −∆2EV
ln
(
∆1EV
∆2EV
)
(2.37)
While for the gas cooler the value of ∆Tml,GC is calculated following equations 2.38 2.39
and 2.40.
∆1GC = T6 −T3
(2.38)
∆2GC = T7 −T2
(2.39)
∆Tml,GC = ∆1GC −∆2GC
ln
(
∆1GC
∆2GC
)
(2.40)
Subsequently the UA values for gas cooler and evaporator are obtained with equations
2.42 2.41.
(h5 −h8) · ˙mref = UAEV · ∆Tml,EV
(2.41)
36
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:47==
(h6 −h7) · ˙mref = UAGC · ∆Tml,GC
(2.42)
The overall heat transfer coefficients have been assumed to be 0.020 kW/m2K for the
gas cooler and 0.030 kW/m2K for the evaporator [54].
2.8
Data collection and measurements
During the project work, new and more precise data were progressively acquired. These
data comes from the connection and discussion with the personnel of Grundofs and
Labotek or from their direct acquisition through measurement sessions directly on the
plant
2.8.1
Humidity measurements
During the time spent on the project, it was possible to visit the existing plant in Grundfos
and perform some measurements.
The main focus of the measurement session was on the humidity content in the return
pipe, this measurement is crucial to better understand the dehumdification and moisture
removal process.
As visible in picture 2.5 three pipes are connected to the DFD unit, the return pipe that
goes into the trap, the pipe that connects the DFD unit with the DFD itself and the supply
pipe. The pipe visible in the front is installed to suck the exhaust air from regeneration
and convey it towards th outside of the building.
2.8.2
Return pipe humidity measurements
The first measurement session aimed to verify the humidity content in the return air. The
measurement system was composed by a flexible hose inserted in a hole already present
in the duct, connected to the humidity sensor. The circuit was composed by a filter in
charge of not contaminating the sensor with the additives contained in the air.
The return pipe is at a pressure lower that atmospheric pressure because of its position
at the end of the circuit. This fact carried to the need of suck the air from the return duct
using, in this specific measurement setup, an ejector 2.6.
The humidity sensor used is the Vaisala HMT330 transmitter equipped with the mea-
surement probe.The transmitter was then connected to the chassis NI-9203 equipped
with the acquisition module NI-CDAQ-9171. The reading system was than connected to
a laptop via a usb cable. The laptop was capable of reading the data with the software
NI-FlexLogger. An image of the setup is visible in picture 2.7.
The analog reading logged is a current value I between 4 mA and 20 mA. The sensor is
capable to read temperature and relative humidity. The reading range are from 0 to 100%
relative humidity (RH) and from -20 to 100 °C.
The conversion from current to value was so carried out considering a linear proportion-
ality between current value and measured quantity. RH value is calculated with equation
2.43 while temperature value is obtained with equation 2.44.
%RH = (IRH −4) · 6.25
(2.43)
%RH = (IT −4) · 7.5
(2.44)
Every acquisition has been correlated with the exact plastic flow rate in each hopper as a
figure of the working load of the system.
For the acquisition in object, the working load of the hoppers i presented in table 2.4.
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 2.5: DFD unit, top part
Table 2.4: Hoppers load for relative humidity measurements of the return pipe
Hopper
Status
Polymer
Name
Temperature
Setpoint (°C)
Plastic Flow
(kg/h)
1
ON
RM 2023
140
12
2
ON
RM 3215
80
23
3
ON
RM 2484
140
5.5
4
ON
RM 5844
140
4
5
OFF
RM 2484
140
0
6
ON
RM 2383
100
7
7
ON
RM 3840
140
4
2.8.3
Dew point port measurements
It has been possible to perform the same measurement from the dew point reading port
available in every DFD unit produced by Labotek 2.8. The aim is to check the status of
the dry air during the operations and possible variation along time.
38
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:49==
Figure 2.6: Measurement setup
Figure 2.8: Dew point port
The ejector was no longer necessary in the equipment because, being the port the at the
beginning of the circuit, the air is not affected by pressure drops and so the pressure is
slightly bigger than atmospheric pressure.
2.9
Performance evaluations
In order to evaluate and compare the performance of the system several parameters are
used. The evaluation takes into account both figures related to the heat pump itself, the
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
39
==PAGE:50==
Figure 2.7: Transmitter, acquisition shield and laptop
performance of the dryer and also economical related index.
2.9.1
Electric energy consumption
Standing to the data provided by Grundfos, the energy consumption is subdivided be-
tween DHs and DFD unit.
Grundfos has in its facilities a energy consumption monitoring system that is capable of
tracking the energy usage of the various appliances in the plant.
The data for the system object of this study are reported in picture 2.9. Picture 2.9a repre-
sents the energy consumption of the DFD unit in a time range of four weeks, while, picture
2.9b the energy consumption of the hopper 1 to 6, so excluding number 7. This is due to
the latest modifications to the plant that did not allow to connect Hopper number seven to
the the same control panel. Excluding the outliers of week 23 where some intervention
were carried out on the plant, it is possible to estimate a average daily energy consump-
tion for the DFD unit of 165 kWh, regarding the DH from 1 to 6 this number is around
190 kWh per day. In order to consider hopper number 7 ( a 300 liters volume hopper) en-
ergy consumption, this value can be realistically increased by 20%. As a consequence,
the daily hoppers energy consumption is assumed to be 230 kWh.
The average power consumption can so be calculated as 7.9 kW for the DFD unit and
9.5 kW for the hoppers.
As regards the chiller average heat emission, it has been assumed to be 5 kW as reported
in Labotek catalog. The COP of the chiller plant in the facility is assumed to be 18.125,
this value is calculated as 50% of the Carnot efficiency of a vapour compression cycle
working between 290 and 298 K.
Measured temperatures in the return duct are in the range between 70 and 75 °C, outlet
temperature from the trap is a value around 35 °C and the supply air undergoes a tem-
perature increase of circa 5 K passing through the bed for dehumidification.
The value of the energy consumption for the DFD unit is composed by the energy ad-
sorbed by the blower and the electrical heaters. This energy consumption remain un-
touched after the installation of the heat pump with the proposed configuration.
The consumption of the DHs is partially reduced and the heat emission is covered with
the evaporator except for the heat to remove from the bed after regeneration.
40
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:51==
The benchmark for electrical consumption is calculated with equation 2.45.
˙WTOT = ˙WDFD + ˙WDH + ˙Wcooling
(2.45)
Where ˙WDFD is the electric consumption of the DFD unit which is 7.9kW, ˙WDH is the
averge electric power consumption of the DHs that is 9.5 kW and ˙Wcooling is the average
power consumption of the chiller. The COPchiller is 18.125 and the electrical consumption
is the ratio
˙Wcooling
COPchiller . The efficiency of the heaters is assumed to be 100%
For the case of the new system the energy consumption is calculated with equation 2.46.
˙WTOT,new = ˙WDFD + ˙qadd,TOT + power + ˙Wcooling,new
(2.46)
where ˙qadd,TOT is the sum of every single contribution qadd,i and power the compressor
electric power adsorption.
˙Wcooling,new is the value of ˙Wcooling minus the heat extraction
at the trap that is calculated with equation 2.47 with ∆T 35K plus ˙qextra both divided by
the COP of the chiller.
˙q = ˙m2 · cpair · ∆T
(2.47)
The specific heat at constant pressure of air is 1.006 kJ/kgK and the mass flow rate of air
is 0.1233 kg/s which corresponds to 380 m3/h
(a) DFD unit energy consumption
(b) DHs 1 to 6 energy consumption
Figure 2.9: Energy consumption for DFD unit and DHs, every column represents one day
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
41
==PAGE:52==
The percentage of energy savings are calculated as 2.48.
(1 −
˙WTOT,new
˙WTOT
) · 100
(2.48)
Heat pump and COP
The performance of heat pump are assessed with the coefficient of prformance (COP).
The meaning of COP has already been explained in section 1.5. During all the discussion
it will be mentioned the COP that considers as useful effect the heat extracted at the gas
cooler COPHP . However, in this solution the cooling effect at the evaporator is a useful
effect too working as air cooling system COPref. Being referred to the exact same vapour
compression system in the same conditions, this two COPs are linked from the relation
2.49.
COPHP = COPref + 1
(2.49)
The fact that both the heating and cooling effect are useful must be taken into account
how the performance of the HPD are evaluated because focusing only on the cooling o
heating useful effect provides a limited view on both the concept and the benefits.
SMER
The specific moisture extraction rate is a parameter peculiar of the dryer units and, it has
been briefly introduced in section 1.9. It is defined as the mass of moisture extracted
using 1 kWh of energy. Although the SMER is used extensively for many type of dryers,
comparing this value between technologies intrinsically different each other is wrong. In
considering the SMER of a dryer or a HPD it is fundamental to frame the type of context
and the functioning of the system whose the value is referred to.
The benchmark SMER is defined by equation 2.50
SMER =
˙m2 · (ω1 −ω1)
˙WDFD + ˙WDH + ˙Wcooling
(2.50)
In the case of the new system the SMER is calculated with equation 2.51.
SMERnew =
˙m2 · (ω1 −ω1)
˙WDFD + ˙qadd,TOT + power + ˙Wcooling,new
(2.51)
The percentage improvement of the SMER with respect to the benchmark is calculated
with equation 2.52.
(SMERnew
SMER
−1) · 100
(2.52)
Operating hours and energy price
From information gathered from Grundfos technicians, the plant operates for 5000 h per
year and the energy price Grunfos communicated to pay is 1.57 DKK/kWh which are,
according to the current change (July 2024) 0.21 €/kWh.
Payback time is calculated with equation 2.53.
PB =
investment cost
yearly energy savings
(2.53)
The HP cost is estimated to be 150000 DKK.
42
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:53==
3
Results
3.1
Results design model A
In figure 3.1 is presented the base starting case for this analysis. The P-h diagram 3.1a
represents the heat pump cycle trasncritical cycle. The Mollier diagram explains how
dehumidification is performed: the air enters gas cooler at point 2 and is heated to a tem-
perature of 90 °C at constant absolute humidity. The hot air enters the drying chamber and
undergoes an adiabatic transformation, trapping moisture from the drying product (from
point 3 to 4). Air is then cooled down to point 1 in the evaporator. After dehumidification,
the air is dried and reaches point 2.
Figure 3.1c represent the heat exchange processes, black line is the refrigerant, red line
is the air in the gas cooler while blue line is the air in the evaporator.
Model A is then exploited to perform a sensitivity analysis on T1 . The different cycle
taken into consideration are shown in figure 3.2. In table 3.1 are presented some main
figures coming from multiple simulations. The same data are then plotted in figure 3.1.
Gas cooler capacity is fully exploited.
Figure 3.2: Cycle in the p-h diagram for scenario A to G
Table 3.2: Temperature in [°C] for the various simulation scenarios for design model A
Scenario
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
A
−5
5.214 90
31.23
−5
126.8
10.21 −10
B
0
10.21
90
31.23
0
122
15.21
−5
C
5
15.21
90
31.23
5
117.6
20.21
0
D
10
20.21
90
31.23
10
113.5
25.21
5
E
15
25.21
90
31.23
15
109.8
30.21
10
F
20
30.21
90
31.23
20
106.4
35.21
15
G
25
35.21
90
31.23
25
103.3
40.21
20
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
43
==PAGE:54==
Table 3.1: Performance data of the system under various conditions. Air flow rate 450
m3/h, plastic flow 316 kg/h, water flow 1.8 kg/h for design model A
Scenario
T1 [◦C]
COP
P5 [bar]
P6 [bar]
RH
Share
T6 [◦C]
GC [kW]
A
−5
3.408
26.49
110.3
dew
0.6074
126.7
12.46
B
0
3.503
30.46
114.7
0.8956
0.5501
122
11.73
C
5
3.592
34.85
119.4
0.6274
0.4881
117.6
10.99
D
10
3.671
39.69
124.4
0.4458
0.4199
113.5
10.26
E
15
3.731
45.02
129.8
0.321
0.3437
109.8
9.527
F
20
3.763
50.87
135.8
0.234
0.2569
106.4
8.793
G
25
3.751
57.29
142.5
0.1727
0.1557
103.3
8.059
The trend of COP presented in figure 3.3 has a maximum in scenario F where T1 is 20°C,
the value ranges from 3.408 to 3.763 and the trend is not monotonically increasing. The
COP is affected mainly by two parameters: the pressure ratio which increases lowering
T1 impacting on the required power at the compressor and the gas cooler refrigerant out-
let temperature T7 which decreases proportionally to T1 . Adsorption process in the DFD
provides always the same ∆T if the quantity of water adsorbed is the same, so a lower
T1 means always a lower T2 (gas cooler air outlet temperature).
Optimized pressure is growing with T1 and the more the air temperature at the inlet of
DFD unit is high, the more the optimized pressure is big. Apart from scenario A, the dew
point is never reached so in the evaporator just the sensible load has to be covered.
The variable share grows as T1 decreases, the available capacity is ranging from 6 to
9 kW in the various scenarios but the actual capacity necessary useful to the system is
always less than the total available capacity.
Share variable ranges from 0.601 to 0.156 representing that a big slice of the cold that
the evaporator can provide is not useful to the process in these operating condition.
Figure 3.3: COP as a function of T1 in green, available evaporator capacity in blue, re-
quired evaporator capacity in orange. Data from design model A
44
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:55==
(a) P-h diagram
(b) Psychrometric Mollier diagram
(c) Heat transfer diagram
Figure 3.1: Case T1 =20°C
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
45
==PAGE:56==
3.2
Compressor selection
Selection procedure
The first step in the compressor selection was to compare the capacities declared on the
catalog with the requirements of the heat obtained with the simulations from design model
A (section 2.3), the different scenarios are presented in table 3.3.
From this table, it is visible that the highest COP are obtained for the highest values of T1
so the analysis will mainly focus on those temperature ranges.
Scenario
COP
P5
P6_opt
RH
share
T6
T1
power_c
˙qheat
[bar]
[bar]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[kW]
[kW]
A
3.408
26.49
110.3
dew
0.6074
126.7
-5
3.657
12.46
B
3.503
30.46
114.7
0.8956
0.5501
122
0
3.348
11.73
C
3.592
34.85
119.4
0.6274
0.4881
117.6
5
3.06
10.99
D
3.671
39.69
124.4
0.4458
0.4199
113.5
10
2.795
10.26
E
3.731
45.02
129.8
0.321
0.3437
109.8
15
2.553
9.527
F
3.763
50.87
135.8
0.234
0.2569
106.4
20
2.337
8.793
G
3.751
57.29
142.5
0.1727
0.1557
103.3
25
2.148
8.059
Table 3.3: Performance data from design model A
Comparing the Gas Cooler capacity range in tables 3.4 and 3.5 with the column of ˙qheat
in table 3.3, it is possible to notice that the smaller compressor seems to be the most
suitable solution. This scenario is repeated equal for all the three series of compressors
available. The selection will therefore continue just investigating between three models:
Dorin CD 360 H, Bitzer 2MTE-5K and Bitzer 4PTE-7K.
Dorin CD 360 H
T1=10°C
Tamb [°C]
EVmin [kW]
EVmax [kW]
COP2
GCmin [kW]
GCmax [kW]
40
5.15
7.73
1.91
7.84
11.772
38
5.51
8.27
2.1
8.13
12.20
32
6.33
9.49
2.85
8.55
12.81
20
8.5
12.74
5.31
10.10
15.13
Table 3.4: Example of data conversion from the catalog for Dorin CD 360 H
Dorin 4 75-4.7H
T1=10°C
Tamb [°C]
EVmin [kW]
EVmax [kW]
COP2
GCmin [kW]
GCmax [kW]
40
10.39
12.59
2.02
15.53
18.82
38
10.94
16.4
2.23
15.84
23.75
32
12.31
18.47
3.04
16.35
24.54
20
15.82
23.74
5.3
18.80
28.21
Table 3.5: Example of data conversion from the catalog for Dorin 4 75-4.7H
The ambient temperature row selected form the catalog was 40°C, it is the most demean-
ing requirement for the units and, moreover, this solution is potentially, in terms of gas
cooler outlet temperature T7, close to the gas cooler outlet temperature that would be
reached according to the model. When T7 is 10 °C the model predicts T7 equal to 27 °C.
46
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:57==
However, T7 is changing in the model so taking a conservative assumption is the decision
taken from the designer.
Once the first skimming has been done, the following steps of the sizing are conducted
following the data available on the selection software. The calculation for the three com-
pressors available are presented in tables 3.6 3.7 3.8 and in figure 3.4.
Bitzer 2MTE-5K
T1 [°C]
GCmin [kW]
GCmax [kW]
˙qheat [kW]
-5
7.87
13.79
12.46
0
8.83
15.45
11.73
5
9.8
17.17
10.99
10
10.78
18.87
10.26
15
11.71
20.5
9.527
20
12.55
22
8.793
Table 3.6: Operating range Bitzer 2MTE-5K
Bitzer 4-PTE-7K
T1 [°C]
GCmin [kW]
GCmax [kW]
˙qheat [kW]
0
1.88
18.8
11.73
5
2.1
21
10.99
10
2.32
23.2
10.26
15
2.54
25.4
9.527
20
2.74
27.4
8.793
Table 3.7: Operating range Bitzer 4-PTE-7K
Dorin CD360H
T1 [°C]
GCmin [kW]
GCmax [kW]
˙qheat [kW]
-5
6.59
9.89
12.46
0
7.45
11.17
11.73
5
8.3
12.45
10.99
10
9.11
13.67
10.26
15
9.84
14.76
9.53
Table 3.8: Operating range Dorin CD360H
What has to be noticed from the plots in figure 3.4 is that the more the evaporating tem-
perature increase, the less is the heating capacity required by our system but the more the
capacity available from the compressor. This trend creates some difficulties in selecting
a unit that fulfills the requirements.
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
47
==PAGE:58==
(a) Bitzer 2MTE-5K
(b) Bitzer 4-PTE-7K
(c) Dorin CD360H
Figure 3.4: Operating range compatibility. Red line compressor upper boundary, blue line
compressor lower boundary, green line GC capacity requirement
48
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:59==
The second step for the compressor selection was to check the compressor envelope dia-
grams for the possibly selected units. This task is important so to ensure that the working
point of the system is within the pressure limit of the compressors. The diagrams with the
various operating point analysed in table 3.3 are presented in figure 3.5.
The maximum gas cooler pressure is 140 bar in the case of Bitzer compressor while it
135 bar for the Dorin model.
At the evaporator side, the limits are a maximum allowed evaporating temperature of 20
°C for the Dorin unit while a 57 bar maximum pressure for the Bitzer compressors.
(a) Envelope for Dorin compressor
(b) Envelope for Bitzer compressors
Figure 3.5: Pressure compatibility with reference to table 3.3 scenarios. Green points are
inside the envelope for every compressor, yellow operating points are not always suitable,
red point crosses the limit for all the compressors. Dotted line in picture 3.5b is a boundary
for Bitzer 4-PTE-7K but not for Bitzer 2MTE-5K
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
49
==PAGE:60==
As a result of this analysis Bitzer 4-PTE-7K has been selected as the most suitable for the
application of this study. Thanks to its mechanical regulation mechanism, it ensure wide
range of operation and better fits the capacity required for this project.
Regarding the pressure, considering the COP trend too, probably scenarios E and F are
the best design operating points. Further analysis on the design point will be carried out
in the next paragraphs.
The code number of the unit SCM Frigo unit selected for the project is UMT 075 VS MTDX
equipped with Bitzer 4-PTE-7K compressor.
50
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:61==
3.3
Results design model B
Design model B has been used to perform a sensitivity analysis on T1 in a different condi-
tion of plastic load suggested as more common scenario by Grundfos. The temperature
T3 is set to be 90 °C in all the scenarios and the results are presented in tables 3.9 and
3.10.
Table 3.9: Performance data of the system under various conditions for design model B.
Air flow rate 450 m3/h, plastic flow 80 kg/h, water flow 0.8 kg/h
Scenario
T1 [◦C]
COP
P5 [bar]
P6_opt [bar]
RH
Share
T6 [◦C]
EV [kW]
A
5
3.796
34.85
118.1
0.270
0.86
116.4
10.080
B
10
3.900
39.69
123.1
0.190
0.88
112.5
9.342
C
15
3.991
45.02
128.5
0.140
0.90
108.8
8.607
D
20
4.058
50.87
134.6
0.100
0.92
105.5
7.871
E
25
4.085
57.29
141.4
0.077
0.94
102.6
7.136
F
30
4.049
64.34
149.5
0.057
0.96
99.98
6.400
G
35
3.917
72.14
159.7
0.043
0.97
97.89
5.664
Table 3.10: Temperature in [°C] for the various simulation scenarios for design model B
Scenario
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
A
5
9.54
90
73.43
5
116.4
14.54
0
B
10
14.54
90
73.43
10
112.5
19.54
5
C
15
19.54
90
73.43
15
108.8
24.54
10
D
20
24.54
90
73.43
20
105.5
29.54
15
E
25
29.54
90
73.43
25
102.6
34.54
20
F
30
34.54
90
73.43
30
99.98 39.54
25
G
35
39.54
90
73.43
35
97.89 44.54
30
In this operating condition dominant thermal load is the evaporator, due to the lower mass
flow of plastic, the air temperature T4 results in a a value bigger than design model A. This
means that the cooling load is more demanding ranging from 10 to 5.6 kW as visible in
table 3.9. Gas cooler capacity available is between 13.7 and 7.6 kW while the requirement
is between 11.8 and 7.4 kW as visible in figure 3.6.
In this condition, just a sharing of the Gas cooler capacity is necessary and this ranges
from 0.86 to 0.97. The bigger is T1 the bigger is the gas cooler capacity available and the
slice required by the system.
As regards COP, it has a maximum in scenario E where T1 is 25 °C so this maximum is
moved compared to the case of model A but the trend is still not monotonically growing.
The COP values varies from 3.769 to 4.085.
Optimized pressure values ranges grows with T1 and exedes 140 bar for values of T1
bigger than 20°C.
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
51
==PAGE:62==
Figure 3.6: COP as a function of T1 in yellow, available gas cooler capacity in purple,
required gas cooler capacity in green. Evaporator capacity is fully exploited
52
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:63==
3.4
Results design model C
Model C shows the system behaviour in the case where the heat exchangers capacity is
no longer de-coupled. The variable ”share” is set as equal to one. Sensitivity analysis for
multiple cases of T1 is shown in tables 3.11 and 3.12.
Table 3.11: Performance data of the system for design model C under various conditions.
Air flow rate 450 m3/h, plastic flow 80 kg/h, water flow 0.8 kg/h share=1.
Scenario
COP
p6 [bar]
pinch [K]
p5 [bar]
˙qcool [kW]
˙qheat [kW]
share
pr
A
4.504
115.7
5.011
48.47
6.154
7.910
1
2.39
B
4.491
117.9
5.013
49.79
6.131
7.887
1
2.37
C
4.476
120.1
5.005
51.15
6.106
7.862
1
2.35
D
4.458
122.4
5.003
52.53
6.076
7.833
1
2.33
E
4.439
124.7
5.008
53.94
6.042
7.799
1
2.31
F
4.417
127.0
5.002
55.38
6.004
7.762
1
2.29
G
4.392
129.4
5.009
56.85
5.962
7.719
1
2.29
H
4.365
131.9
5.008
58.35
5.915
7.673
1
2.26
I
4.335
134.4
5.000
59.88
5.863
7.621
1
2.24
J
4.302
137.1
5.009
61.44
5.805
7.564
1
2.23
Table 3.12: Temperature data for various T1 for design model C
Scenario
T1 [◦C]
T2 [◦C]
T3 [◦C]
T4 [◦C]
T5 [◦C]
T6 [◦C]
T7 [◦C]
T8 [◦C]
A
18
22.54
76.36
59.79
18
94.2
27.54
13
B
19.11
23.65
77.32
60.74
19.11
94.33
28.65
14.11
C
20.22
24.76
78.25
61.68
20.22
94.46
29.76
15.22
D
21.33
25.87
79.16
62.59
21.33
94.58
30.87
16.33
E
22.44
26.98
80.04
63.47
22.44
94.71
31.98
17.44
F
23.56
28.09
80.89
64.32
23.56
94.82
33.09
18.56
G
24.67
29.21
81.71
65.14
24.67
94.94
34.21
19.67
H
25.78
30.32
82.50
65.93
25.78
95.05
35.32
20.78
I
26.89
31.43
83.26
66.69
26.89
95.14
36.43
21.89
J
28
32.54
83.98
67.40
28
95.24
37.54
23
As represented in table figure 3.8 the trend of COP is monotonically decreasing with T1 .
In this scenario T3 is free to change and it is possible to notice in figure 3.7 that the value
of T3 decreases following the trend of T1 .
The pressure ratio is almost constant in the different scenarios showing to be of correlated
with the temperature differential in figure 3.7.
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
53
==PAGE:64==
Figure 3.7: COP line in blue, evaporator capacity in green and gas cooler capacity in
orange as a function of different T1
Figure 3.8: COP as a function of T1 in green, available evaporator capacity in blue, re-
quired evaporator capacity in orange
The value of COP ranges from 4.504 to 4.302 showing an increase compared o the pre-
vious model cases. However, these number of COP are not directly comparable to the
previous results since they produces values of T3 that are in any scenario smaller than
the set point of previous models which was set at 90 °C.
The highest value of T3 obtained is 83.98 °C and it is obtained in scenario J. This shows
the some difficulties in obtaining high air temperatures when the system has no degree
of freedom for the heat exchanges capacities. This phenomenon is strictly correlated to
the nature of the air closed loop system.
Evaporator and gas cooler capacities values along the different scenarios have a stable
behaviour.
In table 3.13 is explained how the system behaves at different load of plastic in the hop-
54
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:65==
Table 3.13: Sensitivity analysis for different mass of plastic in the hoppers for T1 =20°C
for design model C
Scenario
COP
˙mref [kg/s]
T2 [°C]
T3 [°C]
T4 [°C]
˙mH2O [kg/s]
˙mplast [kg/h]
P6 [bar]
A1
4.806
0.033 57
23.78
71.68
57.87
0.000 185 2
66.67
112.2
B1
4.407
0.037 63
24.73
79.59
62.32
0.000 231 5
83.33
121.5
C1
4.098
0.041 19
25.67
86.85
66.13
0.000 277 8
100
130.7
D1
3.848
0.044 36
26.62
93.60
69.44
0.000 324 1
116.7
139.8
E1
3.640
0.047 22
27.57
99.95
72.33
0.000 370 4
133.3
148.9
F1
3.463
0.049 82
28.51
106.00
74.88
0.000 416 7
150
158.1
G1
3.309
0.052 20
29.46
111.70
77.13
0.000 463 0
166.7
167.3
pers. What is visible is that the more the plastic content grows, the more the COP de-
creases, the minimum level obtained is 3.309. Moreover, the trend of T3 is also increasing
since the air outlet temperature of the gas cooler grows up to 111.7 °C in scenario G1.
The optimized pressure grows with T3 and crosses the value of 140 bar in scenario E1.
This behaviour can be explained with the data reported in table 3.14. The different amounts
of plastic (and so water) affect the temperature delta across the DFD and the DH result-
ing in condition where the system has to re balance in order to fulfill the energy balance
respecting the 5K minimum pinch for the gas cooler.
The bigger plastic content reflects on poorer energy performance in terms of COP and
the highest is the plastic load the greatest are the capacities exchanged in the gas cooler
and in the evaporator.
Table 3.14: Temperature delta across the DH and the DFD, with EV and GC values for
sensitivity analysis for different mass of plastic in the hoppers for T1 =20°C for design
model C
Scenario
∆DH [°C]
∆DFD [°C]
˙qcool [kW]
˙qheat [kW]
A1
13.81
3.78
5.573
7.038
B1
17.27
4.73
6.234
8.064
C1
20.72
5.67
6.111
7.868
D1
24.16
6.62
7.292
9.852
E1
27.62
7.57
7.724
10.65
F1
31.12
8.51
8.105
11.4
G1
34.57
9.46
8.444
12.1
In table 3.15 and 3.16 and are presented the result for different mass flow of air ranging
from 350 to 500 m3/h fixing the mass flow of plastic at 80 kg/h and T1 at 20 °C.
It can be noticed that the highest COP comes from the biggest air flow but this scenario is
also affected by the lowest value of T3 and the lowest pressure p6 resulting in a smaller
pressure ratio for the compressor
The cases where the air flow is bigger are also characterized by a biggest capacity in
exchanged in heat exchanges which does not reflect on biggest values of T3 due to the
larger amount of air circulating in the system.
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
55
==PAGE:66==
Table 3.15: Sensitivity analysis for different flows of air in for design model C, T1 20°C
Scenario
COP
Air flow [m3 h−1]
T1 [°C]
T2 [°C]
T3 [°C]
A2
4.052
350
20
25.84
88.04
B2
4.129
366.7
20
25.57
86.09
C2
4.203
383.3
20
25.33
84.27
D2
4.275
400
20
25.11
82.56
E2
4.345
416.7
20
24.9
80.97
Table 3.16: Data Table - Part 2
Scenario
T4 [°C]
T6 [°C]
Plastic [kg h−1]
p6 [bar]
˙qcool [kW]
˙qheat [kW]
A2
66.74
103.9
80
132.3
5.358
7.114
B2
65.75
102.0
80
129.7
5.494
7.25
C2
64.81
100.3
80
127.3
5.625
7.381
D2
63.92
98.69
80
125.2
5.751
7.508
E2
63.07
97.19
80
123.2
5.874
7.631
56
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:67==
3.5
Results components model
3.5.1
Compressor efficiencies curves
The first step of model D is the introduction of some equation capable to calculate the real
value of isentropic and volumetric efficiency for the compressor selected.
The results are two polynomial correlations that give the value of efficiencies as a function
of the pressure ratio. The trends of ηis and ηvol are presented in figure 3.9 and 3.10.
Figure 3.9: isentropic efficiency as a function of the pressure ratio for Bitzer 4PTE-7K
Figure 3.10: volumetric efficiency as a function of the pressure ratio for Bitzer 4PTE-7K
The resulting polynomial are presented in equation 3.1 and 3.2.
y = −0.0266 · pr4 + 0.293 · pr3 −1.2883 · pr2 + 2.1612 · pr −0.7381
(3.1)
y = 0.0112 · pr2 −0.11633 · pr + 1.0891
(3.2)
3.5.2
Simulations
The sensitivity analysis for different values of T1 is shown in tables 3.17 and 3.18. The
results shows that the COP is smaller for smaller values of T1. The range of COP is be-
tween 3.636 and 3.873 as presented in figure 3.11 and optimized pressure values are
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
57
==PAGE:68==
between 136.6 bar and 145 bar, the biggest pressure are associated to the bigger values
of T1. T3 follows the opposite trend of T1, the biggest value, 95.18 °C is obtained for the
smallest trial value of T1. This behaviour is opposite to what happens in model C but it is
justified by the different layout of the system.
Gas cooler capacity ranges between 7.048 kW between 8.926kW, evaporator capacity
ranges from 5.228 and 6.471kW, the total additional heat from the heaters is between
3.725 and 3.229kW and extra cooling provided by the fan is a value comprised 1.878 and
2.019kW. In all the cases the biggest heat transfer rate are required for the highest value
of T1.
Figure 3.11: COP as a function of T1 air flow 380 m3/h and plastic load of std case in
components model
In this scenario the heat pump can cover from 68.6 to 66.4 % of the total cooling capacity
required and from 73.4 to and 75.4% of the heating capacity. It has to be specified that
the value of ˙qextra is not necessarily provided by a additional unit but can be also repre-
sentative of the losses. Moreover, in case of a extra cooling heat exchanger it could be
an air to air heat exchanger or also preheat some heat stream present in the facility.
The calculated UA values for the heat exchanger are stable along the simulations and
for the evaporator ranges from 0.322 to 0.301 kW/K while for the gas cooler they are
between 0.870 to 0.897 kW/K. For the evaporator case the biggest values are for lower
values of T1 and for the gas cooler the behaviour is the same.
Isentropic and volumetric efficiencies has better values for higher T1 and this is also re-
flected in the COP of the heat pump.
The refrigerant mass flow rate flowing in the heat pump circuit has a value that is really
stable across all the configurations simulated. It is in all the cases very close to 0.037
kg/s. In the case with T1 =23 °C, the mass flow of refrigerant at compressor full speed
predicted by the polynomial is 0.1414 kg/s so the load would be 26%, the the case of
T1=18 °C the compressor full speed flow would be 0.1197kg/s and so the resulting load
is 31%.
58
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:69==
Table 3.17: Sensitivity analysis for components model changing the values of T1 air flow
380 m3/h and plastic load of std case - Part 1
Sc
COP
p6 [bar]
T1 [°C]
T3 [°C]
ηis
ηvol
UAEV [kW/K]
UAGC [kW/K]
˙mref [kg/s]
A
3.636
136.6
18.0
95.18
0.636
0.718
0.322
0.870
0.037 21
B
3.672
137.3
18.6
94.84
0.639
0.724
0.320
0.873
0.037 19
C
3.707
138.1
19.1
94.50
0.642
0.750
0.318
0.876
0.037 18
D
3.739
138.9
19.7
94.17
0.645
0.736
0.316
0.879
0.037 18
E
3.769
139.8
20.2
93.84
0.648
0.741
0.313
0.882
0.037 21
F
3.796
140.7
20.8
93.53
0.650
0.747
0.311
0.885
0.037 24
G
3.821
141.7
21.3
93.22
0.653
0.752
0.308
0.889
0.037 30
H
3.843
142.7
21.9
92.92
0.655
0.757
0.306
0.892
0.037 38
I
3.860
143.8
22.4
92.62
0.657
0.762
0.303
0.895
0.037 49
J
3.873
145.0
23.0
92.33
0.659
0.766
0.301
0.897
0.037 61
Table 3.18: Sensitivity analysis for components model changing the values of T1 air flow
380 m3/h and plastic load of std case - Part 2
Scenario
˙qadd [kW]
˙qcool [kW]
˙qheat [kW]
˙qextra [kW]
power [kW]
A
3.229
6.471
8.926
2.019
2.455
B
3.295
6.333
8.703
2.000
2.370
C
3.359
6.195
8.484
1.982
2.289
D
3.419
6.057
8.268
1.965
2.211
E
3.476
5.919
8.057
1.948
2.183
F
3.531
5.781
7.848
1.933
2.067
G
3.584
5.643
7.643
1.918
2.000
H
3.663
5.505
7.441
1.904
1.936
I
3.680
5.367
7.243
1.891
1.876
J
3.725
5.228
7.048
1.878
1.820
The benchmark for SMER is 1.19988E-05 kJ/kg or 0.04319kWh/kg, for the electric con-
sumption ˙WTOT is 17.67 kW. The SMER increase ranges between 30.11 and 28.72 %
and it is bigger for configurations with bigger values of T1 (and smaller of T3). Energy
savings are comprised between 23.14 and 22.31% and again biggest savings come from
the last scenarios. PB time ranges between 3.59 and 3.76 years.
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
59
==PAGE:70==
Table 3.19: Sensitivity analysis for components model changing the values of T1 air flow
380 m3/h and plastic load of std case - Part 3
Scenario
Electric
SMER
SMER
SMER
Energy
PB time
consumption
[kJ/kg]
[kWh/kg]
increase [%]
savings [%]
[years]
[kW]
A
13.732
1.527 38×10−5 0.054 986
28.72
22.31
3.76
B
13.712
1.529 61×10−5 0.055 066
28.91
22.42
3.74
C
13.694
1.531 62×10−5 0.055 188
29.08
22.53
3.72
D
13.675
1.533 74×10−5 0.055 214
29.26
22.63
3.69
E
13.658
1.535 65×10−5 0.055 283
29.42
22.73
3.67
F
13.641
1.537 54×10−5 0.055 351
29.58
22.82
3.65
G
13.626
1.539 21×10−5 0.055 411
29.72
22.91
3.64
H
13.610
1.541 00×10−5 0.055 476
29.87
23.00
3.62
I
13.597
1.542 55×10−5 0.055 532
30.00
23.07
3.60
J
13.585
1.543 88×10−5 0.055 579
30.11
23.14
3.59
Fixing T1 at 20°C it is analyzed the behaviour of different of changing the air flow rates.The
results are indicated in table 3.20. As the air flow increases, the COP increases as well,
the trend of T3 and the optimized pressure is the opposite. Increasing the flow the results
also suggests an increase of the capacities at the heat exchanges and a small increase
of compressor efficiency.
Table 3.20: Effect of different air flow for components model T1 20 °C, plastic load of std
case - Part 1
Air flow [m3/h]
COP
p6 [bar]
T3 [°C]
˙qcool [kW]
˙qheat [kW]
ηis
ηvol
380
3.70
138.0
93.97
6.223
8.528
0.6415
0.7286
393
3.71
137.5
93.67
6.440
8.811
0.6419
0.7295
407
3.73
137.1
93.38
6.658
9.093
0.6423
0.7303
420
3.75
136.8
93.11
6.876
9.376
0.6427
0.7310
433
3.76
136.4
92.86
7.093
9.659
0.6430
0.7317
447
3.78
136.1
92.63
7.311
9.942
0.6433
0.7324
460
3.79
135.8
92.41
7.529
10.230
0.6436
0.7330
473
3.80
135.5
92.20
7.746
10.510
0.6439
0.7336
487
3.82
135.3
92.00
7.964
10.790
0.6442
0.7341
500
3.83
135.0
91.82
8.181
11.080
0.6444
0.7346
Bigger flow rate of air would also require higher flow rate of refrigerant and bigger heat
exchangers as presented in table 3.21.
60
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:71==
Table 3.21: Effect of different air flow for components model T1 20 °C, plastic load of std
case - Part 2
Air flow [m3/h]
˙mref [kg/s]
UAEV [kW/K]
UAGC [kW/K]
380
0.037 18
0.318
0.875
393
0.038 39
0.330
0.905
407
0.039 60
0.341
0.935
420
0.040 82
0.352
0.965
433
0.042 03
0.363
0.994
447
0.043 24
0.374
1.024
460
0.044 46
0.385
1.054
473
0.045 67
0.396
1.084
487
0.046 88
0.408
1.113
500
0.048 10
0.419
1.143
The system behaviour selecting T1 equal to 20°C as a design point, and repeating simu-
lations with different plastic loads fixing the air flow at 380 m3/h is shown in tables 3.22
and 3.23.
The simulation performed with full plastic load shows an increase of the COP to 4.241
but the scenario in terms of temperatures is completely different. T3 goes down to 46.4
°C. The common return loss less temperature Thp is 29.37 °C due to very high values of
˙qplast,icaused by a huge amount of plastic in each hopper, extra cooling ˙qextra is removed
because it is no longer necessary. Moreover, decreasing T1 seems not to be a strategy
to increase T3 because the further cooling has than to be replaced with further heating
and despite the heat exchanged increases, T3 remains stable. When extra cooling is not
present, the system has its own equilibrium point given by the behaviour in the heat DFD
unit, and the DHs
The behaviour is different from the one showed in model C (where T3 increased for bigger
plastic content) because in that case the temperature T3 was the one that the plastic was
subject to. The model increases it so to have an higher value of T4 and so balance the
gas cooler and evaporator capacity but in model D the temperature T3 is then adjusted
via electrical heaters to reach the set point of each hopper resulting in a extra electricity
consumption of 8.582 kW.
On the other side, reducing the mass load of plastic (case low) increases as well the COP
to 3.954, T3 is reduced to 89.8 °C and optimized pressure is lowered as well to 132.3
bar. The value of Thp is 101.8 °C and the additional heat goes down to 3.749 kW. The
negative value of ˙qplast represents the fact that T3 is smaller than Thp.
Table 3.22: Simulations of different plastic mass loads for components model T1 20 °C,
air flow 380 m3/h- Part 1
Config
COP
ηis
ηvol
˙qextra [kW]
˙mref [kg/s]
Power [kW]
Pr
std
3.700
0.6415
0.7286
1.986
0.037 18
3.163
2.712
full
4.241
0.6686
0.7940
0.000
0.0102
0.3614
1.873
low
3.954
0.6471
0.7402
3.945
0.035 98
2.103
2.600
The data concerning the energy consumption are represented in tale 3.24 and shows
that the best performance in terms of both energy savings and SMER are achieved in the
standard configuration. As regards the SMER, the new benchmark for full and low load
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
61
==PAGE:72==
Table 3.23: Simulations of different plastic mass loads for components model T1 20 °C,
air flow 380 m3/h- Part 2
Config
˙qadd_TOT [kW]
˙qcool [kW]
˙qheat [kW]
˙qplast [kW]
Tend [°C]
p6 [bar]
T3 [°C]
std
3.346
6.223
8.528
0.9876
86.01
138.0
93.97
full
8.582
1.171
1.533
2.112
29.37
95.3
46.4
low
3.749
6.213
8.317
−1.488
101.80
132.3
89.80
Table 3.24: Simulations of different plastic mass loads for components model T1 20 °C,
air flow 380 m3/h- Part 3
Config
Electric
SMER
SMER
SMER
Energy
PB time
consumption
[kJ/kg]
[kWh/kg]
increase [%]
savings [%]
[years]
[kW]
std
13.697
1.531 26×10−5
0.055 513
29.05
22.51
3.72
full
16.880
3.381 95×10−5
0.121 750
4.71
4.50
22.92
low
14.221
7.518 20×10−6
0.027 066
24.38
19.60
4.43
are 0.1162 kWh/kg and 0.0217 kWh/kg, respectively. In the case of full plastic load gives
almost negligible improved performance with respect to the benchmark case.
In tables 3.25, 3.26 and 3.27 are presented the results for simulations where T1 20 is °C,
air flow is 380 m3/h and T3 is varied from 72 to 60 °C.
The effect obtained is a decrease of the temperature T3 due to a smaller quantity of heat
pumped from the source to the sink. In particular, the capacity provided by the GC goes
from 74.9 to 56.5 % of the heating requirement while from the cooling side it goes from
77.9 to 63.6 % of the cooling requirement.
The COP increases from 3.596 to 4.274 and the optimized pressure p6 varies from 142.4
bar to 118.5 bar.
In terms of energy performance, the decrease of T4 carries to a bigger value of energy
consumption due to the biggest load for the additional heating and cooling device which
increase the average power consumption from 13.74 kW in the case where T4 is 72 °C
to 14.80kW in the case where T4 is 60 °C decreasing the energy savings performance by
the 6.01 % of the total.
SMER follows the same trend and decreases for lower value of T4. The pay back time
goes from increases of more than one year in these simulations going from 3.78 to 5.57
years.
62
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:73==
Table 3.25: Simulations for different values of T4 for components plastic load of std case,
air flow 380 m3/h - Part 1
T4 [°C]
COP
p6 [bar]
T3 [°C]
eta_is
eta_vol
72.00
3.596
142.4
97.48
0.6371
0.7197
70.67
3.665
139.4
95.13
0.6401
0.7257
69.33
3.735
136.5
92.82
0.6429
0.7315
68.00
3.807
133.7
90.55
0.6457
0.7373
66.67
3.880
131.0
88.32
0.6484
0.7429
65.33
3.956
128.3
86.12
0.6510
0.7485
64.00
4.033
125.7
83.95
0.6535
0.7539
62.67
4.111
123.3
81.82
0.6558
0.7592
61.33
4.192
120.9
79.72
0.6580
0.7644
60.00
4.274
118.5
77.65
0.6600
0.7694
Table 3.26: Simulations for different values of T4 for components plastic load of std case,
air flow 380 m3/h - Part 2
T4 [°C]
˙qcool [kW]
˙qheat [kW]
˙qadd [kW]
˙qextra [kW]
˙mref [kg/s]
power [kW]
72.00
6.472
8.965
3.007
1.834
0.038 50
2.493
70.67
6.306
8.672
3.234
1.935
0.037 62
2.366
69.33
6.140
8.385
3.457
2.037
0.036 74
2.245
68.00
5.974
8.102
3.677
2.140
0.035 85
2.128
66.67
5.807
7.824
3.892
2.244
0.034 96
2.016
65.33
5.641
7.550
4.105
2.349
0.034 07
1.909
64.00
5.475
7.280
4.314
2.454
0.033 18
1.805
62.67
5.309
7.015
4.519
2.561
0.032 28
1.706
61.33
5.143
6.754
4.730
2.677
0.031 38
1.611
60.00
4.977
6.497
4.986
2.842
0.030 47
1.520
Table 3.27: Simulations for different values of T4 for components plastic load of std case,
air flow 380 m3/h - Part 3
T4 [°C]
SMER [kWh/kg]
SMER improv
energy cons [kW]
EN sav [%]
PB time [years]
72.00
0.0549
28.62
13.74
22.25
3.78
70.67
0.0545
27.64
13.84
21.66
3.91
69.33
0.0541
26.66
13.95
21.04
4.06
68.00
0.0537
25.68
14.06
20.43
4.21
66.67
0.0533
24.71
14.17
19.81
4.37
65.33
0.0529
23.74
14.28
19.18
4.55
64.00
0.0524
22.78
14.39
18.56
4.74
62.67
0.0520
21.84
14.51
17.92
4.95
61.33
0.0516
20.82
14.63
17.23
5.19
60.00
0.0510
19.04
14.80
16.24
5.57
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
63
==PAGE:74==
3.5.3
Proposed configuration
Considering all the constrains to be respected for the plant in Grundfos, a configuration
is proposed. It has to be taken into account that hopper number 2 temperature set point
is 80 °C so, in a scenario free of losses the following configuration can be selected as the
most suitable for the integration.
Fixing T1 to be equal to 20 °C and so evaporating temperature at 15 °C, T4 equal to 62 °C,
the resulting, T3 would be to be equal to 80.77 °C. Optimized pressure is 122.1 bar, the
UA value of the evaporator is 0.3006 kW/K and of the gas cooler is 0.6951 kW/K, mass
flow rate of CO2 is 0.03183 and it represents the 19.8% of the compressor full speed mass
flow rate. The corresponding areas ”A” are 10.02 m2 for the evaporator and 34.75 m2 for
the gas cooler. The mean logarithmic temperature delta is 19.54 K for the evaporator and
9.64 K for the gas cooler.
The heat capacity of the gas cooler ˙qheat is 6.88 kW, the heat capacity of the evaporator
˙qcool is 5.226 kW, the additional heat provided by the coolers ˙qadd is 4.62 kW and the
additional cooling is ˙qextra is 2.615 kW. The heat pump covers the 59.8 % of the heating
load and the 66.6% of the cooling load.
The COP of the heat pump is 4.151, the SMER is 0.05181 kWh/kg resulting in an increase
of 21.36 % with respect to the benchmark, energy savings are 17.60% and the resulting
payback time is 5.06 years.
64
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:75==
3.6
Results from humidity measurements
In this operating conditions, the total mass flow of plastic is 55.5 kg/h. Air flow is con-
sidered constant and equal to 380 m3/h as indicated by the site personnel. The data
presented in the next lines refers to an acquisition of more than two hours, to be precise:
start 29/05/2024 11:11 and end 29/05/2024 14:00
The data are then elaborated with EES so to obtain the humidity ratio value that, differently
from RH, is not correlated to temperature so it results as a more significant value 3.12 This
Figure 3.12: Humidity ratio
acquisition can be than correlated to the functioning of the DFD unit using the plot visible
from the control panel of the machine 3.13.
The humidity ratio is calculated assuming 100% dry air as supply air. On average the hu-
midity ratio results to be 0.001 407 kgH2O/kgdryair. Considering the air flow to be 380 m3/h
and a density of the air of 1.168 kg/m3 the water mass flow on plastic mass flow results
to be 1.126%.
This result justify and confirm the assumption of 1% water content on plastic mass.
The first clarification to make is about the air temperature shown in figure 3.14. Return
temperature is around 70 to 75 °C as explained section 1.11. However, the value of around
30 °C is justified by the path the air does to reach the sensor in which it cools down.
Moreover, is interesting to observe how the humidity content trend of the return air has
some spikes which, discussing with Grundfos engineers, can be re conducted to injection
of new and humid material in the hoppers.
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
65
==PAGE:76==
Figure 3.13: Picture of the control panel in the time interval of the aquisition
Figure 3.14: Relative humidity and temperature in the return pipe
Dew point measurements
It was noticed that the value of relative humidity changes along the time and it is linked
to the timed passed from the bad swap moment. The trend is shown in picture 3.15 and
in particular, the closer to the moment when the bed comes to operation, the lower is the
value of RH. This shows that the adsorption performance of the bed decreases during
time and so the capability of the dry air of extracting moisture. It has been measured a
value of relative humidity ranging from 0.2 % to 4.1% along the tow hours of operation of a
66
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:77==
bed. Being said that the value of 4.1% might be an outlier registered from the instrument,
the second peak shows the value of 2.5%.Temperature acquired by the sensor was 30.5
°C on average and the corresponding values of dew point are -43.4 °C, -19.4 °C and -14.1
°C.
Figure 3.15: Relative humidity reading from the dew point port
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
67
==PAGE:78==
68
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:79==
4
Conclusion
The research work, carried out with multiple subsequent simulation steps where the com-
plexity of the steady state model was progressively increased, took to several results that
are significant for the integration of a CO2 heat pump in the drying system of plastic gran-
ules and in particular for the case of the plant in Grundfos. All the consideration presented
are focused on an energy point of view and take into account just in minor part the drying
kinetics of the plastic granules.
The first aspect that emerged is that the nature of the system where the same air re-
circulated in a closed loop is both the sink and the source of the heat pump, has a weak
equilibrium in terms of energy balance and the only methodology to control the air temper-
ature precisely in a steady state scenario both at the bed inlet (T1) and at the hoppers inlet
(T3) is to decouple the capacity of the heat exchangers. This process has been carried
out computationally with the variable ”share” but in practice can be done controlling the
losses and building a multiple heat exchangers layout that has in any case to consider
the sinks and sources available in the plant location.
Design model A and B predicted a maximum of the COP in the scenarios where T1 were
20 and 25 °C, respectively. The maximum COP in the case of design model A was 3.763
while in the case of design model B was 4.085. The comparison between the two model
explains how a different mass of plastic granules and different humidity contents changes
the optimization drivers of the system and deeply affect the heating and cooling capacity
requirements.
Throughout the results produced from design model A, considering the big market con-
strains in finding a HP of this size, the condensing unit SCM-frigo cubo 2 plus UMT 075
VS MTDX equipped with the compressor Bitzer 4PTE-7K with the varistep CRII module
was selected. Form the compressor envelope analysis it emerged that 140 bar is the dis-
charge pressure limit for the unit and that the evaporating temperature cannot go above
20 °C resulting in a limit to be respected in the design phase.
Design model C proved that in the case of non decoupled heat exchanger system, the
behaviour is different. The maximum of COP is obtained for the lowest values of T1 but
it is accompanied by a lower value of T3 too. In this scenario, bigger capacities are ex-
changed in gas cooler and evaporator but bigger cooling before the bed reflects in a air
inlet temperature in the gas cooler T2 which is lower as well, and so T3 does not increase.
It has been calculated that for T1 equal to 18 °C the COP is 4.504 and T3 is 76.33 °C.
In design model C, the variation of the mass of plastic in the hoppers took to a decrease
of COP that in the base case with T1 equal to 20°C brought the COP to be reduced from
4.476 with 80 kg/h of plastic down to 3.309 in the case of 166 kg/h. These results cannot
be directly compared because they come together with different T3 (78.25 and 111.7 °C,
respectively), justified by the closed loop nature of the system.
A similar phenomena is happening when the air flow rate is increased, the COP increase
at higher flow rates is matched with T3 decrease.
Component model analyzed the behaviour of the final integration layout considering the
characteristics of Bitzer 4PTE-7K compressor and the temperature requirements of each
hopper. The system makes use of some additional electric heaters and an additional
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
69
==PAGE:80==
cooler.
The model predicted a COP trend growing with T1 but still coupled with a decrease of T3.
Simulations are carried out for values of T1 between 18 and 23 °C, COP ranges between
3.636 and 3.873, T3 ranges between 95.18 and 92.33 °C, optimized pressure ranges from
136.6 to 145 bar, SMER goes from 0.005498 kWh/kg to 0.005557 kWh/kg showing an
increase from 28.72 and 30.11 % from the benchmark case. Energy savings goes from
the 22.31 % to 23.14% and payback time from 3.76 to 3.59 years.
Increase in the air flow brings again to bigger COP but to lower slightly lower values of
main supply temperature T3. The energy and drying performance were not compared for
the lack of benchmark data.
Regarding the plastic load, standard configuration gives the best results in terms of en-
ergy savings and SMER improvement with values of 18.31 % and 29.05 %, respectively.
The resulting payback time is 3.72 years. The low load scenario performance are com-
parable to the standard load scenario in terms of energy savings. The full load scenario
produces poor results in terms of energy savings with just the 4.50% of energy saved from
the benchmark case.
Simulations for different temperature set point of the extra cooler T4, suggest that con-
trolling T4 is a good strategy to control T3. The lower is T4 the lower T3 will be. The
performance in terms of COP increases for lower evaporator outlet air temperature but
decreases in terms of overall energy performance. T4 ranging from 72 °C to 60 °C would
bring the energy savings from 22.25 % to 16.24%.
Considering all the constrains, the final proposed configuration for the system has a COP
of the heat pump of 4.151, the gas cooler heat capacity ˙qheat is 6.88 kW, the SMER is
0.05181 kWh/kg resulting in an increase of 21.36 % with respect to the benchmark, en-
ergy saved would be 17.60% of the existing solution and the resulting payback time is
5.06 years.
Relative humidity readings suggest a moisture content of the plastic of 1.126 % (on mass
basis) average and shows graphically how the humidity ratio of the return air varies along
the process.
Dew point port measurement suggest that also the dew point of the air fed in the hoppers
is not constant and follows a monotonically growing trend where the minimum is when the
bed is freshly regenerated.
70
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:81==
5
Discussion
The results obtained from the integration procedure are tailored to this plant, in the case of
similar systems but with different requirements the results could potentially be improved.
The the closed air loop design is peculiar of desiccant drying systems but the temperature
set points and the choice of the refrigerant could in principle be different.
During the modelling phase, it has clearly emerged that, the system where the heat sink
and the source belong to the same closed loop, and where there are temperature require-
ments for the outlet air of both gas cooler and evaporator, has strong constrains in terms
of energy balance.
Moreover, the plant has different temperature set points for all the hoppers and the range
is wide: the minimum set point is 80 °C and the maximum is 140 °C forcing not to fully ex-
ploit the potential of the heat pump for the selected configuration given the constrains on
T3. Flexibility is of course one of the main feature of the equipment that Labotek produces
and the integration of the heat pump cannot affect this peculiarity of the system distorting
its industrial purpose. Considering the PB time as performance indicator that combines
COP and SMER, the best results are obtained in the scenarios where there are no upper
constrains on T3.
The small SMER increase compared to benchmark case is also explained by the thermal
load of the regeneration phase which is essential for the drying procedure but none of its
load is covered by the HP.
Regarding the refrigerant, together with all the stakeholders, CO2 has been selected be-
cause of its characteristic in terms of safety. One of the main issue of R744 is the low
critical point temperature which carries to some limitations to avoid a fully supercritical cy-
cle that would impact performance and technical implementation. This specific case study
present some constrains on the main duct supply temperature, however, in the case of no
temperature limitations, hydrocarbons would probably be the most suitable natural refrig-
erants to reach high air supply temperatures. Having said that, the restriction existing in
terms of charge quantity and safety instruction might results in new technical constrains
to the project.
Finally, the very small capacity of this industrial heat pump is a limit for this project. The
trade off found with the purchase of a condensing unit for refrigeration purpose and adapt
if for HP purpose is working from an engineering point of view but shows that the market
is not currently focused on this size of CO2 industrial heat pumps. Some concerns can
be expressed on the selection of the compressor which will work at low load in the final
configuration proposed, this is again feasible from a technical point of view but is a strong
trade off.
Some final observation can be done having a wider perspective in the functioning of the
system. No attention has been paid to the outlet air temperature of each hopper, but,
since this air would interact with the just fed granules, it might be a not negligible driver
for the plant. How the new configuration could affect the desiccant beds and drying per-
formance, is an open topic of discussion. A bigger air flow rate brings to slightly better
performance in terms of COP and might also have positive effect on the drying kinet-
ics of the granules. This suggests that bigger system can have a good potential for a
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
71
==PAGE:82==
similar integrated solution. Anyway, this topic should be further investigated through the
acquisition of some new data to define a benchmark for every air flow. Moreover, the final
configuration has a bed inlet temperature T1 which is around 15 K smaller than the current
one measured in the plant. This could, in principle, improve the adsorption performance
of the bed resulting in a more effective drying plant.
72
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
Thomas Stocker. Climate change 2013: the physical science basis: Working Group
I contribution to the Fifth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change. Cambridge university press, 2014. ISBN: 110705799X.
[2]
N Z IEA. Net zero by 2050. IEA, Paris. 2021.
[3]
Simon Dietz. “The treatment of risk and uncertainty in the US social cost of carbon
for regulatory impact analysis”. In: Economics 6 (1 2012), p. 20120018. ISSN: 1864-
6042.
[4]
James K Boyce. “Carbon pricing: effectiveness and equity”. In: Ecological Eco-
nomics 150 (2018), pp. 52–61. ISSN: 0921-8009.
[5]
I E IEA. Heating without Global Warming-Market Developments and Policy Consid-
erations for Renewable Heat. 2014.
[6]
Gregory P. Thiel and Addison K. Stark. To decarbonize industry, we must decar-
bonize heat. Mar. 2021. DOI: 10.1016/j.joule.2020.12.007.
[7]
Grundfos. URL: https://www.grundfos.com/.
[8]
Labotek. URL: https://labotek.com/.
[9]
DTI. URL: https://www.dti.dk/.
[10]
“Handbook of industrial drying”. In: ().
[11]
Arun S. Mujumdar. An overview of innovation in industrial drying: Current status and
RnD needs. Jan. 2007. DOI: 10.1007/s11242-006-9018-y.
[12]
C M Van’t Land. Drying in the process industry. John Wiley n Sons, 2011. ISBN:
1118105826.
[13]
K J Chua, S K Chou, and W M Yang. “Advances in heat pump systems: A review”.
In: Applied Energy 87 (12 2010), pp. 3611–3624. ISSN: 0306-2619. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2010.06.014. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S030626191000228X.
[14]
E Granryd. Refrigerating Engineering. Department of energy technology, 2005. ISBN:
9789174154153. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=_oQNngEACAAJ.
[15]
Cordin Arpagaus et al. High temperature heat pumps: Market overview, state of
the art, research status, refrigerants, and application potentials. June 2018. DOI:
10.1016/j.energy.2018.03.166.
[16]
Ashrae. Ashrae standard 34. URL: https://www.ashrae.org/technical- resources/
bookstore/ashrae- refrigeration- resources#:~:text=ASHRAE%20Standard%2034%
20establishes%20a,refrigerant%20concentration%20limits%20to%20refrigerants..
[17]
United nations. Montreal protocol. URL: https://www.unep.org/ozonaction/who-we-
are/about-montreal-protocol.
[18]
United Nations. Kigali agreement. URL: https://ozone.unep.org/news/kigali-story.
[19]
EU. REGULATION (EU) 2024/573 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF
THE COUNCIL of 7 February 2024 on fluorinated greenhouse gases, amending
Directive (EU) 2019/1937 and repealing Regulation (EU) No 517/2014.
[20]
NOAA. CO2. URL: https://www.co2.earth/daily-co2.
[21]
Gustav Lorentzen. “Revival of carbon dioxide as a refrigerant”. In: International
Journal of Refrigeration 17 (5 1994), pp. 292–301. ISSN: 0140-7007. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/0140-7007(94)90059-0. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/0140700794900590.
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
73
==PAGE:84==
[22]
Paul Maina and Zhongjie Huan. “A review of carbon dioxide as a refrigerant in re-
frigeration technology”. In: South african journal of science 111 (9-10 2015), pp. 1–
10. ISSN: 0038-2353.
[23]
NIST. Nist CO2. URL: https://webbook.nist.gov/cgi/cbook.cgi?Source=1927LOW%
2FERI2729-2734&Units=SI&Mask=7#Thermo-Gas.
[24]
Ji Wang et al. A comprehensive review and analysis on CO2 heat pump water
heaters. Aug. 2022. DOI: 10.1016/j.ecmx.2022.100277.
[25]
Hua Tian et al. “Research and application of CO2 refrigeration and heat pump cy-
cle”. In: Science in China, Series E: Technological Sciences 52 (6 June 2009),
pp. 1563–1575. ISSN: 10069321. DOI: 10.1007/s11431-009-0175-4.
[26]
Aklilu Tesfamichael Baheta et al. “Performance investigation of transcritical carbon
dioxide refrigeration cycle”. In: vol. 26. Elsevier B.V., 2015, pp. 482–485. DOI: 10.
1016/j.procir.2015.02.084.
[27]
Trygve M Eikevik, Ingvald Strømmen, and Odilio Alves-Filho. Heat Pump Fluidised
Bed Dryer with CO2 as Refrigerant – Measurements of COP and SMER.
[28]
Annex 35 Application of Industrial Heat Pumps Final Report Part 1 Operating Agent:
Germany IEA Heat Pump Programme. 2014. ISBN: 9789188001924.
[29]
Benjamin Zühlsdorf. IE A High-Temperature Heat Pumps Task 1-Technologies Task
Report Operating Agent. ISBN: 9789189821347. URL: https://heatpumpingtechnologies.
org.
[30]
René Rieberer et al. “IEA Heat Pump Programme Annex 35: Anwendungsmöglichkeiten
für industrielle Wärmepumpen”. In: Wien: Bundesministerium für Verkehr„ Innova-
tion und Technologie. URL: https://nachhaltigwirtschaften. at/de/iea/publikationen/ieahpp-
annex-35-application-of-industrial-heat-pumps. php [Accessed 11.05. 2022] (2015).
[31]
Christian Schlemminger et al. “Hochtemperatur Wärmepumpe mit Ejektor”. In: 2020.
[32]
“Methodology to estimate the energy flows of the European Union heating and cool-
ing market”. In: Energy 52 (2013), pp. 339–352. ISSN: 0360-5442. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2013.01.062. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0360544213000935.
[33]
A. Marina et al. “An estimation of the European industrial heat pump market po-
tential”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 139 (Apr. 2021). ISSN:
18790690. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2020.110545.
[34]
George Kosmadakis. “Estimating the potential of industrial (high-temperature) heat
pumps for exploiting waste heat in EU industries”. In: Applied Thermal Engineering
156 (June 2019), pp. 287–298. ISSN: 13594311. DOI: 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.
2019.04.082.
[35]
Neslihan Colak and Arif Hepbasli. “A review of heat pump drying: Part 1 - Systems,
models and studies”. In: Energy Conversion and Management 50 (9 Sept. 2009),
pp. 2180–2186. ISSN: 01968904. DOI: 10.1016/j.enconman.2009.04.031.
[36]
I C Claussen et al. “Atmospheric Freeze Drying—A Review”. In: Drying Technology
25 (6 June 2007). doi: 10.1080/07373930701394845, pp. 947–957. ISSN: 0737-
3937. DOI: 10.1080/07373930701394845. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/07373930701394845.
[37]
Neslihan Colak and Arif Hepbasli. “A review of heat-pump drying (HPD): Part 2 -
Applications and performance assessments”. In: Energy Conversion and Manage-
ment 50 (9 Sept. 2009), pp. 2187–2199. ISSN: 01968904. DOI: 10.1016/j.enconman.
2009.04.037.
[38]
Abdeen Mustafa Omer. “Ground-source heat pumps systems and applications”.
In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 12 (2 2008), pp. 344–371. ISSN:
1364-0321. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2006.10.003. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032106001249.
74
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:85==
[39]
Paul Christodoulides, Lazaros Aresti, and Georgios Florides. “Air-conditioning of a
typical house in moderate climates with Ground Source Heat Pumps and cost com-
parison with Air Source Heat Pumps”. In: Applied Thermal Engineering 158 (2019),
p. 113772. ISSN: 1359-4311. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2019.
113772. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1359431119305770.
[40]
P Navarri, J Andrieu, and A Gevaudan. Drying’92, Mujumdar, AS. 1992.
[41]
Li Jin Goh et al. Review of heat pump systems for drying application. Dec. 2011.
DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2011.07.072.
[42]
Conrad O Perera and M Shafiur Rahman. “Heat pump dehumidifier drying of food”.
In: Trends in Food Science & Technology 8.3 (1997), pp. 75–79.
[43]
Sadjad Abasi, Saeid Minaei, and Mohammad Hadi Khoshtaghaza. “Performance of
a recirculating dryer equipped with a desiccant wheel”. In: Drying Technology 34 (8
June 2016), pp. 863–870. ISSN: 15322300. DOI: 10.1080/07373937.2015.1021421.
[44]
V Shanmugam and E Natarajan. “Experimental investigation of forced convection
and desiccant integrated solar dryer”. In: Renewable Energy 31 (8 2006), pp. 1239–
1251. ISSN: 0960-1481. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2005.05.019. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960148105001655.
[45]
Kamil Neyfel Çerçi and Ertaç Hürdoğan. “Performance assessment of a heat pump
assisted rotary desiccant dryer for low temperature peanut drying”. In: Biosystems
Engineering 223 (Nov. 2022), pp. 1–17. ISSN: 15375110. DOI: 10.1016/j.biosystemseng.
2022.08.009.
[46]
Kai Shing Yang et al. “Experimental analysis of a heat pump dryer with an external
desiccant wheel dryer”. In: Processes 9 (7 July 2021). ISSN: 22279717. DOI: 10.
3390/pr9071216.
[47]
Minxia Li et al. “Analysis of CO2 Transcritical Cycle Heat Pump Dryers”. In: Dry-
ing Technology 27 (4 Mar. 2009). doi: 10.1080/07373930802715674, pp. 548–554.
ISSN: 0737-3937. DOI: 10.1080/07373930802715674. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/
07373930802715674.
[48]
Zhili Sun et al. “Experimental analysis of a CO2 closed heat pump drying system
combined with rotary dehumidification for drying banana slices drying”. In: Interna-
tional Journal of Refrigeration (2024). ISSN: 0140-7007.
[49]
EU. Atex directive. URL: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=
CELEX:32014L0034.
[50]
f-chart. EESf −chart. URL: https://fchartsoftware.com/ees/.
[51]
SCM-frigo. URL: https://www.scmfrigo.com/en/.
[52]
Dorin. URL: https://www.dorin.com/en/.
[53]
Bitzer. URL: https://www.bitzer.de/it/it/.
[54]
Peter Stephan and VDI Heat Atlas. VDI heat Atlas. Springer Berlin Heidelberg
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010.
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
75
==PAGE:86==
76
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:87==
A
Appendix
A.1
Design model A
//COMBINED MODEL: AIR SIDE AND HEAT PUMP SIDE
// Losses are not taken into account
$TABSTOPS 1 1,5 3
// Points description
// [1] DFD inlet / EV outlet
// [2] DFD inlet / GC inlet
// [3] DH inlet / GC outlet
// [4] DH outlet / EV inlet
// [5] Compressor inlet / EV outlet
// [6] Compressor outlet / GC inlet
// [7] GC outlet / throttling valve inlet
// [8] Throttling valve outlet / EV inlet
// PRELIMINARY CALCULATIONS
// Calculated in standard conditions
cp = cp(AirH2O; T = 40; D = -40; P = 1)
// Specific heat capacity
rho = density(AirH2O; T = 25; D = -40; P = 1)
// Density of air-water
cp_water = cp(Water; T = 25; P = 1)
// Specific heat capacity
dew = -40
// Dew point temperature
// EVAPORATOR
T[1] = T[5]
// Outlet air evaporator
SH = 5 [°C]
// Superheat
P_ev = p_sat(CarbonDioxide; T = T_ev)
// Evaporation pressure
T[5] = T_ev + SH
// Compressor inlet temperature
P[5] = P_ev
h[5] = enthalpy(CarbonDioxide; T = T[5]; P = P[5])
(h[5] - h[8]) * m_dot_ref * share = (h[4] - h[1]) * m_dot[3] // HE in the evaporator
T[1] = 10
// Input air temperature evaporator
omega[1] = m_dot_H2O / m_dot[3]
// Humidity ratio
omega[1] = omega[4]
// No change in the evaporator
// GAS COOLER
m_dot[3] = 450 / 3600 * rho
// Mass flow rate of air
T[3] = 90 [°C]
// Inlet temperature for the air
m_dot[3] = m_dot[2]
// Mass conservation
(h[6] - h[7]) * m_dot_ref = (h[3] - h[2]) * m_dot[3] // Heat exchange
P[7] = P[6]
// Isobaric process
T[7] = T[2] + 5
// Outlet temperature gas cooler
omega[2] = humrat(AirH2O; T = T[2]; D = dew; P = 1) //-40°C as dew point
omega[2] = omega[3]
// No change in the GC
// COMPRESSOR
// P[6] = 138
// Compressor outlet pressure
T[6] = temperature(CarbonDioxide; h = h[6]; P = P[6]) // Compressor outlet temperature
s[5] = entropy(CarbonDioxide; T = T[5]; P = P[5])
h_is[6] = enthalpy(CarbonDioxide; s = s[5]; P = P[6]) // Isoentropic compression point
h[6] = ((h_is[6] - h[5]) / eta_is) + h[5]
// Real point
eta_is = 0.70
// Isentropic efficiency
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
77
==PAGE:88==
// DRYING HOPPER
m_dot_plast = 316 / 3600 [kg/s]
// Mass flow rate of plastic
delta_T_plast = 50
// Delta T plastic
h_water_in = enthalpy(Water; T = 20; P = 1)
h_water_out = enthalpy(Water; T = 20 + delta_T_plast; P = 1)
delta_h_vap = enthalpy_vaporization(Water; T = 45)
q_dot_water = m_dot_H2O * ((h_water_out - h_water_in) + delta_h_vap)
q_dot_plast = (m_dot_plast * cp_plast * delta_T_plast) + q_dot_water
cp_plast = 1.67
// From available data
m_dot[4] = m_dot[3] + m_dot_H2O
T[4] = T[3] - (q_dot_plast / (m_dot[3] * cp))
// Air delta T
h[3] = enthalpy(AirH2O; T = T[3]; w = omega[3]; P = 1) // Air specific enthalpy
h[4] = enthalpy(AirH2O; T = T[4]; w = omega[4]; P = 1)
rh[4] = relhum(AirH2O; T = T[4]; w = omega[4]; P = 1) // Air relative humidity
rh[3] = relhum(AirH2O; T = T[3]; w = omega[2]; P = 1)
// THROTTLING VALVE
P[8] = P[5]
// To evaporator pressure
h[8] = h[7]
// Isenthalpic process
h[7] = enthalpy(CarbonDioxide; T = T[7]; P = P[7])
T[8] = temperature(CarbonDioxide; h = h[8]; P = P[8])
// DESICCANT FLEXIBLE DRYER
m_dot_H2O = 1.8 / 3600 [kg/s]
// Mass flow rate of water
m_dot[2] = m_dot[1] - m_dot_H2O
T[1] = T[2] - (q_dot_gain / (m_dot[2] * cp))
// Delta T air
q_dot_gain = q_dot_ads
q_dot_ads = m_dot_H2O * delta_h_ads
delta_h_ads = 3000 [kJ/kg]
h[2] = enthalpy(AirH2O; T = T[2]; w = omega[2]; P = 1) // Specific enthalpy
h[1] = enthalpy(AirH2O; T = T[1]; w = omega[1]; P = 1)
rh[2] = relhum(AirH2O; T = T[2]; D = dew; P = 1) // Relative humidity
rh[1] = relhum(AirH2O; T = T[1]; w = omega[1]; P = 1)
// FINAL CALCULATIONS FOR BALANCE CHECK AND PERFORMANCE
q_dot_heat = (h[6] - h[7]) * m_dot_ref
// gas cooler
q_dot_cool = (h[5] - h[8]) * m_dot_ref * share
// evaporator
power = (h[6] - h[5]) * m_dot_ref
// Electric power
heat_bal = q_dot_heat + q_dot_gain
// Total thermal power in
cool_bal = q_dot_cool + q_dot_plast
// Total thermal power out
check_hp = power + q_dot_cool / share
// energy balance of the heat pump
// Coefficients of performance
COP1 = q_dot_heat / power
// Coefficient of performance
COP2 = q_dot_cool / share / power
// Coefficient of performance
balance_check = heat_bal - cool_bal
// PINCH ANALYSIS
m = (T[3] - T[2]) / (h[6] - h[7])
// Slope of the heat sink line
pitch = (h[6] - h[7]) / 100
// Pitch to create an array
Duplicate i = 1; 101
En[i] = h[7] + pitch * (i - 1)
// Enthalpy point calculation
78
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:89==
Te[i] = temperature(CarbonDioxide; h = En[i]; P = P[6]) // Temperature of the CO2
Ta[i] = ((En[i] - h[7]) * m) + T[2]
// Temperature of the heat sink
delta[i] = Te[i] - Ta[i]
// Pinch in point i
End
dtmin = min(delta[2..101])
// Minimum pinch
A.2
Design model B
[fontsize=\small]
// COMBINED MODEL: AIR SIDE AND HEAT PUMP SIDE
// losses are not taken into account
$TABSTOPS
1
1,5
3
// points description
// [1] DFD inlet /EV outlet
// [2] DFD inlet / GC inlet
// [3] DH inlet /GC outlet
// [4] DH outlet / EV inlet
// [5] compressor inlet/ evaporator outlet
// [6] compressor outlet /gas cooler inlet
// [7] gas cooler outlet /throttling valve inlet
// [8] throttling valve outlet/ evaporator inlet
// PRELIMINARY CALCULATIONS
// calculated in standard conditions
cp=cp(AirH2O;T=40;D=-40;P=1)
// specific heat of air
rho=density(AirH2O;T=25;D=-40;P=1)
// density of air
cp_water=cp(Water;T=25;P=1)
// specific heat of water
dew=-40
// dew point temperature
// EVAPORATOR
T[1]=T[5]
// outlet air evaporator
SH=5 [°C]
// superheat
P_ev=p_sat(CarbonDioxide;T=T_ev)
// evaporation pressure
T[5]=T_ev+SH
// compressor inlet temperature
P[5]=P_ev
h[5]=enthalpy(CarbonDioxide;T=T[5];P=P[5])
(h[5]-h[8])*m_dot_ref=(h[4]-h[1])*m_dot[3]
// heat exchange in the evaporator
T[1]=20
// INPUT air temperature evaporator
omega[1]=m_dot_H2O/m_dot[3]
omega[1]=omega[4]
// no change in the evaporator
// GAS COOLER
m_dot[3]=450/3600*rho
// mass flow rate of air, from available
//T[3]=90 [°C]
// inlet temperature
m_dot[3]=m_dot[2]
// mass conservation
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
79
==PAGE:90==
(h[6]-h[7])*m_dot_ref*share_h=(h[3]-h[2])*m_dot[3] // heat exchange
P[7]=P[6]
// isobaric process
T[7]=T[2]+5
// outlet T gas cooler
omega[2]=humrat(AirH2O;T=T[2];D=dew;P=1)
// -40°C as dew point
// omega[2]=0
omega[2]=omega[3]
// no change in the GC
// COMPRESSOR
// P[6]=138
// compressor outlet pressure
T[6]=temperature(CarbonDioxide;h=h[6];P=P[6]) // compressor outlet temperature
s[5]=entropy(CarbonDioxide;T=T[5];P=P[5])
h_is[6]=enthalpy(CarbonDioxide;s=s[5];P=P[6])
// isentropic compression point
h[6]=((h_is[6]-h[5])/eta_is)+h[5]
// real point
eta_is=0,70
// isentropic efficiency
// DRYING HOPPER
m_dot_plast=80/3600 [kg/s]
// mass flow rate of plastic
delta_T_plast=50
// deltaT plastic, from available data
h_water_in=enthalpy(Water;T=20;P=1)
h_water_out=enthalpy(Water;T=20+delta_T_plast;P=1)
delta_h_vap=enthalpy_vaporization(Water;T=45)
q_dot_water=m_dot_H2O*((h_water_out-h_water_in)+delta_h_vap) // sensible + latent
q_dot_plast=(m_dot_plast*cp_plast*delta_T_plast)+q_dot_water // heat flow
cp_plast=1,67
// from available data
m_dot[4]=m_dot[3]+m_dot_H2O
T[4]=(T[3]-(q_dot_plast/(m_dot[3]*cp)))*h_l_f
// air deltaT
h[3]=enthalpy(AirH2O;T=T[3];w=omega[3];P=1)
// air specific enthalpy
h[4]=enthalpy(AirH2O;T=T[4];w=omega[4];P=1)
rh[4]=relhum(AirH2O;T=T[4];w=omega[4];P=1)
// air relative humidity
rh[3]=relhum(AirH2O;T=T[3];w=omega[2];P=1)
h_l_f=1
// THROTTLING VALVE
P[8]=P[5]
// to evaporator pressure
h[8]=h[7]
// isenthalpic process
h[7]=enthalpy(CarbonDioxide;T=T[7];P=P[7])
T[8]=temperature(CarbonDioxide;h=h[8];P=P[8])
// DESSICANT FLEXIBLE DRYER
m_dot_H2O=0,8/3600 [kg/s]
// mass flow rate of water
m_dot[2]=m_dot[1]-m_dot_H2O
T[1]=T[2]-(q_dot_gain/(m_dot[2]*cp))
// deltaT air
q_dot_gain=q_dot_ads
q_dot_ads=(m_dot_H2O*delta_h_ads)
delta_h_ads=3000 [kJ/kg]
for a more reliable number
h[2]=enthalpy(AirH2O;T=T[2];w=omega[2];P=1)
// specific enthalpy
h[1]=enthalpy(AirH2O;T=T[1];w=omega[1];P=1)
rh[2]=relhum(AirH2O;T=T[2];D=dew;P=1)
// relative humidity
rh[1]=relhum(AirH2O;T=T[1];w=omega[1];P=1)
80
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:91==
// FINAL CALCULATIONS FOR BALANCE CHECK AND PERFORMANCE
q_dot_heat=(h[6]-h[7])*m_dot_ref*share_h
// gas cooler
q_dot_cool=(h[5]-h[8])*m_dot_ref
// evaporator
power=(h[6]-h[5])*m_dot_ref
// electric power to the compressor
heat_bal=q_dot_heat+q_dot_gain
// total thermal power in
cool_bal=q_dot_cool+q_dot_plast
// total thermal power out
// check_hp=power+q_dot_cool/share
// energy balance of the heat pump
// coefficients of performance
COP1=q_dot_heat/(power*share_h)
// useful effect is GC
COP2=q_dot_cool/power
//EV (all cold available)
balance_check=heat_bal-cool_bal
// balance_check=0
// PINCH ANALYSIS
m=(T[3]-T[2])/(h[6]-h[7])
// slope of the heat sink line
pitch=(h[6]-h[7])/100
// pitch to create an array
Duplicate i=1;101
En[i]=h[7]+pitch*(i-1)
// enthalpy point calculation
Te[i]=temperature(CarbonDioxide;h=En[i];P=P[6]) // temperature of the CO2
Ta[i]=((En[i]-h[7])*m)+T[2]
// temperature of the heat sink
delta[i]=Te[i]-Ta[i]
// pinch in point i
End
dtmin=min(delta[2..101])
// minimum pinch
A.3
Design model C
[fontsize=\small]
// COMBINED MODEL: AIR SIDE AND HEAT PUMP SIDE
// losses are not taken into account
$TABSTOPS
1
1,5
3
// points description
// [1]DFD inlet /EV outlet
// [2]DFD inlet / GC inlet
// [3]DH inlet /GC outlet
// [4]DH outlet / EV inlet
// [5] compressor inlet/ evaporator outlet
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
81
==PAGE:92==
// [6] compressor outlet /gas cooler inlet
// [7] gas cooler outlet /throttling valve inlet
// [8] throttling valve outlet/ evaporator inlet
// PRELIMINARY CALCULATIONS
// calculated in standard conditions
cp=cp(AirH2O;T=40;D=-40;P=1)
// specific heat of air
rho=density(AirH2O;T=25;D=-40;P=1)
// density of air
cp_water=cp(Water;T=25;P=1)
// specific heat of water at given conditions
dew=-40
// dew point temperature
share_h=1
// share of heat
// EVAPORATOR
T[1]=T[5]
// outlet air evaporator air
SH=5 [°C]
// superheat
P_ev=p_sat(CarbonDioxide;T=T_ev)
// evaporation pressure
T[5]=T_ev+SH
// compressor inlet temperature
P[5]=P_ev
h[5]=enthalpy(CarbonDioxide;T=T[5];P=P[5])
(h[5]-h[8])*m_dot_ref=(h[4]-h[1])*m_dot[3]
// heat exchange in the evaporator
T[1]=20
// air temperature evaporator
omega[1]=m_dot_H2O/m_dot[3]
omega[1]=omega[4]
// no change in the evaporator
// GAS COOLER
m_dot[3]=450/3600*rho
// mass flow rate of air, from available data
// T[3]=80 [°C]
// inlet temperature for the air
m_dot[3]=m_dot[2]
// mass conservation
(h[6]-h[7])*m_dot_ref*share_h=(h[3]-h[2])*m_dot[3] // heat exchange in the gas cooler
P[7]=P[6]
// isobaric process
T[7]=T[2]+5
// outlet T gas cooler
omega[2]=humrat(AirH2O;T=T[2];D=dew;P=1)
// outlet DFD air with -40°C as dew point
// omega[2]=0
omega[2]=omega[3]
// no change in the GC
// COMPRESSOR
// P[6]=138
// compressor outlet pressure
T[6]=temperature(CarbonDioxide;h=h[6];P=P[6]) // compressor outlet temperature
//T[6]=120
s[5]=entropy(CarbonDioxide;T=T[5];P=P[5])
h_is[6]=enthalpy(CarbonDioxide;s=s[5];P=P[6]) // isentropic compression point
h[6]=((h_is[6]-h[5])/eta_is)+h[5]
// real point
eta_is=0,70
// isentropic efficiency
// DRYING HOPPER
var=80
m_dot_plast=var/3600 [kg/s]
// mass flow rate of plastic
delta_T_plast=50
// deltaT plastic
h_water_in=enthalpy(Water;T=20;P=1)
82
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:93==
h_water_out=enthalpy(Water;T=20+delta_T_plast;P=1)
delta_h_vap=enthalpy_vaporization(Water;T=45)
q_dot_water=m_dot_H2O*((h_water_out-h_water_in)+delta_h_vap) // sensible + latent
q_dot_plast=(m_dot_plast*cp_plast*delta_T_plast)+q_dot_water // heat flow
cp_plast=1,67
// from available data
m_dot[4]=m_dot[3]+m_dot_H2O
T[4]=(T[3]-(q_dot_plast/(m_dot[3]*cp)))*h_l_f // air deltaT
h[3]=enthalpy(AirH2O;T=T[3];w=omega[3];P=1) // air specific enthalpy
h[4]=enthalpy(AirH2O;T=T[4];w=omega[4];P=1)
rh[4]=relhum(AirH2O;T=T[4];w=omega[4];P=1)
// air relative humidity
rh[3]=relhum(AirH2O;T=T[3];w=omega[2];P=1)
h_l_f=1
// THROTTLING VALVE
P[8]=P[5]
// to evaporator pressure
h[8]=h[7]
// isenthalpic process
h[7]=enthalpy(CarbonDioxide;T=T[7];P=P[7])
T[8]=temperature(CarbonDioxide;h=h[8];P=P[8])
// DESSICANT FLEXIBLE DRYER
m_dot_H2O=m_dot_plast/100
// mass flow rate of water,
m_dot[2]=m_dot[1]-m_dot_H2O
T[1]=T[2]-(q_dot_gain/(m_dot[2]*cp))
// deltaT air due to adsorption heat
q_dot_gain=q_dot_ads
q_dot_ads=(m_dot_H2O*delta_h_ads)
delta_h_ads=3000 [kJ/kg]
h[2]=enthalpy(AirH2O;T=T[2];w=omega[2];P=1) // specific enthalpy
h[1]=enthalpy(AirH2O;T=T[1];w=omega[1];P=1)
rh[2]=relhum(AirH2O;T=T[2];D=dew;P=1)
// relative humidity
rh[1]=relhum(AirH2O;T=T[1];w=omega[1];P=1)
// FINAL CALCULATIONS FOR BALANCE CHECK AND PERFORMANCE
q_dot_heat=(h[6]-h[7])*m_dot_ref*share_h
// heat exchanged in the gas cooler
q_dot_cool=(h[5]-h[8])*m_dot_ref
// heat exchanged in the evaporator
power=(h[6]-h[5])*m_dot_ref
// electric power to the compressor
heat_bal=q_dot_heat+q_dot_gain
// total thermal power in
cool_bal=q_dot_cool+q_dot_plast
// total thermal power out
// chek_hp=power+q_dot_cool/share
// energy balance of the heat pump
// coefficients of performance
COP1=q_dot_heat/(power*share_h)
// useful effect is GC
COP2=q_dot_cool/power
// useful effect is EV
balance_check=heat_bal-cool_bal
// balance_check=0
// PINCH ANALYSIS
m=(T[3]-T[2])/(h[6]-h[7])
// slope of the heat sink line
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
83
==PAGE:94==
pitch=(h[6]-h[7])/100
// pitch to create an array
Duplicate i=1;101
En[i]=h[7]+pitch*(i-1)
// enthalpy point calculation
Te[i]=temperature(CarbonDioxide;h=En[i];P=P[6]) // temperature of the CO2
Ta[i]=((En[i]-h[7])*m)+T[2]
// temperature of the heat sink
delta[i]=Te[i]-Ta[i]
// pinch in point i
End
dtmin=min(delta[2..101])
// minimum pinch
losses_hp=q_dot_gain+power-q_dot_plast
follia=(h[6]-h[7])*m_dot_ref
cp_test=cp(AirH2O;T=60;w=omega[4];P=1)
A.4
Components model
// COMBINED MODEL: AIR SIDE AND HEAT PUMP SIDE
// Losses are not taken into account
$TABSTOPS
1
1,5
3
// Share fixed to one: full capacity of the heat exchangers is exploited
// Pressure can be optimized
// T3 can change on its own
// Points description
// [1] DFD inlet / EV outlet
// [2] DFD inlet / GC inlet
// [3] DH inlet / GC outlet
// [4] DH outlet / EV inlet
// [5] Compressor inlet / evaporator outlet
// [6] Compressor outlet / gas cooler inlet
// [7] Gas cooler outlet / throttling valve inlet
// [8] Throttling valve outlet / evaporator inlet
// Weighted average of the temperatures
// Volume of each hopper
// Assign some values
v[1] = 300
v[2] = 300
v[3] = 75
v[4] = 40
v[5] = 40
v[6] = 300
v[7] = 300
// Plastic mass flow rate per each hopper
84
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:95==
m_plastic[1] = 25 / 3600
m_plastic[2] = 16 / 3600
m_plastic[3] = 8 / 3600
m_plastic[4] = 2.5 / 3600
m_plastic[5] = 2.5 / 3600
m_plastic[6] = 10 / 3600
m_plastic[7] = 15 / 3600
// Inlet hopper temperature setpoint (or recorded)
T_hin[1] = 140
T_hin[2] = 80
T_hin[3] = 140
T_hin[4] = 140
T_hin[5] = 140
T_hin[6] = 100
T_hin[7] = 140
// Sum and moisture content
total_v = sum(v[1..7])
// Total volume of the hoppers
total_m = sum(m_plastic[1..7])
// Total mass flow rate of plastic
m_H2O = 0.01 * total_m
// Mass flow rate of moisture
// Calculation for weighted values
// Assumption that each polymer has the same initial moisture content
Duplicate i = 1; 7
weight_v[i] = v[i] / total_v
// Weight coefficient hopper volume based
weight_m[i] = m_plastic[i] / total_m
// Weight coefficient plastic mass based
omega_h[i] = (m_H2O * weight_m[i]) / (total_v * weight_v[i]) // Estimation
humidity ratio on the air stream of each hopper
T_hdelta[i] = T_hin[i] - T[3]
// Delta T setpoint and air coming
from the heat pump at T[3]
q_add[i] = if(T_hdelta[i]; 0; 0; 0; m_dot[3] * weight_v[i] * cp * T_hdelta[i]) //
Additional heat to reach the setpoint, provided by electrical heaters
delta_T_plasth_[i] = T_hin[i] - 30
// Plastic temperature difference
in out DH, fixed value for computational simplicity
h_water_in[i] = enthalpy(Water; T = 20; P = 1)
// Water sensible
enthalpy points
h_water_out[i] = enthalpy(Water; T = 20 + delta_T_plasth_[i]; P = 1)
delta_h_vap[i] = enthalpy_vaporization(Water; T = 45)
q_dot_water_h[i] = m_H2O * weight_m[i] *
((h_water_out[i] - h_water_in[i]) + delta_h_vap[i]) // Sensible and latent
q_dot_plast_h[i] = if(m_plastic[i]; 0; 0; 0; (m_plastic[i] * cp_plast *
delta_T_plasth_[i]) + q_dot_water_h[i] - q_add[i]) // Heat balance of the
hopper q p due to cold plastic and additional heat, it will be zero
if no plastic in the hopper
T4[i] = (T[3] - (q_dot_plast_h[i] / (m_dot[3] * weight_v[i] * cp))) // Forecasted
temperature at the end of i-th hopper
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
85
==PAGE:96==
h_h[i] = enthalpy(AirH2O; T = T4[i]; w = omega_h[i]; P = 1) // Air enthalpy
at the end of the i-th hopper
h_weight[i] = h_h[i] * weight_v[i]
// Weighted enthalpy with the volume of
the hopper
temp[i] = T4[i] * weight_v[i]
// Weighted temperature with the volume
of the hopper
End
omega_h = m_H2O / (m_dot[3] * 3600)
// Humidity ratio exiting
h_end = sum(h_weight[1..7])
// Final enthalpy by weighted enthalpies
// Final results
T_end_TEMPERATURE = sum(temp[1..7])
// Final weighted T
T_end_ENTHALPY = temperature(AirH2O; h = h_end; w = omega_h; P = 1) // Final weighted h
q_add_TOT = sum(q_add[1..7])
// Total additional heat that the
T_real = T_end_TEMPERATURE * 0.8
// Just a trial to simulate losses
q_plast_TOT = sum(q_dot_plast_h[1..7]) // Sum of heat balance every hopper
// PRELIMINARY CALCULATIONS
// Calculated in standard conditions
cp = cp(AirH2O; T = 40; D = -40; P = 1)
rho = density(AirH2O; T = 25; D = -40; P = 1)
cp_water = cp(Water; T = 25; P = 1)
dew = -40
share_h = 1
// EVAPORATOR
T[1] = T[5]
// Outlet air evaporator air
SH = 5 [°C]
// Superheat
P_ev = p_sat(CarbonDioxide; T = T_ev)
// Evaporation pressure
T[5] = T_ev + SH
// Compressor inlet temperature
P[5] = P_ev
h[5] = enthalpy(CarbonDioxide; T = T[5]; P = p[5])
(h[5] - h[8]) * m_dot_ref = (h[4] - h[1]) * m_dot[3]
// Heat exchange in the evaporator (not all the cold is exploited to cool
down the air)
T[1] = 20
// Input air temperature evaporator outlet (inlet DFD)
omega[1] = m_dot_H2O / m_dot[3]
/
omega[1] = omega[4]
// No change in the evaporator
// GAS COOLER
variabile = 380
m_dot[3] = variabile / 3600 * rho
// Mass flow rate of air
m_dot[3] = m_dot[2]
// Mass conservation
(h[6] - h[7]) * m_dot_ref * share_h = (h[3] - h[2]) * m_dot[3] // Heat exchange
P[7] = P[6]
// Isobaric process
T[7] = T[2] + 5
// Outlet T gas cooler
omega[2] = humrat(AirH2O; T = T[2]; D = dew; P = 1) //-40°C as dew point
86
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:97==
omega[2] = omega[3]
// No change in the GC
// COMPRESSOR
T[6] = temperature(CarbonDioxide; h = h[6]; P = P[6]) // Compressor outlet temperature
s[5] = entropy(CarbonDioxide; T = T[5]; P = P[5])
h_is[6] = enthalpy(CarbonDioxide; s = s[5]; P = P[6]) // Isoentropic compression point
h[6] = ((h_is[6] - h[5]) / eta_is) + h[5] // Real point
pr = P[6] / P[5]
eta_is = -0.0266 * pr^4 + 0.293 * pr^3 - 1.2083 * pr^2 + 2.1612 * pr - 0.7381
// DRYING HOPPER
q_dot_plast = q_plast_TOT
cp_plast = 1.67
// From available data
m_dot[4] = m_dot[3] + m_dot_H2O
T_hp = (T[3] - (q_dot_plast / (m_dot[3] * cp)))
T[4] = (T[3] - ((q_dot_plast + extra) / (m_dot[3] * cp))) // Air deltaT
T[4] = 62
// Air deltaT due to this heat power exit
h[3] = enthalpy(AirH2O; T = T[3]; w = omega[3]; P = 1) // Air specific enthalpy
h[4] = enthalpy(AirH2O; T = T[4]; w = omega[4]; P = 1)
rh[4] = relhum(AirH2O; T = T[4]; w = omega[4]; P = 1)
// Air relative humidity
rh[3] = relhum(AirH2O; T = T[3]; w = omega[2]; P = 1)
// THROTTLING VALVE
P[8] = P[5]
// To evaporator pressure
h[8] = h[7]
// Isenthalpic process
h[7] = enthalpy(CarbonDioxide; T = T[7]; P = P[7])
T[8] = temperature(CarbonDioxide; h = h[8]; P = P[8])
// DESSICANT FLEXIBLE DRYER
m_dot_H2O = m_H2O
// Mass flow rate of water, from available data
m_dot[2] = m_dot[1] - m_dot_H2O
T[1] = T[2] - (q_dot_gain / (m_dot[2] * cp))
// DeltaT air
q_dot_gain = q_dot_ads
q_dot_ads = (m_dot_H2O * delta_h_ads)
delta_h_ads = 3000 [kJ/kg]
h[2] = enthalpy(AirH2O; T = T[2]; w = omega[2]; P = 1) // Specific enthalpy
h[1] = enthalpy(AirH2O; T = T[1]; w = omega[1]; P = 1)
rh[2] = relhum(AirH2O; T = T[2]; D = dew; P = 1) // Relative humidity
rh[1] = relhum(AirH2O; T = T[1]; w = omega[1]; P = 1)
// FINAL CALCULATIONS FOR BALANCE CHECK AND PERFORMANCE
q_dot_heat = (h[6] - h[7]) * m_dot_ref * share_h
// Heat exchanged in the gas cooler
q_dot_cool = (h[5] - h[8]) * m_dot_ref
// Heat exchanged in the evaporator
power = (h[6] - h[5]) * m_dot_ref
// Electric power to the compressor
heat_bal = q_dot_heat + q_dot_gain
// Total thermal power in
cool_bal = q_dot_cool + q_dot_plast
// Total thermal power out
// Coefficients of performance
COP1 = q_dot_heat / (power * share_h)
// useful effect is GC
COP2 = q_dot_cool / power
// useful effect is EV
balance_check = heat_bal - cool_bal
eta_vol = 0.0112 * pr^2 - 0.1633 * pr + 1.0891
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
87
==PAGE:98==
// PINCH ANALYSIS
m = (T[3] - T[2]) / (h[6] - h[7])
// Slope of the heat sink line
pitch = (h[6] - h[7]) / 100
// Pitch to create an array
Duplicate i = 1; 101
En[i] = h[7] + pitch * (i - 1)
// Enthalpy point calculation
Te[i] = temperature(CarbonDioxide; h = En[i]; P = P[6]) // Temperature of the CO2
Ta[i] = ((En[i] - h[7]) * m) + T[2]
// Temperature of the heat sink
delta[i] = Te[i] - Ta[i]
// Pinch in point i
End
dtmin = min(delta[2..101])
// Minimum pinch
losses_hp = q_dot_gain + power - q_dot_plast
// Energy balance of the heat pump
// HEAT EXCHANGERS
delta1_EV = T[1] - T[8]
delta2_EV = T[4] - T[5]
DTML_EV = (delta1_EV - delta2_EV) / (ln(delta1_EV / delta2_EV))
// Mean logarithmic delta T
delta1_GC = T[6] - T[3]
delta2_GC = T[7] - T[2]
DTML_GC = (delta1_GC - delta2_GC) / (ln(delta1_GC / delta2_GC))
// Mean logarithmic temperature difference
(h[6] - h[7]) * m_dot_ref * share_h = UA_GC * DTML_GC
(h[5] - h[8]) * m_dot_ref = UA_EV * DTML_EV
“
88
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
==PAGE:99==
Heat pump integration in the plastic granule drying industrial process
89
==PAGE:100==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.mek.dtu.dk/
