==PAGE:1==
Improved
methods
for
estimating
supraglacial
lake
depths
from
satellite
data using deep learning
Master Thesis
DTU Space
Department of Space Research and Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Space Research
and Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the area of statistics.
Michail-Achillefs Katarachias - s222653
Signature
Date
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
iii
22/07/2024
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Student: Michail-Achillefs Katarachias, MSc Earth and Space Physics and Engineer-
ing, DTU
Supervisor: Louise Sandberg Sørensen, Professor, Department of Space Research
and Technology, DTU
I would like to thank professor Louise Sandberg Sørensen for giving me the opportunity
to work on such an exciting thesis subject that is in the forefront of the scientific advance-
ments and for her continuous assistance and guidance throughout the duration of the
project. Furthermore, I would like to thank Mikkel Aaby Kruse for the provision of the
ICESat-2 data, as well as Mai Winstrup for providing her knowledge and crucial com-
ments regarding the early U-Net training implementations. Lastly, I would like to thank my
parents, who have always supported me in my endeavours and taught me to chase my
dreams, no matter the obstacles.
iv
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Physical Based Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Empirically Derived Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Laser Altimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
DEM based altimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Deep Learning Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Theory
7
3.1
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Training, Validation and Testing Datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Data
17
4.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Unlabelled Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Labelled Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.4
Area of Interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5
Methodology
27
5.1
Initial Attempts and Model Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
Final Model Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3
Unlabelled Data Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.4
Labelled Data Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.5
Model Training Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.6
Training, Validation and Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.7
Model Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6
Results
47
6.1
Initial Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.2
Final Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
7
Discussion
69
8
Conclusions
71
Bibliography
73
A Appendix
76
A.1 Sentinel-2 Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
A.2 DEM Strips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
A.3 Model Parameters by Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
A.4 Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
v
==PAGE:6==
A.5 Generative AI Acknowledgment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
vi
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The Greenland Ice Sheet (GIS) is a crucial component of Earth’s hydrological cycles and
the climate patterns of the planet. It is an important part of the temperature feedback loop
of the ice sheet by influencing the albedo, local temperatures and atmospheric patterns.
This, in turn, accelerates melting rates which have an impact on ice flow dynamics. Mon-
itoring GIS is paramount to get a better understanding of these processes and develop
more accurate climate models.
The current thesis presents a novel deep learning approach to tackling the challenge of
supraglacial lake (SGL) depth estimation, aiming to overcome the limitations of existing
remote sensing approaches. Leveraging the capabilities of deep learning, a specific ar-
chitecture of Convolutional Neural Network, the U-Net, was utilized to develop a model
that produces accurate depth predictions from multispectral images. Throughout the dura-
tion of the project, multiple U-Net implementations were evaluated, each using a different
combination of unlabelled and labelled data sets.
In the end, a single model was created which accepts a 3-channel input consisting of the
Red, Green and Blue bands, while using Digital Elevation Models as ground truth data,
and predicts the depth and extent of a supraglacial lake. The results demonstrate that the
produced model improves depth estimation accuracy compared to traditional methods,
providing a robust tool for large scale monitoring of supraglacial lakes.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The Greenland Ice Sheet (GrIS) is the second largest body of ice on our planet. It is
an important part of Earth’s cryosphere that influences a significant portion of the global
climate patterns and sea levels. Despite its smaller size compared to the Antarctic Ice
Sheet (AIS), its proximity to the majority of the human settlements enables it to play a
pivotal role in the hydrological cycles and climate, especially in the northern hemisphere.
In the context of the climate patterns over this vast expense of ice, supraglacial lakes are
not, just passive bodies of water and ice, but, instead, active participants in the ice sheet’s
response to changes in global and regional climate dynamics.
Specifically for Greenland, the formation of supraglacial lakes is facilitated, either through
surface melting of the ice sheet during the summer months and the gathering of meltwa-
ter in ponds and depressions of the ice, or through intense rainfalls such as monsoons
over the period of many months, or even years. Their distribution over the ice sheet is
determined by atmospheric variations, regional topography and the characteristics of the
ice sheet. Supraglacial lakes, usually exhibit a seasonal pattern, with increased forma-
tion rates over the summer months. Their formation and drainage initiates a multitude of
changes on the surface and the subsurface levels of the ice sheet. The lakes change the
albedo characteristics of the region, absorbing more solar radiation, increasing melting
rates and crevasse formation. Furthermore, their drainage, introduces water deep into
the ice sheet, reaching the bedrock and impacting basal sliding and ice flow dynamics.
The behavior of supraglacial lakes is a neccessary component of understanding the ice
sheet dynamics, which in turn, influence and are influenced by the global changes in cli-
mate. For this reason, the creation of detection and monitoring methods that provide a
clearer picture of their formation and drainage patterns enables the creation of climate
models with enhanced prediction accuracy. To accomodate this need for more accurate
mapping, with good spatial and temporal resolution, there is a continuous push for new
remote sensing and data analysis techniques that combine technologies from different
scientific fields. The main challenge in this process is the availability of data from this
region of the world, due to the limited amount of satellites monitoring the area, as well
as their monitoring periods and intervals. Current remote sensing techniques provide the
advantages of increased spatial coverage and decreased downtime between measure-
ments, with the disadvanteage of decreased spatial resolution. On the other hand, in-situ
measurements provide much better accuracy and spatial resolution, but they are incredi-
bly tough to obtain in this part of the world, and their spatial coverage, as well as temporal
resolution is poor compared to remote sensing.
One of the biggest challenges regarding supraglacial lake monitoring using remote sens-
ing techniques is the estimation of lake depth. Current techniques are not able to combine
good spatial coverage with good depth accuracy and are very dependent on the specific
dataset they are applied to. Objective of the current thesis is to tackle this problem by
leveraging the advances made in the field of deep learning (DL) in the last decade, to
create a DL model that is able to predict the depth of supraglacial lakes from satellite im-
ages, using the spectral bands that of the visible spectrum. The creation of such a model
provides an abstraction layer to lake monitoring that enables its application on different
datasets without being affected from regional or temporal characteristics.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review
Due to their importance in climate cycles, there have been multiple attempts to estimate
the extent and volume of supraglacial lakes. However, even though extent estimation is
a relatively easy and straightforward application with current available satellites, volume
estimation is not. To measure this, it is necessary to be able to, accurately, calculate, not
only the water surface height, but, most importantly, to understand the lake bathymetry,
due to the continuously changing depth and cracks that are forming in the ice that accel-
erate the discharge. Current supraglacial lake depth estimation is achieved using multiple
techniques, each of them having distinct advantages and disadvantages.
One aspect of the changing volume is the lake bottom ablation. Although, not as impact-
ful as the melting of the surrounding ice [1], ablation adds another point of uncertainty to
the depth and volume estimates. In situ measurements provide data for these dynamic
processes, which, in conjunction with models that take into account the atmospheric con-
ditions in the area [1], can assist in estimating the changing lake volume during melt
seasons.
Most importantly, what impacts the supraglacial lake’s volume is the melting that occurs
in the surrounding ice. This feeds the lake with water, but also, changes slightly the to-
pography of the surrounding landscape, affecting both the extent and the depth. For
this reason, there are in situ techniques developed that can map lake depth, like using
specialized boats and crafts to scan the lake bottom[2]. However, even though these
measurements provide the advantage of increased accuracy, they come with their own
shortfalls. The most prominent one is the temporal resolution, since the measurement
process, usually, involves human presence in the area, even when placing remotely con-
trolled equipment. Poor temporal resolution leads to difficulty in predicting discharges and
the evolution of the lake in general. Additionally, mapping the lake extent, especially in
larger lakes, is a painstaking process, leading to trade-offs between measurement time
and temporal resolution.
For this reason, most of the research in this field, has been directed to remote sensing
techniques and in situ techniques are, mostly, used for validation of these results. Remote
sensing provides multiple advantages to a researcher, most of them being in stark contrast
with in situ measurements.
Due to the increasing number of satellites observing Greenland, the temporal resolution
they provide all year round is vastly greater than any in situ technique. Additionally, the
spatial resolution of the instruments keeps increasing with new satellites being launched,
leading to more and more accurate extent estimations. However, they have one major
drawback, which is, as well, the only difficult problem remaining to be solved in order to
produce accurate volume predictions. That of correct depth estimation.
To estimate lake depth remotely, multiple methods have been devised, based, either on
the physical properties of the water or in empirical formulas[3]. Different depths, along
with various lake bottom features, exhibit different colour characteristics. The main ways
to measure lake depth remotely are:
1. Physical Based Methods
2. Empirically Derived Methods
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
3
==PAGE:12==
3. Laser altimetry
4. DEM-based methods
5. Deep Learning Models
Every method involves a different set of tools and datasets and provides distinct advan-
tages and disadvantages in the spatial and temporal domains.
2.1
Physical Based Methods
The current technique is characterized by the application of a Radiative Transfer Equation
(RTE) to optical datasets (images) taken from polar orbiting satellites. The basis of the
method is the model proposed by Philpot [4][5] and has been used in multiple studies to
derive depth from multispectral images [6].
z = ln(Ad −R∞) −ln(Rw −R∞)
−g
(2.1)
where:
• z is the derived depth (in m),
• Ad is the lake bottom reflectance,
• R∞is the reflectance of optically deep water,
• Rw is the water reflectance at the specific depth,
• g = Kd+αDu, with Kd being ”the diffuse attenuation coefficient for downwelling light,
α is the beam absorption coefficient and Du an upwelling light distribution function
or the reciprocal of the upwelling average cosine”[6]
This method has the advantage of being easy to apply to satellite multispectral imagery,
providing great spatial coverage at the expense of low accuracy and a high degree of
uncertainty. This is due to the fact that, for every spectral band, different Ad, Kd values
are being used, leading to different depth estimations for different bands, as well as some
equation parameters being location specific and needing calibration. Furthermore, this
technique has been proven to provide reduced accuracy as the depth increases [7].
2.2
Empirically Derived Methods
Empirical relationships between spectral bands have been proven to provide robustness
to variations in the aforementioned parameters of the physical based methods. These
methods utilized an empirically created formula using the ratio of reflectance of two spec-
tral bands (R1 and R2) [3]:
z = α + bX + cX2
(2.2)
X = lnR1
R2
(2.3)
where α, b and c are calibrated coefficients, based on a known set of reflectances and
depths [3].
4
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:13==
This technique is more robust than the radiative transfer method discussed earlier, how-
ever, it has the shortcoming of depending on the specific sensors and spectral bands that
are used.
2.3
Laser Altimetry
Another way to retrieve the depth of supraglacial lakes is using laser altimetry. The most
prominent instrument used is ICESat-2, a polar orbiting satellite mission with the task of
measuring ice sheet elevation and sea ice thickness. This technique involves seperating
the surface and lake bottom retrieved photons into two groups, clearly identifying the
surface and basin elevations [8]
ICESat-2 retrieved bathymetry provides highly accurate results. However, the major draw-
back is the poor spatial resolution, as ICESat-2 scans a very narrow path along its flight
track. This renders the laser altimetry inefficient for large spatial coverage applications,
constraining it, mostly to validation scenarios.
2.4
DEM based altimetry
One more method that provides accurate results is, using Digital Elevation Models (DEMs)
to derive lake bathymetry. DEMs are a 3D digital depiction of the elevations in an area,
used commonly in GIS products. A DEM describes the topography of the area with great
accuracy, even down to 2 meters [9] per pixel.
DEMs, provide a wide coverage of an area, aiding in applications where spatial coverage
and resolution are paramount, while at the same time, providing the required accuracy of
the terrain elevations. However, they have some two important drawbacks. They are very
tedious and time consuming to create, leading to poor temporal resolution of the area of
interest. Additionally, they represent the terrain elevations at the time of scanning. This
means that, in the case of supraglacial lakes, they don’t always represent an empty lake,
but the lake surface at the aforementioned time, so, multiple DEMs are needed to identify
the basin. Furthermore, they are computationally intensive to process due to their large
file size which makes them less ideal for large datasets or for applications that need to
explain the dynamic changes in the region.
2.5
Deep Learning Models
Between DEMs, ICESat-2 data and the Radiative Transfer Equation, it has been proven
that DEMs and ICESat-2 results demonstrate good agreement with each other and great
accuracy, while, on the other hand, RTE-based methods are the most inaccurate, es-
pecially with increasing lake depth, but provide the widest spatial coverage [7]. For this
reason, a new type of model is needed. A model that combines all of the advantages,
without the inherent disadvantages.
With the recent advances in the field of deep learning models the last 10 years, they gain
prominence in almost all scientific research fields. Their ability to capture relationships
between the data that are not immediately visible using mathematical formulas and in-
verse problem theory, has made them an essential tool in solving problems that were not
easily addressed before.
To predict the depth of water bodies, multiple deep learning approaches have been uti-
lized. Most common, is the use of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), since the
majority of data obtained for these types of applications are 2-D images of the respective
areas and CNNs perform exceptionally well in image segmentation.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
5
==PAGE:14==
The most prominent type of deep learning model used is the U-Net [10], a type of CNN
model which excels in image segmentation tasks and retains spatial resolution during
inferencing. It is, commonly, utilized to map supraglacial lake extent [11][12][13][14][15]
due its segmentation capabilities, however, it is applicable to depth predictions, as well,
both in rivers [16] and supraglacial lakes [17][18][19] due to its ability to extract features
and spatial relationships between pixels in the image.
6
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:15==
3
Theory
The current project aims to try and predict the depth of supraglacial lakes from images.
To achieve this goal, a computer needs to be able to associate pixel values (colour) with
depth. For example it is known that, in the context of water, darker pixels in the visible
spectrum, indicate deeper water due to light refraction, absorption and scattering, as well
as less light reflection from the bottom of the lake.
For this reason, mostly, straight-forward mathematical formulas, based on, just the re-
flectance value, have been used until now. One prominent depth measuring thechnique
is using the Radiative Transfer Equation, based on the radiative properties of the water.
This method, even though it provides a great tool for applications with large spatial cov-
erage demands, tends to introduce great inaccuraces in its predictions, especially with
increasing depth [7].
To combat this problem, for more accurate predictions, apart from a simple pairwise as-
sociation between reflectance and depth, it would be beneficial if the computer model
would also be able to identify spatial relationships in the image, such as understanding
the boundaries of a lake, the shore and where the deeper areas are expected to be lo-
cated. A tool that unlocks all these possibilities is Machine Learning.
3.1
Machine Learning
Machine Learning (ML) is a scientific field in the realm of Artificial Intelligence (AI) that
employs statistical algorithms to enable a computer program to learn from data, make
predictions and be able to generalize to previously unseen data, without being given spe-
cific instructions. In the last decade, ML techniques have exploded in popularity and have
found their use in a wide variety of applications. Despite being a scientific field with ap-
proximately 70 years of research, recent breakthroughs in computing power and research
in different machine learning algorithms and architectures, has led to a rapid growth trend
in this scientific field, being, still, considered, at its infancy, when taking into consideration
the potential of its applications.
Machine Learning has its basis in probability theory and pattern recognition.
Pattern
recognition is ”concerned with the automatic discovery of regularities in data through the
use of computer algorithms and with the use of these regularities to take actions such as
classifying the data into different categories”[20]. Essentially, the model is trained on a set
of learning data and is tasked to be a general model that enables it to produce sufficient
predictions on, previously, unseen data.
3.1.1
Categories
Machine learning is a wide field encompassing different techniques and methods to achieve
the goal of generalization. These techniques differ based on the data in hand and can be
encapsulated into 3 general categories:
• Supervised Learning: In supervised learning, the primary goal for the program is
to associate inputs with desired outputs based on corresponding labels. Supervised
Learning is ideal for regression and classification problems
• Unsupervised Learning: In unsupervised learning, there are no input labels to the
training data. The model has to learn to identify patterns and the structure in the
input data based on a general rule given to it.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
7
==PAGE:16==
• Reinforcement Learning: Reinforcement learning is the method where the model
must perform a certain task and achieve a desired outcome. The way the learning
procedure works in this instance is a decision-making approach where, during train-
ing, the model is presented with rewards as feedback and its goal is to maximize
these rewards.
3.2
Deep Learning
Deep Learning is a subset of Machine Learning. It is based on the implementation of
multiple-layered neural networks that utilize feature detection by employing representation
learning [21] techniques. The word deep in deep learning refers to the number of layers
the network is utilizing for data transformation. Their goal is to transform the input data
to a more abstract representation of features. The strength of Deep Learning models
compared to traditional mathematical approaches is that they are able to identify features
and patterns in the data that are not easily identified through normal models applied to
inverse problems. Their weakness is that, compared to these techiques, they require
huge amounts of computing power due to the number of computations, mainly matrix
computation, they use to transform the input data into predictions.
The main structure of a general Deep Learning model is this:
1. Input Layer: It is the first step in the processing chain. It consists of several neurons
that represent the features of the dataset. Each neuron corresponds to one feature
of the input data. More neurons means a more complex network, but this increased
complexity leads to greater computing requirements.
2. Hidden Layers:
• Neurons: Each neuron is a node through which data and computations flow.
Their job is to receive an input, process it and pass the result to the next layer.
The number of neurons in each layer is fixed during each training instance and
is determined by the architecture of the neural network.
• Weights: Not all features in the input data are of equal importance for the
prediction. Weights are the determining factors on the strength and direction
of one neuron’s output to another. During training, the model learns to tweak
the weight parameters in order to optimize its output.
• Biases: These are additional parameters for each neuron that allow the acti-
vation function to shift, making the model flexible.
3. Activation Functions: Activation functions are one of the main reasons neural net-
works can learn so effectively. They introduce non-linearity to the model, enabling
it to learn complex patterns in the data. Common activation functions used in Deep
Learning are:
• Sigmoid: σ(x) =
1
1+e−x
• ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit): f(x) = max(0, x)
• Tanh: tanh(x) = ex−e−x
ex+e−x
4. Output Layer: This layer contains neurons whose calculations provide the final
prediction of the model.
5. Loss Function: This function measures the difference between the predicted out-
put and the actual or desired output. It is a way to quantify how well the model is
8
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:17==
performing. For different tasks, different loss functions are used, with some of the
common ones being:
• Mean Squared Error (MSE): For regression tasks.
• Cross-Entropy Loss: For classification tasks.
6. Backpropagation: It is the algorithm used to update the weights and biases of the
network in order to minimize the loss function. The steps to achieve the desired
outcome are:
• Forward Pass: The input data are passed through each layer of the network,
being transformed in the process.
• Loss Calculation: The loss is calculated from the predicted output against the
desired outcome.
• Backward Pass: The gradients of the loss are computed with respect to the
weights and biases.
• Weight Update: Weights and biases are adjusted and another batch of the
input data is fed forward through the model.
7. Optimization Algorithm: Its task is to update the weights and biases. The most
common algorithm is the gradient descent. In this, the model, iteratively updates the
weights and biases by moving in the direction of the negative descent of the loss
function.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.1: Simple deep neural network depiction with weights and biases.
There are many variations of neural networks, each one tailored to a specific application.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are a regularized type of feed-forward neural net-
works that have the abillity to learn features by themselves. This characteristic makes
them great tools for image processing, segmentation, classification and analysis tasks.
They include multiple layers that perform convolutions on the input data and are com-
monly activated by ReLU functions.
Mathematically, the main function of a convolutional layer can be expressed as [17]:
Y l+1(i, j) =
Kl
X
k=1
f
X
x=1
f
X
y=1
h
Y l
k(s0i + x, s0j + y) wl+1
k
(x, y)
i
+ b
(3.1)
where:
• Y l+1(i, j) is the output value at position (i, j) in layer l + 1.
10
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:19==
• Kl is the number of input channels (feature maps) in layer l.
• f is the size of the convolutional filter (kernel) .
• Y l
k(s0i + x, s0j + y) is the value at position (s0i + x, s0j + y) in the k-th input channel
in layer l.
• s0 is the stride of the convolution operation.
• wl+1
k
(x, y) is the weight of the convolutional filter at position (x, y), corresponding to
the k-th input channel for layer l + 1.
• b is the bias
The logic is that, when passing through a convolution layer, the image is translated into
an abstract feature map, with shape ninputs×heightmap×widthmap×noutputchannels where
outputchannels = filters.
Figure 3.2: Convolutional Neural Network Structure [22]
This enables the network to extract features like objects, edges or textures, using the
created feature map and identify unique patterns between the image data[16].
3.2.1
U-Net
For the requirements of the current project the use of a CNN is an ideal solution, since
it involves image processing. For a two-dimensional array, the convolution algorithm can
be described as:
Traditional Convolution Neural Networks contain only a contracting path which consists
of consecutive layers that reduce the spatial dimensions, essentially reducing the spatial
resolution of the input image, while, at the same time, increasing the number of feature
maps. This path involves a chain of processes such as convolution, activation and pooling
to extract hierarchical features from the previous layer.
CNNs, while performing well in image classification and segmentation tasks, require a
substantial amount of computing power and a large dataset to achieve the desired levels
of accuracy. The problem of predicting lake depth from images combines regression for
the depth predictions with image segmentation characteristics, since spatial relationships
between, specifically, lake pixels and depth would be necessary to be identified.
A type of CNN that has seen an exploding growth in popularity the last years is the U-
Net. U-Net is a Convolutional Neural Network, initially developed for biomedical image
segmentation tasks in 2015 at the University of Freiburg[10]. It is based on the idea of
Fully Convolutional Neural Networks proposed in 2014 [23], but it leverages its unique
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
11
==PAGE:20==
architecture to be able to achieve the necessary results with fewer training images and
yield more precise image segmentation.
U-Net aims to combat the loss of spatial information in the output, which leads to reduced
spatial resolution, by incorporating an upsampling path after the contracting path. There,
pooling operators are replaced by upsampling operators, retaining spatial resolution in
the output data.
Typical U-Net architecture:
• Contracting Path (Encoder):
1. Input Layer: This layer accepts the input image. It can be tweaked to accept
images of different sizes and dimensions (e.g channels).
2. Convolutional Block: Each block, typically, consists of two convolution layers
and a successive Max Pooling layer which achieves the downsampling. Typi-
cally, the activation between the layers of the block is achieved using ReLU.
3. Doubling of the Feature Maps: After each convolutional block, the feature
maps are doubled.
4. Spatial Dimension Reduction: The spatial dimensions of the feature maps
are halved after each max-pooling operation.
• Bottleneck: This is a convolutional block that does not include the max-pooling
operation for downsampling. It is located between the encoder and the decoder.
• Expanding Path (Decoder):
1. Upsampling Block: An upsampling block, followed by concatenation of the
result with the corresponding feature maps from the contracting path and two
convolutional layers.
2. Feature map halving: As opposed to the encoder, here the number of feature
maps is halved after each block.
3. Spatial Dimension Increase: Doubling of the spatial dimensions after each
block.
• Skip connections: They are a necessary part of the network and the novelty of
the U-Net. They facilitate the concatenation of the feature maps from the encoder
with feature maps from the decoder. This way, they enable the network to preserve
spatial information and context in the original image and use it for its predictions.
• Output Layer: Here, a convolution is used to reduce the number of feature maps
to the desired number of the output channels.
12
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.3: Example architecture of a UNET using 572x572 input images. [10]
The characteristics of the current project are an ideal fit for the advantages of the U-Net
over other Neural Network architectures. The model, due to its symmetrical architecture
and the use of a decoding path, is able to preserve spatial resolution and perform pixel-
level predictions, a critical characteristic for the available dataset, since the images are
not of the highest resolution.
Additionally, the skip connections preserve features as the data flow through the forward
path, retaining spatial information that, otherwise, would be lost in downsampling and
ensure that subtle variations in the image, such as a change in reflectance due to depth,
will be retained and utilized during training. Furthermore, the network is able to capture
contextual information and differentiate between water and ice on lake shores, as well as
deep and shallower parts of the lake.
This introduces localization abilities in the model, aiding in the prediction of where the
deepest parts of the lake are expected to be based on a multitude of factors, such as
reflectance, surrounding area pixels and labelled depths (slope).
However, the most important characteristic for the current application, is the performance
of the U-Net in small datasets. It is a computationally efficient network that is able to make
accurate predictions after being trained on small datasets, making it ideal for situations
where high resolution images are used during inference, a task other Convolutional Neural
Networks would struggle with.
3.3
Training, Validation and Testing Datasets
Training a Neural Network is the process of providing it with inputs of different characteris-
tics from a specified dataset with the goal of producing outputs that fit well to the labelled
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
13
==PAGE:22==
training data. In the beginning, a random initialization of the model’s internal parameters
takes place. During the training procedure, the network is updating its internal weights
and biases in order to achieve the desired outcome.
3.3.1
Hyperparameters
As hyperparameters, are denoted specific parameters that specify details of the training pro-
cess and not the model itself. Their main object is to tweak the training procedure in order
to achieve a better fit to the training data and to enable it to generalize well to new, unseen
data. For different model architectures, there is a different combination of hyperparame-
ters. However, the most important ones are:
• Epochs: Epochs are the number of iterations the model is trained for. An iteration is
considered as a single complete forward pass, the loss calculation and backpropa-
gation of the whole training dataset into the model.
• Batch Size: It is a subgroup of the training dataset and describes the number of
samples (for example, images) that are processed before the model updates its
internal parameters. Each epoch consists of, either a single, or multiple batches,
depending on how the training dataset is split, based on the batch size. In gen-
eral terms, a smaller batch size aids in situations where there are computational
constraints like memory size, while, a larger batch size, usually, introduces better
generalization capabillities into the model. However, a larger batch size can also
lead to longer training times due to the slower convergence of the training loss. For
this reason, striking the correct balance is a process of trial and error.
• Criterion: It is the way the model evaluates its performance by comparing its output
to the labelled data, during every batch calculation. It is, almost entirely, based on
the specific application of the model and the data characteristics. Some common
ones are the Mean Squared Error, the Dice Loss, or the Mean Absolute Error.
• Optimizer: It is the algorithm that controls the backpropagation process. Common
optimizers include Adam optimizer or Stochastic Gradient Descent.
• Learning Rate: Learning rate is a parameter of the optimizer which determines the
step size of the optimization process during each iteration, while moving towards
the minimum of the loss function. It is a crucial parameter that dictates, both the
convergence speed of the loss, as well as the ability of the model to converge.
Lower learning rates lead to more required epochs and slower convergence, while
higher learning rates provide faster training time. However, too low of a learning
rate introduces the risk of the model getting stuck in local minimum, while too high
of a learning rate may prevent the model from finding the global minimum.
14
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.4: Examples of local and global minimum.
3.3.2
Validation
During training, the model aims to minimize the training loss. This loss is calculated based
on the provided training set. However, since the goal of the final model is to be able to
make predictions based on new data, it is paramount to evaluate, during training, the fit
of the model to data, outside the training data set.
This is achieved by implementing a validation set which consists of new data that don’t
overlap with the training data. The usual process is to split the available data set into train-
ing and validation data sets. Validation consists of the same steps and hyperparameters
as the training process, with one exception. Here, the model is switched to evaluation
mode and does not perform the backpropagation. This means that it does not update its
internal parameters, but only calculates the loss for evaluation purposes. The validation
procedure happens during every epoch, or every a predetermined number of epochs and
in the same training loop.
The main goal is for the training and validation loss to converge by the end of the training.
An optimal learning curve consists of high training and validation losses in the beginning
which converge in the end. It is an indication that, adding more training data won’t improve
the model significantly, so the training process reached its optimal point, or a tweak of the
hyperparameters is needed.
A validation loss much higher than the training loss indicates that the model is overfitting
to the training data, with less accurate predictions on the validation data. To combat
this, techniques like dropout [24] or data augmentation can be used which depend on the
dataset characteristics (e.g flipping, rotating, mirroring for images). These have the effect
of, artificially, increasing the data set, making the training process harder. Dropout, on
the other hand, randomly ignores a number of nodes during training, making the training
process less accurate, thus, harder to fit.
The opposite is often observed when the model underfits the training data, an indication
that the model may not be complex enough to capture the underlying patterns. To pre-
vent underfitting, or an increased number of epochs can be used, picking more complex
validation data or even changing the model architecture by adding more complexity.
Below is an example of a loss plot that is paramount to evaluate the training process.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.5: Ideal plot example of the training and validation losses during training.
16
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:25==
4
Data
4.1
Overview
The success or failure of any deep learning model is, first and foremost, based on the
quality of the data used for training, validation and testing of the predicted results. In the
current project, the UNET, as every convolutional neural network, trains on preprocessed
images and compares the result to a predetermined output. For the input training data,
this project uses Sentinel-2 optical imagery and DEM files for the same area are used in
the validation step as ”ground truth” labelled data.
Raw Data Characterization:
1. Unlabelled Data: Sentinel-2 optical imagery
2. Labelled Data: Digital Elevation Model (DEM) Strips and ICESat-2 ATL-03 data
4.2
Unlabelled Data
As unlabelled data, we refer to the data that have not been assigned to any category
and are used as the model input. In machine learning, unlabelled data are ideal for un-
supervised learning, such as deep neural network applications. The goal for the network
during training is to find patterns between the data and classify them correctly, comparing
them against a benchmark data set. In the current project, this category of data set is
included in the images of each lake. There, the labelled data are the different pixel values,
which the deep learning network will try to associate with different depth labels, so it can
produce depth predictions of the lake area. As the goal of the project was to create a
model that is able to predict lake depths, just from images, the input data set in this case
was comprised from optical imagery of each lake in different spectral bands. The data set
was received from the products of Sentinel-2 satellite mission.
4.2.1
Sentinel-2
The Sentinel-2 mission is a European initiative consisting of 2 identical satellites, Sentinel-
2A and Sentinel-2B in the same orbit, seperated by 180°orbital phase and designed to
provide a small revisit interval of 5 days at the equator. The satellites operate in a sun-
synchronous orbit and a mean altitude of 786 km.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.1: Sentinel-2 [25]
The main payload of the two satellites is the MSI (MultiSpectral Instrument). MSI is a
passive imager that utilizes the push-broom concept, collecting sunlight reflected from the
Earth as it is scanning along its orbital path. The instrument is able to split the incoming
light using stripe filters and produce images into 13 different spectral bands with with
various pixel resolutions.
Table 4.1: Sentinel-2 Spectral Bands
Band
Resolution
Central Wavelength
Description
B1
60 m
443 nm
Ultra Blue (Coastal and Aerosol)
B2
10 m
490 nm
Blue
B3
10 m
560 nm
Green
B4
10 m
665 nm
Red
B5
20 m
705 nm
Visible and Near Infrared (VNIR)
B6
20 m
740 nm
Visible and Near Infrared (VNIR)
B7
20 m
783 nm
Visible and Near Infrared (VNIR)
B8
10 m
842 nm
Visible and Near Infrared (VNIR)
B8A
20 m
865 nm
Visible and Near Infrared (VNIR)
B9
60 m
940 nm
Short Wave Infrared (SWIR)
B10
60 m
1375 nm
Short Wave Infrared (SWIR)
B11
20 m
1610 nm
Short Wave Infrared (SWIR)
B12
20 m
2190 nm
Short Wave Infrared (SWIR)
4.2.2
Sentinel Products
The satellite imagery used in this study was obtained through Sentinel Hub [26] and is
based on modified Copernicus Sentinel data for the years 2019-2021. Sentinel products
are offered from the Sentinel Hub portal in 2 categories: Level 1-C and Level 2-A datasets:
• L1-C: This product is composed by 100 km2 tiles in the WGS84 coordinate sys-
18
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:27==
tem. It has been created implementing a Digital Elevation Model (DEM) in order to
project the image in cartographic coordinates [27] and provides orthorectified Top Of
the Atmosphere (TOA) reflectance values with subpixel accuracy. As seen from the
different resolutions in each band, in 4.1, the products are resampled on their na-
tive resolutions with a constant Ground Sampling Distance, different for each band.
The generation of L1-C products includes radiometric and geometric corrections and
spacial registration on a global reference system with sub-pixel accuracy. For this
reason, L1-C datasets, usually, serve as the basis for further processing, especially
when fine adjustments in the data are needed. They can be custom corrected for at-
mospheric conditions, especially when dealing with situations where cloud masking
is paramount.
• L2-A: Level 2-A Sentinel products are a further step in the processing chain of Level-
1C data. The primary additional step is the conversion of the TOA reflectance values
contained in the L1-C data to Bottom Of the Atmosphere (surface reflectance) val-
ues. This is achieved with by applying corrections that aim to remove the effects
of atmospheric gases, aerosols and water vapor. Additionally, wherever applicable,
cloud and cloud shadow masking is applied to improve the accuracy of the BOA
retrieved values. Lastly, they contain information about atmospheric water vapor
content and aerosol optical thickness.
In the scope of the current project, the product of choice was L2-A data. Surface re-
flectance values provided by L2-A products are more closely related to the actual re-
flectance properties of the ground features, since they have been atmospherically and
radiometrically corrected. This reduces atmospheric interference and, most importantly,
the effects of scattering and absorption, making them ideal candidates for input data in a
deep learning network that will be trained to identify water and ground reflectance values
and associate them with depth measurements.
One additonal advantage, which was not exploited in the current project, is the fact that,
from L2-A, other products (such as NDWI, NDVI, etc) can easily be obtained, just by
combining the different spectral bands. These products can, in turn, be used for land
cover classification and to create masks that can be passed to the model during training,
enabling it to identify the lake extent and seperate it from the surrounding environment,
so it can focus its elevation (depth) predictions only for the lake pixels.
4.2.3
Image Acquisition
To obtain the input images for model training, in the current project, the EO Browser tool
[28], from SentinelHub was used. Both are part of the Copernicus Data Space Ecosystem,
operated by Sinergise. Sentinel Hub, by itself, is an engine for processing large datasets
of satellite data, providing the tools for more accessible browsing, visualization and anal-
ysis. EO Browser is an interactive tool that enables to browse and compare visualizations
of full resolution images of products from different missions such as Sentinel-1, Sentinel-
2, Sentinel-3, Sentinel-5P, Landsat, etc, based on the area and timeframe of interest. It
is a valuable tool for Earth Observation projects, creating an abstraction layer in finding
and manipulating data from different satellites, for a specific area of the globe, in different
points in time.
While there are other tools to obtain different products and datasets, as well as to create
L2-A products from Sentinel L1-C products, EO Browser provides an abstraction layer
and an easy way to, visually, inspect and identify specific structures and download all the
relevant data, precisely for the area of interest. This feature was used to, manually, crop
lake areas from each Sentinel-2A tile and choose to download geolocated optical images
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
19
==PAGE:28==
in a .tiff format of all the selected optical bands from B01 to B12.
Using different combinations of the spectral bands, is useful on various scenarios, such
as creating False Colour images or different indices. In the current project, different deep
learning architectures were tested, utilizing all the bands. However, in the end, the chosen
network takes as input only the RGB bands which, for Sentinel-2, correspond to B02
(blue), B03 (green) and red (B04).
4.3
Labelled Data
Every deep learning model, in order to achieve a degree of precision and accuracy, re-
quires a set of labelled data to which it will try to fit the features it identifies from the
unlabelled (input) data. Labelled data specify the expected outcome of the model and are
used during training, both to train the model, as well as for evaluation and testing, as they
provide an easy way to measure the accuracy and precision. For the current application
the initial attempt was to employ depth values retrieved from ICESat-2 as labelled data.
However, during the duration of the project, after evaluating the performance of different
model architectures, the choice was made to switch to Digital Elevation Models (DEMs),
due to their different characteristics.
4.3.1
ICESat-2 measurements
The Ice Cloud and Land Elevation Satellite - 2 (ICESat-2) is a satellite mission deployed by
NASA with the goal of measuring the height of changing Earth using laser pulses and was
launched in September 15, 2018. It is part of NASA’s Earth Observing System and its main
goal is to measure ice sheet elevation, sea ice thickness, land topography, vegetation
characteristics and clouds.To achieve the goals of the mission, ICESat-2 is a near polar
orbiting satellite with an inclination of 92o and a repeat cycle of 91 days[29]. Since the
sheet volume changes are a major variable in the climate system, ICESat-2 enables much
more accurate elevation and, in turn, volume change measurements that help scientists
uncover the complex dynamics of Earth’s climate system.
Figure 4.2: ICESat-2 (Image Credit: NASA)
Its only instrument is the Advanced Topographic Laser Altimeter (ATLAS). It is a photon-
20
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:29==
counting laser altimeter that allows precise and accurate elevation measurements along
its flight path. ATLAS is able to acquire concurrently high resolution elevation measure-
ments and backscatter from atmospheric gases and aerosols.
Since ICESat-2 utilizes a laser altimeter, the swath width is only 17 meters, enabling high
accuracy of 4mm per year, but with very narrow spatial coverage. Its spatial coverage is
constrained to this small swath width along its track.
The ICESat-2 elevation data for the current project were a courtesy of Mikkel Aaby Kruse,
researcher at DTU Space. They were provided in netCDF files, each one containing pro-
cessed, corrected for atmospheric for atmospheric effects, geolocated and time-stamped
elevation measurements for the area of interest in SE Greenland. The structure of each
file was the following:
Table 4.2: ICESat-2 Dataset
lat
Latitude in WGS84
lon
Longitude in WGS84
surface
Surface elevation relative to the WGS84 Ellipsoid
bathymetry
Depth elevation relative to the WGS84 Ellipsoid
ac_date
Acquisition Date
beam_id
Beam ID (gt1r, gt1l, gt2r, gt2l, gt3r, gt3l)
The files were processed and, from them, the data of each track that intersected with the
lakes in the dataset were manually selected.
4.3.2
Digital Elevation Models
Another type of data that was used as labelled data for the model was Digital Elevation
Models (DEMs). Digital Elevation Models are representations of the Earth’s surface ex-
cluding surface objects such as trees and buildings. They provide a high resolution of
the terrain in question and are widely used in various applications, such as topographic
mapping, hydrological modeling, land use planning and more. Their advantages over
ICESat-2 are the wider spatial coverage they provide as well as their higher resolution in
the area of interest. The disavantages are the fact that they are computationally demand-
ing, static, being labour intensive to create and update and they do not provide the same
level of temporal resolution as ICESat-2 data.
The source of the DEMs used in the current project was the ArcticDEM project, from the
Polar Geospatial Center in the University of Minnesota. ”ArcticDEM is a public-private
initiative to produce high-resolution, high-quality Digital Elevation Models (DEMs) of the
Arctic using optical stereo imagery, high-performance computing, and open source pho-
togrammetry software” [9].
4.4
Area of Interest
For model training, multiple data sets were trialed through the duration of the project. The
reason for this was that the selection was dictated by the need for different network archi-
tectures and labelled data, as well as the availability of said labelled data that intersected
with the lakes (DEM strips, ICESat-2 tracks). This, along with the continuous evolution
of the neural network architecture, were dictating factors for selecting different lake data
sets, during each model version. Additionally, wherever possible, the selection was per-
formed on the criterion of having a basis of comparison with previous studies, attempting
to apply different methods for depth detection. The test site was chosen to be Southwest
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
21
==PAGE:30==
Greenland and it contains part of the Watson river basin, a place where supraglacial lakes
are noumerous and very dynamic during the melting season.
Figure 4.3: Active lakes in the region.
All the images were obtained for the month of July, between the years 2019-2020. To
achieve the best image clarity and to ensure the absence of cloud-related artifacts, only
datasets with cloud coverage less than 10% were used. The research area spanned
the latitudes between 66.5°South and 70.5°North and longitudes between -49.5°West to
-47°East in WGS84 coordinates.
22
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.4: Study region.
More specifically, the lakes chosen for the final model were 12 in total and consisted of
the following:
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
23
==PAGE:32==
Eight lakes (1-8) were used for training:
Figure 4.5: Training Dataset Lakes.
(a) Lake 1
(b) Lake 2
(c) Lake 3
(d) Lake 4
24
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:33==
(a) Lake 5
(b) Lake 6
(c) Lake 7
(d) Lake 8
One lake was used for validation (Lake 9) and 3 lakes (Lakes 10-12) were used for testing.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.7: Validation and Testing Dataset Lakes.
(a) Lake 9
(b) Lake 10
(c) Lake 11
(d) Lake 12
26
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:35==
5
Methodology
All the models are able to run, either on a CPU or a GPU. For the current project, a single
GPU with 16GB of memory and Tensor cores was used to maximize the training speed.
5.1
Initial Attempts and Model Architectures
During the duration of the project, several different architectures for the model were con-
sidered and multiple implementations were tested. The creation of the final model was a
process of trial and error, where different approaches were tested and evaluated based
on their performance.
5.1.1
U-Net with ICESat-2 Labelled Data
The initial attempt was to try and create a U-Net model that would use ICESat-2 measure-
ments as labelled data. The input data in this early phase consisted from lake images of
dimensions 1 × 1024 × 1024, in all 12 of the Sentinel-2 bands. The reasoning was to try
and capture the highest amount of information about the area of interest that may not
be available only in the RGB bands. However, the implementation was incorrect. Out of
inexperience in the creation of the U-Net, instead of utilizing a 12-channel image for each
lake, each channel was seperated into a different input data point. This way, the number
of training files increased, but the actual capabilities of the model were degraded.
One more issue with this approach, apart from the input, was the correct use of the labelled
data. As was mentioned in chapter 4, the ICESat-2 data consist of individual elevation
measurements on the direction of the satellite track. The downside of this was that, in
every lake image, there was only a single line of pixels that corresponded to the labelled
data (ICESat-2 elevations). The way the loss calculation was implemented is by extracting
from the predicted depth map, the vector of pixels that corresponded to the elevation
retrieves from the intersecting ICESat-2 track, calulating the Mean Squared Error and
feed this loss in the backpropagation algorithm. Normally, the model would try to find
patterns and fit the input data (pixel values) to the labels. However, a U-Net excels in
learning spatial context from surrounding pixels and identifying individual features in an
image. The more dense the labelled data are, the more information it can extract. By
providing it with very sparse data labels, such as only a few pixels in the whole image, it
is, effectively, handicapped, unable to leverage is unique architecture and make accurate
predictions. No matter how much the hyperparameters were tweaked, the output of the
model was too much off the ground truth data.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.1:
Training Losses for the Network using ICESat-2 labelled data for a
batch_size=20 and learning_rate=10−3
During multiple runs and tweaks of the hyperparameters, even when the losses con-
verged, the predictions of the model were far off the target data, both in the validation
set and, especially in the test set. To mitigate the problem, an attempt was made to mask
all the input data to lead the model to rely only in the specific pixels where there were
ICESat-2 data. Due to the sparsity of the labelled data in this occation, no usable results
were obtained.
5.1.2
Changing the Labelled Dataset - DEM
Recognizing the need for a denser dataset to produce accurate predictions, the choice to
change the labelled dataset was made. For this attempt, both the model architecture and
the input dataset remained exactly the same and the labels changed from ICESat-2 one-
dimension vectors (array of measurements) to a complete elevation representation of the
whole lake area. The training algorithm was tweaked, as well, to work with 2-D arrays for
backpropagation. Different combination of epoch numbers and batch sizes were used,
28
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:37==
as well as the introduction of augmentations in the input dataset with flipping, rotations
and mirroring of the images, and dropout layers in the U-Net to prevent overfitting[24] and
enable better generalization. This attempt started yielding more promising results since
the U-Net was able to capture much more information and make associations between
the pixels.
Figure 5.2: Training Losses for the Network using DEM labelled data for a batch_size=10
and learning_rate=10−3
Based solely on the training plot for this version of the model, the predictions seem to
fit the training and validation datasets well, while at the same time, the overfitting is not
negligible. However, there was still the issue of the context being provided only from the
elevation labels, without any external spatial knowledge about the characteristics of the
surrounding environment, such as hills, flat plains or lake extents. The problem seemed
to lie on the labels. It needed a way to understand were the lake is and focus its attention
on this.
5.2
Final Model Architecture
Until now, the U-Net has been utilized only to try and solve a regression problem, that of
depth estimation. Since this is not its intended use, an alternative approach was needed.
To enable the model to make a distinction between the lake and the surrounding area, two
strategies stood out as the most performant. There was the option to incorporate an at-
tention mechanism in the network. This module would dynamically weigh different spatial
locations in the input image, based on their relevance with lake regions[30]. However, this
option would introduce increased complexity into the neural network and would be time-
consuming from an implementation point of view, to solve problems, if they appeared.
The next and final option was to enable the model to predict the depth, as well as the
extent of the lake, using manually created masks in addition to the DEM data. Using
masks to inform the model where the object of interest is, during training, is the main
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
29
==PAGE:38==
way a U-Net model is trained on image segmentation. This approach has already been
demonstrated to produce accurate enough results in other studies[18][14][13].
The final model architecture was chosen to be a dual output U-Net that is able to predict
both the spatial extent and the depth of the lakes. The choice was made based on the
nature of the data and the goals of the project. U-Net models excel in image segmentation
tasks first and foremost, with regression tasks being a secondary objective. The problem
of depth prediction is that of regression, while lake extent is a segmentation task.
Seing as previous attempts to create a single output model that only predicted the depth
did not bear the necessary results, producing unsatisfactory outcomes with large devia-
tions from the ground truth values, a reevaluation of the model architecture was necessary.
Using only a 2-D array of elevation (depth) values, essentially, counteracted the inherent
advantages of the U-Net architecture, which is designed to capture spatial relationships
between the pixels in the image. To achieve this, the model has to be able to understand
the context of the input data and, most importantly, the lake extent, its features and its po-
sitioning inside the image. While using only a DEM for a single output model is possible,
in this scenario, the model does not make any valid associations between the white pixels
surrounding the lake (snow/ice) and the lake itself. This way, even learning some spatial
relationships between pixels and labelled characteristics like how the elevation change,
or slope is translated into pixel value change, it would be confused every time these pixel
values changed dramatically when moving from ice to water inside the image. Essentially,
the model could not ”see” any distinctive characteristics in the image. For it, the data was
just an array of pixels and depths with little relation between them.
For this reason, the choice to extend the model from estimating only the depth, to predict-
ing the lake extent,as well, was made. As was aformentioned in 5.1, one consideration
was to use masks to mask the whole input image except from that corresponding to the
ICESat-2 depth labels. This is an extension and reevaluation of this idea, where the model
is trained to predict the lake extent and depth, simultaneously. Since, during training the
model learns to identify features5.3, when it evaluates its findings, if it only depth infor-
mation (from ICESat-2 or DEM) to use in backpropagation, it is, effectively, handicapped.
The logic behind it is that the model would be able to identify dynamically, during train-
ing, which pixels denote the lake and focus its predictions on this information and, at the
same time have enough spatial density on the labelled training data to make satisfactory
predictions. The U-Net capabilities in image segmentation are utilized here to aid in the
task of regression by providing the model with the context of where exactly the lake is in
the image.
The final model consists of a U-Net architecture that accepted an input with dimensions
3 × 1024 × 1024 that consisted of an RGB image of the lake in its three seperate spectral
bands. The first part of the network, the encoder, contains of down-sampling blocks.
Each block included a Double Convolutional layer followed by a Max Pooling layer. The
Double Convolutional Layers had a kernel size of 3 × 3, padding of 1 and stride of 1. This
kind of padding was chosen to preserve as much as was possible the spatial dimensions
of the input. The stride of 1 was chosen to keep the spatial density of the input data high,
especially in this application where small features like a slight change of the water colour
from deep to shallow areas or the edges of the lake are crucial. Following each Double
Convolution, the data are transformed by a Max Pooling layer that has the task of reducing
its spatial dimensions. The kernel of the Max Pooling layer had a size of 2x2, the smallest
size possible. It reduces the dimensions by half, while at the same time, preserving the
most important features.
30
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:39==
The number of Convolutional blocks was determined by how many times the number of
features is chosen to be increased, as the spatial dimensions are increased through the
encoder, aiding the model to capture more complex and abstract patterns. In the current
application, 7 Convolutional blocks were used and, thus, the feature map increased 7
times, achieving a good balance between model complexity and efficiency. The scaling
was gradual, doubling the number of feature channels, from 8 in the begining to 512
in the last block. Below are depicted visualizations of the feature maps for the first 3
convolutional blocks (8,16,32), for different lakes to show the progression of the feature
extraction through the model. It is a depiction of how the model ”sees” the lake image.
(a) Epoch 1
(b) Epoch 6
Figure 5.3: 8-channel Feature Map (First Convolutional Block)
(a) Epoch 1
(b) Epoch 6
Figure 5.4: 16-channel Feature Map (Second Convolutional Block)
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.5: 32-channel Feature Map (Third Convolutional Block) - Epoch 1
32
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.6: 32-channel Feature Map ( Third Convolutional Block) - Epoch 6
It is clear how, as an image of a lake is flowing through the pipeline, the model learns more
and more abstract patterns. While in Figure 5.3, the model has identified the general
shape of the lake and its extent, when the data reach the 3rd Convolutional Block in
Figure 5.6 it has already managed to find different patterns inside the lake that indicate
differrences in depth only due to the pixel colour and the spatial relationships between the
pixels.
After the 7 downsampling steps of the encoder, the data reach the bottleneck where they
have the highest number of feature channels, but the lowest spatial resolution, before
they are fed into the decoder. The decoder, essentially, reverses the encoding process
utilizing transposed convolutions to reduce the feature channels and increase the spatial
resolution before it reaches the final 1×1 convolution that creates the desired output with
dimensions 2 × 1024 × 1024. One channel represents the the mask prediction and the
other channel the depth output.
The table below summarizes the model architecture:
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
33
==PAGE:42==
Component
Parameter
Value
Double
Convolution
Kernel Size
3x3
Padding
1
Stride
1
Max Pooling
Kernel Size
2x2
Stride
2
Transposed
Convolution
Kernel Size
2x2
Stride
2
Final
Convolution
Kernel Size
1x1
Input Channels
Default
3 (RGB)
Output
Channels
Default
2 (Extent, Depth)
Feature
Channels
Progression
[8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512]
Table 5.1: Model Architecture Structure
5.3
Unlabelled Data Preprocessing
The model is designed to process optical imagery and make predictions based on this.
In order to construct the neural network, first, it was important to identify the nature of the
data.
5.3.1
Images
As was mentioned earlier, the input images from Sentinel-2 are provided in 13 bands,
each representing a different part of the electromagnetic spectrum. For the requirements
of the current project, 3 bands were chosen as part of the the input dataset. The choice
was made based on the spatial resolution they provide, combined with the information
they carry.
Bands 4, 3, and 2 were selected, representing the red, green, and blue parts of the spec-
trum, respectively. These, along with Band 8A are the ones from Sentinel-2 that provide
the highest spatial resolution 4.1, which is crucial for the detection of small features in the
image, such as the distinction between lake shore edges and and water or the gradual
change of the water color from deep to shallow areas. Furthermore, the RGB bands are
the building blocks of a true color image, providing a great tool for manual inspection dur-
ing data preprocessing and later verification of the results. One additional advantage was
that the use of only 3 bands strikes a good balance between computational efficiency and
model accuracy. Band 8A was omitted from the input dataset, as it represents the near-
infrared spectrum and provides no further information in the current state of the project,
apart from making the training process slower due to the increased size of the input data.
No normalization was performed in the image arrays, since the absolute value of the pixel
reflectance in each band was deemed essential for the model to identify different features
of the lake, such as floating ice and debris.
34
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:43==
5.4
Labelled Data Preprocessing
5.4.1
Mask
The final model is able to make predictions both on the spatial extent of the lake and the
depth of the water. In order to make predictions on the lake extent, the model needed
to be trained on labelled data regarding this aspect, first. This was achieved by manual
creation of different masks for each lake with binary values, where 1 represents the lake
and 0 the non-water pixels.
For the mask creation, two were the most prominent methods that were considered. Prin-
cipal Component Analysis (PCA) and the NDWI index:
• PCA: Principal component analysis is a statistical tool for dimensionality reduction.
The processing chain involves the calculation of the mean for every dimension in
the whole dataset, the covariance matrix of the whole dataset, the computation of
its eigenvectors and eigenvalues, sorting them by decreasing eigenvalues and the
projection of the data onto the new coordinate system. With PCA, the data is trans-
formed into a new coordinate system, where the first axis represents the direction
of the highest variance in the data. The principal components that explain the most
variance in the data can be used to create a new ”synthetic” image to highlight im-
portant features that were not immediately visible in the original one. It is a common
tool used in remote sensing for land classification.
• NDWI: Normalized Difference Water Index is an index created by the combination
of different bands (images) of the electromagnetic spectrum. It is mainly used for
the detection of water bodies in satellite images. It uses the green and near-infrared
bands to create a new image that highlights water bodies.
NDWI = Green −NIR
Green + NIR
(5.1)
In the case of Sentinel-2, the green band is represented by Band 3 and the near-
infrared band by Band 8A.
For the current project, the choice was made to perform the mask creation using PCA.
The reasons behind this are concerning the goals of the project, as well as the nature
of the data. While NDWI is an excellent tool for water detection, in Greenland, there are
lakes with different water colour based on their depth, as well as containing ice during
the melt season. This has the potential to confuse the NDWI, especially in parts where
the water is very shallow, such as lake shores, compared to the deeper parts, making the
thresholding process more challenging.
On the other hand, PCA, essentially highlights the features that explain the most variance
in the image. In Greenland, the area surrounding the lakes is mainly covered by ice
and snow, having little variance, mainly in the RGB bands. This is in contrast with the
lake, both due to the difference in colour, as well as the colour variations inside the lake
from deep to shallow parts. Additionally, PCA is more robust to noise and atmopsheric
conditions, making it a more suitable tool for general applications. This last characteristic
complements the nature of the project, since the goal is to create a model that is for
general use and can be applied to a wide area.
PCA masks were created using all the bands from Sentinel-2, which did not complicate
the process, since EO Browser tool [28] provided the option for batch download. Each
lake was manually processed by setting a threshold value that created a product with a
good balance between the lake, the surrounding area and the ice floats inside the lake.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
35
==PAGE:44==
While the masks cannot be perfect, due to the nature of the PCA, they provide a good
representation of the lake for the purposes of the project. After the masks were created,
they were normalized to binary values, where 1 represents the lake and 0 the non-water
pixels and saved as .png files.
36
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:45==
(a) Lake 1
(b) Lake 2
(c) Lake 3
(d) Lake 4
(e) Lake 5
(f) Lake 6
(g) Lake 7
(h) Lake 8
Figure 5.7: Masks of the Lakes in the training dataset
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
37
==PAGE:46==
Below are presented the masks for the lakes in the validation and testing dataset. Lake
9 was used for validation, while Lakes 10 and 11 were used for testing.
(a) Lake 9
(b) Lake 10
(c) Lake 11
(d) Lake 11
Figure 5.8: Masks of the Lakes in the validation and testing dataset
5.4.2
DEM
However able the model is to predict the spatial extent of the lake, the real goal of the
project was to predict its depth. In order to achieve this, it needed some labelled values to
which it would try to fit the input data. Since the choice to work with a U-Net architecture
was made, in order to achieve good results, the labelled data needed to be the same
shape as the input data. Additionally, the spatial density is a crucial characteristic for
this type of model, since it is designed to capture spatial relationships between the pixels
in the image. For this reason, for the final version of the model, the labelled data were
composed of 2-D elevation arrays covering the exact same area as the input images.
Each lake was identified through its coordinates and the DEMs were downloaded from the
ArcticDEM database. However, the raw DEM strips in the ArcticDEM database provide
38
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:47==
coverage of the same area in different resolutions and temporal periods. There is no
distinction between a DEM that represents a filled lake and an empty one.
For this reason, the choice for the DEM strip that represented each lake basin was made
manually, utilizing the Timeline tool in the ArcticDEM Explorer [31]. It provides a visual
representation of the temporal elevation changes of a single point in the lake. Each point
in the timeline represents a different DEM strip. This made the manual inspection and se-
lection, necessary, though time-consuming, since there were multiple occurrences where
the selected DEM strip did not cover the whole lake and there was the need for a different
lake to be chosen. From this point, the choice of the correct DEM strip was a balancing act
between finding the closest temporal period to the image acquisition date and ensuring
that it represented an empty lake basin. This action was performed by manually inspect-
ing the elevation changes, comparing them with previous points in the timeline to set a
baseline for the lake basin elevation and being close to the image acquisition date.
After each DEM strip was downloaded, it was converted from NSIDC Polar Stereographic
projection to WGS84 and cropped to the extent of the corresponding lake images. How-
ever, the DEM values are a representation of the elevation over the reference ellipsoid,
while the model requires the depth of the water. For the model to be bale to make depth
predictions, a surface baseline elevation needed to be set. This was achieved manually
by overlaying the true colour RGB image of each lake with its corresponding DEM and
choosing 5 points on the shore of the lake. Afterwards, the surface elevation was calcu-
lated as the mean value of the elevations of the 5 points. The baseline zero elevation was
set by subtracting the reference surface value from all the DEM values in each file and
saved as a 2-D array. Despite not offering millimeter precision, this method provided a
good approximation of the surface elevation, which was deemed sufficient for the require-
ments of the current project, taking into account the image and the DEM resolutions.
Below are presented the reference heights that represent each lake surface for the train-
ing, validation and testing sets. Lakes 1-8 were used for training, Lake 9 for validation
and Lakes 10 and 11 for testing.
Lake Points
Lake 1
Lake 2
Lake 3
Lake 4
Lake 5
Lake 6
Lake 7
Lake 8
Point 1
1168.88
1242.25
1293.88
1210.17
1319.26
1124.13
1462.75
1202.87
Point 2
1167.55
1242.48
1292.49
1210.58
1319.52
1123.91
1462.66
1201.49
Point 3
1167.70
1242.35
1293.17
1210.47
1320.01
1123.83
1462.57
1201.46
Point 4
1168.49
1241.93
1292.97
1210.43
1319.73
1123.79
1462.53
1202.25
Point 5
1168.21
1242.74
1293.07
1210.46
1319.44
1124.06
1462.65
1202.06
Surface
1168.17
1242.35
1293.11
1210.42
1319.59
1123.94
1462.63
1202.03
Table 5.2: Training Set: Lake Points and Surface Elevations (m) for Lakes 1-8.
Lake Points
Lake 9
Lake 10
Lake 11
Lake 12
Point 1
1465.00
1385.27
1312.63
900.83
Point 2
1464.61
1385.42
1312.77
900.22
Point 3
1464.72
1385.26
1312.56
900.05
Point 4
1464.81
1385.23
1312.64
900.95
Point 5
1464.67
1385.85
1312.57
901.02
Surface Elevation
1464.76
1385.41
1312.63
900.61
Table 5.3: Validation and Testing Set: Lake Points and Surface Elevations (m) for Lakes
9-12
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
39
==PAGE:48==
After the initial preprocessing of the images, their masks and the DEMs, they were col-
lected and split into different folders for each lake. There, they were rezised using gdal.Warp
to 1024 × 1024 pixels in order for their dimensions to align exactly and produce the maxi-
mum image quality, with respect to the computing resources available. The resizing was
done using bilinear interpolation, in order to preserve the information in the images. This
specific method was chosen due to the fact that it provides smoother transitions between
the pixels compared to nearest neighbour interpolation, which would create a blocky ef-
fect, possibly confusing the model. Additionally, it reduces artifacts and preserves image
features, a highly important characteristic when the goal is to distinguish between slight
colour changes due to depth variations. The last step in the preprocessing chain was the
creation of a pickle file (.pkl) ”bundle” for each lake that contained all the image bands,
the DEM and the mask, each one in a 2-D array. This aided in the simplification of the
data loading process during training of the model as it removed the unnecessary, for the
model, information from each file (e.g. metadata, coordinates) and allowing for faster
data access and memory-efficient training. No augmentations such as rotating, mirror-
ing or flipping of the input data was performed. After multiple training runs, it was made
clear that, due to the amount of available input data, as well as the density of the labels,
augmentations were not necessary to produce accurate results in this instance.
5.5
Model Training Details
The framework of choice, both for writing the model, as well as the training and validation,
was PyTorch[32]. It is a machine learning, Python-based library, originally developed
by Meta AI, used for the developement of deep learning networks. The advantage of
Pytorch against other frameworks such as TensorFlow is its ease of use and its flexibility.
It encourages a ”Pythonic” way of implementing solutions and it can be used both by
beginners and researchers alike due to its modularity which enables rapid prototyping
with minimal changes in the code.
5.5.1
Backpropagation
For backpropagation, the Adam optimizer was chosen. It is based on the Adam algorithm
which stands for Adaptive Moment Estimation and is an extended version of stochastic
gradient descent [33]. Its main advantage is that it incorporates adaptive learning rates
by adjusting the learning rates of the individual parameters based on the historical gradi-
ents, leading to faster convergence. It displays robust performance and stability, crucial
characteristics for the current application. The algorithm operates as follows [33]:
1. Update biased first moment estimate:
mt = β1mt−1 + (1 −β1)gt
2. Update biased second moment estimate:
vt = β2vt−1 + (1 −β2)g2
t
3. Compute bias-corrected first moment estimate:
ˆmt =
mt
1 −βt
1
4. Compute bias-corrected second moment estimate:
ˆvt =
vt
1 −βt
2
40
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:49==
5. Update parameters:
θt = θt−1 −α
ˆmt
√ˆvt + ϵ
where:
• mt: First moment (mean) estimate
• vt: Second moment (variance) estimate
• β1, β2: Decay rates for the moment estimates
• gt: Gradient at time step t
• α: Learning rate
• ϵ: A small constant for numerical stability
5.5.2
Binary Cross Entropy Loss
For this specific application, where two different predictions were made simultaneously,
two different loss algorithms needed to be used. For the lake extent, which is a binary
classification problem, the loss algorithm of choice was the Binary Cross Entropy (BCE)
Loss. BCE tries to quantify the measure of similarity between the predicted probability
distribution and the labelled values.
BCE = −(y log(ypred) + (1 −y) log(1 −ypred))
(5.2)
Where y is the labelled binary class (0 or 1) and ypred is the predicted outcome.
The advantage of BCE on binary classification tasks is the fact that it provides stable gra-
dients. On the contrary, it treats pixels independently, not utilizing the spatial relationships
between them, making it weaker in more complex segmentation tasks. However, in the
scope of the current project, since the main goal is the depth prediction and the spatial
extent of the lake is a secondary target, the more stable gradients that the BCE provides
compared to other loss algorithms aid in the simplification of the training process, since
fewer considerations need to be undertaken and the effect of tweaking the hyperparam-
eters is focused on how they affect the depth loss.
5.5.3
Mean Squared Error Loss
For calculating the depth loss, the Mean Squared Error algorithm was used. It calculates
the mean squared error pairwise, between each element in the predicted and the ground
truth depth labels.
MSE = 1
N
N
X
i=1
(y −ypred)2
(5.3)
MSE is straightforward, both in its implementation and understanding of its characteristics.
It is a common loss algorithm used in regression tasks such as depth prediction. Its most
prominent characteristic, though, made it ideal for the current task.
MSE, by design, penalizes large values. This means, large deviations between the pre-
dicted depth and the ground truth label would be penalized more, enhancing the perfor-
mance of the model in deeper parts of the lake. From the start of the project, the goal
was to create a model that is able to tackle the shortcomings of traditional methods. Their
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
41
==PAGE:50==
most important problem was that, while demonstrating good performance in shallow wa-
ters, they seem to struggle in their estimations as the depth increases[7]. Creating a
model which can make accurate predictions both on shallow and deep water is the main
reason for choosing MSE as an algorithm for the loss criterion.
5.6
Training, Validation and Testing
Initially, a training set employing only Lake 1 was used. The goal at this point was to
validate the working state of the model, as well its ability to fit the data. The strategy
was to evaluate if the model was able to overfit a single image to its corresponding labels
before the whole dataset was introduced. At this point, no validation test was used.
Afterwards, 3 more lakes were introduced into the training dataset. The batch size was set
to b_s=3, meaning that, in every epoch, the model would process the dataset in 2 steps.
In the first process, the dataloader contained 3 images, which the model processed before
it updated its internal parameters, and in the next, it would process the remaining one.
Shuffling was implemented to introduce an element of randomness into the operation.
Smaller batch sizes were attempted, but they degraded the performance of the model.
With the dataset being so small, b_s=3 was deemed sufficient, initially.
As soon as it was made clear that the model could learn effectively, the hyperparameter
tuning was initiated. The learning rate, initially, was set to lr=10-3, a common starting
point for simple deep learning networks. The performance of the model under different
learning rates is, usually, tied to the number of training epochs. While, higher learning
rates, such as lr=10-3 helped the model converge faster, the loss would taper off at a
higher number of epochs than with lower learning rates. The ideal learning rate was
found to be the original one, lr=10-3.
Alongside the learning rate, the number of epochs was, simultaneously being adjusted.
As with the rest of the hyperparameters, the ideal epoch number is not fixed and can differ
from model to model, even if they have the same type of architecture. It is affected by
a multitude of factors, the main ones being the depth and complexity of the model, the
learning rate which can slow the training process down, the number of batches and the
size of the dataset. The final number is found through trial and error and after taking into
account, both the training and the validation loss curves to spot the point of convergence,
from which onwards, the improvement will yield diminishing results. An initial attempt with
100 epochs was made, but was, quickly, dismissed. Common values are, usually, in the
range of 50 to 500 epochs, however, this number can vary wildly and is not a hard limit. For
the current model, the training took place for 1000 epochs, with the loss function converg-
ing, approximately, at epoch 450. When the number of epochs that produce the optimal
train loss function was established, 3 more lakes were introduced into the training dataset
to feed the model with more input data and provide better accuracy and generalization.
In its final form, the training dataset contained 8 lakes in total (Lakes 1-8). Since more
data were available, and to balance the batches during epochs, as much as possible, the
batch size was set to 4, with 4 lakes on each batch.
Since the whole dataset (training, validation and test set) consisted of 12 lakes in total,
the choice was made for the validation dataset to contain only one lake, Lake 9. This was
procured in order to have a consistent benchmark between different epochs, as well as
different training runs, that would aid in the evaluation of the training results.
Finally, the test set, consisted of Lakes 10, 11 and 12 due to their characteristics that
made them ideal for testing purposes. Lake 10 represents a clear lake with a smooth
surface and a mostly circular shape. Theoretically, it should be the easiest sample to make
42
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:51==
predictions on, so the ”best case scenario” can be evaluated. On the other hand, Lake
11 and 12 present irregularities, both in their shape, as well as their surface properties.
They have, either an elongated or irregular shape, making it more difficult for the model to
identify where the deepest parts should lie and, on their surface some floating ice exists,
which has the potential to, greatly, confuse the model. They serve, then, as a ”worst-case
scenario” for the model predictions.
5.6.1
Loss weighting
Normally, in a single prediction model, the loss would be a straightforward calculation,
based on a criterion like MSE or BCE. However, on this instance, the model produces a
dual output estimation. Extent and Depth. For this reason, during training and validation,
both were tracked and plotted after every run. They were combined into a single loss vec-
tor that was fed into the backpropagation algorithm to optimize the model for both outputs.
In order to achieve this, a weight value was attributed to each loss vector depending on
its magnitude and the expected results. This way, more flexibillity is introduced into the
training process, since the model can be tweaked and retrained based on the application
characteristics. Larger weights for depth prediction accuracy and smaller weights for lake
extent accuracy.
Loss = wd ∗D + we ∗E
(5.4)
where w ∈[0, 1], D is the depth loss and E is the extent loss in every epoch.
5.6.2
Evaluation of the training parameters
Training is a process of trial and error to find the optimal parameters that minimize the
loss in an appropriate number of epochs and training time. Integral part of the evaluation
process is the plot of the loss curve.
Figure 5.9: Loss plot for a training run of the tweaked model.
Figure 5.9 displays a breakdown of all the loss metrics for a better evaluation of the model’s
performance during training. Normally, the loss plot in a tweaked model is expected to
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
43
==PAGE:52==
display a convergence from 0 epochs to the end of its run. Figure 5.9 does not demon-
strate these properties uniformly. While training (Total and Depth Loss) losses seem to
converge as expected, the validation losses remain high and most importantly, exhibit
spikes which indicate a degradation of the fit to the validation data compared to previous
epochs. Optimally, the validation and training loss should converge by the end of the
training run.
However, two considerations must be taken into account when reading the aforemen-
tioned plot. The speed of convergence and the difference between training and validation
loss are not only affected by the model hyperparameters, but also by the initialization of
the model parameters (weights and biases). Additionally, the depicted spikes do not nec-
essary describe a degradation of the model performance. They exist, mainly due to the
characteristics of the different depth and extent loss metrics. Depth loss, being measured
by MSE has, inherently, higher magnitude than the extent, measured by BCE. Small devi-
ations in the depth validation loss drive the total loss of the model higher, as well, since it is
a linear combination of the two. This can be examined more in depth if the two validation
losses are isolated and plotted for two different runs:
44
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.10: Breakdown of the validation losses for different runs.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.10 shows a breakdown of the aforementioned validation losses, in different runs
of the model, with the exact same training and validation datasets, hyperparameters and
model parameters. Furthermore, the claim that the driving force behind the spikes is the
deviations in the depth losses is backed by a simple calculation of the standard deviation
of the two vectors.
Depth Loss STD
8.296
Extent Loss STD
0.161
Table 5.4: Standard Deviation of the validation losses.
Based on both figures, the decision to keep the number of epochs at 1000 was taken.
5.7
Model Parameters
Model parameters are the properties of the training data that the model learns during
training. More specifically, they are the final values of the weights and biases of each
neuron. The number of model parameters is a measure of the complexity of the model and
an indication of its performance. For reference, a huge Large Language Model like GPT-3
contains 175 billion parameters [34]. The current U-Net is a specialized model, trained on
a small dataset and a specific task with its parameter count being 31119906. For context,
it would be important to mention here that, in the two previous model approaches, the
number of model parameters did not exceed 12.1 million, indicating the increase in depth
and complexity, in the final model. The breakdown of the parameters by layer is displayed
analytically in the Appendix, section A.3.
46
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:55==
6
Results
6.1
Initial Models
6.1.1
Model with ICESat-2 labelled data
As was mentioned in Chapter 5, an initial attempt to create a deep learning model using
ICESat-2 data as labels an without masks indicating the extent of the lake was made,
which did not yield usable results. Below, the validation sample for this attempt is pre-
sented, with the intersecting ICESat-2 track, along with the corresponding labelled data.
(a) Model Depth Prediction with Intersecting ICESat-2 track
(b) ICESat-2 track and corresponding Model Predictions.
Figure 6.1: Comparison between Model Depth Prediction and ICESat-2 track
From Figure 6.1a, can be concluded that the U-Net, as a CNN, is capable of identifying
spatial relationships between pixels in the input image, making a clear distinction between
the negative values (lake depths in yellow) and the positive (surface in brown). However,
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
47
==PAGE:56==
as depicted in 6.1b, which analyzes elevation in the pixels that correspond to the ICESat-
2 track, it is completely incapable of solving the regression problem and produce robust
depth estimations, with the values oscillating in a wide range around the elevations re-
trieved from ICESat-2, but never fitting.
6.1.2
Model with DEM labelled data, without masking
The next attempt was to configure the model to use a DEM of the area as its labelled
data, instead of just a vector of pixels. By using this, denser dataset, the model would
be able to extract more spatial context to, possibly, aid it in its regression task. The best
model produced with this method, ended up providing more accurate results compared to
the one using ICESat-2 data, but had issues with handling anything else outside the lake
extent.
48
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.2: Model Predictions Using DEMs as Labelled Data.
It is clear that the network has the capacity to understand spatial relationships between
the pixels and identify features inside the image. However, when data augmentation was
introduced into the training process, the accuracy of the predictions on the validation set
degraded significantly.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 6.3: Model Predictions Using DEMs as Labelled Data (augmented dataset).
Once rotations, flipping and mirroring were introduced, the model was rendered unable
to generalize, displaying poor performance on the validation dataset.
In summary, neither of the two combinations of model architectures and training methods
provided the required optimal performance. Table 6.1 provides a statistical overview of
the performance of the best outcomes for both approaches on the validation dataset.
Metric
DEM labels
ICESat-2 labels
MAE (m)
1.24
7.53
STD of Error (m)
2.87
8.15
MSE (m2)
1.87
89.76
RMSE (m)
1.37
9.47
Max Error (m)
2.62
23.54
Table 6.1: Comparison of the depth estimation performance between the two first failed
model architectures.
From Table 6.1, as well as Figures 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3 it is clear that neither of the two
models is suitable for the task of depth estimation. However, as expected due to denser
labelled data, the model using DEM as ground truth labels, was significantly more accurate
than the one using ICESat-2. This is an indication that, using DEM data was a choice in
the right direction, but not enough. While the Mean Absolute Error on the validation
dataset was acceptable and in line with previous studies [18], the Standard Deviation
of Error indicated large variations in the accuracy of the predictions. This conclusion is
further supported by the visual results displayed on Figures 6.2 and 6.3 where the model
is struggling, either to generalize, or, in the case it manages to generalize, to figure out
the shape of the lake basin.
6.2
Final Model
Since the previous attempts did not yield accurate enough results, the introduction of lake
extent prediction capabilities into the model was essential. After tweaking the new model
50
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:59==
hyperparameters and training it, it was necessary to evaluate the performance, both on
the validation set and the, completely unseen before, testing dataset.
6.2.1
Training Sample Performance
To, visually, confirm that the model did not, extremely, overfit to the training data, Lake 1
is chosen for analysis.
Figure 6.4: Training True Colour Image (Lake 1)
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.5: Comparison of the ground truth elevation labels and the model depth estima-
tion (Lake 1).
Figure 6.6: Comparison of the, manually created, PCA mask and the extent model pre-
diction (Lake 1).
Figures 6.5 and 6.6 showcase that, while the model fits well on the training image, it does
not fit completely, indicating, either inefficiences in the training process, or, the ability of
the model to generalize, leading to, slightly less accurate, but correct predictions. This
hypothesis, can, further, be tested by plotting the results for the validation and training
datasets.
6.2.2
Validation Set Performance
The validation dataset consisted of a single lake, to provide a stable benchmark between
different runs and hyperparameter combinations. The lake used for validation combines
a few characteristics, crucial for a subjective assessment of the results. It has a slightly
irregular circular shape, as well as some floating ice on its surface which can possibly
confuse the model.
52
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.7: Validation True Colour Image (Lake 9)
Figure 6.8: Comparison of the ground truth elevation labels and the model depth estima-
tion (Lake 9).
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.8 provides a clear picture of the model’s capabilities in the task of depth predic-
tion.
As it is evident from the right plot showcasing the relative difference, the model performs
well, producing accurate depth predictions for the majority of the lake area. Not only the
magnitude of the predictions, but the gradual change in depth from shallow to deeper
water are captured in the model output. It is able to predict elevations close to the ground
truth values, even at the center of the lake, for deep water. Additionally, the model has,
correctly identified the shape of the lake, as well as the expected deeper areas, based on
the combination of unique features it learned during training.
Figure 6.9: Scatter Plot of the ground truth elevation labels and the model depth estimation
(Lake 9).
Figure 6.9 verifies the accuracy of the validation set results, with most of the predictions
in the whole range of depth values following closely the ground truth data.
Despite this remarkable accuracy, even from this validation product, some shortcomings
of the network are evident. In the places where, in the image, the lake is covered by
54
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:63==
floating ice, the model is not able to, completely ignore them and is producing the largest
error compared to the ground truth data. However, even at this situation, which, is the
most difficult one for depth detection, with the exemption of floating ice, it has been able
to minimize its errors by, eliminating almost half of the ice-covered area, based on the
depth difference plot.
Additionally, while the model achieves unexpectedly good results in deep water regions,
even this is not perfect at these areas. In the center of the lake, the model, slightly,
overestimates the depth. The error in this location does not surpass the 2 meter value
vertically.
Another one of its weak points is the distinctive observed abrupt changes in elevation at
the shores of the lake. Instead of the smooth transition from the surrounding ice to the
shores of the lake, and to deep waters displayed in the ground truth data plot, the predicted
output depicts abrupt changes at the lake shores, indicating a slight inabillity of the model
to make correct predictions at the boundary of the water and ice. This assumption can be
evaluated by plotting the lake extent predictions from the second channel of the model’s
output.
Figure 6.10: Comparison of the, manually created, PCA mask and the extent model pre-
diction (Lake 9).
By comparing the two predicted masks in 6.10, it is observable that the model is able to,
correctly identify the lake extent, with very slight errors. Additionally, despite the mask and
the input image being obscured by the presence of floating ice, the model managed to,
correctly, predict the presence of water in a vast majority of the covered areas, especially
close to the middle of the lake. However, the hypothesis of the model failing to predict
the edges of the lake, made by the visual inspection of the depth plots, is proven correct,
since there is a slight discrepancy between the predicted and the masked extent. In this
occasion, the model underestimates the lake extent, with the largest deviation being in
the left part of the image, where there is an increased presence of floating ice.
6.2.3
Testing set performance
Since the validation set is already used during training to identify the correct set of hy-
perparameter, even though the model does not train on it, it is important to evaluate the
performance of the final, tweaked model, to a, completely new, set of data, to verify its
generalization capabilities. For this reason, three new lakes were introduced, each of
them having different characteristics.
Lake 10 is a very symmetrical lake regarding its boundaries and with a predictable slope
on its terrain, while the maximum depth is half of that of the validation image. The floating
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
55
==PAGE:64==
ice on its surface is almost non-existent in the input images and, theoretically it is easy to
retrieve depth predictions for a well-trained model.
Figure 6.11: Testing True Colour Image (Lake 10)
56
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:65==
Figure 6.12: Comparison of the ground truth elevation labels and the model depth esti-
mation (Lake 10).
In Figure 6.12, the same characteristics that were evident in the validation image are
observed here, as well. The model performs well in predicting the depth, both in shallow
and deeper areas. This time, the difference between the predicted depth in the deepest
part of the lake and the ground truth data is less than 1 meter with very few predictions
being more than this limit. The only significant error in the predicted values compared to
the rest of the values is a very small part of the output elevations, on the top left of the
plot, where, in the input images the presence of floating ice can be detected. This, slightly
confuses the model, but, even at this point, it manages to ouput depth predictions with an
error close to 2 meters. Admittedly, the aforementioned error magnitude may be attributed
to the fact that it is close to the lake shore, with the ground truth values indicating a depth
of less than 2 meters, which minimized the final difference. Furthermore both the extent
of the lake, and the correct slope and gradient of the elevation values inside the lake area
have been correctly identified.
Additionally, the characteristically, abrupt changes in elevation in the validation image,
appear here, mainly in the lake edges, while there is a slight overestimation in the deepest
part, in the middle of the lake.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.13: Scatter Plot of the ground truth elevation labels and the model depth estima-
tion (Lake 10).
The consistent results of the validation set are verified for the first testing image in Figure
6.13, as well. The model’s predictions are in line with the ground truth data, with very little
overestimation, mainly close to the surface reference elevation.
58
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:67==
Figure 6.14: Comparison of the, manually created, PCA mask and the extent model pre-
diction (Lake 10).
Figure 6.14 showcases, mainly the limitations of the current model. On this instance,
the extent prediction accuracy is, visibly, higher than in the validation dataset, a fact,
mainly, attributed to the uniformity of the lake. However, there are some small artifacts
corresponding with the floating ice, which were not eliminated on the predicted output,
this time. The same pattern is observed in the lake edges, as well, with the model slightly
underestimating the lake boundaries, although, with fewer mislabelled pixels, one factor
for the small error being, mainly the predictable shape of the lake.
Lake 11 is the second specimen of the testing data set and the most challenging one.
It is a lake with an irregular shape, which does not have uniform or predictable depth in
all of its extent, making it more challenging for the model to output accurate predictions.
Additionally, a sizeable part of it is covered by floating ice, degrading the quality of the
input data even more.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 6.15: Testing True Colour Image (Lake 11)
Figure 6.16: Comparison of the ground truth elevation labels and the model depth esti-
mation (Lake 11).
60
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:69==
From Figure 6.16, it is clear that the model is able to predict the expected depth, not only
on regular shaped lakes such as in Figure 6.12, but also on occasions where the lake
bottom appears to split into smaller basins, each with its own depth characteristics. Their
error appears higher in the current Figure than previously, especially in the shallower of
the two basins, with the model smoothing the depth differences, predicting values which
are less than the ground truth ones for the deep basin (top) and slightly higher values
(depth) for the shallower basin (bottom).
Figure 6.17: Scatter Plot of the ground truth elevation labels and the model depth estima-
tion (Lake 11).
On Lake 11, the model showcases slightly degraded performance, based on the distri-
bution of the predicted versus expected results. Close to the shoreline, it appears to
underestimate the lake depth, strengthening the conclusion that it demonstrates lower
accuracy on the lake edges. Additionally, as was evident on Figure 6.16, there is a slight
underestimation of the deepest parts of the lake.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 6.18: Comparison of the, manually created, PCA mask and the extent model pre-
diction (Lake 11).
Figure 6.18 displays the same characteristics as all the previous lake extent predictions.
The model’s estimations degraded at the point where the concentration of the floating ice
is increased, while, at the same time, the issue of a slight underestimation at the boundary
of the lake edges still remains. However, on this instance, it is important to note that the
model managed to, largely, overcome the floating ice problem, producing a lake mask
that is even better than the original PCA one. This indicates that it has identified some
spatial features during training that enable it to identify patterns between floating ice and
water, and to prevent some artifacts from appearing in the output.
Lastly, Lake 12, represents a unique sample from the data, since, as was confirmed after
manual inspection, it is a lake that drains very rapidly, making the retrieval of elevation
values using a DEM, very difficult and sparse. For this reason, the ground truth data for
this occasion, was from 2019, while the image is from 2020, but, by inspecting the timeline
values in the ArcticDEM Explorer, there is good amount of certainty that they represent
an empty lake basin.
62
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:71==
Figure 6.19: Testing True Colour Image (Lake 12)
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6.20: Comparison of the ground truth elevation labels and the model depth esti-
mation (Lake 12).
As is evident from Figure 6.20 This is the test sample where the model predictions pre-
sented the maximum error inside the lake area, surpassing 5 meters in some places.
However, the locations of these errors coincide exactly with the appearances of cracks
and crevasses on the lake basin.
64
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:73==
Figure 6.21: Scatter Plot of the ground truth elevation labels and the model depth estima-
tion (Lake 12).
Figure 6.21 confirms the challenges the model faces in predicting the depth of Lake 12.
As it was evident from Figure 6.20, in the vast majority of the predictions, the model
underestimates the real depth of the lake. However, this underestimation is uniform for
the whole lake and not in specific depth ranges.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure 6.22: Comparison of the, manually created, PCA mask and the extent model pre-
diction (Lake 12).
In Figure 6.22, the performance of the model remains consistent, with the lake extent
predictions being better in the center than in the lake edges. This time, however, there is
a slight overestimation of the lake area, evident, mainly, at the bottom left of the difference
plot which is not affected by floating ice.
6.2.4
Metrics
In addition to visual inspection of the predicted results, stastistical analysis is paramount
for the complete evaluation of the model’s performance. All the statistical parameters
were calculated only for the extent of the lake, ignoring the model predictions and ground
truth data for the surrounding ice-covered area.
Table 6.2: Depth Prediction Statistics for the Training and Validation Sets.
Training Set
Validation Set
Parameter
Lake 1
Lake 9
MAE (m)
0.32
0.471
STD of Error (m)
0.286
0.382
MSE (m2)
0.184
0.368
RMSE (m)
0.429
0.607
Max Error (m)
2.704
5.034
Table 6.2 confirms the indication obtained from Figure 5.9, that, while the final model does
not fit the training data perfectly, it is able to generalize well. The Mean Absolute Error
between the predictions and the real depths is less than 0.5 meters in both samples. Most
imporantly, the small Standard Deviation of the Error, while expected in the training
sample due to the fitting of the model, in the validation set indicates a, spatially, uniform,
error distribution and, close to the mean value. Maximum Error pinpoints to it being an
outlier value, judging from, both the statistical results and visual inspection of the depth
plots.
66
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:75==
Table 6.3: Extent Prediction Statistics for the Training and Validation Sets.
Metric
Training Sample
Validation Data Set
Accuracy
0.988
0.989
Precision
0.942
0.993
Recall
1
0.985
Specificity
0.986
0.993
F1 Score
0.97
0.989
IoU (Jaccard)
0.942
0.978
Regarding lake extent, the statistical results of the model during training and validation,
verify the visual inspection. The accuracy of the predictions in both training and valida-
tion is high and, extremely comparable, which showcases the generalization ability of the
model. The high precision of the validation set suggests that the model has a low false
positive rate when predicting lake extent on unseen data. A recall of 98.5% means that the
model missed very few pixels that it should have included in the lake. The high specificity
of the model indicates its ability to, correctly, exclude non-lake areas from its predictions.
Achieving such high precision and recall led to an F1 Score of 98.9%, suggesting that
the model’s performance is well balanced in the task of extent prediction. Lastly, the met-
ric for Intersection over Union (IoU), measures the degree on which the predicted lake
area overlaps with the mask labels. A higher IoU value in the validation set is, mainly, a
byproduct of the ideal lake shape and the absence of floating ice on the surface which
could confuse the model.
Even though, the results from the validation set are encouraging, it remains only one
image. The real challenge lies in producing predictions for multiple, different, unseen
lakes, in the testing data set.
Table 6.4: Depth Prediction Statistics for Lakes 10, 11, and 12 with their Mean
Parameter
Lake 10
Lake 11
Lake 12
Mean
MAE (m)
0.297
0.638
0.800
0.578
STD of Error (m)
0.253
0.459
0.714
0.475
MSE (m2)
0.152
0.617
1.150
0.640
RMSE (m)
0.390
0.786
1.072
0.749
Max Error (m)
3.132
7.710
6.094
5.645
The measured statistical parameters on the testing data set uncover an interesting picture.
The model, in its best prediction, has a Mean Absolute Value of 0.297 for Lake 10, which
had a maximum depth of, approximately 8 meters. This result beats the expectations and
improves on those of previous studies [18] by a great amount. Additionally, the Standard
Deviation of the Error is centered around the mean value, indicating a consistent per-
formance across the lake. This position is strengthened further by the Mean Squared
Error, one of the metrics that penalizes the outliers, which remains very low for Lake 10,
while, on the contrary, is 3 times higher for the difficult to predict, Lake 12. Despite the
model being incredibly performant on Lake 10, on average, the quality of the predictions
remains extremely high, along the whole data set, indicating a robust performance.
As far as lake extent is concerned, the trend of the model being very accurate on the
Lake 10, is observable here, as well. On average the extent prediction metrics are in
agreement with the validation set, even though, slightly lower on occassions.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
67
==PAGE:76==
Table 6.5: Extent Prediction Statistics for Lakes 10, 11, and 12 with their Average
Parameter
Lake 10
Lake 11
Lake 12
Accuracy
0.994
0.978
0.982
Precision
0.999
0.959
0.953
Recall
0.989
0.994
0.995
F1 Score
0.994
0.976
0.974
IoU (Jaccard)
0.988
0.954
0.949
Table 6.6: Performance Metrics for Extent Prediction
68
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:77==
7
Discussion
Summarizing, both from visual inspection of the results in the validation and testing data
sets, and from the statistical analysis, it is concluded that the final trained model has
exceptional performance in both easy and challenging scenarios.
The model’s depth accuracy and ability to identify lake pixels remains high, consistently
in the whole testing data set, providing robust performance in different scenarios. The
model is able to identify, not only the shapes of the lakes and the location of the deeper
parts, in order to make an estimation, but it is also manages this with sharper than 1-meter
accuracy in most cases. Apart from the absolute depth values, it is able to, correctly es-
timate the slope of the lake bottom, even when it is more complex than expected, such
as the example of Lake 12 in Figure 6.20 in the test set, where the basin was consisted
of 2, distinct deepwater locations. Extracting information from a combination of the sur-
rounding terrain, as well as the water colour and its location, it can, accurately pinpoint,
both the depth of the basin and, even the presence of cracks and crevasses in the lake
bottom. This ability can, further be exploited to, apart from estimating static depth values
in different temporal periods, also create models to predict more accurately the forma-
tion and discharge of a lake, aiding in the understanding of supraglacial lake dynamics in
Greenland.
However, as was evident in Chapter 6, the model struggles to identify lake extent correctly,
which, leads to a slightly worse depth accuracy on lake edges. The reason behind it is
that, during training, the weights for extent and depth prediction were chosen such as,
there was a good balance between both outputs, with most emphasis being given towards
depth predictions.
There are multiple ways to enhance the performance of the model. One of them, which
was considered but, abandoned due to complexity and time constraints, was the introduc-
tion of an attention module in the model architecture, like a Convolutional Block Attention
Module (CBAM)[30]. This has the potential to improve model performance, in both chan-
nel outputs, by enabling it to focus on the lake placement in the picture and the specific
lake features which affect the depth measurements. Additionally, the weights for depth
and extent predictions, can, also be tuned to lean the model’s output towards one or the
other desired result.
Another, easier, but more time-consuming effort would be to increase the model’s training
data by including more lakes to improve its generalization abilities. However, this is not a
guaranteed success. A training run with the current model architecture was attempted in
this project, including 3 more lakes as a test, however it only produced, marginally better
statistical results, thus, it was not used in the final version.
Furthermore, future work can be done to expand the number of input channels of the
model of to increase the number of feature maps and, by extension, the number of con-
volutional blocks of the model. This would enable the network to accept as an input more
spectral bands compared to the current RGB ones, including more information in the train-
ing process and, possibly, uncovering more patterns that enhance its depth prediction
capabilities.
Despite the U-Net, being an architecture primarily used for image segmentation, even
in the problem of regression, it is proven to be able to produce accurate and repeat-
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
69
==PAGE:78==
able results. In depth prediction for supraglacial lakes, the model exceeded expectations,
with respect to similar research in the field[19] Additionally, it is further confirmed that,
deep learning approaches and, most importantly, U-Net models,demonstrate great per-
formance, specifically in depth estimation of water bodies surrounded by terrain[16] The
reason behind this is their inherent characteristics and their ability to capture, simultane-
ously, spatial and functional relationships and use their segmentation abilities to enhance
the depth predictions by, mostly, ignoring the surrounding area.
70
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:79==
8
Conclusions
The current project has introduced and validated a novel deep learning approach for esti-
mating supraglacial lake depth from satellite optical imagery. The scope of the project was
to create a robust model that addresses the limitations of current remote sensing depth
estimation techniques which often struggle to strike a balance between temporal resolu-
tion, spacial coverage and depth accuracy. This was achieved through the integration of
various data sources, such as multispectral Sentinel-2 images, Digital elevation models
(DEMs) and elevation retrieves from ICESat-2 data.
Different model architectures and unlabelled/labelled data combinations were evaluated
and the most performant was developed further. The produced model has shown signifi-
cant improvements in the accuracy and robustness of supraglacial lake depth predictions.
The key findings of the project were:
• Performance The developed model demonstrates accurate results, both in depth
estimation and lake extent metrics using just 3 spectral bands.
• Improved Depth Estimation: The model’s results indicate a substantial improve-
ment over current physical based, empirical and other remote sensing techniques.
• Key Improvements over Current Models: The main alteration over other imple-
mentations was the use of DEM data as labels during training. These provide a much
denser labelled dataset which enables the model to capture more spatial informa-
tion and context between the input data, enhancing the accuracy of the predictions.
This change lead to a model with increased accuracy, especially in the deeper parts
of the lake, which was a weak point of other, traditional methods [7]
• Adaptability The produced network, currently relies on a combination of only the 3
optical Sentinel-2 bands. However, the architecture is easily expandable to include
more bands to adapt to different scenarios, if needed. This flexibility is particularly
important for continuous monitoring and assessment of supraglacial lakes under
changing climate conditions. It provides an additional tool to scientists for, more
accurately, predicting the behavior and dynamics of the Greenland Ice Sheet.
Finally, the current thesis is another successful demonstration of the capabilities of deep
learning models to uncover patterns in the datasets, enhancing our current inverse mod-
elling approaches to various scientific fields by extending our available data analytics
toolkit.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
71
==PAGE:80==
72
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
M. Tedesco et al. “Measurement and modeling of ablation of the bottom of supraglacial
lakes in western Greenland”. In: Geophysical Research Letters 39.2 (2012). doı: https:
//doi.org/10.1029/2011GL049882. eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1029/2011GL049882. url: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1029/2011GL049882.
[2]
M. Tedesco and N. Steiner. “In-situ multispectral and bathymetric measurements
over a supraglacial lake in western Greenland using a remotely controlled water-
craft”. In: The Cryosphere 5.2 (2011), pp. 445–452. doı: 10.5194/tc-5-445-2011. url:
https://tc.copernicus.org/articles/5/445/2011/.
[3]
A. Pope et al. “Estimating supraglacial lake depth in West Greenland using Landsat
8 and comparison with other multispectral methods”. In: The Cryosphere 10.1 (2016),
pp. 15–27. doı: 10.5194/tc-10-15-2016. url: https://tc.copernicus.org/articles/10/
15/2016/.
[4]
William D. Philpot. “Radiative transfer in stratified waters: a single-scattering ap-
proximation for irradiance”. In: Appl. Opt. 26.19 (Oct. 1987), pp. 4123–4132. doı:
10.1364/AO.26.004123. url: https://opg.optica.org/ao/abstract.cfm?URI=ao-26-19-
4123.
[5]
William Philpot. “Bathymetric mapping with passive multispectral imagery”. In: Ap-
plied optics 28 (Apr. 1989), pp. 1569–78. doı: 10.1364/AO.28.001569.
[6]
W. Sneed and Gordon Hamilton. “Evolution of Melt Pond Volume on the Surface
of the Greenland Ice Sheet”. In: Geophysical Research Letters - GEOPHYS RES LETT 340
(Feb. 2007). doı: 10.1029/2006GL028697.
[7]
L. Melling et al. “Evaluation of satellite methods for estimating supraglacial lake
depth in southwest Greenland”. In: The Cryosphere 18.2 (2024), pp. 543–558. doı:
10.5194/tc-18-543-2024. url: https://tc.copernicus.org/articles/18/543/2024/.
[8]
Wanxin Xiao et al. “An automated algorithm to retrieve the location and depth of
supraglacial lakes from ICESat-2 ATL03 data”. In: Remote Sensing of Environment 298
(2023), p. 113730. ıssn: 0034-4257. doı: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2023.113730.
url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S003442572300281X.
[9]
ArcticDEM Release 7. 2018. url: https://www.pgc.umn.edu/news/arcticdem-release-7/.
[10]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U-Net: Convolutional Net-
works for Biomedical Image Segmentation”. In: arXiv:1505.04597v1 [cs.CV] (2015). url:
http://lmb.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/people/ronneber/u-net.
[11]
Adam Booth and Richard Burke. “A novel application of DUCK-Net for extracting
supraglacial lakes in Greenland”. In: Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference
on Advances in Geographic Information Systems. SIGSPATIAL ’23. Hamburg, Germany:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2023. ısbn: 9798400701689. doı: 10.1145/
3589132.3629973. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3589132.3629973.
[12]
Nida Qayyum et al. “Glacial Lakes Mapping Using Multi Satellite PlanetScope Im-
agery and Deep Learning”. In: ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information 9.10 (2020).
doı: 10.3390/ijgi9100560. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2220-9964/9/10/560.
[13]
Simon Walther et al. “Diving into Supraglacial Lakes Detection: a Deep Semantic
Segmentation Approach”. In: Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Ad-
vances in Geographic Information Systems (2023). url: https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:266470007.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
73
==PAGE:82==
[14]
Katrina Lutz, Zahra Bahrami, and Matthias Braun. “Supraglacial Lake Evolution
over Northeast Greenland Using Deep Learning Methods”. In: Remote Sensing 15.17
(2023). doı: 10.3390/rs15174360. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/15/17/
4360.
[15]
Jiawei Yuan et al. “Automatic Extraction of Supraglacial Lakes in Southwest Green-
land during the 2014–2018 Melt Seasons Based on Convolutional Neural Network”.
In: Water 12.3 (2020). doı: 10.3390/w12030891. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2073-
4441/12/3/891.
[16]
Hossein Hosseiny. “A deep learning model for predicting river flood depth and ex-
tent”. In: Environmental Modelling & Software 145 (2021), p. 105186. ıssn: 1364-8152.
doı: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2021.105186. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1364815221002280.
[17]
Wei Song et al. “An Improved U-Net Convolutional Networks for Seabed Mineral
Image Segmentation”. In: IEEE Access 7 (2019), pp. 82744–82752. doı: 10.1109/
ACCESS.2019.2923753.
[18]
Deep learning-based supraglacial lake extent and depth detection on the Greenland Ice Sheet by
combining ICESat-2 and Sentinel-2 data. Zenodo, May 2023. doı: 10.5281/zenodo.7981531.
url: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7981531.
[19]
Yingkang Wang et al. “Single Image Depth Estimation Based on Improved U-NET”.
In: 2023 3rd International Conference on Digital Society and Intelligent Systems (DSInS). 2023,
pp. 514–518. doı: 10.1109/DSInS60115.2023.10455274.
[20]
Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. New York: Springer,
2006.
[21]
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. “Representation Learning:
A Review and New Perspectives”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 35.8 (2013), pp. 1798–1828. doı: 10.1109/TPAMI.2013.50.
[22]
Faisal Shahbaz. Five Powerful CNN Architectures. 2018. url: https://medium.datadriveninvestor.
com/five-powerful-cnn-architectures-b939c9ddd57b.
[23]
Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell. “Fully Convolutional Networks
for Semantic Segmentation”. In: arXiv:1411.4038v2 [cs.CV] (2015). url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1411.4038v2.
[24]
Nitish Srivastava et al. “Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from
overfitting”. In: J. Mach. Learn. Res. 15.1 (Jan. 2014), pp. 1929–1958. ıssn: 1532-4435.
[25]
European Space Agency (ESA). European Space Agency (ESA) Website. url: https://
www.esa.int.
[26]
Sinergise Solutions d.o.o. Sentinel Hub. A Planet Labs company. 2024. url: https:
//www.sentinel-hub.com.
[27]
European Space Agency. Sentinel-2 User Handbook. Tech. rep. Noordwijk, The Nether-
lands, 2020. url: https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/user-guides/sentinel-2-msi.
[28]
Sinergise Solutions d.o.o. EO Browser. A Planet Labs company. 2024. url: https:
//apps.sentinel-hub.com/eo-browser/.
[29]
ICESat-2 NASA. ICESat-2 Science - Technical Specs. Accessed: 2024-07-22. n.d. url:
https://icesat-2.gsfc.nasa.gov/science/specs.
[30]
Sanghyun Woo et al. “CBAM: Convolutional BlockAttention Module”. In: ArXiv abs/1807.06521
(2018). url: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:49867180.
[31]
ArcticDEM Explorer. url: https://arcticdem.apps.pgc.umn.edu/.
[32]
Adam Paszke et al. “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learn-
ing Library”. In: ArXiv abs/1912.01703 (2019). url: https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:202786778.
74
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:83==
[33]
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization”. In:
International Conference on Learning Representations (Dec. 2014).
[34]
Tom B. Brown et al. “Language Models are Few-Shot Learners”. In: CoRR abs/2005.14165
(2020). arXiv: 2005.14165. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.
[35]
OpenAI. GPT-4: Generative Pre-trained Transformer 4. Accessed: 2024-07-21. 2023. url:
https://www.openai.com/research/gpt-4.
[36]
Anthropic. Claude 3.5 Sonnet. AI assistant. 2024. url: https://www.anthropic.com.
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
75
==PAGE:84==
A
Appendix
A.1
Sentinel-2 Data
A.2
DEM Strips
The specific DEM strips used for each lake in the training, validation and testing datasets
are described below:
Lake
DEM Strip
L1
SETSM_s2s041_W2W3_20200618_10300100A7496000_104001005DBE2B00_2m_lsf_seg1
L2
SETSM_s2s041_WV03_20190527_104001004D8A4400_104001004D76D100_2m_lsf_seg1
L2
SETSM_s2s041_WV01_20200403_1020010097D13000_1020010095D37E00_2m_Isf_seg1
L2
SETSM_s2s041_WV01_20200516_10200100978BF400_1020010095353500_2m_Isf_seg1
L5
SETSM_s2s041_WV02_20210702_10300100C1445A00_10300100C17EA900_2m_Isf_seg1
L6
SETSM_s2s041_W2W3_20200618_10300100A7496000_104001005DBE2B00_2m_Isf_seg1
L7
SETSM_s2s041_WV01_20200620_10200100982C5E00_102001009793BD00_2m_Isf_seg1
L8
SETSM_s2s041_WV01_20200403_1020010097D13000_1020010095D37E00_2m_lsf_seg1
Table A.2: Training lakes DEM strips.
Lake
DEM Strip
L9
SETSM_s2s041_WV01_20200620_10200100982C5E00_102001009793BD00_2m_lsf_seg1
L10
SETSM_s2s041_WV01_20200620_10200100982C5E00_102001009793BD00_2m_lsf_seg1
L11
SETSM_s2s041_WV03_20200217_10400100584A4600_104001005758DF00_2m_lsf_seg1
L12
SETSM_s2s041_WV01_20190809_102001008B7A2E00_102001008BCC5000_2m_lsf_seg1
Table A.3: Validation and Testing lakes DEM strips.
A.3
Model Parameters by Layer
Modules
Parameters
downs.0.conv.0.weight
216
downs.0.conv.1.weight
8
downs.0.conv.1.bias
8
downs.0.conv.3.weight
576
downs.0.conv.4.weight
8
downs.0.conv.4.bias
8
downs.1.conv.0.weight
1152
downs.1.conv.1.weight
16
downs.1.conv.1.bias
16
downs.1.conv.3.weight
2304
downs.1.conv.4.weight
16
downs.1.conv.4.bias
16
downs.2.conv.0.weight
4608
downs.2.conv.1.weight
32
downs.2.conv.1.bias
32
downs.2.conv.3.weight
9216
downs.2.conv.4.weight
32
76
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:85==
downs.2.conv.4.bias
32
downs.3.conv.0.weight
18432
downs.3.conv.1.weight
64
downs.3.conv.1.bias
64
downs.3.conv.3.weight
36864
downs.3.conv.4.weight
64
downs.3.conv.4.bias
64
downs.4.conv.0.weight
73728
downs.4.conv.1.weight
128
downs.4.conv.1.bias
128
downs.4.conv.3.weight
147456
downs.4.conv.4.weight
128
downs.4.conv.4.bias
128
downs.5.conv.0.weight
294912
downs.5.conv.1.weight
256
downs.5.conv.1.bias
256
downs.5.conv.3.weight
589824
downs.5.conv.4.weight
256
downs.5.conv.4.bias
256
downs.6.conv.0.weight
1179648
downs.6.conv.1.weight
512
downs.6.conv.1.bias
512
downs.6.conv.3.weight
2359296
downs.6.conv.4.weight
512
downs.6.conv.4.bias
512
ups.0.weight
2097152
ups.0.bias
512
ups.1.conv.0.weight
4718592
ups.1.conv.1.weight
512
ups.1.conv.1.bias
512
ups.1.conv.3.weight
2359296
ups.1.conv.4.weight
512
ups.1.conv.4.bias
512
ups.2.weight
524288
ups.2.bias
256
ups.3.conv.0.weight
1179648
ups.3.conv.1.weight
256
ups.3.conv.1.bias
256
ups.3.conv.3.weight
589824
ups.3.conv.4.weight
256
ups.3.conv.4.bias
256
ups.4.weight
131072
ups.4.bias
128
ups.5.conv.0.weight
294912
ups.5.conv.1.weight
128
ups.5.conv.1.bias
128
ups.5.conv.3.weight
147456
ups.5.conv.4.weight
128
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
77
==PAGE:86==
ups.5.conv.4.bias
128
ups.6.weight
32768
ups.6.bias
64
ups.7.conv.0.weight
73728
ups.7.conv.1.weight
64
ups.7.conv.1.bias
64
ups.7.conv.3.weight
36864
ups.7.conv.4.weight
64
ups.7.conv.4.bias
64
ups.8.weight
8192
ups.8.bias
32
ups.9.conv.0.weight
18432
ups.9.conv.1.weight
32
ups.9.conv.1.bias
32
ups.9.conv.3.weight
9216
ups.9.conv.4.weight
32
ups.9.conv.4.bias
32
ups.10.weight
2048
ups.10.bias
16
ups.11.conv.0.weight
4608
ups.11.conv.1.weight
16
ups.11.conv.1.bias
16
ups.11.conv.3.weight
2304
ups.11.conv.4.weight
16
ups.11.conv.4.bias
16
ups.12.weight
512
ups.12.bias
8
ups.13.conv.0.weight
1152
ups.13.conv.1.weight
8
ups.13.conv.1.bias
8
ups.13.conv.3.weight
576
ups.13.conv.4.weight
8
ups.13.conv.4.bias
8
bottleneck.conv.0.weight
4718592
bottleneck.conv.1.weight
1024
bottleneck.conv.1.bias
1024
bottleneck.conv.3.weight
9437184
bottleneck.conv.4.weight
1024
bottleneck.conv.4.bias
1024
final_conv.weight
16
final_conv.bias
2
Total Parameters
31119906
78
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:87==
Table A.1: Sentinel-2 Acquisition Dates
Lake
Date
L1
2020-07-17
L2
2019-07-16
L3
2019-07-16
L4
2020-07-17
L5
2020-07-17
L6
2020-07-17
L7
2020-07-12
L8
2020-07-17
L9
2020-07-17
L10
2020-07-17
L11
2020-07-17
L12
2020-07-01
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
79
==PAGE:88==
A.4
Code
A.4.1
Resizing the rasters to create 1024 × 1024 images
1
from osgeo import gdal
2
import os
3
4
gdal.DontUseExceptions()
5
6
wd = "/home/mike/OneDrive/MSc Earth and Space Physics and Engineering/4th
Semester/Thesis/Raw_Data/Lakes_Final_Data/L13"
7
8
os.chdir(wd)
9
files = os.listdir(wd)
10
11
resized_folder = os.path.join(wd, "Resized")
12
if not os.path.exists(resized_folder):
13
os.mkdir(resized_folder)
14
15
# Filter out files containing "aux" in their names
16
for file in files:
17
if file.endswith(".aux") or file.endswith(".txt") or file.endswith(".xml")
:
18
files.remove(file)
19
20
files.sort()
21
22
23
def resize_raster(input_dem , output_dem , width, height):
24
print(f"Resizing to: {width}x{height}")
25
dataset = gdal.Open(input_dem)
26
gdal.Warp(
27
output_dem ,
28
dataset ,
29
width=width,
30
height=height,
31
resampleAlg=gdal.GRA_Bilinear ,
32
)
33
34
35
width = 1024
36
height = 1024
37
38
# Resize all the images in the resized_folder
39
for file in files:
40
print(os.path.abspath(file))
41
out_file = os.path.join(resized_folder , file)
42
print(out_file)
43
resize_raster(file, out_file , width, height)
44
45
print("Finished resizing all the files!")
Code/resize_raster.py
A.4.2
PCA Mask Creation
1
import numpy as np
2
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
3
from sklearn.decomposition import PCA
4
import os
5
from osgeo import gdal
6
7
# Working directory
8
wd = "/home/mike/OneDrive/MSc Earth and Space Physics and Engineering/4th
Semester/Thesis/Raw_Data/Lakes_Final_Data/L1/Resized"
80
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:89==
9
lake = wd.split("/")
10
lake = lake[-2]
11
12
os.chdir(wd)
13
files = os.listdir(wd)
14
15
# Filter out non-image files (created from QGIS)
16
files = [
17
file
18
for file in files
19
if not (
20
os.path.isdir(file)
21
or file.endswith(".aux")
22
or file.endswith(".txt")
23
or file.endswith(".xml")
24
)
25
]
26
files.sort()
27
28
29
def read_bundle(filename):
30
ds = gdal.Open(filename)
31
band = ds.GetRasterBand(1)
32
data = band.ReadAsArray()
33
ds = None
34
return data
35
36
37
# Identify files
38
dataset = [os.path.join(wd, file) for file in files]
39
dataset.sort()
40
41
# Find specific bands or the DEM
42
for file in dataset:
43
if "DEM" in file:
44
dem = file
45
elif "B02" in file:
46
blue = file
47
elif "B03" in file:
48
green = file
49
elif "B04" in file:
50
red = file
51
52
# Read image data
53
blue = read_bundle(blue)
54
green = read_bundle(green)
55
red = read_bundle(red)
56
57
# Stack images to create an RGB image
58
images = np.stack((red, green, blue), axis=-1)
59
print(images.shape)
# Should output (1024, 1024, 3) if dimensions are correct
60
61
# Perform PCA on the flattened images
62
height, width, _ = images.shape
63
flat_images = images.reshape(height * width, 3)
# Flatten correctly
64
65
pca = PCA()
66
pca.fit(flat_images)
67
68
# Weighted sum of principal components based on explained variance
69
weighted_sum_image = np.zeros((height , width))
70
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
81
==PAGE:90==
71
# Calculate weighted sum using all principal components
72
transformed_images = pca.transform(flat_images)
73
for i in range(transformed_images.shape[1]):
74
component_image = transformed_images[:, i].reshape(height , width)
75
weighted_sum_image += pca.explained_variance_ratio_[i] * component_image
76
77
# Normalize weighted_sum_image to be between 0 and 1
78
weighted_sum_image = (weighted_sum_image - np.min(weighted_sum_image)) / (
79
np.max(weighted_sum_image) - np.min(weighted_sum_image)
80
)
81
82
# Threshold to create a mask for the lake
83
threshold = 0.3
# Adjust this threshold based on your data
84
lake_mask = weighted_sum_image < threshold
85
86
# Plot original image and lake mask
87
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 6))
88
89
plt.subplot(1, 2, 1)
90
plt.title("Original Image")
91
plt.imshow(images)
# Plot the RGB image
92
93
plt.subplot(1, 2, 2)
94
plt.title("Lake Mask (Weighted Sum)")
95
plt.imshow(lake_mask , cmap="gray")
96
97
plt.show()
98
# breakpoint()
99
# Save the mask image
100
mask_name = lake + "_mask.png"
101
mask_dir = "/home/mike/OneDrive/MSc Earth and Space Physics and Engineering/4
th Semester/Thesis/Raw_Data/Lakes_Final_Data/Masks"
102
if not os.path.exists(mask_dir):
103
os.mkdir(mask_dir)
104
mask_path = os.path.join(mask_dir , mask_name)
105
plt.imsave(mask_path , lake_mask , cmap="gray")
106
print(f"Mask saved: {mask_path}")
Code/pca_mask_creation.py
A.4.3
Input Data Creation (Bundles)
1
import pickle
2
import numpy as np
3
from osgeo import gdal
4
import os
5
import re
6
from natsort import natsorted
7
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
8
from PIL import Image
9
10
gdal.DontUseExceptions()
11
12
wd = "/home/mike/OneDrive/MSc Earth and Space Physics and Engineering/4th
Semester/Thesis/Raw_Data/Lakes_Final_Data"
13
bundles_dir = os.path.join(wd, "Bundles")
14
if os.path.exists(bundles_dir) == False:
15
os.mkdir(bundles_dir)
16
17
pattern = re.compile(r"^L")
18
lake_dirs = list()
19
20
82
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:91==
21
def open_tiff(file):
22
ds = gdal.Open(file)
23
band = ds.GetRasterBand(1)
24
band = band.ReadAsArray()
25
ds = None
26
return band
27
28
29
def open_mask(file):
30
file = Image.open(file)
31
file = np.array(file)
32
file = file[:, :, 0] / 255
33
return file
34
35
36
def create_bundle(red_tmp , green_tmp , blue_tmp , dem_tmp , mask_tmp , path_tmp):
37
data = dict()
38
data["Red"] = red_tmp
39
data["Green"] = green_tmp
40
data["Blue"] = blue_tmp
41
data["DEM"] = dem_tmp
42
data["Mask"] = mask_tmp
43
with open(path_tmp , "wb") as f:
44
pickle.dump(data, f)
45
return data
46
47
48
surface_reference = {
49
"L1": 1168.17,
50
"L2": 1242.35,
51
"L3": 1293.11,
52
"L4": 1210.42,
53
"L5": 1319.59,
54
"L6": 1123.94,
55
"L7": 1462.63,
56
"L8": 1202.03,
57
"L9": 1464.76,
58
"L10": 1385.41,
59
"L11": 1312.63,
60
"L12": 1300.62,
61
"L13": 900.61,
62
}
63
64
#
########################################################################################
65
66
for i in os.listdir(wd):
67
if pattern.match(i):
68
lake_dirs.append(i)
69
lake_dirs.sort()
70
element = lake_dirs.pop(1)
71
lake_dirs.append(element)
72
lake_dirs = natsorted(lake_dirs)
73
print(lake_dirs)
74
75
76
lake_files = dict()
77
for i in lake_dirs:
78
resized_dir = "Resized"
79
path = os.path.join(wd, i, resized_dir)
80
temp_list = list()
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
83
==PAGE:92==
81
for i2 in os.listdir(path):
82
temp_list.append(os.path.join(path, i2))
83
lake_files[i] = temp_list
84
85
86
for i in lake_files.keys():
87
temp_list = lake_files[i]
88
temp_list.sort()
89
red = open_tiff(temp_list[2])
90
green = open_tiff(temp_list[1])
91
blue = open_tiff(temp_list[0])
92
dem = open_tiff(temp_list[3])
93
dem = dem - surface_reference[i]
94
# image = np.stack((red, green, blue), axis=-1)
95
mask = open_mask(temp_list[4])
96
name = i + ".pkl"
97
path = os.path.join(bundles_dir , name)
98
create_bundle(red, green, blue, dem, mask, path)
99
100
print(f"Created the lake bundles in:\n{bundles_dir}")
Code/create_bundles.py
A.4.4
Network Architecture
1
import torch
2
import torch.nn as nn
3
import torch.optim as optim
4
from torch.utils.data import dataloader
5
import torchvision.datasets as datasets
6
import torchvision.transforms.functional as F
7
8
if torch.cuda.is_available():
9
device = "cuda"
10
else:
11
device = "cpu"
12
print(f"Device: {device}")
13
14
15
#
#############################################################################################
16
# Double Convolution layer
17
class DoubleConv(nn.Module):
18
def __init__(self, in_channels , out_channels):
19
super(DoubleConv , self).__init__()
20
kernel_size = 3
21
padding = 1
22
stride = 1
23
self.conv = nn.Sequential(
24
nn.Conv2d(
25
in_channels , out_channels , kernel_size , padding , stride , bias=
False
26
),
27
nn.BatchNorm2d(out_channels),
28
nn.ReLU(inplace=True),
29
nn.Conv2d(
30
out_channels , out_channels , kernel_size , padding , stride , bias
=False
31
),
32
nn.BatchNorm2d(out_channels),
33
nn.ReLU(inplace=True),
34
)
84
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:93==
35
36
# Moving forward inside the layer
37
def forward(self, x):
38
return self.conv(x)
39
40
41
# Model
42
class UNET(nn.Module):
43
def __init__(
44
self,
45
in_channels=3,
46
out_channels=2,
47
features=[8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512],
# , 1024],
48
):
49
super(UNET, self).__init__()
50
self.downs = (
51
nn.ModuleList()
52
)
# a way for the model to evaluate while moving down (through the
encoder)
53
self.ups = (
54
nn.ModuleList()
55
)
# a way for the model to evaluate while moving up (through the
decoder)
56
self.pool = nn.MaxPool2d(kernel_size=2, stride=2)
57
58
# Encoder (moving down)
59
for feature in features:
60
self.downs.append(
61
DoubleConv(in_channels , feature)
62
)
# Moving from the in_channels to the first output channel (in
the features list)
63
in_channels = feature
# To move from 64 to 256, etc
64
65
# Decoder (moving up)
66
for feature in reversed(features):
67
self.ups.append(
68
nn.ConvTranspose2d(
69
feature * 2, feature , kernel_size=2, stride=2
70
)
# We use feature*2 because we concatenate - skip
connections)
71
)
72
self.ups.append(DoubleConv(feature * 2, feature))
73
74
# Bottleneck
75
self.bottleneck = DoubleConv(features[-1], features[-1] * 2)
76
77
# Final Convolution Layer (Upscaling)
78
self.final_conv = nn.Conv2d(features[0], out_channels , kernel_size=1)
79
80
# Move forward through the model
81
82
def forward(self, x):
83
skip_connections = []
84
# Moving through the model
85
for idx, down in enumerate(self.downs):
86
x = down(x)
87
skip_connections.append(x)
88
x = self.pool(x)
89
90
# Reaching the Bottleneck
91
x = self.bottleneck(x)
92
skip_connections = skip_connections[::-1]
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
85
==PAGE:94==
93
94
# Upsampling
95
# Here we do up and double -conv steps
96
for idx in range(0, len(self.ups), 2):
97
x = self.ups[idx](x)
# Here, essentially , we do the
ConvTranspose2d
98
99
skip_connection = skip_connections[idx // 2]
# We add the skip
connection
100
101
# If the size of the previous output does not match the skip
connection to concatenate
102
if x.shape != skip_connection.shape:
103
x = F.resize(
104
x, size=skip_connection.shape[2:], antialias=True
105
)
# We may have a difference of 1 pixel (insignificant)
106
107
concat_skip = torch.cat(
108
(skip_connection , x), dim=1
109
)
# We concatenate them along the channel dimension (dim=1)
110
x = self.ups[idx + 1](concat_skip)
111
return self.final_conv(x)
112
113
114
#################################################################
Code/network.py
A.4.5
Training and Validation
1
from matplotlib import image
2
import numpy as np
3
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
4
import os
5
import pickle
6
from PIL import Image
7
import torch
8
import torch.nn as nn
9
import torch.optim as optim
10
from torch.utils.data import Dataset , DataLoader
11
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
12
from network import UNET
13
from time import time
14
from natsort import natsorted
15
16
# Visualize Feature Maps
17
import torchvision.utils as vutils
18
from torchvision.utils import save_image
19
20
21
wd = "/home/mike/OneDrive/MSc Earth and Space Physics and Engineering/4th
Semester/Thesis/Raw_Data/Lakes_Final_Data"
22
bundles_dir = os.path.join(wd, "Bundles")
23
vis_dir = os.path.join(wd, "Visualizer")
24
models_dir = os.path.join(wd, "Models")
25
figures_dir = os.path.join(wd, "Figures")
26
files = list()
27
for i in os.listdir(bundles_dir):
28
files.append(os.path.join(bundles_dir , i))
29
30
files = natsorted(files)
31
32
# Split into training and validation sets
86
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:95==
33
val_test_set = files[8:]
34
train_files = files[:8]
35
36
val_file = val_test_set[0]
37
38
39
print("Training files are:")
40
for i in train_files:
41
print(i.split("/")[-1])
42
43
print(f"Validation file is: {val_file.split('/')[-1]}")
44
45
46
def read_bundle(filename):
47
with open(filename , "rb") as f:
48
data = pickle.load(f)
49
rd = data["Red"]
50
gr = data["Green"]
51
bl = data["Blue"]
52
dm = data["DEM"]
53
msk = data["Mask"]
54
return rd, gr, bl, dm, msk
55
56
57
# Formulate a class to visualize the feature maps
58
class FeatureMapVisualizer:
59
def __init__(self, model, layer_name , output_dir):
60
self.model = model
61
self.layer_name = layer_name
62
self.features = None
63
self.output_dir = output_dir
64
self._register_hook()
65
66
def _register_hook(self):
67
def hook(module, input, output):
68
self.features = output
69
70
for name, module in self.model.named_modules():
71
if name == self.layer_name:
72
module.register_forward_hook(hook)
73
74
def visualize(self, input_tensor , epoch, batch_idx):
75
_ = self.model(input_tensor)
76
if self.features is not None:
77
feature_maps = self.features[0].cpu().detach()
78
num_features = feature_maps.size(0)
79
80
# Determine grid size
81
grid_size = int(np.ceil(np.sqrt(num_features)))
82
83
# Create a grid of subplots
84
fig, axes = plt.subplots(grid_size , grid_size , figsize=(20, 20))
85
fig.suptitle(
86
f"Feature Maps of {self.layer_name} (Epoch {epoch}, Batch {
batch_idx})"
87
)
88
89
for i in range(num_features):
90
ax = axes[i // grid_size , i % grid_size]
91
ax.imshow(feature_maps[i].numpy(), cmap="viridis")
92
ax.axis("off")
93
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
87
==PAGE:96==
94
# Remove empty subplots
95
for i in range(num_features , grid_size * grid_size):
96
fig.delaxes(axes[i // grid_size , i % grid_size])
97
98
# Create the output directory if it doesn't exist
99
os.makedirs(self.output_dir , exist_ok=True)
100
101
# Save the figure
102
plt.tight_layout()
103
plt.savefig(
104
os.path.join(
105
self.output_dir , f"feature_maps_epoch_{epoch}_batch_{
batch_idx}.png"
106
),
107
dpi=300,
108
bbox_inches="tight",
109
)
110
plt.close()
111
112
113
###############################################################
114
######## TRAIN ################################################
115
116
117
# Dataset class
118
class LakeDataset(Dataset):
119
def __init__(self, file_list):
120
self.file_list = file_list
121
self.data = []
122
123
for file in self.file_list:
124
red, green, blue, dem, mask = read_bundle(file)
125
image = np.stack((red, green, blue), axis=2)
126
self.data.append((image, mask, dem))
127
128
def __len__(self):
129
return len(self.data)
130
131
def __getitem__(self, idx):
132
image, mask, dem = self.data[idx]
133
134
image = torch.tensor(image, dtype=torch.float32).permute(2, 0, 1)
135
mask = torch.tensor(mask, dtype=torch.float32).unsqueeze(0)
136
dem = torch.tensor(dem, dtype=torch.float32).unsqueeze(0)
137
138
return image, torch.cat((mask, dem), dim=0)
139
140
141
device = "cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu"
142
model = UNET().to(device)
143
visualizer = visualizer = FeatureMapVisualizer(model, "downs.3.conv", vis_dir)
144
b_s = 4
145
criterion_mask = nn.BCEWithLogitsLoss()
# For binary classification (lake
mask)
146
criterion_depth = nn.MSELoss()
# For regression (depth prediction)
147
learning_rate = 1e-3
148
optimizer = optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=learning_rate)
149
150
# Training loop
151
num_epochs = 1000
152
validate_every = 10
153
88
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:97==
154
# Different weightings for the mask and depth.
155
weight_mask_loss = 0.6
# Weight for mask loss
156
weight_depth_loss = 0.4
# Weight for depth loss
157
158
train_dataset = LakeDataset(train_files)
159
val_dataset = LakeDataset(
160
[val_file]
161
)
# Because validation set needs to be a list for the DataLoader"
162
163
# Create data loaders
164
train_dataloader = DataLoader(train_dataset , batch_size=b_s, shuffle=True)
165
val_dataloader = DataLoader(val_dataset , batch_size=b_s, shuffle=False)
166
167
# Lists to store losses
168
train_losses = []
169
train_depth_losses = []
170
train_extent_losses = []
171
val_losses = []
172
val_depth_losses = []
173
val_extent_losses = []
174
175
best_val_loss = float("inf")
176
best_model_state = None
177
save_model_after = int(num_epochs * 0.4)
# Save model after 40% of epochs
178
179
start = time()
180
for epoch in range(num_epochs):
181
model.train()
182
epoch_loss = 0
183
epoch_depth_loss = 0
184
epoch_extent_loss = 0
185
186
for batch_idx , (data, targets) in enumerate(train_dataloader):
187
data, targets = data.to(device), targets.to(device)
188
targets_mask = targets[:, 0].unsqueeze(1)
189
targets_depth = targets[:, 1].unsqueeze(1)
190
191
outputs = model(data)
192
outputs_mask_logits = outputs[:, 0].unsqueeze(1)
193
outputs_depth = outputs[:, 1].unsqueeze(1)
194
195
loss_mask = criterion_mask(outputs_mask_logits , targets_mask)
196
loss_depth = criterion_depth(outputs_depth , targets_depth)
197
198
weighted_loss_mask = weight_mask_loss * loss_mask
199
weighted_loss_depth = weight_depth_loss * loss_depth
200
loss = weighted_loss_mask + weighted_loss_depth
201
202
optimizer.zero_grad()
203
loss.backward()
204
optimizer.step()
205
206
epoch_loss += loss.item()
207
epoch_depth_loss += loss_depth.item()
208
epoch_extent_loss += loss_mask.item()
209
210
if batch_idx % 10 == 0:
211
print(
212
f"Epoch [{epoch+1}/{num_epochs}], Step [{batch_idx+1}/{len(
train_dataloader)}], Loss: {loss.item():.4f}, Mask Loss: {
loss_mask.item():.4f}, Depth Loss: {loss_depth.item():.4f}
"
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
89
==PAGE:98==
213
)
214
215
# Visualize feature maps for the first batch of the selected epoch
216
if epoch == 5 and batch_idx == 0:
217
visualizer.visualize(data[0].unsqueeze(0).to(device), epoch,
batch_idx)
218
219
average_loss = epoch_loss / len(train_dataloader)
220
average_depth_loss = epoch_depth_loss / len(train_dataloader)
221
average_extent_loss = epoch_extent_loss / len(train_dataloader)
222
223
train_losses.append(average_loss)
224
train_depth_losses.append(average_depth_loss)
225
train_extent_losses.append(average_extent_loss)
226
227
# Validation block
228
if (epoch + 1) % validate_every == 0:
229
model.eval()
230
val_epoch_loss = 0
231
val_epoch_depth_loss = 0
232
val_epoch_extent_loss = 0
233
234
with torch.no_grad():
235
for val_batch_idx , (val_data , val_targets) in enumerate(
val_dataloader):
236
val_data , val_targets = val_data.to(device), val_targets.to(
device)
237
val_targets_mask = val_targets[:, 0].unsqueeze(1)
238
val_targets_depth = val_targets[:, 1].unsqueeze(1)
239
240
val_outputs = model(val_data)
241
val_outputs_mask_logits = val_outputs[:, 0].unsqueeze(1)
242
val_outputs_depth = val_outputs[:, 1].unsqueeze(1)
243
244
val_loss_mask = criterion_mask(
245
val_outputs_mask_logits , val_targets_mask
246
)
247
val_loss_depth = criterion_depth(val_outputs_depth ,
val_targets_depth)
248
249
weighted_val_loss_mask = weight_mask_loss * val_loss_mask
250
weighted_val_loss_depth = weight_depth_loss * val_loss_depth
251
val_loss = weighted_val_loss_mask + weighted_val_loss_depth
252
253
val_epoch_loss += val_loss.item()
254
val_epoch_depth_loss += val_loss_depth.item()
255
val_epoch_extent_loss += val_loss_mask.item()
256
257
average_val_loss = val_epoch_loss / len(val_dataloader)
258
average_val_depth_loss = val_epoch_depth_loss / len(val_dataloader)
259
average_val_extent_loss = val_epoch_extent_loss / len(val_dataloader)
260
261
val_losses.append(average_val_loss)
262
val_depth_losses.append(average_val_depth_loss)
263
val_extent_losses.append(average_val_extent_loss)
264
265
print(
266
f"Validation - Epoch [{epoch+1}/{num_epochs}], Loss: {
average_val_loss:.4f}, Depth Loss: {average_val_depth_loss:.4f
}"
267
)
268
# Save the model on its best validation loss after 40% of the epochs
90
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:99==
269
if epoch + 1 >= save_model_after and average_val_loss < best_val_loss:
270
best_val_loss = average_val_loss
271
best_model_state = model.state_dict()
272
273
# Interpolate validation losses to match the length of training losses for
plotting
274
val_losses_interpolated = np.interp(
275
np.arange(num_epochs),
276
np.arange(validate_every - 1, num_epochs , validate_every),
277
val_losses ,
278
)
279
val_depth_losses_interpolated = np.interp(
280
np.arange(num_epochs),
281
np.arange(validate_every - 1, num_epochs , validate_every),
282
val_depth_losses ,
283
)
284
285
val_extent_losses_interpolated = np.interp(
286
np.arange(num_epochs),
287
np.arange(validate_every - 1, num_epochs , validate_every),
288
val_extent_losses ,
289
)
290
291
if best_model_state:
292
model_name = f"full_2_data_best_model_after_{save_model_after}_ep_{
num_epochs}_bs_{b_s}_lr_{learning_rate}_w_depth_{weight_depth_loss}.
pth"
293
model_path = os.path.join(models_dir , model_name)
294
torch.save(best_model_state , model_path)
295
print(f"Best model saved at: {model_path}")
296
297
end = time()
298
299
duration = end - start
300
hours = duration // 3600
301
minutes = (duration % 3600) // 60
302
seconds = duration % 60
303
304
print(
305
f"Training duration: {hours:.0f} hours, {minutes:.0f} minutes , {seconds:.0
f} seconds"
306
)
307
308
309
figure_path = os.path.join(figures_dir , "Losses.png")
310
plt.plot(train_losses , label="Train Total Loss")
311
plt.plot(train_depth_losses , label="Train Depth Loss")
312
plt.plot(train_extent_losses , label="Train Extent Loss")
313
plt.plot(val_losses_interpolated , label="Validation Loss")
314
plt.plot(val_depth_losses_interpolated , label="Validation Depth Loss")
315
plt.plot(val_extent_losses_interpolated , label="Validation Extent Loss")
316
plt.legend()
317
plt.title("Training and Validation Losses")
318
plt.xlabel("Epoch")
319
plt.ylabel("Loss")
320
plt.savefig(figure_path , dpi=600)
321
plt.show()
322
323
print(f"Depth Loss STD: {np.std(val_depth_losses):.3f}")
324
print(f"Extent Loss STD: {np.std(val_extent_losses):.3f}")
Code/training.py
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
91
==PAGE:100==
A.4.6
Model Evaluation
1
import numpy as np
2
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
3
import seaborn as sns
4
import os
5
import pickle
6
import torch
7
from prettytable import PrettyTable
8
from network import UNET
9
import rasterio
10
from PIL import Image
11
from sklearn.metrics import (
12
f1_score ,
13
precision_score ,
14
recall_score ,
15
accuracy_score ,
16
jaccard_score ,
17
confusion_matrix ,
18
)
19
import pandas as pd
20
from natsort import natsorted
21
from scipy.ndimage import binary_dilation
22
23
# Define paths
24
wd = "/home/mike/OneDrive/MSc Earth and Space Physics and Engineering/4th
Semester/Thesis/Raw_Data/Lakes_Final_Data"
25
bundles_dir = os.path.join(wd, "Bundles")
26
models_dir = os.path.join(wd, "Models")
27
best_model = "Best/best_ep_1000_bs_3_lr_0.001.pth"
28
best_new = "Best/best_model_after_900_ep_1000_bs_4_lr_0.001_w_depth_0.4_l_1_7.
pth"
29
# best_new_full = "full_2_data_best_model_after_400_ep_1000_bs_4_lr_0.001
_w_depth_0.4.pth"
30
model_name = best_new
31
model_path = os.path.join(models_dir , model_name)
32
33
# Get the test file
34
files = [os.path.join(bundles_dir , f) for f in os.listdir(bundles_dir)]
35
files = natsorted(files)
36
37
for idx, file in enumerate(files):
38
print(f"{idx}: {file}")
39
40
print(files)
41
42
test_file = files[0]
43
44
45
lake_id = test_file.split("/")[-1]
46
lake_id = lake_id.split(".")[0]
47
48
print(f"Test file: {test_file}")
49
50
51
def read_bundle(filename):
52
with open(filename , "rb") as f:
53
data = pickle.load(f)
54
rd = data["Red"]
55
gr = data["Green"]
56
bl = data["Blue"]
57
dm = data["DEM"]
58
msk = data["Mask"]
92
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:101==
59
return rd, gr, bl, dm, msk
60
61
62
def open_raster(filename):
63
with rasterio.open(filename) as src:
64
band = src.read(1)
65
band = np.array(band)
66
return band
67
68
69
# Set up device
70
device = "cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu"
71
72
# Load the model
73
model = UNET().to(device)
74
model.load_state_dict(torch.load(model_path))
75
76
model.eval()
77
78
# Prepare the test data
79
red, green, blue, dem, mask = read_bundle(test_file)
80
81
#
########################################################################################
82
# RANDOM NOISE FOR A MASK TO CHECK THE CORRESPONDING DEPTH OUTPUT
##############################
83
# shape = (1024, 1024)
84
# random_array = np.random.rand(*shape)
85
# mask = random_array
86
#
########################################################################################
87
88
89
image = np.stack((red, green, blue), axis=2)
90
91
data = (
92
torch.tensor(image, dtype=torch.float32).unsqueeze(0).permute(0, 3, 1, 2).
to(device)
93
)
94
targets_mask = (
95
torch.tensor(mask, dtype=torch.float32).unsqueeze(0).unsqueeze(0).to(
device)
96
)
97
targets_depth = (
98
torch.tensor(dem, dtype=torch.float32).unsqueeze(0).unsqueeze(0).to(device
)
99
)
100
101
102
# Get model predictions
103
with torch.no_grad():
104
outputs = model(data)
105
outputs_mask_logits = outputs[:, 0].unsqueeze(1)
# Logits for mask
prediction
106
outputs_depth = outputs[:, 1].unsqueeze(1)
# Depth prediction
107
108
outputs_mask_binary = (
109
(outputs_mask_logits >= 0).float().cpu().numpy()[0, 0]
110
)
# Binary mask prediction
111
outputs_depth = outputs_depth.cpu().numpy()[0, 0]
# Depth prediction
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
93
==PAGE:102==
112
113
targets_mask = targets_mask.cpu().numpy()[0, 0]
# Ground truth mask
114
targets_depth = targets_depth.cpu().numpy()[0, 0]
# Ground truth depth
115
116
# Calculate differences
117
mask_diff = np.abs(targets_mask - outputs_mask_binary)
118
depth_diff = np.abs(targets_depth - outputs_depth)
119
120
# Find minimum and maximum depth values
121
min_depth = np.min([targets_depth.min(), outputs_depth.min()])
122
max_depth = np.max([targets_depth.max(), outputs_depth.max()])
123
min_diff = np.min(depth_diff)
124
max_diff = np.max(depth_diff)
125
126
#
###############################################################################
127
################### PLOTTING
###################################################
128
sns.set_style("whitegrid")
129
temp_plot_dir = "/home/mike/OneDrive/MSc Earth and Space Physics and
Engineering/4th Semester/Thesis/Thesis Document/Pictures/Results/
Final_Model"
130
extent_plot_path = os.path.join(temp_plot_dir , lake_id + "_extent.png")
131
depth_plot_path = os.path.join(temp_plot_dir , lake_id + "_depth.png")
132
133
134
def plot_image_mask(ax, data, title, cmap, vmin=None, vmax=None):
135
im = ax.imshow(data, cmap=cmap, vmin=vmin, vmax=vmax, aspect="equal")
136
ax.set_title(title, fontsize=14)
137
ax.axis("off")
138
return im
139
140
141
# Mask plots
142
fig_mask , axes_mask = plt.subplots(1, 3, figsize=(20, 7))
143
144
im_mask_ground = plot_image_mask(axes_mask[0], targets_mask , "Label Mask", "
gray")
145
plt.colorbar(im_mask_ground , ax=axes_mask[0], fraction=0.046, pad=0.04)
146
im_mask_pred = plot_image_mask(
147
axes_mask[1], outputs_mask_binary , "Predicted Mask (Binary)", "gray"
148
)
149
plt.colorbar(im_mask_pred , ax=axes_mask[1], fraction=0.046, pad=0.04)
150
im_mask_diff = plot_image_mask(axes_mask[2], mask_diff , "Mask Difference", "
gray")
151
plt.colorbar(im_mask_diff , ax=axes_mask[2], fraction=0.046, pad=0.04)
152
plt.tight_layout(pad=1)
153
fig_mask.savefig(extent_plot_path)
154
# plt.show()
155
plt.close()
156
157
158
# Plot depths
159
def plot_image(ax, data, title, cmap, vmin=None, vmax=None):
160
im = ax.imshow(data, cmap=cmap, vmin=vmin, vmax=vmax)
161
ax.set_title(title, fontsize=14)
162
ax.axis("off")
163
return im
164
165
166
fig_depth , axes_depth = plt.subplots(1, 3, figsize=(20, 7))
94
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:103==
167
168
im_target = plot_image(
169
axes_depth[0], targets_depth , "Label Depth (m)", "terrain", vmin=min_depth
, vmax=5
170
)
171
im_output = plot_image(
172
axes_depth[1],
173
outputs_depth ,
174
"Predicted Depth (m)",
175
"terrain",
176
vmin=min_depth ,
177
vmax=5,
178
)
179
im_diff = plot_image(
180
axes_depth[2], depth_diff , "Depth Difference (m)", "turbo", vmin=0, vmax=5
181
)
182
183
plt.colorbar(im_target , ax=axes_depth[0], fraction=0.046, pad=0.04)
184
plt.colorbar(im_output , ax=axes_depth[1], fraction=0.046, pad=0.04)
185
plt.colorbar(im_diff , ax=axes_depth[2], fraction=0.046, pad=0.04)
186
plt.tight_layout(pad=1)
187
fig_depth.savefig(depth_plot_path)
188
# plt.show()
189
plt.close()
190
#############################################################################
191
# Calculate statistics for the lake
192
sep = 100 * "#"
193
print(sep)
194
# Calculate Mean Absolute Error for the lake area only
195
lake_area_indices = targets_mask == 1
# Get indices of the lake area
196
mae_depth_lake = np.mean(depth_diff[lake_area_indices])
197
mae_depth = np.mean(depth_diff)
198
199
print(sep)
200
201
202
# Function to see the model parameters clearly
203
def count_parameters(model, wd):
204
headers = ["Modules", "Parameters"]
205
table = PrettyTable(headers)
206
total_params = 0
207
for name, parameter in model.named_parameters():
208
if not parameter.requires_grad:
209
continue
210
params = parameter.numel()
211
table.add_row([name, params])
212
total_params += params
213
print(table)
214
215
# Convert PrettyTable to Pandas DataFrame
216
df = pd.DataFrame(data=table.rows, columns=table.field_names)
217
218
# Save DataFrame to Excel file
219
table_path = os.path.join(wd, "Model_Parameters.xlsx")
220
df.to_excel(table_path , index=False)
221
222
print(f"Total Trainable Parameters: {total_params}")
223
return total_params
224
225
226
count_parameters(model, wd)
227
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
95
==PAGE:104==
228
print(sep)
229
230
231
# Function to calculate mask metrics
232
def calculate_mask_metrics(target_mask , predicted_mask):
233
# Flatten the masks
234
target_mask_flat = target_mask.flatten()
235
predicted_mask_flat = predicted_mask.flatten()
236
237
# Calculate confusion matrix
238
tn, fp, fn, tp = confusion_matrix(target_mask_flat , predicted_mask_flat).
ravel()
239
240
# Calculate metrics
241
accuracy = accuracy_score(target_mask_flat , predicted_mask_flat)
242
precision = precision_score(target_mask_flat , predicted_mask_flat)
243
recall = recall_score(target_mask_flat , predicted_mask_flat)
244
f1 = f1_score(target_mask_flat , predicted_mask_flat)
245
iou = jaccard_score(target_mask_flat , predicted_mask_flat)
246
247
# Calculate specificity (true negative rate)
248
specificity = tn / (tn + fp)
249
250
return {
251
"True Positives": tp,
252
"True Negatives": tn,
253
"False Positives": fp,
254
"False Negatives": fn,
255
"Accuracy": accuracy ,
256
"Precision": precision ,
257
"Recall (Sensitivity)": recall ,
258
"Specificity": specificity ,
259
"F1 Score": f1,
260
"IoU (Jaccard)": iou,
261
}
262
263
264
# Depth Statistics
265
def calculate_statistics(target_depth , predicted_depth , target_mask ,
predicted_mask):
266
# Calculate depth statistics
267
lake_area_indices = target_mask == 1
268
depth_diff = np.abs(target_depth - predicted_depth)
269
lake_depth_diff = depth_diff[lake_area_indices]
270
271
mae = np.mean(lake_depth_diff)
272
std_error = np.std(lake_depth_diff)
273
mse = np.mean(lake_depth_diff**2)
274
rmse = np.sqrt(mse)
275
276
mask_positive = np.logical_and(target_mask == 1, target_depth != 0)
277
mape_values = np.abs(target_depth - predicted_depth) / target_depth
278
mape_values = mape_values[mask_positive]
279
mape = np.mean(mape_values) * 100
280
281
max_error = np.max(lake_depth_diff)
282
283
# Calculate mask metrics
284
mask_metrics = calculate_mask_metrics(target_mask , predicted_mask)
285
286
return {
287
"Depth Metrics": {
96
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:105==
288
"MAE": mae,
289
"STD of Error": std_error ,
290
"MSE": mse,
291
"RMSE": rmse,
292
"MAPE": mape,
293
"Max Error": max_error ,
294
},
295
"Mask Metrics": mask_metrics ,
296
}
297
298
299
stats = calculate_statistics(
300
targets_depth , outputs_depth , targets_mask , outputs_mask_binary
301
)
302
303
print("Depth Metrics:")
304
for stat_name , value in stats["Depth Metrics"].items():
305
print(f"{stat_name}: {value:.3f}")
306
307
print(sep)
308
309
print("\nMask Metrics:")
310
for stat_name , value in stats["Mask Metrics"].items():
311
print(f"{stat_name}: {value:.3f}")
312
313
print("Evaluation complete.")
314
315
316
#
########################################################################################
317
# Testing RTE
318
band = green
319
band = np.max(band) - band
320
A_d_red = 0.1347
# Lake bottom albedo/reflectance
321
R_infinity_red = 0.0254
# Reflectance of optically deep water
322
K_d_red = 0.4075875
# Coefficient for spectral radiance loss
323
g_red = 2.75 * K_d_red
324
A_d_green = 0.2055
325
R_infinity_green = 0.0474
326
K_d_green = 0.07636
327
g_green = 2.75 * K_d_green
328
329
330
# Calculating the depth for each pixel
331
def rte(Rw, R_infinity , A_d):
332
return np.log(R_infinity / Rw) - np.log(A_d / R_infinity)
333
334
335
# Compute RTE depth
336
rte_depth = rte(band, R_infinity_green , A_d_green)
337
rte_depth_row = rte_depth
338
rte_depth = np.where(mask == 1, rte_depth , 0)
339
rte_depth = np.ma.masked_where(rte_depth == 0, rte_depth)
340
unet_depth = np.where(mask == 1, outputs_depth , 0)
341
unet_depth = np.ma.masked_where(unet_depth == 0, unet_depth)
342
v_min = -6
343
v_max = 6
344
345
# Create a figure with 2 subplots side by side
346
fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(12, 6))
347
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
97
==PAGE:106==
348
cax1 = ax[0].imshow(unet_depth , cmap="bwr", vmin=v_min, vmax=v_max)
349
ax[0].set_title("U-Net")
350
fig.colorbar(cax1, ax=ax[0])
351
352
cax2 = ax[1].imshow(rte_depth , cmap="bwr", vmin=v_min, vmax=v_max)
353
ax[1].set_title("RTE")
354
fig.colorbar(cax2, ax=ax[1])
355
356
# plt.show()
357
plt.close()
358
print(np.mean(depth_diff))
359
360
middle_column_index = outputs_depth.shape[1] // 2
361
dem_row = outputs_depth[:, middle_column_index]
362
rte_row = rte_depth_row[:, middle_column_index]
363
364
subsurface = dem_row <= 0
365
366
# Keep only the lake shore and less values (DEM <= 0)
367
dem_row = dem_row[subsurface]
368
rte_row = rte_row[subsurface]
369
370
plt.plot(dem_row , label="DEM")
371
plt.plot(rte_row , label="RTE")
372
plt.legend()
373
plt.show()
Code/model_eval.py
A.5
Generative AI Acknowledgment
Generative AI was not used for the creation of this thesis, the coding of the model archi-
tecture, the mask and bundle creation, the resizing of the rasters, the model evaluation or
the training algorithm. It was used after the creation of the final, trained model to assist in
cleaning up the last version of the code and to create the FeatureMapVisualizer class in
training.py and insert it into the training loop for visualization of the feature maps during
the writing of the thesis. Additionally, it was used to create quickly Figure 3.5 in Chapter
3 which is just an example of an ideal training process. The specific models used for the
aforementioned tasks were GPT-4[35] and Claude 3.5[36]
98
Improved methods for estimating supraglacial lake depths from satellite data using deep learning
==PAGE:107==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 327
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.space.dtu.dk
