==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
DEPARTMENT OF SPACE RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY
Material characterization using waveguide and
free-space setups at microwave frequencies
Thomas Tuong - s180535
4th of August, 2024
Master thesis, February 2024 to August 2024
Supervisors:
Rasmus Elkj├”r Jacobsen, Postdoc
Samel Arslanagi┬┤c, Associate Professor and Head of Electromagnetic
Systems
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
To determine the material parameters is crucial in many fields of engineering and medical sciences.
In the context of electromagnetic systems the choice of material is important in any application, the
correct choice of a material can optimize the performance, and conversely choosing a non suited
material could severely lower the performance of the application. For most communication systems
the frequency dependency is the most crucial, and this dependency is what this thesis will illuminate.
This thesis will present an analysis of material parameter and describe extraction methods in various
environments, such as free-space, waveguides, coaxial cables and resonators.
Methods involving waveguide systems has been demonstrated, and results were compared to known
references. Field solutions has been described and compared to known extraction algorithms, different
methods has also been tested against each other. Some of the results were more precise than other,
and error sources has been discussed in cases where the results deviated from expectations.
Parameters from known materials has been extracted in order to validate the methods described, and
practical techniques has been documented to replicate the measurements.
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface
Proper determination of material parameters has always been important. Whether it is used for
components at microwave frequencies or even higher frequencies. Or in the medical field where
various biological tissues may be measured to determine various aspects with regards to health, in
the fields of agriculture to see if a particular soil might be well suited for crops. The applications of
material characterization are various, and thus I find it very interesting, as this could be of importance
for many different people.
Throughout this project a lot of articles and books were studied, as there was a lot of new knowledge
for me. This has let me to become more organized and structured in my work. The project includes
descriptions of extraction methods in free-space, waveguides, coaxial cables as well as resonators.
Experiments have been conducted, theories have developed, and many failures have been encoun-
tered. However, this has let me to gain a much better understanding of the equipment, theory and
general practical work.
When I began my studies I had little understanding of what electrical engineering was, but when
I met a professor at DTU, Sten S. S├Ėbj├”rg, who worked with radars it peaked my initial interest
for wireless communications and electromagnetics. Then upon following the introduction course in
electromagnetics with Michael Mattes, I was convinced this was a field I would like to dedicate myself
towards. With the introduction of meta-materials and continued exploration of non simple materials, I
look forward to learn more about these topics in the future.
A big thanks to the people involved in the project:
Rasmus Elkj├”r Jacobsen: my DTU supervisor who I met with many times, and he helped me with
some of the theory, providing useful feedback on the report as well as helping me staying within the
time frame and scope of the project.
Samel Arslanagi┬┤c: my co-supervisor from DTU. I have learned a lot from his lectures during my time
at DTU.
Jeppe Majlund Bj├Ėrstorp: who has helped with the initial setup, and introduction to the project.
The mechanical lap: they have measured the waveguides, and produced samples.
Lastly, a big thanks to family and friends and the rest of my professors at DTU.
- Thomas Tuong, 4th August 2024.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Material Parameters
2
2.1
Classification of materials
2
3
Methods
5
3.1
Free-space methods
5
3.2
Line methods: waveguide transmission and reflection
13
3.3
Line methods: waveguide reflection only
19
3.4
Line method: coaxial reflection only
25
3.5
Resonator methods
26
4
Results
28
4.1
Materials under test
28
4.2
Waveguide transmission and reflection measurements
28
4.3
Waveguide reflection only measurements
44
4.4
Free-space transmission and reflection simulations
53
5
Conclusion
56
Appendix A: MATLAB codes
58
Appendix B: Calibration guides
68
Appendix C: Newton-Raphson method
71
Appendix D: Fast NRW algorithm and air gap correction
72
iii
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
The determination of material properties, more specifically electrical material properties such as
the permittivity and permeability, is a very important aspect of any applications. The wrong choice
of a material can result in very poor performance, whereas the correct choice could optimize the
application immensely. Excluding external factors such as temperature or humidity and other factors,
the dependency of the frequency is important for any device used.
Especially with the advancements in the field of meta-materials, which are engineered materials
constructed by placing a certain material in a certain manner in another so-called host medium. To this
end it is also important to be able to characterize materials properly. Different methods can be used
depending on the situation, for example it is beneficial to be able to measure a very high temperature
sample in free-space rather than in a closed line environment, where risks of altering the material are
a factor, as well as physical damage potentially taken when measuring. If the sample was a liquid
it would be difficult to measure it in a waveguide system, where the samples are placed in sample
holders.
Hence various methods are favorable in different scenarios. Another situation could be that, the
measuring material is very expensive or hard to come by. So, alternative methods must be implemented.
It could be the case that a sample is emerged in a tissue or a solid, thus only reflection can be
obtained. The scenarios are endless, and therefore it is important to have many different methods of
characterizing various samples.
Thus, the purpose of this project was to investigate various methods to extract material parameters.
Experiments has also been made to confirm the validity of these methods. The report is split into three
sections:
ŌĆó Material parameters
ŌĆó Extraction methods
ŌĆó Results
In the first section material parameters are introduced, and various electromagnetic concepts are
briefly described. Then in section two various methods are investigated, along with explanation of
their environments including free-space and waveguides mostly. The last section contains extracted
material parameters for some of the described methods.
1
==PAGE:6==
2
Material Parameters
At the core of all known materials are atoms. An atom consists of a nucleus containing positively
charged protons and electrically neutral neutron. The nucleus is surrounded by a cloud of negatively
charged electrons. This project does not involve the study of material on an atomic level, rather
macroscopic quantities such as the polarization will be considered in order to understand some of
the mechanisms happening inside materials, when exposed to external forces, typically in electric
engineering an applied electric field.
In this chapter some of the material parameters will be introduced, and some of the theoretical phenom-
ena will be explained. Since the late 1990 there has been a lot of attention towards the fabrication of
so-called meta-materials. These materials are described with permittivity and permeability below zero.
This project will not consider meta-materials, but rather conventional double positive (DPS) materials
and how to extract material parameters of these. To properly describe these constitutive parameters is
important as it relates to the wave-matter interaction. So, for any application, the material matters.
2.1
Classification of materials
Generally materials can be divided into three groups: dielectrics, magnetic materials and conductors.
Dielectric materials also known as insulators, are described with the material parameter permittivity,
which described the materials ability to store electric energy, magnetic materials are described by their
permeability, and lastly conductors are described by their conductance. However, away from DC it is
possible to describe a conductor in terms of an equivalent permittivity and vice versa. These three
quantities are generally complex.
All materials considered in this project are non-magnetic, as most materials used are non-magnetic.
Magnetic materials can be very difficult to deal with and some magnetic materials experiences a
highly non linear phenomena called hysteresis, there is also some dielectrics that exhibits this, such
material will not be addressed in this project. So, the materials tested are classified as dielectrics. The
characterization of materials can be seen on figure 2.1
Figure 2.1: Classification of materials.
Dielectrics
Dielectrics are described as having bound charges, this is in opposition to conductors that experiences
free charges. Once an electric field is applied to a dielectric material the electron cloud is displaced in
the direction opposite to the applied field, giving rise to induced polarization.
The other polarization mechanism is the orientational polarization, this refers to the case where a
2
==PAGE:7==
material is created with permanent dipoles pointing arbitrary resulting in zero polarization. Once an
electric field is applied to this, the dipoles will arrange them selves giving rise to polarization. Once the
field is turned off, the permanent dipoles will revert to pointing in arbitrary directions. The polarization
is related to the electric flux density as:
D = ╬Ą0E + P
(2.1)
Introducing the electric susceptibility Žće = ╬Ąr ŌłÆ1 gives an expression for the polarization:
P = ╬Ą0ŽćeE
(2.2)
Getting:
D = ╬Ą0╬ĄrE = ╬ĄE
(2.3)
Which is recognized from MaxwellŌĆÖs equations. The complex permittivity is given as:
╬Ą (Žē) = ╬Ą0╬Ąr (Žē) ,
╬Ąr (Žē) = ╬ĄŌĆ▓
r (Žē) ŌłÆj╬ĄŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓
r (Žē)
(2.4)
╬Ą0 in equation (2.4) refers to the free-space permittivity, which is a constant given as ╬Ą0 = 8.854 ┬Ę
10ŌłÆ12 F/m. The relative permittivity ╬Ąr for free-space is unity, hence recovering ╬Ą = ╬Ą0 for free-space.
The relative permittivity is generally also depended on external factors such as temperature, humidity
etc., here all external factors are assumed constant, and only the frequency dependency is investigated.
The frequency response of a material can be seen on figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Frequency response of a material. [Microwave Electronics, Chen et al.]
3
==PAGE:8==
Here it can be seen, that the real part of the permittivity is constant from DC up to around microwaves,
where also losses starts to appear, which is apparent due to the emergance of an imaginary part. The
first mechanism taking place it is the dielectric relaxation or the orientational polarization. The fields
are oscillating so rapidly the dipole moment cannot rearrange them selves. The second mechanism
taking place is the atomic polarization and lastly the electronic. Electrons are the particles with the
lowest mass, hence they can reorient them selves faster, however at infinitely high frequency, they
will also not be able to follow, and responses are lost. This is referred to as dispersion, dispersion
indicates losses and vice versa.
The ratio of the imaginary part to the real part of the complex relative permittivity, describes the ratio of
dissipated electric energy to the stored electric energy. This is also known as the loss tangent tan ╬┤e.
tan ╬┤e = ╬ĄŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓
r
╬ĄŌĆ▓r
(2.5)
This is related to another quantity often studied in material characterization which is the quality factor
Q. The dielectric quality factor Qe can be determined through the real and imaginary parts of the
relative permittivity.
Qe =
1
tan╬┤e
(2.6)
This quality factor is the method to determine the relative permittivity using resonators. Sometimes a
conductor is described by its permittivity, and a dielectric is described by a conductivity. Consider the
case where D(Žē) = ╬Ą(Žē)E(Žē) and J(Žē) = Žā(Žē)E(Žē). Maxwell-AmpereŌĆÖs law can be written as:
Ōłć├Ś H = jŽē╬Ą(Žē)E + Žā(Žē)E = jŽē
’Ż«
’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż░
╬Ą(Žē) + Žā(Žē)
jŽē
|
{z
}
Equivalent permittivity
’Ż╣
’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż╗E
(2.7)
So, away from DC it is possible to lump permittivity into conductivity or vise versa. Another important
material property is the intrinsic impedance given as:
╬Ę =
r┬Ą
╬Ą
(2.8)
For free-space this is denoted ╬Ę0 and is given as:
╬Ę0 =
r┬Ą0
╬Ą0
Ōēł377 Ōä”
(2.9)
The wave number is a measure number of wavelength per unit distance, this is related to the material
4
==PAGE:9==
parameters as:
k = ŽēŌłÜ┬Ą╬Ą
(2.10)
So, for free-space, this is given as:
k0 = ŽēŌłÜ┬Ą0╬Ą0
(2.11)
3
Methods
This chapter will analyze and discuss some of the methods that are used to extract material parameters.
Free-space methods will be discussed first, then followed by waveguide measurement methods, which
can be seen as a special case of free-space methods, where the waves no longer are unbounded as
in free-space, but rather bounded into a guiding structure. Coaxial probes and resonators will briefly
be described, along with some of the pros and cons to the various methods.
3.1
Free-space methods
This section will describe some of the important considerations towards free-space measurements
using antennae. This method can be very beneficial in order to measure the material parameters
of high temperature samples, or samples where the temperature is increased, in order to study the
dependency of temperature. Other external parameters can also more conveniently be altered in
free-space, rather than in a waveguide, as will be presented later in the report.
Antenna measurements
Most antenna measurements takes place in the so-called far-field, in the far field the electromagnetic
waves are said to be local transverse electromagnetic (TEM) waves, this is illustrated on figure 3.1.
In the reactive near-field there exists a high mutual coupling, and not suited for accurate antenna
measurements. In the radiative near-field it is possible to make antenna measurement, and good
measurements can be obtained through post processing. However, most antenna measurements
takes places in the far-field.
The electric field can be determined directly in terms of a source J. Sometimes it can be more difficult
to do so, or the source is unknown, and then auxiliary functions for the vector potentials can be used
to calculate the fields. However, the field expression directly in terms of the source provides a good
understanding for the concept of far-field. The electric field at the observer coordinate r is given as [1]:
5
==PAGE:10==
Figure 3.1: Local TEM waves. [Lecture slides, Michael Mattes] [1]
E (r) = Žē┬Ą
j
Z
Ōä”
" 
J
 rŌĆ▓
ŌłÆJ
 rŌĆ▓
┬Ę ╦åR ╦åR

ŌłÆ
j
k |R|

J
 rŌĆ▓
ŌłÆ3J
 rŌĆ▓
┬Ę ╦åR ╦åR

ŌłÆ
1
k2 |R|2

J
 rŌĆ▓
ŌłÆ3J
 rŌĆ▓
┬Ę ╦åR ╦åR
 #
eŌłÆjk|R|
4ŽĆ |R| dŌä”
(3.1)
One of the ways to characterize the far-field is to assume the kR product to be much larger than unity.
In that case the equations second and third term approaches zero. Another way to ensure far-field
conditions is the geometrical condition, letting r be much larger than rŌĆ▓ which leads to the so-called
Rayleigh distance:
r > 2D2
╬╗
(3.2)
Where D is the largest physical dimension of the antenna, and ╬╗ is the wavelength. This condition
ensures that the local plane waves are obtained at a planar surface with a error less than ŽĆ
8 . Conversely
when the kR product is much smaller than unity the second and third terms in equation (3.1) become
dominant and this is the near-field. For material characterization and many other measurements it is
important to be in the far-field.
If the tests are performed inside it can be difficult to ensure far-fields, especially for highly directive
antennae. Towards this end far-field conditions can be emulated by creating the so-called quite zone.
This is done by placing an absorber d away from the MUT, where d denotes the distance from the
MUT to the antenna. Typically horn antennae are used in material characterization, this is due to their
directive nature along with their broad bands of operation.
6
==PAGE:11==
S parameters
A typical measurement setup can be seen on figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Typical measurement situation. [Microwave Electronics, Chen et al.]
Scattering parameters (S parameters) are a set of parameters obtained with a vector network analyzer
(VNA). Port 1 is connected to port 1 of the device under test (DUT), and likewise port 2 is connected
to port 2 of the DUT, and the VNA will make a sweep across a set band of frequency. The VNA will
capture the full scattering matrix:
S =
 
S11
S12
S21
S22
!
(3.3)
Expressions for these S parameters will be derived in the following section. These will be used to
compute the material parameters.
Fields approach
In the far-field there are local TEM waves, so it is appropriate to analyze the situation by considering the
fields. The situation can be considered as a dielectric slab of thickness d bounded by two semi-infinite
spaces filled with air, having the material parameters ╬Ąs and ┬Ąs. The material under test (MUT) is a
non-magnetic material so ┬Ąs = ┬Ą0, the slab then has the intrinsic impedance ╬Ęs, and the slab wave
number ks. The air regions (I and III) has the free-space material parameters ╬Ą0 and ┬Ą0, thus also
the free-space intrinsic impedance ╬Ę0 and the wave number, is that of free-space k0. The situation is
depicted on figure 3.3.
For this configuration the fields in region I are given as:
E1(z) = ╦åax

EieŌłÆjk0z + Erejk0z
(3.4)
H1(z) = ╦åay
1
╬Ę0

EieŌłÆjk0z ŌłÆErejk0z
(3.5)
The fields in region II are given as:
7
==PAGE:12==
Figure 3.3: Dielectric slab bounded by air.
E2(z) = ╦åax

EaeŌłÆjksz + Ebejksz
(3.6)
H2(z) = ╦åay
1
╬Ęs

EaeŌłÆjksz ŌłÆEbejksz
(3.7)
And the fields in region III are given as:
E3(z) = ╦åax

EteŌłÆjk0z
(3.8)
H3(z) = ╦åay
1
╬Ę0

EteŌłÆjk0z
(3.9)
It is assumed that there is continuity across the MUT interfaces at z = 0 and z = d. Leading to the
boundary conditions:
E1(0) = E2(0)
(3.10)
H1(0) = H2(0)
(3.11)
E2(d) = E3(d)
(3.12)
H2(d) = H3(d)
(3.13)
Given the amplitude Ei is known, it is possible to determine the unknown amplitudes Er, Ea, Eb and
8
==PAGE:13==
Et in terms of Ei. This has been done in [2], and confirmed using a MATLAB solver (Appendix A).
The found results are:
Er =
Ei(1 ŌłÆZ2)(╬Ę2
s ŌłÆ╬Ę2
0)
(╬Ęs + ╬Ę0)2 ŌłÆ(╬Ęs ŌłÆ╬Ę0)2Z2
(3.14)
Ea =
Ei2╬Ęs(╬Ę0 + ╬Ęs)
(╬Ęs + ╬Ę0)2 ŌłÆ(╬Ęs ŌłÆ╬Ę0)2Z2
(3.15)
Eb =
Ei2Z2╬Ęs(╬Ę0 ŌłÆ╬Ęs)
(╬Ęs + ╬Ę0)2 ŌłÆ(╬Ęs ŌłÆ╬Ę0)2Z2
(3.16)
Et =
Ei4╬Ę0╬ĘsZeŌłÆjk0d
(╬Ęs + ╬Ę0)2 ŌłÆ(╬Ęs ŌłÆ╬Ę0)2Z2
(3.17)
With Z = eŌłÆjksd. Then the S parameters can be defined from the field solutions, as S11 is the ratio of
the reflected wave at z = 0 to the incident wave at z = 0. And S21 is the ratio of the transmitted wave
at z = d to the incident wave at z = 0 such:
S11 =
(1 ŌłÆZ2)(╬Ę2
s ŌłÆ╬Ę2
0)
(╬Ęs + ╬Ę0)2 ŌłÆ(╬Ęs ŌłÆ╬Ę0)2Z2
(3.18)
S21 =
4╬Ęs╬Ę0Z
(╬Ęs + ╬Ę0)2 ŌłÆ(╬Ęs ŌłÆ╬Ę0)2Z2
(3.19)
Which is equivalent to the expressions in [3] [2]. These expression are:
S11 = (1 ŌłÆZ2)╬ō
1 ŌłÆ╬ō2Z2
(3.20)
S21 = (1 ŌłÆ╬ō2)Z
1 ŌłÆ╬ō2Z2
(3.21)
Where ╬ō = (╬ĘsŌłÆ╬Ę0)
╬Ęs+╬Ę0 , Z = eŌłÆjksd. These expressions can be derived by considering multiple reflections
in a three layered configuration, where the first and third layers are air, and the second layer is the
MUT. This model will be discussed later in section 3.3.
An expression for the wave number in the slab is given as:
ks = Žē┬Ąs
╬Ęs
(3.22)
This can be shown by considering the two curl equations in MaxwellŌĆÖs equations:
9
==PAGE:14==
Ōłć├Ś E = ŌłÆjŽē┬ĄsH
(3.23)
Ōłć├Ś H = jŽē╬ĄsE
(3.24)
Here simple media (linear, homogeneous and isotropic) are assumed, such that B = ┬ĄH and D = ╬ĄE.
Since the fields are given as in equations (3.4 - 3.7) this results in:
Ōłć├Ś E = jks

ŌłÆEaeŌłÆjksz + Ebejksz
(3.25)
Inserting this into equation (3.23) gives:
jks

ŌłÆEaeŌłÆjksz + Ebejksz
= ŌłÆjks┬Ąs
 1
╬Ęs

EaeŌłÆjksz ŌłÆEbejksz
(3.26)
Getting ks = Žē┬Ąs
╬Ęs Ōćö┬Ąs = ks╬Ęs
Žē .
Considering:
Ōłć├Ś H = jks
╬Ęs

EaeŌłÆjksz + Ebejksz
(3.27)
Is equal to jŽē╬ĄsE it is found that:
jks
╬Ęs

EaeŌłÆjksz + Ebejksz
= jŽē╬Ąs

EaeŌłÆjksz + Ebejksz
(3.28)
Getting ks = Žē╬Ęs╬Ąs Ōćö╬Ąs =
ks
Žē╬Ęs . This can also be shown using squared quantities and solve for ┬Ąs in
╬Ę2
sk2
s and for ╬Ąs in k2
s/╬Ę2
s.
Equations for the material parameters can be found as:
┬Ąs = ks╬Ęs
Žē
(3.29)
╬Ąs = ks
Žē╬Ęs
(3.30)
So, to determine the material parameters the unknowns are ks and ╬Ęs. ╬Ęs can be found by solving
equations (3.18-3.19) for ╬Ęs. ks is found as:
10
==PAGE:15==
╬Ęs = ┬▒╬Ę0
s
(S11 + 1)2 ŌłÆS21
(S11 ŌłÆ1)2 ŌłÆS21
(3.31)
And for the wave number:
ks = 1
d (ŌłÆ(Arg (Z) + 2ŽĆp) + jlog (|Z|)) ,
p ŌłłZ
(3.32)
Where Z is found by solving equation (3.62) for Z2 and substitute this into equation (3.63):
Z =
S21(╬Ęs + ╬Ę0)
(╬Ęs + ╬Ę0) ŌłÆS11(╬Ęs ŌłÆ╬Ę0)
(3.33)
These results were reported in [2]. A flow chart of the method can be shown on figure 3.4
Figure 3.4: Flow chart of method for free-space.
This ends the method considering the field solutions from an incidence TEM wave impinging on the
planar surface of MUT, which can be used in free-space, as in free-space the waves can be assumed
to be TEM waves, when the measurements are performed in the antenna far-field. It will be shown
later that the so-called Nicholson-Ross-Weir (NRW) algorithm can be modified to the case of TEM
waves, and thus also be used for free-space obtained S parameters.
Ambiguities
This method holds an inherent ambiguity. It is possible for a set of measured S parameters to give
rise to infinitely many integer multiple of material parameters. This shows mathematically in equation
(3.32), where the parameter p indicates a specific solution. This is the same ambiguity described later
in Nicholson-Ross-Weir method with a certain parameter ╬ø.
The reason for this ambiguity is that a phase change of 2ŽĆ corresponds to a sample with length ╬╗.
The phase Z does not change by itself when the samples increase with a wavelength. This can
be corrected for by choosing a solution such that ┬ĄŌĆ▓
r = 1 for non-magnetic materials. Alternatively,
electrically thin samples can be used, such that the sample is electrically shorter than a wavelength,
hence avoiding this ambiguity. However, the wavelength is depended on the material parameters, so,
11
==PAGE:16==
unless a good initial estimate is known this is impossible to know. The wavelength is defined as:
╬╗ =
1
fŌłÜ┬Ą╬Ą
(3.34)
So, for free space this results in ╬╗0 = 1/fŌłÜ┬Ą0╬Ą0 = c/f = 299792458/f. But if the relative material
parameters are unknown, it is not possible to predict this. The severity of choosing a wrong p value
or solution to ╬ø is illustrated on figure 3.5, where several material parameters are extracted for the
same S parameters. On the figure the material used is rexolite which has an expected real relative
permittivity of 2.54, which is obtained for p = 0. In some cases choosing the wrong solution can result
in thinking it is a meta-material exhibiting negative relative permittivity.
Figure 3.5: Ambiguities illustrated as multiple material parameters.
Calibration
There exists various calibration methods for 2-port systems. One of the popular ones is the Thru -
Reflect - Line (TRL) calibration. A detailed guide for this can be found in Appendix B where it has been
done for a waveguide system. For the "thru" standard is realized by positioning the two open-ended
waveguides directly after each other. The "reflect" standard is realized by a metal plate inserted
between the two waveguides. Lastly, the "line" standard is realized by placing a piece of waveguide
with known length between the two waveguides. This piece of waveguide should be accounted for in
terms of a delay at the VNA.
12
==PAGE:17==
For free space systems this calibration method is also used. Here the "thru" standard is realized by
moving the two apertures at a distance D away from each other, this is typically a Rayleigh distance
(r > 2D/╬╗). For the "reflect" standard a metal plate is inserted at the midpoint, however, the thickness
of the metal plate must be compensated for, so, the antennae must be moved slightly backwards.
Lastly, for the "line" standard, the distance of one of the antennae is shifted a distance corresponding
to ╬╗/4. Alternatively, TRM (Thru - Reflect - Match) calibration can be done, the "match" standard is
obtained by a microwave absorber placed in between the antennae.
Remarks
Generally speaking the free-space measurement serve as an important tool in material characterization.
The biggest advantage is the possibility to conduct measurements where external circumstances are
adjusted, this is not always possible in other types of measurements. Additionally, horn antennae
usually have quite a broadband of operation, thus allowing characterization over most frequency
bands.
The disadvantage of free-space measurements compared to waveguide measurements are the effects
of the external environment, even though a lot of precautions can be taken in order to create far-field
conditions, there is usually more post processing involved in free-space measurements, such as time
gating. Depending on the frequency band it might require rather larges samples, such that it looks like
a planar surface to avoid fringe effects. The surface roughness should also not extend to more than
╬╗/20 [4].
3.2
Line methods: waveguide transmission and reflection
In material extraction methods there are two types are lines that are typically used. These are
rectangular waveguides and coaxial cables. In this chapter some of the theory behind these methods
will be introduced, the focus will however mostly be aimed towards rectangular waveguides, as this is
the method that has been demonstrated in this project.
Rectangular waveguides
A rectangular waveguide can be seen on figure 3.6.
Rectangular waveguides does not support TEM waves, rather they are cable of propagating transverse
electric (TE) and transverse magnetic (TM) waves. TE and TM modes have cutoff frequencies, and for
frequencies below cutoff there is no propagation, so the rectangular waveguides can be thought of like
a high pass filter.
There are various TE and TM modes, they are denoted as TMmn and TMmn. The cutoff frequency
is determined by the physical dimensions of the waveguide together with the mode. The mode with
the lowest cutoff frequency is called the fundamental mode. And for a rectangular waveguide like the
one depicted on figure 3.6, where the width a is larger than the height b, the fundamental mode is the
TE10 mode (m = 1, n = 0). The cutoff frequency for a TEmn mode is given as:
13
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.6: Rectangular waveguide. [https://www.everythingrf.com]
fc,mn =
1
2ŽĆŌłÜ┬Ą╬Ą
rmŽĆ
a
2
+
nŽĆ
b
2
(3.35)
It can be seen that not only is the cutoff frequency depended on the physical dimensions, but also
depended on the material filling the waveguide. However, often it is just filled with air and then the
free-space material parameters are used.
The wave number also consists of three components, here defined for k2:
k2 = k2
x + k2
y + k2
z = k2
c + k2
z,
k2
c = k2
x + k2
y
(3.36)
Where:
kx = mŽĆ
a ,
m ŌłłZ
(3.37)
ky = nŽĆ
b ,
n ŌłłZ
(3.38)
The general fields for the TEmn mode are given as [5].
14
==PAGE:19==
Hz = Amn cos
mŽĆx
a

cos
nŽĆy
b

eŌłÆj╬▓z
(3.39)
Ex = jŽē┬ĄnŽĆ
k2cb
Amn cos
mŽĆx
a

sin
nŽĆy
b

eŌłÆj╬▓z
(3.40)
Ey = ŌłÆjŽē┬ĄmŽĆ
k2ca
Amn sin
mŽĆx
a

cos
nŽĆy
b

eŌłÆj╬▓z
(3.41)
Hx = j╬▓mŽĆ
k2ca Amn sin
mŽĆx
a

cos
nŽĆy
b

eŌłÆj╬▓z
(3.42)
Hy = j╬▓nŽĆ
k2cb Amn cos
mŽĆx
a

sin
nŽĆy
b

eŌłÆj╬▓z
(3.43)
Where ╬▓ is the propagation constant, being real for propagation and imaginary in the situation of
operation below the cutoff frequency, it is defined as [5]:
╬▓ =
p
k2 ŌłÆk2c
(3.44)
Fields method
In the case for TE10 mode the fields from equations (3.39-3.43):
Ey = ŌłÆjŽē┬Ąa
ŽĆ
A10 sin
ŽĆx
a

eŌłÆj╬▓z
(3.45)
Hx = j╬▓a
ŽĆ A10 sin
ŽĆx
a

eŌłÆj╬▓z
(3.46)
Hz = A10 cos
ŽĆx
a

eŌłÆj╬▓z
(3.47)
It can be seen that now the electric field has only a y component whereas the magnetic field has a x
and z component. Now the fields are known it is once again possible to consider the field solutions
as in the case of TEM incident waves. The configuration is depicted on figure 3.7. On the figure the
magnetic field is only described with the y component, this is because the field is continuous across
the MUT interface, and hence only the transverse components needs to be considered.
The fields are then given as:
15
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.7: Dielectric slab bounded by air, in TE10 mode.
E1(z) = ŌłÆ╦åay

EieŌłÆjk0z + Erejk0z
(3.48)
H1(z) = ╦åax

HieŌłÆjk0z ŌłÆHrejk0z
(3.49)
E2(z) = ŌłÆ╦åay

EaeŌłÆjksz + Ebejksz
(3.50)
H2(z) = ╦åax

HaeŌłÆjks0 ŌłÆHbejksz
(3.51)
E3(z) = ŌłÆ╦åayEteŌłÆjk0z
(3.52)
H3(z) = ╦åaxHteŌłÆjk0z
(3.53)
The boundary conditions remains the same, as in the TEM case such that:
E1(0) = E2(0)
(3.54)
H1(0) = H2(0)
(3.55)
E2(d) = E3(d)
(3.56)
H2(d) = H3(d)
(3.57)
In the case of TEM waves, there exists a very simple relationship between the electric field and the
magnetic field where E = ╬ĘH. Here the constant of proportionality was the intrinsic impedance. This
is no longer the case, and the ratio of the electric field to the magnetic field is no longer the intrinsic
impedance, but rather the wave impedance. This is given as:
16
==PAGE:21==
Zw =

E
H

(3.58)
In the case for TE10 this becomes:
Zw,TE10 =

ŌłÆjŽē┬Ąa
ŽĆ
jkza
ŽĆ
 = Žē┬Ą
kz
(3.59)
Thus, in free-space and in the slab respectively:
Zw,0 = Žē┬Ą0
k0,z
(3.60)
Zw,s = Žē┬Ąs
ks,z
(3.61)
Also, in the case of TE10 the wave number becomes z component of the wave number. So, it is
possible to make a transformation from TEM incidence case to TE10 case by implementing the
substitutions seen in table 3.1.
TEM
TE10
╬Ę0
ŌåÆ
Zw,0
╬Ęs
ŌåÆ
Zw,s
k0
ŌåÆ
k0,z
ks
ŌåÆ
ks,z
Table 3.1: TEM to TE10 transformations.
Getting a similar expression for the S parameters, as in the TEM case:
S11 =
(1 ŌłÆZ2)(Z2
w,s ŌłÆZ2
w,0)
(Zw,s + Zw,0)2 ŌłÆ(Zw,s ŌłÆZw,0)2Z2 = (1 ŌłÆZ2)╬ō
1 ŌłÆ╬ō2Z2
(3.62)
S21 =
4Zw,sZw,0Z
(Zw,s + Zw,0)2 ŌłÆ(Zw,s ŌłÆZw,0)2Z2 = (1 ŌłÆ╬ō2)Z
1 ŌłÆ╬ō2Z2
(3.63)
With ╬ō = (Zw,sŌłÆZw,0)
(Zw,s+Zw,0), Z = eŌłÆjks,zd. Lastly, getting the updated expressions for the material parameters:
┬Ąs = ks,zZw,s
Žē
(3.64)
╬Ąs = k2
s,z + k2
c
Žēks,zZw,s
(3.65)
17
==PAGE:22==
These transformations will follow through the whole algorithm, so the wave impedance of the slab,
Zw,s, the wave number ks,z and Z2 is given as:
Zw,s = ┬▒Zw,0
s
(S11 + 1)2 ŌłÆS21
(S11 ŌłÆ1)2 ŌłÆS21
(3.66)
ks,z = 1
d (ŌłÆ(Arg (Z2) + 2ŽĆp) + jlog (|Zs|)) ,
p ŌłłZ
(3.67)
Z2 =
S21(Zw,s + Zw,0)
(Zw,s + Zw,0) ŌłÆS11(Zw,s ŌłÆZw,0)
(3.68)
This marks the end of the field method in the TE10 incidence case. It is very like the field method for
the TEM case, expect some transformations must be done in order to compensate for the fact that
the waves now are bounded by the waveguide, as suppose to propagate in unbounded in free-space.
With regards to the ambiguities discussed for the TEM case, it is the same case here.
Nicholson-Ross-Weir algorithm
This method is used extensively when extracting material parameters in waveguide systems. This is
due to its easy to implement style and good results. This algorithm can be found in most books that
covers material extraction. Once S11 and S21 or conversely S22 and S12 are obtained by some means,
the extraction method is straight forward. Calculate the quantity X:
X = S2
11 ŌłÆS2
21 + 1
2S11
(3.69)
Then collect this into ╬ō, which is given as:
╬ō = X ┬▒
p
X2 ŌłÆ1
(3.70)
Here the condition is such that |╬ō| shall be less or equal to unity, as the MUT are passive materials.
The the propagation factor T is then given as:
T =
S11 + S21 ŌłÆ╬ō
1 ŌłÆ(S11 + S21)╬ō
(3.71)
The relative permeability can then be calculated as:
┬Ąr =
1 + ╬ō
(1 ŌłÆ╬ō)╬ø
 ╬╗ŌłÆ2
0
ŌłÆ╬╗ŌłÆ2
c

(3.72)
Where ╬╗0 defines the free-space wave length, and ╬╗c defines the cutoff frequency wave length. The
18
==PAGE:23==
free-space wave length is given as:
╬╗0 = c
f
(3.73)
Where f is the frequency. The cutoff frequency for a rectangular waveguide with width a operating in
the TE10 mode, in free-space is given as:
fc,10 = c
2a ŌćÆ╬╗c = c
c
2a
= 2a
(3.74)
The quantity ╬ø can be found from:
1
╬ø2 = ŌłÆ
 1
2ŽĆd ln
 1
T
2
(3.75)
Where d is the sample length. It is seen that equation (3.75) has an infinite number of solutions, as the
logarithm of a complex number is multi valued. The imaginary part of the solution is equal to the angle
of this complex value +2ŽĆn where n ŌłłZ. This 2ŽĆ corresponds to a wavelength. The solution to 1/╬ø2
is:
╬ø = j2ŽĆnd
ln
  1
T
,
n ŌłłZ
(3.76)
This n is the same ambiguity in the field solutions when choosing p. The relative permittivity is
calculated from the expression:
╬Ąr = ╬╗2
0
┬Ąr
 ╬╗ŌłÆ2
c
ŌłÆ╬øŌłÆ2
(3.77)
This method can also be used for free-space measurements. In free-space there is no cutoff frequency,
and hence there is no cutoff wavelength ╬╗c, so letting ╬╗c ŌåÆŌł×this will be equivalent to the TEM case.
Moreover, for non-magnetic materials it is possible to let ┬Ąr = 1 and compute ╬Ąr.
3.3
Line methods: waveguide reflection only
In this section two different methods are presented. The first one is the fields method, that has
been presented previously. However, for reflection only methods the there is a short circuit, thus,
eliminating any transmission, but rather only allows for measurement the S parameter S11. This means
that for a single measurement it is only possible to determine one of either relative permittivity or
relative permeability. Usually it is wanted to determine the relative permittivity as mostly non-magnetic
materials are measured.
19
==PAGE:24==
At the position of the short circuit there will be no electric field. So, permittivity measurements cannot
be conducted if the sample is placed at the position of the short circuit. Ideally, the sample should
be placed at the closest maxima of the electric field which is at a distance ╬╗/4 away from the short.
Conversely, if the permeability is material wanted to measure, the sample should be placed at the
position of the short circuit, as the magnetic field has a maxima at the position of a short circuit. This
is illustrated on figure 3.8(a). This is also consistent with the findings [6][7] illustrated on figure 3.8(b).
(a) Microwave engineering, D. M. Pozar
(b) Sample considerations J. Sinkey et al.
Figure 3.8: Electric field maxima in short circuit termination.
Fields method
For reflection only measurements the waveguide is terminated by a short circuit, realized with a plate
of metal in real applications. In the following analysis this metal plate will be modeled as a PEC, as
PEC like the short circuit exhibit an impedance of zero. The situation is depicted on figure 3.9
The short circuit is located at the position z = d + Ōłål. So, the sample has the length d and the distance
from the back of the sample to the short circuit is Ōłål The total fields in regions I, II and III are given as
[3]:
E1(z) = eŌłÆ╬│0z + C1e╬│0z
(3.78)
E2(z) = C2eŌłÆ╬│z + C3e╬│z
(3.79)
E3(z) = C4eŌłÆ╬│0(zŌłÆd) + C5e╬│0(zŌłÆd)
(3.80)
The boundary conditions are given as:
20
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.9: Dielectric slab bounded by air, terminated with PEC.
E1(0) = E2(0)
(3.81)
E2(d) = E3(d)
(3.82)
E3(d + Ōłål) = 0
(3.83)
Here ╬│0 and ╬│ denotes the propagation constants for free-space and in the sample respectively, they
are given as:
╬│0 = j
sŽē
c
2
ŌłÆ
2ŽĆ
╬╗c
2
(3.84)
╬│ = j
s
Žē2╬Ąr
c2
ŌłÆ
2ŽĆ
╬╗c
2
(3.85)
Here under the assumption that the MUT is non-magnetic, hence ┬Ąs = 1. In the case that the sample
plane coincides with the calibration plane the reflection coefficient at z = 0, C1 can be determined as
[3]:
S11 = C1 = ŌłÆ2╬▓╬┤ + ((╬┤ + 1) + (╬┤ ŌłÆ1)╬▓2) tanh(╬│d)
2╬▓ + ((╬┤ + 1) ŌłÆ(╬┤ ŌłÆ1)╬▓2) tanh(╬│l)
(3.86)
With:
╬▓ = ╬│┬Ą0
╬│0┬Ą,
╬┤ = eŌłÆ2╬│0Ōłål
(3.87)
21
==PAGE:26==
The only unknown is now ╬Ąr lumped into the propagation constant ╬│. The equation can be solved by
numerical methods. The one used in this project is the Newton-Raphson method, which will be shortly
described in Appendix C. The issue with this method is that only one parameter can be determined,
either relative permittivity or relative permeability. Also prior knowledge of the sample thickness is a
requirement, along with the distance to the short circuit.
This distance to the short circuit also brings forward some issues which are associated to the
wavelength. Ideally, the sample back should be ╬╗/4 away from the short circuit, however for a band
of frequencies the wavelength could change such that for some frequencies it is ╬╗/4 away from the
short, but at others it might even be ╬╗/2 away, in which case the electric field would be at its minimum.
Alternatively, measurements are single frequencies could be made or a very short band. The model
could also be used in free-space with ╬╗c ŌåÆŌł×.
Multiple reflections method
Another method of analyzing the short circuited rectangular waveguide is by placing the sample at
the location of the short circuit, and consider the case of maximum magnetic field. The three layer
configuration is shown on figure 3.10.
Figure 3.10: Multiple reflection in three layers. [Advanced engineering electromagnetics, C. A. Balanis]
In general the situation is analyzed for three different media with their associated parameters:
╬Ąi, ┬Ąi, ╬Ęi, ki,
i = 1, 2, 3
(3.88)
22
==PAGE:27==
Once an electromagnetic wave is incident on the planar boundary at z = 0, there will be a reflection
coefficient ╬ō12 defined in terms of the intrinsic impedances of the two regions:
╬ō12 = ╬Ę2 ŌłÆ╬Ę1
╬Ę2 + ╬Ę1
(3.89)
The wave that is transmitted though the interface is described with a transmission coefficient Žä12, which
can be described with the reflection coefficient as:
Žä12 = 1 ŌłÆ╬ō12
(3.90)
To be more precise, the convention z = 0ŌłÆand z = 0+ is adopted. This is to distinguish the situation
where a wave is impinging the interface from region I to region II, and the situation where the wave
comes from region II towards region I. The wave transmitted through the MUT is hitting the interface
at z = dŌłÆand gives rise to a reflection coefficient ╬ō23 and a transmission coefficient Žä23. They are
defined as:
╬ō23 = ╬Ę3 ŌłÆ╬Ę2
╬Ę3 + ╬Ę2
(3.91)
Žä23 = 1 ŌłÆ╬ō23
(3.92)
For a semi-infinite space no waves will be hitting at z = d+. The wave will accumulate a certain phase
whilst travelling through the MUT, this phase ╬Ė is given as ╬Ė = k2d where d is the thickness of the slab.
For an incidence wave with amplitude E0 the reflected wave at z = 0ŌłÆwill have the amplitude ╬ō12E0.
In the following the situation of E0 = 1 will be assumed. The wave transmitted will have the amplitude
Žä12 at z = 0+, at z = dŌłÆit will have accumulated the phase ╬Ė, so given as Žä12eŌłÆjk2d. Then the
reflected wave from z = dŌłÆwill be ╬ō23Žä12eŌłÆjk2d and travels back and at the interface z = 0+ it will
have accumulated yet another ╬Ė and then be given as ╬ō23Žä12eŌłÆj2k2d, some will be transmitted back to
region I with the transmission coefficient Žä21 such that it will be given as ╬ō23Žä12Žä21eŌłÆj2k2d and some
will be reflected back with the reflection coefficient ╬ō21 and once it reaches z = dŌłÆagain it will have
accumulated yet another ╬Ė and be given as ╬ō23Žä12╬ō21eŌłÆj3k2d.
These multiple reflections continuous in theory infinitely. Hence to determine a reflection coefficient at
z = 0ŌłÆ, ╬ōin(z = 0ŌłÆ) all these infinite reflections should be summed up.
╬ōin(z = 0ŌłÆ) = ╬ō12 + Žä12Žä21╬ō23eŌłÆj2ksd + Žä12Žä21╬ō21╬ō2
12eŌłÆj4ksd + ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę
(3.93)
All the higher order terms can be written as an infinite series:
23
==PAGE:28==
╬ō12 +
Ōł×
X
n=0
Žä21Žä12╬ōn
21╬ōn+1
23 ej2(n+1)ksd
(3.94)
This can be re-written as:
╬ō12 + ╬ō23Žä21Žä12eŌłÆj2ksd
Ōł×
X
n=0
(╬ō21╬ō23eŌłÆj2ksd)n
(3.95)
To then be used to write an expression for ╬ōin(z = 0ŌłÆ) as:
╬ōin(z = 0ŌłÆ) = ╬ō12 + ╬ō23Žä21Žä12eŌłÆj2ksd
Ōł×
X
n=0
(╬ō21╬ō23eŌłÆj2ksd)n
(3.96)
This series is recognized as a geometric series, and a geometric series has a closed form as:
Ōł×
X
n=0
(ax)n =
a
1 ŌłÆx,
|x| < 1
(3.97)
Since ╬ō12 and ╬ō23 both are quantities less than unity, which would indicate perfect reflection, this term
must be less than one. So, the closed form is valid in this situation. This allows for a definition of the
reflection coefficient ╬ōin(z = 0ŌłÆ) as:
╬ōin(z = 0ŌłÆ) = ╬ō12 + ╬ō23Žä21Žä12eŌłÆj2ksd ╬ō23Žä21Žä12eŌłÆj2ksd
1 ŌłÆ╬ō21╬ō23eŌłÆj2ksd
(3.98)
Since Žä12 and Žä21 are given in terms of ╬ō12 and ╬ō21 respectively, this can be simplified to:
╬ōin(z = 0ŌłÆ) = ╬ō12 + ╬ō23eŌłÆj2ksd
1 + ╬ō12╬ō23eŌłÆj2ksd
(3.99)
For a short circuited dielectric slab the third layer can be considered as a PEC. This is because a
short circuit like the PEC has an impedance of zero. For the impedance to be zero this will result in
╬ō23 = ŌłÆ1 which is consistent with a short circuit. This leads to equation 3.99 to become:
╬ōin(z = 0ŌłÆ) = ╬ō12 ŌłÆeŌłÆj2ksd
1 ŌłÆ╬ō12eŌłÆj2ksd
(3.100)
╬ō12 is composed of the impedance of medium 1 and 2. The intrinsic impedance for medium 1 i known,
as this is air, meaning ╬Ę1 = ╬Ę0 = 376.73 Ōä”. The only unknown is now the intrinsic impedance of the
MUT which holds the relative permittivity and relative permeability.
24
==PAGE:29==
Two lengths method
For a short circuited rectangular waveguide hosting one single sample of the MUT, it is not sufficient
to determine both relative permittivity and relative permeability. One way to do so is to measure two
samples of different thickness. This has been described in [3] and a special case where sample 2 has
the length 2d where d is the length of sample has been described in [4].
The design equations for the material parameters were given as:
┬Ąr =
(1 + ╬ō)
╬ø(1 ŌłÆ╬ō)
q
╬╗ŌłÆ2
0
ŌłÆ╬╗ŌłÆ2
c
(3.101)
╬Ąr = ╬╗2
0
┬Ąr
(╬øŌłÆ2 ŌłÆ╬╗ŌłÆ2
c )
(3.102)
3.4
Line method: coaxial reflection only
A short summary of some of the methods using coaxial cables will be presented along with some of
their typical applications. A well described method using only reflection is the open ended coaxial
cable. This method is not restricted to, but is very useful, for measurements of liquid and powder MUT.
[8] has described many different models of the open ended coaxial cable.
Capacitance model
Here the open ended coaxial probe is modeled as a capacitor where to total
capacitance is equal to the sum of the capacitances Cf, which is MUT independent and C(╬Ąr) which
is depended upon the permittivity of the MUT. The capacitance C(╬Ąr) is given as C(╬Ąr) = ╬ĄrC0 where
C0 is the capacitance with an "MUT" of air. The complex reflection coefficient ╬ōŌłŚis measured and the
relative permittivity can be found as:
╬Ąr =
1 ŌłÆ╬ōŌłŚ
jŽēZ0C0(1 + ╬ōŌłŚ) ŌłÆCf
C0
(3.103)
Where Cf is know through calibration with a material with known material parameters.
Radiation model
The probe can also be modeled as a radiator with a capacitance C1 which is
independent on the MUT, a capacitance ╬ĄrC2 which is depended on the permittivity of the MUT. Lastly,
a conductance G is included. This conductance can be modeled as G = ╬Ą5/2
r
G [9] which leads to the
normal admittance of the equivalent circuit given as:
Y
Y0
= jŽēC1Z0 + jŽē╬ĄrC2Z0 + ╬Ą5/2
r
GZ0 ŌćöY
Y0
= K1 + K2╬Ąr + K3╬Ą5/2
r
(3.104)
The factors K1, K2 and K3 can be determined by calibration with three materials with know material
25
==PAGE:30==
parameters.
These were two models, there exists a variety of models with their own benefits. The capacitance
model is the most simple, but not the most accurate of the models. The radiation model is more
accurate at higher frequencies, but at lower frequencies it has proved not to be accurate. These open
ended coaxial probes serve as a good tool, especially if the MUT has an irregular shape or is stuck
inside another object, and the thickness is not known. The equivalent models are shown on figure
3.11.
(a) Capacitance model.
(b) Radiation model.
Figure 3.11: Open ended coaxial probe equivalent circuits.
3.5
Resonator methods
There are a lot of different resonators, and not everything will be covered here. Only the basic principle
will be introduced, as this is a huge subject, and it would be impossible to cover everything.
For material characterization the resonant perturbation is a method that is often used. In material
characterization the so-called material perturbation is often used, in this method the MUT is inserted
into a cavity. The resonance frequency and quality factor of the cavity resonator will then change. The
situation where E1 and H1 are the electric and magnetic fields before a perturbation, and E2 and H2
are the fields after a perturbation. For material perturbation the perturbation equation becomes [3]:
Žē2 ŌłÆŽē1
Žē1
= ŌłÆ
R
Vc(Ōłå╬ĄE2 ┬Ę EŌłŚ
1 + Ōłå┬ĄH2 ┬Ę HŌłŚ
1) dV
R
Vc(╬Ą1E2 ┬Ę EŌłŚ
1 + ┬Ą1H2 ┬Ę HŌłŚ
1) dV
(3.105)
The equations to determine the relative permittivity and permeability are then given as [3]:
f2 ŌłÆf1
f2
= A(XŌĆ▓
r ŌłÆ1)Vs
Vc
(3.106)
1
Q2
ŌłÆ1
Q1
= B(XŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓
r )Vs
Vc
(3.107)
With X = ╬Ą, ┬Ą. This method is very accurate for material that does not posses very small losses.
26
==PAGE:31==
However, the major disadvantage of resonance methods is that they are all very narrow banded.
The major advantage is that it is possible to measure oddly shaped materials as well as very small
materials. A small sample of volume Vs is inserted into the cavity of volume Vc, giving rise to this
perturbation. The situation is depicted on figure 3.12.
Figure 3.12: Small perturbation. [Microwave electronics, Chen et al.]
In summary, chapter 2 has presented various extraction methods along with some of their descriptions.
The methods mentioned are listed in short form in table 3.2 along with some of their characteristics.
Method
Parameters measured
Parameter extracted
Typical materials
measured
Free space
S11 and S21
╬Ąr and ┬Ąr
Solids
Waveguide
S11 and S21
╬Ąr and ┬Ąr
Solids
Short ended waveguide
S11
╬Ąr or ┬Ąr
Solids
Coaxial probe
S11
╬Ąr or ┬Ąr
Liquids
Resonator
Ōłåf and ŌłåQ
╬Ąr and ┬Ąr
Solids and liquids
Table 3.2: Measurement methods.
27
==PAGE:32==
4
Results
In this chapter the obtained results will be displayed and discussed. Measurements has been made
in the R band as well as in the C band, and there has been made a simulation in X band. These
frequency bands have different designations. In [5] R band is the band from 1.372 GHz to 2.745 GHz.
Whereas, the same band is called W band in [6]. To avoid misunderstandings the two frequency bands
along with some of their descriptions is found in table 4.1.
Band
Recommended
frequencies
[GHz]
TE10 cutoff
frequency [GHz]
EIA designation
width [mm]
height [mm]
R
1.70 - 2.60
1.372
WR-430
109.22
54.61
C
3.95 - 5.85
3.153
WR-187
47.56
22.15
X
8.2 - 12.4
6.557
WR-90
22.86
10.16
Table 4.1: Definition of frequency bands.
4.1
Materials under test
In this project two materials were investigated, namely rexolite and POM-C. Rexolite is widely used
in the field of telecommunications. Usually used as insulating material as it posses a low dielectric
constant - to be verified in this work. The losses associated to the material are also very low [5].
POM-C is likewise used in components in telecommunications, usually as insulating components or
support structures. The expected values for the dielectric constants of the MUTs is found in table 4.2
Rexolite
POM-C
2.54
2.94 ┬▒ 0.02
Table 4.2: Expected values for dielectric constants.[5] [10]
4.2
Waveguide transmission and reflection measurements
This chapter will show the obtained results from the methods discussed in section 3.2. The methods
will be proven to be equivalent and the extracted parameters will be discussed and compared.
Setup
For reflection and transmission a measurement system consisting of two identical rectangular waveg-
uides was used. Furthermore, this setup included a sample holder of length l = 4 cm, and two
coax-to-waveguide adaptors. One connected to port 1 on the VNA, and the other one connected to
port 2 on the VNA. The measurement situation is depicted on figure 4.1.
Furthermore, a piece of extra line and a metal plate was used to perform the calibration. The calibration
used was the so-called Thru-Reflect-Line (TRL). A detailed calibration guide is included in Appendix B.
28
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.1: Measurement setup for reflection and transmission measurements.
R band measurements
R band designates the frequency band from 1.342 GHz to 2.745 GHz [5]. The waveguides typically
used within this frequency band are denoted WR-430. This type of waveguide has also been used in
the project. The samples are cut to fit into the sample holder, so they have a thickness of 4 cm.
Air
The first MUT is not an actual MUT, rather the initial test were carried out using a "slab" of air of
course just realized with an empty sample holder. This was done with the intention of this serving as a
reference. The following measurements could potentially be very precise, but be subject to an inherent
offset, and thus give a false sense of judgement. Air is know to have relative permittivity and relative
permeability both of unity. The extracted values for ╬ĄŌĆ▓
r and ╬ĄŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓
r for air is shown on figure 4.2.
29
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.2: Air relative permittivity at R band.
It is seen that relative material parameters of unity was extracted. The small gaps on in the measured
results comes from the fact that the measured S parameters were truncated, hence at some point not
defined and therefore no extracted parameters could be defined for that particular frequency point.
Rexolite
The magnitude in dB of the measured S parameters S11 and S21 are shown on figure 4.3(a) 4.3(b)
respectively, and the measured phases is shown on figure 4.4(a) and 4.4(b) respectively. The extracted
material parameters along with the loss tangent can be seen on figure 4.5.
30
==PAGE:35==
(a) Rexolite measured S11 at R band.
(b) Rexolite measured S21 at R band.
Figure 4.3: Measured magnitudes for rexolite at R band.
31
==PAGE:36==
(a) Rexolite measured S11 at R band.
(b) Rexolite measured S21 at R band.
Figure 4.4: Measured phase for rexolite at R band.
32
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.5: Rexolite relative permittivity at R band.
It is apparent that around 2.5 GHz there is a dramatic shift. This is the ambiguity described in section
3.1. Depending on the algorithm used this either calls for a change of p in the fields method or different
solution to equation (3.75) in the NRW method. The corrected results can be seen on figure 4.6(a)
and 4.6(b) respectively.
33
==PAGE:38==
(a) Corrected relative permittivity.
(b) Corrected relative permeability.
Figure 4.6: Corrected extracted values for rexolite at R band.
34
==PAGE:39==
The third quantity computed along with the relative permittivity is the loss tangent as defined earlier in
equation (2.5). The loss tangent is seen to be very low which is consistent with the expectations. This
means almost all the electric energy is stored rather than dissipated, if the power would be dissipated
it would be converted into heat, the material is not heated and very low losses take place.
To evaluated the measurement accuracy some statistical analysis is applied. In table 4.3 the minimum
value ╬ĄrŌĆ▓,min, maximum value ╬ĄrŌĆ▓,max, the difference of these Ōłå╬ĄŌĆ▓
r, the mean m╬ĄŌĆ▓r, the difference from the
reference to the mean ╬ĄrŌĆ▓,ref ŌłÆm╬ĄŌĆ▓r and the standard deviation Žā╬ĄŌĆ▓r is described. The most interesting
is the real part of the relative permittivity, as the losses have been shown to be almost zero.
╬ĄrŌĆ▓,min
╬ĄrŌĆ▓,max
Ōłå╬ĄŌĆ▓
r
m╬ĄŌĆ▓r
╬ĄrŌĆ▓,ref ŌłÆm╬ĄŌĆ▓r
Žā╬ĄŌĆ▓r
2.4689
2.6176
0.1487
2.5449
-0.0049
0.0062
Table 4.3: Rexolite relative permittivity results.
The extracted data was truncated from 1.8 GHz to 2.3 GHz in order to get true measurements, far
away from the cutoff frequency, and the point where ambiguities appear.
The setup is inherently unstable, as it is practically impossible to emulate the same exact circumstances
for measurements. This is because the waveguides are not locked in place nor are the cables, and
when removing the sample holder inevitably there will appear misalignmentŌĆÖs relative to the previous
measurement situation. Towards this end it would be beneficial to provide more measurements, and
investigate the effect of this practical obstacle. Five measurements has been made where a complete
disassembly has been made between the measurements. The results can be seen on figure 4.7.
35
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.7: Rexolite relative permittivity at R band.
It is seen that the measurements agrees quite well to one another, it is also expected that multiple
measurements would increase the accuracy. There seems to be larger differences in the imaginary
part. This is expected as this represents losses, and losses are more sensitive towards changes in
external factors such as temperature and smaller impurities which can occur when making multiple
measurements. Additionally the sample holder is fastened by eight screws, the torque actually
showed to have some impact in the measurements. The effects of the practical consequences seems
to be negligible for material characterization of rexolite at R band. Taking the average of the five
measurements, the average value for ╬ĄŌĆ▓
r was ╬ĄŌĆ▓
r = 2.5409.
It can be observed that the ripples occurs at the same places, and does not seem to be random. This
suggests a certain periodicity which implies standing waves due to multiple reflections.
Another algorithm called called the fast algorithm has been used towards the same set of measured S
parameters. The results are compared to the NRW results on figure 4.8
36
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.8: NRW vs fast algorithm.
It can be seen that the results somewhat agree. The imaginary part is computed as the same, however
the real part can clearly be seen not being the same. However the interesting result here is the fact
that the standing wave phenomenon can clearly be seen to be identical. Hence it can be concluded
that it is not a deficiency in the NRW algorithm, but rather more suggests an inherent consequence of
the multiple reflections. The fast algorithm can be seen in Appendix D.
POM-C
The measured magnitudes for the S parameters S11 and S21 are shown in figure 4.9(a) and 4.9(b)
respectively, and the measured phases are shown in figure 4.10(a) and 4.10(b) respectively.
37
==PAGE:42==
(a) POM-C measured S11 at R band.
(b) POM-C measured S21 at R band.
Figure 4.9: Measured magnitudes for POM-C at R band.
38
==PAGE:43==
(a) POM-C measured S11 at R band.
(b) POM-C measured S21 at R band.
Figure 4.10: Measured phases for POM-C at R band.
39
==PAGE:44==
Just as in the case for S11 for rexolite, there occurs to be a resonance. And once again this resonance
frequency, this frequency is lower than for the rexolite, which is expected as the relative permittivity of
POM-C is expected to be larger than for rexolite, hence the wavelength for POM-C should be expected
to be smaller than for rexolite, and this resonance should occur prior. The extracted relative permittivity
is shown in figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11: Extracted relative permittivity of POM-C at R band.
It can be seen that the losses are, however small, larger than in the case of rexolite. The same periodic
ripples are present, which is consistent with the assumption that these are not random, but more likely
a result of multiple reflections. The same statistical analysis has been made, as in the extracted values
for rexolite. The results can be seen on table 4.4
╬ĄrŌĆ▓,min
╬ĄrŌĆ▓,max
Ōłå╬ĄŌĆ▓
r
m╬ĄŌĆ▓r
╬ĄrŌĆ▓,ref ŌłÆm╬ĄŌĆ▓r
Žā╬ĄŌĆ▓r
2.8953
3.1362
0.2408
3.0091
-0.0391
0.0239
Table 4.4: POM-C relative permittivity results.
With regards to the losses, they are slightly higher than expected, a loss tangent of 0.03 is expected
[10]. This is likely due to surface roughness, the POM-C samples have some scratches, this might
40
==PAGE:45==
explain some of the added losses. The POM-C sample is also a bit smaller than the rexolite sample,
thus, not filling the sample holder as well. The loss tangent of five different measurements of POM-C
can be seen on figure 4.12. The air gap corrected extracted permittivity for POM-C can be seen on
figure 4.13. The five different measurements of POM-C is shown on figure 4.14. Lastly, the extracted
relative permeability is shown on figure 4.15.
Figure 4.12: Loss tangents of POM-C at R band.
41
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.13: Corrected extracted relative permittivity of POM-C at R band.
Figure 4.14: Five extracted relative permittivity of POM-C at R band.
42
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.15: Five extracted relative permeability of POM-C at R band.
The corrected values for the relative permittivity seems to make the extracted values closer to the
reference. The correction technique is described in Appendix D.
The fields method and NRW methods gives the same results, and they are equivalent. The fields
method is somewhat easier to comprehend, but is a bit more difficult to implement. This can be
shown in figure 4.16, where the NRW and fields methods provides the same result for ╬╗c = Ōł×in the
NRW method, and m = n = 0 in the fields method, which is equivalent to free-space. The extracted
parameters are a bit above the reference, but this is expected as they are S parameters obtained in
the TE10 case. Since, the wave number for the TE10 is lower than for TEM (free-space), an overshoot
is expected. This shows that the field and NRW methods also holds for S parameters obtained in
free-space as local TEM waves.
43
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.16: TEM model used on TE10 waves.
4.3
Waveguide reflection only measurements
In this chapter the results of reflection only measurements will be displayed and discussed. There has
been extracted material parameters in the R band as well as in C band. Due to the practical difficulties
of the location of the short circuit there has been measured relative permittivity for rexolite at R and C
band, relative permeability for rexolite at C band.
Setup
The setup only requires one port. A schematic of the setup can be seen on figure 4.17.
44
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.17: Reflection only measurements setup schematic.
R band measurements
In this chapter the R band results for the relative permittivity of rexolite will be discussed.
Rexolite
At R band the sample of 4 cm was placed inside the sample holder, and the extra piece of line used
for calibration was mounted behind it with the metal plate used for reflection calibration behind that.
This can be seen on figure 4.18. For this setup the usual TRL calibration was used.
Figure 4.18: Reflection only measurements setup.
It is known from the previous section that the short circuit should ideally be ╬╗/4 away from the sample.
The line is 47 mm hence this is valid for f = 1.6 GHz. So, the conditions are not ideal. The extracted
dielectric constant ╬ĄŌĆ▓
r can be seen on figure 4.19.
45
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.19: Extracted relative permittivity for rexolite at R band.
The values are not the same as in the case for transmission and reflection measurements. This could
be due to the conditions mentioned above. The reflection only measurements are not as broad banded
as for transmission and reflection, due to this positioning of the sample to the short circuit. Interestingly,
these results are very similar to the results using the "fast NRW" method.
Two length measurements
One of the ways to solve for both permittivity and permeability was to measure two sets of S11 for
samples with different lengths. This has been done at R band for POM-C. This involves iterative
solving, hence a good initial estimation is needed. It was difficult to provide a good guess for ╬ō over
the whole band as this changes a lot as seen on figure 4.20
46
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.20: ╬ō plotted over R band.
So, this was only done for a single frequency as a "proof of concept". The values obtained are shown
on figure 4.21
Figure 4.21: Extracted relative permittivity and relative permeability.
The values agrees well with the reference and the results reported for the transmission and reflection
method. The length of sample 1 was 2 cm, and the length of the second sample was 4 cm. This
however, requires some future work to verify with a higher certainty.
C band measurements
In this section relative permeability and relative permittivity of rexolite will be displayed. For the
reflection only measurements at R band a TRL calibration was kept from the transmission and
reflection measurements. This was because the necessary standards for normal 1-port calibration
was not available at R band. Likewise, the necessary standards for TRL calibration at C band was not
available. So, another calibration method must be used.
47
==PAGE:52==
Calibration
A short - flush short - match (S-FS-M) calibration was used for the C band measurements. A calibration
guide can be found in Appendix B. The short standard is realized with a metal plate, the flush short
is a short piece of line which has been short circuited by a metal plate, and the match standard is a
piece of line that has a tapering inside, thus providing a match (zero reflection in theory).
Rexolite
The extracted ╬ĄŌĆ▓
r for rexolite at C band can be seen on figure 4.22. Here five different measurements
has been made, to investigate any disturbance of removing and inserting the sample.
Figure 4.22: Extracted relative permeability for rexolite at C band.
The extracted values are bit too high in the beginning of the frequency band, at frequencies below the
recommended the Newton-Raphson method did not converge, this might be an explanation to why at
lower frequencies the extracted values diverge from expectations. Additionally, when the workshop
procured the samples, they found that the metal plate at the back of the sample holder (flush short),
was not only not planar, but more critically it was curved. This effect could potentially give rise to these
deviations from the expected values. On figure 4.23 the loss tangent is showed, according to [5] the
loss tangent of rexolite is expected to be 0.00048, thus extremely low loss. The extracted losses are
48
==PAGE:53==
very small, but not as small as expected, it can be very difficult to characterize such low losses. But
also, due to the curved nature of the metal, it could give rise to additional losses.
Figure 4.23: Loss tangent for rexolite at C band.
On figure 4.24 the extracted relative permeability is shown. Again it suffers from an overestimation at
lower frequencies, but even at higher frequencies is suffers from a slight overestimation. This is likely
due to the positioning of the sample.
49
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.24: Extracted relative permeability for rexolite at C band.
POM-C
The extracted material parameters for POM-C are displayed on figure 4.25.
50
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.25: Extracted relative permittivity for POM-C at C band.
Here the same behaviour as for rexolite can be seen for lower frequencies. Once again the Newton-
Raphson method did not converge at lower frequencies close to the recommended band. A final value
of 3.01 was found, which is in close agreement with the values for R band. A general observation
for C band measurements is that there is a lot less difference when measuring, this is likely due to a
better calibration along with the fact, that the cables were not moved when inserting or removing a
new sample due to a holder for the waveguide. The expected loss tangent for POM-C was mentioned
earlier to be 0.03. A plot of the extracted loss tangent is shown on figure 4.27.
51
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.26: Loss tangent for POM-C at C band.
From the results it can be seen to agree quite well with the expectation. It was expected to be a better
estimation for POM-C, as the losses are a bit higher, thus easier to capture in this configuration. Lastly,
on figure ?? the extracted values for the relative permeability can be shown.
52
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.27: Loss tangent for POM-C at C band.
Just like in the case for rexolite, an overestimation is shown. This is again likely due to the positioning
of the sample relative to the short circuit.
4.4
Free-space transmission and reflection simulations
X band measurements were not possible, as the VNA only went up to 6 GHz, to this end a simulation
where TEM conditions were emulated was made in CST Studio Suite. NRW algorithm with ╬╗c ŌåÆŌł×.
The simulation setup can be seen on figure 4.28. Initially, two X-band horn antennae were made.
However, due to a restriction of 100000 mesh cells this could not be realized. So, two waveguide ports
were setup.
53
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.28: Simulation of Teflon (PTFE).
The sample had the thickness d = 5 mm, utilizing the prior knowledge of the material parameters, an
electrically thin sample can be chosen. The reference value is 2.1 as defined in CST, the extracted
parameters can be seen on figures 4.29 and 4.30.
Figure 4.29: Extracted relative permittivity of teflon in X band.
54
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.30: Extracted relative permeability of teflon in X band.
The extracted values seems to agree with the reference values provided in CST.
55
==PAGE:60==
5
Conclusion
This study has uncovered various extraction methods, to determine relative permittivity and relative per-
meability, in solid samples. In case of any modifications or ambiguities, these have been investigated
and techniques to unambiguously determine the correct results have been presented.
Free-space measurements were discussed from a theoretical perspective, and antenna measurement
principles have been analyzed. The methods were tested with simulated scattering parameters in
order to give an indication of the validity of the method. The extracted values were reported to agree
quite well with expectations. The fields solutions method has proven to be equivalent to the well known
NRW method.
Traditional methods using 2 port waveguide system including both transmission and reflection pa-
rameters, were discussed and verified in the results section where known materials were tested at
R and C band. Additionally, reflection only methods were discussed from two different perspectives,
mainly by considering the fields and then making use of iterative solving to determine the material
parameter. However, for reflection only methods, only one parameter could be determined from a
single measurement. To determine both parameters, a technique where two samples of different
lengths has been demonstrated for a single frequency.
The other method considered the case of multiple reflections, and iterative solving was used to
extract the material parameter, however, as mentioned only one parameter could be found for a single
measurement. Sample positioning was also explained, and it was found that the location relative to the
short circuit was very important. At the location of the short circuit it was found to be most appropriate
to determine permeability, since the magnetic field is at its maximum at that location. For permittivity
measurements the sample should ideally be a quarter of a wavelength from the short circuit, as the
electric field is at its maximum there.
These reflection methods has also been tested experimentally, some of the results agreed well
with expectations, and in some cases they diverged a bit from expectations, and a discussion on
the reasoning has been reported. Some methods inhabited ambiguities due to the sample length
coinciding with a wavelength, this has been explained, and a correction has been demonstrated. Lastly,
the methods using coaxial cables and resonators have been purely described theoretically. Most of
the methods that has been implemented were proven to give quite accurate results.
Future work
Future work would include more experiments conducted in order to gain more certainty about the
methods. Real free-space measurement would be something to work on. Also, in theory reflection
only methods should also be valid in free-space, testing of these would also be interesting.
For waveguide systems it would be interesting to try the same setup for R band as in the case of C
band. Due to missing components, the same calibration was not carried out for these measurements,
so will the results improve for another calibration method? Of course, it could also be interesting of
56
==PAGE:61==
investigating different materials, perhaps also magnetic materials, or materials in the for of liquids or
samples in different external environments, such as temperature which likely is the easiest factor to
change.
Lastly, it could be interesting to try experimental setups for coaxial cable probes, and for resonators.
This would of course need a bit more in dept knowledge on these methods.
57
==PAGE:62==
Appendix A: MATLAB codes
Listing 1: BC Solver
1
syms Ei Er Ea Eb Et z k0 ks eta_0 eta_s d
2
3
E1 = Ei*exp(ŌłÆ1i*k0*z)+Er*exp(1i*k0*z);
4
H1 = (1/eta_0)*(Ei*exp(ŌłÆ1i*k0*z)ŌłÆEr*exp(1i*k0*z));
5
E2 = Ea*exp(ŌłÆ1i*ks*z)+Eb*exp(1i*ks*z);
6
H2 = (1/eta_s)*(Ea*exp(ŌłÆ1i*ks*z)ŌłÆEb*exp(1i*ks*z));
7
E3 = Et*exp(ŌłÆ1i*k0*z);
8
H3 = (1/eta_0)*Et*exp(ŌłÆ1i*k0*z);
9
10
% At z = 0
11
BC1 = E1 == E2;
12
BC2 = H1 == H2;
13
14
% At z = d
15
BC3 = subs(E2, z, d) == subs(E3, z, d);
16
BC4 = subs(H2, z, d) == subs(H3, z, d);
17
18
solutions = solve([subs(BC1, z, 0), subs(BC2, z, 0), BC3, BC4], [Er, Ea, Eb, Et]);
19
20
Er_sol = simplify(solutions.Er);
21
Ea_sol = simplify(solutions.Ea);
22
Eb_sol = simplify(solutions.Eb);
23
Et_sol = simplify(solutions.Et);
24
25
disp(['Er = ', char(Er_sol)])
26
disp(['Ea = ', char(Ea_sol)])
27
disp(['Eb = ', char(Eb_sol)])
28
disp(['Et = ', char(Et_sol)])
Listing 2: Newton Raphson solver
1
lambda_c = 0.09509759683;
2
l = 0.0116;
3
delta_l = 0.01483;
4
c = 299792458;
5
6
f_l = 3.153*1e9;
7
f_h = 6*1e9;
8
f = f_l:(f_hŌłÆf_l)/200:f_h;
9
10
f_lr = 3.95e9;
11
f_hr = 5.85e9;
12
13
MUT = dlmread('C:\Users\AB\Desktop\MscŌłÆData\Nye\2643Rex2.txt');
14
S11 = MUT(:, 1)+1i*MUT(:, 2);
15
16
% MUTa = dlmread('C:\Users\AB\Desktop\MscŌłÆData\Nye\2643Air.txt');
17
% S11a = MUTa(:, 1)+1i*MUTa(:, 2);
18
58
==PAGE:63==
19
max_iter = 1000;
20
tol = 1eŌłÆ9;
21
initial_guess = 3;
22
23
% Initialize epsilon_r vector
24
epsilon_r = ones(size(f))*initial_guess;
25
% epsilon_ra = ones(size(f))*initial_guess;
26
27
for idx = 1:length(f)
28
omega = 2*pi*f(idx);
29
30
for iter = 1:max_iter
31
gamma = 1j * sqrt((omega^2 * epsilon_r(idx)) / c^2 ŌłÆ(2 * pi / lambda_c)^2);
32
gamma_0 = 1j * sqrt(omega^2 / c^2 ŌłÆ(2 * pi / lambda_c)^2);
33
34
% gammaa = 1j * sqrt((omega^2 * epsilon_ra(idx)) / c^2 ŌłÆ(2 * pi / lambda_c)^2);
35
% gamma_0a = 1j * sqrt(omega^2 / c^2 ŌłÆ(2 * pi / lambda_c)^2);
36
37
beta = gamma / gamma_0;
38
% betaa = gammaa / gamma_0a;
39
40
tanh_gamma_l = tanh(gamma * l);
41
tanh_gamma0_delta_l = tanh(gamma_0 * delta_l);
42
43
% tanh_gamma_la = tanh(gammaa * l);
44
% tanh_gamma0_delta_la = tanh(gamma_0a * delta_l);
45
46
numerator = tanh_gamma_l + beta * tanh_gamma0_delta_l ŌłÆbeta * (1 + beta *
tanh_gamma_l * tanh_gamma0_delta_l);
47
denominator = tanh_gamma_l + beta * tanh_gamma0_delta_l + beta * (1 +
tanh_gamma_l * tanh_gamma0_delta_l);
48
F_x = numerator / denominator ŌłÆS11(idx);
49
50
% numeratora = tanh_gamma_la + betaa * tanh_gamma0_delta_la ŌłÆbetaa * (1 + betaa
* tanh_gamma_la * tanh_gamma0_delta_la);
51
% denominatora = tanh_gamma_la + betaa * tanh_gamma0_delta_la + betaa * (1 +
tanh_gamma_la * tanh_gamma0_delta_la);
52
% F_xa = numeratora / denominatora ŌłÆS11a(idx);
53
54
h = 1eŌłÆ9;
55
epsilon_r_plus_h = epsilon_r(idx) + h;
56
gamma_plus_h = 1j * sqrt((omega^2 * epsilon_r_plus_h) / c^2 ŌłÆ(2 * pi / lambda_c)
^2);
57
beta_plus_h = gamma_plus_h / gamma_0;
58
tanh_gamma_l_plus_h = tanh(gamma_plus_h * l);
59
60
% h = 1eŌłÆ9;
61
% epsilon_r_plus_ha = epsilon_ra(idx) + h;
62
% gamma_plus_ha = 1j * sqrt((omega^2 * epsilon_r_plus_ha) / c^2 ŌłÆ(2 * pi /
lambda_c)^2);
63
% beta_plus_ha = gamma_plus_ha / gamma_0a;
64
% tanh_gamma_l_plus_ha = tanh(gamma_plus_ha * l);
59
==PAGE:64==
65
66
numerator_plus_h = tanh_gamma_l_plus_h + beta_plus_h * tanh_gamma0_delta_l ŌłÆ
beta_plus_h * (1 + beta_plus_h * tanh_gamma_l_plus_h * tanh_gamma0_delta_l);
67
denominator_plus_h = tanh_gamma_l_plus_h + beta_plus_h * tanh_gamma0_delta_l +
beta_plus_h * (1 + tanh_gamma_l_plus_h * tanh_gamma0_delta_l);
68
F_x_plus_h = numerator_plus_h / denominator_plus_h ŌłÆS11(idx);
69
70
% numerator_plus_ha = tanh_gamma_l_plus_ha + beta_plus_ha * tanh_gamma0_delta_la
ŌłÆbeta_plus_ha * (1 + beta_plus_ha * tanh_gamma_l_plus_ha *
tanh_gamma0_delta_la);
71
% denominator_plus_ha = tanh_gamma_l_plus_ha + beta_plus_ha *
tanh_gamma0_delta_la + beta_plus_ha * (1 + tanh_gamma_l_plus_ha *
tanh_gamma0_delta_la);
72
% F_x_plus_ha = numerator_plus_ha / denominator_plus_ha ŌłÆS11a(idx);
73
74
dF_x_depsilon_r = (F_x_plus_h ŌłÆF_x) / h;
75
76
% dF_x_depsilon_ra = (F_x_plus_ha ŌłÆF_xa) / h;
77
78
epsilon_r_new = epsilon_r(idx) ŌłÆF_x / dF_x_depsilon_r;
79
% epsilon_r_newa = epsilon_ra(idx) ŌłÆF_xa / dF_x_depsilon_ra;
80
81
if abs(epsilon_r_new ŌłÆepsilon_r(idx))<tol
82
epsilon_r(idx) = epsilon_r_new;
83
break;
84
end
85
86
epsilon_r(idx) = epsilon_r_new;
87
% epsilon_ra(idx) = epsilon_r_newa;
88
end
89
90
if iter == max_iter
91
warning('No convergence for frequency %f', f(idx));
92
end
93
end
94
95
% plot(f,real(epsilon_r),'rŌłÆ',f,real(epsilon_ra),'bŌłÆ')
96
% xlim([f_lr f_hr])
97
% grid on
98
% ylim([ŌłÆ0.5 4])
99
% title('Relative Permittivity of Rexolite at C Band')
100
% xlabel('Frequency [Hz]')
101
% ylabel('Relative Permittivity')
102
% legend([char(949), '_{r}'' Rexolite'], [char(949), '_{r}'' POMŌłÆC'])
103
104
plot(f,real(epsilon_r),'rŌłÆ')
105
xlim([f_lr f_hr])
106
grid on
107
ylim([ŌłÆ0.5 4])
108
title('Relative Permittivity of Rexolite at C Band')
109
xlabel('Frequency [Hz]')
110
ylabel('Relative Permittivity')
60
==PAGE:65==
111
legend([char(949), '_{r}'' Rexolite'])
112
113
figure;
114
plot(f,20*log10(S11))
115
116
figure;
117
plot(f,angle(S11))
Listing 3: Multiple reflections solver
1
function mu_r = findMuR(S11, omega, d)
2
c = 299792458;
3
4
mu_r = 1*ones(size(omega));
5
6
max_iter = 1000;
7
tol = 1eŌłÆ3;
8
9
for i = 1:length(omega)
10
for iter = 1:max_iter
11
n2 = sqrt(2.54 * mu_r(i));
12
13
exp_term = exp((ŌłÆ2j*omega(i)*n2*d)/c);
14
numerator = (n2ŌłÆ1)/(n2+1)ŌłÆexp_term;
15
denominator = (1ŌłÆ(n2ŌłÆ1)*exp_term)/(n2+1);
16
F_x = numerator / denominator ŌłÆS11(i);
17
18
h = 1eŌłÆ6;
19
mu_r_plus_h = mu_r(i) + h;
20
n2_plus_h = sqrt(2.54 * mu_r_plus_h);
21
22
exp_term_plus_h = exp(ŌłÆ2j * omega(i) * n2_plus_h * d / c);
23
numerator_plus_h = (n2_plus_h ŌłÆ1) / (n2_plus_h + 1) ŌłÆexp_term_plus_h;
24
denominator_plus_h = 1 ŌłÆ(n2_plus_h ŌłÆ1) * exp_term_plus_h / (n2_plus_h + 1);
25
F_x_plus_h = numerator_plus_h / denominator_plus_h ŌłÆS11(i);
26
27
dF_x_dmu_r = (F_x_plus_h ŌłÆF_x) / h;
28
29
mu_r_new = mu_r(i) ŌłÆF_x / dF_x_dmu_r;
30
31
if abs(mu_r_new ŌłÆmu_r(i)) < tol
32
mu_r(i) = mu_r_new;
33
break;
34
end
35
36
mu_r(i) = mu_r_new;
37
end
38
39
if iter == max_iter
40
warning('No converge %d', i);
41
end
42
end
43
61
==PAGE:66==
44
end
45
46
MUT = dlmread('C:\Users\AB\Desktop\MscŌłÆData\Nye\4572Rex.txt');
47
S11 = MUT(:, 1)+1i*MUT(:, 2);
48
49
f_l = 3.153*1e9;
50
f_h = 6*1e9;
51
f = f_l:(f_hŌłÆf_l)/200:f_h;
52
53
f_lr = 3.95e9;
54
f_hr = 5.85e9;
55
56
omega = 2*pi.*f;
57
d = 0.0116;
58
59
mu_r = findMuR(S11, omega, d);
60
61
figure;
62
plot(f,mu_r,'rŌłÆ')
63
grid on
64
title('Relative Permeability of Rexolite at C Band')
65
xlabel('Frequency [Hz]')
66
ylabel('Relative Permittivity')
67
legend('\mu_r Rexolite')
68
xlim([3.95e9 5.85e9])
Listing 4: Fields solutions and NRW solver
1
clear all;
2
clc;
3
4
% Fundamental constants
5
6
mu_0 = 4*pi*1eŌłÆ7;
7
eps_0 = 8.854*1eŌłÆ12;
8
eta_0 = sqrt(mu_0/eps_0);
9
c = 299792458;
10
a = 109.22eŌłÆ3;
11
fc = c/(2*a);
12
d = 0.04;
13
14
f_l = 1.342*1e9;
15
f_h = 2.745*1e9;
16
f = f_l:(f_hŌłÆf_l)/200:f_h;
17
f = reshape(f,[],1);
18
omega = 2*pi*f;
19
20
21
f_lr = 1.72e9;
22
f_hr = 2.6e9;
23
24
% SŌłÆParameters
25
62
==PAGE:67==
26
Rex1 = dlmread('C:\Users\AB\Desktop\MscŌłÆData\TRLŌłÆLŌłÆBand\SameŌłÆcalŌłÆlinear\RexoliteŌłÆA.txt','
\t');
27
28
% S11
29
30
S11a_r = Rex1(:, 1);
31
S11a_i = Rex1(:, 2);
32
S11rex = S11a_r+1i*S11a_i;
33
34
% S11pomc_r = POMC1(:, 1);
35
% S11pomc_i = POMC1(:, 2);
36
% S11pomc = S11pomc_r+1i*S11pomc_i;
37
38
% S21
39
40
S21a_r = Rex1(:, 3);
41
S21a_i = Rex1(:, 4);
42
S21rex = S21a_r+1i*S21a_i;
43
44
% S21pomc_r = POMC1(:, 3);
45
% S21pomc_i = POMC1(:, 4);
46
% S21pomc = S21pomc_r+1i*S21pomc_i;
47
48
% NRW Algorithm
49
50
K = ((S11rex.^2ŌłÆS21rex.^2)+1)./(2.*S11rex);
51
Gamma = K + sqrt(K.^2ŌłÆ1);
52
T = ((S11rex+S21rex)ŌłÆGamma)./(1ŌłÆ(S11rex+S21rex).*Gamma);
53
Lambda1 = (1i*2*pi*d)./log(1./T);
54
% Lambda2 = ŌłÆ1*(1i*2*pi*d)./log(1./T);
55
% Lambda3 = 2*(1i*2*pi*d)./log(1./T);
56
% Lambda4 = ŌłÆ2*(1i*2*pi*d)./log(1./T);
57
% Lambda5 = 3*(1i*2*pi*d)./log(1./T);
58
% Lambda6 = ŌłÆ3*(1i*2*pi*d)./log(1./T);
59
% lambda_c = c/fc;
60
lambda_c = 99999999999999999999999999999999999;
61
lambda_0 = c./f;
62
lambda_g = 1./sqrt(1./lambda_0.^2ŌłÆ1/lambda_c);
63
64
eps_eff = (1ŌłÆGamma).*lambda_g./((1+Gamma).*Lambda1);
65
mu_eff = (1+Gamma).*lambda_g./((1ŌłÆGamma).*Lambda1);
66
eps_rr = (1ŌłÆ(lambda_0.^2./lambda_c^2)).*eps_eff+(lambda_0.^2./lambda_c^2).*1./mu_eff;
67
68
mu_r = (1+Gamma)./((1ŌłÆGamma).*Lambda1.*sqrt((1./lambda_0.^2)ŌłÆ(1/lambda_c^2)));
69
eps_r = (lambda_0.^2./mu_r).*(1/lambda_c^2ŌłÆ(1/(2*pi*d).*log(1./T)).^2);
70
71
plot(f,real(eps_rr),'rŌłÆ',f,ŌłÆimag(eps_rr),'bŌłÆŌłÆ',f,real(eps_r),'gŌłÆ',f,ŌłÆimag(eps_r),'mŌłÆŌłÆ')
72
grid on
73
% ylim([ŌłÆ1 3])
74
xlim([f_lr f_hr])
75
legend([char(949), '_{r}'' fast algorithm'],[char(949), '_{r}'''' fast algorithm'], [char
(949), '_{r}'' NRW'], [char(949), '_{r}'''' NRW'])
63
==PAGE:68==
76
title('NRW vs Fast algorithm')
77
xlabel('Frequency [Hz]')
78
ylabel('Relative permittivity')
79
80
% figure;
81
% plot(f,real(eps_r),'gŌłÆ',f,ŌłÆimag(eps_r),'mŌłÆŌłÆ')
82
% grid on
83
% xlim([f_lr f_hr])
84
% figure;
85
% plot(f,real(mu_r),'gŌłÆ',f,ŌłÆimag(mu_r),'mŌłÆŌłÆ')
86
% grid on
87
% xlim([f_lr f_hr])
88
89
% mu_r2 = (1+Gamma)./((1ŌłÆGamma).*Lambda2.*sqrt((1./lambda_0.^2)ŌłÆ(1/lambda_c^2)));
90
% eps_r2 = (lambda_0.^2./mu_r2).*(1/lambda_c^2ŌłÆ(1/(2*pi*d).*log(1./T)).^2);
91
%
92
% mu_r3 = (1+Gamma)./((1ŌłÆGamma).*Lambda3.*sqrt((1./lambda_0.^2)ŌłÆ(1/lambda_c^2)));
93
% eps_r3 = (lambda_0.^2./mu_r3).*(1/lambda_c^2ŌłÆ(1/(2*pi*d).*log(1./T)).^2);
94
%
95
% mu_r4 = (1+Gamma)./((1ŌłÆGamma).*Lambda4.*sqrt((1./lambda_0.^2)ŌłÆ(1/lambda_c^2)));
96
% eps_r4 = (lambda_0.^2./mu_r4).*(1/lambda_c^2ŌłÆ(1/(2*pi*d).*log(1./T)).^2);
97
%
98
% mu_r5 = (1+Gamma)./((1ŌłÆGamma).*Lambda5.*sqrt((1./lambda_0.^2)ŌłÆ(1/lambda_c^2)));
99
% eps_r5 = (lambda_0.^2./mu_r5).*(1/lambda_c^2ŌłÆ(1/(2*pi*d).*log(1./T)).^2);
100
%
101
% mu_r6 = (1+Gamma)./((1ŌłÆGamma).*Lambda6.*sqrt((1./lambda_0.^2)ŌłÆ(1/lambda_c^2)));
102
% eps_r6 = (lambda_0.^2./mu_r6).*(1/lambda_c^2ŌłÆ(1/(2*pi*d).*log(1./T)).^2);
103
104
% mu_r2 = (1+Gamma)./((1ŌłÆGamma).*Lambda2.*sqrt((1./lambda_0.^2)ŌłÆ(1/lambda_c^2)));
105
% eps_r2 = (lambda_0.^2./mu_r2).*(1/lambda_c^2ŌłÆ(1/(2*pi*d).*log(1./T)).^2);
106
%
107
% mu_r1_segment = mu_r1(1:139);
108
% mu_r2_segment = mu_r2(140:end);
109
%
110
% mu_r = [mu_r1_segment; mu_r2_segment];
111
%
112
% eps_r1_segment = eps_r1(1:139);
113
% eps_r2_segment = eps_r2(140:end);
114
%
115
% eps_r = [eps_r1_segment; eps_r2_segment];
116
117
% Wavenumber method
118
119
m = 1;
120
n = 0;
121
c = 299792458;
122
a = 109.22*10^ŌłÆ3;
123
b = 54.61*10^ŌłÆ3;
124
p = 0;
125
126
f_c = c./(2*a);
127
k_0 = omega.*sqrt(mu_0*eps_0);
64
==PAGE:69==
128
129
k_x = (m*pi)/a;
130
k_y = (n*pi)/b;
131
k_c = sqrt(k_x^2+k_y^2);
132
k_0z = sqrt(k_0.^2ŌłÆk_c.^2);
133
134
Z_w0 = omega*mu_0./k_0z;
135
Z_w0 = reshape(Z_w0, [], 1);
136
Z_ws = Z_w0.*sqrt(((S11rex+1).^2ŌłÆS21rex.^2)./((S11rexŌłÆ1).^2ŌłÆS21rex.^2));
137
138
Z_A10 = (S21rex.*(Z_ws+Z_w0))./((Z_ws+Z_w0)ŌłÆS11rex.*(Z_wsŌłÆZ_w0));
139
[Z_A10_mesh, p_mesh10] = meshgrid (Z_A10, p);
140
141
k_2z10 = 1/d*(ŌłÆatan2(imag(Z_A10_mesh), real(Z_A10_mesh)+2*pi*p_mesh10))+1i*log(abs(
Z_A10_mesh));
142
[omega_mesh10, ~] = meshgrid(omega, p);
143
[Z_ws_mesh, p_mesh10] = meshgrid(Z_ws, p);
144
145
mu_010 = (k_2z10.*Z_ws_mesh)./omega_mesh10;
146
mu_s10 = mu_010/mu_0;
147
148
eps_010 = (k_2z10.^2+k_c^2)./(k_2z10.*Z_ws_mesh.*omega_mesh10);
149
eps_s10 = eps_010/eps_0;
150
151
losst = ŌłÆimag(eps_r)./real(eps_r);
152
153
% figure;
154
% plot(f, real(eps_r),'rŌłÆ',f, ŌłÆimag(eps_r), 'bŌłÆŌłÆ',f,losst,'gŌłÆ')
155
% grid on
156
% xlim([f_lr f_hr])
157
% title('Extracted relative permittivty of rexolite')
158
% xlabel('Frequency [Hz]')
159
% ylabel('Relative permittivity')
160
% legend([char(949), '_{r}'''], [char(949), '_{r}'''''],'tan\delta')
161
162
% figure;
163
% plot(f, real(eps_r),'rŌłÆ',f,real(eps_r2),'rŌłÆŌłÆ',f,real(eps_r3),'bŌłÆ',f,real(eps_r4),'bŌłÆŌłÆ',
f,real(eps_r5),'gŌłÆ',f,real(eps_r6),'gŌłÆŌłÆ')
164
% grid on
165
% xlim([f_lr f_hr])
166
% title('Concequence of multivalue solution for \Lambda')
167
% xlabel('Frequency [Hz]')
168
% ylabel('Relative permittivity')
169
% legend([char(949), '_{r}'' for n = 1'],[char(949), '_{r}'' for n = ŌłÆ1'],[char(949), '_{
r}'' for n = 2'],[char(949), '_{r}'' for n = ŌłÆ2'],[char(949), '_{r}'' for n = 3'],[
char(949), '_{r}'' for n = ŌłÆ3'])
170
171
losst_m = imag(mu_r)./real(mu_r);
172
173
% figure;
174
% plot(f,real(mu_r),'rŌłÆ',f,ŌłÆimag(mu_r),'bŌłÆŌłÆ',f, losst_m,'gŌłÆ')
175
% grid on
65
==PAGE:70==
176
% xlim([f_lr f_hr])
177
% title('Relative permeability')
178
% xlabel('Frequency [Hz]')
179
% ylabel('Relative permeability')
180
% legend('\mu_{r}''','\mu_{r}''''','tan\delta_m')
181
182
% figure;
183
% plot(f,real(eps_r),'rŌłÆ',f,ŌłÆimag(eps_r),'bŌłÆŌłÆ',f,losst, 'gŌłÆ')
184
% grid on
185
% xlim([f_lr f_hr])
186
% ylim([ŌłÆ3 4])
187
% title('Relative permittivity')
188
% xlabel('Frequency [Hz]')
189
% ylabel('Relative permittivity')
190
% legend([char(949), '_{r}'''],[char(949), '_{r}'''''],'tan\delta')
191
%
192
figure;
193
plot(f, angle(S11rex)*180/pi,'rŌłÆ')
194
grid on
195
xlim([f_lr f_hr])
196
title('S11 Phase')
197
xlabel('Frequency [Hz]')
198
ylabel('Phase [rad]')
199
legend('POMŌłÆC S11')
200
201
figure;
202
plot(f, angle(S21rex)*180/pi,'rŌłÆ')
203
grid on
204
xlim([f_lr f_hr])
205
title('S21 Phase')
206
xlabel('Frequency [Hz]')
207
ylabel('Phase [deg]')
208
legend('POMŌłÆC S21')
209
210
figure;
211
plot(f, 20*log10(S11rex),'rŌłÆ')
212
grid on
213
xlim([f_lr f_hr])
214
title('S11 Magnitude')
215
xlabel('Frequency [Hz]')
216
ylabel('Magnitude [dB]')
217
legend('POMŌłÆC S11')
218
219
figure;
220
plot(f, 20*log10(S21rex),'rŌłÆ')
221
grid on
222
xlim([f_lr f_hr])
223
title('S21 Magnitude')
224
xlabel('Frequency [Hz]')
225
ylabel('Magnitude [dB]')
226
legend('POMŌłÆC S21')
227
66
==PAGE:71==
228
% eps_rt = eps_r(66:138);
229
% min_value = min(eps_rt)
230
% max_value = max(eps_rt)
231
% m = mean(eps_rt)
232
% diff = max_value ŌłÆmin_value
233
% 2.54ŌłÆm
234
%
235
% n = length(eps_rt);
236
% sigma = sqrt(sum((eps_rt ŌłÆm).^2)/(n ŌłÆ1));
237
% disp('The standard deviation sigma is:');
238
% disp(sigma);
67
==PAGE:72==
Appendix B: Calibration guides
TRL calibration
A Thru-Reflect-Line (TRL) calibration is required to do measurements of these sorts. Towards this
select user kit and set up a custom kit. It is important to note that once the calibration is done the
number of points cannot be changed, hence this should be decided on prior to the calibration. The
same is the case for averaging, if this is wanted then it should be done prior to the calibration process.
Define the standards according to the table 5.1.
Standard number
Standard name
1
Short
2
Short
3
Load
4
Thru/Line
5
Load
6
Thru/Line
7
Open
8
Open
Table 5.1: Standard numbers and their names.
Only standards 1,4 and 6 are going to be used. For the short standard press ŌĆ£1ŌĆØ then follow by pressing
ŌĆ£1xŌĆØ then ŌĆ£shortŌĆØ. Then set the coefficients C0 = C1 = C2 = C3 = 0. For the ŌĆ£Thru/LineŌĆØ standards no
coefficients are defined. Then proceed to implement the following table 5.2 throughout the standards
in question.
Standard
Number
Offset delay
Offset loss
Offset Z0
fmin
fmax
WG or coaxial
Short
1
0 s
0 Ōä”/s
1 Ōä”
1.342 GHz
6 GHz
WG
Thru/Line
4
0 s
0 Ōä”/s
1 Ōä”
1.342 GHz
6 GHz
WG
Thru/Line
6
156.775 ps
0 Ōä”/s
1 Ōä”
1.342 GHz
6 GHz
WG
Table 5.2: Standard parameters.
Even though the waveguides used are specified in the frequency range f ŽĄ [1.342 GHz : 2.745 GHz]
the maximum frequency of the vector network analyzer (VNA) is used, which in this case is 6 GHz.
The linear offset delay is used, as the VNA itself accounts for the non-linearities in its calibration. The
linear time delay, Žäd, can be found from the equation,
Žäd = dwg
vwg
(5.1)
Where dWG denotes the length of the line, and vWG the wave velocity. For dWG = 0.047 m and
vWG = c = 299792458 m/s since it is an air-filled piece of line, one obtains Žäd = 156.775 ps.
Once the standards are defined correctly, proceed to define the classes, to this end implement the
table 5.3.
68
==PAGE:73==
Class
Standard number
S11A
1
S11B
6
S11C
6
S21A
1
S21B
6
S21C
6
FWD TRANS
4
REV TRANS
4
FWD MATCH
4
REV MATCH
4
RESPONSE
4
RESPONSE AND ISOLATION
4
Table 5.3: Class and corresponding standard numbers.
Optionally the standards can be given meaningful names such as ŌĆ£ShortŌĆØ ŌåÆŌĆ£ReflectŌĆØ, ŌĆ£Thru/LineŌĆØ
standard 4 ŌåÆŌĆ£ThruŌĆØ, and ŌĆ£Thru/LineŌĆØ standard 6 ŌåÆŌĆ£LineŌĆØ or something similar. Once the calibration
kit is correctly set up proceed to complete a TRL calibration, perform the 10-step calibration. For the
ŌĆ£IsolationŌĆØ step it is sufficient to ŌĆ£Omid isolationŌĆØ. The calibration is now done. This is a highly sensitive
setup, hence even a slight bending of the cables, misalignment or torque of the bolts used will cause
variations. To minimize such effects, it can be helpful to mark reference points. For example,
Figure 5.1: Example of alignment.
S-FS-M calibration
Once again a user kit must be defined in order to do this kind of calibration. There are three standards
that needs to be defined for this user kit: short, flush short and match. Give the standards the following
numbers, according to table ??
69
==PAGE:74==
Standard number
Standard name
1
Short
2
Short
3
Load
4
Thru/Line
5
Load
6
Thru/Line
7
Open
8
Open
Table 5.4: Standard numbers and their names for short, flush short, match calibration.
Once again, when defining the standards select maximum frequency of 6 GHz. This should be done
anyway as the band has operating frequency up to 6.305 GHz. But the VNA used only goes up to 6
GHz. In case another VNA is used the maximum frequency should be set to that.
For the short and match standards there is no need for a delay. But for the flush short, there needs
to be calculated a time delay cause by the extra piece of line. The time delay used is the linear and
found as:
Žäd = dwg
vwg
(5.2)
For dwg of 11.6 mm the calculated time delay is 38.693 ps. The standards are listed in table 5.5
Standard
Number
Offset delay
Offset loss
Offset Z0
fmin
fmax
WG or coaxial
Short
1
0 s
0 Ōä”/s
1 Ōä”
3.153 GHz
6 GHz
WG
Flush short
2
0 s
0 Ōä”/s
1 Ōä”
3.153 GHz
6 GHz
WG
Match
3
38.693 ps
0 Ōä”/s
1 Ōä”
3.153 GHz
6 GHz
WG
Table 5.5: Standard parameters.
The classes should then be defined according to table 5.6
70
==PAGE:75==
Class
Standard number
S11A
1
S11B
2
S11C
3
S21A
1
S21B
2
S21C
3
FWD TRANS
4
REV TRANS
4
FWD MATCH
4
REV MATCH
4
RESPONSE
4
RESPONSE AND ISOLATION
4
Table 5.6: Class and corresponding standard numbers for short, flush short, match.
Appendix C: Newton-Raphson method
This numerical root finding method to find the correct root for the nŌĆÖth solution xn by calculating a better
solution based on the prior solution x0. This of course then needs a good initial estimation. The new
solution is given in terms of the old solution minus the function evaluated at the prior solution divided
with the derivative of the function evaluated at the prior solution. This is formulated as:
xn+1 = xn ŌłÆf(xn)
fŌĆ▓(xn)
(5.3)
This is visualized on figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Newton-Raphson method visualized. [www.geeksforgeeks.org]
71
==PAGE:76==
Appendix D: Fast NRW algorithm and air gap correction
Fast NRW algorithm
This method builds on the NRW method, so terms are defined in the samme manner as in NRW, it is
described in [11] . In this method so parameters ╬Ąeff and ┬Ąeff are calculated by a term ╬╗0g which is
given as:
╬╗0g =
1
q
1
╬╗2
0 ŌłÆ1
╬╗2c
(5.4)
The effective parameters are calcualted as:
┬Ąeff = ╬╗0g
╬ø
1 + ╬ō
1 ŌłÆ╬ō

(5.5)
╬Ąeff = ╬╗0g
╬ø
1 ŌłÆ╬ō
1 + ╬ō

(5.6)
The material parameters are then extracted as:
┬Ąr = ┬Ąeff
(5.7)
╬Ąr =

1 ŌłÆ╬╗2
0
╬╗2c

╬Ąeff + ╬╗2
0
╬╗2c
1
┬Ąeff
(5.8)
Air gap correction
This correction is described in [11][6]. Consider a situation where the sample has the dimensions a
and b, and the sample holder has the dimensions a and b + Ōłåb = d. The situation is depicted on figure
5.3.
Figure 5.3: Air gap in sample holder.
72
==PAGE:77==
The corrected values are found as:
╬ĄŌĆ▓
r,cor = ╬ĄŌĆ▓
r
d
b ŌłÆ(b ŌłÆd)╬ĄŌĆ▓r
(5.9)
╬ĄŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓
r,cor = ╬ĄŌĆ▓
r,cor
╬ĄŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓
r
╬ĄŌĆ▓r

b
b ŌłÆ(b ŌłÆd)╬ĄŌĆ▓r
(5.10)
Corrections for the relative permeability:
┬ĄŌĆ▓
r,cor = ┬ĄŌĆ▓
r
 b
d

ŌłÆ
b ŌłÆd
d

(5.11)
┬ĄŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓
r,cor = ┬ĄŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓
r
b
d
(5.12)
73
==PAGE:78==
References
[1]
Michael Mattes. Lecture slides, advanved antenna techniques.
[2]
S. Arslanagi┬┤c et al. A Review of the Scattering-Parameter Extraction Method with Clarifi cation
of Ambiguity Issues in Relation to Metamaterial Homogenization.
[3]
L. F. Chen et al. Microwave Electronics Measurement and Materials Characterization.
[4]
B. B. Szendrenyi et al. An alternative broadband method for automatic measurement of the
complex permeability and permittivity of materials at microwave frequencies.
[5]
David M. Pozar. Microwave Engineering 4th edition.
[6]
James Baker-Jarvis et al. Transmission/Reflection and Short-Circuit Line Methods for Measuring
Permittivity and Permeability.
[7]
J. Sinkey et al. Sample Considerations For Short-Circuited Filled Transmission Line Measure-
ments," Conference Record - IEEE Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference,
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Jan 2023.
[8]
Abdel-Hakim Boughriet et al. Noniterative Stable Transmission/Reflection Method for Low-Loss
Material Complex Permittivity Determination.
[9]
D. B├®rub├® et al. A Comparative Study of Four Open-Ended Coaxial Probe Models for Permittivity
Measurements of Lossy Dielectric/Biological Materials at Microwave Frequencies.
[10]
Swiss Speag. https://speag.swiss/components/dielectric-database/low-loss-materials/.
[11]
Rohde and Scwarz. Measurement of Material Dielectric Properties.
74
