==PAGE:1==
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to
Distracting Sounds
An investigation into the modulating effect of distractor relevancy on
gaze metrics, and their link to cognitive processes.
Master Thesis
DTU Hearing Systems
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
An investigation into the modulating effect of distractor relevancy on gaze metrics,
and their link to cognitive processes.
Master Thesis
August, 2024
By
Magnús Rúnar Hjartarson
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Brovej, Building 356,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at Hearing Systems, Department
of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial ful­
filment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Magnús Rúnar Hjartarson ­ s222747
Signature
Date
ii
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Hearing impairment afflicts a large portion of the population, with it being espe­
cially prevalent amongst older people. For detection, classical diagnostic meth­
ods like pure tone audiograms and speech­in­noise tests, are are often adequate.
They do, however, only help analyze real life listening to a limited extent. Under­
standing the underlying cognitive functions, such as listening effort and attention,
is paramount to get a deeper understanding of the various hearing difficulties in­
dividuals may experience. In this thesis, the author explored the effect of relevant
and irrelevant interrupting stimuli during a focus task on eye gaze metrics. Build­
ing on a pupillometry study conducted at Eriksholm Research Centre, eye tracker
data from N = 21 normal hearing participants was analysed, and Horizontal Gaze
Position, Gaze Dispersion and Microsaccades were extracted. The experiment
involved the subjects listening to a story from a speaker facing them, while rel­
evant and irrelevant stimuli arrived laterally from the left and right, at random.
The hypothesis that eye movements further reduce when subject to, and gaze
shifts more towards, a relevant rather than an irrelevant stimulus was examined.
Horizontal Gaze Position did not show a clear effect relating to different responses
to stimulus onset. However, an effect linked to the information of which side the
relevant stimulus would arrive from caused a general shift of gaze towards the
relevant side during testing. A non­significant effect was observed in the reduc­
tion of Gaze Dispersion following a relevant stimulus compared to an irrelevant
one, possibly rectifiable with an increased number of subjects. Additionally, a
non­significant increase in activity in the relevant case, linked to the memory re­
quirements of the test. A significant decrease was observed in microsaccades,
i.e. microsaccadic inhibition, following a relevant stimulus, indicating an increase
in attention and listening effort. Also, a quicker return to baseline compared to
a previous pupillometry study, making the metric a favorable alternative to pupil
dilation as a measure of effort.
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Magnús Rúnar Hjartarson, MSc Engineering Acoustics, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Lorenz Fiedler, Senior Scientist, Eriksholm Research Centre
Thanks for trusting me with this project. Thanks for the introduction to the subject,
your guidance was invaluable.
Jens Hjortkjær, Associate Professor, Denmark Technical University
iv
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Methods
7
2.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Testing Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Stimuli Generation and Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Task Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Gaze Metrics and Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Results
15
3.1
Horizontal Gaze Position
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Gaze Dispersion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Microsaccades . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Discussion
29
4.1
Horizontal Gaze Position Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Gaze Dispersion Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Microsaccade Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Significance and Further Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Conclusion
35
Bibliography
37
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Hearing impairment is an issue that affects a large proportion of the population
[1]. Age related hearing problems are especially common. However, how to effec­
tively and accurately measure hearing loss for a large, diverse population, in order
to adequately treat each of them, is of great interest. When a hearing impaired in­
dividual is fitted with a hearing aid the classic testing methods of speech­in­noise
(SPIN) and pure­tone audiometry, while often deemed sufficient, are limited in
their real­world applications. An audiometry test measures the lower bound of a
person’s hearing ability, the threshold. But day­to­day hearing happens above
this threshold.
Speech­in­noise tests do tackle some aspects of day­to­day hearing, but do not
factor in things like attention. It is therefore difficult to make sweeping statements
about a person’s hearing ability from these tests alone, as there are underlying
executive functions of the brain that affect how well a person performs on said
tests. The tests can give us a basic idea of an individual’s hearing ability, but do
not reflect on the challenges that listeners, especially hearing impaired people,
can face in everyday life. It is therefore of interest to find metrics that can be
measured, in a straightforward manner, to facilitate a better diagnostic process.
One of the executive functions of interest is attention control. This can be de­
scribed as a person’s ability to concentrate, or more aptly, how well they can
maintain their attentional focus towards something that is relevant to them. It is
paramount for an individual to be able to maintain focus on, for example, a con­
versation they are having at a party, without it being drowned out by the buzz
of other conversations or activities happening simultaneously. In the same way,
when in a working environment, an individual needs to be able to concentrate on
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
1
==PAGE:10==
their work, filtering out the noise around them. There is however another part of
attentional focus that is equally as important. The ability for an individual to shift
focus to something new, information that our brain deems as being relevant to us.
This shift of attention due to a new relevant stimulus is for example highlighted in
the ”cocktail party effect” or ”cocktail party problem” [2] [3]. The effect describes
an individual’s ability to react to an unattended stimulus when hearing something
that is salient to them. This can for example be their own name being called out.
Hearing impaired individuals often lack the ability to segregate stimuli in this way,
thus giving rise to the ”problem”.
Attention in the auditory sense, can be split up in to three distinct categories:
Top­down, object­based and bottom­up attention [4][5]. Top­down attention is a
conscious process that allows us to e.g. focus on a specific talker in a scene,
while ignoring another. This is our ability to selectively amplify some, in this case
auditory, inputs in favor of others. Object­based attention relates to, as the name
implies, the ability to focus our top­down attention on an object that is favorable
to us. For example, focusing on a person standing by a podium, preparing to give
a talk. Our focus is spatial, but nothing is grabbing our full attention. As the talk
begins, we hone in on the non spatial features of the speech signal. This is also
very evident in speech, in general. We keep our focus on a talking individual,
despite the stream not being constant, due to the temporal dynamics of speech.
Bottom­up attention is however an unconscious reaction to a specifically salient or
unexpected stimulus. This interrupts our top­down attention and shifts our focus
to the new stimulus, an example would be someone shouting your name at you.
Now an individual allocates their attention to a signal, is that enough? In everyday
life there are multiple factors that affect how easily a signal can be received and
understood. Competing speech, background noise and a speech impediment or
an accent. These are all things that can affect the clarity of a signal as it reaches
the listener [6]. In adverse conditions, listening requires effort. For a hearing
2
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:11==
impaired individual these effects are compounded with the underlying degradation
of the signal [7]. These effects may then lead to an increase in listening effort for
hearing impaired individuals [8].
This is a crucial factor that gets overlooked when we stare at the results of a
hearing test and use them to make blanket statements about someones hearing
ability, or prescribe them with treatment. Hermann and Johnsrude (2019) discuss
this in their Model of Listening Engagement (MoLE) [9]. Two individuals can have
very similar audiograms and SPIN results, but face vastly different difficulties with
their hearing.
A situation where behavioral data misses the point is that it shows us when some­
one starts to fail, but it does nothing to gauge the effort the patient exerted to try
to hear. How much (top­down) attention was the participant paying towards the
examination procedure. Did it involve a lot of effort? Prior to the behavioral data
changing, are there quantifiable cognitive measures that indicate an increase in
effort before the individual starts failing?
A previously conducted study at Eriksholm Research Centre looked into the ef­
fects of relevant and irrelevant interrupting stimuli during a focus task. A frontal to­
be­attended stream was occasionally interrupted by laterally arriving stimuli [10].
The stimuli were deemed to be either relevant or irrelevant at the top of the trial,
based on if they arrived from the left or from the right. The measures of atten­
tion that were of interest were pupil dilation and Electroencephalography (EEG)
response differences to the two types of interruptions. In the study, a greater
pupillary dilation was recorded in response to relevant distractors compared to
irrelevant ones, indicating an increased allocation of cognitive resources in the
form of attention.
Pupillometry is well documented as a cognitive measure, although it’s value as a
measure of attention has been up for debate[11][9]. Furthermore, measurements
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
3
==PAGE:12==
of the pupil do pose difficulties. Adverse conditions to do with e.g. luminance can
make pupil dilation data gathering cumbersome, except under clinical conditions
[12][11]. In addition, measuring the pupil requires a constant fixation on a point.
This is due to the pupil appearing to be of different sizes when a person’s gaze
shifts in relation to the stationary eye tracker, even though no dilation or constric­
tion of the pupil occurred [13][14].
It is therefore relevant to see whether pupil dilation results can be corroborated,
or more efficiently observed, by utilizing other measures extracted from the same
dataset. It may be that the increased pupil dilation observed in response to rel­
evant distractors could be an erroneous observation, perhaps confounding pupil
dilation with movements of the eye [13][14]. While not investigated here, it still
remains important to keep in mind.
What this thesis means to accomplish is to see if other measures of the eye, specif­
ically Horizontal Gaze Position (HGP), Gaze Dispersion (GD) and Microsaccades
(MS) or Microsaccadic Inhibition (MSI), show similar trends in relation to interrupt­
ing stimuli.
For HGP it is known that a person is able to better process sounds when they are
gazing towards the origin of the audio stream [15]. If attending a stream from the
front, with distractors arriving laterally, it is expected that the gaze of a participant
will shift towards the relevant distractor, in order to pay better attention to it. The
gaze position shift towards the irrelevant distractors is expected to be smaller or
non existent.
Gaze dispersion, defined as the overall movement of the eyes, has been shown
to decrease under high load [14]. Cui and Herrmann (2024) showed that the drop
in eye movements was greater in difficult conditions than in easy conditions [16].
It is hypothesized that a relevant distractor will elicit a larger cognitive response,
a bigger drop, than the irrelevant ones. This stems from the fact that there is no
4
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:13==
inherent need for the individual to pay any mind to the irrelevant stimuli.
In their paper, Microsaccades Uncover the Orientation of Covert Attention, Ralf
Engbert and Reinhold Kliegl described microsaccades as one of a few small move­
ments that occur in the human eye when viewing a stationary scene [17]. These
movements serve to work against the stagnation of the eye by introducing ran­
dom, jerky movements. Contadini­Wright et al. have previously shown that MS
are a complementary measure of attention in effortful conditions, alongside pupil
dilation [18]. It is expected that a greater level of MSI, i.e. more reduction in activ­
ity, will occur as a result of a relevant distractor, compared to a relevant one. This
would support the results found in previous pupillometry studies using the same
data set [10].
If this proves fruitful for all, or some of the measures, it opens the possibility of
gathering this data when performing hearing tests under conditions where pupi­
lometry would not be feasible, due to the strict testing procedure. Eye move­
ments can furthermore be measured with an electroencephalogram (EEG), or
more specifically an electrooculogram (EOG) [19]. This data could then be gath­
ered in tandem with other measurements utilizing EOG, if the situation would allow
for it.
By getting a better insight into effort and attention, the hope is to be able to more
thoroughly diagnose hearing impaired individuals. Getting improved diagnostic
tools would hopefully speed up and streamline the process of fitting a hearing aid,
and allow for better treatment for hearing impaired individuals. This is outlined
in The Framework for Understanding Effortful Listening (FUEL), where Pichora­
Fuller et al. outline the importance of cognitive measures like attention in the
diagnostic process [20]. Take for example the case of adjusting the level of noise
reduction in a hearing aid [21]. How much noise reduction is applicable to avoid
the patient either experiencing regular cacophony in their day to day life, or feeling
isolated in social situations due to the noise reduction being too high? This level
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
5
==PAGE:14==
is usually acquired by trial­and­error. Self­reported updates from the patient over
a long period of time are used to find a sweet spot. If there was a metric available,
to effectively measure how relevant and irrelevant sounds affect the individual,
this time could be drastically cut.
Therefore, the aim here is to analyse gaze data from several participants to answer
the research question:
”Do measures if horizontal gaze position, gaze dispersion and microsac­
cades, during a focus task, differ when an interrupting stimulus is relevant
to the subject, versus when it’s irrelevant.”
6
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:15==
2
Methods
2.1
Participants
The data, previously gathered at Eriksholm Research Centre, was obtained from
N = 21 total participants, all of which were self­reported normal hearing. The
ages of the individuals ranged from 27 to 66 years old, with average age being
47 years. Each participant took a pure­tone audiometry test, where their hearing
ability was affirmed. Measured pure tone average (PTA) was 9.1 dBHL (Decibel
Hearing Level) with a standard deviation of σ = 7.6 dBHL. This is above normal
hearing threshold, at 20 dBHL. One participant, upon test completion, reported
possession of hearing aids and occasional use. With a PTA of 26 dBHL they were
still included in the analysis.
2.2
Testing Procedure
Testing took place in a sound­proof booth that was in addition shielded from electro­
magnetic waves. Participants were comfortably seated at a desk in the middle of
the room, situated so that their ears aligned with the laterally placed loudspeakers
to their left and right. On the desk there was a keyboard that the subjects used
to proceed with the trials. Stickers indicated buttons for ”Yes” and ”No” (”Ja” and
”Nej”), and the spacebar was used to proceed to next trial run.
A total of three loudspeakers (Genelec 8030A, Genelec Oy, Ilsami, Finland) were
situated in a 1 m radius around the subject. Two, as previously mentioned, later­
ally to the left and right (at ±90°), and one to the front (at 0°) above the screen.
The audio stream was executed through Matlab using the Soundmexpro toolbox
(HörTech gGmbH, Oldenburg, Germany).
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
7
==PAGE:16==
As mentioned, a screen was situated on the desk, below the loudspeaker facing
the individual. The monitor displayed a graphical user interface that was controlled
with Matlab. Instructions were presented on the screen, as well as a cross to focus
on while the test was run. Additionally, comprehension questions and the 3 by 3
numbers box were displayed at the end of each run.
2.3
Stimuli Generation and Behavior
The target stimuli of the experiment was an audiobook reading, a biography of
Simon Spies. To ease with integration, the audiobook was split up into 46 equal
parts of approximately one minute each, on average. The audiobook parts were
equalized to maintain a consistent RMS (Root mean square) level across all parts.
There was one reader, and parts were cut so the narrative would flow from one
run to the next.
To divert the participants focus from the target signal, distracting signals were
used. Each distractor was constructed as a pair. A name was heard at t = 0 s,
then a brief silence of about a second, and finally a number was heard. The top
126 names in Denmark were used, 63 male and 63 female. The numbers ranged
from 21 to 99, intentionally avoiding multiples of 10, to ensure a similar number
of syllables. The numbers were always presented at t = 2 s after the onset of the
name. In order to create a more realistically distracting scenario, the distractors
were embedded within multi­talker babble. It was level adjusted in similar manner
as the target speech, to create the illusion of the subject being in a crowd. Good
care was taken to ensure that the babble noise was at a considerably lower level
than the distractor itself, 6 dB below the target. When setting the presentation
levels of the signals, the level of the distractors was attenuated by −3 dB, com­
pared to the attended speech. During the trials, the speech was presented from
the front, with the distractors arriving laterally from the left and right, at random.
At the start of each minute run the participant were instructed that sounds coming
8
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:17==
from the left or right were relevant to them during that run. During the run, the
distractors were then presented from left and right. There were three on each
side, six in total, occurring randomly over the duration. Every distractor pair was
randomly selected for each run.
Each trial begun with a 5 second fixation window, where subjects were prompted
to keep their eyes on the cross that appeared on the monitor. Following that
were five seconds of babble noise, and finally the run began with the target noise
emanating from the speaker facing them. Distractor intervals were randomized
between 7 (to avoid overlap) and 11 s. To ensure equal trial lengths and to ease
the processing, the final distractor was set to be played at the 56 second mark. A
mockup of a run can be seen in fig. 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Stimuli mockup for one trial. Here the left side is the relevant side. A
random possible distractor pair (Emma ­ 56) is given as an example.
2.4
Task Description
The experimental trials included two separate tasks which the participants were
asked to perform. The aforementioned novel was the primary target, and at the
conclusion of each part the subject was prompted with a ”Yes” or ”No” question,
pertaining to the subject of the story snippet they had just heard. The secondary
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
9
==PAGE:18==
task was conducted simultaneously to the main one. The numbers in the distractor
pairs from either left or right, prompted at the top of the run with a message on
screen: ”Listen to the left/right side”, were to be remembered. At the conclusion of
each trial, after answering the question concerning the primary task, the subjects
were presented with a 3 by 3 grid of numbers. These number’s included the three
from either side’s distractor pairs, the relevant and irrelevant ones, and additionally
a set of three randomly selected numbers, not presented in the trial. The full
experimental run for each subject was split into 40 trials, divided into 4 blocks of
10 trials each.
Each trial therefore estimated the listener’s attention towards the main task, they
used the keyboard to input their responses to the ”Yes” or ”No” question. While
focusing on the main stream to keep up with the context of the story, they had to
remember the numbers in the distractor pairs coming from left or right, and ignore
the other side to the best of their ability. The division of runs in to blocks of ten trials
was implemented to avoid participant fatigue, allowing them to rest a bit between
each block.
Prior to the main experiment, the participants underwent a short training regiment
to avoid confusion and mistakes stemming from misunderstanding the instruc­
tions. The training process consisted of six trials. For the first two, the subject
was asked to listen to the audiobook and afterwards answer a question regard­
ing the context of what they just heard. For the next two trials, babble noise was
introduced for the left and right speakers, but no distractors were presented. In
the final two trials they got the full experiment, audiobook and distractors, and
were prompted to answer a context question, as well as select the three relevant
numbers at the conclusion of both trials.
10
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:19==
2.5
Gaze Metrics and Processing
During the experimental proceedings a Tobii Pro Spectrum eye tracker (Tobii AB,
Stockholm, Sweden) was situated below the monitor. The device tracked the eyes
of participants, recording where they were looking and the dilation of their pupils,
amongst other things. The Tobii Pro Spectrum is a high frequency eye tracker,
recording data at 1200 Hz, and employs infrared illumination and top of the line
tracking algorithms to efficiently record gaze data of each participant. Luminance
was strictly regulated in the testing booth to optimize performance, and offer a
comfortable testing environment. It was kept at approximately 75 Lux across all
participants, effectively eliminating inconsistencies that could stem from variable
lighting. At the start of the visit, the eye tracker was calibrated to the participant,
were the eye tracker determined correlation between the eye participant’s eye
movements and them looking at a few set points on the monitor. In order to keep
this distance to the eye tracker as stable as possible during the trials, the subjects
were seated in a stationary chair. This ensured that the data acquisition was as
robust as possible.
2.5.1
Preprocessing and Analysis of Gaze Data
The raw gaze data was treated in various ways during the preprocessing step.
The raw data points were obtained in terms of absolute position on the screen.
They ranged from (0, 0) in the bottom left corner of the screen, to (1, 1) in the top
right of the screen. To begin with, a half was subtracted from each point in order
to move (0, 0) to the center of the screen, and then the Y­coordinates were scaled
in terms of screen resolution (1920x1080) in order to have the same weight on
horizontal and vertical movements of the eyes.
During blinks, or if the individual looked far off the screen, the eye tracker would
return a non value (NaN) for the time period in which it occurred. Some measures
required for the data not to include NaNs. For that reason, a copy of the data
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
11
==PAGE:20==
was created and the regions of NaNs were interpolated, using the values at the
edges of the regions. Both datasets, interpolated and not, were then kept. Tri­
als were discarded from the overall analysis if there was insufficient amount of
recorded samples, under 50 %. Furthermore, distinction of ”better eye” was given
to whichever eye, right or left, had a greater number of valid samples. Various
measures were extracted and calculated, those of interest here were: Horizon­
tal Gaze Position (HGP), Gaze Dispersion (GD), Microsaccades (MS) and their
baseline values. In addition to extracting these values for the full trials, 40 per
participant, the values during the set­length distractor events were specifically ex­
tracted and stored.
Horizontal Gaze Position
For Horizontal Gaze Position, the x­values, horizontal gaze movements during
the trials, were recorded. Due to how the data was formatted, this ranged from
−0.5 to 0.5 on the monitor. Higher values were possible if the subject looked off
screen.
Gaze Dispersion
Björn Herrmann describes Gaze Dispersion as a measure of the general tendency
of the eyes to move around [14]. Here, it was calculated as the one second aver­
age moving standard deviation in x and y, given in logarithmic values. A window
of length 1 s was moved over the data, separately in x and y, and the standard
deviation, σ, was found. The formula used to calculate the level of GD was then
Gaze Dispersion = log10
(σx + σy
2
)
.
(2.1)
A larger value therefore indicates more GD. The GD calculations were performed
on the un­interpolated dataset, the NaNs were simply ignored. There was how­
ever a stipulation that no more than 90% of the data could be missing within a one
second window.
12
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:21==
Microsaccades
When extracting microsaccades from the data, a method developed by Engbert
and Kliegl was utilized [17]. The velocity at point in time n, −→v n, is extracted over
a period of samples as
−→v n =
−→x n+2 + −→x n+1 −−→x n−1 −−→x n−2
6∆t
,
(2.2)
where ∆t is the time between samples. This is done to suppress noise in the
measurements. In their case the velocity is taken over 5 samples. Due to the eye
tracker used here sampling at a very high frequency of 1200 Hz, the velocities
were instead extracted over a longer window of 11 samples, as shown
−→v n =
−→x n+5 + −→x n+4 + ... −−→x n−4 −−→x n−5
12∆t
.
(2.3)
Secondly, velocity thresholds,σx,y , over which microsaccades are able to occur
are calculated as
σx,y = ⟨v2
x,y⟩−⟨vx,y⟩2,
(2.4)
where the brackets indicate the median estimator. Lastly, the velocity thresholds
are adjusted independently for horizontal ηx, and vertical ηy components as
ηx,y = λσx,y
(2.5)
where λ can be chosen based on the noise level of the velocities. Here a value
of λ = 6 was chosen, as it is a traditional value to use [17][18].
To extract the time series, a 1 second sliding window was used to count the rate
of MS occurrences during each part of the trial. Another change made here was
that the value for η was computed for the combined velocity vector of a participant
over all their trials. This means that a singular value of eta was found for each
participant, before the extraction of MS from the data was performed. This was
thought to be a good way to get a more stable overview of MS and MS inhibition.
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:23==
3
Results
3.1
Horizontal Gaze Position
For each of the 21 participants, horizontal gaze position was measured across the
twenty trials. Each trial started with 10 s of noise before the onset at t = 0 s. The
trials where truncated to 63 s. The average across trials per participant plotted
over time can be seen in fig. 3.1 as a thin line.
HGP is here a measure of screen size, ranging from −0.5 to 0.5 from the left side
of the screen to the right, with 0 in the center of the screen. Note that the plot
shows an ipsilateral representation of the HGP, where a positive value indicates
that the participant was looking towards the attentive side. That is, if they had been
prompted that the relevant sounds would come from the left then HGP towards
the left side is plotted as positive for that trial. The thick line represents the grand
average across all participants while the shaded area shows ±one standard error
of the mean (SE).
HGP for each distractor events was then plotted separately, now split up into rel­
evant and irrelevant events, this is shown in fig. 3.2. Plotted are the individual
ipsilateral averages across trials, where HGP towards the distractor side, during
each event, is given a positive value. The relevant averages are shown as thin
cyan line, while the thick cyan line and the accompanying shaded area represent
the grand average for all relevant trials ±SE. The irrelevant participant averages
are, in the same way, represented by thin orange lines with the grand average
and ±SE illustrated by the thick orange line and the shaded area, respectively.
The overall trend seen here was that the participants inherently shift their eyes
slightly towards the side they were prompted the relevant distractors would arrive
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.1: Ipsilateral gaze position during trial. The values range from −0.5 to
0.5, from the left edge of the screen to the right. Trial onset is at t = 0 s, preceded
by 5 s of silence and 5 s of multi­talker babble, in that order. Has been adjusted
so positive values indicate that the participant gaze veered towards the attentive
side which they had been prompted to pay attention to, while performing the main
task. Thin lines show individual participant averages across their 40 trials. Group
grand average is shown as the thick line, shaded by ±one standard error (SE).
16
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.2: Evoked ipsilateral horizontal gaze position to relevant and irrelevant
name and number distractor pairs. Relevant distractor events are in cyan, irrele­
vant distractor events are in orange. The values range from −0.5 to 0.5, from the
left edge of the screen to the right. Name onset is at t = 0 s, number onset at t
= 2 s. Has been adjusted so positive values indicate that the participant’s gaze
veered towards the side the distractor arrived from. Thin lines show individual
participant averages across their 120 events. Group grand average are shown as
a thick line, shaded by ±one standard error (SE). Black rectangle shows biggest
relevant cluster obtained from a CBPT, accompanied by it’s P­value.
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
17
==PAGE:26==
from. This difference, as illustrated on the plot with a black rectangle, was found
to be statistically different from zero, and not random, with a cluster­based per­
mutation test (CBPT), with a P­value = 0.002 after M = 1000 permutations. Each
distractor event had a name onset at t = 0 s, followed by a number two seconds
later, both of which are represented by vertical lines on the plot. Neither the name
nor the number seem to have a big effect on participants’ average eye position
during each distractor event.
To find out whether HGP was different during relevant and irrelevant events, a
baseline correction was subtracted from the event data. This baseline was defined
as the average HGP between t = −1 s before the onset of the name and at the
onset, t = 0 s. Figure 3.2 shows the baselined data from fig. 3.3 and although
there seems to be a slight difference between the relevant and irrelevant data, at
around the onset of the number t = 2 s, when analysed with a CBPT the difference
was not deemed statistically different from zero.
18
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.3: Baseline corrected evoked ipsilateral horizontal gaze position to rele­
vant and irrelevant name and number distractor pairs. Relevant distractor events
are in cyan, irrelevant distractor events are in orange. The values range from
−0.5 to 0.5, from the left edge of the screen to the right. Name onset is at t = 0 s,
number onset at t = 2 s. Has been adjusted so positive values indicate that the
participant’s gaze veered towards the side the distractor arrived from. Thin lines
show individual participant averages across their 120 events. Group grand aver­
age are shown as a thick line, shaded by ±one standard error (SE). No significant
cluster was obtained from a CBPT.
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.4: Gaze dispersion during trial. log10 values in arbitrary units, higher
value indicates more movement. Trial onset is at t = 0 s, preceded by 5 s of silence
and 5 s of multi­talker babble, in that order. Thin lines show individual participant
averages across their 40 trials. Group grand average is shown as the thick line,
shaded by ±one standard error (SE).
3.2
Gaze Dispersion
Gaze dispersion was calculated for each individual trial across all participants.
The participant averages are plotted as thin lines in fig. 3.4 while the grand average
and ±SE are displayed as a thick line and shaded area. On average the overall
eye movements remain rather constant over the course of the trials, disregarding
increased movements during the period of noise at the start.
For each individual distractor events, participants’ average GD were then gathered
separately for relevant and irrelevant distractors, thin lines in fig. 3.5. Responses
to relevant distractors are in cyan, and irrelevant in orange. The respective grand
20
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:29==
averages are thick lines of the same colors, shaded by the ±SE.
The average response is a slight drop to both cases after the onset of the number
at t = 0 s, followed by an increase for both the relevant and irrelevant case. The
response to the irrelevant sound then returns to baseline, while the response to
the relevant number is a drop leading up to following the number, and then a rise
about one second after the number is heard, at t = 3 s. Movement activity then
tapers back to the same level as in the irrelevant case about five seconds after
the onset of the number, at t = 7 s.
In order to better observe this effect, the data was baselined by subtracting the
average GD between t = −1 s before the onset of the number and the onset at t
= 1 s. In fig. 3.6 this baselined version of GD can be seen.
Baselining the data reduces the standard error and makes it more legible. Neither
the non­baselined nor the baselined data when subjected to a CBPT revealed any
clusters significantly different from zero after M = 1000 permutations. The resulting
best clusters are shown on figs. 3.5 to 3.6 , P = 0.089 in the normal case, and P
= 0.133 for the baselined data.
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.5: Evoked gaze dispersion to relevant and irrelevant name and number
distractor pairs. Relevant distractor events are in cyan, irrelevant distractor events
are in orange. log10 values in arbitrary units, higher value indicates more move­
ment. Name onset is at t = 0 s, number onset at t = 2 s. Thin lines show individual
participant averages across their 120 events. Group grand average are shown as
a thick line, shaded by ±one standard error (SE). Black rectangle shows biggest
close to relevant cluster obtained from a CBPT, accompanied by it’s P­value.
22
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.6: Baseline corrected evoked gaze dispersion to relevant and irrelevant
name and number distractor pairs. Relevant distractor events are in cyan, irrele­
vant distractor events are in orange. log10 values in arbitrary units, higher value
indicates more movement. Name onset is at t = 0 s, number onset at t = 2 s.
Thin lines show individual participant averages across their 120 events. Group
grand average are shown as a thick line, shaded by ±one standard error (SE).
Black rectangle shows biggest close to relevant cluster obtained from a CBPT,
accompanied by it’s P­value.
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
23
==PAGE:32==
3.3
Microsaccades
Figure 3.7: Microsaccades per second during trial. Trial onset is at t = 0 s, pre­
ceded by 5 s of silence and 5 s of multi­talker babble, in that order. Thin lines
show individual participant averages across their 40 trials. Group grand average
is shown as the thick line, shaded by ±one standard error (SE).
When extracting occurrences of microsaccades in each trial, the decision was
made, due to each participant taking the twenty trials in order, to extract an η
for the entire velocity series for each participant. The interpolated gaze data for
each trial was appended to the one before it to create one total velocity vector.
Velocity was then averaged over 11 samples, per eq. (2.3), and a single value of
eta was obtained for each participant. MS time series for each trial was obtained
by counting with a one second sliding window, participant averages over all trial
can be seen in fig. 3.7.
24
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:33==
The average count across trials hovers around 2 MS/s as indicated by the thick
dark navy line, the accompanying shade indicates ±one SE.
For the individual trials the MS time series were split up and averaged based on the
relevancy of the distractor. Figure 3.8 shows how after the the onset of the name
at t = 0 s there is a drop in MS activity, or an increase of microsaccadic inhibition,
for both the relevant (cyan) and irrelevant (orange) participant averages.
The drop in both cases is slightly greater in the relevant case, as well as lasting
longer in the relevant case after the onset of the number at t = 2 s, which was to be
remembered. A CBPT was performed with M = 1000 permutations, and it yielded
one significant cluster with P­value = 0.041, indicating that the greater MSI of the
relevant stimuli is significantly different from zero.
The amount of MSI occurring can be better illustrated when the data has been
baseline corrected using the average from t = −1 s before the onset of the name
til t = 0 s, at the onset. As fig. 3.9 shows, the MSI magnitude for the relevant
stimulus is greater in for both parts of the stimuli, name and number. It amounts to
about −0.3202 and a greater difference between the cases was observed after the
number onset at t = 2 s, the target. However, a CBPT with 1000 permutations did
not yield any clusters significantly different from zero. The best cluster, illustrated
with a box on fig. 3.9, had a P­value of P = 0.079.
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.8: Evoked microsaccades per second to relevant and irrelevant name
and number distractor pairs. Relevant distractor events are in cyan, irrelevant
distractor events are in orange. Name onset is at t = 0 s, number onset at t = 2 s.
Thin lines show individual participant averages across their 120 events. Group
grand average are shown as a thick line, shaded by ±one standard error (SE).
Black rectangle shows biggest relevant cluster obtained from a CBPT, accompa­
nied by it’s P­value.
26
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.9: Baseline corrected evoked microsaccades per second to relevant and
irrelevant name and number distractor pairs. Relevant distractor events are in
cyan, irrelevant distractor events are in orange. Name onset is at t = 0 s, number
onset at t = 2 s. Thin lines show individual participant averages across their 120
events. Group grand average are shown as a thick line, shaded by ±one standard
error (SE). Black rectangle shows biggest close to relevant cluster obtained from
a CBPT, accompanied by it’s P­value.
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:37==
4
Discussion
4.1
Horizontal Gaze Position Results
The results for Horizontal Gaze Position in fig. 3.1 show that, on average, partici­
pants held their gaze close to the center position during the trials.
The outcome of the individual distractor events in fig. 3.2, does not fully support
the hypothesis. That an individual will shift their gaze towards the relevant side,
more so than towards the irrelevant one, when subject to a lateral stimulus during
a forward facing listening task. There is however a difference, statistically different
from zero, in where the participants gaze lies. Overall, they tend to look slightly
towards the side from which the relevant distractors were said to originate from
during the trial. This is in accordance with the results from Ulrich and Chait (2017)
[15]. In their paper they observed that by looking away from the location of the
origin of a sound, the processing of said audio stream becomes impeded. There­
fore, gazing towards an auditory source, helps with the processing of information
from said source. At around t = 0.5 s after the name onset, there is a drop in the
average gaze position towards the irrelevant stimuli. This could indicate that in
order to better ignore the stimuli, participants shift their gaze away slightly.
The difference observed here does not necessarily seem to be caused by the dis­
tractor pair. The cluster obtained from the cluster based permutation test does
start at point about half a second after the onset of the name in the distractor
pair. This, based on the side, indicated to the participant whether an irrelevant or
relevant number was to be expected. However, when the baselined data is ob­
served, there does not exist a relevant cluster in that case, see fig. 3.3. Therefore,
from their baseline eye position just before the distractor event, individuals do not
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
29
==PAGE:38==
necessarily shift their eyes in response to the stimuli.
The overall trend was that participants looked towards the relevant, and away
from the irrelevant stimuli. This may stem from the fact that at the top of each trial,
the relevant side was given to the participant. Even though they are instructed
to look at the cross, their gaze shifts slightly towards the relevant side. A possi­
ble control for that would be to not to give that information out at the start, and
keep the relevancy of each distractor hidden. Then we could indicate within the
distractor pair whether it is relevant or not. This could be done by utilizing the
first half to play a word or a sound of some sort, as the first half of the pair, that
would clearly indicate the following distractor would be relevant. This would likely
increase the difficulty level of the task, but could provide useful information into
the gaze position metric. It is paramount not to convolute the testing process dis­
proportionately, as subjects giving up is a possibility if the task becomes too hard
[22]. Gaze position in general could further be utilized as a metric to correct for
possible inaccuracies in pupil dilation measurements [13].
4.2
Gaze Dispersion Results
The results obtained for Gaze Dispersion were not conclusive. The overall aver­
age across trials after the target onset at t = 0 s is relatively stable across trials as
seen in fig. 3.4.
As fig. 3.5 shows, both the relevant and irrelevant trial averages follow a similar
at the beginning of each distractor event. A slight reaction to the first half of the
distractor pair, the name. Then, a greater decrease in GD in the relevant case,
than for the relevant one. This supports the hypothesis that a relevant distractor
would elicit a greater reduction in eye movements. This difference was, however
based on a cluster based permutation test (CBPT), not significantly different from
zero (P > 0.05).
An effect, but not a significant one, of increased eye movements for the relevant
30
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:39==
case is noticeable in both fig. 3.5 and fig. 3.6. This occurs 1 to 2 s after the onset
of the latter half of the stimulus pair. This rise does not appear in the results
of either Cui and Herrmann 2023, or Herrmann and Jennifer (2024) [14][16]. In
their research on gaze dispersion as an alternate measure for pupillometry, Cui
and Herrmann used sentences in noise and showed that GD decreased when the
listening conditions worsened. The same effect can be seen here, immediately
after the onset of the stimulus. Their data representation was however cut shortly
after the sentence concluded. We can therefore not say for sure whether this
effect was present. This could also come as a result of the individuals moving
their eyes while committing the numbers to memory.
A recent study by Herrmann and Jennifer (2024) shows that the complimentary
nature of pupil dilation and gaze dispersion as indexes for effort is perhaps not
as straight forward as previously stated [16]. They assessed the levels of pupil
dilation and gaze dispersion with a sentence test in varying levels of SNR. These
levels were described as easy, difficult and impossible listening conditions. Pupil
dilation formed a U­shape. Low for easy and impossible conditions, due to no
effort and giving up, and high for difficult conditions. The gaze dispersion did
however decrease as the conditions worsened. This lead them to suggest that a
different cognitive process than the arousal regulating pupil size, was involved in
the reduction of eye movements under high cognitive load.
4.3
Microsaccade Results
Average count of microsaccades remained relatively stable over the duration of
the trials, as can be seen in fig. 3.7. An average of about 2 MS/s is higher than
what is most often reported as a MS rate of 1 Hz, but not unheard of.
This
can be seen from Zhao et al. 2024 who mention an average of about 2 MS/s
[23][18][17][24].
The microsaccadic inhibition in response to both parts of the distractor pairs is
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
31
==PAGE:40==
greater in the relevant case than for the irrelevant one. This is in accordance with,
and support the hypothesis. For the non baselined data in fig. 3.8 the difference in
responses to relevant versus irrelevant number is statistically significant, i.e. not
zero. The shape of the response, triangular, as opposed to a more sharp square
response in other experiments is likely due to differences in windowing of the time
series when the individual events are converted to counts per second [17].
The differences in response support the capacity theory leading back to Kahne­
man [25]. With attention as a finite resource, irrelevant inputs are ignored in favor
of more salient ones. Given the bombardment of stimuli that surround us in our
everyday lives, it is paramount for the brain to filter information sources based on
their importance to the observer.
Comparing the MSI response to the pupilometry results previously obtained for the
same data set yields interesting comparisons [10]. MSI has a similar magnitude to
both halfs of the relevant distractor pair, whilst the pupil dilation was much greater
for the number than the name. MS rate also returned to baseline after after the
name half, before the onset of the number at t = 2 s. After the onset of the name,
MS quickly returned to baseline about 3 s after the onset of the name, at least
in comparison with pupil dilation, where the effect was still ongoing at t = 8 s, 6
seconds after the onset of the name. MS being more transient might make them
favorable over pupil dilation when measuring for attention. Arousal state leading
into the next distractor event could skew the baselining of pupil data for.
4.4
Significance and Further Research
The results not being statistically significantly different from zero for most of the
metrics is something that should be rectified. Continuation of similar experiments
is already ongoing at Eriksholm Research Centre and increasing the numbers of
participants will no doubt clarify whether or not the differences are tangible. As
previously mentioned, doing a pilot where the attentive side is indicated within the
32
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:41==
stimulus pair instead of at the top of the experiment might show different behavior
in the horizontal gaze position, making the data more robust by avoiding errors
due to improper eye placement.
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:43==
5
Conclusion
Usage of pupil dilation when assessing attention and listening effort is difficult, ex­
cept under clinical conditions. The study showed promise for utilizing gaze metrics
like horizontal gaze position, gaze dispersion and microsaccades as supplemen­
tary or alternative method to gauge attention and listening effort. The relevance
of distractors had a significant effect on microsaccadic inhibition, indicating an
increase in attention, and a quick return to baseline, compared to pupil dilation.
There was a non­significant effect of larger reduction of gaze dispersion in re­
sponse to relevant stimuli. Same goes for an increase in eye movements follow­
ing relevant distractor offset, attributed to the memory component of the exercise.
Horizontal gaze position did not show any effect relating to stimuli onset. The
participants possessing knowledge of which side was relevant for each trial did
however show a significant trend of the average horizontal gaze position shifting
away from the fixation cross, towards the relevant, over the entire trial. Due to the
limited significance of the results obtained, increasing the number of participants
is advisable to increase the statistical power. The results show promise that eye
movements can be utilized in lieu of pupillometry when assessing effort.
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
Adrian C. Davis and Howard J. Hoffman. “Hearing Loss: Rising Prevalence
and Impact”. In: Bulletin of the World Health Organization 97.10 (2019),
646–646A. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2471/BLT.19.224683.
[2]
E. Colin Cherry. “Some Experiments on the Recognition of Speech, with
One and with Two Ears”. In: Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
25 (1953). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1121/1.1907229.
[3]
S. Evans et al. “Getting the cocktail party started: masking effects in speech
perception”. In: Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 28.3 (2016). DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00913.
[4]
Abigail L. Noyce, Jasmine A. C. Kwasa, and Barbara G. Shinn­Cunningham.
“Defining attention from an auditory perspective”. In: WIREs Cognitive Sci­
ence 14.1 (2022). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/wcs.1610.
[5]
Emine Merve Kaya and Mounya Elhilali. “Modelling Auditory Attention”. In:
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 372.1714
(2017), p. 20160101. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0101.
[6]
Sven L. Mattys et al. “Speech Recognition in Adverse Conditions: A Re­
view”. In: Language and Cognitive Processes 27.7­8 (2012), pp. 953–978.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/01690965.2012.705006.
[7]
Larry E. Humes and Lisa Roberts. “Speech­Recognition Difficulties of the
Hearing­Impaired Elderly: The Contributions of Audibility”. In: Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 33.4 (1990), pp. 726–735. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1044/jshr.3304.726.
[8]
Barbara Ohlenforst et al. “Effects of Hearing Impairment and Hearing Aid
Amplification on Listening Effort: A Systematic Review”. In: Ear & Hearing
38.3 (2017), pp. 267–281. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1097/AUD.0000000000000396.
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
37
==PAGE:46==
[9]
Björn Herrmann and Ingrid S. Johnsrude. “A Model of Listening Engage­
ment (MoLE)”. In: Hearing Research 397 (2020), p. 108016. DOI: https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.heares.2020.108016.
[10]
Garghiseeneas Sivakumar Punitharani. “Neurophysiological responses to
relevant and irrelevant distractors: An investigation into the impact of dis­
tractors on neurophysilogical processes underlying attention and congitive
control.” MA thesis. DTU, 2023.
[11]
Sijia Zhao et al. “Pupillometry as an Objective Measure of Sustained Atten­
tion in Young and Old Listeners”. In: Trends in Hearing 23 (2019), pp. 1–21.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/2331216519887815.
[12]
Yue Zhang et al. “Luminance Effects on Pupil Dilation in Speech­in­Noise
Recognition”. In: PLOS ONE, edited by Sebastiaan Mathôt 17.12 (2022),
e0278506. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0278506.
[13]
Taylor R. Hayes and Alexander A. Petrov. “Mapping and Correcting the Influ­
ence of Gaze Position on Pupil Size Measurements”. In: Behavior Research
Methods 48.2 (2016), pp. 510–527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-
015-0588-x.
[14]
M. Eric Cui and Björn Herrmann. “Eye movements decrease during effortful
speech listening”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 43.32 (2023), pp. 5856–5869.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0240-23.2023.
[15]
Ulrich Pomper and Maria Chait. “The Impact of Visual Gaze Direction on
Auditory Object Tracking”. In: Scientific Reports 7.1 (2017), p. 4640. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-04475-1.
[16]
Björn Herrmann and Jennifer D. Ryan. “Pupil Size and Eye Movements Dif­
ferently Index Effort in Both Younger and Older Adults”. In: Journal of Cog­
nitive Neuroscience 36.7 (2024), pp. 1325–1340. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1162/jocn_a_02172.
38
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:47==
[17]
Ralf Engbert and Reinhold Kliegl. “Microsaccades uncover the orientation
of covert attention”. In: Vision Research 43.9 (2003), pp. 1035–1045. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0042-6989(03)00084-1.
[18]
Claudia Contadini­Wright et al. “Pupil Dilation and Microsaccades Provide
Complementary Insights into the Dynamics of Arousal and Instantaneous
Attention during Effortful Listening”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 43.26 (2023),
pp. 4856–4866. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0242-23.2023.
[19]
Yingxin Jia and Christopher W. Tyler. “Measurement of Saccadic Eye Move­
ments by Electrooculography for Simultaneous EEG Recording”. In: Behav­
ior Research Methods 51.6 (2022), pp. 2139–2151. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
3758/s13428-019-01280-8.
[20]
M. Kathleen Pichora­Fuller et al. “Hearing Impairment and Cognitive En­
ergy: The Framework for Understanding Effortful Listening (FUEL)”. In: Ear
& Hearing 37.1 (2016), 5S–27S. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1097 / AUD .
0000000000000312.
[21]
Lorenz Fiedler et al. “Hearing Aid Noise Reduction Lowers the Sustained
Listening Effort During Continuous Speech in Noise—A Combined Pupil­
lometry and EEG Study”. In: Ear & Hearing 42.6 (2021), pp. 1590–1601.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1097/AUD.0000000000001050.
[22]
Dorothea Wendt et al. “Toward a More Comprehensive Understanding of
the Impact of Masker Type and Signal­to­Noise Ratio on the Pupillary Re­
sponse While Performing a Speech­in­Noise Test”. In: Hearing Research
369 (2018), pp. 67–78. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heares.2018.05.006.
[23]
Sijia Zhao et al. “Cross­Modal Interactions Between Auditory Attention and
Oculomotor Control”. In: The Journal of Neuroscience 44.11 (2024), e1286232024.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1286-23.2024.
[24]
Ralf Engbert. “Microsaccades: A Microcosm for Research on Oculomotor
Control, Attention, and Visual Perception”. In: Progress in Brain Research
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
39
==PAGE:48==
154 (2006), pp. 177–192. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079- 6123(06)
54009-9.
[25]
Bryan Bruya and Yi­Yuan Tang. “Is Attention Really Effort? Revisiting Daniel
Kahneman’s Influential 1973 Book Attention and Effort”. In: Frontiers in Psy­
chology 9 (2018), p. 1133. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01133.
40
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
==PAGE:49==
Analysis of Eye Movements in Response to Distracting Sounds
41
==PAGE:50==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 356
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
