==PAGE:1==
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Ki­
netic Models Using Machine Learning
Master Thesis
DTU Bioengineering
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Te Chen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Brovej, Building
221, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared for six months at the Laboratory of Computational Systems
Biotechnology, School of Basic Sciences, Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering
at the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), the Novo Nordisk Foundation
Center for Biosustainability and the Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine at the
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Sci­
ence in Biotechnology, MSc Eng.
Te Chen ­ s222371
Signature
Date
ii
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Kinetic models hold potential for a wide range of applications in synthetic biology, includ­
ing strain design for biochemical production, drug discovery, and understanding metabolic
pathways. However, the widespread use of these models is hindered by the challenge
of accurate parameterization, which requires extensive experimental data and computa­
tional resources. This thesis presents a modified workflow based on the machine learning
framework RENAISSANCE[1], which directly integrates experimental data from bioreac­
tor to enhance the parameterization process in kinetic model construction. The modified
workflow is able to achieve a 25 times higher incidence of experimentally relevant kinetic
models compare to traditional methods. Additionally, this study introduces 3 methods to
improve kinetic model performance and accuracy. The results demonstrate that our ap­
proach not only accelerates the development of kinetic models but also makes them more
accessible for practical applications in synthetic biology.
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to Subham Choudhury and Miskovic Ljubisa for their
guidance during my time at EPFL.
I am grateful to Teddy Groves for his support throughout the thesis management and
editing process.
A special thanks to Mogens Kilstrup and Lars Keld Nielsen for establishing the thesis
logistics.
Supverisors:
Choudhury, Subham, Laboratory of Computational Systems Biology (LCSB), Ecole Poly­
technique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH­1015, Lausanne, Switzerland
Miskovic, Ljubisa, Laboratory of Computational Systems Biology (LCSB), Ecole Poly­
technique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH­1015, Lausanne, Switzerland
Groves, Teddy, The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, DTU, Kon­
gens Lyngby 2800, Denmark
Kilstrup, Mogens, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, DTU, Kongens Lyn­
gby 2800, Denmark
Nielsen, Lars Keld, The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, DTU,
Kongens Lyngby 2800, Denmark
iv
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Kinetic Model Construction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Kinetic Parameter Estimation Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Mathmetical and Computational Concepts Used in the Thesis . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Kinetic Modeling Tools Used in This Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Methods
15
3.1
Setting up Kinetic Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Modified Workflow for RENAISSANCE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Hyperparameter Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.4
Result Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.5
Computational Constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4
Results
25
4.1
Preliminary Result of the Training Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Generator Comparisons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.3
Statistical Analysis of the Selected Generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4
Model Enrichment through Perturbation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.5
Invalid Model Improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5
Discussion and Conclusion
35
5.1
Effectiveness of the Modified Workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2
Generate Diverse and Accurate Kinetic Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.3
Methods for Kinetic Models Fine Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.4
Future Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Bibliography
37
A Appendix
41
A.1 Computational Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.2 Reward Function Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
A.3 Hyperparameter Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Synthetic biology represents a groundbreaking field in biotechnology, aiming to design
and construct new biological parts, devices, and systems. The grand vision of synthetic
biology is to engineer complex biological systems that can perform novel functions, driv­
ing advances in healthcare, food, environmental management, and chemical industry.[2]
As an important subset of synthetic biology, metabolic engineering focuses on precise ge­
netic modifications to microorganisms for enhanced production of chemicals, fuels, and
pharmaceuticals. [3] Another aspect of synthetic biology is to uncover the complexities
of cellular signaling and regulatory networks, which can lead to breakthroughs in under­
standing cellular responses and disease mechanisms.[4]Central to synthetic biology is the
development and application of metabolic models, which use mathematical formulations
to describe the reactome in cellular metabolism, enabling omics­data analysis, in­silico
simulation and rational design of the metabolic network.[5][6]
The most popular approach has traditionally been constraint­based modelling, which lever­
ages biochemical knowledge in the form of stoichiometric maps, thermodynamics, opti­
mality criteria and constraints on the values of certain quantities to predict cellular be­
haviour at metabolic steady state.[7] These models use gene­protein­reaction (GPR) as­
sociations to map cellular metabolism and predict interactions with the environment. [8]
However, constraint­based modelling can only capture the snapshot of steady state and
limited in their ability to capture the enzymatic mechanisms.[9] Due to the simplicity, it
also has difficulties to integrate multi­omics data such as fluxomics and metabolomics.
This limitation has spurred interest in kinetic metabolic models, which offer a more ac­
curate approach of describing metabolic reaction dynamics. These models utilizes ki­
netic rate formulation to describe each reaction through ordinary differential equations
(ODEs). Through the formulations, metabolic models are more adaptive at integrating
diverse omics datasets, enhancing their predictability.
Yet, building accurate kinetic models presents several challenges. They require detailed
descriptions of reaction mechanisms, including post­translational modifications and regu­
latory interactions. Moreover, integrating multi­omics data effectively remains difficult due
to the variability and uncertainty inherent in data generation.[10] Additionally, the compu­
tational demands of solving ODEs present challenges not just in kinetic models but in
numerical methods more broadly.[11]
Another significant problem is kinetic parameter estimation. Accurately describing reac­
tions requires highly parameterized mathematical expressions, which often lack experi­
mental data for validation.[10] While several estimation methods have been developed ,
the increasing complexity of models means that they often require substantial computa­
tional resources and expertise.[12][13][14][15][1][16]
In this thesis, we presents a modified version of kinetic parameterization workflow based
on RENAISSANCE, a generative neural network framework and evolutionary strategies
for kinetic parameter estimation.[1] The new workflow can directly integrate experimental
data into the optimization process and create accurate kinetic models. We demonstrate
the efficiency of this modified workflow by replicating partial result from Narayanan et al.
and compare the incidence rate of accurate model with the original article [6]. We also
show three different methods to improve a kinetic model’s performance by perturbation of
the neural network and using sampling method to make better models. With the modified
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
1
==PAGE:10==
workflow, we can speed up the kinetic model building process and enhance the practical
use of kinetic models.
1.1
Overview
The thesis begins in Chapter 2 with a review of the mathematical framework for kinetic
models, covering the principles and equations during kinetic model construction. The
methods for estimating kinetic parameters will also be examined, highlighting both sta­
tistical and machine learning approaches. We will introduce relevant mathematical and
computational methods used in this thesis. In Chapter 3, we will introduce the setup of
the experiment and the modified workflow developed during this thesis. We also include
explanations of the hyperparameter tuning process and baseline case. In Chapter 4, the
thesis will present the results of applying this method to a fermentation experiment by
fitting a large­scale kinetic model of Escherichia coli (E. coli). We will also describe three
different methods based on the modified workflow to improve the model’s performance.
Finally, Chapter 5 of this thesis will discuss the results, providing insights and conclusions
drawn from the research.
2
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
2.1
Kinetic Model Construction
A kinetic model is a type of biological model that that uses parameterised mechanistic
models of reaction kinetics to describe the dynamics of a reaction network using a sys­
tem of ordinary differential equations (ODEs). [10] This model provides a detailed un­
derstanding and explicit representation of how metabolism evolve over time, capturing
the temporal changes in metabolite concentrations and fluxes. As shown in Figure 2.1,
building a kinetic model requires three main steps: constructing the reaction network,
mathematically describing the reactions, and estimating the kinetic parameters.
Figure 2.1: The process of constructing a kinetic model. Step 1. Construct a metabolic network
based on annotated information and integrating omics data. Step 2. To build the kinetic frame­
work, each reaction in the metabolic network is built through rate law formulations, regulation
mechanisms such as allosteric regulation and thermodynamics information about reaction direc­
tionality. Step 3. With the kinetic framework, kinetic parameters should be supplemented to test
its relevancy to experimental condition, such as steady state concentrations. The model is then
used for further analysis like bioreactor simulation or potential strain design targets.
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
3
==PAGE:12==
Step 1. Reaction Network Construction
The first step in constructing a kinetic model is to describe the reaction network or pathway.
There are several approaches for building the network; in this project, we focus on first
building the genome scale metabolic model (GEM).[7] The GEM can be assembled using
annotated genome data and transcriptomics data, providing a versatile framework for the
metabolic activities of the organism under study. Genome­scale models leverage Gene­
Protein­Reaction (GPR) associations to represent the entire reactome. Key aspects of
building the reaction network include ensuring that all reactions are mass balanced and
thermodynamically feasible.[17] Finally, a model is validated against experimental data
using flux balance analysis (FBA), which identifies the possible solution space and opti­
mizes the growth rate or production capabilities.[8] This approach allows for a detailed and
accurate representation of the organism’s metabolic processes, setting a solid foundation
for subsequent kinetic modeling.
Step 2. Mathematical Formulation of Reaction Kinetics
Once the reaction network is established, the next step is to describe the rate of each
reaction as a function of the metabolic state and some parameters, based on knowledge of
its kinetics and regulations. Many rate equations have been proposed in the literature, with
the Michaelis­Menten equation[18] being particularly popular. Reactions can be described
using different types of mathematical formulations, depending on the required accuracy,
number of parameters, and available data.[10]
Incorporating regulations, if available, into the kinetic model is also essential, as it reflects
the impact of metabolites to reaction pathways. The reaction network is then described as
a system of reaction kinetic formuations, which governed by ODEs, capturing the dynamic
behavior of the system.
Kinetic Model Formulation
The following equation describes the kinetic model [10]:
dx
dt = S · v(E; x; k),
x(0) = x0
(2.1)
where x is a vector of the concentration of metabolites, S is the stoichiometric matrix, and
the flux vector or rate vector v is a function that depends on the enzyme concentrations
E, the metabolite concentrations x, and kinetic parameters k. x0 is the initial condition of
the metabolites.
Steady­State Assumption [12]
The steady­state assumption aims to describes the exponential phase of cell growth,
where the concentrations of metabolites (x) remain constant over time. This allows ac­
curate measurement, since the rate of change of the metabolite concentrations is zero.
From Equation 2.1, we have:
dx
dt = S · v(E; x; k) = 0
(2.2)
This results in a system of linear equations relating the reaction fluxes which are con­
strained by the stoichiometry of a network.
Type of Kinetic Parameters [10]
Historically, many different reaction kinetic formulations have been used, and the formu­
lations are mostly based on the following kinetic parameters.
• kcat: The turnover number, representing the number of substrate molecules con­
verted into product per enzyme molecule per unit time when the enzyme is fully
saturated with substrate.
4
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:13==
• Km: The Michaelis constant, indicating the substrate concentration at which the
reaction rate is half of the maximum velocity (Vmax), and reflecting the affinity of the
enzyme for its substrate.
• Vmax: The maximum reaction velocity achieved by the enzyme when the substrate
concentration is sufficiently high to saturate the enzyme.
• Ki: The inhibition constant, measuring the effectiveness of an inhibitor in reducing
enzyme activity, and representing the concentration of inhibitor required to halve the
enzyme activity.
• Ka: The activator constant, indicating the concentration of an activator required to
achieve half­maximal activation of the enzyme.
Common Types of Reaction Kinetics Formulations
The goal is to integrate experimentally validated or generated values into the kinetic
model. The following are a detailed explanation of common enzyme kinetics formula­
tions based on the kinetic parameters described above. This also includes regulation
terms that can be added given the type of regulation.
Example: Irreversible Michaelis­Menten Kinetics [19]
For an irreversible reaction from substrate S to product P:
S →P
(2.3)
the reaction can be described using the Irreversible Michaelis­Menten Kinetics, which is
the most prevalent model for rate descriptions:
v = Vmax[xS]
Km + [xS]
(2.4)
where [xS] is the substrate concentration.
Example: Allosteric Regulation [19]
The presence of allosteric regulation can be described with the kinetics described in Eq
2.4:
v = Vmax[xS]
Km + [xS] ·
[xA]
Ka + [xA]
(2.5)
where [xA] is the concentration of an allosteric activator.
Example: Reversible Inhibition with Michaelis­Menten Kinetics [19]
The Irreversible Michaelis­Menten equation (Eq 2.4) in the presence of a reversible com­
petitive inhibitor is given by:
v =
Vmax[xS]
Km
(
1 + [xI]
Ki
)
+ [xS]
(2.6)
where [xI] is the inhibitor concentration.
Thermodynamic Constraints
The standard metabolic network optimization process does not account for the thermo­
dynamic feasibility of reactions. Therefore, thermodynamic constraints are introduced to
enforce the optimization process, ensuring the solutions adhere to the laws of thermody­
namics and exclude biologically impossible or non­reproducible solutions.[17]
Thermodynamic constraints are typically represented by the negatively bound Gibbs free
energy of chemical reactions, ∆rG′
i, formulated as:
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
5
==PAGE:14==
∆rG′
i = ∆rG′◦
i + RT
m
∑
i=0
nij ln(Xj) ≤0
where X is the activity of a metabolite, n is the corresponding stoichiometric coefficient
in the reaction, and m is the total number of metabolites. This formulation allows for
obtaining feasible ranges of metabolite activities or concentrations in addition to flux pro­
files. However, the formulation of thermodynamic constraints requires prior knowledge
of the standard Gibbs free energy change, ∆rG′◦
i , for reactions. Due to the scarcity of
experimental measurements for ∆rG′◦
i , estimation methods like the Group Contribution
Method (GCM) and eQuilibrator are used.[20][21] pyTFA and matTFA are the most used
computational packages that implement TFA in Python and MATLAB, respectively.[22]
Step 3. Model Fitting and Kinetic Parameter Estimation
The kinetic rate formulations require parameterization to precisely characterize the re­
action dynamics. Accurate description of reactions requires highly parameterized math­
ematical expressions, but these parameters are often not available experimentally.[15]
Estimating kinetic parameters typically involves statistical techniques, optimization algo­
rithms, and machine learning approaches to overcome this limitation. There are two fun­
damental approaches to implement kinetic parameters.[10]
The first method is a bottom­up approach, where detailed kinetic information of enzymes
and their regulatory mechanisms is iteratively added to the model. This approach starts
with the smallest components, such as individual enzyme kinetic parameters, and builds
up the model by incorporating experimentally measured parameters and refining the model
iteratively. For example, one might start by characterizing the kinetics of key enzymes
involved in glycolysis and then progressively add interactions and regulatory mecha­
nisms.[23]
In contrast, the top­down approach begins with a predefined model and dataset, utilizing
high­level data such as fluxomics, proteomics, and metabolomics. This approach iter­
atively applies statistical, optimization, and machine learning methods to fit the model
and estimate kinetic parameters simultaneously.[10] For instance, a top­down approach
might involve using omics data from a perturbed metabolic network to infer the kinetic
parameters that best explain the observed data. [14][16]
Given the complexity and scale of modern metabolic networks, the top­down approach
is increasingly preferred. Three key reasons explain trend: First, the parameters of a
large kinetic model usually have hundreds of kinetic parameters to fulfill, and many of the
unknown parameters have to be estimated. [24] Second, even if many parameters are ex­
perimentally determined, the in­vitro measurements doesn’t translate to in­vivo scenarios
and insufficient parameterization doesn’t predict network behaviour.[25][26] Lastly, some
parameters in the models are sloppy, meaning that the parameters are not constrained
and have a high range of possible values. The sloppiness of these parameters making
experimental measurements irrelevant and estimation required.[27]
Therefore, the top­down approach allows for the integration of large­scale data and effi­
cient parameter estimation, which also facilitates the construction of accurate kinetic mod­
els. The ability to handle vast datasets, resolve sloppiness in models and simultaneously
fit multiple parameters with in­vitro/in­vivo differences makes this approach particularly
valuable in systems biology and metabolic engineering.
6
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Kinetic Parameter Estimation Methods
Many methods for estimating parameters of kinetic models have been published in the
past decade.[12][13][14] [16][15][28] This section describes several representative meth­
ods, each implemented using different techniques.
Iterative Bottom Up Approach
The method presented by Smallbone et al. 2013 [23] for building a kinetic model of yeast
glycolysis involves an iterative ”cycle of knowledge” approach that integrates experimental
measurements with modeling to refine kinetic parameters. Initially, a mathematical model
is developed, and key reaction steps with significant control over flux are identified. The
kinetic parameters of individual isoenzymes involved in these steps are then measured
under standardized conditions. This experimental data is integrated into the model to
predict new metabolite concentrations and reassess the system’s control properties. This
iterative process is repeated, progressively refining the model to accurately represent the
differential activities of isoenzymes and their roles under various conditions.
ORACLE
The ORACLE framework[12] solves the challenges of developing kinetic models for genome­
scale metabolic networks by integrating stoichiometric, thermodynamic, and physiological
constraints. The framework utilizes a sampling method to generate a large ensemble of
candidate kinetic models that adhere to these constraints. These models are then val­
idated and refined using available experimental data. By systematically exploring the
parameter space, ORACLE helps identify robust kinetic parameters, facilitating the con­
struction of accurate and predictive metabolic models.
KETCHUP
KETCHUP[14] employs a primal­dual interior­point algorithm to parameterize large­scale
kinetic models of metabolism by efficiently solving a nonlinear programming problem. This
method leverages diverse multi­omics dataset evaluated at different reference states such
as wild­type and various perturbed conditions. By minimizing the least squares differ­
ences between experimental and predicted data, KETCHUP accurately estimates kinetic
parameters. This provides accurate kinetic model predictions across different conditions.
Maud
Maud[16] is a tool that uses Bayesian statistical inference for the kinetic modeling of bio­
chemical metabolic reaction networks. By integrating omics data, prior knowledge, and
structural information about kinetic mechanisms and regulatory interactions, Maud accu­
rately estimates kinetic parameters despite the inherent noise and uncertainty in biologi­
cal data. The tool employs adaptive Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) to efficiently sample
from high­dimensional posterior distributions, enabling robust parameter estimation taking
into account the full joint distribution. Maud respects the constraints of real measurements
(such as that concentration measurements are non­negative with approximately constant
CV), guarantees thermodynamic feasibility at the same time as incorporating informa­
tion about correlated thermodynamic parameters and allows accurate representation of
allosteric regulation and phosphorylation.
REKINDLE
The REKINDLE framework[15] is a deep­learning­based method designed to address the
challenges in kinetic modeling of metabolic networks. Utilizing generative adversarial net­
works (GANs), REKINDLE efficiently generates kinetic models that capture experimen­
tally observed metabolic responses, which are often challenging to achieve with traditional
kinetic modeling techniques. By training a generator and discriminator using data gen­
erated from traditional method, the GANs learn to generate parameter sets that produce
biologically relevant models. The generated models are validated by comparing their sta­
tistical properties and dynamic responses to the training data.
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
7
==PAGE:16==
RENAISSANCE
The RENAISSANCE workflow[1] is a machine learning tool designed to predict kinetic pa­
rameters for large­scale metabolic models by utilizing evolutionary strategies and genera­
tive neural networks. This framework features several key functions: it starts with creating
draft kinetic models using existing metabolic information, which can include results from
flux balance analysis (FBA) and thermodynamics­based flux analysis (TFA). RENAIS­
SANCE then employs generative neural networks to explore the parameter space, pre­
dicting kinetic parameters without requiring prior experimental data. It uses evolutionary
strategies to iteratively refine these parameters, ensuring they align with the biochemical
realities of the metabolic network.
2.3
Mathmetical and Computational Concepts Used in the
Thesis
2.3.1
Nonlinear Dynamical Systems [29]
Nonlinear dynamical systems play a crucial role in modeling the kinetics of biochemical
reactions. These systems are defined by sets of nonlinear differential equations that de­
scribe how the concentrations of various species in a reaction network change over time.
The key concepts include the linearized dynamics using the Jacobian matrix, and the
system stability through eigenvalue.
Steady State[29]
A steady state of a dynamical system occurs when the concentrations of the species in
the reaction network do not change over time. Mathematically, this is expressed as:
v(x∗) = 0
where x∗is the steady­state concentration vector. This means that at steady state, the
rate of change of each species’ concentration is zero.
Linearized Dynamics[29]
To analyze the stability of a nonlinear dynamical system near its steady state, we linearize
the system around the steady­state point. This involves computing the Jacobian matrix
(J), which contains the first partial derivatives of the system’s equations with respect to its
variables. For a system of equations v(x), the Jacobian matrix is given by:
J =
[ ∂vi
∂xj
]
(i,j)
where vi are the functions describing the system and xj are the variables.
System Stability and Biological Relevancy[29][6]
The stability of the system at the steady state is determined by analyzing the eigenvalues
of the Jacobian matrix. If all eigenvalues (λi) have negative real parts, the steady state is
stable; if any eigenvalue has a positive real part, the steady state is unstable.
Mathematically, if J is the Jacobian matrix evaluated at the steady state x∗, the eigenvalue
problem is given by:
Jv = λv
where λ are the eigenvalues and v are the corresponding eigenvectors.
The condition for stability is:
8
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:17==
Re(λmax) < 0
If any eigenvalue has a positive real part, the steady state is considered unstable. There­
fore, the maximum eigenvalue in the matrix needs to be less than 0. The more negative
the maximum eigenvalue is, the faster the model becomes stable after perturbation.
It is important to note that maximum eigenvalue can be translated to kinetic model’s sta­
bility, which indicates the biological relevancy. A kinetic model has to be fast enough to
become biologically relevant.
2.3.2
Machine learning
Machine learning is a set of techniques for statistical inference, where an inference model
is trained to recognize complex patterns within a dataset and subsequently predict out­
comes based on new inputs. Machine learning techniques are typically categorized into
three main approaches: supervised learning, semi­supervised learning, and unsuper­
vised learning.[30] The distinction between these approaches lies in how training data
is used. Supervised learning relies on a labeled dataset, where each training example
is paired with an output label, enabling the model to learn the mapping from inputs to
outputs. Unsupervised learning, on the other hand, utilizes only unlabeled data, seeking
to uncover hidden patterns or intrinsic structures within the dataset without prior informa­
tion. Semi­supervised learning combines both labeled and unlabeled data, leveraging the
large amounts of unlabeled data to improve learning accuracy and robustness when only
a limited amount of labeled data is available.
Neural Networks
In recent years, techniques and architectures inspired by biology have shown great po­
tential in machine learning, with neural networks being a prime example. Neural networks
mimic the functioning of brain neurons. In general, a neural network is composed of layers
of neurons, where each layer is connected to the previous one. An input is fed into a layer
of neurons, each connection is associated with a weight and an activation function. These
layers are stacked, allowing each layer to capture and store different types of non­linear
information.[30]
Figure 2.2: A Visualization of the Neural Network Architecture, image adopted from Grosse et
al.[31]
Mathematically, a neural network can be described as follows:
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
9
==PAGE:18==
1. Input Layer: The input layer receives the input vector x ∈Rn.
2. Hidden Layers: Each hidden layer l consists of neurons that perform a weighted sum
of their inputs followed by the application of an activation function f. The output h(l)
of layer l is given by:
h(l) = f
(
W(l)h(l−1) + b(l))
where:
• W(l) is the weight matrix for layer l.
• h(l−1) is the output vector from the previous layer (or the input vector x for the
first hidden layer).
• b(l) is the bias vector for layer l.
• f is the activation function, such as the sigmoid function, ReLU (Rectified Lin­
ear Unit), or tanh.
3. Output Layer: The output layer produces the final output y of the network:
y = fout
(
W(out)h(L) + b(out))
where L is the index of the last hidden layer, W(out) and b(out) are the weight matrix
and bias vector for the output layer, and fout is the activation function for the output
layer.
This mathematical formulation allows neural networks to learn and approximate complex
nonlinear and high dimensional mappings from input to output through the adjustment of
weights and biases during the training process.[30]
Latent space in neural networks refers to the hidden, intermediate representation of the
data captured by the network during the training process. [32] This space encodes the
underlying features and structures of the input data in a compressed form, facilitating the
generation of new, similar data points. The input features are mapped to points in the
latent space through the network’s encoder, and these points are then decoded back into
the output data by the generator.
A deep neural network(DNN) extends this concept by using multiple hidden layers be­
tween the input and output layers.[33] Deep architectures can learn complex representa­
tions of data, which makes them particularly powerful for tasks such as image and speech
recognition, language processing, and biological data analysis.[33][34][35] Generative
neural networks, another subset of neural networks, focus on generating new data in­
stances that resemble the training data. This includes Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs)[36] and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs)[37], which have been used to generate
realistic images, text, and even biological molecules.[38][35]
Notable advancements in biology using neural networks include the development of Al­
phaFold by DeepMind, which predicts protein structures with remarkable accuracy, rev­
olutionizing structural biology.[35] Another significant achievement is the use of neural
networks to analyze single­cell RNA sequencing data, helping to uncover the complexi­
ties of cell differentiation and disease mechanisms.[39]
10
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:19==
Evolutionary Computation
Another significant area of development in machine learning is evolutionary computation.
Evolutionary computation encompasses algorithms inspired by the process of natural se­
lection and genetics.[40] These algorithms, known as evolutionary algorithms (EAs), sim­
ulate the process of evolution to optimize solutions to complex problems.
Evolutionary strategies (ES) are a subset of evolutionary algorithms that use mechanisms
such as mutation, recombination, and selection to evolve a population of candidate solu­
tions.[41] ES have been particularly effective in optimizing neural network architectures
and hyperparameters, where traditional gradient­based methods may struggle. For in­
stance, NeuroEvolution of Augmenting Topologies (NEAT) uses evolutionary strategies
to evolve both the structure and weights of neural networks, leading to efficient network
architectures. [42]
Random Forest
Random Forest is a versatile machine learning algorithm that operates by constructing
multiple decision trees during training and outputting the mode of the classes (classifica­
tion) or mean prediction (regression) of the individual trees. [43] It is an ensemble learning
method known for its high accuracy, robustness to overfitting, and ability to handle large
datasets with many features. Random Forest is widely used for feature selection, identi­
fying important variables, and making reliable predictions based on complex data.[43]
Hybrid Approach
The combination of different machine learning techniques can lead to better results. For
example, integrating neural networks with evolutionary algorithms can harness the strengths
of both approaches.[41] Neural networks excel at learning representations from data,
while evolutionary algorithms are powerful for exploring a wide search space and opti­
mizing complex objective functions.[44]
2.3.3
Dimensionality Reduction Techniques
High­dimensional data often poses challenges in analysis and visualization. To overcome
these challenges, dimensionality reduction techniques aim to simplify the data while pre­
serving its essential structures and patterns.[45] Two widely used methods for this pur­
pose are Principal Component Analysis (PCA)[46] and t­distributed Stochastic Neighbor
Embedding (t­SNE)[47].
PCA is a statistical technique that reduces the dimensionality of a dataset while retaining
as much information as possible by transforming the original variables into a new set of
uncorrelated variables called principal components.[46] These components are ordered
to retain most of the information present in the original dataset, making PCA effective for
linear dimensionality reduction.
t­SNE, on the other hand, is a non­linear dimensionality reduction technique particularly
well­suited for visualizing high­dimensional data.[47] Unlike PCA, t­SNE focuses on pre­
serving the local structure of the data, making it excellent for visualizing clusters and
complex patterns in datasets. This makes t­SNE a powerful tool for uncovering the un­
derlying structure in high­dimensional datasets and facilitating better data interpretation
and visualization.
2.3.4
Kolmogorov­Smirnov (KS) test[48]
The Kolmogorov­Smirnov (KS) test is a non­parametric statistical test used to determine
if two samples come from the same distribution. It compares the cumulative distribution
functions of the two samples and calculates the maximum difference between them. This
maximum difference, known as the KS statistic, helps identify whether the distributions
are significantly different.
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
11
==PAGE:20==
2.4
Kinetic Modeling Tools Used in This Study
2.4.1
SKiMpy[49]
The Symbolic Kinetic Models in Python (SKiMpy) toolbox is designed for semiautomatic
generation and analysis of large­scale kinetic models across various biological domains
such as signaling, gene expression and metabolism. SKiMpy allows users to implement,
parameterize, and analyze kinetic models.
Figure 2.3: The capabilities of the SKiMpy toolbox, image adopted from Weilandt et al. [49] (A)
Construction and simulation of various model types, including metabolic, signaling, and gene ex­
pression networks. (B) Parameterization of kinetic metabolic models around a reference steady
state derived from constraint­based modeling, with parameter pruning based on local stability and
characteristic time constants. (C) Bioreactor modeling of microbial growth in dynamic environ­
ments for both individual and multiple species.
Each reaction in SKiMpy is characterized by its rate laws, which can include various types
of kinetics such as Reversible Michaelis­Menten, Generalized Reversible Hill, and Con­
venience kinetics. SKiMpy also incorporates regulation mechanisms like competitive, un­
competitive, and mixed inhibition, as well as activation. The kinetic parameters and rate
laws for each reaction are expressed symbolically, enabling numerical integration and
analysis.
SKiMpy extends its capabilities to include bioreactor simulations. These simulations can
model the growth and metabolic activity of microorganisms in a dynamic environment,
accounting for factors such as nutrient availability and waste accumulation. By integrating
multispecies bioreactor simulations, SKiMpy enables users to evaluate the performance
of different strains and optimize conditions for industrial applications.
12
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:21==
2.4.2
RENAISSANCE[1]
RENAISSANCE (REconstruction of dyNAmIc models through Stratified Sampling using
Artificial Neural networks and Concepts of Evolution strategies) is a computational frame­
work designed to facilitate the parameterization of large­scale kinetic models of metabolism.
The primary goal of RENAISSANCE is to efficiently generate kinetic models that accu­
rately reflect the dynamic behaviors of biochemical networks, ensuring they are both bio­
logically relevant and experimentally valid.
The core concept of the RENAISSANCE workflow is based on Natural Evolution Strate­
gies (NES), a family of optimization algorithms that iteratively refine candidate solutions
through principles akin to natural evolution. The process begins (Figure 2.4) with an ini­
tial population of neural network­based generators, each initialized with random weights.
These generators produce kinetic parameters that are used to parameterize kinetic mod­
els of metabolic networks. Each generated kinetic model is evaluated for its dynamic
properties, specifically through the largest eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix, which indi­
cates the system’s stability. Through successive iterations, the population of generators
evolves to produce kinetic models that better fit the desired dynamic properties.
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.4: Overview of the RENAISSANCE framework, image adopted from Choudhury et al.[1]
(a) Conceptual representation of the steps of Natural Evolutionary Strategy (NES), an optimization
algorithm used in RENAISSANCE. (b) Context­specific structural properties of metabolic networks
are established and incorporated into the model. (c) Once the model structure is fixed, available
omics data are integrated into the model. (d) Generators for parameterizing biologically relevant
(valid) kinetic models are optimized iteratively in four steps: (I) A population of generators is ran­
domly initialized. (II) Generators produce parameters needed to parameterize kinetic models. (III)
The fitness of the kinetic models is assessed based on the largest eigenvalues of the Jacobian
corresponding to the dominant time constants of the model responses. The generator is assigned
a score based on this performance. (IV) The rewards for each generator are fed back to NES to
find the best­performing generator. The best­performing generator is then perturbed to obtain the
next generation of generators, repeating the process.
14
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:23==
3
Methods
This chapter presents a new method for enhancing kinetic models of E. coli to match
fermentation data more accurately by leveraging the RENAISSANCE framework. Kinetic
modelling is crucial for understanding how metabolic phenotypes can explain observable
physiological properties such as the concentrations of chemical compounds secreted or
absorbed by a cell population during fermentation. As kinetic models capture detailed cell
dynamics in a time­dependent manner, accurately modeling these properties can open
great potential in discovering complex cellular mechanisms and facilitating strain design
analysis.
Despite the superior ability of kinetic models, the challenge lies in the process of making
a functional kinetic model for strain design. The goal is to parameterize models retains
biological relevancy while and at the same time, fit experimental observation data in fer­
mentation. Previously, models fitting these curves were found through random sampling
like monte­carlo based methods, a process that is computationally intensive and ineffi­
cient. In fact, in the original study of Narayanan et al.[6] using the sampling method in
ORACLE[12], only 212 out of 800,000 sampled models fit the experimental data, which
has a low efficiency. To address this, we aim to modify the optimization objective within
the RENAISSANCE framework to directly produce models that align with experimental
fermentation titers more efficiently.
3.1
Setting up Kinetic Models
To make the modified workflow, we describe the setup process for our kinetic model
and the experimental data. This involves five different key steps, including making the
metabolic model’s structure, the steady­state profiles used as inputs, the experimental
data sources, the model representation and the bioreactor simulation setup. To carry out
these steps we proceeded as follows:
1. Metabolic Model Structure: We used the W3110 trpD9223 E. coli, an anthranilate
production strain, as our model for studying. The kinetic model of this strain is adopted
from the model presented in Narayanan et al. [6], which consists of 196 reactions and
159 metabolites in two compartments. The model was curated through lumpGEM [50]
and redGEM [51] using an E.coli meatabolic model, and the reaction stoichiometry in­
cluded the type of reaction kinetics. Most of the regulutory information came from an
earlier kinetic modeling study [24], with additional focus on anthranilate related pathway.
The model can be found at: https://github.com/EPFL­LCSB/NOMAD/tree/master/study­
1­K_trpD9923/model
2. Kinetic Model Representation and RENAISSANCE Setup: The kinetic model is
loaded through the SKiMpy Toolbox and transformed into system of ODEs [49] using the
defined model structure and kinetic mechanisms. The primary reaction mechanisms in the
kinetic model are Reversible Michaelis Menten, Generalized Reversible Hill and Conve­
nience kinetics. SKiMpy allows the incorporation of various regulatory mechanisms such
as allosteric reugation, competitive, uncompetitive, and mixed inhibition, as well as activa­
tion, by adding appropriate regulatory parameters. All the reactions are parameterized by
a total of 1042 kinetic parameters including 106 regulatory kinetic parameters. The RE­
NAISSANCE framework is loaded from a docker image, which includes the SKiMpy tool­
box and the workflow for RENAISSANCE: https://github.com/EPFL­LCSB/RENAISSANCE
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
15
==PAGE:24==
3. Steady State profiles: The input used for RENAISSANCE, also adopted from Narayanan
et al. [6], was derived from computationally generated steady­state profiles produced
using pyTFA [22]. These profiles encompass approximately 5000 samples, each con­
taining crucial variables such as metabolite concentrations, metabolic fluxes, standard
Gibb’s free energy for all reactions, and thermodynamic displacement for all reactions.
The dataset assures that the generated models adhere to thermodynamic constraints
and align with observed experimental data, providing a realistic and robust starting point
for kinetic parameter estimation. The profiles can be found at: https://github.com/EPFL­
LCSB/NOMAD/tree/master/study­1­K_trpD9923/data
4. Experimental Data: The experimental data in this study comes from Balderas­Hernandez
et al. [52] and the calibration scale comes from Narayanan et al. [6]. This data includes
temporal profiles of key species such as biomass, glucose, and anthranilate during batch
fermentation. This data was used to calibrate and validate the kinetic models to ensure
they accurately reflect the experimental observations. The dataset was chosen because
it provides detailed temporal profiles that are crucial for capturing the dynamic behav­
ior of the system under real fermentation conditions, thereby enhancing the accuracy of
the kinetic models. The experimental data can be found here: https://github.com/EPFL­
LCSB/NOMAD/tree/master/study­1­K_trpD9923/data
5. Bioreactor Simulation: The bioreactor simulations were conducted using the SKiMpy
Toolbox [49]. The setup involved configuring the bioreactor environment to replicate the
experimental batch fermentation conditions. This included setting parameters such as
temperature, pH, and nutrient availability to match those used in the experimental studies,
these information is available in Balderas­Hernandez et al. [52] and Narayanan et al. [6]
The simulations tracked the temporal evolution of key metabolites, allowing us to compare
the predicted data against the experimental results for validation purposes. The bioeractor
setup can be found here: https://github.com/EPFL­LCSB/NOMAD/blob/master/study­1­
K_trpD9923/scripts/single_species.yaml
3.2
Modified Workflow for RENAISSANCE
Now the kinetic model is set up for our new workflow. To address the problem of low
efficiency in generating valid kinetic models, we modified the RENAISSANCE framework’s
optimization objective.
In the original RENAISSANCE workflow, the objective of the optimization focuses on max­
imizing the incidence of valid models, that is, generating as many models as possible that
satisfy biologically relevant linearized dynamics properties.[1] In our modified workflow,
the optimization goal was shifted to directly fitting experimental fermentation titers.
The modified workflow uses bioreactor simulations as a direct feedback for RENAIS­
SANCE. The population is generated the same way as in the original RENAISSANCE
workflow 2.4.2, and each generator generates a set of kinetic parameters that will be
used for making kinetic models. Each generated kinetic model is first evaluated based on
the linearized dynamics, and the biologcially relevant models are put through the bioreac­
tor simulation. Since the experimental data include the biomass, anthranilate production,
and glucose uptake, we use the error between simulation and experiment for the whole
time period for evaluation. The loss is calculated as the normalized root mean square
error (L2 norm), and the loss is converted into rewards through a weighted reward func­
tion for each objective. The reward function employs a scaled exponential decay function
which gives a value from 0 to 1, with 1 indicating a total fit of the experimental value. With
three objectives in this study, the highest model reward is 3, indicating a total fit for all
16
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.1: The process of creating generators for kinetic parameters using the modified RENAIS­
SANCE workflow involves six main steps: 1) Generate a set of generators. 2) Generate a fixed
number of kinetic parameter sets for making kinetic models. Equip the kinetic parameters to each
model. 3) Perform bioreactor simulation for each parameterized kinetic model and compare simu­
lated values of several objective quantities with observed values. 4) Evaluate the simulation result
based on normalized root mean square error (NRMSE) for each experimental objective (biomass,
anthranilate, and glucose in this study) and calculate a model reward. Rank the model rewards
from highest to lowest, and sum the top percentile of the model rewards for each generator. 5)
Collect all generator rewards to prepare for the final iteration reward. This will form a localized re­
ward landscape that determines the gradient direction 6) Use the final reward for the next iteration.
The final generator will be saved at this step, which can be used to generate more models.
three objectives. The kinetic model rewards are then ranked, and the top percentile of
model rewards are selected to form a generator reward. It’s rare to encounter a kinetic
model that satisfies our criteria, so keep the best portion of models for each generator is
critical for an informative reward. Once the whole population of generator rewards has
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
17
==PAGE:26==
been collected, the final reward is used for estimating the gradient step. The optimiza­
tion utilizes Natural Evolution Strategies to iteratively improve the model parameters. The
whole workflow is illustrated in Figure 3.1
3.2.1
Modified Algorithm
As described above, the modified algorithm focuses on using the bioreactor simulation as
the most important information for optimization. At the center of this modified workflow is
the reward function and its associated hyperparameters. The next two sections provide
a detailed description of this algorithm and its hyperparameters.
Overview
The neural network architecture and evolutionary strategy part of the original RENAIS­
SANCE workflow is preserved. In each iteration, a population of generators will be gener­
ated and a set of kinetic parameter samples are equipped in kinetic models. The kinetic
models are evaluated based on their linearlized dynamics to ensure system stability and
biological relevancy. However, the original RENAISSANCE reward is not used, the sta­
ble models will be sent for bioreactor simulation, and the simulation result for each kinetic
model will be evaluated using a new designed reward function. The above process is vi­
sualized in Figure 3.1(1­3). The design of the reward function can be found in in the next
section. After the rewards for each generator is calculated, the population of generator
will give a reward landscape which will be used for gradient step estimation. This gradient
will show a direction for the next iteration.
Reward Function
This section describes the process shown in Figure 3.1(4­5). The reward calculation in
the redesigned RENAISSANCE workflow is a multi­step process aimed at evaluating and
optimizing kinetic models based on their fit to experimental fermentation data. The first
step involves calculating the Normalized Root Mean Square Error (NRMSE) to measure
the difference between simulated bioreactor results and experimental values. Since each
objective has different ranges, NRMSE can fairly compare different objective value, the
design rationale can be found in Appendix A.2. The NRMSE for each objective and sam­
ple point is computed using the formula:
NRMSEij =
√
1
n
∑n
k=1(Sijk −Oik)2
max(Oi) −min(Oi)
where Oik is the experimental value for ith objective (biomass, anthranilate and glucose in
this study) at kth time point in experiment. Sijk is the simulated value for ith objective, jth
kinetic model at kth time point. The NRMSE is calculated for all points in the experiment,
but it can be tuned for certain points.
Next, the objective reward for each kinetic model is determined using an exponential
decay function, which rescales the NRMSE into a value between 0 and 1:
rij = e−σi·NRMSEij
Here, rij is the objective reward for ith objective and jth kinetic model. σi represents the
steepness parameter for each objective. The steepness can be used to tune the difficulty
for achieving an objective. For example, the main challenge for the optimization process
is to find a model capable of producing high concentration of anthranilate. Thus, we give
a lower steepness to anthranilate so the model can improve more easily.
18
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:27==
The bioreactor reward is then calculated as a weighted sum of the individual objective
rewards, allowing for the prioritization of specific objectives:
Rj =
m
∑
i=1
ωi · rij
where m is the total number of objectives and ωi is the weight for each objective. The
difference between weight and steepness is that weight focuses on the importance of each
objective, where steepness cares more about how easy an objective can be achieved.
Finally, the overall generator reward is derived by summing the top c­percentile of the total
bioreactor rewards for all samples associated with a generator. This is expressed as:
Rtop =
∑
top c% of {R1, R2, . . . , R|S|}
where |S| is the total number of samples, and c is the selected percentile. Although the
selected percentile doesn’t represent the overall capability of a generator, this hierarchical
reward structure ensures that only the most accurate and relevant kinetic models are
prioritized, leading to high incidence rate of a valid model.
3.2.2
Hyperparameters
Hyperparameters are critical for optimizing the model’s performance to align with ex­
perimental fermentation data. These settings govern the behavior of the optimization
algorithm and must be carefully tuned to balance exploration and exploitation, ensur­
ing efficient convergence to an optimal solution that accurately reflects the experimental
curves. The modified workflow includes four types of hyperparameter: the original RE­
NAISSANCE parameters, bioreactor simulation parameters, reward function parameters,
and computational constraints.
Renaissance Hyperparameters
The following set of hyperparameters comes from RENAISSANCE, and the Figure 3.3
visually describes the effect of changing each parameters.
• Iteration (I): The number of iterations to run. Increasing iterations leads to better
fitting of the generator but takes longer to run.
• Population (P): A set of generators for each iteration. A larger population size
allows more thorough exploration but increases computational time.
• Generator Setup (G): A generative neural network with specified layers and num­
ber of neurons. More layers and neurons hold more information, leading to better
fitting but are more computationally intensive.
• Samples (S): A set of generated parameters for each generator. A larger sample
size results in a more thorough evaluation of the generator’s performance, though
it is more computationally intensive.
• Search Radius (β): The local radius for generating new neural network generators.
A larger search radius with a small population size can cause inadequate explo­
ration, leading to optimization failure.
• Learning Rate (α): The step size of gradient ascent for each iteration. Too low a
learning rate slows the process, while too high a rate can miss global optimums.
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.2: Overview of the hyperparameters of RENAISSANCE, image adapted from Subham et
al.[1]: (a) Overview of Natural Evolution Strategies. (b) Effect of increasing population size (P).
(c) Effect of search radius (β). (d) Effect of learning rate (α). (e) Effect of learning rate decay (d)
on the optimization process. (f) Effect of constraining the range of kinetic parameters (K′). (g)
Effect of the target range of dynamics on the fitness landscape.
• Learning Rate Decay (d): The rate at which the learning speed decays per iteration.
Too fast a decay slows optimization prematurely, while too slow a decay may skip
desired optimums.
• Linearized Dynamics Cutoff (λmax): As explained in the section 2.3.1Ensures a
model is able to converge for bioreactor simulation and remains biologically relevant.
More negative values mean the model will converge faster, which is set at ­1.5 in
our experiment.
• Latent Space Dimension (N): The dimension of the input features for each gener­
ator, it is fixed at 99 dimensions. The input is generated using a normal distribution.
More input features meaning more randomness is introduced to the neural network.
• Range of Kinetic Parameters (K′): Fixed bounds for generated kinetic parameters,
sourced from the BRENDA database, ranging from e−26 to e4.
20
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.3: The illustration of the hyperparameters for the reward function, bioreactor simulation
and computation.
Reward Function Hyperparameters
The reward function consists of three important hyperparameters, steepness, weights
and top percentage models considered. The process of testing and determining the final
reward function can be found in Appendix A.2.
• Steepness (σ): Controls the scaling factor in the objective reward function (expo­
nential decay). Higher values make it harder to achieve high rewards unless the
simulated value closely matches the experimental objective.
• Weights (ω): Determine the importance of each objective. The sum of weights is 1,
with higher weights indicating more prioritized objectives.
• Top Percentage Models Considered (c): The top percentage of rewards consid­
ered from samples of each generator. A higher percentage means the generator
reward is more representative, but the best models’ advantage may not be as visi­
ble in the final generator reward.
Bioreactor Simulation Hyperparameters
The following hyperparameters are responsible for controlling the definition of valid mod­
els and the simulation time. In this study, a valid model is defined as a simulation re­
sponse of a kinetic model satisfies all the objectives in the valid model range. The final
titer is used as the objective. Not all models will complete the full simulation in a quick
time, thus, the simulation is controlled by the maximum simulation time, which will also
affect the computational time of the full algorithm.
• Final Titer Objective (Ofinal): The final titers of the fermentation experiment, based
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
21
==PAGE:30==
on data from Balderas et al [52], the values are calibrated based on scaling factors
from Narayanan et al.[6]
• Valid Models Range (θ): The acceptable range of values relative to the objective
for a model to be considered valid (±15% in this study). Only models satisfying all
objectives are considered valid.
• Maximum Simulation Time (t): The maximum time for bioreactor simulation, and
it is set to 60 seconds in this study. Simulations running longer than 60 seconds
are terminated for computational efficiency and are not considered in reward calcu­
lations.
Computation Hyperparameters
Different computers will affect the computational time, so it’s important to have a baseline
with the given setup.
• Computer: The computer on which the experiment is performed. This study used
two computers with different CPU processors and memory, detailed in the Appendix
A.1.
• Threads: The number of threads used in the experiment for simulation (120 threads
unless otherwise mentioned). More threads reduce computational time by speeding
up neural network computations and parallelizing ODE simulations.
3.3
Hyperparameter Tuning
To ensure the modified workflow can have the best result, we tested different set of hy­
perparameters to derive the baseline case. We divided the hyperparameter testing into
four experiments, and all of the experimental results are detailed in Appendix A.3. After
running these experiments, we found the following set of hyperparameters that becomes
our baseline.
3.3.1
Baseline Case
After demonstrating the details of the modified algorithm and experiments with hyperpa­
rameter tuning, and the following parameters were used as a reference point for evaluating
algorithm performance.
• Iterations: I = 30
• Population: P = 50
• Samples: S = 100
• Linearized Dynamics Cutoff: λ = −1.5
• Latent Space Dimension: N = 99
• Learning Rate: α = 10−3
• Learning Rate Decay: d = 0.05
• Search Radius: σ = 10−2
• Neural Network Layers: L = 3(256, 128, 512)
• Weights: ω = [0.1, 0.7, 0.2] for Biomass, Anthranilate and Glucose
• Steepness: σ = [7, 2, 2] for Biomass, Anthranilate and Glucose
• Top Model Rewards Percentile: c = 10%
22
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:31==
• Final Titer Objectives: Biomass (1.34 g), Anthranilate (0.31 g/L), and Glucose
(1.29 g/L)
• Valid Model Range: ±15%
3.3.2
Validation Criteria
Valid Model
Validity of a model is judged based on their response relative to the final titers of key ob­
jectives, namely biomass, anthranilate, and glucose. Specifically, a model is considered
as valid if the simulated final titers for these objectives fall within ±15% of the experimental
final titers. Futhermore, models that fail to produce results within the maximum simulation
time are excluded from consideration, as they do not provide conclusive final titers.
Training Performance Analysis
To select the best performing run, we evaluate the highest number of valid models gen­
erated by a generator across all iterations.
Generator Performance Evaluation
We use the maximum percentage of valid models per 1000 samples per generator as the
final measure.
3.4
Result Analysis
After hyperparameter testing, we validated the training outcomes to identify which gener­
ator generates the highest percentage of valid models. Through the optimal generator,
we explored the latent space to uncover critical information contributing to its success.
The methodology is presented in Figure 3.4. Finally, we developed a methodology to en­
hance model performance based on the valid models obtained, as shown in Figure 3.5.
The result of these will be shown in the next chapter.
3.5
Computational Constraints
The computational aspects of this modified workflow includ es the specifications of the
computer used, the key software that supported this work, and the computational time
required to run the algorithm. The detailed setup is explained in Appendix A.1
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.4: Methodology for model enrichment through perturbation in latent space. (1) Identify
Key Features: Perturb all input features of the original model and use the generator to create
kinetic parameter sets. These sets are simulated, and the resulting titers are analyzed to rank
important features based on their impact. (2) Grid Search in Top 2 Input Features: Perform a grid
search on the top two identified features, and find the best model in the local region. (3) Identify
Most Important Kinetic Parameters: Perturb the most important kinetic parameters identified from
the previous steps. The improved models are compared to the original models to assess the
performance enhancement.
Figure 3.5: Methodology for improving invalid models through identifying the most different ki­
netic parameters. Starting with large kinetic parameter sets, simulations are run to observe titer
responses. Kinetic parameters are partitioned into valid and invalid sets, and the most different
parameters are identified. Substituting these key parameters from valid models into invalid models
results in improved models that better align with experimental data.
24
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:33==
4
Results
In this chapter, we present the outcomes of our modified workflow, emphasizing the statis­
tics from the training process and generators. Our initial training result suggests 13%
valid models is achieved in the baseline case. We then explore the statistical differences
among three representative generators and highlight the valid models produced by the
best performing generator. Finally, we propose three different strategies for enhancing
model performance through latent space perturbation and kinetic parameter differences,
demonstrating their potential for further improving the accuracy of the generated models.
4.1
Preliminary Result of the Training Process
Figure 4.1: The training process of the run that generated the highest percentage of valid models.
(a) The final titer responses from three objectives (biomass, anthranilate and glucose) of the best
models from each iteration. The mean (red lines) and median (orange lines) of the predicted final
titers are shown with the final titer samples (green dots), valid model range (orange shaded area)
and the experimental values (black dashed lines). (b) The distribution of the final titers of best
generator for biomass, anthranilate, and glucose across iterations. (c) The number of valid models
achieved from each generator in the population for each iteration, with darker colors indicating a
higher number of valid models.
From the baseline experiment, one run with a population size (P) of 50, sample size (S) of
100, and 30 iterations (I) of the modified algorithm resulted in 13% of valid models, that
is, achieving all three objectives (biomass, glucose and anthranilte) within ±15% of the
experimental titers. The results, summarized in Figure 4.1(a), show that the mean (red
lines) and median (orange lines) of the predicted final titers approached the experimen­
tal range over iterations of the generators, indicating that the optimization was moving
towards the objective.
Figure 4.1(b) shows the distribution of the final titers from every 5 iterations for biomass,
anthranilate, and glucose, highlighting that achieving the anthranilate final titer is more
challenging compared to the other two objectives. It is also clear that two peaks shows
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
25
==PAGE:34==
up in the glucose objective, suggests the optimization process is able to utilize the re­
ward well. Figure 4.1(c) summarizes the generator performance across all iterations.
The darker color indicates a higher number of valid models achieved by each generator,
demonstrating that after 9­12 iterations, the population of generators improves signifi­
cantly in prediction accuracy, with the best individuals appearing after the 20th iteration.
Figure 4.2: The responses of three objectives (biomass, anthranilate, and glucose) for iterations
1, 15, and 30 with 100 random sample models, with valid model responses (red lines) and invalid
model responses (grey lines). The valid model percentage increased from 0% in iteration 1 to 3%
in iteration 15 and 13% in iteration 30. Remind that only models that satisfies all three final titers
in the valid range are colored in red lines.
In Figure 4.2, we rerun the final generators from each iteration with 100 samples, and
shows the simulation response from generation 1, 15 and 30. The modified workflow
effectively converges towards generating valid models, demonstrating its potential for re­
fining kinetic models to fit experimental data.
4.2
Generator Comparisons
Generator
Valid Models (%)
of 100 Samples
Valid Models (%)
of 1000 Samples
Valid Models (%)
of 5000 Samples
1
4
3.9
3.10
2
3
4.2
3.50
3
10
4.6
5.22
Table 4.1: Percentage of true valid models generated by three best performing generators from
hyperparameter experiments for 100, 100, and 5000 randomly sampled kinetic parameter sets.
Here, we compare the best performing generators from three hyperparameter tuning ex­
periments, and the highest percentage of valid models on average across different sample
size, as shown in 4.1. With more samples, the valid model percentage is generally de­
ceased. Generator 3 generates the highest number of valid models, thus we choose it as
the reference generator for later studies.
With the three generators, we want to show the difference among valid models using t­
26
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:35==
SNE as shown in Figure 4.3. It is apparent that the generators explored different regions
of the solution space, leading to three distinctive clusters of kinetic model populations.
This disconnection might due to insufficient exploration in the vast space of valid kinetic
models with our limited training window. This is not surprising given the large number of
parameters and the non­linear complexity native to the model structure.
Figure 4.3: This plot compares three best generators from training with 5000 random samples
using t­SNE with two components. The samples of generator is labeled in a different color and
the valid samples of each generator are highlighted in ’x’.
4.3
Statistical Analysis of the Selected Generator
This section explores in detail the results from the selected generator 3 from last sec­
tion. We generate 10,000 models from random sampling, of which 532 are valid models.
Analyzing the response curves of the three objectives reveal that this trained generator
provides an excellent fit to the experimental values, as shown in Figure 4.4(a). Further
analysis using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) in Figure 4.4(b) suggests that valid
solutions are distributed throughout the entire space, and no cluster of valid model can
be found. Figure 4.4(c) shows the distances among valid and invalid models and their
distances relative to the centroid of valid models. The distributions of valid and invalid
models are quite similar, indicating that the solution space for valid models is sparsely
populated and have very similar structure. These findings suggest that while valid mod­
els are achievable, they occupy a sparse and dispersed region in the solution space.
4.4
Model Enrichment through Perturbation
In order to better understand the mechanisms of this generator and improve model per­
formance, we explore the mappings from input features to generated kinetic parameters
and bioreactor simulations. It is important to discover the type of information stored in
the neural network and to determine the potential for improving kinetic models using this
knowledge.
4.4.1
Reference Model for Study
We start with generating 1000 kinetic models from random inputs, performed bioreactor
simulation on all generated kinetic parameter sets, and identified 58 models that satisfies
all three objectives, see Figure 4.5(a).
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.4: Performance of the generator 3 from the best training run with 10,000 randomly gener­
ated models. (a) Dynamic response of the three objectives (biomass, anthranilate, and glucose),
showing 532 valid models that meet the requirements. Valid model responses are shown in red,
invalid model responses in grey, with experimental data points as black dots. (b) Principal Com­
ponent Analysis (PCA) of the generated kinetic parameters for all models, with valid models (red)
and invalid models (grey) represented as dots. The valid models are diverse in terms of param­
eters. (c) Distribution of distances between valid (red) and invalid (grey) models relative to the
centroid of valid models (0 on x­axis), highlighting the similarity of the two distributions.
To select a few models for further study, we want to find the furthest and closest models in
all valid models. In Figure 4.5(b), we show the euclidean distance among all valid models
and ranked from furthest to closest, with the highlight of the 5 valid models in both fur­
thest and closest. We also visualize their relative position in t­SNE in Figure 4.5(c), and
the highlight indices of furthest models (red) and closest models (blue) shows their rela­
tive location. We can see that the furthest models are away from the valid model centroid
compare to the closest models. Bear in mind that t­SNE is an algorithm that conveniently
visualizes high­dimensional samples in their relative positions, thus the absolute distance
is not meaningful, as suggested in Chapter 2.3.3. In Figure 4.5(d), a heatmap shows the
furthest and closest models in their kinetic parameter space, showing differences in fur­
thest models but also distinctions in the closest models, which confirms that the generator
can produce diverse models across the range of valid models.
We select model 22 in the valid model as a representative to do further perturbation stud­
ies. Given the 99­dimensional input features in latent space, it is essential to determine
which dimensions significantly impact the objectives. Each input feature is perturbed by
±10% and ±50%, and the resulting percentage changes in all three final titers are ana­
lyzed, as shown in Figure 4.6. The importance of each feature is ranked using a random
forest classification, revealing feature 63 and 90 as the most significant.
28
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.5: (a) Dynamic responses of biomass, anthranilate, and glucose for 1,000 models gen­
erated from the best generator, with 58 models within the valid range. Valid model responses are
shown in red and invalid model responses in grey, with experimental data points as black dots.
(b) Pairwise Euclidean distances of valid models are ranked and visualized. The size and color of
each dot represent the Euclidean distance between two valid models marked on the x and y­axis.
The furthest 5 models (6, 22, 31, 25, and 32) and the closest 5 models (57, 4, 36, 20, and 28) are
highlighted. (c) t­SNE plot showing the relative position of valid models compared to invalid ones,
with the closest and furthest models highlighted. (d) Heatmap showing the rescaled values of
the generated kinetic parameters for the selected closest and furthest models. The rescaling was
done using a fit transform where each kinetic parameter of all models was scaled by a standard
normal distribution.
4.4.2
Perturbation of Important Features
The two input features (63 and 90) are perturbed from ­100% and +100% by a step of
10%, , and measure the error between simulated and experimental final titers. As shown
in Figure 4.7 a), the gradient suggests that the current model has a high final titer for
biomass and low final titer for anthranilate and glucose at the original model settings (0%
for feature 63 and 0% for feature 90). By varying feature 63 by ­90% and feature 90 by
+30%, the simulated value is minimized across the perturbation landscape. To highlight
the best model after perturbation, the total error of all three objectives are visualized in
Figure 4.7 b). Figure 4.7 c) also shows the response improvement in anthranilate from
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.6: Differential objective responses in percentage to feature perturbation for model 22 from
the last run. Each input feature was perturbed by ­50%, ­10%, 10%, and 50%. The differential
responses are used to rank the importance of each feature, shown on the X­axis. Features are
sorted from most important to least important based on their impact on the final titers of biomass,
anthranilate, and glucose.
original model (black curve) to the best perturbed model (green curve).
To identify which kinetic parameters are most responsible for the simulation improvement,
each individual kinetic parameter is changed from original to the best perturbed value. The
kinetic parameter change is ranked by the total change in final titers compare to the original
model. In Figure 4.7 d), top 10 kinetic parameter parameters are ranked, revealing that
reactions NADPH16pp and ATPS4rpp are the most important, with the kinetic parameters
of Ubiquinone­8, ATP, and phosphate being the three most critical values affecting the
kinetic model performance.
4.4.3
Important kinetic parameters Perturbation
From the feature space perturbation results, we identified two kinetic parameters crucial
for model improvement. So here we are perturbing the top two kinetic parameters from
Figure 4.7 d) directly to see which perturbation is more effective. The same type of per­
turbation for feature space is applied to the kinetic parameter space directly. In Figure
4.8(a), we perturb the kinetic parameter values of NADH16pp q8_c and ATPS4rpp atp_c
by ±20% with 1% step, and the percentage error between the experimental and simulated
values is shown. The total error plot in Figure 4.8(b), shows that from the original model
(black box) to the best perturbed model (orange box), the kinetic parameter of NADH16pp
q8_c needs to be decreased by 10% and the kinetic parameter of ATPS4rpp atp_c by 2%.
The response of the perturbed model is shown in Figure 4.8(c), where a better fit for all
three objectives can be observed.
We then compare the difference between the original model and the two perturbed models–
one in feature space and one in kinetic parameter space. In the feature space, kinetic pa­
rameter of NADH16ppp/q8_c is deceased for a better fit, where the optimal kinetic param­
eter perturbation shows the opposite. Although the kinetic parameter of ATPS4rpp/atp_c
is decreased in both perturbed models, the extent of the decrease varies, indicating that
30
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.7: Effect of perturbing key features (63 and 90) on model improvement. (a) Percentage
error between simulated and experimental final titers for biomass, anthranilate, and glucose across
the perturbation space. Highlighted colored hue regions indicate the valid model, while shaded
areas represent models with at least one final titer out of range. The original model is highlighted in
a black box, and the most optimal perturbed model is in a green box. (b) Sum of errors for all three
objectives across the perturbation space, with the model having the lowest total error highlighted
in a green box. (c) Changes in the response curves for biomass, anthranilate, and glucose from
the original model (black line) to the best­perturbed model (green line). Experimental data points
are shown as black dots with error bars. (d) Top 10 kinetic parameter parameters responsible
for the most significant improvements in the sume of objective outcomes, with a ranking focus on
the change in the final titer of anthranilate. Changes in final titers for biomass, anthranilate, and
glucose are shown in relation to these key kinetic parameter parameters.
the input feature of latent space may encode additional information about the kinetic pa­
rameter space.
As shown above, kinetic parameter perturbation provides a direct way to improve model.
However, considering the size of kinetic parameter space and the complexity of nonlinear
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.8: Perturbation of the most important two kinetic parameters (kinetic parameter of
NADH16pp: q8_c and kinetic parameter of ATPSrpp: atp_c) identified in the previous section
(Figure 4.8).(a) Heatmaps showing the error in final titer predictions relative to experimental val­
ues for biomass (left), anthranilate (middle), and glucose (right) as a function of perturbed kinetic
parameter values for NADH16pp (q8_c) and ATPSrpp (atp_c). Color ranges from green to red in­
dicate negative to positive errors, respectively. Perturbed valid models are shown in darker colors,
perturbed invalid models in lighter colors, with the original model in black and the best perturbed
model in orange.(b) Heatmap representing the overall simulation error for the combined objectives
across all perturbed models. Color ranges from yellow (lower error) to black (higher error). The
best perturbed model is highlighted in orange, and the original model in black.(c) Time­dependent
response curves for biomass (top), anthranilate (middle), and glucose (bottom). The original model
response is shown in black, and the best perturbed model response in orange, with experimental
data points as black dots and error bars representing standard deviations.(d) Bar graph compar­
ing the kinetic parameter values of NADH16pp (q8_c) and ATPSrpp (atp_c) for the original valid
model (black), the best perturbed model in feature space (orange), and the best perturbed model
in kinetic parameter space (green).
32
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:41==
dynamics in ODE simulation, it’s hard to find out which kinetic parameter was the most
important one. It’s possible that input features provide higher level relationships between
different kinetic parameters through encoded neural networks, which can capture more
complex information that is not directly available from the individual kinetic parameter.
4.5
Invalid Model Improvement
Instead of choosing valid models in the first place, we’d also like to improve invalid models
in a rational way. By using the Kolmogorov­Smirnov test, we can find out the difference
in distributions of kinetic parameter in valid model and invalid models. The difference of
kinetic parameter in distributions explains why a model is valid, we can use this information
to improve an invalid model. In this experiment, we observe that the top 20 different kinetic
parameters showed a distinct centroid in the high­dimensional space, as shown in the t­
SNE plot in Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: This t­SNE plot shows the distribution of the top 20 most different kinetic parameter
parameters between valid and invalid models. The samples are generated from Section 4.3. Valid
models are indicated in red, and invalid models are in grey. The centroids of valid and invalid
models are marked with red and grey squares, respectively. Histograms on the top and right
represent the frequency distribution of t­SNE coordinates for valid and invalid models.
We randomly sample 100 invalid models from Section 4.3 and their response is plotted in
Figure 4.10. Then we change the top 20 most different kinetic parameters from the original
to the mean of kinetic parameters in the valid models, and run bioreactor simulation using
the new models. After the change, 13% of the models become valid, and, as shown in
Figure 4.10. The distribution of the final titers improved in all three objectives with the most
improvement in anthranilate. This means that using the high dimensional information
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
33
==PAGE:42==
captured from the neural network, we can tune specific kinetic parameters to improve
kinetic model into a valid range.
Figure 4.10: This plot shows the improvement of 100 randomly selected invalid models after
changing the top 20 most different kinetic parameter parameters. The ”Before” plots (left) show the
response curves of biomass, anthranilate, and glucose for invalid models. The ”After” plots (cen­
ter) show the improved responses (red) after adjusting the kinetic parameter parameters. The
”Before vs. After” histograms (right) compare the distribution of final titers before and after the
changes.
4.6
Summary
In this chapter, we summarized the best training process, demonstrating that the modified
RENAISSANCE workflow effectively captures the dynamic responses of the kinetic model
and integrates them into a neural network. We explore three generators from the top
training runs, discovering that the models they produce are distinct, indicating that the
evolutionary algorithms searched different solution spaces. Using the best generator, we
found that the valid kinetic models are diverse and distinct. We further investigate the
mechanism of the generator by perturbing input features in the latent space, which led to
the identification of important kinetic parameter parameters. By comparing perturbations
in feature space and kinetic parameter space, we observed differences in their impacts
on the model. Finally, we used the insights gained from identifying top 20 distinct kinetic
parameters to improve invalid models.
34
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:43==
5
Discussion and Conclusion
5.1
Effectiveness of the Modified Workflow
In this thesis, we developed a novel method that enhances the power of RENAISSANCE
for effectively parameterizing kinetic models. The modified workflow is able to integrate
bioreactor experimental data into the RENAISSANCE for accurate kinetic model gener­
ation. Our algorithm demonstrate the ability to generate around 10% valid models in
30 iterations under the baseline case, indicating the high flexibility and usability of the
modified RENAISSANCE workflow.
Despite the valid model incidence rate not being particularly high, the training process
executed over 24­26 hours is significantly faster compared to the ORACLE method[12].
To put it into perspective, the modified RENAISSANCE workflow can generate 1 million
models in 20 seconds, yielding approximately 100,000 valid models that satisfy fermen­
tation experiments. This efficiency is about 25 times higher than the random sampling in
ORACLE, which required 36­48 hours for training and had a validity rate of around 0.4%
among 800,000 sampled parameters in the same time.[1] These findings highlight the new
method’s advantage in model generation speed and efficiency over traditional methods.
Metric
Modified
RENAIS­
SANCE workflow
ORACLE [1]
Training Time
24­26 hours
36­48 hours
Valid Model Yield per 1 Million
Generated Samples
100,000 (10%)
4,000 (0.4%)
Efficiency (Valid Models per
Second)
4000­5000
60­90
Table 5.1: Comparison of modified RENAISSANCE workflow and ORACLE performance in gen­
erating valid kinetic models.
5.2
Generate Diverse and Accurate Kinetic Models
In Section 4.3, we compared different generators and found that each generator explored
vastly different solution spaces and generate a diverse range of valid models. The valid
model solution space seemed to be very scattered and sparsely located. This diversity
allows researchers greater flexibility to fine­tune models.
This also means that the training process can be improved to search for a larger region,
and have more complex generator that’s able to record the complexity of kinetic model
responses.
5.3
Methods for Kinetic Models Fine Tuning
More importantly, we developed a perturbation method of latent space, which could re­
veal important input features of a generator and kinetic models. Continuous perturbation
enables researchers to find models that better fit experimental values. Additionally, per­
turbation results in the kinetic parameter space also yielded improved models with better
responses. This method can generalize to finding key parameters for optimization, even
with multi­objective problems, significantly shortening the time required to find the best
models.
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
35
==PAGE:44==
We also found another method for improve invalid kinetic models. By constraining im­
portant parameters, invalid models can be transformed into valid ones. The dissection of
generator’s input feature and output relationship allow us to discover the patterns in kinetic
parameter space. This not only suggests that the generator is capable of learning higher
level information about the models, but also open doors for improving RENAISSANCE
even further.
5.4
Future Perspectives
With insights from this modified workflow, exhaustive hyperparameter testing can be con­
ducted to find better generators that explore a larger range or have a higher incidence
rate. More experimental data, including deletion strains, can be incorporated into the ob­
jectives to enhance the predictability of the model. Additionally, generated valid models
need to be tested for robustness around the reference steady state by conducting per­
turbation experiments before they can be confidently applied to strain design strategies.
Expanding the impact of this modified workflow requires applying it to other steady­state
samples and potential kinetic models to verify its capability.
5.5
Conclusion
The promise of kinetic models shows great potential in synthetic biology such as strain de­
sign for biochemical and pharmaceutical production, studying the mechanisms of certain
diseases, and discovering interactions and regulations in biochemical pathways. How­
ever, the development of kinetic models is still hindered by the usability of experimental
data, effective methods for model integration, and better parameterization techniques. In
this research, we proposed a modified RENAISSANCE workflow that represents an ad­
vancement in kinetic model development. By addressing key challenges and enhancing
the efficiency and accessibility of the parameterization process, this workflow has the po­
tential to transform the field and democratize the use of kinetic models, making them a
valuable tool for researchers and industries worldwide.
36
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
Subham Choudhury et al. “Generative machine learning produces kinetic models
that accurately characterize intracellular metabolic states”. In: bioRxiv (Apr. 2024),
p. 2023.02.21.529387. eprint: 2023.02.21.529387. URL: https://doi.org/10.1101/
2023.02.21.529387.
[2]
George M. Church et al. “Realizing the potential of synthetic biology”. In: Nat. Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol. 15.4 (Apr. 2014), p. 289. DOI: 10.1038/nrm3767.
[3]
Nian Liu and Gregory Stephanopoulos. “Metabolic Engineering Perspectives”. In:
Metabolic Engineering. Weinheim, Germany: WILEY­VCH GmbH, July 2021, pp. 1–
21. ISBN: 978­3­52782346­8. DOI: 10.1002/9783527823468.ch1.
[4]
Paula Unger Avila et al. “Gene regulatory networks in disease and ageing”. In: Nat.
Rev. Nephrol. (June 2024), pp. 1–18. ISSN: 1759­507X. DOI: 10.1038/s41581-024-
00849-7.
[5]
Fei He, Ettore Murabito, and Hans V. Westerhoff. “Synthetic biology and regulatory
networks: where metabolic systems biology meets control engineering”. In: J. R.
Soc. Interface 13.117 (Apr. 2016). ISSN: 1742­5662. DOI: 10.1098/rsif.2015.1046.
[6]
Bharath Narayanan et al. “Rational strain design with minimal phenotype pertur­
bation”. In: Nat. Commun. 15.723 (Jan. 2024), pp. 1–14. ISSN: 2041­1723. DOI:
10.1038/s41467-024-44831-0.
[7]
Nathan D. Price et al. “Genome­scale microbial in silico models: the constraints­
based approach”. In: Trends Biotechnol. 21.4 (Apr. 2003), pp. 162–169. ISSN: 0167­
7799. DOI: 10.1016/S0167-7799(03)00030-1.
[8]
Ines Thiele and Bernhard Ø. Palsson. “A protocol for generating a high­quality
genome­scale metabolic reconstruction”. In: Nat. Protoc. 5 (Jan. 2010), pp. 93–
121. ISSN: 1750­2799. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2009.203.
[9]
Ivn Domenzain et al. “Reconstruction of a catalogue of genome­scale metabolic
models with enzymatic constraints using GECKO 2.0”. In: Nat. Commun. 13.3766
(June 2022), pp. 1–13. ISSN: 2041­1723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-31421-1.
[10]
Pedro A. Saa and Lars K. Nielsen. “Formulation, construction and analysis of kinetic
models of metabolism: A review of modelling frameworks”. In: Biotechnol. Adv. 35.8
(Dec. 2017), pp. 981–1003. ISSN: 0734­9750. DOI: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2017.09.
005.
[11]
Philipp Stdter et al. “Benchmarking of numerical integration methods for ODE mod­
els of biological systems”. In: Sci. Rep. 11.2696 (Jan. 2021), pp. 1–11. ISSN: 2045­
2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-82196-2.
[12]
Anirikh Chakrabarti et al. “Towards kinetic modeling of genome­scale metabolic
networks without sacrificing stoichiometric, thermodynamic and physiological con­
straints”. In: Biotechnol. J. 8.9 (Sept. 2013), pp. 1043–1057. ISSN: 1860­6768. DOI:
10.1002/biot.201300091.
[13]
Saratram Gopalakrishnan, Satyakam Dash, and Costas Maranas. “K­FIT: An ac­
celerated kinetic parameterization algorithm using steady­state fluxomic data”. In:
Metab. Eng. 61 (Sept. 2020), pp. 197–205. ISSN: 1096­7176. DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.
2020.03.001.
[14]
Mengqi Hu, Patrick F. Suthers, and Costas D. Maranas. “KETCHUP: Parameter­
izing of large­scale kinetic models using multiple datasets with different reference
states”. In: Metab. Eng. 82 (Mar. 2024), pp. 123–133. ISSN: 1096­7176. DOI: 10.
1016/j.ymben.2024.02.002.
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
37
==PAGE:46==
[15]
Subham Choudhury et al. “Reconstructing Kinetic Models for Dynamical Studies of
Metabolism using Generative Adversarial Networks”. In: Nat. Mach. Intell. 4 (Aug.
2022), pp. 710–719. ISSN: 2522­5839. DOI: 10.1038/s42256-022-00519-y.
[16]
Teddy Groves, Nicholas Luke Cowie, and Lars Keld Nielsen. “Bayesian Regres­
sion”. In: ACS Synth. Biol. 13.4 (Apr. 2024), p. 1205. DOI: 10 . 1021 / acssynbio .
3c00662.
[17]
Christopher S. Henry, Linda J. Broadbelt, and Vassily Hatzimanikatis. “Thermodynamics­
Based Metabolic Flux Analysis”. In: Biophys. J. 92.5 (Mar. 2007), pp. 1792–1805.
ISSN: 0006­3495. DOI: 10.1529/biophysj.106.093138.
[18]
Kenneth A. Johnson and Roger S. Goody. “The Original Michaelis Constant: Trans­
lation of the 1913 Michaelis–Menten Paper”. In: Biochemistry 50.39 (Oct. 2011),
pp. 8264–8269. ISSN: 0006­2960. DOI: 10.1021/bi201284u.
[19]
Vladimir Leskovac. Comprehensive Enzyme Kinetics. Springer US, 2007. ISBN:
978­0­306­48390­5. URL: https : / / link . springer . com / book / 10 . 1007 / b100340 #
bibliographic-information.
[20]
Moritz E. Beber et al. “eQuilibrator 3.0: a database solution for thermodynamic con­
stant estimation”. In: Nucleic Acids Res. 50.D1 (Jan. 2022), pp. 603–609. ISSN:
1362­4962. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkab1106. eprint: 34850162.
[21]
Matthew D. Jankowski et al. “Group Contribution Method for Thermodynamic Anal­
ysis of Complex Metabolic Networks”. In: Biophys. J. 95.3 (Aug. 2008), pp. 1487–
1499. ISSN: 0006­3495. DOI: 10.1529/biophysj.107.124784.
[22]
Pierre Salvy et al. “pyTFA and matTFA: a Python package and a Matlab toolbox for
Thermodynamics­based Flux Analysis”. In: Bioinformatics 35.1 (Jan. 2019), pp. 167–
169. ISSN: 1367­4803. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bty499.
[23]
Kieran Smallbone et al. “A model of yeast glycolysis based on a consistent kinetic
characterisation of all its enzymes”. In: FEBS Lett. 587.17 (Sept. 2013), pp. 2832–
2841. ISSN: 1873­3468. DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.06.043. eprint: 23831062.
[24]
Ali Khodayari and Costas D. Maranas. “A genome­scale Escherichia coli kinetic
metabolic model k­ecoli457 satisfying flux data for multiple mutant strains”. In: Nat.
Commun. 7.13806 (Dec. 2016), pp. 1–12. ISSN: 2041­1723. DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13806.
[25]
Arren Bar­Even et al. “The Moderately Efficient Enzyme: Evolutionary and Physico­
chemical Trends Shaping Enzyme Parameters”. In: Biochemistry 50.21 (May 2011),
pp. 4402–4410. ISSN: 0006­2960. DOI: 10.1021/bi2002289.
[26]
B. E. Wright, M. H. Butler, and K. R. Albe. “Systems analysis of the tricarboxylic acid
cycle in Dictyostelium discoideum. I. The basis for model construction.” In: J. Biol.
Chem. 267.5 (Feb. 1992), pp. 3101–3105. ISSN: 0021­9258. DOI: 10.1016/S0021-
9258(19)50700-1.
[27]
Ryan N. Gutenkunst et al. “Universally Sloppy Parameter Sensitivities in Systems
Biology Models”. In: PLoS Comput. Biol. 3.10 (Oct. 2007), e189. ISSN: 1553­7358.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030189.
[28]
Veda Sheersh Boorla and Costas D. Maranas. “CatPred: A comprehensive frame­
work for deep learning in vitro enzyme kinetic parameters kcat, Km and Ki”. In:
bioRxiv (Mar. 2024), p. 2024.03.10.584340. eprint: 2024.03.10.584340. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1101/2024.03.10.584340.
[29]
Steven H. Strogatz. Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos:With Applications to Physics,
Biology, Chemistry, and Engineering. Andover, England, UK: Taylor & Francis, May
2019. ISBN: 978­0­42949256­3. DOI: 10.1201/9780429492563.
[30]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press,
2016. URL: https://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262035613/deep-learning.
38
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:47==
[31]
Roger Grosse. Lecture Notes. [Online; accessed 20. Jul. 2024]. Jan. 2024. URL:
http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~rgrosse/teaching.html.
[32]
Yang Liu et al. “Latent Space Cartography: Visual Analysis of Vector Space Embed­
dings”. In: Comput. Graphics Forum 38.3 (June 2019), pp. 67–78. ISSN: 0167­7055.
DOI: 10.1111/cgf.13672.
[33]
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. “Deep learning”. In: Nature 521
(May 2015), pp. 436–444. ISSN: 1476­4687. DOI: 10.1038/nature14539.
[34]
Tom B. Brown et al. “Language Models are Few­Shot Learners”. In: arXiv (May
2020). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2005.14165. eprint: 2005.14165.
[35]
Josh Abramson et al. “Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular interactions
with AlphaFold 3”. In: Nature 630 (June 2024), pp. 493–500. ISSN: 1476­4687.
DOI: 10.1038/s41586-024-07487-w.
[36]
Ian J. Goodfellow et al. “Generative Adversarial Networks”. In: arXiv (June 2014).
DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1406.2661. eprint: 1406.2661.
[37]
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. “Auto­Encoding Variational Bayes”. In: arXiv
(Dec. 2013). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1312.6114. eprint: 1312.6114.
[38]
Golnaz Ghiasi et al. “Exploring the structure of a real­time, arbitrary neural artistic
stylization network”. In: arXiv (May 2017). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1705.06830. eprint:
1705.06830.
[39]
Hui Li, Cory R. Brouwer, and Weijun Luo. “A universal deep neural network for in­
depth cleaning of single­cell RNA­Seq data”. In: Nat. Commun. 13.1901 (Apr. 2022),
pp. 1–11. ISSN: 2041­1723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-29576-y.
[40]
A. E. Eiben and J. E. Smith. Introduction to Evolutionary Computing. Berlin, Ger­
many: Springer, 2015. ISBN: 978­3­662­44874­8. URL: https://link.springer.com/
book/10.1007/978-3-662-44874-8.
[41]
Tim Salimans et al. “Evolution Strategies as a Scalable Alternative to Reinforcement
Learning”. In: arXiv (Mar. 2017). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1703.03864. eprint: 1703.03864.
[42]
K. O. Stanley and R. Miikkulainen. “Efficient evolution of neural network topologies”.
In: Proceedings of the 2002 Congress on Evolutionary Computation. CEC’02 (Cat.
No.02TH8600) (2002), pp. 12–17. DOI: 10.1109/CEC.2002.1004508.
[43]
Leo Breiman. “Random Forests”. In: Machine Learning 45.1 (Oct. 2001), pp. 5–32.
ISSN: 1573­0565. DOI: 10.1023/A:1010933404324.
[44]
Peilin Wang et al. “Combining multi­objective genetic algorithm and neural network
dynamically for the complex optimization problems in physics”. In: Sci. Rep. 13.880
(Jan. 2023), pp. 1–10. ISSN: 2045­2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-27478-7.
[45]
Philip D. Waggoner. Modern Dimension Reduction (Elements in Quantitative and
Computational Methods for the Social Sciences). Cambridge, England, UK: Cam­
bridge University Press, Aug. 2021. ISBN: 978­1­10898689­2. URL: https://www.
amazon.com/Dimension-Reduction-Elements-Quantitative-Computational/dp/1108986897.
[46]
Herv Abdi and Lynne J. Williams. “Principal component analysis”. In: WIREs Com­
put. Stat. 2.4 (July 2010), pp. 433–459. ISSN: 1939­5108. DOI: 10.1002/wics.101.
[47]
Laurens Van Der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. “Viualizing data using t­SNE”. In:
Journal of Machine Learning Research 9.2605 (Nov. 2008), pp. 2579–2605. ISSN:
1533­7928. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228339739_Viualizing_
data_using_t-SNE.
[48]
Thomas Viehmann. “Numerically more stable computation of the p­values for the
two­sample Kolmogorov­Smirnov test”. In: arXiv (Feb. 2021). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.
2102.08037. eprint: 2102.08037.
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
39
==PAGE:48==
[49]
Daniel R. Weilandt et al. “Symbolic kinetic models in python (SKiMpy): intuitive mod­
eling of large­scale biological kinetic models”. In: Bioinformatics 39.1 (Jan. 2023),
btac787. ISSN: 1367­4811. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btac787.
[50]
Meric Ataman and Vassily Hatzimanikatis. “lumpGEM: Systematic generation of
subnetworks and elementally balanced lumped reactions for the biosynthesis of tar­
get metabolites”. In: PLoS Comput. Biol. 13.7 (July 2017), e1005513. ISSN: 1553­
7358. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005513.
[51]
Meric Ataman et al. “redGEM: Systematic reduction and analysis of genome­scale
metabolic reconstructions for development of consistent core metabolic models”. In:
PLoS Comput. Biol. 13.7 (July 2017), e1005444. ISSN: 1553­7358. DOI: 10.1371/
journal.pcbi.1005444.
[52]
Vctor E. Balderas­Hernndez et al. “Metabolic engineering for improving anthranilate
synthesis from glucose in Escherichia coli”. In: Microb. Cell Fact. 8.1 (Dec. 2009),
pp. 1–12. ISSN: 1475­2859. DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-8-19.
40
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:49==
A
Appendix
A.1
Computational Setup
A.1.1
Computer
In this thesis, we used two different computers for the modified RENAISSANCE workflow.
The following two tables provide the specifications of the two computers. It’s important to
note that in our modified workflow, we didn’t use GPU as the computational framework to
make it more publicly available, and the algorithms are parallelized to run on CPUs.
Table A.1: System Hardware Specifications of Computer 1
Component
Specification
CPU
Intel Xeon Gold 6134, 32 Cores
Architecture
x86_64, 32­bit, 64­bit modes
CPU Frequency
1200 MHz ­ 3700 MHz
Physical Cores
32 cores
Threads per Core
2
Total System Memory
64 GiB System Memory
Memory Modules
16 GiB DIMM DDR4 Synchronous 2666 MHz x 4
Operating System
Ubuntu
Table A.2: System Hardware Specifications of Computer 2
Component
Specification
CPU
AMD Ryzen Threadripper PRO 5995WX 64­Cores
Architecture
x86_64, 32­bit, 64­bit modes
CPU Frequency
1800 MHz ­ 7024 MHz
Physical Cores
64 cores
Threads per Core
2
Total System Memory
256 GiB DDR4
Memory Modules
32 GiB DIMM DDR4 x 8
Operating System
Ubuntu
A.1.2
Threads
Since we are using parallelization to speed up the computation, it’s important to consider
the maximum number threads to use on each computer. The number of threads are
computed from the number of physical cores and virtual threads per core. To efficiently
run our modified workflow in parallel but still leave some room for system tasks, we used
60 threads (64 threads in total) on computer 1 and 120 threads (128 threads in total) on
computer 2.
A.1.3
Running Time
The average running time of the baseline case on the two computers are 25­30 hours (120
threads) and 45­55 hours (60 threads) respectively. The most critical factor that affects
the running time is the total number of bioreactor simulations to run for each training
process. Therefore, the total running time is directly affected by the number of iterations,
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
41
==PAGE:50==
population size and sample size, which is also controlled by the maximum simulation
time. On average, each training process will have 150 thousand bioreactor simulation to
run and each simulation will take around 70­90 seconds to complete. This is expected
since the maximum simulation time is set at 60 seconds, and the models that take more
than 60 seconds will be discarded for reward calculation. In fact, the modified workflow
will favor models that converge faster.
A.1.4
Software
As described in Section 3.1, the modified pipeline was branched from RENAISSANCE
(https://github.com/EPFL­LCSB/RENAISSANCE), and uses the latest version of SKiMpy
for kinetic model representation and bioreactor simulation. The code is written in python
and the package uses Python 3.6 as the running environment. The ODE solver in SKiMpy
is scikits.odes 2.6.3, which utilizes SUNDIALS 5.1.0 (SUite of Nonlinear and DIfferen­
tial/ALgebraic equation Solvers) as the core engine for ODE compilation and simulation.
The modified pipeline is wrapped in a docker image and other required packages are
included in the Dockerfile.
A.1.5
File Structure
The modified pipeline included 4 main files: workflow.ipynb, analysis.ipynb, validation.ipynb
and configurefile.ini. To start a modified workflow, first edit configurefile.ini and run work­
flow.ipynb, the file will create generators for each iteration and a reward file, which will be
stored in the output folder. To analyze the training process, run analysis.ipynb file to have
figures that summarizes the rewards from training. To check which generator have the
best performance, run validation.ipynb file. The file will rerun the generators from each
iteration and give the best generator from all generators from training.
A.2
Reward Function Design
The original RENAISSANCE updates the gradient step based on the fitness landscape of
the generator population, thus the rewards for the generator population is a critical piece
of information for the algorithm. In the modified algorithm, the reward of the generator
population is formed from bioreactor simulation results.
First, each generator will generate a set of parameterized models with random inputs
and put them into bioreactor simulation based on the biological relevancy of the model.
Then the simulated result is compared with the experimental data in bioreactor to form
a loss. The loss of each objective is then transformed into a score, and all the scores
form a reward for the model. The model reward partly represents the performance of
the generator, and all the model reward together is used to calculate the reward for each
generator. Finally, all the generator rewards together gives the fitness landscape that
allow step gradient calculation. As the result, the reward function is divided into four
different components: the loss function, the objective reward, the model reward and the
generator reward.
A.2.1
Testing Different Settings of Reward Function Components
After figuring out the components of reward function, we proposed two settings for each
part of calculation for testing. For loss functions, both NRMSE (Normalized Root Mean
Square Error) and normalized error were tested to compare a more traditional error mea­
surement against a normalized metric that accounts for data variability, providing a fair
comparison across different operational scales. The reward calculations included ex­
ponential decay and 1/exponential, exploring both a standard decaying function and its
inverse to evaluate which better motivates performance improvements. Reward accumu­
lation was assessed through harmonic mean and weighted sum, the former emphasizing
42
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:51==
the impact of outliers and the latter providing a straightforward aggregation that values
each instance equally. Finally, reward consideration methods sum of all bioreactor re­
wards and top 10 percentile were compared to determine whether focusing on the top
performers would yield better overall outcomes compared with averaging across all re­
sults.
• Loss Function: As the experimental data for each objective is in the different range,
the loss need to fairly represent the error and variability. We propose NRMSE (Nor­
malized Root Mean Square Error) and percentage deviation as the loss function.
• Objective Reward: When the loss is large, a reward function should be able to
give a lower reward, and the reward should all be from 0 to 1. Exponential decay
is a standard reward function that does this, we also added a squared version of
exponential decay function to make reward a bit more robust when it’s close the the
experimental value. We also added a scaling factor to make the decay steeper or
slower, which suggests the hardness of the reward to have high reward.
• Model Reward: Since we have multiple objectives with various goals and difficul­
ties, it is important to weight objectives differently. We considered weighted har­
monic mean and weighted sum to calculate the model reward.
• Generator Reward: From initial testing, we observed that the incidence of a model
from a randomly generated population is low, and averaging the rewards of all the
models doesn’t really translate into meaningful rewards, thus we compare the sum
of all rewards and only taking the best 10% models from the model population.
To test different settings for the reward function, we setup an orthogonal array to minimize
the runs and still able to get the result. The metrics of the result compares the highest
number of valid models that a training process can achieve. We fixed most hyperparame­
ters the same as original workflow, and use 30 iterations, 20 generators per iteration and
100 samples per generator as the baseline. The result is shown in Table A.3. Through
systematic testing of the combinations, it was observed that certain settings led to bet­
ter outcomes. For instance, configurations using NRMSE as the loss function generally
outperformed those using normalized error, indicating a better sensitivity to variations in
performance metrics. Similarly, exponential decay in reward calculations tended to yield
better results than its inverse, suggesting that a more straightforward decay function aligns
better with desirable outcomes in this context. Among the reward accumulation methods,
the weighted sum approach frequently showed higher efficacy compared to the harmonic
mean, likely due to its simplicity and directness in aggregating individual rewards.
The final selection of NRMSE for loss function, exponential decay for objective reward,
weighted sum for model reward, and top 10% rewards for generator reward was made
based on their superior performance in the experimental results. This combination was
particularly effective because NRMSE provided a robust basis for error calculation, sen­
sitive to the full range of experimental data. Exponential decay, by prioritizing immediate
rewards more significantly, proved effective in motivating quick adjustments and improve­
ments in bioreactor conditions. Weighted sum as a reward accumulation method offered a
direct and unbiased way to integrate rewards across experiments, enhancing consistency.
Lastly, focusing on the top 10 percentile for reward consideration effectively emphasised
the most successful experiments, encouraging a performance standard that drives in­
novation and efficiency. This strategic assembly of modes harnesses the strengths of
each approach, optimally tuning the bioreactor performance to achieve peak operational
excellence.
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
43
==PAGE:52==
Table A.3: Test Different Combinations of Reward Function Components
Loss
Function
Objective
Reward
Model
Reward
Generator
Reward
Highest
Percentage
of Valid
Models
NRMSE
Squared Exp.
Decay
Weighted
Harmonic
Mean
Sum of top
10% rewards
7%
NRMSE
Squared Exp.
Decay
Weighted
Sum
Sum of all
rewards
4%
NRMSE
Exponential
Decay
Weighted
Harmonic
Mean
Sum of all
rewards
3%
NRMSE
Exponential
Decay
Weighted
Sum
Sum of top
10% rewards
4%
% Deviation
Squared Exp.
Decay
Weighted
Harmonic
Mean
Sum of all
rewards
2%
% Deviation
Squared Exp.
Decay
Weighted
Sum
Sum of top
10% rewards
4%
% Deviation
Exponential
Decay
Weighted
Harmonic
Mean
Sum of top
10% rewards
3%
% Deviation
Exponential
Decay
Weighted
Sum
Sum of all
rewards
2%
A.3
Hyperparameter Experiments
A.3.1
Experiment 1
In the following table A.4, we can see the population size 50 on average produces 4­5
times more valid models compare the population size 20, and neural work with 4 layers
doesn’t necessarily increase the number of valid models. Increase population size can
provide better fitness landscape for gradient step, but the larger neural network didn’t give
significant improvement, which needs further experimentation.
With population size of 50 and 3 layers of neural network, we were able to find the best
performing training run, the result is further explained in the next section 4.1.
A.3.2
Experiment 2
As population size significantly affects the reward landscape, in the second experiment,
we try to optimize the reward landscape even further to find the best set of hyperparam­
eters for reward function. We designed the experiment to test different combinations of
population size, sample size, and the top model rewards percentile.
In the result, the best training run performed the best compare to all other settings, with
the 100 population size and 100 sample size came close. Taking more top model reward
44
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:53==
Table A.4: Tuning Hyperparameters for Population Size and Layers of Neural Network
Population
Size
Layer of
Neural
Networks
Percentage
Valid Model
(Trial 1)
Percentage
Valid Model
(Trial 2)
20
3
2%
2%
20
4
1%
2%
50
3
6%
13% (Best)
50
4
4%
9%
Table A.5: Tuning Hyperparameters for Population Size, Sample Size and Top Percentage of Valid
Models
Population
Size
Sample Size
Top Model
Rewards
Percentile
Percentage
of Valid
Model (%)
50
100
10%
13% (Best)
50
100
5%
3%
50
100
20%
2%
50
20
50%
0.5%
50
50
20%
4%
100
100
10%
7%
100
20
100%
0.5%
100
10
100%
0%
did not improve the optimization and smaller sample size gave lower percentage of valid
models. One possible reason to explain the higher model reward results in lower per­
centage is that finding a valid model is a difficult task, and by having more rewards, it’s
hard to distinguish between generators. And with smaller sample size, the generator’s full
capability is not effectively explored.
A.3.3
Experiment 3
In the third experiment, we fixed on using the parameters in the best training run, and
did testing on iterations, steepness, weight, simulation time, and good model cutoff. The
result is shown below in Table A.6.
Out of all hyperparameters, the best run still came from the baseline experiment. 100
Iterations and highest weights on glucose maintained similar level of performance, which
gave rise to the second and third highest percentage of valid models. However, vary­
ing iteration and weight didn’t seem to affect the best percentage of valid models. The
experiment with 50 iterations seem to fall into local maximum and the performance was
worse.
As for the other hyperparameters such as the good model cutoff, the steepness for each
objective rewad, and the mximum simulation time, yield lower percentage of valid models.
A.3.4
Other Experiments
We also made other changes to the RENAISSANCE workflow to see if they can improve
the optimization process. We first took the best generator from the best run in Table A.4,
and vary the learning rate to see if the algorithm can search for a better configuration for
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
45
==PAGE:54==
Table A.6: Summary of Other Hyperparameter Testing and Model Performance
Hyperparameter
Value
Percentage
of Valid
Models
Iteration (Baseline)
30
13%
Iteration
50
4%
Iteration
100
12%
Weight (Baseline) Biomass: Anthranilate:
Glucose
0.1:0.7:0.2
13%
Weight
0.1:0.55:0.35
11%
Weight
0.1:0.45:0.45
9%
Good Model Cutoff (Baseline)
­1.5
13%
Good Model Cutoff
­0.5
9%
Steepness (Baseline) Biomass: Anthranilate:
Glucose
7:2:2
13%
Steepness
1:1:1
5%
Steepness
7:7:7
3%
Max Simulation Time (Baseline)
60 seconds
13%
Max Simulation Time
30 seconds
3%
Max Simulation Time
15 seconds
2%
the generator. Moreover, instead of taking the whole population for the gradient step, we
took the top performing generators for next iteration. Additionally, we also tried to fix the
random sampling from a gaussian distribution and therefore reduce the randomess for the
generator. We tested different configurations of the 4 layer neural network to see if the
configuration can change the result. We also tried to convert all experimental data and
simulation value to log scale to see how it affects the optimization process. The results
from the above mentioned experiments are shown below.
Retraining the best generator with more iterations with different learning rate didn’t have
better result compare to the original best generator. Also, updating RENAISSANCE pro­
cess by only taking the best generators for the next iteration greatly decreased the per­
formance of optimization process. Lastly, a slightly different neural network architecture
with more neurons did not improve the result. Converting experimental data into log scale
also didn’t yield good result.
46
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
==PAGE:55==
Table A.7: Other Experiments Result
Experiment
Percentage
of Valid
Models (%)
Baseline
13%
Take top 1 best performing generators for next iteration
0%
Take top 10 best performing generators for next iteration
1%
Reload best generator from Baseline with different learning rate (1e­4)
11%
Reload best generator from Baseline with different learning rate (1e­5)
11%
4 layer of neural network with different neurons for each layer (512,
256, 128, 512), Trial 1
9%
4 layer of neural network with different neurons for each layer (512,
256, 128, 512), Trial 2
4%
Fixing random sampling, only train with pre­defined sets of input
4%
Converting the experimental data and simulated result into log scale
1%
Estimation of Kinetic Parameters in Large Kinetic Models Using Machine Learning
47
==PAGE:56==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 221
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
