==PAGE:1==
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute
myeloid leukemia
Master’s Thesis
Line Damgaard Henriksen
DTU Bioengineering
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
Master’s Thesis
July, 2024
By
Line Damgaard Henriksen, s184242
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Bygningstorvet, Building
116, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a severe hematologic disease characterized by poor prognosis
and high relapse rates. The AML hierarchy resembles that of hematopoiesis with leukemic stem
cells (LSCs) at the apex giving rise to aberrant myeloid cells. LSCs and stemness have been linked
to relapse and therapy resistance prompting the need for targeted therapies. This study investi-
gates the potential of cell specific drug treatment of AML by utilizing single-cell proteomics by
mass spectrometry (scp-MS) to study sub-populations and the cellular heterogeneity in AML. Us-
ing the OCI-AML8227 model system, we performed label-free single-cell MS to analyze protein
expression profiles across different cell types within the AML hierarchy. The differential expres-
sion analysis identified key proteins and signaling pathways, such as the MAPK pathway, that
were up-regulated in LSCs compared to the other cell types. Based on the protein expression in
the LSCs, five kinase inhibitors were selected and subsequent drug screenings revealed varying
effects on the cell viability. The two multi-kinase inhibitors flavopiridol and midostaurin had the
most pronounced effect on the cell viability and were selected for drug treatment and TMT-labeled
single-cell MS analysis of the OCI-AML8227 model system. A large intra-culture heterogeneity,
low data completeness and a lack of standardized data processing workflows imposed a challenge
for the data analysis. However, the protein expression profiles indicated a drug-related effect on
cell division and myeloid differentiation. Our findings underscore the potential but also some of
the challenges of scp-MS for uncovering novel therapeutic targets and improving AML treatment
outcomes through data driven cell specific approaches.
ii
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Hematopoiesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Leukemic stem cells and acute myeloid leukemia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Current treatments in AML . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Studying AML and the OCI-AML8227 model system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Mass spectrometry for the study of proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Single-cell proteomics by mass spectrometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.7
Aims of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Materials and Methods
13
2.1
Cell culture and FACS for label-free scp-MS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
MS sample preparation of label-free single-cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Label-free LC-MS data collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Computational analysis of label-free single-cell data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Cell culture for drug treatments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6
Drug screenings of OCI-AML8227 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.7
Drug treatment of OCI-AML8227 and FACS for TMT-labeled scp-MS . . . . . .
15
2.8
MS sample preparation of TMT-labeled single-cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.9
TMT-labeled LC-MS data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.10 Computational analysis of drug-treated TMT-labeled single-cell data . . . . . . .
16
3
Results
18
3.1
Single-cell analysis and drug target discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Drug screenings and cell viability assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Drug treatment of OCI-AML8227 and scp-MS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Discussion
38
4.1
The data analysis is challenged by missing values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
The five drugs have variable effect on the viability of different AML cell lines . .
39
4.3
Cell type designations are derived from FACS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
The drug screenings suffer from a discrepancy in the total number of events . . .
40
4.5
Standardized data processing workflows are imperative . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.6
The protein expression does not vary a lot between drug treatments . . . . . . . .
41
4.7
Flavopiridol affects cell division . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Conclusion
44
Bibliography
45
A Abbreviations
53
B
Appendix
55
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
iii
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
1.1
Hematopoiesis
All the cellular components of our blood are produced through a process called hematopoiesis. Bil-
lions of cells are produced every day giving rise to red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets.
Together, these cells are responsible for vital functions in our body such as oxygen transport, im-
mune defence, and blood clotting. The main location of hematopoiesis is in the bone marrow where
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) reside. The HSCs have the capacity to give rise to all types of
blood cells and are characterized by their multipotency and ability to self-renew (Laurenti and
Göttgens 2018). They are essential for replenishing the blood cellular components throughout life
and the balance between differentiation and self-renewal of the HSCs must be tightly controlled to
ensure hematopoietic homeostasis and response to injury.
Traditionally, the hematopoietic system has been visualized as a branching tree with the HSCs at
the apex that differentiate into multipotent progenitors (MPPs) with limited self-renewal capacity
(Fig 1.1a). The MPPs can then branch into cells of lymphoid or myeloid lineage (Akashi et al. 2000,
Kondo, Irving L. Weissman, and Akashi 1997). The lymphoid lineage generates T cells, B cells and
natural killer (NK) cells which are an important part of the immune system. The myeloid lineage
branch into two progenitor populations with megakaryocyte-erythrocyte progenitors (MEPs) and
granulocyte-monocyte progenitors (GMPs). With the discovery of cell surface markers to isolate
different cell populations and colony-forming cell (CFC) assays to study their differentiation ca-
pacities, the understanding of the hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) has improved
significantly over the years (Metcalf et al. 2010, Bryder, Rossi, and Irving L Weissman 2006).
Among the least differentiated cells, it is now known that the pool of HSPCs constitutes cells that
are heterogeneous in terms of self-renewal capacity and differentiation potential (R. Yamamoto
et al. 2013, Paul et al. 2015). Recently, the hierarchical model of hematopoiesis with well defined
cell populations has been challenged for not capturing the heterogeneity within each population
nor the continuum of cell states that constitute the differentiation process (Laurenti and Göttgens
2018, Notta et al. 2016). In a model proposed by Velten, S. F. Haas, et al. 2017, the HSCs do not
pass through hierarchically organized progenitor populations with increasingly restricted lineage
commitment. Instead, unilineage-restricted cells emerge directly from a continuum of low-primed
undifferentiated HSCs (Fig 1.1b).
1.1.1
The HSC niche
The HSCs reside in the bone marrow within a specialized hypoxic micro-environment called the
HSC niche (Pinho and Frenette 2019). Within the niche, the HSCs are maintained and regulated
through cellular and molecular interactions with other components of the niche including endothe-
lial cells and mesencymal stem cells (Marchand and Pinho 2021). To meet the hematopoietic
demands throughout life the dormancy of HSCs is an essential feature (Trumpp, M. Essers, and
Wilson 2010). At steady state, most of the HSCs are quiescent defined by a reversible non-cycling
G0 cell state (Wilson et al. 2008). These HSCs are essential for maintaining the self-renewal ca-
pacity of the population. Studies have shown that the self-renewal capacity is correlated with the
time spent in quiescence with the most dormant HSCs displaying the largest repopulation capacity
(Laurenti and Göttgens 2018, Wilson et al. 2008). Several signals within the niche promote HSC
quiescence. One of such signaling molecules is cyclin dependent kinase 6 (CDK6). CDK6 is a cell
cycle regulator that drives the passage from G1 to S phase in complex with D-type cyclins (Tigan
et al. 2015). A study by Laurenti, Frelin, et al. 2015 showed that the levels of CDK6 mRNA and
CDK6 protein in quiescent HSCs are directly linked to the timing of the quiescent exit. A low
level of CDK6 corresponds to a delayed exit from G0 upon mitogenic stimuli and subsequently a
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
1
==PAGE:7==
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.1:
Visual representations of the hematopoietic system.
(a) Traditionally, the
hematopoietic system has been depicted as a branching tree where hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
differentiate into multipotent progenitors (MPPs) that in turn branch into a lymphoid or myeloid
lineage. (b) In a more recent model, the fully differentiated cells arise directly from a continuum
of low-primed undifferentiated HSCs. The figure is adapted from S. Haas, Trumpp, and Milsom
2018. Abbreviations: CMP: Common myeloid progenitors, CLP: Common lymphoid progeni-
tor, MEP: Megakaryocyte-erythrocyte progenitor, GMP: Granulocyte-monocyte progenitor, Mk:
Megakaryocyte, RBC: Red blood cell, Granu: Granulocyte, Mono: Monocyte, Mac: Macrophage,
DC: Dendritic cell, NK: Natural killer cell, B: B cell, T: T cell.
longer division time. Quiescence is not only essential for the self-renewal of the HSCs, but also
provides protection against genotoxic damage. Furthermore, the niche serves an important role
in protecting malignant HSCs from chemotherapy and quiescence provides protection against the
conventional cell cycle-dependent chemotherapeutic agents (M. A. G. Essers and Trumpp 2010,
Marchand and Pinho 2021).
1.2
Leukemic stem cells and acute myeloid leukemia
In the 1990s, leukemia initiating cells with self-renewal and proliferative capacities were identified
in immunodeficient mice transplanted with human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells (Lapidot
et al. 1994, Bonnet and Dick 1997). These cells were able to differentiate into leukemic blasts
in line with the expected properties of a leukemic stem cell (LSC). The identification of LSCs in
AML supported the existing cancer stem cell (CSC) model that defined a small subset of cancer-
initiating cells, CSCs, as responsible for long-term maintenance of tumor growth in multiple can-
cers (Dalerba, Cho, and Clarke 2007). These CSCs resemble their non-pathological counterpart
with LSCs showing similar characteristics to HSCs.
One of the basic principles in cancer research is that tumors arise through the sequential ac-
quisition of genetic mutations that leads to clonal expansion of cancer cells (Kreso and Dick
2014). In leukemia, some HSCs acquire pre-leukemic mutations through a process known as
clonal hematopoiesis (CH), or clonal hematopoiesis of intermediate potential (CHIP), resulting
in a small population of pre-leukemic stem cells (pre-LSCs) (Velten, Story, et al. 2021). The fre-
quency of clonal mutations increases with age and comes with an elevated risk of hematologic
cancers (Jaiswal et al. 2014). The pre-LSCs retain the capacity to differentiate into mature blood
cells like HSCs and do not generate leukemia themselves. However, they can become cancerous
LSCs through the acquirement of additional deleterious mutations (Fig 1.2) (Shlush, Zandi, et al.
2014, Bowman, Busque, and Levine 2018).
2
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1.2: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) develops from mutated healthy hematopoietic
stem cells. Pre-leukemic stem cells (pre-LSCs) arise from hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) that
have acquired somatic mutations through clonal hematopoiesis. The pre-LSCs retain the capacity
to differentiate into mature blood cells but can become cancerous through the acquirement of addi-
tional mutations. LSCs possess some of the characteristics of HSCs such as self-renewal capacity
and dormancy but display a differentiation block that prevents them maturing into functional blood
cells. Figure from Stelmach and Trumpp 2023. Abbreviations: MPP: Multipotent progenitor.
AML is the most common type of acute leukemia (J. F. Yamamoto and Goodman 2008). It pre-
dominately affects older people with a median patient age of 68 years (Sasaki et al. 2021). It
is characterized by the disruption of normal hematopoiesis by the clonal expansion of immature
myeloid derived blast cells in the bone marrow (De Kouchkovsky and Abdul-Hay 2016). These
blasts cells are aberrant white blood cells that arise from LSCs. Cancers are inherently heteroge-
neous and AML is a complex dynamic disease with an intricate genomic landscape shaping the
phenotype. Multiple commonly mutated genes have been identified in AML patients with some of
them being suspected driver mutations for pre-LSCs while others are believed to initiate leukemia
(Fig 1.2) (Stelmach and Trumpp 2023). Mutations commonly found in AML patients include
NPM1 (27%), FLT3 (28%), DNMT3A (26%), and IDH1/2 (20%) (Cancer Genome Atlas Research
Network 2013). With genotype affecting the prognosis of AML patients, NPM1 and FLT3 as well
as other mutations are routinely screened for in clinical practice to select the most suitable treatment
strategy.
1.3
Current treatments in AML
The treatment strategy for AML patients has not changed substantially for many years and the
current induction therapy consists of the infusion of two chemotherapeutic drugs; cytarabine and
an anthracycline such as daunorubicin or idarubicin (Döhner, Estey, et al. 2017). It is often re-
ferred to as the 7+3 regimen because cytarabine is continuously infused for seven days while the
anthracycline is only infused for the first three days. Both drugs interfere with DNA synthesis
or repair either through incorporation into the DNA during synthesis, intercalation between adja-
cent base pairs or inhibition of topoisomerase II (Murphy and Yee 2017). Some patients are not
fit for standard induction therapy and older patients are in general considered poor candidates for
intensive chemotherapy. This has limited the treatment alternatives to non-curative low-intensity
chemotherapy, best supportive care, or treatment with investigational drugs in clinical trials (Döh-
ner, Weisdorf, and Bloomfield 2015).
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
3
==PAGE:9==
Recently, multiple novel therapies have been approved for the treatment of AML and even more are
in clinical development. In 2017-2018, the genetically targeted therapies midostaurin, enasidenib,
and ivosenib were approved by the FDA for patients within genotype specific disease categories
(Stanchina et al. 2020). Midostaurin was approved for patients with FLT3 mutations and enasi-
denib and ivosenib were approved for patients with IDH1/2 mutations. Midostaurin is a multi-
targeted kinase inhibitor that among other kinases targets the receptor tyrosine kinase FLT3. FLT3
is constitutively activated as a results of the FLT3 mutation and promotes the proliferation and
differentiation of the HSPCs (Stone et al. 2017, Gilliland and Griffin 2002). In addition to geno-
type specific therapies, non-genetically targeted chemotherapeutics such as venetoclax and oral
azacitidine have also been approved within recent years for patients unfit for standard therapy or
as maintenance therapy (Stanchina et al. 2020).
Despite recent advances, the long term survival of patients remains poor. Data from the previous
decade shows that the 5-year survival of de novo AML patients is 28% (Sasaki et al. 2021). How-
ever, it is heavily influenced by age. Patients 0-14 years of age have a 5-year survival rate of 70%
while it is 22% for patients between 60 and 69 years. Furthermore, relapse occurs for most patients
despite initial remission with a median overall survival of only 0.5 years after relapse (Ganzel et al.
2018). This sparks for further research into the disease mechanisms of AML and the development
of improved therapies for the affected patients.
1.3.1
Drug targets in AML and quiescent LSCs
Cancers are in essence heterogeneous diseases which necessitates multiple targeting strategies to
address the many hallmarks of cancer. Conventional chemotherapy predominantly targets divid-
ing cells. In AML, some of the existing chemotherapeutics include nucleoside analogues, kinase
inhibitors and epigenetic modulators generally affecting the rapidly proliferating bulk of blast cells
(Stanchina et al. 2020). However, for many years researchers have been interested in developing
LSC specific therapies because of their observed therapy-resistance and relapse association (Pol-
lyea and Jordan 2017, Stelmach and Trumpp 2023). A study by Shlush, Mitchell, et al. 2017 traced
the origin of relapse to a small rare group of LSCs already present at diagnosis or bulk leukemia
cells with stemness transcriptional programs. This data suggest that targeting stem cell properties
provides a conceivable strategy in the development of novel therapeutic agents. One approach to
targeting stemness is the disruption of dormancy by induction of cell cycling. Multiple strategies
have been proposed in this regard. One strategy exploits the regulation of LSC retention in the
niche and induces cell cycle entry by treatment with G-CSF (Saito et al. 2010). Another strat-
egy involves treatment with interferon-α to stimulate proliferation of the LSCs (M. A. G. Essers,
Offner, et al. 2009, M. A. G. Essers and Trumpp 2010). In this context, a two-step therapy approach
has been proposed where the dormant LSCs are first activated and sensitized by stem cell factors
followed by treatment with chemotherapeutic agents (Trumpp, M. Essers, and Wilson 2010).
Despite the potential of inducing cell cycling in dormant LSCs, studies have shown that it is not
necessarily quiescent LSCs that initiate relapse (Duy et al. 2021). Moreover, a study by Farge et al.
2017 showed that functionally defined LSCs and bulk blasts can be equally reduced by cytarabine
which is generally perceived to target cycling cells. Such studies indicate that other approaches to
targeting LSCs are highly relevant. The mechanism behind therapy resistance of dormant LSCs
may not be confined to their lack of cell cycling but also their reduced metabolism. LSCs are
considered relatively metabolically inflexible and rely on mitochondrial oxidative phosphoryla-
tion for ATP production (Stelmach and Trumpp 2023). The unique metabolic requirements of
LSCs separate them from HSCs which rely on anaerobic glycolysis and has drawn attention to the
potential of targeting the metabolic state of LSCs (Suda, Takubo, and Semenza 2011). Elevated
levels of reactive oxygen species and a reliance on oxidative metabolism have been identified in
chemotherapy-resistant AML cells indicating a prospect for selective inhibition of the oxidative
phosphorylation in LSCs (Farge et al. 2017). In support of this strategy, studies have shown that
4
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:10==
BCL-2 inhibition, the mechanism of venetoclax, reduces oxidative phosphorylation and selectively
eradicates LSCs (Lagadinou et al. 2013, Pollyea, Stevens, et al. 2018)
In addition to chemotherapeutic agents targeting the stemness properties of LSCs, their immunophe-
notypic profile could be exploited for the development of LSC specific drugs (Pollyea and Jordan
2017). The antibody-drug conjugate gemtuzumab ozogamicin is already approved for the treat-
ment of AML. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin binds to the CD33 antigen on LSCs which is then inter-
nalized resulting in the release of the cytotoxic agent calicheamicin inside the cell (Stanchina et al.
2020). Cell surface markers have served an invaluable resource in the study of LSCs, however, the
heterogeneity among cells, variability between patients, and close resemblance to HSCs impose a
challenge for their use in immunotherapies.
1.4
Studying AML and the OCI-AML8227 model system
AML has been widely studied for many decades and foundational studies were performed in xeno-
transplantation assays with immunodeficient mice which is still the method used to detect true
LSCs/HSCs with self-renewal and repopulation capacity (Lapidot et al. 1994, Bonnet and Dick
1997, S. Haas, Trumpp, and Milsom 2018). The cellular hierarchy in AML resembles that of the
hematopoietic system and has been depicted as three distinct populations containing LSCs, progen-
itors and blasts (Fig 1.3a). The cell surface markers CD34 and CD38 have been used to distinguish
these three cell types from each other (Fig 1.3b) (Kreso and Dick 2014). The LSCs are enriched in
the CD34pos CD38neg compartment, while progenitors are CD34pos CD38pos and terminally differ-
entiated blasts are CD34neg. Even though the LSCs predominantly reside in the CD34pos CD38neg
compartment, studies have shown that they can also be present in other compartments, primarily
the CD34pos CD38pos (Taussig et al. 2008, Eppert et al. 2011).
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.3: The hierarchy and profile of AML. The cellular hierarchy in AML contains LSCs,
progenitors and blasts. (a) The LSCs are self-renewing cells that can differentiate into progenitors
which in turn can differentiate into blast cells. (b) The expression of CD34 and CD38 surface
markers are used to distinguish the cell types. The figure is adapted from Schoof et al. 2021.
Despite the clear advantages of categorizing the cells by their cell surface markers, caution should
be taken as the cell surface markers fail to capture the great cellular heterogeneity within each
compartment. The surface markers might indicate what type of cell it is, but they do not suffice
to say what the cell functionally does. For instance as few as 1 in 103-106 of the cells within
the CD34pos CD38neg compartment are true LSCs with long-term repopulation capacity (Eppert
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
5
==PAGE:11==
et al. 2011). The large difference in LSC frequency and their varying surface marker expression
suggest a high inter-patient variability adding to the great complexity of the disease. Variations
in the cellular composition of the leukemic hierarchy between patients have been shown to have
prognostic and predictive effects (Zeng et al. 2022). In an attempt to predict patient outcome
and drug response, gene expression signatures have been developed that reflect LSC stemness
characteristics and hierarchy classifications (LSC17: Ng et al. 2016, LinClass-7: Zeng et al. 2022).
Furthermore, a recent study by Schoof et al. 2021 has shown a possible alternative differentiation
pathway in AML where LSCs differentiate directly into blasts without an intermediate progenitor
step. A similar two-track differentiation path has been suggested for other cells of the hematopoi-
etic system (R. Yamamoto et al. 2013, S. Haas, Hansson, et al. 2015). It is unsure how each of these
differentiation paths contribute to hematopoiesis. However, in a recent study by J.-J. Li et al. 2024,
distinct functional roles for megakaryocytes derived from two different differentiation paths were
identified. In a similar fashion, it is possible that the blasts from different LSC differentiation routes
display distinct activity and further investigation of these cell subsets is warranted. To that end,
single-cell studies are an important tool to be able to discriminate between differences among ap-
parently similar cells. Single-cell data can provide valuable insight into the heterogeneity of LSCs
and later differentiation stages and the underlying molecular machinery. Molecular changes in the
cells could elucidate mechanisms behind cell fate choices as well as the response to drug treatment
and other environmental factors. RNA sequencing has been applied for the study of single-cells
for many years and mRNA levels have been used as a proxy for protein abundance. However,
transcriptomics does not provide the whole picture. mRNA levels are not always correlated with
protein abundance and the transcripts fail to reflect protein isoforms and post-translational modifi-
cations (PTMs) (Greenbaum et al. 2003). With frequent relapse, resistance development and much
still unknown about the disease, single-cell proteomics can provide invaluable knowledge about
the aberrant hematopoietic system in AML.
In this study, we use the primary AML culture model OCI-AML8227 to investigate the proteomic
alterations induced by drug treatment at the single-cell level. The OCI-AML8227 model is a
patient-derived culture that can be propagated ex vivo under appropriate growth conditions. The
model maintains the hierarchical organization of AML in culture and is characterized by p53,
RUNX1, and FLT3-ITD mutations (Lechman et al. 2016, Laverdière et al. 2018). While an ex vivo
model such as OCI-AML8227 might fail to capture the full complexity of AML in vivo, it provides
a simple and controlled system to study the disease.
1.5
Mass spectrometry for the study of proteins
Mass spectrometry (MS) is an analytical tool to study the mass of atoms and molecules. It is highly
applicable within numerous fields and can be used for the study of proteins, natural products, iso-
topes among many other compounds. MS relies on the ionisation of the compounds of interest and
measures the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) of the resulting ions. The charged particles are acceler-
ated within the mass spectrometer and separated according to their m/z by which the mass of the
compounds can be deduced.
1.5.1
The architecture of a mass spectrometer
A mass spectrometer consists of three main components: An ionization source, a mass analyzer,
and a detector. The ionization source of a mass spectrometer must convert the analytes to a charged
state. A widely used ionization method is electrospray ionization (ESI). In ESI, the analyte solution
is passed through a thin capillary and a high voltage supplied to the solution to create charged
droplets. As the solvent evaporates, the analyte is converted into gas phase and ions emitted. The
ions can then move through the mass spectrometer and enter the mass analyzer. Multiple mass
analyzers exist which are based on different principles. The Orbitrap is a mass analyzer where the
ions are trapped around a central electrode (Fig 1.4). The ions orbit around the electrode while
6
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:12==
also moving along its axis. The orbital trajectories are dependent on the m/z of the analytes which
can be determined by Fourier transformation of the harmonic oscillations along the electrode. In
an Orbitrap mass spectrometer, a Fourier-transform detector is used to detect the current on the
outer electrodes and transform it into an m/z. The Orbitrap provides high resolution and high mass
accuracy (Zubarev and Makarov 2013).
Another mass analyzer is the quadrupole. It contains four parallel metal rods where two electrical
fields are created between the opposing rods. The electrical fields affect the trajectory of the ions
travelling through the middle of the four rods. By adjusting the voltage, specific m/z ranges can
be selected and the entire mass spectrum scanned. In a quadrupole mass spectrometer, the detector
is often a photon multiplier that amplifies the electronic signal generated when the ions hit the
detector. The quadrupole has a low resolution and mass accuracy, but it can also be used as an
ion filter coupled to a secondary mass analyzer (Gross 2017). It can for instance be coupled to an
Orbitrap where specific m/z ranges are selected in the quadrupole and analyzed in the Orbitrap (Fig
1.4). The combination of a quadrupole mass filter and an Orbitrap mass analyzer is found in the
Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer and the Orbitrap Astral mass spectrometer by Thermo
Scientific. Both instruments use ESI to ionize the analytes but differ in other ways. For instance
the Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid contains a linear ion trap (LIT) as a second mass analyzer whereas the
Orbitrap Astral contains an Astral mass analyzer in addition to the Orbitrap.
Figure 1.4: Schematic of a quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The analytes enter the
mass spectrometer through a lens followed by an injection flatapole and a bent flatapole to sort
out non-charged particles. The ions then pass through the quadrupole where ions of a specific m/z
range can be selected. A C-trap collects the ions before they are injected into the Orbitrap where
they are analyzed. The ions can also pass through the C-trap into the collision cell where the ions
are fragmented before they are returned to the C-trap and can enter the Orbitrap.
1.5.2
Mass spectrometry in bottom-up proteomics
MS has proven extremely useful within the field of proteomics for the identification and quantifi-
cation of proteins. Mainly two different approaches have been developed: Top-down proteomics
and bottom-up proteomics. In top-down proteomics, intact proteins are analyzed in the mass spec-
trometer. This technique comes with multiple challenges and is limited by the vast physio-chemical
diversity of the proteins (Melby et al. 2021). In bottom-up proteomics, the proteins are digested
into peptides before they are injected into the mass spectrometer. The sample is thereby more ho-
mogeneous and can more easily be converted into gas phase. The protein sequence is then inferred
from the peptides.
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
7
==PAGE:13==
Bottom-up proteomics requires multiple sample preparation steps before MS. The cells are first
lysed and the proteins denatured. This step is often followed by a reduction of the cysteine residues
and alkylation to prevent reformation of the disulfide bonds. The proteins are then cleaved into
smaller peptides which is usually done enzymatically with a protease like trypsin. Trypsin cleaves
at the C-terminal side of lysine and arginine unless they are followed by proline. To infer the protein
from the peptides, tandem MS (MS2) must be performed. In MS2, a precursor ion is selected to
be fragmented into smaller ions. The fragmentation can be done with higher-energy collisional
dissociation (HCD). HCD is a type of collision induced dissociation where a neutral gas such as
N2 collides with the ions and thereby fragments them (Olsen et al. 2007). With HCD, b- and y-
ions are created upon fragmentation. b-ions contain the N-terminal side of the peptide while y-ions
contain the C-terminal side. These ions are the result of a dissociation of the amide bonds in the
peptide backbone between the carbonyl and amine groups (Fig 1.5). The peptide sequence of the
precursor ions can be inferred from the fragmentation pattern in MS2 by a database search of in
silico digested proteins. Subsequently, the protein sequence can be inferred from the identified
peptides.
Figure 1.5: Fragmentation pattern of a precursor ion. A precursor ion is selected from the
MS1 spectrum and fragmented with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). b- and y-ions
are created upon dissociation of the amide bonds in the peptide backbone and the peptide sequence
can be identified from the MS2 spectrum.
A major challenge in proteomics is the wide dynamic range of the proteome. Some proteins are
present in a few copies while other proteins are present in millions of copies resulting in a dynamic
range of around 106 (MacCoss et al. 2023). To overcome this challenge, the mass spectrometer
is coupled to a liquid chromatography system (LC-MS). Reverse-phase high performance liquid
chromatography (RP-HPLC) is used to separate the peptides according to their physio-chemical
properties. The RP-HPLC contains a stationary and a mobile phase that interact with the peptides
with varying affinity. The stationary phase is commonly a C18 column and the mobile phase
an increasing gradient of acetonitrile. In this setting, the most hydrophobic peptides bind with
the highest affinity to the stationary phase and have the longest retention times. In LC-MS, only
a fraction of the peptides are eluted from the column and into the mass spectrometer at a time.
Consequently, some fractions are enriched for low abundant peptides improving the dynamic range
of the measurement.
8
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:14==
1.5.3
The acquisition mode affects the peptide fragmentation at the MS2 level
An essential part of MS2 is selecting the precursor ions for fragmentation. Multiple approaches
have been developed for this purpose in general falling into either data-dependent acquisition
(DDA) or data-independent acquisition (DIA). The type of acquisition method dictates which pep-
tides are fragmented and identified leading to differences in the protein coverage and depth of
the analysis. In DDA, the precursor ions are selected from a mass spectrum at the MS1-level. A
narrow m/z window is created on the mass spectrum and the precursor ions within this window
are selected for fragmentation (Fig 1.6). Different settings can be applied for creating the m/z
window but it is usually around the most abundant ions. As a result, DDA is greatly affected by
the dynamic range of the precursor ions and low abundance ions can be overlooked which is one
of the drawbacks of DDA (Petrosius and Schoof 2023). In DIA, wider windows are created to
systematically select all ions within an m/z range for fragmentation. A main difference between
DDA and DIA is that a single MS2 spectrum in DDA originates from one precursor ion whereas in
DIA, fragments from multiple precursor ions can make up one MS2 spectrum. The data processing
in DIA is therefore more computationally demanding, but DIA surpasses DDA in both proteome
depth and data completeness (Petrosius and Schoof 2023).
Figure 1.6: Acquisition methods in MS. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) or data-independent
acquisition (DIA) can be used to select the precursor ions in MS1 for fragmentation and MS2. In
DDA, narrow m/z windows are used to select specific precursor ions. In DIA, wider m/z windows
are created to systematically select all precursor ions within an m/z range.
1.5.4
Throughput can be increased with multiplexing
When conducting an MS experiment one can decide to do it label-free or opt for one of multiple
labeling strategies. With label-free quantification, a single sample is analyzed at a time. It has the
advantage of a simpler sample preparation without the requirement of expensive reagents. On the
other hand, labeling allows multiplexing with quantification of multiple samples at a time which
provides a higher throughput. One of the most widely used labeling strategies uses tandem mass
tags (TMT). TMT is an isobaric label which means that the labels have the same nominal mass
and are chemically identical but they differ in their isotope distribution. The separation of the
labeled samples happens when a reporter ion with a specific mass is cleaved off the tag. TMT
contains a mass reporter, a mass normalizer and an amine-reactive group (Fig 1.7a). The total
mass of the mass reporter and mass normalizer is constant for all TMT labels (304 Da) and the
peptides from all samples will therefore look the same at the MS1-level. However, the distribution
of carbon and nitrogen isotopes across the isobaric labels varies between the TMT labels. When
the mass reporter is cleaved off during MS2, the isotope pattern in the mass reporter provides
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
9
==PAGE:15==
slightly different masses of the reporter ions (126-135 Da). The reporter ions can thereby be used
to distinguish the individual samples from each other and quantify them by their relative abundance.
TMT exists in an 18-plex version that enables multiplexing of up to 18 samples (J. Li et al. 2021).
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.7: TMT can be used for multiplexing. (a) Up to 18 samples can be multiplexed with
TMT. The mass reporter is cleaved off upon higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) during
MS2. The slightly different masses of the reporter ions allow quantification of the individual
samples. (b) In a single-cell experiment, TMTpro-126 is usually used for the booster channel and
TMTpro-127C kept empty to minimize the effect of spillover from isotopic impurities.
The choice of labeling strategy affects the acquisition method for MS2. With TMT, the quantifi-
cation happens at the MS2-level as the peptides from the multiplexed samples are identical at the
MS1-level. In DIA, multiple precursors are present within the selection window of the mass spec-
trum and they are all selected for fragmentation together. The reporter ions of all these peptides
will be detected together and the abundance of each individual peptide will be indistinguishable
from the others. The analysis of TMT samples therefore requires DDA, where a single peptide is
selected for MS2 at a time.
1.6
Single-cell proteomics by mass spectrometry
For many years, MS has been used to gain biological insight into complex metabolic and signaling
networks as well as many other traits at the proteome level. Traditionally, these studies have fo-
cused on bulk analysis of cells because a high sample load was necessary for an accurate detection
10
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:16==
and quantification of the proteins. However, bulk analysis is a population-averaged method that
mainly reflects the dominant biological traits of the population. It fails to capture the complex
heterogeneity within cell populations and obscures potentially important biological information.
To understand population dynamics and cell-to-cell differences studies at the single-cell level are
necessary (Labib and Kelley 2020).
Single-cell studies have been performed at the transcript level for many years. A major advantage
of studying mRNA is the ability to amplify RNA through polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Single-
cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) has greatly expanded our understanding of phenotypic diversity
in cell populations. Nonetheless, mRNA levels are not always correlated with protein abundance
due to PTMs, differences in protein half lives among other processes (Greenbaum et al. 2003). As
most cellular reactions are catalyzed by proteins and the cell phenotype thereby largely controlled
by the proteins, single-cell studies of the proteome are highly needed. However, unlike for nucleic
acids, there is currently no method for amplifying proteins which poses a great challenge for the
study of single-cell proteomes. Fortunately, proteins are more abundant than mRNA transcripts
with an estimated average of 2,800 more protein copies than their respective mRNA copies in a
cell (Schwanhäusser et al. 2011). However, the amount of proteins is still low with only 100-250
pg protein in a single mammalian cell (Wiśniewski et al. 2014).
Single-cell studies of proteins have largely been restricted to methods that rely on fluorescent la-
beling of the proteins of interest. This includes attaching green fluorescent protein (GFP) to the
proteins and antibody-based techniques such as flow cytometry and Western blotting (Labib and
Kelley 2020). However, these techniques only allow a limited number of proteins to be assayed
at a time and require prior knowledge of the proteins of interest. In contrast, MS provides a non-
targeted approach for the study of the cell proteome.
1.6.1
Advancements in the field of scp-MS
With tremendous progress in the field of MS-based proteomics in the last five years, single-cell
proteomics by mass spectrometry (scp-MS) is now a reality. Scp-MS has gained great attention
because of its ability to reveal cellular heterogeneity and study rare cell populations that would
otherwise be concealed in larger cell populations. The low amount of protein in a cell has been
a limitation for the study of single-cells by MS and makes it critical to avoid sample loss during
sample preparation. The first successful method for scp-MS using LC-MS was developed by the
Slavov group and termed SCoPE-MS (Budnik et al. 2018). In SCoPE-MS, the issues arising from
a low input amount were partly addressed by lowering the sample volume to a low microliter
scale. Development of nanodrop-based techniques has further improved the sample preparation
and significantly decreased surface adsorption and protein loss (Zhu et al. 2018). To increase the
protein amount even more in each MS run SCoPE-MS employed a TMT-labeling approach with a
booster consisting of 200 cells in the experimental design. The booster channel was added together
with the single-cells to ensure a sufficient ion load for peptide identification. A similar TMT-
labeling layout has been applied in later scp-MS studies (Fig 1.7b) (Schoof et al. 2021, Furtwängler
et al. 2022).
In addition to advancements in the sample preparation and the experimental design, progress on
the instrumental front has improved the prospects of scp-MS. Coupling of ion mobility technology
to the mass spectrometer has allowed filtering of singly charged species to deplete the number of
contaminants in the mass spectrometer. Peptide ions are typically multiply charged while chemical
contaminants are singly charged. Technologies like Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spectrometry
(FAIMSpro, Thermo intrumentation) and Trapped Ion Mobility (TIMS, Bruker instrumentation)
exploits this principle and show improvement of the signal-to-noise ratios which is of particular
importance in single-cell studies (Petrosius and Schoof 2023). Recently, a novel high-resolution
accurate mass (HRAM) instrument platform was released consisting of an Orbitrap and an HRAM
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
11
==PAGE:17==
Astral analyzer. The Astral analyzer provides high sensitivity and high scan rates allowing shorter
ion injection times which is a hurdle for low input samples (Petrosius, Aragon-Fernandez, et al.
2023).
All these advancements have greatly improved the field of scp-MS but challenges still persist.
Among these is a limited throughput of 20 −40 single-cells per day. Multiplexing of samples
with TMT increases this throughput to > 100 cells per day but introduces potential biases in the
quantification (Petrosius and Schoof 2023). Furthermore, computational analysis of scp-MS data
suffers from only a few dedicated analysis tools. Current tools are mostly based on methods devel-
oped for scRNA-seq. However, inherent differences in the data output require proper evaluation
of the tools before re-purposing them. For instance, scRNA-seq data is based on counts while scp-
MS is based on intensities with a much wider range in quantification. Solving these challenges
and more is essential to fully exploit the potential of scp-MS.
1.7
Aims of the study
This thesis seeks to leverage the capabilities of scp-MS to study sub-populations of the AML hier-
archy. Firstly, to identify potential LSC specific drug targets and select drug treatments for further
investigation. Secondly, to assess the efficacy of the selected drugs on the viability of the AML
cells and the proteomic alterations induced by drug treatment. To this end, the primary AML cul-
ture model OCI-AML8227 will be used as an ex vivo model resembling the AML hierarchy. To
achieve these aims the following three steps are taken.
1. Conduct data analysis of a single-cell MS data set with 216 OCI-AML8227 cells to identify
proteins that are up-regulated in LSCs and could serve as potential drug targets.
2. Select drug treatments based on the initial analysis and utilize the OCI-AML8227 model to
perform drug screenings and assess the drugs’ effect on the cell viability with flow cytometry.
3. Expose the OCI-AML8227 cells to drug treatment with the drugs that performed satisfactory
in the drug screenings and analyze the drug-treated cells with FACS followed by scp-MS to study
the effect of drug treatment on the proteome of the cells.
12
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:18==
2
Materials and Methods
Two single-cell data sets of OCI-AML8227 cells were acquired by MS. The label-free single-cell
data set was acquired by members of the Cell Diversity Lab, DTU, before the present thesis was
started. The drug treatments were performed and the accompanying TMT-labeled single-cell data
set acquired as part of this thesis work.
2.1
Cell culture and FACS for label-free scp-MS
OCI-AML8227 cells were grown in StemSpan SFEM II media supplemented with growth factors
(Miltenyi Biotec, IL-3, IL-6 and G-CSF (10 ng/mL), SCF and Flt3-L (50 ng/mL), and TPO (25
ng/mL)). The cells were grown at 37◦C in 24-well flat-bottom non-treated plates. On the sixth day,
the cells were harvested, washed, counted and resuspended in fresh media at a density of 5,000,000
cells/mL. The cells were stained with CD34 antibody (CD34-APC-Cy7, Biolegend, clone 518) at
1:100 (v/v) and CD38 antibody (CD38-PE, BD, clone HB-7) at 1:50 (v/v) for 30 minutes on ice.
The cells were then washed with media followed by three washes with ice cold PBS to remove
any remaining growth factors. The cells were sorted with FACS on an Aria II (BD) operated with
a 100 µm nozzle and controlled by the DIVA software package (v.8.0.2). The cells were sorted
at single-cell resolution into a 384-well EppendorfLoBind PCR plate (Eppendorf AG) containing
1 µL of lysis buffer (100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.5, 20 % (v/v) 2,2,2-
Trifluoroethanol (TFE)). Directly after sorting, the plate was briefly spun, snap-frozen on dry ice,
boiled at 95oC in a PCR machine (Applied Biosystems Veriti 384-well) for five minutes and stored
at -80oC until MS sample preparation.
2.2
MS sample preparation of label-free single-cells
The plate was thawed and the protein lysates were digested with 2 ng of trypsin (Sigma, T6567) in
1 µL of 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5. The digestion was carried out overnight at 37oC and stopped by the
addition of 1 µL of 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). All the dispensing steps were performed
using an I-DOT One instrument (Dispendix). The plate was stored at -80oC until MS analysis.
2.3
Label-free LC-MS data collection
The peptides were separated with liquid chromatography (LC) on a vanquish Neo UHPLC system
connected to a 50 cm uPAC Neo Low-load and an EASY-spray emitter via built-in NanoViper
fittings (Thermo Scientific). Direct injections were performed from the 384-well plate using a 25
µL injection loop. The separation was carried out using a single-column configuration and the
column oven set to 50oC. 11.8 min gradients were applied. The percentage of buffer B (0.1%
(v/v) formic acid (FA), 80% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) in MS-grade water) was initially increased
from 0 to 13.5% during the first 2 min with a nominal flow of 750 nL/min followed by a gradual
increase to 99% from 2-5.1 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min and kept constant at 99% for the
remaining time (5.1-11.8 min). The peptide spectra were acquired with an Orbitrap Astral mass
spectrometer operated in positive mode with the FAIMSpro interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific)
using a compensation voltage of -50 V. MS1 spectra were acquired using the Orbitrap at a resolution
of 120,000 and a scan range of 400-900 m/z with normalized automatic gain control (AGC) target
of 300% and maximum injection time of 246 ms. MS2 spectra were acquired with DIA using the
Astral with loop control set to 0.7 seconds per cycle. The injection time was set to 65 ms and a
15 m/z isolation window width with 1 m/z window overlap was used. The precursor ions were
fragmented with HCD using a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25%. The AGC target was
set to 800%.
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
13
==PAGE:19==
2.4
Computational analysis of label-free single-cell data
The MS-generated raw files were processed with Spectronaut version 17 (Biognosys). Direct DIA
analysis was performed in pipeline mode using default factory settings. Pulsar searches were per-
formed without fixed modifications and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set
as variable modifications. The quantification was performed at the MS1-level and calculated from
the area under the curve. Protein quantification tables were exported from Spectronaut and further
analyzed in R (v.4.3.2).
The exported protein quantification tables were processed to remove potential contaminants, low
coverage proteins, and outlier cells. Multiple steps were conducted and can be seen in table 2.1.
Firstly, potential contaminant proteins were removed. Secondly, cells with fewer than 500 protein
groups (PGs) identified were removed to account for empty wells and sample loss during prepa-
ration. Then very low abundant PGs that were only identified in less than 10 cells were removed.
Additional outlier cells were identified and removed based on two parameters. Cells with a me-
dian coefficient of variation above 0.8 calculated across peptides within each PG were removed.
Only PGs with at least 3 peptides were included in the calculations. A linear model of the sum
of PG quantity as a function of cell size represented by forward scatter area (FSC-A) from FACS
was created. Cells that were more than two times the residual standard error (RSE) away from
the linear model were removed as well. The data was subsequently median normalized and log2
transformed. Before imputation of missing values, low coverage proteins were removed. Multiple
thresholds were evaluated based on how well the four FACS-derived cell types clustered in 2D
UMAP space. The clustering performance was measured by the silhouette score (the mean of all
silhouette coefficients). A threshold of 20% coverage was selected equivalent to a PG presence
in at least 38 cells. The data was imputed using the k-nearest neighbours (KNN) method with 5
nearest neighbours. After imputation, the protein expression was scaled to zero mean and unit
variance. Differential expression (DE) analysis and gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis were
conducted with the limma package (Ritchie et al. 2015) and p-values were corrected using the
Benjamini–Hochberg procedure. Diffusion maps were created with the destiny package (Angerer
et al. 2016). Clustering was performed using Louvain clustering with the scran package (Lun,
McCarthy, and Marioni 2016). All visualization were made with ggplot (Wickham 2016).
Step
Action
Total PGs
Total cells
1
Start
2904
216
2
Not a common contaminant
2859
216
3
At least 700 PGs per cell
2859
209
4
At least 10 cells per PG
2689
209
5
Median cell CV ≤0.8
2689
195
6
Within 2·RSE of linear model
2689
189
7
At least 38 cells per PG
2393
189
Table 2.1: The steps in the data cleaning workflow of the label-free single-cell MS data. A
total of 215 protein groups (PGs) and 27 cells were removed during data cleaning. In step 5, the
coefficient of variation (CV) was calculated across peptides within the same PG for each cell and
the median determined. In step 6, a linear model of the sum of PG quantity as a function of cells
size was created. Cells were removed if they were more than two times the residual standard error
(RSE) away from the model trend line.
14
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:20==
2.5
Cell culture for drug treatments
OCI-AML8227 cells were grown in 20% BIT 9500 (Stem Cell Technologies) and 80% X-Vivo
10 (LONZA) media supplemented with growth factors (Bio-Techne, IL-3 and G-CSF (10 ng/mL),
SCF (100 ng/mL), IL-6 20 (ng/mL), Flt3L (50 ng/mL), and TPO (25 ng/mL)). The cells were
grown at 37◦C in 24-well flat-bottom non-treated plates. Every 6 days, the cells were harvested,
counted and resuspended in fresh media at a density of 400,000 cells/mL.
2.6
Drug screenings of OCI-AML8227
The OCI-AML8227 cells were exposed to drug treatment with five kinase inhibitors: FRAX597,
BSJ-03-123, flavopiridol, midostaurin, and SBP-3264 (Selleckchem). Seven drug concentrations
(0.1 nM, 1 nM, 10 nM, 30 nM, 100 nM, 300 nM, and 1000 nM) were examined and the viability
of the cells assessed at each concentration. On day 0, the cells were harvested, counted and resus-
pended in fresh media at a density of 400,000 cells/mL. 100 µL of cell suspension was added to
each well of a 96 well v-bottom non-adherent culture plate containing 0.1 µL of drug for a final
concentration as indicated above. The experiment was performed in triplicates and contained six
negative controls with DMSO instead of drug as reference points. Dispensing of all the drugs was
performed using an I-DOT One instrument (Dispendix). On day 3, the cells were stained with
CD34 antibody (CD34-APC, BD, clone 8G12) and CD38 antibody (CD38-PE, BD, clone HB-7)
for 35 minutes and then with a 7-AAD viability marker (Thermo Scientific) for 10 minutes at room
temperature. The plates were centrifuged at 500 g for five minutes and the media removed before
each of the two staining steps. 25 µL of a 1:100 dilution of the antibodies and 25 µL of a 1:1000
dilution of the viability marker were added to each well. To ensure sufficient sample volume for
flow cytometry, the cells were diluted in 150 µL of PBS just before the analysis. The cells were
analyzed with flow cytometry on an LSRFortessa 3 laser (BD) using a 100 µm nozzle and oper-
ated with the DIVA software. The data was analyzed in FlowJo (BD, v.10.8.1) and exported into R
(v.4.3.2). Dose-response curves were calculated for the drug-treated cells using a four-parameter
log-logistic model with the drc package (Ritz et al. 2015).
2.7
Drug treatment of OCI-AML8227 and FACS for TMT-labeled
scp-MS
The OCI-AML8227 cells were exposed to drug treatment with 96.7 nM flavopiridol, 233 nM mi-
dostaurin or DMSO as a negative control. On day 0, the cells were harvested, counted and resus-
pended in fresh media as previously described at a density of 400,000 cells/mL. 100 µL of cell
suspension was added to each well of a 96 well v-bottom non-adherent culture plate containing
0.1 µL of the drug. The drugs were dispensed using an I-DOT One instrument (Dispendix) and a
total of 54 wells at each of the three conditions were made. On day 3, the cells exposed to each
treatment were pooled and stained with CD34 antibody (CD34-APC, BD, clone 8G12) and CD38
antibody (CD38-PE, BD, clone HB-7) for 35 minutes. 200 µL of a 1:100 dilution of the antibodies
was used to stain each sample. The cells were washed twice with PBS and stained with 3 mL of
a 1:1000 PBS dilution of the 7-AAD viability marker (Miltenyi Biotec) for 10 minutes at room
temperature. The cells were sorted into 384-well Eppendorf LoBind PCR plates (Eppendorf AG)
containing 1 µL of lysis buffer (80 mM TEAB pH 8.5 and 20% TFE). The cells were sorted using
FACS on an MA900 Multi-Application Cell Sorter (SONY) with a 100 µm nozzle and the machine
controlled by the SONY Cell Sorter Software (v3.1.2). Three plates were sorted at single-cell res-
olution using a quadrant approach. Eight wells on each plate were kept empty as a control. See
Appendix figure B.1 for the plate layout. One booster plate was sorted in bulk with 500 cells in
each well using a four-way approach. After sorting, the cells were snap-frozen on dry ice, boiled
at 95oC in a PCR machine (Biometra TAdvanced 384-well, Analytik Jena) for five minutes, and
frozen again and stored at -80oC until MS sample preparation.
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
15
==PAGE:21==
2.8
MS sample preparation of TMT-labeled single-cells
The plates were thawed and the protein lysates were digested with 2 ng of trypsin for the single-cell
plates and 10 ng of trypsin for the booster plates (Promega, VA9000). The trypsin was dissolved
in 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5 and 1 µL dispensed into each well. All dispensing steps in the protocol
were performed in 1 µL volumes unless otherwise stated with the I-DOT One instrument (Dis-
pendix). The plates were incubated overnight at 37oC. After digestion, the peptides were labeled
with TMTpro (Thermo Scientific). The booster channel was labeled with 12 mM TMTpro-126
and the single-cells were labeled with 6 mM TMTpro-127N - TMTpro-135N. The single-cell la-
bels were randomized within each column on the 384-well plates. See Appendix figure B.2 for the
labeling layout. The plates were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature and the labels quenched
with 2.5% hydroxylamine in 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5 for the booster and 1.25% hydroxylamine in
100 mM TEAB pH 8.5 for the single-cells. The samples were incubated for 15 minutes before
they were acidified with 1% TFA. The wells on the booster plate were pooled and desalted using
a SOLAµ C18 column (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief,
300 µL methanol was added to the column, followed by 300 µL of buffer B and 300 µL of buffer
A (0.1% FA in MS-grade water). The sample was loaded onto the column in a 1:3 dilution with
1% TFA and rinsed with 300 µL of buffer A. The peptides were eluted with 80 µL 0.1% FA in
40% MS-grade ACN. The columns were centrifuged at 800 g for 1 minute in between each step.
The peptides were dried in an Eppendorf Speedvac and resuspended in 15 µL of buffer A for a
peptide equivalent of 6,000 cells/µL. The final TMT samples were manually pooled column-wise
with the equivalent of a 250 cells booster channel into an Evotip C18 column (Evosep) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, the columns were rinsed with 20 µL of MS-grade ACN,
soaked in 2-propanol for 30 seconds and equilibrated with 20 µL of buffer A. The tips were cen-
trifuged at 700 g for 1 minute in between each step. 80 µL buffer A was loaded onto the columns
followed by 10 µL of booster and the pooled single-cells. The wells were rinsed with 10 µL of
buffer A and loaded onto the tips. The tips were centrifuged at 700 g for 2 minutes and washed
with 20 µL of buffer A. The tips were then filled with 250 µL of buffer A and soaked in buffer A
to ensure the tips did not dry out for the LC-MS.
2.9
TMT-labeled LC-MS data collection
The peptides were separated with LC on an EvosepOne UHPLC system (Evosep) connected to a 15
cm Aurora Elite TS (Ion Opticks). Separation was carried out with the column oven at 50oC with
Evosep’s built-in 20 samples per day (SPD) workflow. The peptide spectra were acquired on an
Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in positive mode with a FAIMSpro
interface (Thermo Scientific) running Tune 3.4 and Xcalibur 4.3. The real-time search (RTS) MS2
acquisition method RETICLE developed by Furtwängler et al. 2022 was used for data collection.
Briefly, MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap and precursor peptides fragmented with CID
and subjected to MS2 in the linear ion trap. RTS of the MS2 spectra against a database of the human
proteome allowed identification of peptides of interest which were subsequently fragmented with
HCD and quantified in the Orbitrap. Few adjustments were done to the protocol including an
updated homo sapiens data base from Uniprot for the RTS as well as the fixed modifications set to
TMTpro 18-plex on lysine and the N-terminus instead of TMTpro 16-plex.
2.10
Computational analysis of drug-treated TMT-labeled
single-cell data
The MS-generated raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer version 3.0 (Thermo Fisher
Scientific). The built-in TMTPro Reporter ion quantification workﬂows with the standard settings
were used. The spectra were searched against the homo sapiens data base obtained from Uniprot
(Swiss-Prot reviewed, downloaded 2023) with trypsin set as enzyme and the maximum number
16
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:22==
of cleavages set to 2. The fixed modifications were set to TMTpro 18-plex on lysine and the
N-terminus and the variable modifications were set to methionine oxidation and N-terminal acety-
lation. The results were rescored with percolator and filtered with a 1% false discovery rate. The
quantification was performed on MS2-level with spectra from the Orbitrap. These spectra were
also sent to Sequest for identification, where they were searched with a precursor mass tolerance
of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. No normalization mode, scaling mode or
isotopic error correction were applied and the average reporter signal-to-noise threshold was set to
0. Precursor quantification tables were exported from Proteome Discoverer and further analyzed
in R (v.4.3.2).
The exported precursor quantification tables were aggregated into peptides and protein groups
using the scp package (Vanderaa and Gatto 2021). Data processing was then performed using the
SCeptre computational workflow developed by Schoof et al. 2021. As SCeptre is a python package
and the analysis conducted in R, the reticulate package was used to create an interface between the
two programming languages and call python functions from R (Ushey, Allaire, and Tang 2021).
Data processing in R using the SCeptre workflow was facilitated by the framework developed by
Vanderaa and Gatto 2022. After data processing with SCeptre, the protein data was embedded
using principal component analysis (PCA), UMAP (McInnes, Healy, and Melville 2018), or a
diffusion map (Haghverdi, Buettner, and Theis 2015). Furthermore, a non-imputed version of the
data was created and used for DE analysis and GO enrichment analysis using the limma package
(Ritchie et al. 2015) and p-values were corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. In
all other statistical test, one-way ANOVA was performed to derive statistical significance between
samples. Significant results were followed up by post-hoc analysis using Tukey’s honest significant
difference method. The significance level was set to 0.05.
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
17
==PAGE:23==
3
Results
The OCI-AML8227 model system was used to identify cell specific drug targets for the treatment
of AML. As LSCs are one of the main drivers of relapse, we hypothesized that proteins with an
altered expression profile in these cells compared to the other cells of the AML hierarchy could
serve as potential targets for further investigation.
3.1
Single-cell analysis and drug target discovery
Cells of the OCI-AML8227 model system were sorted with FACS using an Aria II. A gated ap-
proach was used to sort the cells according to their CD34 and CD38 expression (Fig 3.1). A total
of 216 single-cells were sorted into a 384-well plate with an equal contribution from each of the
four gates. The single-cells were subsequently analyzed by MS with DIA on an Orbitrap Astral
mass spectrometer.
Figure 3.1: FACS profile of the sorted cells. A total of 216 single-cells were sorted with FACS
and analyzed with mass spectrometry. Four gates were created to sort the cells according to their
CD34 and CD38 expression with 54 cells collected from each gate.
After data processing, an average of 4804±1342 precursors, 4650±1293 peptides and 1683±357
protein groups (PGs) were identified in each cell with CD38neg blasts in general showing the fewest
identifications (Table 3.2a, Fig 3.2b). The average cell completeness across PGs was 70.3±14.9%
with CD38neg blasts also showing the lowest degree of completeness (Fig 3.2c). Progenitors had
the highest completeness and the highest Jaccard index (Fig 3.2d). With a mean Jaccard index
of 0.77, around 77% of PGs were consistently found across progenitors. Meanwhile, only around
60% of the PGs identified in CD38neg blasts were consistently found across these cells. Hence, the
progenitors shared more features within the population while it appeared that the CD38neg blasts
were more heterogeneous in terms of identifications. A total of 2393 PGs were identified across
all cells and used for the data analysis at the protein level.
3.1.1
The MAPK signaling pathway is enriched in the LSCs
The cells were grouped according to their CD34 and CD38 expression with LSCs in the CD34pos
CD38neg compartment. A differential expression analysis was performed on protein level com-
paring the LSCs to all the other cells. A total of 464 PGs were up-regulated and 130 PGs were
down-regulated in the LSCs (Fig 3.3a). The PGs were matched to their gene names and gene on-
tology (GO) enrichment analysis was performed on the significantly regulated PGs. The top 10
18
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:24==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.2: Identifications and completeness in the scp-MS data set. (a) Summary statistics for
each FACS-derived cell type. Mean and standard deviations for each population with n = number
of cells. (b) The number of identified precursors, peptides, and protein groups (PGs) for each cell
type. LSCs (blue), progenitors (green), CD38pos blasts (pink) and CD38neg blasts (yellow). (c)
The cell completeness across protein groups. The mean completeness varies from 50.9% for the
CD38neg blasts to 80.0% for the progenitors. (d) The Jaccard index for each cell type.
most significantly enriched GO terms were extracted (Fig 3.3b). Fundamental biological processes
such as organization of organelles and other cellular components were enriched as well as telomere
maintenance which is important for DNA replication and cell division. GO terms related to the re-
sponse to reactive oxygen species were also enriched which aligns with the metabolic requirement
of LSCs. Additionally, two signaling pathways were enriched: The MAPK and ERBB signaling
pathways. The MAPK signaling pathway is involved in a multitude of cellular processes like pro-
liferation, differentiation, and apoptosis (Wei and H. T. Liu 2002). The ERBB signaling pathway
contains transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinases that can act as upstream regulators and activate
the MAPK signaling pathway (Hynes and MacDonald 2009). We therefore decided to investigate
the MAPK signaling pathway further and extracted up-regulated PGs in GO:0043408 ”regulation
of MAPK cascade”. Of greatest interest were the up-regulated protein kinases. Kinases are es-
sential in cell signaling and many kinases are associated with various types of cancers, thereby
leading us to focus on this enzyme class. Some of the kinases subjected to further investigation
are highlighted on figure 3.3a. p21-activated kinase 1 (PAK1) and 3 (PAK3) and serine/threonine
kinase 4 (STK4) are all part of the MAPK signaling pathway. The PAKs are serine/threonine ki-
nases involved in many signaling pathways promoting cell proliferation, inhibiting apoptosis and
regulating many other cellular processes (Radu et al. 2013). STK4 forms part of the hippo signal-
ing pathway which is involved in cell proliferation, apoptosis, and stem cell self-renewal among
other processes (Fu et al. 2022). Kinases outside the MAPK signaling pathway were also sub-
jected to further inspection. In this process, hematopoietic cell kinase (HCK) was identified. HCK
is a tyrosine kinase that belongs to the Src family tyrosine kinases (SFKs) which are important for
hematopoietic signaling and can promote proliferation and survival of myeloid progenitors (Ku et
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
19
==PAGE:25==
al. 2015). Additionally, C-terminal Src kinase (CSK) was identified as up-regulated in LSCs. CSK
is a tyrosine kinase that serves as a negative regulator of the SFKs (Ku et al. 2015). A sixth kinase
of interest was CDK6 which has previously been described in the context of LSC self-renewal and
quiescence exit (Laurenti, Frelin, et al. 2015). However, CDK6 was not found to be significantly
up-regulated in the LSCs (p = 0.068).
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3: Differential expression analysis of LSCs vs all other cell types. (a) Significantly dif-
ferentially expressed protein groups (PGs) are colored red (α = 0.05) and six PGs are highlighted.
(b) The 10 most significantly enriched gene ontology (GO) terms and the number of differentially
expressed (DE) PGs within each GO term.
3.1.2
Five kinase inhibitors are selected for drug screenings
Based on the initial scp-MS analysis, five kinase inhibitors were selected to target some of the
protein kinases that were up-regulated in the LSCs (Table 3.1). FRAX597 is an ATP-competitive
inhibitor of PAK1 and PAK3 which both belongs to the structurally similar group 1 PAKs (Licciulli
et al. 2013). SBP-3264 is an STK3 and STK4 inhibitor that also binds competitively to the ATP
ribose pocket of the kinases (Bata et al. 2022). Additionally, a CDK6 degrader, BSJ-03-123, was
selected despite it not showing a significant differential expression in LSCs (Brand et al. 2019).
Another CDK6 inhibitor, flavopiridol (also known as alvocidib), was also selected. Flavopiridol
inhibits multiple CDKs involved in cell cycle regulation and is currently in clinical trials for the
treatment of AML (Stanchina et al. 2020). Lastly, the multi-kinase inhibitor midostaurin was se-
lected. As previously described, midostaurin is used to treat AML patients with FLT3 mutations.
The OCI-AML8227 model contains the FLT3 mutation which sparked our interest in the drug and
its effect on the system. Furthermore, midostaurin inhibits the SFKs c-Fgr and c-Src (Tvedt, Nep-
stad, and Bruserud 2017). These two SFKs were not identified in the scp-MS data set, however,
the concomitant identification of HCK and CSK made us interested in SFK dysregulation.
Drug
Target
FRAX597
PAK1, PAK2 and PAK3
BSJ-03-123
CDK6
Flavorpiridol
CDK1, CDK2, CDK4, CDK6 and CDK9
Midostaurin
PKCα/β/γ, Syk, Flk-1, Akt, PKA, c-Kit,
c-Fgr, c-Src, FLT3, PDFRβ and VEGFR1/2
SBP-3264
STK3 and STK4
Table 3.1: The five drugs used in the drug screenings and their targets as listed by the supplier
(Selleckchem).
20
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:26==
3.1.3
Imputation and PG filtering affects the analysis
The drug treatment was selected and designed based on this initial analysis of the protein expression
in LSCs. However, flaws in the data analysis were identified after the drug screening. The initial
data analysis was performed on non-imputed and non-normalized data. Without imputation a lot
of PGs will be missing between cells. Consequently, the data set is unbalanced which has to be
taken into account when analyzing the differential expression across cells. With a varying degree
of completeness in the data set, the PG identification can differ a lot between the cell types. When
inspecting the protein expression of the six highlighted PGs from figure 3.3a one can observe that
some of the PGs are not uniformly identified across cell types (Fig 3.4b). For instance PAK1
and HCK are mainly identified in LSCs while CDK6 is almost not identified in CD38neg blasts.
The PG identification pattern could be biologically meaningful assuming that the reason for not
observing the PGs is biological. That could be because the PG expression is either so low that
it falls below the limit of detection or the PG is not expressed in the cell at all at the time of
sampling. Such assumptions would mean that the values are not missing at random and one could
set the missing values to zero. However, that is a very strict assumption and technical reasons
can also lie behind the missing values. Many analyses assume that the missing values are indeed
missing at random. The missing values can then be imputed using imputation algorithms which
also facilitates dimensionality reduction and data visualization of high dimensional data.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4: Diffusion map and protein expression of selected protein groups. (a) A diffusion
map of the 189 cells from the non-imputed and non-normalized data set colored according to their
cell type. (b) The protein group (PG) expression of the six selected kinases: PAK1, PAK3, STK4,
HCK, CSK, and CDK6 overlayed on top of the diffusion map. The grey points are cells in which
the PGs are not identified.
A secondary data analysis was performed on the imputed and median-normalized data. Similarly,
a differential expression analysis was performed on the protein level comparing the LSCs to all the
other cells. 630 PGs were identified as up-regulated and 168 PGs were down-regulated. Of the
six highlighted PGs, only CSK and STK4 were significantly differentially expressed in the LSCs
(Fig 3.5a). Furthermore, GO enrichment analysis on the significantly regulated PGs no longer
showed an enrichment of the MAPK signaling pathway (Fig 3.5b). However, the ERBB signaling
pathway was still enriched. Additionally, a lot of new GO terms related to transmembrane transport
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
21
==PAGE:27==
of monoatomic ions were highly enriched.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.5: Differential expression analysis of LSCs vs all other cell types. (a) Differential
expression (DE) analysis performed on the imputed and median-normalized data. Significantly
differentially expressed protein groups (PGs) are colored red (α = 0.05) and six PGs are high-
lighted. (b) The 10 most significantly enriched gene ontology (GO) terms from the imputed and
median-normalized data set and the number of differentially expressed PGs within each GO term.
(c) DE analysis performed on the non-imputed and median-normalized data where PGs present in
< 6 cells of each cell type are filtered out. Significantly differentially expressed PGs are colored
red (α = 0.05) and four PGs are highlighted. (b) The 10 most significantly enriched GO terms
from the non-imputed, median-normalized and filtered data set and the number of differentially
expressed PGs within each GO term.
Imputation is a useful tool when dealing with missing values and a necessity for most dimensional-
ity reduction methods. However, a multitude of imputation algorithms exist which account for the
missing values in different ways and they should be applied with caution. Another way to increase
the confidence in the differential expression analysis is by sorting out low abundant PGs. To this
end, a third differential expression analysis was conducted where only PGs identified in more than
five cells within each cell type were included. 360 PGs were filtered out in the process, some of
which were PAK1 and CDK6. In this analysis, a total of 100 PGs were down-regulated and 858
PGs were up-regulated in the LSCs including the other four highlighted kinases (Fig 3.5c). Some
of the GO terms were similar to that of the imputed data set, however, new terms related to nucle-
oside triphosphate metabolic processes were enriched (Fig 3.5d). Furthermore, positive regulation
of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) / protein kinase B (PKB/AKT) signal transduction was
enriched. The PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway is an intracellular signaling pathway involved in cell
cycle regulation and cell survival (Porta, Paglino, and Mosca 2014).
3.1.4
Clustering of the cells allows cell type independent analysis of the data
So far all the analyses have been based on the cell types. These cell types were derived from the
fluorescence markers from FACS (Fig 3.1). However, as cell differentiation is a gradual process
22
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:28==
and not composed of fixed steps of clearly defined cell states and the LSC compartment is het-
erogeneous in terms of functional output, a cell type independent analysis was also performed. A
diffusion map was created from the imputed and median-normalized data and the diffusion pseu-
dotime calculated for all cells (Fig 3.6a, 3.6b). Louvain clustering of the cells was then performed
and the clusters overlaid onto the diffusion map (Fig 3.6c). Cluster six contained cells close to the
root of the diffusion map with the lowest diffusion pseudotime. When comparing to the FACS de-
rived cell types, these cells were mostly progenitors and LSCs (Fig 3.6d). A differential expression
analysis of cluster six compared to all other cells was performed on the non-imputed and median-
normalized data. A PG filter was applied and PGs present in < 6 cells within each cluster were
filtered out. This filtering step had a substantial effect on the number of PGs included in the analy-
sis with 996 PGs removed and only 1397 PGs left. The majority of the PGs were removed because
of cluster three which mostly consisted of CD38neg blasts with a low degree of completeness. A
total of 219 PGs were down-regulated and 899 PGs were up-regulated in cluster six while only 279
PGs were not significantly differentially expressed (Fig 3.7). Of the six highlighted kinases, only
CSK and STK4 were included in the analysis after filtering and both were up-regulated in cluster
six.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.6: Diffusion pseudotime and clustering of the cells. (a) A diffusion map of the 189
cells from the imputed and median-normalized data set colored according to their cell type. (b)
The diffusion pseudotime of the cells with the cell furthest to the left on the diffusion map as the
root. (c) The six clusters derived with Louvain clustering overlayed on top of the diffusion map.
(d) The distribution of cell types within each cluster.
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
23
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.7: Differential expression analysis of cluster 6 vs all other clusters. Differential ex-
pression analysis performed on the non-imputed and median-normalized data where protein groups
(PGs) present in < 6 cells of each cluster were filtered out. Significantly differentially expressed
PGs are colored red (α = 0.05) and two PGs are highlighted.
3.2
Drug screenings and cell viability assessment
To test the effect of the drugs on the cell viability the OCI-AML8227 cells were subjected to drug
treatment with the five kinase inhibitors from table 3.1. The drugs were tested at concentrations
between 0.1 nM and 1000 nM and the cell viability assessed after 72 hours with flow cytometry
on an LSRFortessa (BD). The distribution of cell types varied a lot between some of the drugs and
a surprisingly high LSC frequency of 21-37% was observed for the cells treated with flavopiridol,
midostaurin, and SBP-3264 (Fig 3.8a). Meanwhile, the LSC frequency for the cells treated with
FRAX597 and BSJ-03-123 was 2-5%. When looking at the six DMSO negative controls, a similar
discrepancy between the cell type distribution was observed (Fig 3.8b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8: Distribution of cell types among live cells. The distribution of blasts (red), progenitors
(green), and LSCs (blue) among the live cells for (a) all five drugs at each drug concentration and
(b) the negative DMSO controls. Error bars represent standard deviations (sd) (n = 3). The high
sd of the cells treated with 1000 nM flavopiridol is due to a very low total cell count (2-4 cells).
24
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:30==
The drug screenings were conducted on two plates to allow room for all the samples and there were
three DMSO negative controls on both plates. Interestingly, the discrepancy in cell type distribution
of the DMSO negative controls correlated with the position of the samples with respect to the plate
number (Fig 3.8b). However, the two distinct levels of LSC frequency for the drug-treated samples
did not correlate with the plate number, as the flavopiridol-treated cells were in plate 1. Instead, it
correlated with the total number of events counted on the flow cytometer for each sample (Fig 3.9).
The first 45 samples had an average of 7081±1317 total events while all the later samples had an
average of 15666±2195 total events. No adjustments were made to the flow cytometry protocol
during the run and the samples were analyzed in one go. The increase in the number of events
during the run is puzzling and possible explanations for these observations will be discussed later.
Figure 3.9: Total event count for each sample. The total number of events for each sample in
the order the samples were run on the flow cytometer. The samples are colored according to their
respective drug treatment and the plot is split into two by a black vertical line with samples from
plate 1 to the left and samples from plate 2 to the right of the line.
The viability of the drug-treated cells was compared to the negative DMSO controls to determine
the effect of the drugs on the cell viability. To adjust for the observed discrepancy in cell type
distribution, the DMSO controls were grouped in two according to the total number of events. The
two DMSO control groups were then used to calculate the relative viability of the drug-treated
cells that were grouped in a similar fashion. Cells treated with FRAX597 and BSJ-03-123 were
normalized to the DMSO controls with a low number of total events while the cells treated with
flavopiridol, midostaurin and SBP-3264 were normalized to the DMSO controls with a high num-
ber of total events. From figure 3.10, it appears that only two out of the five drugs had an effect
on the cell viability. For the cells treated with flavopiridol and midostaurin there is a clear dose
related effect on the relative cell viability. However, statistical analysis of variance with one-way
ANOVA revealed a significant difference in the relative cell viability across drug concentrations
for FRAX597 as well (α = 0.05). For BSJ-03-123 and SBP-3264 the relative viability did not
change significantly with the increasing drug concentrations.
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
25
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.10: The relative viability of drug-treated cells. The relative viability is the number of
live cells in each sample relative to the negative DMSO controls. Error bars represent standard
deviations (n = 3).
The drugs were selected to presumably target LSCs specifically. Nonetheless, there appeared to be
no difference in the relative viability of each cell type when treated with FRAX597, flavopiridol
and midostaurin (Fig 3.11a, 3.11c and 3.11e). All three cell types followed the overall trend of
the live cells. The same was the case for the cells treated with SBP-3264 and BSJ-03-123 where
no dose-dependent effect of the drugs was observed (data not shown). Dose-response curves were
created for the live cells using a four-parameter log-logistic model to determine the half maximal
inhibitory concentration (IC-50) of FRAX597, flavopiridol and midostaurin (Fig 3.11b, 3.11d and
3.11f). This gave an IC-50 of 11,268 nM for FRAX597, 96.7 nM for flavopiridol, and 233 nM for
midostaurin. The IC-50 value for FRAX597 is outside of the tested range and should be evaluated
with care. Only treatment with flavopiridol and midostaurin was continued.
26
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:32==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 3.11: Dose-response curves for FRAX597, flavopiridol and midostaurin. The rela-
tive viability of blasts (red), progenitors (green), LSCs (blue) and all live cells (black) and dose-
response curves for live cells treated with (a,b) FRAX597, (c,d) flavopiridol and (e,f) midostaurin.
The IC-50 values of the drugs are shown on the dose-response curves with an arrow for flavopiridol
and midostaurin. For FRAX597 the estimated IC-50 value is out of the tested drug range. Error
bars represent standard deviations (n = 3).
3.3
Drug treatment of OCI-AML8227 and scp-MS
Five kinase inhibitors were selected from the initial data analysis of the scp-MS data from the
OCI-AML8227 model system. Of these five kinase inhibitors, flavopiridol and midostaurin had
a dose-related effect on the cell viability with IC-50 values within the tested range. The next step
was to test the effect of drug treatment on the proteome of the OCI-AML8227 cells. To this end,
the cells were subjected to drug treatment with flavopiridol and midostaurin at a concentration of
96.7 nM and 233 nM, respectively, or with DMSO. After 72 hours of drug treatment, the cells were
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
27
==PAGE:33==
sorted using FACS on an MA900 Multi-Application Cell Sorter (SONY). A quadrant approach was
used to sort the cells. A total of 384 cells were sorted at each condition with an equal contribution
from each of the four quadrants (Fig 3.12). The cells were sorted into three 384-well plates with
each treatment type and cells from all four quadrants represented on all three plates for a balanced
design (Appendix fig B.1). Eight wells on each plate were kept empty and did not have a cell
deposited into them. These served as negative controls and were treated similarly to the remaining
wells during sample preparation. The cells were multiplexed with TMTpro for a higher throughput.
For each plex, 16 single-cells were labeled with TMTpro-127N - TMTpro-135N at random and a
250 cell equivalent booster was labeled with TMTpro-126. The labeled cells were analyzed with
scp-MS on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).
(a) DMSO
(b) Flavopiridol
(c) Midostaurin
Figure 3.12: FACS profile of the drug-treated OCI-AML8227 cells. The CD34 and CD38
expression of the cells were measured using FACS. A quadrant (Q) approach was used to sort
single-cells into three 384-well plates. The percentage of cells in each quadrant can be seen in
the corners of the plots. (a) The FACS profile for the cells treated with DMSO. Total cell count
= 97, 747. (b) The FACS profile for the cells treated with flavopiridol. Total cell count = 108, 994.
(c) The FACS profile for the cells treated with midostaurin. Total cell count = 103, 107.
Data processing of TMT-labeled data differs from label-free data due to a higher experimental
complexity. Each MS run, also called batch, contains 16 single-cells with different labels that have
to be separated from each other. Multiple workflows have been developed to process TMT-labeled
single-cell data that applies different quality control and normalization strategies. Before applying
any data processing workflow, a simple overview of the data can provide an indication of how the
experiment went.
A total of 2235 PGs were identified across all cells and an average of 1683 ± 294 precursors,
1669 ± 290 peptides, and 760 ± 103 PGs were identified in each sample (Fig 3.13a). The number
of identifications in the empty wells was quite high with an average of 1476 ± 253 precursors
per well. In comparison with the single-cells where there were 1688 ± 293 precursors per well,
the number of precursors in the empty wells was still significantly lower (α = 0.05). The many
identifications in the empty wells could be because of spillover from the adjacent channels or
contamination during sample preparation. In that case, the summed intensities of the identified
precursors is expected to be very low. On average, the empty wells had a lower summed intensity
than the single-cells, however, it was still relatively high and not significantly different from the
single-cells (Fig 3.13b). The average cell completeness across PGs was 34.0 ± 4.6%. The single-
cells from each quadrant (Q) had a slightly higher degree of completeness compared to the empty
wells (Fig 3.13c). The empty wells also had the lowest Jaccard index of 0.53 (Fig 3.13d).
28
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:34==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.13: Identifications and completeness in the drug-treated and TMT-labeled scp-MS
data set. (a) The number of identified precursors, peptides, and protein groups (PGs) for each quad-
rant (Q). Q4 (blue), Q1 (green), Q2 (pink), Q3 (yellow), and empty wells (grey). (b) The summed
intensities of precursors for each quadrant. (c) The cell completeness across protein groups. (d)
The Jaccard index for each quadrant.
Furthermore, a variation in the performance of the TMT labels was observed (Fig 3.14). On av-
erage, the TMT-131C channel had a lower summed PG intensity compared to the other channels.
However, with a large variation between samples this difference was non-significant. Nonethe-
less, the observed lower summed PG intensity could be due to a poor labeling efficiency. With a
good data processing workflow, the empty wells and the TMT-131C channel should be filtered out
during quality control.
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
29
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.14: Identifications across TMT channels in the drug-treated and TMT-labeled scp-
MS data set. The summed protein group (PG) intensity of each sample grouped by the TMT
channel. On average, the TMT-131C channel had a lower summed intensity than the other chan-
nels.
3.3.1
TMT-labeled single-cell MS data can be processed with SCeptre
The SCeptre computational workflow was developed by Schoof et al. 2021. SCeptre is a python
package that extents the functionalities of Scanpy for streamlined and reproducible data processing
of single-cell MS data. An overview of the SCeptre workflow can be seen on figure 3.15. Most
of the steps in the workflow can be done in R and only a few steps (Batch correction and impu-
tation) are specific to the SCeptre package and require integration between the two programming
languages.
Figure 3.15: Overview of the SCeptre workflow. The SCeptre workflow is performed at the
protein-level and includes multiple steps of quality control, batch correction and normalization.
The steps are colored according to the R packages used. The green steps rely on SCeptre called
from R. Figure from Vanderaa and Gatto 2022.
30
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:36==
The SCeptre workflow was applied to the single-cell MS data of the drug-treated TMT-labeled
OCI-AML8227 cells. Initially, protein data was generated from the raw precursors/peptide-spectrum
matches (PSMs) as the SCeptre workflow is performed at the protein-level. The single-cell quality
control was based on the relationship between the number of detected PGs and the summed inten-
sity of these PGs (Fig 3.16). In the protein quality control, contaminants and proteins identified
in fewer than three cells were removed. A total of 223 cells and 54 PGs were filtered out with
SCeptre leaving 929 cells and 2181 PGs for the downstream analysis.
Figure 3.16: Single-cell quality control with SCeptre. Single-cells were filtered based on the
number of protein groups (PGs) and the summed intensity of the PGs in a cell. A threshold of 650
PGs in each cell and two median absolute deviations (MAD) away from the median summed PG
intensity was applied (horizontal and vertical black lines, respectively). Only cells within the top
middle square were left after this filtering step. The cells are colored according to quadrant (Q).
Q4 (blue), Q1 (green), Q2 (pink), Q3 (yellow), and empty wells (grey).
3.3.2
Empty wells and a group of cells with a high median CV are left after data
processing with SCeptre
The ability of SCeptre to filter out the empty wells and the TMT-131C channel was evaluated. 16
of the empty wells and 30 of the TMT-131C samples remained after filtering. The number of PGs
per cell had increased to 772 ± 50 after filtering out low abundance cells and fewer outliers were
observed (Fig 3.17a). The cell completeness had increased slightly as well as the Jaccard index
(Fig 3.17c, 3.17d). The 16 empty wells that were not filtered out performed significantly worse
than the single-cells on all three parameters (α = 0.05). Moreover, the TMT-131C channels that
were not filtered out now had a significantly lower summed PG intensity than the other channels
(Fig 3.17b). For the remaining data analysis, the 16 empty wells and the 30 TMT-131C channels
were filtered out manually with only 884 cells left.
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
31
==PAGE:37==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.17: Identifications and completeness in the drug-treated and TMT-labeled scp-MS
data set after processing with SCeptre. (a) The number of protein groups (PGs) identified in
each quadrant (Q). Q4 (blue), Q1 (green), Q2 (pink), Q3 (yellow), and empty wells (grey). (b)
The summed PG intensity for each TMT channel. (c) The cell completeness across protein groups.
The mean completeness varies from 32.9% for the empty wells to 35.6% for Q1. (d) The Jaccard
index for each quadrant.
To visualize the data different dimensionality reduction methods were applied. Both the linear
dimensionality reduction method PCA and the non-linear dimensionality reduction UMAP showed
a quadrant-related grouping of the cells (Fig 3.18a, 3.18b). However, on both plots, there was an
area which did not show the same grouping of cells and exhibited a more intermingled pattern
of the quadrants. Furthermore, the diffusion map did not recapitulate the expected hierarchy of
the OCI-AML8227 system (Fig 3.18c). Diffusion component 2 appeared to capture some of the
expected differentiation path with cells from each quadrant grouping together gradually going from
Q1 to Q3. However, Q4 is expected to be at the apex of the hierarchy which is not observed in the
diffusion map where cells from Q1 are below cells from Q4 on diffusion component 2. Diffusion
component 1 has a long tail with relatively few cells from all four quadrants. The cells that were
scattered in the bottom and the right of the PCA plot, the top-left of the UMAP and the left and
the top of the diffusion map appeared a part from the majority of the cells and were investigated
further.
159 cells from the PCA plot, 164 cells from the UMAP, and 169 cells from the diffusion map
were extracted according to the thresholds on figure 3.18. Interestingly, there was a great overlap
between the cells extracted from each plot and a total of 148 reoccuring cells. (Fig 3.19).
32
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:38==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.18: Dimensionality reductions of the drug-treated and TMT-labeled scp-MS data
set after processing with SCeptre. (a) PCA of the data colored according to quadrant (Q). Q4
(blue), Q1 (green), Q2 (pink), and Q3 (yellow). Cells below the black horizontal line and to the
right of the black vertical line were extracted and compared to cells extracted from the other plots.
(b) UMAP of the data colored according to quadrant. Cells in the top left corner of the UMAP
were extracted for the comparison. (c) Diffusion map of the data colored according to quadrant.
Cells above the black horizontal line and to the left of the black vertical line were extracted for the
comparison.
Figure 3.19: Venn diagram of extracted cells from figure 3.18. 159 cells from the PCA plot,
164 cells from the UMAP, and 169 cells from the diffusion map (DM) were compared. 148 of the
cells were identical in all three plots.
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
33
==PAGE:39==
In an attempt to identify potential reasons for these observations, we investigated if any of the
meta data could provide an explanation. As almost all the cells were identical in the three plots,
the UMAP was used as a representative. The UMAP was colored according to the plate number,
the drug treatment, the TMT channel or the batch number to see if any descriptors were over-
represented in these cells (Fig 3.20). None of these parameters appeared to be enriched in the cells
extracted from the UMAP. Subsequently, the median coefficient of variation (CV) was calculated
for each cell to see if there was a trend for these cells. After coloring the UMAP according to the
median CV, it was evident that the outlier cells had a higher median CV than the other cells (Fig
3.21).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.20: UMAPs of the drug-treated and TMT-labeled scp-MS data set colored by differ-
ent meta-data. (a) UMAP of the data colored according to plate number. (b) UMAP of the data
colored according to drug. (c) UMAP of the data colored according to channel (15 levels). (d)
UMAP of the data colored according to batch (68 levels).
Figure 3.21: UMAPs of the drug-treated and TMT-labeled scp-MS data set colored by the
median CV. The median coefficient of variation (CV) for each cell was calculated by grouping the
peptides that belong to the same protein group. In general, the cells in the top left of the UMAP
showed a higher median CV than the other cells.
34
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:40==
The 148 overlapping cells were removed from the data set and the remaining 736 cells were visu-
alized. These cells grouped together on the PCA and UMAP plots according to the quadrants (Fig
3.22a, 3.22b). Furthermore, the diffusion map recapitulated the expected hierarchy much better
albeit the cells from Q1 were still at the tip with cells from Q4 following (Fig 3.22c). Figure 3.22d
shows that the cells from Q4 had the highest CD34 expression while cells from Q1 had a lower
CD34 expression. This matches the observations from the FACS profiles were the cells in Q4 in
general have a higher CD34 expression than the cells in Q1 (Fig 3.12).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.22: Dimensionality reductions of the drug-treated and TMT-labeled scp-MS data set
after processing with SCeptre and removing outliers. (a) PCA of the data colored according to
quadrant (Q). Q4 (blue), Q1 (green), Q2 (pink), and Q3 (yellow). (b) UMAP of the data colored
according to quadrant. (c) Diffusion map of the data colored according to quadrant. (d) Diffusion
map of the data colored according to CD34 expression.
3.3.3
Cell division, proliferation and myeloid differentiation are affected by drug
treatment
To investigate the effect of drug treatment on the proteome of the OCI-AML8227 cells the PG
expression in the three treatment groups was examined. Differential expression analysis was per-
formed comparing the cells treated with DMSO to the cells treated with flavopiridol or midostaurin.
The differential expression analysis was performed on the non-imputed data with PGs present in
< 6 cells from each quadrant filtered out. A total of 140 PGs were up-regulated and 100 PGs were
down-regulated in the flavopiridol-treated cells compared to the DMSO-treated cells (Fig 3.23a).
For the midostaurin-treated cells, this number was 84 up-regulated PGs and 62 down-regulated PGs
(Fig 3.23c). GO enrichment analysis of the significantly regulated PGs in the flavopiridol-treated
cells revealed GO terms related to cytoplasmic translation, ribosome and ribonucleoprotein com-
plex biogenesis as well as cell division (Fig 3.23b). GO enrichment analysis of the significantly
regulated PGs in the midostaurin-treated cells revealed GO terms related to myeloid cell differ-
entiation and more specifically megakaryocyte differentiation. Furthermore, GO terms related to
protein localization to chromosomes and chromatins were enriched suggesting a potential regula-
tion of cell division as well (Fig 3.23d).
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
35
==PAGE:41==
(a) Flavopiridol
(b) Flavopiridol
(c) Midostaurin
(d) Midostaurin
Figure 3.23: Differential expression and gene ontology enrichment analysis of the drug-
treated cells. (a) Differential expression (DE) analysis of the cells treated with flavopiridol com-
pared to the cells treated with DMSO. Significantly differentially expressed protein groups (PGs)
are colored red (α = 0.05) (b) Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of the significantly reg-
ulated PGs from the cells treated with flavopiridol. (c) DE analysis of the cells treated with mi-
dostaurin compared to the cells treated with DMSO. Significantly differentially expressed PGs are
colored red (α = 0.05) (b) GO enrichment analysis of the significantly regulated PGs from the
cells treated with midostaurin.
To further study the effect of drug treatment the drug targets of flavopiridol and midostaurin were
explored. Three proteins targeted by midostaurin were identified in the data set: PKC-α, PKC-β,
and Syk. The expression of PKC-α was significantly lower in the cells treated with midostaurin
compared to the cells treated with DMSO (Fig 3.24a). The expression of PKC-β was not signif-
icantly different between the drug treatments (Fig 3.24b) while the expression of Syk was signif-
icantly higher in the midostaurin-treated cells compared to the DMSO-treated cells (Fig 3.24c).
However, the same significant regulation of the three PGs was observed for the cells treated with
flavopiridol compared to the cells treated with DMSO.
Flavopiridol is a multi CDK inhibitor but none of the CDKs inhibited by flavopiridol were iden-
tified in the data set. CDKs are cell cycle regulators and their inhibition could lead to cell cycle
arrest. Proliferation marker protein Ki-67 (MKI67) is a widely used marker to asses cell prolifer-
ation in cancers (Scholzen and Gerdes 2000). The expression of MKI67 in the cells was therefore
examined (Fig 3.25a). The median expression of MKI67 was highest in the cells from Q2 and Q3
and lowest in cells from Q1 and Q4 in line with the expected behavior of blast cells. Nonethe-
less, this trend was comparable in all the cells regardless of drug treatment. The cells treated with
flavopiridol did not show a decreased MKI67 expression indicative of cell cycle arrest and re-
duced proliferation. On the contrary, the overall MKI67 expression was significantly higher in the
flavopiridol-treated cells compared to the DMSO-treated cells (p-value = 0.002).
36
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:42==
(a) PKC-α
(b) PKC-β
(c) Syk
Figure 3.24: Midostaurin targets and their expression in the drug-treated TMT-labeled OCI-
AML8227 cells. Three of the kinases inhibited by midostaurin were identified in the data set:
PKC-α, PKC-β, and Syk. (a) The expression of PKC-α in cells treated with DMSO, flavopiri-
dol, or midostaurin. (b) The expression of PKC-β in cells treated with DMSO, flavopiridol, or
midostaurin. (c) The expression of Syk in cells treated with DMSO, flavopiridol, or midostaurin.
Looking at the cells from Q4 separately, a significantly higher MKI67 expression was also observed
in the flavopiridol-treated cells compared to the DMSO-treated cells (p-value = 0.0007). Moreover,
a pattern of two distinct MKI67 levels was visible (Fig 3.25b). The cells could be grouped into two,
with cells either showing a high MKI67 expression or a low MKI67 expression. Interestingly, the
cells treated with flavopiridol had a higher percentage of cells showing a high MKI67 expression
(27% and 49% for cells treated with DMSO and flavopiridol, respectively).
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.25: The expression of proliferation marker protein Ki-67 in the drug-treated TMT-
labeled OCI-AML8227 cells. The expression of MKI67 in cells treated with DMSO, flavopiridol,
or midostaurin. (a) The expression of MKI67 in cells from each quadrant (Q) treated with each of
the three drugs. (b) The expression of MKI67 in cells from Q4. The cells treated with DMSO or
flavopiridol can be grouped into two with a high (MKI67 intensity > 0.2) or low (MKI67 intensity
< 0.2) MKI67 expression.
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
37
==PAGE:43==
4
Discussion
AML is the most common type of acute leukemia in adults primarily affecting older people with
a low overall survival and high relapse rates (Sasaki et al. 2021, Ganzel et al. 2018). Much effort
has been done to improve the treatment of AML and novel therapies have seen the market in recent
years (Stanchina et al. 2020). LSCs have been associated with relapse and therapy resistance and
therefore gained great interest for the development of cell specific therapies (Stelmach and Trumpp
2023). In this study, we used a single-cell MS data set with 216 cells from the primary OCI-
AML8227 model system to identify up-regulated proteins in the LSCs that could serve as potential
cell specific drug targets. Five kinase inhibitors were selected from the analysis of the protein
expression in the LSCs (Fig 3.3, Table 3.1).
4.1
The data analysis is challenged by missing values
After analyzing the data and selecting the five kinase inhibitors, we identified some shortcomings
in our initial work and conducted follow-up analyses. Firstly, the data set was not normalized
and a median-normalization was applied to adjust for cell size and sampling depth. Secondly,
the PGs exhibited a varying degree of completeness across cell types, with some PGs being over-
represented in certain cell types and nearly absent in others (Fig 3.4). Biological reasons could
lie behind these missing values but technical and stochastic effects could also be causative. Two
approaches were taken to remedy these uncertainties. A differential expression analysis of the
imputed data and a differential expression analysis of the non-imputed but filtered data provided
different results. The MAPK signaling pathway was no longer enriched in the GO enrichment
analyses and some of the differentially expressed PGs previously highlighted were either filtered
out or not significantly regulated in these processed data sets (Fig 3.5).
Missing values impose a challenge in the analysis of single-cell data sets. There is no universal
solution to the problem as it depends on the cause and the amount of missing values. The average
cell completeness in the data set was 70.3 ± 14.9% with fewer identifications and a lower cell
completeness in the CD38neg blasts compared to the three other cell types (Fig 3.2). A low degree
of completeness means that the overall protein expression is more heavily affected by imputation.
The missing values were imputed with KNN but many other methods exist that perform differently
depending on whether the values are missing not at random or completely at random (M. Liu and
Dongre 2021). The evaluation of the effect of imputation and different imputation methods is out
of the scope of this thesis. However, without imputation the protein expression of a group in the
differential expression analysis could rely on a few, highly variable observations. Filtering out PGs
present in < 6 cells mitigated this issue but also removed a lot of PGs from the data set. Especially,
from the analysis based on cell clusters where a cluster of CD38neg blasts had a dramatic effect
on the number of PGs left after filtering. Imputation and filtering affected the PGs identified as
differentially expressed in the label-free data set. Nonetheless, the completeness was still much
higher in this data set than the completeness in the TMT-labeled data set which had an average
of only 34.0 ± 4.6% cell completeness (Fig 3.17c). MS data collected with DDA, like the TMT-
labeled data set, contains a significant amount of missing values and in a similar experimental
setup, the percentage of missing values was 45.8% −52.5% (Schoof et al. 2021). For the TMT-
labeled data set, imputation was only applied for dimensionality reduction and data visualization.
The differential expression analysis was performed on the non-imputed data, as the individual PG
expression would otherwise rely substantially on imputed values.
38
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:44==
4.2
The five drugs have variable effect on the viability of different
AML cell lines
The drug targets were identified from the differential expression and GO enrichment analysis of
the protein expression in the LSCs. The MAPK signaling pathway was enriched which led us to
investigate kinases of this pathway. However, signaling pathways consist of intricate networks
with a multitude of proteins which often act as a part of many different pathways in a highly
dynamic and context dependent matter. Identifying a single indispensable protein whose inhibition
can directly affect the viability of the cells is difficult. Complex intracellular networks regulate
the proliferation and survival of the cells and the inhibition of a single or a few proteins may be
compensated by activation or regulation of other proteins in the cell. While up-regulated PGs
within the LSC compartment can serve as indicators of potential drug targets, their inhibition does
not necessarily elicit the desired response. The up-regulation of some of the drug targets in the
LSCs was inconclusive, however, the five kinase inhibitors selected for the drug screenings have
all previously been reported to reduce the proliferation or increase apoptosis in AML cell lines.
Inhibition of PAK1 by FRAX597 has been shown to reduce proliferation and increase apoptosis of
four AML cell lines as well as reduce the viability of the CD34pos compartment of primary AML
patient samples (Pandolfi et al. 2015). Treatment with FRAX597 for 24 hours showed varying
IC-50 values (0.8 −8 µM) for the four AML cell lines tested by Pandolfi et al. 2015. Treatment
of the OCI-AML8227 cells with FRAX597 indicated a dose-related effect, however, the estimated
IC-50 value was ∼11 µM which was outside the tested drug range (Fig 3.11b). Further studies are
therefore necessary to confirm the effect of FRAX597 treatment on the OCI-AML8227 cell line.
STK4 was the only drug target that was significantly up-regulated in the LSCs in all three differen-
tial expression analyses (Fig 3.3a, 3.5a, 3.5c). However, no dose-related effect on the cell viability
was observed for the OCI-AML8227 cells treated with SBP-3264 (Fig 3.10). In a study by Bata
et al. 2022, treatment with SBP-3264 for 72 hours showed varying IC-50 values (3.7 −10.6 µM)
for six different AML cell lines. The highest drug concentration tested in our study was 1 µM
which was possibly too low to observe an effect on the viability of the cells. However, in a clinical
context, a higher drug concentration is infeasible and a drug with an IC-50 value in the micro molar
range is unlikely to show clinical potential.
CDK6 has been shown to be involved in the timing of quiescent exit of HSC and a CDK6 depen-
dency has been observed in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and the AML subtype mixed-lineage
leukemia (MLL) (Laurenti, Frelin, et al. 2015, Scheicher et al. 2015, Placke et al. 2014). CDK6
has therefore gained interest as a novel target for AML treatment (Uras, Sexl, and Kollmann 2020).
We did not find a significant up-regulation of CDK6 in the LSCs in our study but in light of recent
studies we decided to investigate the effect of CDK6 inhibition anyway. The CDK6 degrader BSJ-
03-123 and the multi-CDK inhibitor flavopiridol were selected. CDK6 is targeted for degradation
by the PROTAC-drug BSJ-03-123 and three AML cell lines showed impaired growth after 10 days
treatment with 0.2 µM BSJ-03-123 (Brand et al. 2019). However, no effect on the cell viability
was observed for the OCI-AML8227 cells treated with BSJ-03-123 (Fig 3.10). On the other hand,
the cells treated with flavopiridol showed a significant dose-related effect and had an IC-50 value
of 96.7 nM (Fig 3.11d). Flavopiridol is a CDK6 inhibitor with effect on cell cycle progression but
the primary mechanism of action is believed to be driven by inhibition of CDK7 and CDK9 which
work as transcriptional regulators (Zeidner and Karp 2015). It cannot be excluded that CDK6 de-
pletion in itself would impair growth in the AML cells, however, no effect was observed after 72
hours of exposure with BSJ-03-123 at concentrations up to 1 µM.
Flavopiridol is in clinical trials for the treatment of AML and midostaurin is an FDA approved drug
for the treatment of AML with FLT3 mutation (Stanchina et al. 2020). As expected, the treatment
with midostaurin reduced the cell viability of the OCI-AML8227 cells with an IC-50 value of 233
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
39
==PAGE:45==
nM (Fig 3.11f).
4.3
Cell type designations are derived from FACS
The variable effect on the different cell lines emphasizes the heterogeneity of AML and the diffi-
culties involved in studying the disease and developing new therapies. The drugs were selected in
an attempt to target LSCs specifically, however, none of the drugs had a cell type specific effect on
the viability of the OCI-AML8227 cells (Fig 3.11). There can be many reasons for these observa-
tions. A caveat for the analysis is the compartmentalization of the cells based on the FACS-derived
cell types. The LSCs are defined as CD34pos CD38neg cells, however, this cell subset comprises
a heterogeneous cell population with variation in PG expression and cell function. Furthermore,
the FACS profile of the cells did not show the expected cell pattern. In previous studies of the
OCI-AML8227 culture, the majority of the cells are CD34neg blasts and a smaller subset of the
cells CD34pos (Fig 1.3b) (Laverdière et al. 2018, Schoof et al. 2021). The FACS profile of the
cell culture used to acquire the label-free data set appeared like a blob of cells with intermediate
CD34 expression (Fig 3.1). The gates used to sort the cells were placed in the corners of this
blob. This could be indicative of an unhealthy cell culture and affect the dynamics of the popu-
lation. Despite these gates and the exclusion of cells with an intermediate CD34 expression from
the cell sort, the expected hierarchy of the AML cells was still captured by the diffusion map (Fig
3.4a). Interestingly, the non-canonical differentiation pathway proposed by Schoof et al. 2021 that
directly bridges the LSCs with the CD38neg blasts was also evident from the diffusion map trajec-
tories. Moreover, the diffusion map calculated from the imputed and median normalized data also
showed, although less clearly, a similar two-track differentiation path (Fig 3.6a).
While LSCs have been associated with relapse, bulk leukemia cells showing stemness character-
istics have also been linked to relapse (Shlush, Mitchell, et al. 2017). We therefore decided to do
a cell type independent analysis. The cells were clustered together based on their protein expres-
sion and a cluster close to the root of the diffusion map was identified (Fig 3.6). This cluster was
presumed to contain the most immature cells and its protein expression compared to that of all the
other cells. A lot of PGs were filtered out during the differential expression analysis and 80% of
the remaining PGs were significantly differentially expressed (Fig 3.7). Such a result is challeng-
ing to interpret and the analysis most likely inflates the differences in PG expression and does not
effectively distinguish between relevant and irrelevant differences.
4.4
The drug screenings suffer from a discrepancy in the total
number of events
The effect of drug treatment was assessed by counting the number of live cells with flow cytometry.
A large discrepancy in the cell type distribution was observed for the five drug treatments as well
as the DMSO-treated cells (Fig 3.8). The cell type distribution correlated with the total number
of events counted for each sample (Fig 3.9). The first runs had a low number of total events
while the later runs had a higher number of total events. It is unsure what caused this discrepancy
but we suspect that it arose during plating of the cells. The cells were plated in the same order
as they were run and the cell density could have increased during plating if the cells were not
properly mixed. Moreover, if the LSCs were more prone to aggregate, this might explain why
their frequency increased with the total events. In the data analysis, we tried to accommodate for
this effect by grouping the DMSO-treated cells in two and use them as separate references for the
relative viability calculations. However, we advice repeating the drug screenings for a more robust
result. Possibly including a higher concentration of FRAX597 as well to better assess its effect on
the cells.
40
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:46==
4.5
Standardized data processing workflows are imperative
Flavopiridol and midostaurin were selected for drug treatment and scp-MS analysis of the OCI-
AML8227 cells. The cells were treated with the drugs for 72 hours, sorted with FACS, and labeled
with TMT before MS analysis. Inherent differences in the data sets acquired by label-free quan-
tification and TMT multiplexing require different data processing workflows before downstream
data analysis. However, the field of scp-MS lacks standardized data processing workflows and
divergent methodologies are applied by different research groups. Differences in normalization
methods and quality control naturally affects the data composition. Ad hoc workflows tailored
to specific data sets greatly complicate the data comparison and replication of analyses between
research groups. In this study, we applied the SCeptre workflow developed by Schoof et al. 2021
to process the TMT-labeled data set (Fig 3.15). Empty wells were included in the experimental
design to evaluate the background noise and the ability of SCeptre to separate these wells from the
true single-cell samples. The empty wells showed a surprisingly high number of identifications and
summed intensity (Fig 3.17). To investigate where these peptides come from, one could look into
how they are distributed, if there is a special pattern in their retention time, and which peptides
were identified. Lack of time prevented us from following up on this aspect of the data. How-
ever, these observations highlight the necessity of including controls in the experimental design.
Moreover, the high background noise from the empty wells calls for caution when interpreting the
identifications in the true single-cell wells. The SCeptre computational workflow only filtered out
1/3 of the empty wells and the remaining empty wells were manually removed from the data set
before downstream analysis. Additionally, a potential batch effect from the TMT channels was
observed before data processing (Fig 3.14). This batch effect was not corrected for during normal-
ization with SCeptre and the summed intensity of the TMT-131C channel was significantly lower
than that of the other channels after data processing (Fig 3.17b). Consequently, the TMT-131C
channel was also removed manually before downstream analysis.
While standardized data processing workflows are imperative, it is important to select the most
suitable workflow for the experimental setup and evaluate its efficacy on the individual data set.
The SCeptre workflow was developed for a TMT-labeled data set with OCI-AML8227 single-cells
where the differentiation stages were randomly labeled across channels and the sample layout was
balanced to include an equal number of single-cells from each differentiation stage in each batch.
The experimental layout of our study was very similar, however, the inability of SCeptre to correct
for the observed batch effects and empty wells during normalization and quality control emphasizes
the challenge of developing standardized tools. In other scp-MS data processing workflows, a
reference channel of a few cells have been included to normalize across batches or minimal data
processing has been suggested combined with linear modelling to account for batch effects (Specht
et al. 2021, Vanderaa and Gatto 2024).
4.6
The protein expression does not vary a lot between drug
treatments
One of the aims of this study was to investigate the effect of drug treatment on the proteome of
the OCI-AML8227 cells. Differences between the drug treatments were explored with differential
expression analysis of the flavopiridol- or midostaurin-treated cells compared to the DMSO-treated
cells (Fig 3.23). A lot fewer PGs were identified as significantly differentially expressed between
the drug treatments compared to the differential expression analysis of the cell types from the
label-free data set. Additionally, the log2 fold changes were small and fewer than 10 cells in the
analyses had an absolute log2 fold change above 0.5 (Fig 3.23a, 3.23c). This suggests that the
intra-culture heterogeneity is larger than the changes induced by drug treatment which makes it
challenging to extract the biological changes caused by the drugs. Partly because the changes
can be relatively subtle or because the effects are highly variable between the cells in the cell
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
41
==PAGE:47==
culture. 240 PGs from the differential expression analysis of the cells treated with flavopiridol and
146 PGs from the analysis of the cells treated with midostaurin were used for the GO enrichment
analyses. In the cells treated with midostaurin, GO terms related to myeloid cell differentiation and
more specifically megakaryocyte differentiation were enriched (Fig 3.23d). The GO enrichment
analysis could indicate a regulatory effect of midostaurin on the cell differentiation but additional
studies are needed to affirm this.
Midostaurin is a multi-kinase inhibitor with a broader specificity than flavopiridol. A systemic
approach must be applied to examine the effect of midostaurin as the isolation of a few targets and
their downstream effector molecules is infeasible. However, the proteomic depth of the analysis
and a low degree of completeness complicates this pursuit. An aspect to keep in mind is the num-
ber of PGs identified in the data set. The label-free data set had an average of 1683 ± 357 PGs
per cell while the TMT-labeled data set only had an average of 772 ± 50 PGs per cell. This can
partly be attributed to the acquisition mode used in the MS analysis where DDA is biased towards
the most abundant proteins. Additionally, the mass spectrometer differed between the two ex-
periments with the Orbitrap Astral mass spectrometer having shown an unprecedented proteomic
depth (Petrosius, Aragon-Fernandez, et al. 2023). FLT3 is the most widely studied kinase among
the midostaurin targets in relation to AML. However, only three of the other kinases targeted by
midostaurin were identified in the data set. There was no consistent expression pattern for these
three kinases in the midostaurin-treated cells and they were either up-regulated, down-regulated or
not significantly different from the expression in the DMSO-treated cells (Fig 3.24). Nevertheless,
as an inhibitor and not a degrader like the PROTAC-drug BSJ-03-123, the effect cannot necessar-
ily be seen on the drug targets themselves and should instead be inferred from proteins regulated
by the kinases and their downstream targets. An alternative approach is to study the effect at the
phosphorylation-level instead of at the protein-level. With phosphoproteomics the effect of kinase
inhibition might be more evident, however, technological limitations prevented us from pursuing
this matter. Further investigations into the proteomic alterations induced by midostaurin treatment
are needed to explain its effects on the OCI-AML8227 system.
4.7
Flavopiridol affects cell division
Flavopiridol had a strong effect on the cell viability in the drug screenings but the observed reduc-
tion of the relative cell viability was not cell type specific (Fig 3.11c). As previously discussed,
the drug screenings were marked by uncertainty and we recommend repeating them for a more
robust result. The dose-response curve modelled over the cell viability data from the drug screen-
ings gave an IC-50 value of 96.7 nM for flavopiridol. This drug concentration was used for the
drug treatment of the OCI-AML8227 cells for scp-MS. The cells were sorted with FACS where
the profile of the cell culture was recorded. The FACS profile of the cells treated with flavopiridol
revealed a low percentage of CD34pos CD38neg cells comprising Q4 (Fig 3.12b). 1.45% of the
flavopiridol-treated cells were in Q4 whereas 3.50% and 3.94% of the cells treated with DMSO
and midostaurin, respectively, were in Q4 on their FACS profiles (Fig 3.12a, 3.12c). Similarly, the
highest percentage of cells in Q3 was found for the cells treated with flavopiridol. In contrast to
the previous findings, these observations indicate that flavopiridol has a cell type specific effect.
GO enrichment analysis of the differentially expressed proteins in the flavopiridol-treated cells
revealed GO terms related to cell division (Fig 3.23b). This prompted us to investigate the ex-
pression of the proliferation marker protein Ki-67 (MKI67). As expected, the median expression
of MKI67 was highest in the cells from Q2 and Q3 which represent the blast compartment and
lowest in the cells from Q1 and Q4 which represent the progenitor and LSC compartments (Fig
3.25a). Interestingly, the MKI67 expression was higher in Q4 compared to Q1 indicating that
these cells were more proliferative. When comparing the overall MKI67 expression in the cells
treated with flavopiridol to the cells treated with DMSO, the MKI67 expression was significantly
42
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:48==
higher in the flavopiridol-treated cells. These findings were surprising as we initially thought that
flavopiridol would induce cell cycle arrest due to its mechanistic effects as a multi-CDK inhibitor.
Additionally, the MKI67 expression of the cells in Q4 revealed a pattern of two MKI67 expression
levels where the cells could be separated into a group with a high and a group with a low MKI67
expression (Fig 3.25b). For the cells treated with flavopiridol, 49% of the cells in Q4 showed a
high MKI67 expression while only 27% of the cells treated with DMSO were found in this group.
The combined observations of a lower percentage of cells in Q4 on the FACS profile and a higher
MKI67 expression in the cells treated with flavopiridol led us to question the proposed growth in-
hibitory mechanism of flavopiridol. We are uncertain about how flavopiridol affects the dynamics
of the cell culture and what caused these observations. The negative effect on the cell viability of
the OCI-AML8227 cells was clear in the drug screenings, however, the increased expression of
MKI67 did not match. It could be a compensatory mechanism in the cell culture were the depletion
of some of the more mature and cycling cells induces differentiation of the LSCs. It could also be a
secondary mechanism of flavopiridol that regulates cells division and possibly induces cell differ-
entiation resulting in a reduced and more proliferative LSC compartment. This effect could both
arise directly from cell differentiation or from asymmetric cell division which would also result in
a relative smaller LSC population. Further studies into the dynamics of the OCI-AML8227 model
system treated with flavopiridol could elucidate the effect of drug treatment on the cell culture and
clarify its impact on cell division.
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
43
==PAGE:49==
5
Conclusion
In this thesis, we applied scp-MS to study the cellular heterogeneity in AML and identify potential
cell specific drug targets in LSCs. Treatment with five kinase inhibitors showed varying effects
on the viability of the OCI-AML8227 culture. Among these, the FDA-approved therapeutic mi-
dostaurin and the investigational drug flavopiridol significantly reduced the cell viability. The
proteomic alterations induced by these two drugs were explored and indicated an effect on differ-
entiation and cell division. However, further studies are needed to clarify these findings and test
the implications of cell specific drug treatment in AML.
While scp-MS provides the means to identify cell specific drug targets, its strength in unraveling
cellular heterogeneity comes with the great challenge of deciphering the biologically meaningful
differences among the highly variable observations. Our study highlights difficulties in the data
analysis stemming from a low data completeness, limited proteome depth, high background noise
and the lack of standardized data processing workflows. scp-MS is a field in rapid development
and recent advancements in sample handling, experimental design and instrument sensitivity have
greatly improved its potential to enhance our understanding of cellular dynamics, molecular pertur-
bations and disease mechanisms. Despite these advancements, challenges still prevail and further
refinement of scp-MS techniques and data analysis methods are necessary for the field to fully
realize its potential in expanding our comprehension of diseases and guiding the development of
improved treatment strategies.
44
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:50==
Bibliography
Akashi, Koichi et al. (Mar. 2000). “A clonogenic common myeloid progenitor that gives rise to
all myeloid lineages”. In: Nature 404.6774, pp. 193–197. ISSN: 0028-0836. DOI: 10.1038/
35004599. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/35004599.
Angerer, Philipp et al. (Apr. 2016). “destiny: diffusion maps for large-scale single-cell data in R”.
In: Bioinformatics 32.8, pp. 1241–1243. ISSN: 1367-4803. DOI: 10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/
BTV715. URL: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article/32/8/1241/1744143.
Bata, Nicole et al. (Jan. 2022). “Inhibitors of the Hippo Pathway Kinases STK3/MST2 and STK4/MST1
Have Utility for the Treatment of Acute Myeloid Leukemia”. In: Journal of Medicinal Chem-
istry 65.2, pp. 1352–1369. ISSN: 15204804. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.1c00804. URL:
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.1c00804.
Bonnet, Dominique and John E. Dick (July 1997). “Human acute myeloid leukemia is organized
as a hierarchy that originates from a primitive hematopoietic cell”. In: Nature medicine 3.7,
pp. 730–737. ISSN: 1078-8956. DOI: 10.1038/NM0797-730. URL: https://www.nature.
com/articles/nm0797-730.
Bowman, Robert L., Lambert Busque, and Ross L. Levine (Feb. 2018). “Clonal Hematopoiesis
and Evolution to Hematopoietic Malignancies”. In: Cell stem cell 22.2, p. 157. ISSN: 18759777.
DOI: 10.1016/J.STEM.2018.01.011. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1934590918300110?via%3Dihub.
Brand, Matthias et al. (Feb. 2019). “Homolog-Selective Degradation as a Strategy to Probe the
Function of CDK6 in AML”. In: Cell Chemical Biology 26.2, pp. 300–306. ISSN: 2451-9456.
DOI: 10.1016/J.CHEMBIOL.2018.11.006. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2451945618304136.
Bryder, David, Derrick J Rossi, and Irving L Weissman (2006). “Hematopoietic stem cells: the
paradigmatic tissue-specific stem cell”. In: The American journal of pathology 169.2, pp. 439–
443. ISSN: 0002-9440. DOI: 10.2353/AJPATH.2006.060312. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0002944010627174?via%3Dihub.
Budnik, Bogdan et al. (Oct. 2018). “SCoPE-MS: mass spectrometry of single mammalian cells
quantifies proteome heterogeneity during cell differentiation”. In: Genome Biology 19.1, pp. 1–
12. ISSN: 1474760X. DOI: 10.1186/s13059- 018- 1547- 5. URL: https://genomebiology.
biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-018-1547-5.
Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network (May 2013). “Genomic and Epigenomic Landscapes
of Adult De Novo Acute Myeloid Leukemia”. In: New England Journal of Medicine 368.22,
pp. 2059–2074. ISSN: 0028-4793. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1301689. URL: https://www.
nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1301689.
Dalerba, Piero, Robert W. Cho, and Michael F. Clarke (Feb. 2007). “Cancer stem cells: Models and
concepts”. In: Annual Review of Medicine 58.Volume 58, 2007, pp. 267–284. ISSN: 00664219.
DOI: 10.1146/annurev.med.58.062105.204854. URL: https://www.annualreviews.org/
content/journals/10.1146/annurev.med.58.062105.204854.
De Kouchkovsky, I. and M. Abdul-Hay (2016). “‘Acute myeloid leukemia: A comprehensive re-
view and 2016 update’”. In: Blood Cancer Journal 6.7. ISSN: 20445385. DOI: 10.1038/BCJ.
2016.50. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/bcj201650.
Döhner, Hartmut, Elihu Estey, et al. (Jan. 2017). “Diagnosis and management of AML in adults:
2017 ELN recommendations from an international expert panel”. In: Blood 129.4, pp. 424–447.
ISSN: 0006-4971. DOI: 10.1182/BLOOD-2016-08-733196. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.
1182/blood-2016-08-733196.
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
45
==PAGE:51==
Döhner, Hartmut, Daniel J. Weisdorf, and Clara D. Bloomfield (Sept. 2015). “Acute Myeloid
Leukemia”. In: The New England journal of medicine 373.12. Ed. by Dan L. Longo, pp. 1136–
1152. ISSN: 1533-4406. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMRA1406184. URL: https://www.nejm.org/doi/
full/10.1056/NEJMra1406184.
Duy, Cihangir et al. (2021). “Chemotherapy Induces Senescence-Like Resilient Cells Capable of
Initiating AML Recurrence”. In: Cancer discovery 11.6, pp. 1542–1561. ISSN: 2159-8290. DOI:
10.1158/2159-8290.CD-20-1375. URL: https://aacrjournals.org/cancerdiscovery/article/
11/6/1542/666577/Chemotherapy-Induces-Senescence-Like-Resilient.
Eppert, Kolja et al. (Aug. 2011). “Stem cell gene expression programs influence clinical outcome
in human leukemia”. In: Nature Medicine 2011 17:9 17.9, pp. 1086–1093. ISSN: 1546-170X.
DOI: 10.1038/nm.2415. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/nm.2415.
Essers, Marieke Alida Gertruda, Sandra Offner, et al. (Feb. 2009). “IFNα activates dormant haematopoi-
etic stem cells in vivo”. In: Nature 2009 458:7240 458.7240, pp. 904–908. ISSN: 1476-4687.
DOI: 10.1038/nature07815. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/nature07815.
Essers, Marieke Alida Gertruda and Andreas Trumpp (2010). “Targeting leukemic stem cells by
breaking their dormancy”. In: Molecular Oncology 4.5, pp. 443–450. ISSN: 15747891. DOI:
10.1016/J.MOLONC.2010.06.001. URL: https://febs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1016/
j.molonc.2010.06.001.
Farge, Thomas et al. (July 2017). “Chemotherapy-Resistant Human Acute Myeloid Leukemia Cells
Are Not Enriched for Leukemic Stem Cells but Require Oxidative Metabolism”. In: Cancer
discovery 7.7, pp. 716–735. ISSN: 2159-8290. DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-16-0441. URL:
https://aacrjournals.org/cancerdiscovery/article/7/7/716/5937/Chemotherapy-Resistant-
Human-Acute-Myeloid.
Fu, Minyang et al. (Nov. 2022). “The Hippo signalling pathway and its implications in human
health and diseases”. In: Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy 2022 7:1 7.1, pp. 1–20.
ISSN: 2059-3635. DOI: 10.1038/s41392-022-01191-9. URL: https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41392-022-01191-9.
Furtwängler, Benjamin et al. (2022). “Real-Time Search-Assisted Acquisition on a Tribrid Mass
Spectrometer Improves Coverage in Multiplexed Single-Cell Proteomics”. In: Mol Cell Pro-
teomics 21.4, p. 100219. DOI: 10.1016/j.mcpro.2022.100219. URL: https://www.mcponline.
org/article/S1535-9476(22)00027-5/fulltext.
Ganzel, Chezi et al. (Aug. 2018). “Very poor long-term survival in past and more recent studies for
relapsed AML patients: The ECOG-ACRIN experience”. In: American journal of hematology
93.8, p. 1074. ISSN: 10968652. DOI: 10.1002/AJH.25162. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pmc/articles/PMC6699929/.
Gilliland, Gary and James D. Griffin (Sept. 2002). “The roles of FLT3 in hematopoiesis and
leukemia”. In: Blood 100.5, pp. 1532–1542. ISSN: 0006-4971. DOI: 10.1182/BLOOD-2002-
02-0492. URL: https://ashpublications.org/blood/article/100/5/1532/106333/The-roles-
of-FLT3-in-hematopoiesis-and-leukemia.
Greenbaum, Dov et al. (Aug. 2003). “Comparing protein abundance and mRNA expression levels
on a genomic scale”. In: Genome Biology 4.9, pp. 1–8. ISSN: 14656906. DOI: 10.1186/gb-
2003-4-9-117. URL: https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/gb-2003-
4-9-117.
Gross, Jürgen H (2017). “Mass Spectrometry”. In: DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-54398-7. URL:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-54398-7.
Haas, Simon, Jenny Hansson, et al. (Oct. 2015). “Inflammation-Induced Emergency Megakary-
opoiesis Driven by Hematopoietic Stem Cell-like Megakaryocyte Progenitors”. In: Cell Stem
Cell 17.4, pp. 422–434. ISSN: 1934-5909. DOI: 10.1016/J.STEM.2015.07.007. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1934590915003069?via%3Dihub.
46
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:52==
Haas, Simon, Andreas Trumpp, and Michael D. Milsom (May 2018). “Causes and Consequences
of Hematopoietic Stem Cell Heterogeneity”. In: Cell Stem Cell 22.5, pp. 627–638. ISSN: 1934-
5909. DOI: 10.1016/J.STEM.2018.04.003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1934590918301656.
Haghverdi, Laleh, Florian Buettner, and Fabian J. Theis (Sept. 2015). “Diffusion maps for high-
dimensional single-cell analysis of differentiation data”. In: Bioinformatics 31.18, pp. 2989–
2998. ISSN: 1367-4803. DOI: 10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTV325. URL: https://academic.
oup.com/bioinformatics/article/31/18/2989/241305.
Hynes, Nancy E. and Gwen MacDonald (Apr. 2009). “ErbB receptors and signaling pathways
in cancer”. In: Current Opinion in Cell Biology 21.2, pp. 177–184. ISSN: 0955-0674. DOI:
10.1016/J.CEB.2008.12.010. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0955067409000143?via%3Dihub.
Jaiswal, Siddhartha et al. (Dec. 2014). “Age-Related Clonal Hematopoiesis Associated with Ad-
verse Outcomes”. In: The New England journal of medicine 371.26, p. 2488. ISSN: 0028-4793.
DOI: 10 . 1056 / NEJMOA1408617. URL: https : / / www . nejm . org / doi / full / 10 . 1056 /
NEJMoa1408617.
Kondo, Motonari, Irving L. Weissman, and Koichi Akashi (Nov. 1997). “Identification of clono-
genic common lymphoid progenitors in mouse bone marrow”. In: Cell 91.5, pp. 661–672. ISSN:
0092-8674. DOI: 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80453-5. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0092867400804535?via%3Dihub.
Kreso, Antonija and John E. Dick (Mar. 2014). “Evolution of the Cancer Stem Cell Model”. In: Cell
Stem Cell 14.3, pp. 275–291. ISSN: 1934-5909. DOI: 10.1016/J.STEM.2014.02.006. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1934590914000575?via%3Dihub.
Ku, Matthew et al. (Mar. 2015). “Src family kinases and their role in hematological malignancies”.
In: Leukemia & Lymphoma 56.3, pp. 577–586. ISSN: 10292403. DOI: 10.3109/10428194.2014.
907897. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.3109/10428194.2014.907897.
Labib, Mahmoud and Shana O. Kelley (Feb. 2020). “Single-cell analysis targeting the proteome”.
In: Nature Reviews Chemistry 2020 4:3 4.3, pp. 143–158. ISSN: 2397-3358. DOI: 10.1038/
s41570-020-0162-7. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41570-020-0162-7.
Lagadinou, Eleni D. et al. (Mar. 2013). “BCL-2 inhibition targets oxidative phosphorylation and se-
lectively eradicates quiescent human leukemia stem cells”. In: Cell stem cell 12.3, pp. 329–341.
ISSN: 1875-9777. DOI: 10.1016/J.STEM.2012.12.013. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1934590912007552?via%3Dihub.
Lapidot, Tsvee et al. (1994). “A cell initiating human acute myeloid leukaemia after transplantation
into SCID mice”. In: Nature 1994 367:6464 367.6464, pp. 645–648. ISSN: 1476-4687. DOI:
10.1038/367645a0. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/367645a0.
Laurenti, Elisa, Catherine Frelin, et al. (Mar. 2015). “CDK6 Levels Regulate Quiescence Exit in
Human Hematopoietic Stem Cells”. In: Cell Stem Cell 16.3, p. 302. ISSN: 18759777. DOI:
10.1016/J.STEM.2015.01.017. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1934590915000181.
Laurenti, Elisa and Berthold Göttgens (Jan. 2018). “From haematopoietic stem cells to complex dif-
ferentiation landscapes”. In: Nature 2018 553:7689 553.7689, pp. 418–426. ISSN: 1476-4687.
DOI: 10.1038/nature25022. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/nature25022.
Laverdière, Isabelle et al. (June 2018). “Leukemic stem cell signatures identify novel therapeutics
targeting acute myeloid leukemia”. In: Blood Cancer Journal 2018 8:6 8.6, pp. 1–16. ISSN:
2044-5385. DOI: 10.1038/s41408-018-0087-2. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41408-018-0087-2.
Lechman, Eric R. et al. (Feb. 2016). “miR-126 Regulates Distinct Self-Renewal Outcomes in Nor-
mal and Malignant Hematopoietic Stem Cells”. In: Cancer Cell 29.2, p. 214. ISSN: 18783686.
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
47
==PAGE:53==
DOI: 10.1016/J.CCELL.2015.12.011. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1535610815004754?via%3Dihub.
Li, Jiaming et al. (May 2021). “TMTpro-18plex: The Expanded and Complete Set of TMTpro
Reagents for Sample Multiplexing”. In: Journal of Proteome Research 20.5, pp. 2964–2972.
ISSN: 15353907. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.1c00168. URL: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/
full/10.1021/acs.jproteome.1c00168.
Li, Jing-Jing et al. (Mar. 2024). “Differentiation route determines the functional outputs of adult
megakaryopoiesis”. In: Immunity 0.0. ISSN: 1074-7613. DOI: 10.1016/J.IMMUNI.2024.02.
006. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1074761324000827?via%
3Dihub.
Licciulli, Silvia et al. (Oct. 2013). “FRAX597, a small molecule inhibitor of the p21-activated
kinases, inhibits tumorigenesis of neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2)-associated Schwannomas”.
In: The Journal of biological chemistry 288.40, pp. 29105–29114. ISSN: 1083-351X. DOI: 10.
1074/JBC.M113.510933. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0021925820488854?via%3Dihub.
Liu, Mingyi and Ashok Dongre (May 2021). “Proper imputation of missing values in proteomics
datasets for differential expression analysis”. In: Briefings in Bioinformatics 22.3, pp. 1–17.
ISSN: 14774054. DOI: 10.1093/BIB/BBAA112. URL: https://academic.oup.com/bib/
article/22/3/bbaa112/5855395?login=true.
Lun, Aaron T.L., Davis J. McCarthy, and John C. Marioni (Oct. 2016). “A step-by-step workflow
for low-level analysis of single-cell RNA-seq data with Bioconductor”. In: F1000Research 2016
5:2122 5, p. 2122. ISSN: 1759796X. DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.9501.2. URL: https:
//f1000research.com/articles/5-2122.
MacCoss, Michael J. et al. (Mar. 2023). “Sampling the proteome by emerging single-molecule and
mass spectrometry methods”. In: Nature Methods 2023 20:3 20.3, pp. 339–346. ISSN: 1548-
7105. DOI: 10.1038/s41592-023-01802-5. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-
023-01802-5.
Marchand, Tony and Sandra Pinho (Oct. 2021). “Leukemic Stem Cells: From Leukemic Niche
Biology to Treatment Opportunities”. In: Frontiers in immunology 12. ISSN: 1664-3224. DOI:
10.3389/FIMMU.2021.775128. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/immunology/
articles/10.3389/fimmu.2021.775128/full.
McInnes, Leland, John Healy, and James Melville (Feb. 2018). “UMAP: Uniform Manifold Ap-
proximation and Projection for Dimension Reduction”. In: URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.
03426v3.
Melby, Jake A. et al. (June 2021). “Novel Strategies to Address the Challenges in Top-Down Pro-
teomics”. In: Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry 32.6, pp. 1278–1294.
ISSN: 18791123. DOI: 10.1021/JASMS.1C00099. URL: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.
1021/jasms.1c00099.
Metcalf, Donald et al. (Sept. 2010). “Multipotential hematopoietic blast colony-forming cells ex-
hibit delays in self-generation and lineage commitment”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 107.37, pp. 16257–16261. ISSN: 1091-6490. DOI:
10.1073/PNAS.1011881107. URL: https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1011881107.
Murphy, Tracy and Karen W.L. Yee (Oct. 2017). “Cytarabine and daunorubicin for the treatment
of acute myeloid leukemia”. In: Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy 18.16, pp. 1765–1780.
ISSN: 17447666. DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2017.1391216. URL: https://www.tandfonline.
com/doi/abs/10.1080/14656566.2017.1391216.
Ng, Stanley W.K. et al. (Dec. 2016). “A 17-gene stemness score for rapid determination of risk in
acute leukaemia”. In: Nature 2016 540:7633 540.7633, pp. 433–437. ISSN: 1476-4687. DOI:
10.1038/nature20598. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/nature20598.
48
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:54==
Notta, Faiyaz et al. (Jan. 2016). “Distinct routes of lineage development reshape the human blood
hierarchy across ontogeny”. In: Science (New York, N.Y.) 351.6269. ISSN: 1095-9203. DOI: 10.
1126/SCIENCE.AAB2116. URL: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aab2116.
Olsen, Jesper V. et al. (Aug. 2007). “Higher-energy C-trap dissociation for peptide modification
analysis”. In: Nature Methods 2007 4:9 4.9, pp. 709–712. ISSN: 1548-7105. DOI: 10.1038/
nmeth1060. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth1060.
Pandolfi, Ashley et al. (Aug. 2015). “PAK1 is a therapeutic target in acute myeloid leukemia
and myelodysplastic syndrome”. In: Blood 126.9, p. 1118. ISSN: 15280020. DOI: 10.1182/
BLOOD-2014-12-618801. URL: https://ashpublications.org/blood/article/126/9/1118/
126479/PAK1-is-a-therapeutic-target-in-acute-myeloid.
Paul, Franziska et al. (Dec. 2015). “Transcriptional Heterogeneity and Lineage Commitment in
Myeloid Progenitors”. In: Cell 163.7, pp. 1663–1677. ISSN: 10974172. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.
2015.11.013. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0092867415014932?
via%3Dihub.
Petrosius, Valdemaras, Pedro Aragon-Fernandez, et al. (June 2023). “Evaluating the capabilities of
the Astral mass analyzer for single-cell proteomics”. In: bioRxiv, p. 2023.06.06.543943. DOI:
10.1101/2023.06.06.543943. URL: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.06.06.
543943v1.
Petrosius, Valdemaras and Erwin M. Schoof (Jan. 2023). “Recent advances in the field of single-
cell proteomics”. In: Translational oncology 27. ISSN: 1936-5233. DOI: 10.1016/J.TRANON.
2022.101556. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1936523322002157.
Pinho, Sandra and Paul S. Frenette (Feb. 2019). “Haematopoietic stem cell activity and interactions
with the niche”. In: Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 2019 20:5 20.5, pp. 303–320. ISSN:
1471-0080. DOI: 10.1038/s41580-019-0103-9. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41580-019-0103-9.
Placke, Theresa et al. (July 2014). “Requirement for CDK6 in MLL-rearranged acute myeloid
leukemia”. In: Blood 124.1, pp. 13–23. ISSN: 0006-4971. DOI: 10.1182/BLOOD-2014-02-
558114. URL: https://ashpublications.org/blood/article/124/1/13/33127/Requirement-
for-CDK6-in-MLL-rearranged-acute.
Pollyea, Daniel A. and Craig T. Jordan (Mar. 2017). “Therapeutic targeting of acute myeloid
leukemia stem cells”. In: Blood 129.12, pp. 1627–1635. ISSN: 0006-4971. DOI: 10 . 1182 /
BLOOD-2016-10-696039. URL: https://ashpublications.org/blood/article/129/12/1627/
36074/Therapeutic-targeting-of-acute-myeloid-leukemia.
Pollyea, Daniel A., Brett M. Stevens, et al. (Nov. 2018). “Venetoclax with azacitidine disrupts
energy metabolism and targets leukemia stem cells in patients with acute myeloid leukemia”. In:
Nature Medicine 2018 24:12 24.12, pp. 1859–1866. ISSN: 1546-170X. DOI: 10.1038/s41591-
018-0233-1. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41591-018-0233-1.
Porta, Camillo, Chiara Paglino, and Alessandra Mosca (Apr. 2014). “Targeting PI3K/Akt/mTOR
signaling in cancer”. In: Frontiers in Oncology 4 APR, p. 67531. ISSN: 2234943X. DOI: 10.
3389/fonc.2014.00064. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/oncology/articles/10.
3389/fonc.2014.00064/full.
Radu, Maria et al. (Dec. 2013). “PAK signalling during the development and progression of can-
cer”. In: Nature Reviews Cancer 2014 14:1 14.1, pp. 13–25. ISSN: 1474-1768. DOI: 10.1038/
nrc3645. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/nrc3645.
Ritchie, Matthew E. et al. (Jan. 2015). “limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-
sequencing and microarray studies”. In: Nucleic acids research 43.7, e47. ISSN: 1362-4962.
DOI: 10.1093/NAR/GKV007. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25605792/.
Ritz, Christian et al. (Dec. 2015). “Dose-Response Analysis Using R”. In: PLOS ONE 10.12,
e0146021. ISSN: 1932-6203. DOI: 10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0146021. URL: https://
journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0146021.
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
49
==PAGE:55==
Saito, Yoriko et al. (Feb. 2010). “Induction of cell cycle entry eliminates human leukemia stem
cells in a mouse model of AML”. In: Nature Biotechnology 2010 28:3 28.3, pp. 275–280. ISSN:
1546-1696. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.1607. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.1607.
Sasaki, Koji et al. (June 2021). “De novo acute myeloid leukemia: A population-based study of
outcome in the United States based on the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)
database, 1980 to 2017”. In: Cancer 127.12, pp. 2049–2061. ISSN: 1097-0142. DOI: 10.1002/
CNCR.33458. URL: https://acsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cncr.33458.
Scheicher, Ruth et al. (Jan. 2015). “CDK6 as a key regulator of hematopoietic and leukemic stem
cell activation”. In: Blood 125.1, pp. 90–101. ISSN: 0006-4971. DOI: 10.1182/BLOOD-2014-
06-584417. URL: https://ashpublications.org/blood/article/125/1/90/33933/CDK6-as-a-
key-regulator-of-hematopoietic-and.
Scholzen, Thomas and Johannes Gerdes (2000). “The Ki-67 Protein: From the Known and the
Unknown”. In: DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4652(200003)182:3. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/10.1002/.
Schoof, Erwin M. et al. (June 2021). “Quantitative single-cell proteomics as a tool to characterize
cellular hierarchies”. In: Nature Communications 2021 12:1 12.1, pp. 1–15. ISSN: 2041-1723.
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-23667-y. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-021-
23667-y.
Schwanhäusser, Björn et al. (May 2011). “Global quantification of mammalian gene expression
control”. In: Nature 2011 473:7347 473.7347, pp. 337–342. ISSN: 1476-4687. DOI: 10.1038/
nature10098. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/nature10098.
Shlush, Liran I., Amanda Mitchell, et al. (June 2017). “Tracing the origins of relapse in acute
myeloid leukaemia to stem cells”. In: Nature 2017 547:7661 547.7661, pp. 104–108. ISSN:
1476-4687. DOI: 10.1038/nature22993. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/nature22993.
Shlush, Liran I., Sasan Zandi, et al. (Feb. 2014). “Identification of pre-leukaemic haematopoietic
stem cells in acute leukaemia”. In: Nature 2014 506:7488 506.7488, pp. 328–333. ISSN: 1476-
4687. DOI: 10.1038/nature13038. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/nature13038.
Specht, Harrison et al. (Dec. 2021). “Single-cell proteomic and transcriptomic analysis of macrophage
heterogeneity using SCoPE2”. In: Genome Biology 22.1, pp. 1–27. ISSN: 1474760X. DOI:
10.1186/s13059-021-02267-5. URL: https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/
10.1186/s13059-021-02267-5.
Stanchina, Michele et al. (Nov. 2020). “Advances in Acute Myeloid Leukemia: Recently Approved
Therapies and Drugs in Development”. In: Cancers 12.11, pp. 1–32. ISSN: 20726694. DOI:
10.3390/CANCERS12113225. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-6694/12/11/3225.
Stelmach, Patrick and Andreas Trumpp (Feb. 2023). “Leukemic stem cells and therapy resistance
in acute myeloid leukemia”. In: Haematologica 108.2, pp. 353–366. ISSN: 1592-8721. DOI:
10.3324/HAEMATOL.2022.280800. URL: https://haematologica.org/article/view/10948.
Stone, Richard M. et al. (Aug. 2017). “Midostaurin plus Chemotherapy for Acute Myeloid Leukemia
with a FLT3 Mutation”. In: The New England journal of medicine 377.5, p. 454. ISSN: 0028-
4793. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMOA1614359. URL: https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/
NEJMoa1614359.
Suda, Toshio, Keiyo Takubo, and Gregg L. Semenza (Oct. 2011). “Metabolic Regulation of Hematopoi-
etic Stem Cells in the Hypoxic Niche”. In: Cell Stem Cell 9.4, pp. 298–310. ISSN: 1934-5909.
DOI: 10.1016/J.STEM.2011.09.010. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1934590911004413?via%3Dihub.
Taussig, David C. et al. (Aug. 2008). “Anti-CD38 antibody–mediated clearance of human repopu-
lating cells masks the heterogeneity of leukemia-initiating cells”. In: Blood 112.3, pp. 568–575.
ISSN: 0006-4971. DOI: 10.1182/BLOOD-2007-10-118331. URL: https://ashpublications.
org/blood/article/112/3/568/25258/Anti-CD38-antibody-mediated-clearance-of-human.
50
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:56==
Tigan, A. S. et al. (Oct. 2015). “CDK6—a review of the past and a glimpse into the future: from
cell-cycle control to transcriptional regulation”. In: Oncogene 2016 35:24 35.24, pp. 3083–3091.
ISSN: 1476-5594. DOI: 10.1038/onc.2015.407. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/
onc2015407.
Trumpp, Andreas, Marieke Essers, and Anne Wilson (Mar. 2010). “Awakening dormant haematopoi-
etic stem cells”. In: Nature reviews. Immunology 10.3, pp. 201–209. ISSN: 1474-1741. DOI:
10.1038/NRI2726. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/nri2726.
Tvedt, Tor Henrik, Ina Nepstad, and Øystein Bruserud (Mar. 2017). “Antileukemic effects of
midostaurin in acute myeloid leukemia – the possible importance of multikinase inhibition in
leukemic as well as nonleukemic stromal cells”. In: Expert Opinion on Investigational Drugs
26.3, pp. 343–355. ISSN: 17447658. DOI: 10.1080/13543784.2017.1275564. URL: https:
//www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/13543784.2017.1275564.
Uras, Iris Z., Veronika Sexl, and Karoline Kollmann (Apr. 2020). “CDK6 Inhibition: A Novel
Approach in AML Management”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences 21.7. ISSN:
14220067. DOI: 10.3390/IJMS21072528. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/21/7/
2528.
Ushey, Kevin, JJ Allaire, and Yuan Tang (June 2021). “Interface to ’Python’ [R package reticulate
version 1.38.0]”. In: DOI: 10.32614/CRAN.PACKAGE.RETICULATE. URL: https://CRAN.
R-project.org/package=reticulate.
Vanderaa, Christophe and Laurent Gatto (Oct. 2021). “Replication of single-cell proteomics data
reveals important computational challenges”. In: Expert Review of Proteomics 18.10, pp. 835–
843. ISSN: 17448387. DOI: 10.1080/14789450.2021.1988571. URL: https://www.tandfonline.
com/doi/abs/10.1080/14789450.2021.1988571.
– (2022). Replication of the AML model analysis (Schoof et al. 2021). URL: https://uclouvain-
cbio.github.io/SCP.replication/articles/schoof2021.html.
– (Jan. 2024). “scplainer: using linear models to understand mass spectrometry-based single-cell
proteomics data”. In: bioRxiv, p. 2023.12.14.571792. DOI: 10.1101/2023.12.14.571792. URL:
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.12.14.571792v2.abstract.
Velten, Lars, Simon F. Haas, et al. (Mar. 2017). “Human haematopoietic stem cell lineage com-
mitment is a continuous process”. In: Nature Cell Biology 2017 19:4 19.4, pp. 271–281. ISSN:
1476-4679. DOI: 10.1038/ncb3493. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/ncb3493.
Velten, Lars, Benjamin A. Story, et al. (Mar. 2021). “Identification of leukemic and pre-leukemic
stem cells by clonal tracking from single-cell transcriptomics”. In: Nature Communications 2021
12:1 12.1, pp. 1–13. ISSN: 2041-1723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467- 021- 21650- 1. URL: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41467-021-21650-1.
Wei, Zhang and Hui Tu Liu (2002). “MAPK signal pathways in the regulation of cell proliferation
in mammalian cells”. In: Cell Research 2002 12:1 12.1, pp. 9–18. ISSN: 1748-7838. DOI: 10.
1038/sj.cr.7290105. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/7290105.
Wickham, Hadley (2016). ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. Use R! Springer Inter-
national Publishing. ISBN: 978-3-319-24275-0. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-24277-4. URL:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-24277-4.
Wilson, Anne et al. (Dec. 2008). “Hematopoietic Stem Cells Reversibly Switch from Dormancy
to Self-Renewal during Homeostasis and Repair”. In: Cell 135.6, pp. 1118–1129. ISSN: 0092-
8674. DOI: 10.1016/J.CELL.2008.10.048. URL: https://www.cell.com/fulltext/S0092-
8674(08)01386-X.
Wiśniewski, Jacek R. et al. (Dec. 2014). “A “Proteomic Ruler” for Protein Copy Number and
Concentration Estimation without Spike-in Standards”. In: Molecular & Cellular Proteomics
: MCP 13.12, p. 3497. ISSN: 15359484. DOI: 10.1074/MCP.M113.037309. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1535947620337749?via%3Dihub.
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
51
==PAGE:57==
Yamamoto, Jennifer F. and Marc T. Goodman (May 2008). “Patterns of leukemia incidence in the
United States by subtype and demographic characteristics, 1997-2002”. In: Cancer causes &
control : CCC 19.4, pp. 379–390. ISSN: 0957-5243. DOI: 10.1007/S10552-007-9097-2. URL:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/40271875.
Yamamoto, Ryo et al. (Aug. 2013). “Clonal analysis unveils self-renewing lineage-restricted pro-
genitors generated directly from hematopoietic stem cells”. In: Cell 154.5, pp. 1112–1126. ISSN:
10974172. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.08.007. URL: https://www.cell.com/fulltext/S0092-
8674(13)00964-1.
Zeidner, Joshua F. and Judith E. Karp (Sept. 2015). “Clinical activity of alvocidib (flavopiridol) in
acute myeloid leukemia”. In: Leukemia research 39.12, pp. 1312–1318. ISSN: 1873-5835. DOI:
10.1016/J.LEUKRES.2015.10.010. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0145212615305361?via%3Dihub.
Zeng, Andy G.X. et al. (May 2022). “A cellular hierarchy framework for understanding hetero-
geneity and predicting drug response in acute myeloid leukemia”. In: Nature Medicine 2022
28:6 28.6, pp. 1212–1223. ISSN: 1546-170X. DOI: 10.1038/s41591- 022- 01819- x. URL:
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41591-022-01819-x.
Zhu, Ying et al. (Feb. 2018). “Nanodroplet processing platform for deep and quantitative proteome
profiling of 10–100 mammalian cells”. In: Nature Communications 2018 9:1 9.1, pp. 1–10.
ISSN: 2041-1723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03367-w. URL: https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41467-018-03367-w.
Zubarev, Roman A. and Alexander Makarov (June 2013). “Orbitrap mass spectrometry”. In: An-
alytical Chemistry 85.11, pp. 5288–5296. ISSN: 00032700. DOI: 10.1021/ac4001223. URL:
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/ac4001223.
52
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:58==
A
Abbreviations
ACN - Acetonitrile
AGC - Automatic gain control
AML - Acute myeloid leukemia
CDK - Cyclin-dependent kinase
CFC - Colony-forming cell
CH - Clonal hematopoiesis
CHIP - Clonal hematopoiesis of intermediate potential
CID - Collision induced dissociation
CLP - Common lymphoid progenitor
CML - Chronic myeloid leukemia
CMP - Common myeloid progenitor
CSC - Cancer stem cell
CSK - C-terminal Src kinase
CV - Coefficient of variation
DC - Dendritic cell
DDA - Data-dependent acquisition
DE - Differential expression
DIA - Data-independent acquisition
DM - Diffusion map
DMSO - Dimethyl sulfoxide
DTU - Technical University of Denmark
ESI - Electrospray ionisation
FA - Formic acid
FACS - Fluorescence-activated cell sorting
FAIMS - Field asymmetric ion mobility spectrometry
FDA - Food and Drug Administration
FLT3 - Fms related receptor tyrosine kinase 3
Flt3L - Fms related receptor tyrosine kinase 3 ligand
FSC-A - Forward scatter area
G-CSF - Granulocyte colony stimulating factor
GFP - Green fluorescent protein
GMP - Granulocyte-monocyte progenitor
GO - Gene ontology
Granu - Granulocyte
HCD - Higher-energy collisional dissociation
HCK - Hematopoietic cell kinase
HRAM - High-resolution accurate mass
HSC - Hematopoietic stem cell
HSPC - Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell
IC-50 - Half maximal inhibitory concentration
IL-3 - Interleukin 3
IL-6 - Interleukin 6
KNN - K-nearest neighbours
LC - Liquid chromatography
LC-MS - Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry
LIT - Linear ion trap
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
53
==PAGE:59==
LSC - Leukemic stem cell
Mac - Macrophage
MAD - Median absolute deviation
MAPK - Mitogen-activated protein kinase
MEP - Megakaryocyte-erythrocyte progenitor
Mk - Megakaryocyte
MKI67 - Proliferation marker protein Ki-67
MLL - Mixed-lineage leukemia
Mono - Monocyte
MPP - Multipotent progenitor
MS - Mass spectrometry
m/z - Mass-to-charge ratio
NCE - Normalized collision energy
NK - Natural killer cell
PAK - p21-activated kinase
PBS - Phosphate-buffered saline
PCA - Principal component analysis
PCR - Polymerase chain reaction
PG - Protein group
PI3K - Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
PKB/AKT - Protein kinase B
PKC - Protein kinase C
PSM - Peptide-spectrum match
PTM - Post-translational modification
Q - Quadrant
RBC - Red blood cell
RP-HPLC - Reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography
RSE - Residual standard error
RTS - Real-time search
SCF - Stem cell factor
scp-MS - Single-cell proteomics by mass spectrometry
scRNA-seq - Single-cell RNA sequencing
SFK - Src family tyrosine kinase
SPD - Samples per day
STK4 - Serine/threonine kinase 4
TEAB - Triethylammonium bicarbonate
TFA - Trifluoroacetic acid
TFE - 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol
TIMS - Trapped ion mobility
TMT - Tandem mass tag
TPO - Thrombopoietin
UHPLC - Ultra high performance liquid chromatography
UMAP - Uniform manifold approximation and projection
54
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:60==
B
Appendix
Figure B.1: The plate layout for FACS of drug-treated OCI-AML8227. Single-cells were
sorted row-wise into three 384-well plates (P1-P3) with FACS using a quadrant (Q) approach.
Eight empty wells were assigned to each plate as controls. Cells treated with each of the three drugs
were distributed onto each plate according to the color scheme: Flavopiridol yellow, midostaurin
green, DMSO red, and empty wells white. 500 cells were sorted into each well on a 384-well plate
(P4) using a four-way approach and following the same drug treatment color scheme.
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
55
==PAGE:61==
Figure B.2: The plate layout for TMT-labeling of drug-treated OCI-AML8227 single-cells.
TMTpro labels 127N - 135N were used to label the single-cells. The 16 labels were randomly
assigned to the cells within each column for a balanced design. All three single-cell plates (P1-P3,
Fig B.1) were labeled according to the same layout.
56
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
==PAGE:62==
Data driven cell specific drug treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
57
==PAGE:63==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 116
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
