==PAGE:1==
Refreshment of water inside offshore monopiles
Master Thesis
By Anders Berger Brusch
Student number: s183536
Supervisor: Stefan Carstensen (DTU) & Niels Gjøl Jacobsen (Vattenfall)
22nd of June 2024
==PAGE:2==
Refreshment of water inside offshore monopiles
Udskiftning af vand inde i offshore monopæle
Master Thesis
June 22, 2024
By
Anders Berger Brusch (s183536)
ECTS-points
30
Supervisor
Stefan Carstensen (DTU)
Niels Gjøl Jacobsen (Vattenfall)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Civil and Mechanical
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of hydrodynamics.
Anders Berger Brusch - s183536
Name
22/06-2024
Date
ii
==PAGE:4==
1
Abstract
Refreshment of water inside offshore monopiles is crucial for the prevention of internal
corrosion and thus the lifetime of the structures. This is due to the change in the acidity of
stagnant water where internal cathodic protection is applied. The water can be refreshed
through a replenishment hole below the water surface. The pressure difference as a result
of the wave action is able to exchange water through the replenishment hole creating a
time-varying jet. Time-varying jets, in particular in confined spaces, are not researched
areas and involve a series of uncertainties. This thesis investigates the flow through re-
plenishment holes with focus on the jet propagation and velocities in the area close to the
replenishment hole. This is done through a series of experiments.
Experiment A investigates the relative wave height between inside and outside the monopile
in order to verify the current setup with prior experiments. Furthermore, the objective
is to investigate relative wave heights in different flow regimes than previously performed
experiments. This shows a clear relation based on a series of parameters similar to existing
literature.
The main experiment (Experiment B) utilizes Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) to quan-
tify the jet velocities in the time-varying jet in a confined space. This is done in regular
waves for a set of wave parameters. Based on these results, simple equations can be set up
to estimate the jet velocities. Furthermore, the results indicate that the velocity profiles in
axial distances can successfully be normalized and give an estimate of the jet propagation
for a time varying jet in a confined space.
The experiment is done for two hole sizes,
comparing the jet of these in similar wave conditions. This can show relevant for a series
of applications such as designing internal ICCP strings in monopiles. Despite limitations
in hole orientations and flow regimes tested in Experiment B, the results, combined with
previous experiments, indicate that the jet velocity close to the replenishment hole can be
estimated independently of flow regimes and hole orientations.
Experiment C investigates the stationary jet in a confined space (the monopile).
The
experiment indicates that existing jet theory is inadequate for quantifying and describing
jet propagation in a confined space and that the time-varying jet and the stationary jet
have several significant differences.
iii
==PAGE:5==
List of Symbols
List of Symbols
b
Flume width
d
Hole diameter
dc
Contracted hole diameter
D
Pile diameter
Di
Internal pile diameter
H
Wave height
HMP
Wave height inside monopile
h
Water depth
η
Surface elevation
IA
Interrogation area
k
Wave number
KC
Keulegan-Carpenter number
L
Wave length
p+
Excess pressure
Re
Reynolds number
T
Wave period
u
Horizontal particle velocities
V0
Jet velocity
ω
Angular frequency
x
Horizontal axis
w
Vertical particle velocities
z
Vertical axis
ICCP
Impressed current cathodic protection
PIV
Particle Image Velocimetry
MP
Monopile
SWL
Still water level
DAQ
Data Acquisition software
DS
Dynamic Studios 7.2
iv
==PAGE:6==
Table of Contents
Preface
ii
1
Abstract
iii
2
Introduction
1
3
Conceptual framework
2
4
Method
5
4.1
Experiment A: Wave measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.1.1
Experimental conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.1.2
Experimental setup and procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.1.3
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2.1
Experimental conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2.2
Experimental setup and procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2.3
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Experiment C: Particle Image Velocimetry for a stationary jet . . . . . . . .
19
4.3.1
Experimental conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3.2
Experimental setup and procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Results
22
5.1
Experiment A: Wave measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2.1
Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2.2
Ensemble average particle velocities in regular waves . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.3
Time average particle velocities in regular waves
. . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Experiment C: Particle Image Velocimetry for a stationary jet . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.1
Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.2
Stationary jet velocities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Discussion
54
6.1
Normalization of jet velocities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.2
Jet propagation - Variation in particle velocities in axial distances
. . . . .
54
6.3
Errors and uncertainties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
v
==PAGE:7==
7
Conclusion
59
Bibliography
60
Appendix
61
A Calibration
61
B Procedure for execution of experiments with T ̸= 1.25 s
62
C Raw PIV images
63
D Velocity estimate in jet based on raw images
66
E Contour plot of velocities
67
F Determining contraction coefficient
74
G Mean velocities and standard deviations of u for PIV in regular waves
76
H Wave heights for specific tests during experiment B
78
I
Axial variation of centerline mean velocity
79
vi
==PAGE:8==
Introduction
2
Introduction
Prevention of internal corrosion is crucial for the lifetime of offshore wind turbines. The
foundation of most offshore wind turbines, in shallow to intermediate water depths, is
made up of circular steel cylinders below the seawater level. Many off these foundations
were initially designed to stay watertight, meaning an empty monopile. However, this was
an unrealistic design, as seawater would fill the interior of the monopile due to different
leaks (in locations of cables or other connections)(Intertek, n.d.). This leads to internal
corrosion due to the seawater which shortens the lifetime of the monopile. In order to
prevent internal corrosion, cathodic protection inside the foundation is used. However,
certain challenges do follow this, including a change in the pH values inside the monopile
(Larsen, 2020). To deal with this, refreshment of the sea water will slow down the corrosion
process. By applying one or several holes below the SWL, the monopile can be ventilated.
Through the circular replenishment hole, a jet will refresh the water inside the monopile.
As waves approach the foundation, a difference in surface elevation inside and outside the
circular cylinder will arise. The pressure gradient between the outside and inside of the
monopile drives the jet as the surface elevation changes. The jet is not constant and will
vary in time. This is both in magnitude, angle, and direction.
This thesis aims to quantify and analyze this jet through physical experiments for a MP
with a single replenishment hole. The jet velocities and propagation are aimed to be de-
termined and related to existing theory. The main experiment consists of 2D PIV analysis
in the area close to the replenishment hole. The PIV analysis will be performed on regular
waves generated in the flume. The experiments will compare the jet using different sizes
of the replenishment hole.
One of the main objectives is to compare the jet velocities
with a predictive jet velocity V0 which is easily calculated by a series of wave parameters
in a quasi-steady flow with certain empirical parameters. Furthermore, it is desired to
quantify the propagation of the jet and determine the variation in mean velocities. The
velocities and turbulence close to the replenishment hole can have a damaging effect on the
internal cathodic protection. By quantifying these large velocities and turbulence preven-
tive measures can be done as for positioning and designing the impressed current cathodic
protection (ICCP). Moreover, the jet’s ability to change the water inside the monopile
is investigated to a degree by analyzing the jet. There has previously been very limited
experimenting on time-varying jets, and the current thesis will give insights into how the
jet is acting in such situations. Furthermore, the jet inside of the monopile is in a confined
space, which is also not a well-studied situation.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
1
==PAGE:9==
Conceptual framework
3
Conceptual framework
The ventilation system can, conceptually, be seen by Figure 3.1. This shows two situations
(phases), of which the first is where the wave crest is at the location of the foundation.
The right-hand side illustration shows the situation where the wave trough is located at
the foundation.
Figure 3.1: Conceptual illustration for ventilation of monopile.
As the wave approaches the monopile a difference in the surface elevation outside and inside
the monopile will arise. In an unventilated monopile, the difference in surface elevation
would be equal to the amplitude of the wave (H/2). As the ventilation hole allows water
to flow into and out of the monopile, there will be a small amplitude inside the monopile.
The main driver of the flow is the difference in pressure inside and outside the monopile.
Introducing the energy equation in a quasi-stationary flow situation can provide a first
estimate for the velocities in the hole of the circular cylinder. Given that subscript 1 refers
to the outside of the circular cylinder and subscript 2 refers to inside the monopile, it can
be written:
z1 + p1
ρg + αV 2
1
2g = z2 + p2
ρg + αV 2
2
2g + ∆H
(3.1)
In many cases the surface would be preferable as reference for solving the energy equation.
For this situation, however, it is desired to take the height of the hole as reference height.
This is in order to, eventually, obtain the expected velocities in the replenishment hole. For
the quasi stationary situation the velocities are considered small compared to the remaining
terms considering the large basin. By taking the reference from the bed of the flume the
height will be the same (height of the replenishment hole) for both situation as seen below.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
2
==PAGE:10==
Conceptual framework
Figure 3.2: Conceptual illustration of the stationary energy equation.
By this z1 and z2 equals out and only the pressure term both sides and the energy loss
∆H remains.


z1 + p1
ρg +



αV 2
1
2g = 

z2 + p2
ρg +



αV 2
2
2g + ∆H →∆H = p1 −p2
ρg
(3.2)
By this, the head loss will be proportional to the difference in pressure outside and inside
the monopile.
As waves are present outside the monopile, there will be an excess pressure p+.
This
excess pressure corresponds to the pressure apart from the hydrostatic pressure. This will
therefore be equal to the pressure difference p1−p2. For linear waves with small amplitude,
p+ can be found in Eqn. 3.3 (Sumer and Fredsøe 1997).
p+
ρ = gH
2
cosh(k(z + h))
cosh(kh)
cos(ωt −kx)
(3.3)
z refers to the distance from the still water level to the replenishment hole, since excess
pressure will be found at this point in the water column. With this, the dispersion relation
must be utilized to determine the wave number k.
ω2 = gktanh(kh)
(3.4)
The maximum excess pressure can be determined from Eqn. 3.5.
p+ = gH
2
cosh(k(z + h))
cosh(kh)
ρ
(3.5)
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
3
==PAGE:11==
Conceptual framework
The head loss ∆H can then be utilized to estimate the velocity in the replenishment hole
from Eqn. 3.6.
∆H = ζ V 2
0
2g
(3.6)
Where:
V0 is the velocity in the hole.
ζ is resistance coefficient.
The magnitude of the resistance coefficient has been previously investigated in the BSc
thesis (Sørensen Christensen, 2023) to be approximately 2. This study investigate similar
wave parameters as done in the present study. This is except for the wave height which
will be elaborated further. Initially, the surface elevation inside the cylinder is assumed to
be zero as this will be small in reality compared to the wave height.
∆H = ζ V 2
0
2g →V0 =
s
∆H2g
ζ
(3.7)
An initial expected velocity in the hole can then be directly calculated from this equation.
To understand the jet the flow regimes is of high interest. In an oscillating flow this is
determined by the Keulegan-Carpenter number. The horizontal particle velocity Um can
be determined in the height of the replenishment hole by Eqn. 3.8 (Sumer and Fredsøe
1997). This is for the undisturbed incident wave, not including the effect of the circular
cylinder.
Um = πH
T
cosh(k(z + h))
sinh(kh)
(3.8)
With the particle velocity determined the KC number is can be found.
KC = UmT
D
(3.9)
The flow regimes around a smooth circular cylinder relevant for the the experiment can be
seen by Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Flow regimes for different KC numbers. Re = 103 (Sumer and Fredsøe 1997).
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
4
==PAGE:12==
Method
4
Method
In the following section, the methods for executing the experiments are explained. Three
main experiments are performed for this thesis.
Common for all three experiments is
the flume used for performing the experiments. Furthermore, the same water depth of
h = 0.5 m and pile diameter of D = 100 mm.
The distance from the still water level
to the center of the replenishment hole is also common for all experiments performed at
z = −100 mm. The orientation of the hole with respect to the wave direction is constant
throughout the experiments. The orientation is α = 0o meaning the hole is positioned on
the front face of the cylinder for the incident waves.
The first experiment consists of wave measurement including measurements inside the
monopile (Experiment A). The primary goal of this experiment is to validate with previ-
ous experiments (Sørensen Christensen, 2023), that similar results can be obtained with
the current experimental setup. By this, the results found in the present thesis can be
compared directly to prior projects. The experiments further aims to verify that smaller
wave heights will result in a relative wave height inside the monopile which follow a similar
trend as higher wave heights in a different flow regime.
The main focus of this thesis is experiment B using 2D particle image velocimetry to
investigate the velocities near the ventilation hole of the monopile.
This is in regular
progressive wave. This experiment investigates the time-varying jet which is, inside the
monopile, also in a confined space.
The last experiment performed is experiment C. This experiment is performed much like
Experiment B but in a steady flow jet. This means that instead of waves a constant pump
either supplies or sucks out water from the pile interior. The main purpose of this experi-
ment is to compare the time-varying jet (experiment B), as little research and theory are
currently available for time varying jets as well as jets in confined spaces.
4.1
Experiment A: Wave measurement
Experiment A is performed by wave measurements at different locations tested in a series
of wave parameters. In this experiment, the relative wave heights will be investigated. The
relative wave height describes the surface elevation inside the monopile in relation to the
outside surface elevation.
4.1.1
Experimental conditions
The wave measurement experiment consists of experiments using different wave parameters
(wave heights and wave periods). All waves tested in this experiment are regular waves.
Furthermore, different sizes of the replenishment hole are performed. The overview can be
seen in Table 4.1.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
5
==PAGE:13==
4.1
Experiment A: Wave measurement
Table 4.1: Wave conditions for experiment 1
Wave height
Wave period
Hole diameter
H [mm]
T [s]
d [mm]
30
1.25
10, 14
40
1.25
14
50
1.25
14
60
1.25
14
70
1.25
14
80
1.25
14
75
0.8
10
1.0
10
1.2
10
1.4
10
1.6
10
1.8
10
2.0
10
100
0.8
10
1.0
10
1.2
10
1.4
10
1.6
10
1.8
10
2.8
10
The hole diameter of 10 and 14 mm are chosen as the hole area of d = 14 mm is approxi-
mately twice the area of d = 10 mm.
4.1.2
Experimental setup and procedure
Obtaining the correct surface elevation is crucial for the experiment. Firstly, it is crucial to
verify the relative wave heights inside the pile. Furthermore, it is important to verify the
specific wave heights in each run for the PIV measurements. In this section, the specifics
of the wave measurement experiments are described. The experiments are done in Flume 3
which is 28 meters long. This flume has a piston wave generator on one side that is able to
produce regular waves with specific wave heights and wave periods. In the opposite end of
the flume a wave absorber is placed which limits the reflection of the waves as they reach
the end of the flume. The cylinder is positioned 13 m from the wave generator. At different
positions close to the cylinder, wave gauges are placed to measure the surface elevation in
time. This can be seen in Figure 4.1.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
6
==PAGE:14==
4.1
Experiment A: Wave measurement
Figure 4.1: The setup for experiments.
All experiments with T = 1.25 s (see. Table 4.1) are performed similarly while the tests
for H = 75, 100 mm are performed in accordance to Appendix B. The tests for T = 1.25 s
are done similarly to Experiment B to obtain as reliable results as possible. For each test
10 repetitions are performed (for one set of wave parameters). In each repetition three
waves are used for further analysis. There are several reasons for this choice of experiment
execution. The reasons for three wave are due to limits by PIV analysis in experiment B
and will be elaborated in its section. Furthermore, it is due to the reflection of wave after
they are reflected by the wave absorber. In flume 1 the wave absorber is longer compared
to the wave absorber in flume 3 (current experimental flume). Because of this the reflection
is more significant and it is desired to analyse waves which are not subjected to reflection
by the wave absorber. By using these waves the only reflection will be the reflection from
the pile which is small compared to the waves which are seen after returning from the end
of the flume. This is further elaborated in Appendix B and in the experimental setup for
experiment B.
The input wave height for the wave generator will be smaller than the actual wave height
in the flume. This is due to the response time making the plate of the wave generator plate
change direction before reaching the final position. Due to this, amplifications of the wave
heights are used to obtain the desired wave heights. This is done by testing for different
wave periods with specific wave heights. The wave heights are then measured by the wave
gauges. An estimate of the amplification magnitude is then found. By measuring with the
amplified wave heights input in the wave generator, the correct wave height can be obtained
by iteration. Shorter wave periods must use a larger amplification as the response time is
more significant for smaller wave periods compared to larger periods. The summarizing
procedure for the experiment is as follows:
1. Once calibration is performed (will be elaborated in the following section), the measure-
ments can be initiated.
2. With the initiation of the DAQ software, the wave generator is started with specific
wave heights and wave periods.
3. The trigger system is pressed after 18 seconds of wave generation. The specifics of
the trigger system will be elaborated in the procedure for Experiment B, as this is most
relevant for this purpose.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
7
==PAGE:15==
4.1
Experiment A: Wave measurement
4.1.3
Data processing
Wave height calibration
The calibration of the wave gauges was performed using DAQ software and spacer blocks.
As the measurements were measured in Volt, this must be converted to distance [m] using
the calibration. In DAQ a measurement is done where each wave gauge is positioned in
different heights to convert from Volt to meters. From the neutral position of the gauges,
calibration is done from +50 mm to -50 mm as this includes wave heights of 100 mm.
The CSV file from DAQ software is then imported in Matlab where linear interpolation is
applied for each wave gauge. By this a multiplication factor to convert from Volt to meters
is found which is multiplied for entire datasets as they are imported to data processing.
An example of a calibration plot can be seen by Appendix A.
Raw data processing
The calibration multiplication factor is multiplied by the Volt signal to convert the surface
elevation into unit of meters.
The raw data experience disturbance of the equipment (noise) causing oscillations of the
measured surface elevation (apart from the sinusoidal oscillations due to the waves). These
small oscillations challenge the results and are desired to be filtered to get a more even
sinusoidal propagation. The main reason for this is that the small oscillations cause a
change in the wave height measured from the data. The oscillations give spikes both at the
wave crest and through which results in larger wave measured than is present in reality.
The filtering is completed using the Matlab function ”filterCoeff” offered by supervisor
Stefan Carstensen. The raw data together with the filtered data can be seen in Figure 4.2
Figure 4.2: Raw and filtered data for a wave series of H = 0.1 m
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
8
==PAGE:16==
4.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
The red line (raw data) shows the spikes mentioned. For one wave period finding the wave
height for these two cases will give a lower, and more realistic, wave height for the filtered
data.
Finding the wave heights are then done utilizing a zero crossing.
Between each zero-
up-crossing, the distance from the minimum and maximum surface elevation is used to
determine the wave height. The average of these then concludes the reference wave height.
As in this experiment the monopile inside the flume will affect the waves, the average of
the three wave gauges outside of the circular cylinder is used. Reflections of waves from
the cylinder will have a minor effect on the wave heights, and the effect will depend on the
position of the wave gauge.
4.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
Experiment B aims to quantify the flow close to the replenishment hole in regular waves.
By performing PIV analysis in an area close to the replenishment hole, the time-varying
jet in and out of the hole can be examined and the particle velocities can be determined.
4.2.1
Experimental conditions
For the PIV experiment, less variety in wave parameters is completed compared to experi-
ment A. The reason for this is the data processing of PIV and large data quantities obtained
from relatively few experiments. As one experiment of 1000 images only corresponds to
5.21 seconds of experiment due to the high trigger rate of the camera. Therefore, the pri-
mary experiments are done for regular wave with H = 0.03 m and T = 1.25 s. The specific
period of 1.25 s is chosen as an integer of images are obtained as 1.25 s · 192 Hz = 240
images. 192 Hz describes the maximum trigger rate for the camera, which is 192 images
per second. Two hole diameters d of 10 and 14 mm were used for the PIV analysis and
these were used for comparison. An overview of the conditions can be seen by Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Conditions for experiment B.
Wave height H
30 mm
Wave period T
1.25 s
Hole diameter d
10, 14 mm
Trigger rate
192 1/s
Hole orientation α
0o
The main difference is the wave height in the present thesis is H = 0.03 m and BSc the-
sis (Sørensen Christensen, 2023) were tested for H = 0.075 m & 0.1 m. This leads to a
difference in the flow regime in the different experiments (see Figure 3.3). One reason for
choosing H = 0.03 m is due to the magnitude of the velocities with this wave height will
give more accurate results especially close to the replenishment hole. The laminar flow
around the monopile does also decrease the number of unknowns as the velocities on the
lee side of the monopile are known quite close to the monopile. The flow on the lee side of
the monopile will be more comparable to an undisturbed wave compared to the situation
with vortices and/or separation. In case of an outgoing jet where the wave trough is at
the location of the monopile, there will be no large vortices in the location of the jet. This
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
9
==PAGE:17==
4.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
will give a difference in the jet compared to flow regimes where vortices exist. Vortices
with KC >≈1.6 will give horizontal velocities in the opposite direction of the undisturbed
water particles. With a wave height of 100 mm and a wave period of 1.25 s, this will result,
with the 100 mm monopile, in KC = 2.74. This is large compared to H = 30 mm resulting
in KC = 0.82.
With H = 0.03 m, the wave will be more linear in comparison to larger wave heights.
This is an advantage in regards to comparing to linear theory. In Figure 4.3 the wave
heights of H = 30 mm can be seen with 75 mm and 100 mm waves heights.
Figure 4.3: Regions of stokes second order theory. Significance of second order wave theory
to first order theory (Figure provided by Stefan Carstensen).
By this figure the wave steepness H/L is seen from the vertical axis while kh is seen from
the horizontal axis. The figure show areas in which the waves will have a certain property.
The figure show that for H = 30 mm the waves are characterised by less than 5% second
order effects. This is not the case for 75 and 100 mm waves though these do not exceeds
the 15% limit. The smaller (lower) the wave steepness is naturally the more linear the
waves are for a given kh. It can be seen, that for all three set of wave parameters the
Ursell number of 10 shown by the grey dotted line.
Measurement of the surface elevation inside the monopile with a lower wave height will be
less accurate compared to higher wave heights due to noise in measurements. Furthermore,
the calibration is performed by the spacer blocks, which include inaccuracy of 0.1 mm. In
experiments which serve to quantify this surface elevation, a larger wave height than 30
mm will be desired. Using PIV the surface elevation is not of interest, rather the velocities
in the replenishment hole. Therefore, this is not a limitation.
The PIV measurements, as mentioned, 2D investigating the center of the pile cutting
through the center of the replenishment hole with the orientation of 0 degrees. This will
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
10
==PAGE:18==
4.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
give an estimation of the jet in 2D including the center of the jet and the spreading in the
vertical direction.
4.2.2
Experimental setup and procedure
The setup for the PIV experiments is somewhat similar to the setup for the wave measure-
ments. The same flume, monopile and wave gauges are used. However, the wave gauge
inside the cylinder has been removed. This is due to the interference of this wave gauge
with the flow and jet inside the monopile. The wave gauge inside the monopile will also
need to be masked in PIV which will give undesired gabs in the field of velocities. This can
also be safely done as Experiment A will measure the inside wave height prior to performing
Experiment B with similar wave parameters. The setup can be seen by Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: The setup for experiments using PIV.
The camera is positioned outside the flume recording through the glass wall. On the camera
a filter is applied allowing only green wavelengths to pass through. This allows less outside
light to be recorded. The camera is placed on a metal frame. By this the location of
the camera is locked and the monopile and hole position in each frame will be constant.
Around the setup, spanning over the flume, a tent is placed to let less light enter the setup.
Furthermore, the tent acts a protection from reflections of the laser sheet as this can be
harmful for human eyes.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
11
==PAGE:19==
4.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
Figure 4.5: Frame for camera.
Figure 4.6: Tent for experimental setup.
Behind the flume the RayPower 450 is positioned pointing the laser sheet horizontally un-
der the flume. The laser sheet is then redirected vertically up by a mirror at a 45o angle.
The bottom of the flume is, in the position of the test setup, made of glass which allows
the laser sheet to go through. The position of the laser and the mirror is done carefully as
the laser sheet must be in the center of the monopile and must be vertical. Furthermore,
the size of the laser sheet determines the area in which velocities can be obtained.
As the size of the laser sheet is limited both due to distance and power, the experiments
are divided into two tests for different laser sheet positions. Initial tests were done using
only one laser sheet for the experiments. However, this was shown to be insufficient as the
area was too small. The position of the laser sheet is therefore the following.
1. Laser sheet positioned in front of the cylinder to detect the outside jet.
2. The laser sheet positioned inside the cylinder to detect the particles inside the monopile.
The experimental setup can be seen from above in Figure 4.7.
Here, the entire laser
sheet is shown, which will be done by two test with the different sheet positions. This data
can afterwards be collected to show the entire area of interest. Figure 4.4.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
12
==PAGE:20==
4.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
Figure 4.7: The setup for experiments using PIV seen from above.
The PIV analysis is, as mentioned a 2D PIV as the laser sheet is two dimensional. First
of all this means, that velocities will only be obtained in the horizontal direction of the
wave progression and the vertical direction. This is, naturally, a simplification as the flow
is highly three dimensional. The orientation of the hole, at 0 degrees from the wave direc-
tion, gives a somewhat two dimensional flow. The center of the jet as well as the flow of
the waves will be well documented from the two dimensional analysis. The jet will spread
as developing and the third direction velocities will be more significant as the the distance
from the replenishment hole increases. There will also be three dimensional flow inside the
monopile especially after reaching the rear wall of the circular cylinder. Circular flow of
the particles inside the monopile will be detected partially. Given an orientation of the
monopile apart from 0 and 180 degrees will be more three dimensional and will require a
much different experimental setup.
The frame window can be seen by Figure 4.8.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
13
==PAGE:21==
4.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
Figure 4.8: The sheet which the camera records can be seen by the dotted rectangle.
ˆZ
refers to the direction of the data defined by the PIV analysis.
The window is set up, in such way, that the rear wall of the cylinder is included in the
right side of the image. On the left side the horizontal distance to the replenishment hole
must be at least equal to the diameter of the circular cylinder, as the outgoing jet should
be included at least to the extend of the inside jet.
The procedure for the experimental tests can be summarized by the following steps:
1. With the laser sheet positioned, the seeding (dseeding = 50 µm) is supplied and while
the camera is on ”free run” in order to visualize the current seeding.
2. The data acquisition in DS is initialized as well as the DAQ software.
3. The wave generator is initialized.
4. After 18 seconds from the initiation of the wave generator, the manual trigger is pressed.
This trigger sends a signal to DS as well as the DAQ software. This trigger system is elab-
orated further in the following section.
5. The camera records 1000 images which are used for further analysis.
Trigger system
The trigger rate of the camera is set to 192 frames per second as this is the highest pos-
sible. The high frequency of frames is especially important near the ventilation hole as
the velocities here are largest. With lower trigger rate, there is a risk that the majority
of particles move out of the specified interrogation area between two frames. When this
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
14
==PAGE:22==
4.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
happens and new particles enter the interrogation area, false velocities will be obtained.
In the acquired PIV data, there is no exact indication of the specific phase of the wave to
a certain frame. Therefore, there needs to be a connection from the PIV data to the wave
measurements. This is done using a manual trigger between DAQ software and Dynamic
Studios. The waves are then measured with the same frequency as for the PIV (192 Hz).
By using an Arduino trigger, this connection can be made. It is done by first starting the
wave generator and waiting for the waves to approach the cylinder. At a certain point
(18 seconds after initiation of wave generator) the trigger bottom is pressed giving a 5
Volt signal to the DAQ software which also starts the data acquisition in DS. For better
understanding, a small part of this result is shown in Figure 4.9. With this, the specific
phase of the wave at the start point of data acquisition is achieved and the phase at each
frame is known as the trigger frequency for the camera and the wave gauges are the same.
This does, however, leave the possibility for a shifting of half a frequency between the
PIV data and the wave measurements. This is, nevertheless, considered negligible as the
frequency is high compared to the period of the wave.
Figure 4.9: Trigger signal shown by the red line. The thick part is the trigger point for
start of the image data acquisition
The trigger bottom is, as mentioned, pressed manually and hitting the exact same time
each time can not be done. Therefore, the data used for further analysis is set starting at
the first wave up crossing. This is done using wave gauge 3 as this is positioned at the
front face of the monopile. For each run the data then start at the same point at the same
number wave of the run. The chosen waves can be seen by Figure 4.10.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
15
==PAGE:23==
4.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
Figure 4.10: The selected waves shown with the full series of data.
During the data
acquisition 4.3 full periods can be recorded given a wave period of 1.25 s.
Camera calibration
Camera calibration is done using a calibration sheet as seen in the figure below.
Figure 4.11: Calibration sheet next to the monopile. The purpose of this is to convert from
pixels to meters.
With the setup in place the calibration sheet is put next to the cylinder aligned with the
laser sheet. With the SpeedSense 1040, an acquired image can then be used for calibration.
The measured scale is defined as calibration where origin (0,0) placed in the center of the
calibration sheet. The distance from the top left corner to the bottom right corner of the
calibration sheet is then measured (130.86 mm) and applied to Dynamic Studios. This is
the longest dimension of the calibration sheet which is why this distance is used. Apart
from the calibration the calibration sheet further facilitate the focus of the camera as the
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
16
==PAGE:24==
4.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
position of the dots are in the same distance and positions as the particles are. By focusing
on the dots this focus applies for the particles as well.
4.2.3
Data processing
PIV and data processing using Dynamic Studios 7.2
Particle image velocimetry allows one to quantify the particle velocities in the flow. With
a known rate of images and distances in the frames, the relationship can be established.
Speed [m/s] = Distance [m]
Time [s]
(4.1)
The detected particles are the added seeding which optimally is neutrally buoyant in the
water (2D PIV Reference Manual 2005). The seeding must be distributed equally in the
area of interest. In the current experiment this leads to certain challenges which must
be dealt with carefully. This is due to the seeding inside the monopile is in a confined
space and will be ”washed away” only by the flow trough the hole. The seeding outside
the monopile is in a large flume and will need more careful control. As the tests are split
up with the two laser positions the seeding must be correct also in the area which is not
lit up by the laser. When the inside jet is investigated the seeding must be sufficient and
equally spread outside the pile for the inside jet (with supply from outside) must contain
enough particles. As the seeding outside is supplied the laser sheet is not supplying the
light which makes visual inspection of the seeding easy. Therefore, the seeding must be
done equally and precisely to achieve correct results. If the seeding is, on the contrary,
too concentrated outside the MP the seeding will be too concentrated as it reaches the
inside of the pile.
As the particles are transported in the jet towards the rear wall of
the cylinder and then split the seeding in these areas will be more concentrated than the
remaining pile. Once the seeding is supplied correctly the data acquisition can be initiated.
With the set of images from one data acquisition (1000 images), the PIV analysis can
be initiated. The first procedure is to make double frames. This is done by using image
1-2, 2-3, 3-4 ... rather than 1-2, 3-4, 5-6 ... for the analysis. This results in N-1 double
frames where N is the total number of images acquired as single frames.
Next, Dynamic Studio’s Adaptive PIV is used. This allows for an adaptivity in the size of
interrogation area. The interrogation area is defined by a maximum and a minimum dis-
tance in the horizontal and vertical directions respectively. Using a too large interrogation
area will cause the results to be inaccurate especially close to the replenishment hole. If the
height of the interrogation area is too large, velocities from the jet will be obtained in the
area above and below the replenishment hole, where the velocities actually are small. The
maximum interrogation size is determined from the expected velocities. The horizontal
interrogation area is defined by the expected velocities close to the replenishment hole as
these are the largest velocities. The expected velocity found by Eqn. 3.7 to be V0 = 0.34 m
s
for H = 30 mm and T = 1.25 s. This velocity is in the unit of m
s but can be defined by
Pixels
image rate. The translation coefficient is found for the current camera position between
meter and pixels to be 1.04·10−4. The image rate is equal to the trigger rate 192 Hz. From
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
17
==PAGE:25==
4.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
this, the velocity will be ≈17
Pixels
image rate. As it is desired to have movement through only
a fraction of the interrogation area (approximately 25%) the maximum horizontal distance
is defined as 128 pixels. If the particle movement is close to the size of the interrogation
area, some particles will move out of the interrogation area by the duration of the double
image. At the same time, a new particle will move into the interrogation area. By this,
negative velocities can be obtained where positive velocities are in reality seen. The maxi-
mum vertical IA size is defined as 64 pixels. This is chosen to be significantly larger than
the size of the replenishment hole which has a height of 104 pixels. By this, the IA size is
rectangular as significantly larger horizontal velocities than vertical velocities are expected.
PIV analysis is time costly as few experiment have long processing time.
This time-
consuming process limits the number of different experiments. Dynamic Studio takes ap-
proximately 1.5 hours to process one analysis (one run of 1000 images). As this is done 10
times both in front of and inside the circular cylinder, 20 tests are completed for one hole
diameter with one set of wave parameters. Once the adaptive PIV analysis is completed,
the extraction of data followed by the Matlab data processing for one experiment will also
be time costly as each run has to be analyzed. This is the main reason for the limited
amount of different parameters investigated, such as wave heights, periods and orientation
of the replenishment hole. Throughout the experiment period, different approaches have
been tested to find the optimal test procedure. As each series of experiments are time con-
suming, the combined time for the experiments and, more significantly, the data processing
is limiting the variation in tests greatly.
Data processing in Matlab
In the section, the main aspect of the Matlab data processing will be elaborated. This is
the process of obtaining velocities in particular ensemble average.
From each run 1000 csv files containing the velcities in the horizontal and vertical directions
are analyzed. This run has one corresponding csv file containing the surface elevation for
each time step of the run. As the previous elaborated trigger system does not specify a
phase at the beginning, a common point for analysis of all data sets must be established.
This is simply done by finding the first up-crossing for the wave gauge located at the front
face of the circular cylinder. As the frequency of the images and surface elevation points
are the same, the point of the up-crossing is also the image of the up-crossing. Doing this
for all runs establishes a common phase for all runs as the images before the up-crossing
are removed. The next upcrossing is then found at 240 points (or csv files containing PIV
velocities) later. This is due to the frequency of 192 Hz and the period of 1.25 s.
The csv files containing PIV velocities are loaded into Matlab. As the files, initially, con-
tain one column for each parameter (x, z, u, w) they are reshaped into three-dimensional
matrices. From the grid step size of 16x16 pixels, one run for one parameter will contain a
142x106x1000 matrix. 142x106 correspond to the spatial values in the x and z directions,
while the 1000 correspond to the time variation. The ensemble average can be obtained
by the average of each frame (142x106) with the phase of the first matrix being the same.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
18
==PAGE:26==
4.3
Experiment C: Particle Image Velocimetry for a stationary jet
With 10 repetitions this can be repeated for three periods as the 1000 images leads to:
Nwaves =
1000
192 Hz 1.25 s = 4.1
(4.2)
As the initial part from the trigger to the first up-crossing is removed 3 full waves can be
included in one run. Therefore, the ensemble average can be done for 30 waves.
4.3
Experiment C: Particle Image Velocimetry for a stationary jet
Experiment C aims to quantify the particle velocities for a stationary jet in and out of the
replenishment hole. The area that is interrogated is the same as that for experiment B in
order to compare the time-varying jet from experiment B to the steady jet in experiment
C.
4.3.1
Experimental conditions
The velocities in the stationary jet are desired to be close to the jet in experiment B.
This is the situation of the wave crest and wave trough where the differences in surface
elevation inside and outside are largest in magnitude. Given the wave height in experiment
B of H = 30 mm the largest difference in surface elevation is ∆ηmax = 15 mm. By this,
the aimed elevation for this experiment is ∆ηmax = ±15 mm. The hole diameter used for
experiment C is d = 10 mm. Finding the expected jet velocity V0 by Eqn. 3.3 to Eqn. 3.7
includes the wave number k. As the stationary situation is not subjected to waves the term
in Eqn. 4.3 will go to 1.
cosh(k(z + h))
cosh(kh)
→1
(4.3)
This is as the stationary jet has more time to develop an it leads to an increase in expected
jet velocity and the head loss will correspond to the difference in surface elevation.
4.3.2
Experimental setup and procedure
The setup for experiment C is much like the setup for experiment B. Instead of wave
generation and wave measurement, however, the pump is installed with a tube in the
monopile and one in the free flume. The experimental setup can be seen by Figure 4.12.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
19
==PAGE:27==
4.3
Experiment C: Particle Image Velocimetry for a stationary jet
Figure 4.12: The setup for experiments using PIV for constant jet using pump.
The first phase of experiment C is determining the surface elevation inside the pile given
the maximum pump speed. This is done by inserting a wave gauge inside the monopile.
With the pump at maximum in each direction, positive and negative difference inside the
pile, the surface elevation is measured. The volume change inside the monopile due to the
wave gauge is negligible as it is small compared to the pile volume.
Next, the wave gauge is removed and the PIV measurements are initialized.
The first
experiment investigates the jet going into the pile. For this, the laser sheet is positioned
inside the monopile while the pump removes water from the top of the water column inside
the circular cylinder. This situation simulates the surface elevation of the wave crest, but
in a stationary situation. With the pump initiated, the seeding is applied and an initiation
of one minute is established to reach a stationary constant flow. This is seen when the
surface elevation inside the pile is no longer varying. The camera acquires 1000 images
with one repetition. As this is a stationary situation the experiment does not need more
repetitions as one repetition results in 1000 frames with the same ”phase” compared to
experiment B with three frames of the same phase in one test repetition.
Next, the laser sheet is moved outside of the monopile, and the direction of the pump
is reversed. Now an out-moving jet will appear. The hose inside the pile is moved towards
the bottom of the pile as the jet positioned in the top will point directly at the replenish-
ment hole. This will result in an angle of the outgoing jet instead of a more horizontal jet
which is caused by the difference in surface elevation. The experiment is performed in the
same way as for the inside jet. The inside of the pile is not investigated in this situation
as the velocities come directly from the tube of the pump and is not a situation of interest
for the current experiment.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
20
==PAGE:28==
4.3
Experiment C: Particle Image Velocimetry for a stationary jet
Figure 4.13: Image of setup for experiments with pump.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
21
==PAGE:29==
Results
5
Results
5.1
Experiment A: Wave measurements
The ratio between the wave height inside the monopile and the outside wave height has
been analyzed in research paper by (Kesgin et al. 2024). This was done in another flume
(Flume 1) than the flume tested for the current thesis (Flume 3). The tests showed that
the relative wave height inside the monopile can be predicted on the basis of a series of
wave parameters for regular waves. The relative wave height was shown to be proportional,
given by Eqn. 5.1.
HMP
Href
∝f(Href
gψ )1/2 D2
i
d2
(5.1)
Here HMP refers to the wave height inside the monopile. Href is the average wave height
measured from the three wave gauges outside monopile in the flume. Di refers to the pile
diameter on the inside while d is the diameter of the hole. The relation showed to have
the relation given by Eqn. 5.2.
HMP
Href
= 0.27
 
f(Href
gψ )1/2 D2
i
d2
!−1
(5.2)
Where:
ψ = cosh(k(z + h))
cosh(kh)
(5.3)
The relation in Eqn. 5.2 shows that low frequencies (long wave period) results in relative
large elevations inside the pile. As the frequency is increased the inside elevation does not
have time to vary as much compared to lower frequencies. Given a larger pile diameter
Di, there will be smaller elevation inside the monopile as the velocity in the hole is in-
dependent of the pile diameter. With a larger hole diameter, however, the relative wave
height inside the monopile will increase as the velocity in the replenishment hole is, in a
stationary situation, independent of the hole diameter.
The results of the experiments can be seen by Figure 5.1 with the trend line from Eqn. 5.2.
The figure aims to compare results from the two flumes to verify that similar results can
be obtained from flume 3 as in flume 1. Furthermore, it aims to verify that tests performed
in the initial phase of the horizontal axis (∼2 - 4) also fit the curve.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
22
==PAGE:30==
5.1
Experiment A: Wave measurements
Figure 5.1: HMP /Href for the experiments done. The results compared to results obtained
in Flume 1 (current experiments are done in Flume 3). All experiments titled Flume 1 or
Flume 3 are performed with d = 10 mm. The different wave heights H describes the target
incident wave height for the specific tests. All tests are performed for α = 0.
In Figure 5.1 the relative wave height HMP
Href
can be seen from the vertical axis. The line
shows the regression relation from Eqn. 5.2. The red marks (□and x) shows the relative
wave height from the experiment done in flume 3. These can be seen to correspond well to
the results obtained in flume 1 (Sørensen Christensen, 2023). These results are performed
with similar wave heights and pipe properties and wave frequencies in the same order
of size.
The relative wave heights seems to be slightly shifted down compared to the
expected magnitude. The difference can be due to various differences in the two flumes
and analysis’s. One main difference is the two experimental procedures is the chosen waves
for analysis. While the current experiment (Flume 3) focuses on wave which has not been
subjected to wave reflection from the wave absorber, Flume 1 is found from reflected waves
in a somewhat steady situation. The results are, however, acceptably close to the line.
The blue triangles show the experiments performed for H = 30 mm. For d = 14 mm and
H = 30 mm the largest relative wave height can be seen. This is in the steep phase of the
curve. The black circles marks shows a variation of wave heights all with d = 14 mm and
T = 1.25 s. These can be seen to correspond well to the curve as well. The blue markers
are the parameters which will be used for Experiment B.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
23
==PAGE:31==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
The results of the PIV experiments serve several purposes. Initially, the raw images show
the particle movement in order to understand the flow. From this, the PIV data including
velocities can be analyzed to quantify the flow further. This is done both by the ensemble
average and the time average.
5.2.1
Images
The raw images are split into two as the experiments are taken both inside the cylinder and
in front of the replenishment hole. Examples of raw images can be seen by Appendix C.
In order to better present the results, the images are merged, so the entire image shows
particle flow. Furthermore, the images are processed by showing the RGB (red, green,
blue) parts of images. This allows to see the particle movement for 3 images in a single
image.
Here, the red part is extracted from the first image, while green and blue are
extracted from the following images. To get an overview of the jet in different phases of
a wave 5 images showing a fraction of the monopile (the area close to the replenishment
hole) can be seen by Figure 5.2.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
24
==PAGE:32==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
Figure 5.2: 5 RGB images showing the jet in different phases of the wave.
In the images the circular cylinder can be seen in the right side of the image while the
outside can be seen in the left side of the image. The lit up part in the center of the image
is the replenishment hole where the water is exchanged trough. As the laser lights up the
perimeter of the hole, it is in the images seen to be white.
The first images are seen at the wave up-crossing in the location of the front face of
the monopile. The jet is here changing direction where an outgoing jet can still be seen
with an angle upwards in the water column. This is due to the particle movement caused
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
25
==PAGE:33==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
by the wave, as the direction is in the positive x and z directions. The wave flow is in this
phase flowing with close to zero horizontal velocities and relatively large vertical velocities.
In image 2 (wave crest) the jet is in the initial phase and has an angle with positive vertical
velocities. This can be seen by the particles which are moving upwards inside the monopile.
As the surface elevation moves towards the zero-down-crossing the vertical velocities be-
come negative as the jet has a downwards angle inside the monopile. This shows well the
ability to exchange the water inside the monopile as the jet is not moving directly towards
the rear wall (except at the wave crest). As the phase reaches the wave through the jet is
moving out in a horizontal jet. Prior to this, between the down crossing and the trough,
the jet has a slight downwards direction. However, this is small compared to the upwards
bending as the outgoing jet is not developed in the initial phase of the negative surface
elevation.
The RGB image shown in Figure 5.3 is at the location of the cave crest where the jet is
going into the monopile from the outside waters. This shows the full frame of the image.
Figure 5.3: Flow into the circular cylinder. The monopile is in the right side of the image
while the free water is located at the left of the image. The centered white area is the
replenishment hole.
In Figure 5.3 the jet going into the monopile at wave crest can be seen.
The surface
elevation is high outside the monopile while the surface elevation inside the monopile is
small. The jet can be seen to be short relative to the circular cylinder. This is, however,
not the full length of the jet as it will continue to develop until the zero down crossing
where the jet will change direction. The red color refer to the first image while green and
blue are the second and third images respectively. The particles in which the colors are
clear are those with high velocities as the RGB does not merge in these particles. This
is due to the particles which are approximately still will be the combination of the RGB
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
26
==PAGE:34==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
color (as original image). The particles moving faster is also seen to be longer due to the
exposure time of the camera of 5000 µs (SpeedSense 1040). This is slightly shorter than
the trigger rate. The distance the particle travel during this time will show as the long
particle. The advantage of the longer paricles is, that given the exposure time an initial
idea of the velocities inside the jet can be obtained by the length of the particles. This is
not the case for the low velocity flow. Initial tests are performed using the exposure time
and the calibration allowing to convert from pixels to meters. An example of this can be
seen by Appendix D showing velocities in the expected order of size.
The situation in which the wave trough is in the location of the replenishment hole can be
seen by Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Flow out of the replenishment hole. The monopile is in the right side of the
image, while the free water is located at the left of the image. The two highlighted images
are shown by the dotted rectangles in the image.
The outwards jet can be seen to be developing in this situation. An enlargement of the
part in the yellow rectangles can be seen in the bottom of the image. The left shows the
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
27
==PAGE:35==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
jet close to the replenishment hole. The initial contraction of the jet through the hole can
be seen as the diameter of the jet is smaller than the actual hole diameter. The spreading
can then be seen to develop close to the hole.
The right image in the bottom of Figure 5.4 shows the flow close to the back wall of
the circular cylinder at the wave trough. As the jet reaches the back wall, vortices in can
be seen forming giving and upwards flow above the jet and a downwards flow below the
jet. As these particles are moving away from the replenishment hole shows well that the
same water entering the monopile is not the same particles leaving the monopile. By this,
the ventilation will ventilate more of the water inside the monopile as a circulation of the
water happens both over and under the jet. The velocities are, however, small away from
the jet, which is seen by the almost still standing particles.
5.2.2
Ensemble average particle velocities in regular waves
The extracted csv files containing the PIV results are then processed by first obtaining the
ensemble average velocities. This is done by the combination of the PIV files and the wave
measurements (DAQ). The trigger system allows to know the phase of initiation of the im-
age acquisition. Given that the trigger is pressed approximately 18 seconds upon initiation
of the wave generator, the same set of initial waves can be analyzed through several tests.
The first zero-crossing is then found and given it is an up crossing, the correct wave and
time have been achieved since the accuracy of the manual triggering is sufficient to stay
within one wave period. Given the zero crossing is a down-crossing, further analysis has to
be completed to verify that the waves that are analyzed are the same as for the rest of the
tests. Once the initiation of the analysis is found (first wave up-crossing), the PIV data
prior to this point is deleted. From this the ensemble average can be obtained given the
previously mentioned 240 images (csv files) within one wave period. The zero crossing of
the selected data is checked to verify that the waves period is, in fact, containing 240 data
points. Given this, the 10 tests for each analysis can be averaged. Each of these 10 tests
contains at least three waves and the average of these is then also found to complete the
ensemble average of 30 waves for one analysis.
The PIV data are reshaped into matrices of horizontal and vertical velocities, respectively,
with one matrix for each time instance. The results for one phase (at the wave trough),
the horizontal velocities can be seen by Figure 5.5. On top of the contour plot a quiver
plot can be seen with arrows showing the magnitude (by the length of the vector) and the
direction of the flow.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
28
==PAGE:36==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
Figure 5.5: Raw contour plot of ensemble average at wave trough for d = 10 mm
The raw contour plot is positioned on a drawing of the monopile for overview of the sheet
of PIV measurements.
The full original contour plot can be seen by Appendix E.
In
Figure 5.6 the same plot can be seen at the wave crest where the jet is moving into the
monopile.
Figure 5.6: Raw contour plot of ensemble average at wave crest for d = 10 mm.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
29
==PAGE:37==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
As can be seen, the velocities at the location of the walls are zero which is desired to
be removed as Dantec Dynamics Studios interpret masked areas as zero velocities. This
can be removed by applying a limit for velocities at 0.3 · 10−8 m/s.
Furthermore, the
contour plot show that the particle velocities just after passing the replenishment hole are
not detected properly. This is likely due to the front face of the monopile being masked.
This also go for the hole as it periphery of the hole is lit up by the laser. The particles
entering the interrogation areas just after passing the hole will not be in the previous image
of the double images and therefore the PIV analysis is not able to detect the particles in
both images and therefore not obtain the correct particle velocity. Just inside the pile the
curvature of the pile complicates recording trough the pile. This is likely the reason, that
better results are obtained slightly closer to the hole outside the replenishment hole than
just inside. With masking of particle velocities just around the hole the final contour plots
can be seen by Figure 5.15.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
30
==PAGE:38==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
31
==PAGE:39==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 5.15: Horizontal particle velocities for hole diameter d = 10 mm. The specific phase
is shown by ωt and explained below:
(a): Up-crossing
(b): Between up-crossing and wave crest
(c): Wave crest
(d): Between wave crest and down crossing
(e): Down-crossing
(f): Between down crossing and wave trough
(g): Wave trough
(h): Between wave trough and up crossing
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
32
==PAGE:40==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
In Figure 5.15 the horizontal particle velocities can be seen at different phases of the wave
period. The first figure shows the up crossing (a) where the velocities in the outside jet is
decreasing, which can be seen by Figure (b). Here, the length of the jet can be seen which
approximately reaches the end of the sheet. At the wave crest (c), the inside jet can be seen
with velocities in the order of the expected velocity V0 = 0.34 m/s from the quasi-steady
situation established in Eqn. 3.7. Between the wave crest and the down crossing (d), the
magnitude can be seen to decrease slightly while the jet length is increasing. This further
decreases to the down crossing (e) where it can be seen that the length of the jet inside
the monopile is shorter than the outside jet. This is due to the rear wall of the monopile,
which limits the jet in the confined space. By the phase of the wave trough (g), the jet
can be seen to develop outside the MP with the magnitude in the order of V0. The angle
of the jet can be seen to be changing due to the phase. The inside jet initially has an
upwards angle due to the positive direction of w in the wave flow. As the gradient in the
surface elevation becomes negative, so does the angle of the jet. The opposite is seen for
the outside jet that initially has a small negative angle. During the initial phase of the
outside jet, however, the jet is yet not developed until the wave trough is reached where
the jet is approximately horizontal. This phenomenon is optimal for water exchange inside
the monopile as the downwards jet will reach further down the monopile compared to the
horizontal jet. The upwards jet will also reach further up in the MP. The position of the
replenishment hole is, nevertheless, closer to the surface than the seabed, which makes the
downwards angled jet more significant in mixing of the water.
In Figure 5.15 the actual velocities rather than normalized velocities are shown.
This
is in order to get an understanding of the velocities. The corresponding plot for d = 14 mm
can be seen by Appendix E. Here also the contour plots with dimensionless velocities due
to normalization of V0 can be seen.
Validation of results
The validation of the PIV results is done by analyzing the velocities in the somewhat
undisturbed linear wave particle motion. By analyzing a probe (a point outside the pile),
the velocities can be compared to potential flow. For the relatively low KC number, the
particle motion upstream of the monopile will be undisturbed by the monopile close as the
stroke is small. The probe is placed where the influence of the jet as well as the pile will
be limited. The location of the probe can be seen by Figure 5.16
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
33
==PAGE:41==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
Figure 5.16: Probe location for the free stream. ˆZ refers to the direction of the data defined
by the PIV analysis.
To investigate the influence of the pile at this location, the horizontal and vertical velocities
in the height of 70 mm under the replenishment hole are plotted. The variation in velocity
from the end of the sheet (upstream of the monopile) to the location of the monopile
is plotted in Figure 5.17. Specific phases are chosen where as the largest magnitude of
horizontal and vertical particle motion is seen in both positive and negative directions.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
34
==PAGE:42==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
Figure 5.17: Velocities at z/d = −7 outside of the monopile for d = 10 mm.
The vertical velocities w are largely undisturbed by the pile as the distance to the pile is
decreasing. This is until a sharp drop at the location of the pile. The horizontal velocities
u, however, is decreasing in magnitude from approximately -50 mm. By the figure it can
be seen that the chosen location for the probe is not affected significantly by the pile.
Significant reflection from the monopile would results in variation of the velocities. The
variation of velocities in time for the probe can be seen by Figure 5.18.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
35
==PAGE:43==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
Figure 5.18: Free stream velocities at location of probe with potential flow motion as dotted
lines as well as surface elevation.
The probe is showing the ensemble average for 30 tests. Five points in the velocity grid are
used the probe. The center point at the exact target location is used as well as the point
over, under and on each side of the point. This makes for a round probe with the radius of
one grid step (1.66 mm). The weight of the points are chosen so the center point has the
same weight as the surrounding points combined. This way extreme values will be filtered
slightly but the center point will be most significant. The dotted lines shows the potential
flow theoretical velocities for the linear wave given the same wave parameters. In the figure
the vertical motion extracted from the ensemble average correspond well with the theoret-
ical values. As the experiments are not performed in deep water the horizontal velocities
are expected to be larger than the vertical velocities. From the results of Figure 5.18 and
Figure 5.17 the magnitude seem to be close with slightly larger horizontal velocities. The
horizontal particle flow was mentioned to be undisturbed in the location of the probe. As
the distances of the sheet is small compared to the wave length the entire sheet may very
well be affected by reflection from the monopile. This is likely the reason for the small
differences in horizontal velocities. In further analysis this could be examined by MacCamy
and Fuchs to include the reflection of the circular pile. This could also be concluded by
conducting PIV measurements with the pile removed in order to see the particle velocities
in this situation.
As the interrogation area is not quadratic, it is relevant to analyze the angle between
u and w. This can be seen by Figure 5.19. The phase can be seen by the dotted line which
shows the surface elevation.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
36
==PAGE:44==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
Figure 5.19: Free stream angle between u and w. The angle is shown in degrees of the
vertical axis with the phase ωt in the horizontal axis. The angle is found with the absolute
value of u in order to get a continuous line.
The angle can seen to fit well with the expected angle given a large angle ≈90o at the zero
crossings where u is approximately zero while w is largest in magnitude. At the wave crest
and wave trough w can be seen to be approximately zero given the angle of zero in these
phases.
By this, the PIV measurements in the free stream is validated.
For the jet velocities
the validation is due to the comparison of the jet velocities by the PIV results and the
previously mentioned distance of the particles in the jet. As these are in the same order of
size corresponding to V0 the results are in the expected area.
Jet velocities
Following the same procedure as for the ”free stream” probe, probes in the jets can be
examined. The probes are positioned in the center of the jet at a distance of 2d as the
velocities in this position are not affected by the initial interrogation areas close to the
replenishment hole. This is done for both the tests for d = 10 mm and d = 14 mm resulting
in a axial distance of the probes to the hole of 20 mm and 28 mm respectively. The particle
velocities can be seen by Figure 5.20.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
37
==PAGE:45==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
Figure 5.20: Ensemble average particle velocities outside of monopile close to replenishment
hole.
In the figure η is also displayed showing the phase in the horizontal axis. This can also be
seen by ωt. The particle velocities are shown for both u and w. In the phase with positive
surface elevation the horizontal particle velocities are mainly positive (in the direction of
the wave propagation). Here the particles are moving into the replenishment hole in this
direction as well as the particle movement caused by the waves. As the phase changes and
the surface elevation becomes less than SWL the horizontal particle velocities drastically
decrease to a large negative magnitude. This is the jet forming spraying water out from the
monopile into the surrounding basin. The magnitude of the velocities are, as expected, the
same order of size while there is a small phase difference in where the jet develops. This
shift is due to the difference in probe position by 20 and 28 mm. With same magnitude
of particle velocities the jet for d = 10 mm develops ”earlier” than for d = 14 mm. The
expected particle velocities in the replenishment hole for the specific wave parameters is
V0 = 0.34 m/s due to the stationary situation established in Eqn. 3.7. This correspond well
to the particle velocities seen in the figure at the wave trough. In Figure 5.21 the probes
positioned inside of the hole can be seen.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
38
==PAGE:46==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
Figure 5.21: Ensemble average particle velocities inside of monopile close to replenishment
hole.
In this figure the phase is also seen in the horizontal axis from the up crossing at ωt =
−1/2π. In this figure the maximum horizontal particle velocities are seen at the wave crest
where ∆η is largest. Here the magnitude also correspond well with V0 in the jet. As the
surface elevation decrease ∆η decrease as well and the pressure gradient decrease. This
leads to a decrease in u towards the zero down crossing. By Figure 5.21 it seems, that the
horizontal velocities decrease faster, in particular for d = 10 mm, and only momentarily
reach V0 at the wave crest. This is, however, likely due to the changing angle of the jet.
For a hole diameter of 10 mm the jet is relatively narrow in radius. This is amplified by the
contraction of the jet due to the sharp edge moving into the replenishment hole. With an
axial distance of 2d to the probe a small angle can be significant given a small hole diame-
ter. Furthermore, with a small jet radius the interrogation area is relatively large. Though
the height of the interrogation areas are reduced in regards to the length. The analysis is
carried out with adaptive PIV and minimum IA height of 32 pixels and maximum height
of 64 pixels. With a grid step size of 16 pixels few vertical measure points cover the jet.
The IA height interval correspond to 3.32 mm as minimum and 6.66 mm as maximum.
Quantifying the jet propagation can done by plotting the jet at increasing axial distance
to the hole. This is done for both d = 10 mm and d = 14 mm. The axial distances are
found for both situations. The entire vertical axis can be used for extracting the velocity
profile while the target axial distance is found from a mean of the target distance and the
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
39
==PAGE:47==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
two distances surrounding the axial distance. This is done to limit the fluctuations in the
plot. Several approaches can be used to describe the jet propagation. One method is to
analyze the profiles at an exact time instance in the ensemble average. This will be most
relevant at the crest and trough, as the largest jet velocities will be found here. As the
jet has, at these exact points, not reached a large axial distance to the replenishment hole,
this method will only describe the jet well in the very initial part of the jet. The method
chosen for displaying the jets is by finding the maximum velocities at each axial distance.
For each axial distance (x/d), the time of the maximum particle velocities is found. From
this x/d = 1 will be prior to x/d = 2 etc. Two situations are considered, i.e. the out going
jet at the wave trough and the inside jet at the wave crest. The results for the outside jet
can be seen by Figure 5.22.
Figure 5.22: Normalized velocities in front of the monopile. This is at the wave trough and
shortly subsequent phases for increasing x/d.
The figure show the horizontal particle velocity normalized by V0 in the abscissa. The
ordinate show the position in the water column relative to the hole and hole diameter. V0
is found from the wave height obtained in each test determined by the DAQ software. The
results of this can be seen by Appendix H. The vertical axis is also normalized by the hole
diameter (10 and 14 mm). The same goes for the figure number (1d, 2d...) as the axial
distance is found from the diameter in regard to the specific test hole diameter. The figure
should be seen from right to left as the replenishment hole is positioned to the right of
the figure. The two lines for the two hole sizes can be seen to be much alike close to the
replenishment hole. As for x/d = 1 and 2 (the two sub figures at the right) the peak center
velocity correspond well to u/V0 = 1. The particle velocities can then be seen to decrease
as the axial distance increase. This can especially be seen for d = 14 mm for x/d = 6 and
7. Here the velocities largely correspond to the particle velocities due to the regular waves.
This is due to x/d = 7 in the case of d = 14 mm correspond to a distance of 98 mm. As
the jet is time varying with the wave period the jet can not reach as far as for d = 10 mm
relatively as both tests are performed with the same wave height and wave period. By
this the experiment is not scaled to be similar as V0 is the same for both situations and
the wave period is not longer for the larger hole diameter. Changing the wave period will,
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
40
==PAGE:48==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
however, change V0 as the pressure difference depend on the head loss that depend on the
excess pressure and therefore the wave number. The jet can also be seen, especially for
d = 10 mm to have two peaks. This is due to the change in the angle of the jet in the
duration of the jet. The angle is initially small towards the wave trough. As the phase
move towards the zero up crossing the angle change. Furthermore, the jet is ”bent” by
the waves as the surrounding particles have a positive vertical velocity in this phase interval.
The properties of the jet can be described by introducing a non-dimensional parameter
describing the relative jet stroke (RJS).
RJS = V0 · T
D
(5.4)
Here V0 ·T (Jet velocity and wave period) describes the stroke relative to the pile diameter
D. For the wave and pile parameters used in the current experiment B the relative jet stroke
is RJS = 4.25. This number can be used in further analysis as different RJS-numbers
can be analyzed in order to get a better understanding of the jet.
The dimensionless
number does not describe a physical distance as such given the velocity V0 is not constant
throughout the wave period. If this was the case each jet would have the relative length
of:
Jet length = RJS
2
= 2.13
(5.5)
This is the amplitude corresponding to one of the jets. As can be seen for Figure 5.15 and
Figure 5.22 this is naturally not the length of the jet. For a sinusoidal flow the physical
relative stroke amplitude of the jet can be approximated by a factor of π. This is though
not the case for any given variation as the jet velocity variation is not following a sinusoidal
variation. It should be noted, that the RJS does not scale with the hole diameter. This
is because V0 is somewhat independent of d. This answers to the velocities in Figure 5.22
for d = 14 mm are smaller at higher distance to the replenishment hole. The figure shows
relative distance for the hole diameter but the jet does not scale accordingly.
In Figure 5.23 the same type of as for Figure 5.22 can be seen. This is for the jet in-
side the monopile which should, in contrary to the outside jet, be seen from the left to
right in the direction of the jet.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
41
==PAGE:49==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
Figure 5.23: Normalized velocities inside the monopile.
This is at the wave crest and
shortly subsequent phases for increasing x/d.
It can be seen that for the particle velocities at x/d = 1, the experimental results with 10
mm is too close to the replenishment hole. The velocities here are not captured well and
small particle velocities are obtained. It is with certainty, that the results are inaccurate
as the velocities increase as the axial distance is increased. From x/d = 2 the results can
be seen to correspond well and peak at approximately u/V0 ≈1. The velocities inside
the monopile show to scale better by the fit of the two hole diameters compared to the
outside jet. This is crucial as the inside jet is of most interest. This is partly due to the
presence of waves outside the monopile and not inside the monopile. As the axial distance
is increased, however, the particle velocities drop fast for d = 14 mm. This is due to the
axial distance for the larger replenishment hole at x/d = 6 is for the large hole diameter
84 mm. As the pile diameter is not scaled according to the hole diameter, the rear wall
of the circular cylinder will have an effect on the particle velocities relatively earlier for
d = 14 mm compared to 10 mm. It is, however, seen that the effect of the rear wall appear
quite close to the rear wall. One reason for this is, that the jet is developing in the time
varying jet. When the maximum velocities are seen for the center of the pile, the jet has
not yet reached the rear wall (depending on the wave parameters). By this there will not
be a pressure gradient slowing down the jet as the jet has not ”felt” the rear wall and the
confined space aspect is less significant.
5.2.3
Time average particle velocities in regular waves
Previously the ensemble average has been analyzed. In this section, the time average or
period averaged particle velocities will be analyzed. For this, the PIV measurements are
averaged over the entire time series. For this, it is important to use entire wave periods,
as half periods will cause false averaging. For each test, 3 waves are used, which is equal
to 720 time instances given the wave period and the trigger rate of the analysis. For each
test type (hole diameter) the average velocities will therefore be obtained from 7200 time
instances as 10 tests are performed for each analysis. For d = 14 mm, the mean horizontal
particle velocities can be seen by Figure 5.24. For d = 10 mm see Appendix G.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
42
==PAGE:50==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
Figure 5.24: Period averaged horizontal particle velocities for d = 14 mm for 30 waves.
On top of the contour plot, the mean velocities (u, w) are shown to see the average flow
directions. In the time average velocities both the outside jet and inside jet can be seen.
The magnitude is, naturally, significantly smaller compared to the ensemble average. This
is because the time average also average over the phases where the jet at one location is
not present. The magnitude of the velocities are seen to be less than 0.5V0. As the supply
for the jet comes from the water close to the replenishment hole and not from the same
area as the jet, the average velocities for the two jets are large compared to the particle
velocities from the waves. The mean particle velocities in the ”free flow” are close to zero
as the waves cause the rotational flow which in average will be zero for linear waves. This
can be seen by the vectors away from the outside jet which are small. Inside the monopile
(right side of the image), the circulation cells can be seen of the jet splitting. At the front
face of the circular cylinder (at side of the replenishment hole) the particles are moving
towards the hole and the particles are being entrained in the jet again.
The standard deviation is a statistical tool which for the ensemble average will describe the
turbulence level of the flow. This is because the situation, on average, should be somewhat
similar. By finding the standard deviation for the entire time series, the oscillations in the
jet can be described. The standard deviation can be defined as:
S =
v
u
u
t
1
N −1
N
X
i=1
|x −¯xi|2
(5.6)
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
43
==PAGE:51==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
Where xi is a specific time instance and ¯x is the mean of all xi. N is the number of data
points. Calculating the standard deviation for the same dataset of Figure 5.24 a contour
plot of the standard deviation can be seen by Figure 5.25.
Figure 5.25: Standard deviation of horizontal particle velocities for d = 14 mm for 30
waves.
The figure shows, as predicted, the jet in both direction while the standard deviation of
the remaining sheet is ≈0. By combining the results of Figure 5.24 and Figure 5.25 i.e ¯u
and S a measure of the particle velocities can be obtained. Assuming a normal distribution
of the data (particle velocities) 68% of all horizontal velocities will be within one standard
deviation plus the mean value. Given the jet velocity followed a sinusoidal variation the
peak velocities is ¯u+
√
2S. Here ¯u = 0 and for the peak to peak velocity it should be taken
2
√
2S. As for the RJS this variation is not correct for the jet velocities as the variation is
not sinusoidal. The specific multiplication factor for the time varying jet is not certain to
obtain the peak velocities.
As for the ensemble average, the mean velocities and standard deviation are plotted at
different axial distances to the replenishment hole both inside and outside the monopile.
This is done for both hole diameters. For the outside mean horizontal velocities and the
standard deviation this can be seen by Figure 5.26 and Figure 5.27 respectively. Both
figures are normalized by V0 and the hole diameter.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
44
==PAGE:52==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
Figure 5.26: Mean horizontal particle velocity. The figure is for the outside jet with the
replenishment hole to the right of the figure.
Figure 5.27: Standard deviation of horizontal particle velocities. The figure is for the inside
jet with the replenishment hole to the left of the figure.
The figures are more smooth compared to the ensemble average as more data is used for
obtaining the time averaged velocities. The normalization of both the horizontal and ver-
tical axis show to fit well the two hole diameters plotted on top of each other. This is
especially at the initial phase as d = 14 mm decrease in particle velocity faster relative to
the hole diameter as explained in ensemble average due to the similar RJS. The magnitude
of the average velocity close to the hole can be seen less than 0.5V0. An estimation of the
expected average velocity in the jet is complex as the jet is is not only present at one side
of the hole at a time. After initiation of the outside jet for instance, the inside jet will still
be present from the already moving particles having momentum. Combined by the supply
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
45
==PAGE:53==
5.2
Experiment B: Particle Image Velocimetry in regular waves
of the jet coming from around the hole makes the situation complicated to simplify.
In Figure 5.27 the normalized standard deviation outside the monopile shows a some-
what similar form as the average particle velocity. One main difference between the mean
velocity and the standard deviation is the profile being wider for the standard deviation.
This is as expected given the vortices which form in the outer region layer of the jet. Here,
the vortices give velocities in the opposite direction of the main flow direction. This will for
the average velocities give small values as the positive and negative particle velocities will
somewhat ”equal out”. The standard deviation will on the contrary cause larger values
in these regions. This is the reason that the standard deviation is a describing statistical
parameter for the turbulence level. The magnitude of the standard deviation is larger than
the average velocities giving peak relative values of ≈0.5V0.
The inside jet can be seen by Figure 5.28 and Figure 5.29 with ¯u and S for the horizontal
velocity respectively.
Figure 5.28: Mean horizontal particle velocity. The figure is for the inside jet with the
replenishment hole to the left of the figure.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
46
==PAGE:54==
5.3
Experiment C: Particle Image Velocimetry for a stationary jet
Figure 5.29: Standard deviation of horizontal particle velocities. The figure is for the inside
jet with the replenishment hole to the left of the figure.
Similar trend is seen for this Figure 5.28 as for the corresponding figure found by the
ensemble average. The initial velocities for d = 10 mm is not captured well. The average
velocities as well as the standard deviations for the two hole diameters can be seen to
become more similar as the distance is increased. This is until a certain axial distance
(around x/d = 6) where the results decrease for d = 14 mm as a result of the presence of
the rear wall in the confined space of the MP. Including the standard deviation provides
insight in the area in which the jet has an effect. The turbulent flow with the vortices
can show important as the turbulent velocities can be large. By showing the standard
deviation the vertical distance which is affected by the flow can be seen to be larger than
shown for the average horizontal particle velocities.
5.3
Experiment C: Particle Image Velocimetry for a stationary jet
5.3.1
Images
5.3.2
Stationary jet velocities
In a stationary jet the mean velocity can be used throughout the entire data series since
the jet does not change over time. One time series is performed for the outside jet and
the inside jet respectively. By this the mean velocities are found from N = 1000 −1 time
instances as 1000 images are used and with leading to 999 double frames. In Figure 5.30
the mean horizontal velocities outside the pile are shown with a contour plot. On top of
the contour plot a quiver plot showing the direction of the flow can be seen using both the
horizontal and the vertical velocities.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
47
==PAGE:55==
5.3
Experiment C: Particle Image Velocimetry for a stationary jet
Figure 5.30: Mean horizontal velocities outside the monopile. The arrows show the direc-
tion of the mean flow.
The velocities which are not affected by the jet are, as expected, zero as the water is still
standing. The velocities are largest at the vicinity of the replenishment hole with velocities
≈0.34 m/s. In the mean velocities the flow can be seen to be mainly horizontal though
the flow of the ambient particles being entrained into the jet can be seen. These are the
arrows with an angle towards the center of the jet. The vertical velocities can be seen on
average to be small compared to the jet in regular waves. For the jet inside the monopile
in Figure 5.31 the velocities can be seen to decrease with a larger gradient as the axial
distance from the replenishment hole is increased. This is due to the confined space in
which the jet reaches the rear wall of the circular cylinder.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
48
==PAGE:56==
5.3
Experiment C: Particle Image Velocimetry for a stationary jet
Figure 5.31: Mean horizontal velocities inside the monopile. The arrows show the direction
of the mean flow.
The horizontal velocities can also be plotted by different distances to the jet nozzle (the
replenishment hole). This can be seen by Figure 5.32. This can be done by a normalization
by V0. Given the pump performance the surface elevation was found by the previously
mentioned initial test to determine the elevation ∆η.
The results showed that for the
positive elevation (simulating the wave trough with the outside jet) ∆η = 14.1 mm. For
the negative elevation, the test showed ∆η = 12.8 mm. These are close to the target value
of 15 mm that will be the case for H = 30 mm.
Given the flow is stationary and not
oscillating like for experiment B this results in a slightly different V0. With Eqn. 3.5 the
wave number k has an effect on the excess pressure by the fraction containing cosh. This
can be interpreted as the longer the jet has to develop, causing the fraction containing k
to go to 1. This leads to an increase in V0, which is taken into account for normalization.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
49
==PAGE:57==
5.3
Experiment C: Particle Image Velocimetry for a stationary jet
Figure 5.32: Normalized velocities at increasing distance from the replenishment hole.
For the relative axial distance x/d, there can be included measured to include the contrac-
tion of the particles in the jet. This is due to the hole diameter d which is calculated for
the actual physical diameter of the replenishment hole. Introducing dc, which is the con-
tracted diameter of the jet, can give a better understanding of the velocities at increasing
distances from the replenishment hole. The contraction of the jet for sharp edges is Ψ = 0.6
(Helduser n.d.). This is also investigated by approximating the contraction coefficient by
image inspection. The contraction coefficients can be seen by Appendix F where images
and matlab’s ginput are used to determine the coefficient for different test types. In the
simple case of a stationary jet the contraction coefficient is found to be approximately 0.6
as predicted. In Table 5.1 the velocities are shown normalized for V0.
Table 5.1: Horizontal velocities in jet at different distances from the replenishment hole.
Ψ refers to the contraction coefficient.
x/d
x/dc (x/d · 1/Ψ)
uoutside
uoutside/V0
uinside
uinside/V0
-
-
[m/s]
-
[m/s]
-
1
1.67
0.317
1.013
0.295
0.903
2
3.33
0.251
0.802
0.200
0.612
3
5.00
0.197
0.630
0.148
0.453
4
6.67
0.182
0.581
0.145
0.444
5
8.33
0.187
0.598
0.143
0.438
6
10.0
0.173
0.553
0.129
0.394
7
11.7
0.166
0.529
0.136
0.417
8
13.3
0.154
0.493
0.117
0.359
9
15.0
0.146
0.467
0.068
0.207
10
16.7
0.144
0.459
NaN
NaN
As displayed the axial distance x/d = 10 correspond to the contracted axial distance
x/dc = 16.7. In Turbulent Flows (Pope 2000), experimental observations for the round jet
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
50
==PAGE:58==
5.3
Experiment C: Particle Image Velocimetry for a stationary jet
are examined. The axial variation x/d is examined for the center line jet velocity u(x).
This is done by Huseein et al. for a jet Reynolds number of:
Re = V0d
ν
= 95, 500
(5.7)
Furthermore, (Pope 2000) describe tests performed by Panchapakesan and Lumley for
Re = 11, 000 resulting in a similar trend of the velocity progression. This means, that
in the self-similar region (x/d > 30) and with high Reynolds numbers (Re > 104) the
progression of the center line velocity is independent of the Reynolds number. The results
for the stationary jet performed in the current experiment is plotted to compare with the
results obtained by Hussein et al. in Figure 5.33.
Figure 5.33: Axial distance variation of mean velocity. Hisserin et al. experimental data
is for Re = 95,500.
The figure shows a positive slope as the distance is increased. This is due to the vertical
axis being the jet velocity in nozzle V0 divided by the mean center line particle velocity at
the axial distance u(x). The initial phase close to the nozzle does not have the linear sloped
behavior as the jet is here developing and the line crosses the horizontal axis in x/d = 4.
This is because the theory does, as mentioned not describe this initial part. Because of
this the reference line has been modified to be constant at V0/u(x) = 1 until the linear
progression by Hussein et al. is reached. If the linear regression has continued to zero
this would indicate velocities in the jet moving towards infinity as the axial distance moves
towards x/d = 4. The results from the monopile jet is, plotted to see how the behavior
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
51
==PAGE:59==
5.3
Experiment C: Particle Image Velocimetry for a stationary jet
is progressing compared to the round jet. It should be noted, that the horizontal axis is
defined by dc which is the jet diameter taking the contraction due to the shape of the hole
into consideration. The test results can all be seen above the line. It can be seen, that the
blue circles (the outside jet) are approaching the line as the axial distance is increased. It
is for the entire region above the line showing an initial fast decrease in the velocity. The
outside jet velocities moves towards the linear regression done by Hussein et al. The slope
does, however, seem to be different. Different reason can be the cause of this difference.
The experiments are not in the self-similar region which makes comparison hard. Also the
Reynolds number for the performed experiments are ≈3, 400 which means a much less
turbulent jet. The jet examined by Hussein et al. have a fluid supply to the jet by a pipe
which means the particles are on average moving in the same direction all before reaching
the nozzle. This can also have an effect on the progression of the mean velocities. The
inside jet is, naturally coming to a large increase as seen in the red circles as the rear wall
of the cylinder stops the jet progression. Furthermore the velocities show to decrease at
a higher rate compared to the outside jet quite close to the replenishment hole. In the
stationary jet inside the monopile, the particle upstream in the jet feel the effect of the
rear wall as the particles are stopped creating a pressure gradient. What is further seen
is that before the inside jet reaches the self similar region the velocities have moved to
zero naturally caused by the rear wall. This indicates, that the experiments performed by
Hussein et al. are overestimating the velocities if they are to describe the stationary jet in
a confined space.
To describe the inside jet, the vertical particle velocities is of importance. In Figure 5.34
the vertical average velocities are shown in the inside of the pile.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
52
==PAGE:60==
5.3
Experiment C: Particle Image Velocimetry for a stationary jet
Figure 5.34: Mean vertical velocities inside the monopile. The arrows shows the flow apart
from the main jet in z/d = −1 to z/d = 1
The vertical velocities are shown from close the the replenishment hole on the left of the
figure to the rear wall at the right. The arrows show the magnitude and direction of the
flow (u, w). In the region between z/d = −1 to z/d = 1 the arrows are removed as these
show the main jet where the magnitude is much larger. By removing these the flow over
and under the jet can be described. The jet is seen to be split as it reaches the rear wall
and circulation cells over and under the jet appear. The split is seen at the separation
point which is approximately at z/d = 0. This is what is expected given the horizontal
jet. As the sheet does not cover the entire monopile some of the circulation is outside the
images where the flow is exiting the examined area.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
53
==PAGE:61==
Discussion
6
Discussion
In this section, the results obtained mainly by the main experiment (Experiment B) will be
discussed. Here, the normalization of the velocities as well as the variation in jet velocity
profiles will be taken into consideration.
6.1
Normalization of jet velocities
The expected jet velocity V0 found by Eqn. 3.7 has throughout the current thesis been used
for normalization of the jet velocities obtained by the PIV measurements. The advantage
of this normalization is that, given a set of wave parameters V0 can be calculated. The
specific parameters needed are the wave period T, the wave height H, position in water
column of the replenishment hole, and the water depth h. The expected velocity is found
based on the resistance coefficient found by (Sørensen Christensen, 2023). For the current
thesis, this is assumed to be 2 even though there are small variations. For a successful
normalization, these values can give an estimate of the velocities that will be seen in the
jet. The jet velocity V0 shows to correspond well with the jet velocities given the results
shown in Figure 5.22 and Figure 5.23. These figures also show successful normalization
due to the hole diameter.
This indicates that a good first assumption for the particle
velocity can be calculated given the wave parameters.
This is mainly the case for the
ensemble average in the phases around the wave crest and trough where the maximum
∆η is present. The PIV experiments has been done using one set of wave parameters.
Therefore, it is not certain how the jet velocities will be in case of different parameters in
regular wave. From Experiment A, the relative wave heights show to follow the expected
trend for different wave parameters. This indicates that the magnitude of the velocities
is to be scalable. This showed true despite the change in KC flow regimes. The velocity
fields, however, will likely be affected by this. This will be further discussed in the next
section. In terms of orientation of the replenishment hole (Kesgin et al. 2024) show that the
relative wave height is not significantly affected by the orientation. This indicates similar
velocities on average in the replenishment hole.
6.2
Jet propagation - Variation in particle velocities in axial distances
The variation of the horizontal particle velocities is described by the maximum value (in
the center line) of the jet. This is at a given axial position x/d. The normalized velocity
profiles are shown to fit better for the inside jet compared to the outside jet. This is likely
due to the presence of the waves that affect the jet and given the different sizes in hole
diameter, the effect is seen at different relative distances. The outside and inside jets for
the two hole diameters of d = 10 mm and 14 mm can be seen by Figure 6.1. The reference
line corresponds to the line presented for the stationary jet.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
54
==PAGE:62==
6.2
Jet propagation - Variation in particle velocities in axial distances
Figure 6.1:
Axial distance variation of maximum ensemble average velocity in regu-
lar waves. Blue correspond to outside the monopile while red correspond to inside the
monopile. The circle describes d = 10 mm while the triangle describe d = 14 mm. The
horizontal axis is normalized by the contracted diameter dc
The figure show the contracted diameter dc. This is with a contraction coefficient of Ψ = 0.6
as for the stationary jet. For the time varying jet there are variations in the jet angle and
the contraction coefficient. It is difficult to determine the correct contraction coefficient by
inspection of the jet as it is influenced by the phase. Therefore it is a simplification to have
Ψ = 0.6. In Appendix I the corresponding figure without the contraction of the jet can be
seen. The only difference between these figures is the velocity relative to the reference line.
With the axial distance represented by the physical hole diameter the relative velocities
decrease (increase on the figure) earlier relative to the reference line. The reason that the
contracted is, however, shown in Figure 6.1 is as this will be considering a ”worse” scenario
as the velocities are larger further away from the hole.
In the initial region of the jet until approximately x/dc = 5 the jet velocities for both
ensemble average results can be seen to correspond well with V0. This initial region of a
stationary jet where the mean velocity is not significantly changing is the potential core.
Around x/dc ≈6 the velocities in the large hole jet drop significantly. This in, in the figure,
seen as an increase due to the vertical axis describing V0/u(x). Explicitly explaining this
in relation to the outside jet is due to the RJS by the wave conditions. The distance which
the outside jet reach is in relation to this independent of the hole diameter. The distance
relative to the hole diameter is by this depending on the hole diameter. This is what is
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
55
==PAGE:63==
6.2
Jet propagation - Variation in particle velocities in axial distances
seen by the figure from the outside jets.
Interestingly, the inside jet velocities follow the outside jet velocities for the initial re-
gion. This is likely due to the fact that the rear wall does not have an effect on the jet in
the region close to the hole. This, especially due to the jet not having reached the wall at
the phase of the wave crest. By this, the confined space does not have a large influence on
the jet here. This is in contrast to what is seen for the stationary jet in a confined space,
which is affected by the rear wall for a larger region of the jet. If Experiment B were to be
performed using a much larger RJS, it could not be concluded what the velocities would
be after the initial region. An assumption could be made that given that the inside jet
”feels” the rear wall at an earlier axial distance relative to the hole diameter, the velocities
would decrease due to the pressure gradient caused by the rear wall of the circular cylinder.
It can also by this be assumed that the jet velocities would be over the reference line and
therefore not exceed the expected mean center line velocity. Apart from the confined space,
there are other differences for the inside and the outside jet. The waves interference which
has already been discussed have a large effect outside compared to the inside jet. There
could also be an effect of the curvature of the cylinder. The flow supply for the outside jet
is supplied in a concave form inside the MP. On the contrary, the inside jet supply comes
from a convex form from outside the pile. This will likely have some effect on the jet and
the spreading of the jet. This is, however, a highly three-dimensional situation and can
hardly be quantified by the 2D representation in the current thesis.
The velocity field given a change in flow regime is of interest, as many real cases would be
in regimes of separation and vortex shedding. The outside jet propagation would be highly
affected given a situation with vortex shedding. The vortex shedding at the wave trough
would be in the same area as the jet. Turbulent vortices giving velocities in the horizontal
normal direction to the jet would highly decrease the length of the jet and would cause
bends in the y-direction. The inside jet for the orientation of 0 degrees would regardless
of KC-number be at the stagnation point. The change would naturally cause a change in
the jet Reynolds number given the change in V0 and the RJS. Apart from this, the jet
inside is less affected by the flow caused by the waves as they are not present inside the MP.
The relative wave height for different orientations of the replenishment to the wave di-
rection has been tested by (Kesgin et al. 2024). The experiments showed that the relative
wave height is not significantly affected by the orientation. Although the same quantity
of water is replenished, the jet propagation will be highly affected by the hole orientation.
Given an orientation of α = 90o, the axial direction of the outside jet would be horizon-
tally normal to the flow of the waves. The effect of this in regards to the angle of the jet
would be large as the maximum horizontal particle velocities due to the waves are at the
same phase as the maximum velocities of the outside jet. Furthermore, there will, in this
situation, be contraction of streamlines, and amplifications in the particle velocities in the
waves can occur. The inside jet would just as well be affected by this as the jet would not
flow as directly towards the rear wall of the MP but rather flow around inside the pile. For
this highly three-dimensional situation, the velocity profiles would look different from the
orientation of 0 degrees. However, there are no indications of larger velocity profiles for an
orientation apart from 0 degrees. The direction of the inside jet and the particle flow from
the waves for α = 00 are in the same direction, which likely will result in the strongest
jet. Given an orientation of α = 180o and 1.6 < KC < 4 a pair of symmetric vortices will
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
56
==PAGE:64==
6.3
Errors and uncertainties
appear on the lee side of the MP (see Figure 3.3). The inside jet will be present at the wave
crest with vortices close to the center line in the direction of the replenishment hole. This
could indicate larger velocities. Based on Experiment A and Experiment B, the velocities
in this situation cannot be concluded. However, this flow regime and orientation have been
studied by (Sørensen Christensen, 2023) showing that the effect of KC and orientation is
small on the relative wave height. With this, the pressure difference between inside and
outside the pile, which drives the jet, does not change significantly due to changes in flow
regime and orientation. As Experiment B indicates that V0 (the calculated jet velocity
based on the pressure difference) is a good representation of the jet velocity, other orienta-
tions and flow regimes will likely also be represented well by V0. The velocity profiles and
propagation will, as described, be highly dependent on the orientation and KC.
6.3
Errors and uncertainties
There are a series of potential errors and uncertainties. One of the most critical areas
for PIV analysis is seeding. The particle velocities can only be measured, given there are
particles and sufficient particles is critical. Inside of the MP is the easiest area to obtain
proper seeding concentration. The free stream outside is slightly more difficult, as this is
washed away. As the waves are moving the particles outside the pile the inside jet must
have sufficient particles in where the jet is supplied. Even though this is precisely and
extensively attempted to make sufficient, there can be exceptions. For obtaining 10 tests,
15 tests are performed in any case in which the 10 best are chosen. This further limits
the uncertainty, as the seeding in the images can be expected through visualization. The
size of the data for the ensemble average can also be discussed. 30 waves are processed
to obtain the ensemble average. As the jet is turbulent and difficult to adress, more data
tests could improve the credibility of the results. There can be seen to be fluctuations in
the plots showing ensemble average which could be desireable to limit. Naturally, some
degree of fluctuations will occur as this will take too a great number of data sets to remove.
For PIV analysis, the variation in the velocities also gives rise to errors. The large ve-
locities in the jet must be captured as well as the small particle velocities caused by the
waves. This is taken into account in the size of the interrogation area. It is a balance
between obtaining small and large particle velocities. This is also in regard to trigger rate
and exposure time of the camera. In the jet, high trigger rates are preferable. This is
limited by the steady simple PIV laser system as this limits the maximum trigger rate.
However, this is a good representation for the global measurement area, as an extreme
trigger rate would make detection of wave flow velocities difficult.
Since the PIV analysis is two-dimensional, there are uncertainties in the results. There
will naturally be flow around the pile and aspects of the flow are missed by the simpli-
fication of 2D-analysis. Given that three-dimensional experiments will be greatly more
comprehensive, the 2D-analysis can be said to give a lot of insights, even though it is
simplified.
6.4
Future work
This thesis covers parts of the quantifying of the jet velocities and properties. It does not
give a complete overview of the complex situation of the time-varying jet in a confined
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
57
==PAGE:65==
6.4
Future work
space. Future work will, in the first case, cover more wave parameters, i.e. several wave
periods and wave heights. This way, a variety of V0 can be tested to see if the normalization
is similar for other wave parameters. Apart from this, the orientation of the replenishment
hole to the wave direction is relevant. In the current thesis the orientation of 0 degrees
has been used, as this is the simplest to describe. Other orientations do, as mentioned,
mean a lot more three-dimensional situations, which is harder to describe using 2D-PIV.
Analyzing the orientation of 0 degrees with the laser sheet placed away from the center of
the pile could further give an understanding of the flow and how well a 2D representation
can be used.
In order to compare the outside and the inside jet to the next extend, PIV measurements
can be conducted where the replenishment hole is plugged. This way, the effects of the
waves themselves can be subtracted. The effects of the wave motions on the jet will natu-
rally still be present as in particular the vertical motion of the waves has an effect on the jet.
The determination of the axial variation of the mean velocities done in the current thesis
show relevant to determining the loads on the internal ICCP strings inside the MP. The
ICCP strings can be subjected to sway by the forces caused by the inside jet. Further
analysis can on the basis of the current thesis help quantify the loads and optimize the
design when placed in a replenished monopile. In this relation, the successful normalization
is optimal, as this could eventually help estimate the design forces for the ICCP strings.
The velocities must naturally be converted to forces, which could potentially be done by a
variation of the Morison equation or other equations.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
58
==PAGE:66==
Conclusion
7
Conclusion
Based on the experiments conducted in this thesis, several aspect of the jet inside a
monopile due to a replenishment hole have been examined. The experiments have pro-
vided insight into the jet velocities and propagation of the jet.
The experiments also
showed a series of parameters which should be taken into consideration in a time-varying
jet in a confined space.
The experiments indicates that a good approximation of the jet velocity in regular waves
can be obtained based on a series of wave and pile parameters assuming the flow situation
in a quasi-steady state. Based on the limitations in wave parameters and hole orientation
to the waves, there are uncertainties in obtaining the full overview of the jet. There are,
however, indications showing that the jet velocities inside the monopile are unlikely to
exceed the results obtained in the current thesis.
The experiments showed that some jet properties will be similar for different hole diam-
eters once normalized for the specific hole size. The two replenishment hole experiments
conducted showed that, to a certain distance from the replenishment hole, the normalized
jets behave similarly. The normalization reaches a limit where the relative axial distance
causes differences due to the fact that the pile diameter is not scaled accordingly to the
holes. For the time varying jet, the effect of the rear wall does, nevertheless, show relatively
far (x/d ≈5) from the replenishment hole compared to a steady jet. This distance is, off
course, based on the specific pile and wave parameters.
This thesis covers some main aspects of the flow velocities in relation to the refreshment of
water inside offshore monopiles. However, this is the initial part of quantifying the jet and
refreshment in general, and there are several possibilities to further quantify this jet and
other properties. Future work can be done based on the results obtained in the current
thesis and work on top of what is shown by the present experiments.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
59
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
Intertek, (n.d.). INTERNAL CORROSION ISSUES OFFSHORE WIND FOUNDATIONS
(OWF).
Larsen, Kathy Riggs (2020). Corrosion Risks and Mitigation Strategies for Offshore Wind
Turbine Foundations. url: https://www.materialsperformance.com/articles/
material - selection - design / 2016 / 03 / corrosion - risks - and - mitigation -
strategies-for-offshore-wind-turbine-foundations.
Sumer, B. M. and J. Fredsøe (1997). Hydrodynamics around cylindrical structures. World
Scientific.
Sørensen Christensen, Jesper (2023). Refreshment of water inside offshore monopiles.
2D PIV Reference Manual (2005). Dantec Dynamics.
Kesgin, E. et al. (2024). Experimental study on water replenishment holes in offshore
monopiles. ELSEVIER.
Helduser, Siegfried (n.d.). Jet contraction. Accessed: 2024-06-03. url: https://www.hawe.
com/fluid-lexicon/jet-contraction/.
Pope, Stephen B. (2000). Turbulent Flows. Cornell University.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
60
==PAGE:68==
Appendix
A
Calibration
Figure A.1: Calibration file with the marked areas for calibration
In Figure A.1 the calibration file can be seen. The areas marked in blue shows the ranges
used for the calibration. The average for each wave gauge in each of these ranges are found.
This is then used for the multiplication factors.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
61
==PAGE:69==
B
Procedure for execution of experiments with T ̸= 1.25 s
The reflection of waves will have an effect on the surface elevation as a degree of standing
waves will occur. Flume 3 does have a wave absorber though this is rather short and less
effective than absorbers in other flumes. For this reason only a selected 10 waves are used
for this experiment for each run.
Figure B.1: Initial part of run of H = 0.1 m, T = 1.6 s
By Figure B.1 the calibrated data can be seen. This data has been further filtered. From
the initial growth of the surface elevation, a number of similar waves are observed. These
waves are not yet affected by the reflection from the end of the flume as the water was still
prior to the experiment. Towards the end after approximately 40 seconds the wave heights
start to vary due to the reflection. It is clear that not all wave gauges experience the same
amplification of magnitude due to this reflection. This is because the specific position of
the wave gauge dictates if there will be a node or anti-node or something in between at
this position. The specific number of waves that should be included in such an experiment
can be simply calculated by linear dispersion relation. With the distance from the MP to
the wave absorber of 14 meters, the distance for a wave to reach back at the monopile is
28 m. This shows that, except for the longest periods, there will be no effect of reflection
from the wave absorber. For the longest wave periods the effect is limited and considered
acceptable.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
62
==PAGE:70==
C
Raw PIV images
Figure C.1: Images of particles at zero upcrossing.
First image show the front of the
circular cylinder while the second show inside the circular cylinder.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
63
==PAGE:71==
Figure C.2: Images of particles wave crest.
First image show the front of the circular
cylinder while the second show inside the circular cylinder.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
64
==PAGE:72==
Figure C.3: Images of particles wave trough. First image show the front of the circular
cylinder while the second show inside the circular cylinder.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
65
==PAGE:73==
D
Velocity estimate in jet based on raw images
Figure D.1: Example of initial velocity test for jet. This example is for d = 14 mm
at the wave trough.
Table D.1: Extracted data from example given by Figure D.1. The pixel length is converted
to the velocity and the average velocity of the chosen particles is obtained.
Index
Particle length
Particle velocity
[pix]
[m/s]
1
16.5
0.343
2
23.9
0.499
3
18.0
0.374
4
17.5
0.364
5
20.4
0.426
6
17.5
0.364
Average
18.9
0.395
As the jet particle velocity is for this example V0 = 0.395 m/s this gives an indication of
the expected velocities to be obtained by the PIV measurements. This value is in the order
of size of the expected V0 calculated by the head loss and pressure gradient.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
66
==PAGE:74==
E
Contour plot of velocities
Figure E.1: Raw contour plot of ensemble average at wave trough for d = 10 mm
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
67
==PAGE:75==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
68
==PAGE:76==
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure E.10: Horizontal particle velocities normalized by V0 for hole diameter d = 10 mm.
The specific phase is shown by ωt and explained below:
(a): Up crossing
(b): Between up crossing and wave crest
(c): Wave crest
(d): Between wave crest and down crossing
(e): Down crossing
(f): Between down crossing and wave trough
(g): Wave trough
(h): Between wave trough and up crossing
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
69
==PAGE:77==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
70
==PAGE:78==
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure E.19: Horizontal particle velocities for hole diameter d = 14 mm. The specific phase
is shown by ωt and explained below:
(a): Up crossing
(b): Between up crossing and wave crest
(c): Wave crest
(d): Between wave crest and down crossing
(e): Down crossing
(f): Between down crossing and wave trough
(g): Wave trough
(h): Between wave trough and up crossing
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
71
==PAGE:79==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
72
==PAGE:80==
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure E.28: Horizontal particle velocities normalized by V0 for hole diameter d = 14 mm.
The specific phase is shown by ωt and explained below:
(a): Up crossing
(b): Between up crossing and wave crest
(c): Wave crest
(d): Between wave crest and down crossing
(e): Down crossing
(f): Between down crossing and wave trough
(g): Wave trough
(h): Between wave trough and up crossing
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
73
==PAGE:81==
F
Determining contraction coefficient
Table F.1: Approximation of contraction coefficient from the inspection of chosen images.
*In regular waves the angle of the jet vary therefore the contraction coefficient is not
constant. The given coefficient is therefore not necessarily valid.
Test
Contraction Coefficient approximation Ψ
Stationary jet inside
0.61
Stationary jet outside
0.60
Regular waves d = 10 mm inside
0.65*
Regular waves d = 10 mm outside
0.68*
Regular waves d = 14 mm inside
0.8*
Regular waves d = 14 mm outside
0.65*
Figure F.1: Contraction coefficient by inspection for stationary jet inside the monopile
Figure F.2: Contraction coefficient by inspection for stationary jet outside the monopile
Figure F.3: Contraction coefficient by inspection for d = 10 mm inside the monopile in
regular waves
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
74
==PAGE:82==
Figure F.4: Contraction coefficient by inspection for d = 10 mm outside the monopile in
regular waves
Figure F.5: Contraction coefficient by inspection for d = 14 mm inside the monopile in
regular waves
Figure F.6: Contraction coefficient by inspection for d = 14 mm outside the monopile in
regular waves
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
75
==PAGE:83==
G
Mean velocities and standard deviations of u for PIV in regular waves
Figure G.1: Period averaged horizontal particle velocities for d = 10 mm for 30 waves.
Figure G.2: Standard deviation of horizontal particle velocities for d = 10 mm for 30 waves.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
76
==PAGE:84==
Figure G.3: Standard deviation of horizontal particle velocities combined with the average
horizontal velocities for d = 10 mm for 30 waves.
Figure G.4: Standard deviation of horizontal particle velocities combined with the average
horizontal velocities for d = 14 mm for 30 waves.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
77
==PAGE:85==
H
Wave heights for specific tests during experiment B
Table H.1: Specific wave heights for experiment B. For each hole size two sets of 10 tests
are performed. This is due to 10 tests for each hole size with the laser sheet both inside
and outside the pile.
Parameter
d = 10 mm
d = 14 mm
Outside pile
Inside pile
Outside pile
Inside pile
Wave height
Href [m]
0.0308
0.0307
0.0312
0.0312
0.0309
0.0306
0.0312
0.0313
0.0308
0.0307
0.0313
0.0312
0.0309
0.0308
0.0311
0.0312
0.0307
0.0311
0.0318
0.0321
0.0312
0.0308
0.0315
0.0321
0.0309
0.0300
0.0316
0.0316
0.0304
0.0306
0.0310
0.0312
0.0314
0.0303
0.0310
0.0321
0.0309
0.0306
0.0319
0.0313
V0 [m/s]
0.344
0.342
0.347
0.0348
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
78
==PAGE:86==
I
Axial variation of centerline mean velocity
Figure I.1: Axial distance variation of maximum ensemble average velocity in regular waves.
Blue correspond to outside the monopile while red correspond to inside the monopile. The
circle describes d = 10 mm while the triangle describe d = 14 mm.
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
79
