==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis
MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
Investigating isoform function in cancer
via machine learning
Authors
Laura Figueiredo Tor - s222797
Supervisors
Simon Rasmussen
Kristoffer Vitting-Seerup
June 29, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Alternative splicing and isoforms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Variational autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Multi-omics Variational autoencoder (MOVE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Aim of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Methods and Data
7
2.1
Flowchart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Feature selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
NaN values
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Zero values
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Feature importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3
Correlation between features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
MOVE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.1
Encoding data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.2
Tuning the hyperparameters of the VAE model
. . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.3
Analyzing the latent space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.4
Identifying associations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
Esrum and Slurm for high-performance computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Results
21
3.1
Code optimization. Memory usage and multiprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.1
Memory-usage optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
“Identify associations” task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
“Analyze latent” task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.2
Reduction of the amount of required time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
“Identify associations” task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
“Analyze latent” task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Tuning hyperparameters metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Analysis of associations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.1
Sanity checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3.2
Comparison of associations between isoforms encoded by the same gene 35
3.3.3
"Sister isoforms" with associations with opposite directionality . . . .
39
Genes with the highest number of opposite associations between the
sister isoforms they encode for.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
Opposite associations between sister isoforms with the highest differ-
ences between Bayes factors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.4
Analysis of the latent space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.4.1
Prediction of feature importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.4.2
Latent space analysis for selected features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
i
==PAGE:3==
Master’s thesis
Contents
3.5
Exploring other perturbation types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.5.1
Perturbation to the minimum value of each feature
. . . . . . . . . .
55
3.5.2
Perturbation by adding or subtracting one standard deviation . . . .
56
4
Discussion and Future perspectives
57
4.1
Tuning of hyperparameters and model's performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2
Multiprocessing and memory usage decrease regarding MOVE . . . . . . . .
58
4.3
Isoforms that are encoded by the same gene can have different functions . . .
59
5
Conclusions
61
References
62
ii
==PAGE:4==
Master’s thesis
1
Introduction
1.1
Alternative splicing and isoforms
The human genome, as all eukaryotic genomes, is divided into coding segments, called exons,
and non-coding segments, which we refer to as introns [1].
Exons contain the protein-
coding information, necessary for the synthesis of functional proteins. During the process of
transcription, the DNA sequence, containing both introns and exons, is transcribed into a
precursor mRNA (pre-mRNA). Before this pre-mRNA transcript can be used as a template
for protein synthesis, it needs to undergo splicing, a process in which the introns are removed
and exons are joined to obtain a mature mRNA [2, 3].
Thus, splicing is a process that involves the excision of introns and the subsequent ligation
of exons to generate a mature RNA transcript [3]. It is catalyzed by the spliceosome, a
dynamic ribonucleoprotein complex [4]. Very importantly, splicing is not static, but allows
for flexibility and plasticity. This results in the phenomenon of alternative splicing, which
leads to the production of multiple mRNA isoforms from a single gene. This is done by
selectively including or excluding different combinations of exons [5]. There are five major
subtypes of alternative splicing: exon skipping, mutually exclusive exons, alternative 5’ splice
sites, alternative 3’ splice sites, and intron retention [6]:
• Exon skipping: Consists in not including one or more exons during the splicing
process, resulting in a shorter mRNA isoform.
• Mutually Exclusive Exons: Two or more exons are mutually exclusive, meaning
that only one of them can be included in the final mRNA isoform.
• Alternative 5’ Splice Sites: Involves the use of different 5’ splice sites, leading to
the inclusion or exclusion of specific exons. This can result in changes to the protein’s
N-terminal region.
• Alternative 3’ Splice Sites: Similar to alternative 5’ splice sites, this type of al-
ternative splicing involves the use of different 3’ splice sites, leading to changes in the
protein’s C-terminal region.
• Intron Retention: Not all introns are removed, and some of them are included in the
final mRNA isoform. [3, 5, 6]. Previous studies have shown that intron retention plays
a significant role in various biological functions, many of which affect human health
and disease [7].
These subtypes result in different isoforms of mRNA, which can lead to the production of
distinct protein isoforms from one gene, with different functions or cellular localization [6].
Page 1 of 72
==PAGE:5==
Master’s thesis
1.1
Alternative splicing and isoforms
Hence, alternative splicing allows cells to produce different “versions” of proteins, called
isoforms, from the same gene.
By translating different mature mRNAs that arise from
the same pre-mRNA but are formed by different combinations of exons, a diverse array of
isoforms can be produced from a single gene. Alternative splicing significantly contributes to
the complexity and diversity of the proteome in higher eukaryotes, with up to 95% of human
multi-exon genes undergoing alternative splicing to encode proteins with different function
[6]. This means that, even if the human genome is estimated to have 20,000 protein-coding
genes [8], a relatively small amount, alternative splicing allows for the production of a vastly
larger number of different proteins. Moreover, recent data suggest that each transcript of
protein-coding genes contains 11 exons and produces 5.4 mRNAs on average [9].
Elaborating on this, different isoforms coded by the same gene have been proven to have
distinct functions, contributing to the complexity and diversity of biological systems. Plenty
of examples can be found; for instance, some cases that have been studied in humans are:
• FGFR2, a gene that codes for the fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2), pro-
duces multiple isoforms through alternative splicing.
These isoforms have distinct
ligand-binding specificities and signaling properties, leading to diverse functions in cell
proliferation, differentiation, and migration. For example, specific isoforms of FGFR2
have been implicated in craniosynostosis, a disorder characterized by the premature
fusion of skull bones [10].
• The CD44 gene, which encodes a cell surface glycoprotein involved in cell-cell in-
teractions and cell adhesion, undergoes alternative splicing to produce isoforms with
varying functions. Different CD44 isoforms have been associated with cancer progres-
sion, metastasis, and stem cell maintenance, highlighting the importance of alternative
splicing in disease pathogenesis [11].
• Alternative splicing of TTN, the gene that encodes the protein titin (essential for muscle
function), produces different isoforms that are expressed in different types of muscle
fibers and have different functions. For instance, isoforms expressed in slow-twitch
muscle fibers are longer and have more elasticity than those expressed in fast-twitch
fibers, which are stiffer and more resistant to stretch [12].
• NF1, which encodes protein neurofibromin, involved in the regulation of cell growth
and differentiation, produces isoforms that have different functions in the nervous sys-
tem. For example, one isoform is involved in the development and maintenance of the
nervous system, while another is involved in the regulation of synaptic plasticity [13].
In some cases, isoforms coded by the same gene can even have opposite functions. This is
the case of the BCL2L1 gene, which encodes both pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic proteins
[14].
Regarding cancer, alternative splicing can produce transcription factors with opposite tran-
scriptional activities or antagonistic functions that have an important role on the biology
Page 2 of 72
==PAGE:6==
Master’s thesis
1.2
Variational autoencoders
of this disease [14]. For instance, different isoforms are involved in tumorgenesis, cancer
development, and escape from cell death [15]. Moreover, while alternative splicing is nor-
mally tightly controlled during normal tissue differentiation, its misregulation can lead to
the production of aberrant isoforms, which may contribute to diseases, including cancer [16].
These findings suggest that alternative splicing transcripts could be used both as bioclinical
markers and as a guide to develop novel anti-cancer approaches in personalized medicine
[14].
For instance, splice-switching antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) are a promising approach
for cancer treatment. ASOs are short oligonucleotides of 15-25 bases that are designed to
be complementary to a specific sequence of a transcript, and therefore can bind to it and be
used to close a splice site, effectively masking splicing events that lead to the production of
unwanted isoforms [17]. As an example, in cancer treatment ASOs can be used to block the
expression of proliferative isoforms [17, 18]. Thus, by modulating alternative splicing events
in cancer-related genes, ASOs can shift splicing towards an anti-proliferative isoform, inhibit
cell proliferation, and delay tumor formation [17, 18, 19, 20].
Furthermore, alternative splicing can as well be modified using splice switching oligonu-
cleotides (SSOs), which perform steric blocking, targeting specific cis-elements in the pre-
mRNA and competing with splicing factors to bind to them [17]. As a matter of fact, SSOs
have been successfully used to induce an splicing switch that favored the production of an
apoptotic isoform in cancer cell lines [17, 20, 21].
Despite the functional importance of mRNA isoforms, their functional annotation remains
highly unexplored. However, in recent years, several computational techniques have emerged
with the goal of predicting the biological functions at the mRNA isoform level [22].
1.2
Variational autoencoders
High dimensionality, which occurs when the number of features in a dataset is large, repre-
sents a challenge when it comes to analyzing and working with data [23]. As the number of
features or dimensions in a dataset increases, the complexity of the problem grows rapidly,
requiring more training samples to properly learn and generalize the dataset [24, 25]. High
dimensional data leads to the need for increased computational resources, overfitting, per-
formance degradation, visualization changes, and distorted distance measures [25]. Hence,
high dimensionality hinders the derivation of meaningful insights from data.
Autoencoders, a class of neural networks, have emerged as a powerful tool for dimensionality
reduction, particularly in handling non-linear relationships in data [26, 27] . Autoencoders
consist of two primary components: an encoder and a decoder. While the encoder maps the
high-dimensional input data to a lower-dimensional latent space, the decoder reconstructs
the input data from the latent space. However, the compression can imply a loss of in-
formation, meaning that part of the information can be lost when reducing the number of
Page 3 of 72
==PAGE:7==
Master’s thesis
1.2
Variational autoencoders
dimensions and cannot be recovered after the decoding process [28]. By minimizing the
reconstruction error, autoencoders learn to capture the most important features or patterns
in the data while discarding noise or redundancy [26]. However, while autoencoders are
useful for dimensionality reduction, they cannot be used for content generation. They are
trained to reconstruct input data, and as result the latent space they learn may not cap-
ture the full complexity and variability of the original data distribution. As a consequence,
sampling from the latent space of a standard autoencoder may only yield reconstructions
that closely resemble training examples. In other words, in regular autoencoders the regu-
larity of the latent space depends on the distribution of the original data, the architecture
of the encoder and the dimensionality of the latent space, so it is not possible to generate
new meaningful data by applying the decoder on a point of the latent space [28]. Since
they are trained with the sole purpose of minimizing the reconstruction error and not take
into account the organization of the latent space, an overfitting to the input data can occur
[28]. To address this limitation, variational autoencoders (VAEs) and generative adversarial
networks (GANs) have been developed, enabling the generation of diverse and realistic new
content by learning richer latent representations and incorporating probabilistic frameworks
for sampling [29, 30].
VAEs are a class of generative models designed to learn a probabilistic mapping between
high-dimensional input data and a lower-dimensional latent space. This way, it is possible
to randomly sample a point from the latent space and decode it to generate new content. To
achieve the regularity of the latent space, VAEs encode the input data as a distribution over
the latent space, rather than as a single point [28, 30]. Then, a point is sampled from the
distribution, allowing for the computation of the reconstruction error and backpropagation
[28, 31]. This probabilistic interpretation, treating the latent variables as random variables
following a prior distribution, makes it possible to randomly sample a point from the latent
space and decode it to generate new content. Usually, the distributions are defined as normal,
and the encoder is trained to return the mean and the diagonal covariance matrix [28].
VAEs use backpropagation for training and optimizing the model parameters to maximize
the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO). The ELBO consists of two terms: the reconstruction
term, which represents the log-likelihood of the observed data given the latent variable, and
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence term, which penalizes deviations of the learned latent
distribution from the specified prior distribution [32]. The KL term achieves both continuity
and completeness in the latent space by regularizing the covariance matrix and the mean of
the encoded sample [28]. As is always the case with regularization terms, the introduction of
KL in the ELBO implies a higher reconstruction error. β is a hyperparameter that controls
the trade-off between the likelihood and the KL divergence, influencing the model’s behavior
and performance [30].
ELBO = Eqϕ(z|x)[log pθ(x|z)] −βDKL[qϕ(z|x)||pθ(z)]
More specifically a VAE uses three different distributions, Referring the original data as ‘x’
Page 4 of 72
==PAGE:8==
Master’s thesis
1.3
Multi-omics Variational autoencoder (MOVE)
and to the latent representation of this data as ‘z’, the following distributions are considered:
• Prior distribution (p(z)): Represents the assumed distribution of the latent variables
in the absence of any specific observed data. In a standard VAE, the prior distribution
is typically a standard normal distribution, i.e., p(z) = N(0, I), where I is the identity
matrix [32, 33]. The encoded representations z in the latent space are assumed to
follow the prior distribution.
• Posterior Distribution (p(z|x)): Represents the likelihood of the latent variables
(z) given the observed data (x). The encoder network maps the input data to the
parameters of the posterior distribution. The primary goal of VAE is to learn the true
posterior distribution of the latent variables given the observed variables [30, 32].
• Observation Model (p(x|z)): Represents the likelihood of the observed data (x)
given a sample from the latent space (z). The decoder network in a VAE predicts the
parameters of the distribution of the observed data based on a sample from the latent
variable [32, 33].
Due to their generative properties, VAEs have a wide range of applications, including image
generation, data generation, anomaly detection, and data imputation [34].
In the filed
of Bioinformatics, VAEs have been used for genomic sequence modeling, protein structure
prediction, and single-cell RNA-seq analysis, among other purposes [35, 36, 37].
1.3
Multi-omics Variational autoencoder (MOVE)
MOVE (Multi-omics variational autoencoder) is a deep learning model based on a variational
autoencoder, specifically designed to integrate data across multiple continuous and discrete
data modalities and extract associations among them by performing in silico perturbations
[38, 39]. For instance, MOVE can be used to integrate genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics,
and metabolomics data, clinical data, diet information, microbiomes, etc. Furthermore, this
method can handle missing data, differences in dimensionality, and modality-specific noise
[38]. As an example, MOVE has been used to identify drug-omics associations across multi-
modal datasets for the most prevalent drugs used to treat type 2 diabetes [38].
As all variational autoencoders, MOVE has an autoencoder that compresses the input vari-
ables into a latent space, and a decoder that aims to reconstruct the input from the latent
representation [39]. Once the model has been trained, MOVE can perform perturbations on
the features of a selected dataset, and use either univariate statistical methods or Bayesian
decision theory to find significant differences between features, by comparing the recon-
structed datasets after perturbation against the reconstructed datasets with no perturbation
[39].
Page 5 of 72
==PAGE:9==
Master’s thesis
1.4
Aim of the study
MOVE runs in four main steps: encoding the data, tuning the model, analyzing the latent
space, and identifying the associations, which are explained in detail in the Methods section.
1.4
Aim of the study
The primary aim of this study was to apply MOVE's framework on isoform data to elu-
cidate if isoforms that are coded by the same gene can be associated to different features
and, thus, be predicted to have different, even opposite, functions. For such a purpose, we
integrated gene expression data (measured in transcripts per million), isoforms expression
data (measured in transcripts per million and isoform fractions), pathways expression data
(PARADIGM), and phenotypic and clinical data, as described in more detail in Section 2.2.
Hence, the objective was to input all these data into MOVE to obtain the predicted asso-
ciations, and analyze them to explore our hypothesis: isoforms encoded by the same gene
can have different functions. To achieve this, first it was necessary to train a VAE with a
suitable set of parameters.
However, MOVE had not been designed for handling vast amounts of data, and thus could
not initially be applied to our data. To circumvent that, we modified MOVE's code to allow
for a memory-efficient handling of the data and a speed up in its computations. Thus, a
major part of this project was devoted to inspecting MOVE's code and looking into ways to
solve this problem.
As a secondary aim, we intended to make use of MOVE's functions, and analyze the distri-
bution of the samples in the latent space and the predicted most important features of each
dataset, in case these analyses could yield informative conclusions.
Page 6 of 72
==PAGE:10==
Master’s thesis
2
Methods and Data
2.1
Flowchart
Figure 1 illustrates the workflow followed in the study. As explained in detail throughout
Section 2.2, the first step consisted in feature selection. Then, the selected data was used
as input for MOVE, and different tasks (explained in Section 2.3) were completed. MOVE
provided different results, which were analyzed (Section 3) to answer the questions posed in
Section 1.4.
Figure 1: Flowchart illustrating the workflow for procedures followed in the study. Image obtained using
Lucidchart
2.2
Data
2.2.1
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) datasets
The data used in this project was obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset.
TCGA is a project that has compiled genomic, epigenomic, and proteomic data from more
than 10,000 samples across 33 types of cancer [40]. It contains mRNA and miRNA expression,
Page 7 of 72
==PAGE:11==
Master’s thesis
2.2
Data
somatic mutation, DNA methylation, proteomic, and copy number alteration data [40].
TCGA was established through collaboration between the National Cancer Institute (NCI)
and the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI), with the goal of providing
publicly available datasets for cancer research [41]. In fact, the datasets included in TCGA
provide a rich resource for researchers to study cancer subtypes, identify biomarkers, and
explore the molecular mechanisms underlying different types of cancer, and have facilitated
numerous research studies aimed at improving cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment
strategies [41].
Originally, the purpose of this study was to integrate as much data as possible, in order to
examine the impact of isoforms not only in gene expression, but also in epigenetics, copy
number variation, and more. Thus, we studied the possibility of introducing copy number
variation, DNA methylation, miRNA expression, gene expression, isoforms expression, path-
way activity, phenotypic, and somatic mutation data as input to MOVE. However, all of
these data sets comprised a total of 927,395 features for 7,206 common samples. This high
dimensionality raised a problem in training MOVE effectively, both in terms of the perfor-
mance of the method and the computational burden it implied. Consequently, we opted to
reduce the number of input datasets, focusing on those deemed most critical to our research
objectives. Specifically, we conducted the study with the following datasets:
• Gene TPM: RNAseq data that quantifyies gene expression levels in transcripts per
million (TPM) for a total of 49,923 genes. TPM normalization adjusts for transcript
length and the total read count per sample, ensuring a standardized measure of ex-
pression across diverse samples and genes.
• Isoforms TPM: RNAseq data, quantifying isoform expression levels in transcripts
per million for a total of 197,044 isoforms.
• Isoforms IF: The isoform fraction is a metric calculated from isoform TPM values that
represents the proportion of each isoform's expression relative to the total expression
of all isoforms originating from the same locus. It is calculated by dividing the TPM
value of each individual isoform by the sum of TPM values for all isoforms that are
encoded by the same gene, resulting in a normalized value between 0 and 1. Hence,
it could be said that the TPM is an absolute measure to quantify isoform expression,
while IF gives a relative measure. Since it is calculated from the isoforms TPM values,
it also contains information for 197,044 isoforms.
• Pathways IPLs (Integrated Pathway Levels): This dataset integrates gene ex-
pression data into 19,504 biological pathways. It does so by aggregating the expression
patterns of genes involved in specific biological pathways using the PARADIGM al-
gorithm [42], which incorporates gene expression, copy number alterations, and other
molecular data to infer the activity of pathways rather than individual genes [43]. Fur-
thermore, the copy number data was GISTIC, meaning that the Genomic Identification
of Significant Targets in Cancer (GISTIC) algorithm was applied to identify significant
Page 8 of 72
==PAGE:12==
Master’s thesis
2.2
Data
copy number alterations, enhancing the accuracy of pathway activity inference. The
analysis of pathway activity allows for a more comprehensive understanding of cellular
processes and signaling networks.
• Phenotypes - clinical data: Obtained from Liu et al [44]. The original dataset
contained 34 features, but some of them were discarded due to a high percentage of
NaN values or lack of relevance. After careful consideration, the following features
were included in the study:
– Disease-free Interval (DFI): Defined as the “period from the date of diag-
nosis until the date of the first new tumor progression event subsequent to the
determination of a patient's disease-free status after their initial diagnosis and
treatment” [44]. The values for DFI are 1 if the patient has experienced a new
tumor progression event within the specified period following the determination
of disease-free status, or 0 if the patient's DFI has been censored (no occurrence
of new tumor progression event within that time) [44]. Hence, it was treated as
a categorical variable.
– DFI.time: Defined as the “time period between the completion of primary treat-
ment for cancer and the recurrence of the disease” [44]. It is a continuous variable.
– Disease-specific Survival (DSS): DSS refers to the “duration of time from the
initial diagnosis of a disease until the death of the patient due specifically to that
disease” [44]. It is coded by a 1 in the cases in which the patient died from the
disease, and 0 otherwise (alive patient, or dead with no observed tumor) [44], so
it is a categorical variable.
– DSS.time: Time between the initial diagnosis and the death of the patient due
to that disease [44]. It is a continuous variable
– Overall survival (OS): Defined as the “period from the date of diagnosis until
the date of death from any cause” [44]. It is a categorical variable, coded as 1 for
dead patients, and 0 for alive patients [44].
– OS.time: Continuous variable indicating survival time, calculated as days from
diagnosis to death in deceased patients, and as days until last contact in alive
patients.
– Progression Free Interval (PFI): PFI is the “Period from the date of diagnosis
until the date of the first occurrence of a new tumor event” [44]. It is coded with
1 for patients who presented a new tumor event or died due to cancer, and with
0 otherwise, hence it is a categorical dataset.
– PFI.time: Complementary continuous variable to PFI, which indicates the time
until the appearance of a new tumor event, or until last contact otherwise.
– age_at_initial_pathologic_diagnosis: Age, in years, at the initial patho-
logical diagnosis. It is a continuous variable.
– ajcc_pathologic_tumor_stage: Tumor stage as per the American Joint Com-
mittee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system, which classifies cancer based on factors
Page 9 of 72
==PAGE:13==
Master’s thesis
2.2
Data
that include tumor size , lymph node involvement, and distant metastasis. This
system classifies a patientâs cancer in four possible stages [45]:
∗Stage I: The cancer is small and localized, usually confined to the organ where
it originated [45].
∗Stage II: The cancer is larger than in stage I, and it may have spread to
nearby tissues or lymph nodes [45].
∗Stage III: The cancer is larger and may have spread to nearby lymph nodes
but has not yet spread to distant parts of the body [45].
∗Stage IV: The cancer has spread to distant organs or tissues, indicating metas-
tasis [45].
– Cancer type abbreviation: Indicates the type of cancer, out of the 33 that can
be found in the TCGA dataset. It is a categorical variable.
– Gender: Can be “male” or “female”, so it is a categorical dataset.
– Histological type: Specific cell or tissue type from which the cancer originates
[44]. It is a categorical variable.
– Race: Categorical variable that can take the values “white”, “black” or “other”.
– treatment_outcome_first_course: Response of the patient's condition to
the treatment received. It is a categorical variable.
On
the
other
hand,
the
following
variables
from
the
“Phe-
notypes
-
clinical
data”
were
discarded,
due
to
lack
of
rele-
vance
or
a
NaN
percentage
higher
than
50%:
birth_days_to,
cause_of_death,
clinical_stage,
death_days_to,
histological_grade,
initital_pahthologic_dx_year,
last_contact_days_to,
margin_status,
menopause_status, new_tumor_event_site, new_tumor_event_dx_days_to,
new_tumor_event_site_other,
vital_status,
new_tumor_event_type,
and
residual_tumor.
For the sake of clarity, in the following pages of this report, we will refer to the Gene
TPM dataset as "Genes_TPM", to Isoforms TPM as "Isoforms_TPM", to Isoforms IF
as "Isoforms_IF", and to Pathwways ILPs as "Pathways". In the case of the Phenotypes
- clincal data dataset, we will split it in categorical and continuous datasets, and we will
refer to them as "Pheontypes_continuous" and "Phenotypes_categorical". In the case of
the Genes_TPM, Isoforms_TPM, Isoforms_IF, and Pathwats dataset, all features were
continuous.
Page 10 of 72
==PAGE:14==
Master’s thesis
2.2
Data
2.2.2
Feature selection
NaN values
As mentioned in section 2.2.1, the first approach regarding feature selection was to discard
features that contained a high percentage of NaN values. The Genes_TPM, Isoforms_TPM,
and Pathway datasets had no NaN values, so no features were removed at this point. In
the case of Isoforms_IF, NaN values were found in the samples where the Isoforms_TPM
values of all isoforms coded by the same gene were 0. In these cases, the isoform fraction is
calculated as 0/0, which leads to a NaN value. Out of 197,045 isoforms, 13,350 had 80% or
more NaN values across 10,536 samples. As we planned on performing a further selection
based on the number of zeros, this problem was addressed later.
Regarding the features in Phenotypes_continuous and Phenotypes_categorical, besides those
deemed not relevant, features with more than 50% NaN values were discarded, as indicated
in Section 2.2.1.
Zero values
After selecting the most meaningful datasets for the analysis and removing a small number
of features based on NaN values, we had 197,044 features from Isoforms_TPM, 197,044 from
Isoforms_IF, 49,923 from Genes_TPM, 19,504 from Pathways, and 15 from from Pheno-
types_continuous and Phenotypes_categorical combined, adding up to a total of 463,530
features for 9,183 common samples. It appeared evident that it was necessary to further
reduce the dimensionality before proceeding with the workflow. Hence, we looked into the
expression of the different genes and isoforms, analyzing the percentage of zeros (null ex-
pression) across all common 9,183 samples.
Figure 2 shows how the majority of genes and isoforms are expressed accross all samples
(0% of zeros). However, in both cases there is a considerable number of features with null
expression in all or almost all samples.
Page 11 of 72
==PAGE:15==
Master’s thesis
2.2
Data
(a) Zero % in Genes_TPM’s features
(b) Zero % in Iso_TPM’s features
Figure 2: Distribution of the percentage of zeros in the features included in (a) Genes_TPM and (b)
Isoforms_TPM datasets, taking into account the 9,183 common samples.
Based on the results of Figure 2, at first we decided to apply two cut-offs for two parallel
but different analysis by removing all features in the Genes_TPM dataset with more than
20% or 50% zeros across all samples. Regarding isoforms, we selected only those coded by
the chosen genes, and, among the remaining ones, then removed those that had more than
20% or 50% zeros across all samples. Thus, we ended up with all the genes that had less
than 20% or 50% zeros across all samples and their corresponding isoforms, provided that
they also had less than 20% or 50% zeros accross all samples.
Our intention was to consider and perform analyses regarding both scenarios, which included
the following amount of genes and isoforms:
• Cut-off of 20% zeros: 37,842 genes (features in Genes_TPM) and 152,390 isoforms
(features in Isoforms_TPM and Isoforms_IF) .
• Cut-off of 50% zeros: 32,023 genes (features in Genes_TPM) and 111,409 isoforms
(features in Isoforms_TPM and Isoforms_IF) .
However, this option turned out to be still too computationally heavy for the resources we
had. As will be explained in further sections, this amount of data required too much memory
and time for the completion of all the steps of MOVE, hence we had no choice but to proceed
with an alternative approach.
Feature importance
With the aim of drastically reducing the amount of features to build the model upon, an
initial filter was applied upon the genes (features Genes_TPM dataset), selecting only those
known to be important transcription factors (TFs). Out of the genes with less than 20%
zeros across the common samples (dataset obtained in section 2.2.2), only the 1,612 listed
in "The Human Transcription Factors" list were consider for further analyses.
Page 12 of 72
==PAGE:16==
Master’s thesis
2.2
Data
These genes had a total of 11,116 associated isoforms (features in the Isoforms_TPM and
Isoforms_IF dataset). We deemed this number too high, and decided to proceed only with
the isoforms with less than 60% zeros across all samples, obtaining a total of 7,545.
Regarding the Pathways dataset, we hypothesized that it might be interesting, in terms of
finding potential associations, keeping the pathways with the highest absolute values (the
most upregulated or downregulated pathways), rather than choosing them randomly. Hence,
out of the original 19,504 pathways, only those with an absolute mean value across the 9,183
samples higher than 0.06 were kept, yielding a total of 4,864 pathways.
As a result of this latest selection, based on feature importance, we proceeded the whole
study with the following number of features: 1,611 from Genes_TPM , 7,545 from Iso-
forms_TPM, 7,545 from Isoforms_IF (197 of them were discarded in further steps due to a
very low variance, as will be explained in further sections), 4,864 from Pathways, and 9 from
Phenotypes_categorical and 6 from Phenotypes_continuous. Hence, we performed the final
analysis with 21,374 continuous features and 9 categorical features, yielding a total of 21,383
features.
2.2.3
Correlation between features
With the aim of inspecting the relationships between the data before feeding it into the
model, we performed a correlation analysis on the selected features by calculating the Pear-
son's coefficients for all the features vs all the features, considering all the datasets included
in the study. Looking into the correlations between features is a good practice before initi-
ating a machine learning approach to better understand the relationships between features
and determine how closely related they are. In some cases, it can be interesting to examine
the presence of high correlation between features, as introducing them into the model could
result in making it more complex without adding any predictive power.
In our case, however, we decided not to remove possibly highly-correlated features.
We
expected to obtain high correlations between Genes_TPM and Isoforms_TPM, and between
Isoforms_TPM and Isoforms_IF (since the latter is calculated from the first). Also, the
Pathways levels are calculated by taking into account the expression from different genes,
among other variables, so it was very possible to obtain highly correlated features in this
case as well. Moreover, the expression levels in a high number of isoforms is very low, a fact
that could also lead to high correlation values between different isoforms. Hence, were we
to remove all highly correlated features, we would probably be left with not enough features
to achieve our primary aim: integrating data from multiple isoforms, genes, and pathways
with clinical data to elucidate if different isoforms that are coded by the same gene can have
different functions. Thus, our correlation analysis was an exploratory approach, rather than
a method for a further selection of features.
Figure 3 shows a heatmap of the Pearson's coefficients for all features vs all features. The
Page 13 of 72
==PAGE:17==
Master’s thesis
2.2
Data
amount of features is so vast that it is not easy to extract conclusions from this image;
however, we can see that, as expected, high correlation values (Pearon's coefficient close to
1) were obtained between features of the Isoforms_TPM dataset, as well as between features
from Genes_TPM and Isoforms_TPM. It is also possible to observe high correlation between
the features of the Genes_TPM dataset, and between those of Pathways.
Figure 3: Correlation analysis for the selected features. Pearson's coefficients are shown in the heatmap,
with positive correlations depicted in red and negative correlations in blue.
Even if we did not use the correlation analysis to perform feature selection, observing high
correlations between features implied that we could potentially choose a a lower number of
neurons in the hidden layers and the latent space when training the VAE, reducing in this
way the necessary amount of time and memory. Highly correlated features are redundant
Page 14 of 72
==PAGE:18==
Master’s thesis
2.3
MOVE
in the information they carry; since they do not add unique information, the VAE does not
need as many neurons to capture the underlying structure of the data.
2.3
MOVE
MOVE runs in four steps, or tasks:
1. Encoding data: Consists in formatting the input data so that the method can read
and process it. Categorical data is one-hot encoded, while continuous data is z-scored
normalized. Hereafter, will refer to this task as “encode data”.
2. Tuning the hyperparameters of the VAE model: Trains models using different
sets of hyperparameters and finds the ones that perform the best, in terms of recon-
struction or stability of the latent space. Hereafter, will refer to this task as “tune
hyperparameters”.
3. Analyzing the latent space: Trains a selected model and inspects the latent repre-
sentation it produces. Hereafter, will refer to this task as “analyze latent”.
4. Identifying associations: Finds associations between variables in the input datasets.
In the case of finding associations for continuous data, it can use three approaches: t-
test, the calculation of Bayes factors, or the Kolmogórov-Smirnov test (KS). Hereafter,
will refer to this task as “identify associations”.
2.3.1
Encoding data
The “encode data” task runs by completing the following steps:
1. The script reads the names of the common samples to all datasets and uses them to
filter the samples that will be used to train the model. Hence, it is not necessary to
apply any prior filtering on the datasets according to common samples before running
the method, MOVE performs this function. As a result, only the data for the samples
that are common for all the datasets involved in the study is encoded.
2. Once MOVE has identified the samples of interest, it performs one-hot encoding on
the categorical datasets.
One-hot encoding is a technique used to convert categorical variables into a binary
matrix that can be processed by machine learning algorithms more effectively. For
MOVE to handle them correctly, each categorical variable must be in itself a categorical
dataset. For each categorical variable (or dataset, in this case), the distinct categories
are determined, and for each category, a new binary column is created. This way, each
Page 15 of 72
==PAGE:19==
Master’s thesis
2.3
MOVE
column corresponds to one category. A binary matrix is created where, for a given
data point, a ‘1’ is placed in the column corresponding to the category it belongs to,
and ‘0’s are placed in all other columns. One-hot encoding is usually a more suitable
approach for encoding categorical data than label encoding because it prevents the
model from misinterpreting categorical data as ordinal.
MOVE iterates through each categorical dataset specified in the configuration; reads
the data, performs one-hot encoding, and saves the encoded data and mapping infor-
mation (which is needed to reverse the one-hot encoding process).
3. After encoding the categorical datasets, MOVE proceeds with the continuous ones. It
iterates through each continuous dataset specified in the configuration and performs
z-score normalization, which consists in subtracting the mean and dividing by the
standard deviation.
z = x −µ
σ
After the standardization, MOVE removes columns with zero or almost zero variance,
as they would not provide any discriminative power to the model. By removing them,
the complexity of the model is reduced without discarding any relevant information.
In this study, this only had an effect in the case of the Isoforms_IF dataset, where 197
features out of the initial 7,545 were removed.
In the original MOVE's code, a logarithmic transformation was applied to the input
data to handle scaling, with the purpose of addressing large differences in magnitude
and skewness. However, this approach is unsuitable for datasets containing negative
values, as is the case of the Pathways dataset, as the logarithm of a negative number
is undefined. Hence, the logarithmic transformation was removed and standardization
was performed directly.
4. Moreover, MOVE handles NaN values in the “econde data” task to avoid computational
complications in subsequent steps. In the case of categorical variables, the column
corresponding to the ‘NaN values’ category after one-hot encoding is removed, whereas
for continuous features NaN values are converted to ‘0’ in this step.
2.3.2
Tuning the hyperparameters of the VAE model
Given a set of hyperparameters, the “tune hyperparameters” task optimizes the weights and
biases of the model to obtain the optimal performance. It provides a result table with metrics
that can be used for the comparison of different sets of hyperparameters. MOVE allows for
the tuning of the following hyperparameters:
• Batch size: Number of samples per training batch.
Page 16 of 72
==PAGE:20==
Master’s thesis
2.3
MOVE
• Number of neurons in the hidden layers: Architecture of the encoder network (reversed
for the decoder network).
• Number of neurons in the latent space: Determines how much the dimensionality will
be reduced in the encoding process.
• Beta: Weight applied to the KL divergence term in the loss function.
• Dropout: Regularaization technique that can be used to prevent overfitting. Dropout
works by randomly disregarding a fraction of the neurons in the neural network during
the training process.
• Number of training epochs.
• Learning rate: Controls how much to change the model in response to the estimated
error each time the model weights are updated
• KLD warmup steps: Epochs at which KL diverbence term is warmed. It is possible
to gradually introduce the influence of the KL divergence term during the training
process, rather than applying it at full strength from the beginning.
• Batch dilatation steps: Epochs at which batch size is increased
• Early stopping: Early stopping consists in ceasing the training process when the per-
formance on the validation set begins to degrade with the aim of avoiding overfitting.
The “tune hyperparameters” task can tune the parameters with the aim of improving either
the model's stability or the reconstruction metrics. Due to time limitations, in this study
we focused exclusively in optimizing the reconstruction metrics for the model, without con-
sidering its stability. When the goal is to optimize the reconstruction metrics, the script
performs the following steps:
1. The samples are split into training (90%) and test (10%) sets.
2. A train dataloader is created by combining categorical and continuous datasets. When
creating dataloaders, the drop_last parameter controls whether the last batch in the
dataset should be dropped or not when its size is less than the specified batch size. To
ensure that each training batch has a consistent size, it is set to ‘True’ when creating
the train dataloader.
3. The VAE model is built and trained using the provided configuration..
4. The reconstruction metrics are computed for both train and test splits.
Accuracy
is calculated for the categorical features, while cosine similarity is computed for the
continuous features.
Page 17 of 72
==PAGE:21==
Master’s thesis
2.3
MOVE
Accuracy is a metric used to evaluate the performance of a classification model. It is
defined as the ratio of correctly predicted samples to the total number of samples [46].
.
Accuracy = Number of correct predictions
Total number of predictions
On the other hand, cosine similarity is a measure of similarity between two non-zero
vectors. It is defined as the cosine of the angle between the two vectors [47]. For con-
tinuous features, this metric determines how closely the reconstructed features match
the original features in terms of their direction. This measure ranges from -1 (exactly
opposite) to 1 (exactly the same), with 0 indicating no similarity [47].
Cosine Similarity =
A · B
∥A∥∥B∥
Where A · B is the dot product of vectors A and B, ∥A∥is the Euclidean norm of
vector A, and ∥B∥is the Euclidean norm of vector B.
By using accuracy for categorical features and cosine similarity for continuous features,
it is possible to evaluate the reconstruction quality of the VAE model.
2.3.3
Analyzing the latent space
The “analyze latent” task is designed to gain further insights into the model and the informa-
tion that can be obtained from the latent space. More specifically, it provides the following
functionalities:
1. Reconstruction metrics and loss curves: It is possible to train or reload a model
with the desired configuration and obtain plots concerning the reconstruction metrics
for each dataset and loss curves for the training data.
2. Prediction of feature importance: This task consists on applying the VAE's en-
coder to perturbed datasets, where, one at a time, the value of each feature is set to
0 in the case of continuous features, and to a neutral value in the case of categorical
features. This way, perturbed versions of the latent space are obtained, corresponding
to disregarding each of the features in the datasets. To predict the importance of each
feature, the original latent space (obtained by applying the encoder on the baseline
dataset) and each perturbed latent space are compared. It is assumed that, the greater
the difference of the distribution of the samples between both latent spaces, the big-
ger the impact the removal of a specific feature has and, consequently, the higher the
importance of that feature. When the task is finished, a plot that shows how much
each sample has deviated from the original latent space when removing that feature
Page 18 of 72
==PAGE:22==
Master’s thesis
2.3
MOVE
is obtained. If the position of the samples considerably defers from that of the orig-
inal latent space, it is possible to hypothesize that the perturbed feature has a great
importance in the model; otherwise, it is likely that that feature is irrelevant.
3. Representation of the latent space: The script also plots the samples in a 2-
dimensional latent space, selecting the first two dimensions of the latent space, and
colors them according to the values of selected features. This allows for the exploration
of possible clusters and the distribution of the samples in the latent space according
to the values of a selected feature.
2.3.4
Identifying associations
MOVE allows for the identification of associations through three different methods: t-test,
a Bayesian approach, and KS. However, in this study we only made use of the Bayesian
approach. This decision was based on it being more restrictive than the t-test method when
it comes to finding associations, and therefore more reliable, and less computationally heavy
than KS.
The purpose of the “identify associations” task is to perturb all features in a target dataset,
and use a the generative properties of the VAE (pre-trained on the original data) to estimate
how the values of all other features in all other samples change after each perturbation. This
can be achieved by performing the following steps:
1. The data is loaded and a baseline dataloader is created, with all the original data.
2. For each feature in the target dataset (the dataset to perturb), a perturbed dataloader
is created. In each of the perturbed dataloaders, a different feature is perturbed while
the rest remain as in the baseline dataloader. Features can be perturbed by setting
the value in all samples to the maximum or minimum value found in that feature, or
by adding or subtracting one standard deviation, calcualted for that feature.
In the original script, all the perturbed dataloaders were created by a function and
stored in a list. As this turned out to demand too much memory if we intended to use
the data described in Section 2.2, we made some modifications in the code (for more
information, see Section 3.1).
3. A mask for the NaN values in the original data is created and applied in both the
baseline and the perturbed dataloaders, in order to disregard NaN values when it
comes to finding associations.
4. Using a ‘for’ loop, each refit for the VAE is trained or reloaded and used to obtain
a reconstruction of the baseline dataset. Then, each feature in the target dataset is
perturbed, and the same model is used to calculate its reconstruction.
Page 19 of 72
==PAGE:23==
Master’s thesis
2.3
MOVE
The difference between the reconstruction from the baseline and the reconstruction
from each perturbed dataloader is calculated by subtracting the baseline's reconstruc-
tion to the perturbed reconstruction's reconstruction:
diff = perturb_recon −baseline_recon
By this formula, it can be deducted that, in the case of increasing the perturbed
feature's value, positive associations with the perturbed feature (i.e., with the same
directionality), will result in a positive value for diff, whereas negative associations
(i.e., features with values that decrease when the perturbed feature's value increases),
will have a negative value for diff.
All differences between all baselines reconstructions and perturbed dataloaders recon-
structions are calculated for all refits. Each of them is normalized by dividing it by
the number of refits and stored in an array that contains, for each sample and each
perturbed feature, the average differences between all refits for all continuous features.
5. With the aim of identifying positive and negative associations, a new array, named
prob, is created. First, for each perturbed feature, each continuous feature for each
sample receives a value of 1 if the difference between “perturbed reconstruction” and
the “baseline reconstruction” is positive (greater than 10−8) and a value of 0 if such
difference was inferior to 10−8.
Then, the mean of these values across all samples
is calculated for each continuous feature, and stored in prob. This way, this array
contains values for each continuous feature in all datasets that range between 0 and 1.
If the association with the perturbed feature is negative in all samples for a continuous
feature, it will receive a 0, whereas if the association is positive in all samples, its value
for prob will be a 1.
6. The Bayes factors for each feature are calculated using the following formula:
bayeski = ln(prob + 10−8) - ln(1 - prob + 10−8)
For each perturbed feature, a Bayes factor is calculated for each continuous feature in
all datasets, based on the probability of an association between the perturbed feature
and said feature. Higher absolute values of prob will result in higher values for the
Bayes factors, indicating a stronger probability for an association, whereas the sign
indicates the directionality of the association.
If prob< 0.5, the Bayes factor will
be negative, indicating a negative association with the perturbed features, whereas if
prob> 0.5, the Bayes factor will be positive, indicating a positive association.
7. The Bayes probabilities are calculated by first obtaining the absolute value for the
Bayes factors (bayes_abs), and then applying the following formula:
bayes_p =
ebayes_abs
1+ebayes_abs
After its calculation, the Bayes probabilities are sorted based on the absolute value of
the Bayes factor.
Page 20 of 72
==PAGE:24==
Master’s thesis
2.4
Esrum and Slurm for high-performance computing
8. Calculation of the False Discovery Rate (FDR). FDR is a statistical method used to
correct for multiple comparisons.
It is defined as the expected proportion of false
positives among the declared significant results.
2.4
Esrum and Slurm for high-performance computing
Given the vast size of the data and the long running-time of the computations to perform, this
project was performed using high-performance computing (HPC). Specifically, the Esrum
cluster and SLURM (Simple Linux Utility for Resource Management) were used.
The Esrum cluster consists of a head node, 12 compute nodes, 1 GPU/Hi-mem node, 1
Rstudio server, and 1 server for running containers [48]. Users can connect to the head node,
where they can submit jobs to the various compute nodes utilizing the SLURM Workload
Manager to execute tasks [48].
Each node has 128 CPUs available and 2 TB of RAM, of which 1,993 GB can be reserved
by Slurm, whereas the GPU node has 4 TB of RAM available, of which 3,920 GB can be
reserved by Slurm [48].
3
Results
3.1
Code optimization. Memory usage and multiprocessing
As mentioned in Section 2.2, the initial aim of this study was to use as many features as
possible to train the model and study possible associations, so we were cautious when it
came to removing features. Following this approach, we considered two scenarios: in the
first one we got rid of all genes with more than 20% zeros across all common samples and
selected the isoforms coded by the selected genes that also had less than 20% zeros across
all samples. In the second scenario, we followed the same procedure for the data selection,
but setting a threshold of 50%. This left us with 37,842 genes and 152,390 isoforms for the
first option, and with 32,023 genes and 111,409 isoforms for the second scenario.
Hence, we started the study with these two approaches and were able to run MOVE's first
and second tasks (“encode data” and “tune hyperparameters”). The tuning of parameters
required a long computation time, as the number of initial features was extremely high,
but it was still feasible to complete.
The models’ reconstruction metrics obtained after
can be inspected in Section 3.2. However, when running the “analyze latent” and “identify
associations” tasks we encountered problems both in terms of time and memory:
Page 21 of 72
==PAGE:25==
Master’s thesis
3.1
Code optimization. Memory usage and multiprocessing
• Memory limitations: In the original code, MOVE creates perturbed dataloaders
for all features in the target dataset (all features to perturb) and stores all of them
in a list. Given that our original purpose was to perturb 111,409 or 152,390 features
(number of isoforms), for running the original code we would have needed to request
enough memory to store that many number of dataloaders, each of them with a total
of 37, 842 + 152, 390 + 152, 390 + 19, 504 + 6 = 362, 132 features in the case of the 20%
threshold, or 32, 023 + 111, 409 + 111, 409 −197 + 19, 504 + 6 = 274, 351 features for
the 50% threshold, and 9,183 samples in both cases. As each element in the dataset
has a size of 4 bytes (float), the total amount of memory demanded by these options
would have been:
– 20 % threshold:
362,132·9,183·4
10243
· 152, 390 = 1, 887, 852 GB
– 50 % threshold:
274,351·9,183·4
10243
· 111, 409 = 1, 045, 614 GB
This greatly exceeded our limit of 1,993 GB per job. Moreover, even with the final
feature selection (explained in Section 2.2.2), the amount of necessary memory was
still too high. In this option, the purpose was to perturb 7,545 isoforms, and create
dataloaders with 1, 611+7, 545+7, 545−197+4, 864+9+6 = 21, 383 features. Hence,
a job based on the original job would have required a total amount of 5,519 GB, still
over the limit of memory usage.
21,383·9,183·4
10243
· 7, 545 = 5, 519 GB
In conclusion, it became evident that, in order to perturb a sufficient amount of isoforms
and use enough features, changes in the code were needed to reduce memory-usage.
• Time limitations: In the original code of MOVE, the perturbations of the target
datasets are performed one at a time and sequentially. As a consequence, for per-
turbing, for instance, the Isoforms_TPM dataset, it would be needed to perturb a
feature, reconstruct a model, and calculate the difference with the baseline 7,545 times
(152.390 or 111,409 in the original scenarios), one after the other. This would take an
unreasonable amount of time.
To overcome these problems, we made the necessary changes in MOVE's code in the two
tasks that require performing perturbations: “identify associations” and “analyze latent”.
3.1.1
Memory-usage optimization
In the original scripts, the function “perturb_continuous_data_extended” returned a list
with as many dataloaders as features in the target dataset. Each dataloader is equal to the
original dataloader, baseline dataloader, except for one feature, which is perturbed for all
samples. As mentioned before, it was crucial to avoid the creation of such a heavy object,
in terms of memory.
Page 22 of 72
==PAGE:26==
Master’s thesis
3.1
Code optimization. Memory usage and multiprocessing
“Identify associations” task
In order to avoid the creation of a list with all the perturbed dataloaders, a new function,
“perturb_continuous_data_extended_one” was defined. The code was altered to include an
additional argument for the function, the index of a feature, so that the function perturbed
only the indicated feature and returned only the perturbed dataloader corresponding to that
feature. Instead of storing all dataloaders in one object, the function is called several times,
as many as the number of features to perturb, and each dataloader is created and used for
its purpose before being removed from memory.
However, in addition to the creation of the list of dataloaders, the script for the “identify
associations” task included a further step that implied memory problems. After the creation
of the aforementioned list, a “for” loop iterated over all of them and stored, for each one,
a matrix containing the differences between the perturbed and the baseline dataloaders for
each sample and feature.
To overcome this inconvenience, the code was modified so that it only stored the differences
between the baseline and one perturbed dataloader at a time, and used them to calculate
the Bayes factors for the corresponding perturbed feature. This way, the ultimate goal, the
calculation of the Bayes factors, could be performed without the need of storing such a heavy,
in terms of memory, object.
“Analyze latent” task
In the script for the “analyze latent” task, all features in all datasets, not only those included
in the target dataset, are perturbed to predict feature importance, as explained in Section
2.3.3.
Similarly to the original script for the “identify ssociations” task, the functions used in the
original script to perturb categorical and continuous data, “perturb_categorical_data” and
“perturb_continuous_data” created perturbed dataloaders for all features and stored them
in lists. Exactly as done in Section 3.1.1 for the “identify_associations” script, new func-
tions, “perturb_categorical_data_one” and “perturb_continuous_data_one” were defined.
In both cases, the arguments for the function include the index of the feature to perturb,
and both perturb and return only one perturbed dataloader.
Also in alignment to the changes performed in Section 3.1.1, rather than creating a vast array
that stored all differences for all samples and all features between the baseline dataloader
and the perturbed dataloaders for all perturbed dataloaders, the code was modified to store
the differences for exclusively one dataloader at a time, and to use them to calculate the
importance of the perturbed feature.
Page 23 of 72
==PAGE:27==
Master’s thesis
3.1
Code optimization. Memory usage and multiprocessing
3.1.2
Reduction of the amount of required time
Once the changes to optimize memory usage were implemented, it became possible to run
the tasks “‘identify associations” and “‘analyze latent” without creating objects that exceed
the amount of available memory. However, the scripts were still too slow for our purposes.
The original design perturbed one feature at a time, sequentially processing each feature by
reconstructing and calculating the difference with the baseline before addressing the next
one. Given the large number of features we intended to perturb, this approach was too
time-consuming. Hence, we considered two options:
• Feature selection: Perturbing only a selected subset of features from the target
datasets, such as those with higher expression levels.
• Implementation of multiprocessing: Multiprocessing is a technique that allows a
program to run multiple processes concurrently, utilizing more than one CPU core at a
time. This can significantly reduce the execution time for tasks that can be parallelized.
In our case, implementing multiprocessing was particularly advantageous because the
task of perturbing features and calculating the resultant differences could be performed
independently for each feature. This independence meant that multiple features could
be perturbed simultaneously without any conflicts or dependencies between the tasks.
As explained in Section 2.4 we could request a maximum 128 CPUs. Our initial aim
was to use all of them to perform the perturbations and calculate the Bayes factors for
all features, leading to a substantial reduction in the overall computation time.
In the end, we had to implement a combination of both solutions. We were able to implement
multiprocessing for the parallelization of the features’ perturbations and the calculation of
Bayes factors, but we encountered memory limitations to apply this with all the data. Even
if it was indeed possible to request 128 CPUs (127 to run the job, 1 for various system-
level tasks), we could not ask for more than a total of 1,993 GB. This meant that each
CPU could use a maximum of 1993
127 ≈15GB, which was not enough for loading the datasets
and the models. Since the models and datasets corresponding to the cut-offs of 20% or
50% zeros were too heavy for a reasonable number of processes to be used, we ended up
selecting only the most important features (based on known transcription factors and levels
of expression, as discussed in Section 2.2.2) , training new models with them, and making
use of multiprocessing to run the “analyze latent” and “identify associations” tasks.
We implemented multiprocessing using Python's “torch.multiprocessing” library, which can
handle torch objects, unlike the more traditional “multiprocessing” library. For multipro-
cessing to work, it is essential to avoid CPU oversubscription. If the total number of created
processes exceeds the number of allocated CPUs, as was our case, since the number of fea-
tures to perturb was considerably higher than the number of CPUs available, each CPU tries
to complete several processes at the same time, and this results in a deadlock [49].
Page 24 of 72
==PAGE:28==
Master’s thesis
3.1
Code optimization. Memory usage and multiprocessing
“Identify associations” task
As mentioned, above, we implemented multiprocessing only for the Bayesian approach, as the
t-test option was less restrictive when it came to finding associations and the KS alternative
was more computationally heavy.
Since the aim was to significantly reduce the time required to perform the perturba-
tions of the features in the target dataset and calculate the Bayes factors, we imple-
mented multiprocessing for this steps. For such a purpose, we created a worker function,
“_bayes_approach_worker”, designed to perform all these steps for only one perturbed
feature.
We also created a main function, “_bayes_approach_paralel”, that called the
“torch.multiprocessing” package and distributed all perturbations across the worker func-
tions.
This way, in the new code each worker function creates a perturbed dataloader for a dif-
ferent feature, calculates the perturbed reconstruction and compares it with the baseline
reconstruction of all different refits, and calculates the Bayes factors for the perturbed fea-
ture and all continuous features. In order for each CPU to have enough memory to complete
all its assigned tasks, we used 25 CPUs, giving each CPU 83 GB of memory to work with. As
there were many more features to perturb (7,545 isoforms or 1,611 genes) than CPUs, each
CPU was responsible of applying the worker function to more than one perturbed feature.
In any case, the process was significantly faster, compared to the utilization of only 1 CPU.
Once all Bayes factors for all features to perturb have been calculated, the results are sorted
accordingly to the index of the perturbed feature, and the rest of the calculations can be
performed as in the original script.
“Analyze latent” task
In the case of the “analyze latent” task, the objective was to parallelize the most time-
consuming step in the script: the calculation of importance for all features. Since this task is
divided into two functions, one that computes feature importance for categorical variables,
and another one suited for continuous features, we implemented multiprocessing for both
cases.
As done in Section 3.1.2, worker functions were designed to allow for parallelization.
“_categorical_importance_worker” perturbs a categorical feature (its index is given as
an argument), and returns the difference with the baseline dataloader.
“_continu-
ous_importance_worker” does the some, but with continuous features.
The main function implements multiprocessing by distributing all features among the worker
function, and then processes the results to have them in a format that can be used for the
subsequent steps.
Page 25 of 72
==PAGE:29==
Master’s thesis
3.2
Tuning hyperparameters metrics
3.2
Tuning hyperparameters metrics
As described in Section 2.3.2, MOVE allows for the tuning of multiple hyperparameters.
Ideally, we would have carefully explored different ranges of values for all of them, with the
aim of unravelling the combination of values that yielded the best model. However, given
the considerable size of the datasets used in this study, the training and examination of all
these models would have required more time than we had, hence we decided to focus on
finding a model that captured the relationships within the data satisfactorily and did not
require an unreasonable amount of time to train, even if it was not the optimal one.
Since exploring multiple hyperparemeters implied significantly increasing the computation
time, as all combinations of all possible values for different parameters needed to be studied,
we decided on inspecting only the most determinant hyperparmeters for our study: the
number of neurons in the hidden layers and the number of neurons in the latent space. For
the rest of hyperparameters, standard reasonable values were set, as we considered that the
impact of exploring different values in these cases would not yield enough improvement to
countervail for the amount of time it would require.
Regarding the number of hidden layers in the model, it appeared evident that we ought to
use only 1. Given the high dimensionality of the datasets, with 21,383 features and 9,183
samples, building a model with more than 1 hidden layer would result in problems in both
terms of memory, as the number of weights and biases to store would increase significantly,
and time, as the time for training the models would be drastically higher. In addition, tuning
such a high number of weights and biases could potentially lead to overfitting.
Moreover, determining the range of values to try for the number of neurons in the hidden
layer and the number of neurons in the latent space was a delicate decision. The lower the
values, the lower the time to train the models, but at the risk of compromising the models’
performances. Hence, it was important to find values that did not require an unreasonable
amount of time to train the models but still allowed for a good reconstruction.
In our first approaches, we intended to use a greater number of features, 361,935 when
applying the cut-off of genes and isoforms with less than 20% zeros, and 274,154 for the
50% threshold. With the aim of gradually reducing dimensionality, we started by intending
to train models with 100,000 neurons in the hidden layer and 100, or 1,000 neurons in the
latent space. However, this option turned out to be unfeasible; even disregarding the tremen-
dous amount of training time it required, the required memory exceeded our possibilities.
Consequently, we decided to drastically reduce the number of neurons in the hidden layer.
While still working with the datasets of the 20% and 50% zeros thresholds, we reduced
the number of neurons in the hidden layers to 2,000 or 1,000 neurons, and studied the
performance of the models with 500, 250, and 100 neurons in the latent space. Regarding
the rest of parameters, the batch size was set to 100 samples, β to 0.0001, the learning rate
to 0.0001, and the number of epochs to 100. No dropout, batch dilatation steps or early
Page 26 of 72
==PAGE:30==
Master’s thesis
3.2
Tuning hyperparameters metrics
stopping were applied, for the sake of simplicity.
Figures 4 and 5 display the reconstruction metrics. As can be observed, the reconstruction for
the categorical datasets was almost perfect, while the reconstruction for continuous datasets
ranged between 75-80% of similarity, except for the case of the Isoforms_IF dataset, in which
it was worse.
(a) Reconstruction metrics for the 2,000 HN, 100 LN
model
(b) Reconstruction metrics for the 1,000 HN, 100 LN
model
(c) Reconstruction metrics for the 2,000 HN, 250 LN
model
(d) Reconstruction metrics for the 1,000 HN, 250 LN
model
(e) Reconstruction metrics for the 2,000 HN, 500 LN
model
(f) Reconstruction metrics for the 1,000 HN, 500 LN
model
Figure 4: Reconstruction metrics for the 20% zeros threshold dataset. Accuracy was calculated for categorical
datasets, and cosine similarity for continuous datasets. Different combinations of number of neurons in the
hidden layer (HN) and number of neurons in the latent space (LN) were explored.
Page 27 of 72
==PAGE:31==
Master’s thesis
3.2
Tuning hyperparameters metrics
(a) Reconstruction metrics for the 2,000 HN, 100 LN
model
(b) Reconstruction metrics for the 1,000 HN, 100 LN
model
(c) Reconstruction metrics for the 2,000 HN, 250 LN
model
(d) Reconstruction metrics for the 1,000 HN, 250 LN
model
(e) Reconstruction metrics for the 2,000 HN, 500 LN
model
(f) Reconstruction metrics for the 1,000 HN, 500 LN
Figure 5: Reconstruction metrics for the 50% zeros threshold dataset. Accuracy was calculated for categorical
datasets, and cosine similarity for continuous datasets. Different combinations of number of neurons in the
hidden layer (HN) and number of neurons in the latent space (LN) were explored.
Batch size = 100,
β = 0.0001, lr = 0.0001.
This first approach allowed us to define the range of the values over which to set the number
of neurons in the hidden layer and in the latent space. From Figures 4 and 5 it can be
concluded that a higher number of neurons in the hidden layer improves the performance
of the model, so, once we obtained the final dataset, with 21,383 features, we decided on
exploring models with 2,000 and 5,000 neurons in the hidden layer. Even if a number higher
than 5,000 would have probably yielded better results, we decided not to excessively increase
the computation time and size of the models. Regarding the number of neurons in the latent
space, we trained models with 200 and 100 neurons.
Page 28 of 72
==PAGE:32==
Master’s thesis
3.2
Tuning hyperparameters metrics
(a) Reconstruction metrics for the 5,000 HN 100 LN
model
(b) Reconstruction metrics for the 2,000 HN 100 LN
model
(c) Reconstruction metrics for the 5,000 HN 200 LN model
(d) Reconstruction metrics for the 2,000 HN 200 LN
model
Figure 6: Reconstruction metrics for the final dataset. Accuracy was calculated for categorical datasets,
and cosine similarity for continuous datasets. Different combinations of number of neurons in the hidden
layer (HN) and number of neurons in the latent space (LN) were explored. Batch size = 100, β = 0.0001,
lr = 0.0001.
As shown in Figure 6, setting 5,000 neurons in the hidden layer considerably improved the
models’ performance, in comparison with defining 2,000. With 5,000 neurons, all datasets
except for Isoforms_IF were reconstructed with a score for the median superior to 80%,
indicating that the models were good enough for the purpose of this study. However, no
improvement was seen when increasing the number of neurons in the latent space from 100
to 200. Thus, in order to combine a good performance with simplicity, we decided to proceed
the study with a model defined by 5,000 neurons in the hidden layer and 100 neurons in the
latent space.
As displayed in Figure 7, which shows the loss curves for the training data, 100 epochs
were enough to train the model. Both training losses, the sum of squared errors (SSE) for
continuous features and cross-entropy for categorical features, were effectively minimized.
It can be observed that the cross-entropy was practically completely minimized, hence the
reconstruction loss was mostly influenced by the SSE. Moreover, the drastically low value of
β practically cancelled the KL divergence term.
Page 29 of 72
==PAGE:33==
Master’s thesis
3.2
Tuning hyperparameters metrics
Figure 7: Loss curves for the training set across 100 epochs. The total loss is the sum of the reconstruction
loss (which is a combination of cross-entropy for categorical data and SSE for continuous data) and the KL
divergence term. The parameters of the model were HN = 5, 000, LN = 100, β = 0.0001 Batch size = 100,
lr = 0.0001.
Before addressing further topics, it is worth discussing the chosen value for β. By keeping
this parameter so low, we reduced the KL term in the ELBO (Section 1.2) to a point where
it was negligible, as displayed in Figure 7. As a consequence, the VAE was effectively trained
as an autoencoder; only the performance of the reconstruction was taken into account to op-
timize the model, while the possible deviations from the prior distribution were disregarded.
However, this approach aligns with the purpose of our study. Our aim was to capture the
relationships between the features in these particular datasets and perform reconstructions
on very similar datasets, with only one feature perturbed in each of them. Hence, for our
purposes it was not problematic that the VAE behaved like an autoencoder.
This statement is reinforced by observing how the performance of the model worsens when
increasing β. Figure 8 shows the substantial impact that increasing β has on the perfor-
mance of the models, thereby justifying the decision to use a drastically low value for this
hyperparameter.
Page 30 of 72
==PAGE:34==
Master’s thesis
3.3
Analysis of associations
(a) Reconstruction metrics for the HN 2,000, LN 200, β = 0.001
model
(b) Reconstruction metrics for the HN 2,000, LN 200, β = 0.1
model
(c) Reconstruction metrics for the HN 2,000, LN 200, β = 1
model
Figure 8: Reconstruction metrics for the final dataset. Accuracy was calculated for categorical datasets, and
cosine similarity for continuous datasets. Different values of β were explored. Batch size = 100, lr = 0.0001,
HN = 2,000, LN = 200.
3.3
Analysis of associations
The purpose of this project was to study if isoforms that are coded by the same gene can
have different, even opposite, functions. With this aim, we trained a model that predicted
Page 31 of 72
==PAGE:35==
Master’s thesis
3.3
Analysis of associations
associations between the features in the Isoforms_TPM dataset and the features in all other
datasets (including Isoforms_TPM), and proceeded to study the predicted associations.
Finding that isoforms encoded by the same gene could be associated with different features
would be a starting point for stating that they can have different functions.
As explained in Section 2.3.4, MOVE works by perturbing each feature in a selected dataset
to the maximum or minimum value of the feature across all samples, or by adding or sub-
tracting one standard deviation.
After trying these four options for the Isoforms_TPM
dataset, we decided to perform the further analyses with the one which provided the highest
number of associations: the perturbation to the maximum value of the feature.
After perturbing the 7,545 Isoforms in the Isoforms_TPM dataset, we obtained 2,336,630
associations between isoforms and features of all 5 continuous datasets. The isoforms for
which associations were found were coded by a total of 1,552 different genes. 36.45% of
the associations were found with the Isoforms_TPM dataset, 27.05% with the Pathways,
23.40% with Isoforms_IF, 12.47% with Genes_TPM (it is important to consider that these
dataset has a considerably smaller size than the previous ones), and 0.63% with the Pheno-
types_continuous dataset (with only 6 features).
Figure 9 shows the distributions of values for the Bayes probabilities, Bayes factors, and
False Discovery Rates (FDR) for all associations. As can be observed, only the associations
with a probability higher than 90% were considered significant (Figure 9a). Moreover, a
considerable number of associations showed very low values for FDR, implying high confi-
dence (Figure 9c). Regarding the Bayes factors (Figure 9b), 93.92% of the associations had
an absolute value equal or less than 5, but a non-neglectable amount of associations showed
higher absolute values for Bayes factors. For instance, 5,292 associations were assigned a
Bayes factor greater than or inferior to 18, indicating that they were found in almost all sam-
ples. In addition, by examining the Bayes factors, it can be concluded that 71.25% of the
associations between isoforms and other features were positive, and 28.75% were negative.
This preliminary analysis showed that multiple associations were found for a great number of
isoforms encoded by a huge variety of genes. Moreover, the calculation of the FDRs and the
exploration of the values of the Bayes factors and Bayes probabilities increased our confidence
in their veracity. Once this first step had been addressed, we set the focus on examining the
differences between isoforms encoded by the same gene regarding these associations.
Page 32 of 72
==PAGE:36==
Master’s thesis
3.3
Analysis of associations
(a) Distribution of the Bayes probabilities for the found
associations
(b) Distribution of the Bayes factors for the found asso-
ciations
(c) Distribution of the values of FDR for the found asso-
ciations
Figure 9: Histograms for the (a) Bayes probabilities, (b) Bayes factors, and (c) FDR of the 2,336,630
predicted associations found by MOVE after perturbing each feature in Isoforms_TPM for its maximum
value across all samples
Page 33 of 72
==PAGE:37==
Master’s thesis
3.3
Analysis of associations
3.3.1
Sanity checks
Once the “identify associations” tasks was complete, it was important to examine the results
to verify that they were coherent before performing any further analyses.
With such a
purpose in mind, we designed the following sanity checks:
1. Isoform TPM vs Gene TPM: If the TPM value on an isoform is artificially in-
creased, the model should obtain a reconstruction where the TPM for the gene that
encodes this isoform follows the same behavior.
2. Isoform TPM vs Isoform IF: Similarly, if the TPM value of an isoform is artificially
increased, the IF value for that same isoform should also increase in the reconstruction
obtained by the model.
3. Gene TPM vs Isoform IF: Contrary to the previous two sanity checks, if the TPM
of a gene is artificially increased, the IF value of the isoforms it encodes can increase,
decrease. or not be affected.
It was crucial to test these sanity checks. We knew that these associations were real, hence if
the model was not able to capture them, it would completely invalidate all other associations
found by MOVE.
To address sanity checks 1 and 2, we ran the “identify associations” task by perturbing
each isoform's TPM value to the maximum value found in the feature, and analyzed the
associations predicted by the model. In the case of sanity check 3, we the perturbed features
were those included in the Genes_TPM dataset, also to the maximum value found in each
feature.
Regarding sanity check 1 (Isoform TPM vs Gene TPM), the total number of features in
the Isoforms_TPM dataset associated with the gene that encoded them with a positive
Bayes factor, meaning that the values of the genes increased significantly when the value
of the isoform increased, was 6,738. Only 807 isoforms were not associated with the gene
that encodes them. Furthermore, none were associated with the gene with a negative Bayes
factor. These results were highly positive; 89.3% of the cases behaved as expected, and none
of them behaved in opposition to the expectations: not a single gene significantly decreased
its expression after an increase in the TPM of one of the isoforms it encodes.
About sanity check 2 (Isoform TPM vs Isoform IF), the results were not discouraging, but
not as promising. 4,628 features in Isoforms_IF were found to be associated with their
corresponding isoform in the Isoforms_TPM dataset with a positive Bayes factor, 2,796
were not associated with their corresponding isoform, and 50 were associated with their
corresponding isoform but with a negative Bayes factor. Thus, the number of features that
behaved contrary to expectations was small, but the percentage of features that behaved
Page 34 of 72
==PAGE:38==
Master’s thesis
3.3
Analysis of associations
exactly as expected was reduced to 61.92%. This can be explained by the results displayed
in Figure 6, where it is shown how the reconstruction metrics for the Isoforms_IF are worse
than for the rest of the datasets, indicating that the predicted associations and subsequent
analyses involving this dataset might not be as exact as in the case of other datasets.
Finally, sanity check 3 proved that the model did not regularly find associations between
genes and isoform fractions when perturbing the values for the features in the Genes_TPM
dataset. 23 isoform fractions were associated with the gene that coded for them with a
positive Bayes factor, 37 were associated with a negative Bayes factor, and 7,485 (99.2% of
all isoforms) were not associated with them.
3.3.2
Comparison of associations between isoforms encoded by the same gene
For the sake of clarity, from this section onwards, we will refer to a group of isoforms encoded
by the same gene as “sister isoforms”. This term is neither validated nor used in the literature,
but it is appropriate and very convenient for the analysis of the results of this study.
Before proceeding to analyze the results, we explored the number of sister isoforms encoded
by each of the genes included in this study after the feature selection performed in Section
2.2.2. Figure 10 shows how the number of isoforms encoded by each gene (number of sister
isoforms for the different genes) ranged from 1 to 28, with the majority of genes encoding
only a few isoforms. In fact, the mode of the number of isoforms encoded by each gene was
1 isoform, and the median 4. For further analyses, associations found for genes that encoded
for only 1 isoform would not be informative, hence we decided to remove the 317 of them.
After this, the mode of the number of sister isoforms encoded by a gene changed to 2, and
the median to 5.
Figure 10: Distribution of the number of isoforms encoded by the same gene (sister isoforms) for the genes
and isoforms included in this study
Page 35 of 72
==PAGE:39==
Master’s thesis
3.3
Analysis of associations
Our first approach was to examine each association between an isoform and a feature, ana-
lyzing how many of the sister isoforms shared the association (i.e., how many of them were
associated with the same feature with the same directionality). With such a purpose, we
calculated a ratio by dividing the total number of sister isoforms associated with that feature
with a same directionality by the total number of sister isoforms. This way, we obtained a
metric, which we defined as “ratioassociations” that indicated how unique each association was
for an isoform, taking into account all other isoforms encoded by the same gene.
ratioassociations =
Number of sister isoforms associated to a feature
Total number of sister isoforms for the gene that encodes the isoforms
Figure 11 displays the calculated ratios, taking into account all associations for all datasets
(Figure 11a), and for the associations with the different datasets separately (Figures 11b,
11c, 11d, 11e, and 11f). A ratio of 1 for an association indicates that all sister isoforms
were significantly associated with that feature with the same directionality (same sign in
the Bayes factor). In contrast, the smaller the ratio, the more unique the association is for
an isoform, since it indicates that less (or none) of the sister isoforms were also associated
with it. It can be observed that only a minority of associations were shared between all
sister isoforms, with a ratio equal to 1. Out of the remaining 1,368,702 associations (after
removing those involving isoforms with no sister isoforms included in the study), only 60,021
(4.39%) of them were shared among a group of sister isoforms. Furthermore, we can see that
in the majority of cases the ratios were very low, close to 0, indicating that in most cases
the associations were unique for one isoform. This reinforces the hypothesis that different
isoforms may have different functions, even if they are encoded by the same gene.
Page 36 of 72
==PAGE:40==
Master’s thesis
3.3
Analysis of associations
(a) ratioassociations for associations with all datasets
(b) ratioassociations for associations with Gene_TM
(c) ratioassociations for associations with Isoforms_TPM
(d) ratioassociations for associations with Isoforms_IF
(e) ratioassociations for associations with Pathways
(f)
ratioassociations
for
associations
with
Pheno-
types_continuous
Figure 11:
Distributions of ratioassociations for (a) all associations and associations with datasets (b)
Genes_TPM, (c) Isoforms_TPM, (d) Isoforms_IF, (e) Pathways, and (f) Phenotypes_continuous, cal-
culated for each association as the number of sister isoforms associated with the same feature with the same
directionality divided by the total number of sister isoforms.
In order to explore a more intuitive approach, we decided to perform an analysis based
on the isoforms, rather than on the associations.
With this aim, we selected, for each
isoform, the maximum ratio (number of sister isoforms associated with a feature with the
same directionality divided by the total number of sister isosforms), taking into account all
associations (Figure 12a) or all associations for a specific dataset (Figures 12b, 12c, 12d, 12e,
and 12f).
Regarding the associations between isoforms and genes (Genes_TPM dataset), 4,078 out of
Page 37 of 72
==PAGE:41==
Master’s thesis
3.3
Analysis of associations
6,680 (61.05%) isoforms had a maximum ratio of 1, while 210 (3.14%) had a maximum ratio
lower than 0.5, indicating that most of their associations were unique for them, or shared
with very few of their sister isoforms. In terms of the associations with the Pathways dataset,
1,921 out of 5,165 (37.19%) isoforms had a maximum ratio of 1 and 967 (18.72%) a maximum
ratio lower than 0.5. In the case of the associations with the Iso_TPM dataset, 3,375 out
of 7,118 (47.42%) isoforms had a maximum ratio of 1, and 912 (12.81%) a maximum ratio
lower than 0.5. These results allowed us to see that, even if the majority of associations had
maximum ratios of 1, when taking into account all associations with features of a dataset,
the amount of isoforms where the maximum ratio was very low was not neglectable. Given
that we were disregarding plenty of associations for each isoform, these results give an insight
of the amount of associations that are unique for each isoform, or shared with only a few of
their sister isoforms.
This point is reinforced by examining the maximum ratios for the two last datasets. In
the case of the associations with the Isoforms_IF dataset, only 952 out of 5,967 (15.95%)
isoforms had a maximum ratio of 1, whereas 2,290 (38.38%) had a maximum ratio lower than
0.5. However, these results need to be taken with caution as, as discussed in Section 3.2, the
reconstruction for the features in Isoforms_IF was not as good as in the other datasets. The
most remarkable results were obtained for the associations betweeen isoforms and features in
Phenotypes_continuous. 387 out of 5,345 (7.2%) isoforms had a maximum ratio of 1, while
3,232 (60.47%) had a ratio lower than 0.5. This indicates that, in the case of the associations
between isoforms and features in the Phenotypes_continuous dataset, unique associations
for isoforms were highly common.
Hence, this second analysis allowed us to confirm what had already been suggested after the
calculation of the ratios for each association: isoforms seem to have plenty of associations
that are not shared with all their sister isoforms, with a considerable number being unique
associations. The fact that multiple of this more exclusive or unique associations are found
with phenotypic features is highly relevant, as it suggests that different isoforms could have
a role in the development of different phenotypic traits in cancer patients.
Page 38 of 72
==PAGE:42==
Master’s thesis
3.3
Analysis of associations
(a) Maximum ratios for associations with all datasets
(b) Maximum ratios for associations with Gene_TM
(c) Maximum ratios for associations with Isoforms_TPM
(d) Maximum ratios for associations with Isoforms_IF
(e) Maximum ratios for associations with Pathways
(f)
Maximum
ratios
for
associations
with
Pheno-
types_continuous
Figure 12: Distribution of the maximum values of ratioassociations for each isoform taking into account
associations with (a) all a datasets (b) Genes_TPM, (c) Isoforms_TPM, (d) Isoforms_IF, (e) Pathways,
and (f) Phenotypes_continuous.
3.3.3
"Sister isoforms" with associations with opposite directionality
The results in Section 3.3.2 supported our initial hypothesis: isoforms encoded by the same
gene are often associated with different genes, isoforms, pathways, or phenotypic traits, and
therefore can be predicted to have different functions. To further investigate this hypothesis,
we explored the most extreme case of differences between sister isoforms: when two sister
isoforms are associated with the same feature but with opposite directionalities.
Page 39 of 72
==PAGE:43==
Master’s thesis
3.3
Analysis of associations
With this aim, we extracted all associations in which two sister isoforms were associated
with the same feature with different signs in the Bayes factor. Out of the 2,336,631 found
associations (1,368,702 if we consider exclusively those for isoforms with at least one sister
isoform), 24,963 concerned two sister isoforms associated with the same feature but with
opposite directionalities. The isoforms implicated in these 24,963 associations were encoded
by 861 different genes.
The feature to which more sister isoforms were associated with opposite directions
was ‘age_at_initial_pathologic_diagnosis’ (2,556 opposite associations), followed by ‘ini-
tial_pathologic_dx_year’ (1,864). This is interesting, as it suggests that some isoforms may
be preferentially expressed over others depending on the age of an individual, or on the time
since the development of cancer. The next features with the highest number of opposite asso-
ciations belonged as well to the Phenotype_continuous dataset: DSS.time (1,782), OS.time
(1,742), and DFI.time (1,116). These findings might be relevant for the study of cancer and
its treatment, as they could indicate that different types of phenotypic traits related to the
disease are associated with different specific isosoforms.
Regarding other datasets, the feature with a highest number of opposite associations was
the gene ENSG00000067646.11 (254 opposite associations), followed by two out of the three
isoforms it encodes: ENST00000383052.5 (236) and ENST00000155093.7 (162). However,
this gene, ZFY, is located in chromosome Y , so gender might have had an impact in these
findings. Hence, we decided to disregard the associations involving this gene or the isoforms
it encodes.
Additionally, plenty of sister isoforms were associated with different directionalities to the
dataset Isoforms_IF (11,280 associations). It can be useful to examine these associations,
but it is important to note that they should be taken with caution, as the Isoforms_IF
dataset obtained a lower score in terms of reconstruction accuracy (Section 3.2).
Genes with the highest number of opposite associations between the sister iso-
forms they encode for.
First, we examined the genes that encoded the sister isosforms with the highest number of
opposite associations. The gene that encoded for more isoforms involved in opposite asso-
ciations was TCF3, with 875 opposite associations found within pairs of its sister isoforms.
Figure 13 shows the distribution of the number of opposite associations per gene.
The
median was 8 and the mode 1.
Page 40 of 72
==PAGE:44==
Master’s thesis
3.3
Analysis of associations
Figure 13: Distribution of the number of associations with opposite directionality between sister isoforms
per gene, taking into account all opposite associations found in the study
As the number of genes and associations was too high to analyze all of them, we selected the
10 genes with the higher number of opposite associations between sister isoforms and studied
their functions in an attempt of elucidating the possible opposite roles two sister isoforms can
have. For each of these genes, we also examined the isoform with more opposite associations
with its sister isoforms:
• TCF3 (875 opposite associations): This gene encodes a member of the E protein
family of transcription factors, which are important in lymphopoiesis and in the de-
velopment of B and T lymphocytes [50]. In fact, a deletion of this gene might lead to
lymphoic malignancies. Moreover, TCF3 is also associated with lymphoid malignan-
cies such as pre-B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, childhood leukemia, and acute
leukemia [50]. In this study, 18 isoforms coded by this gene were considered. It has
been reported that some of these isoforms are involved in different stages of B-cell de-
velopment and have distinctive target genes [51]. The highest number of opposite asso-
ciations between isoforms encoded by this gene was 131, between ENST00000344749.9
and ENST00000587425.5 (protein-coding splice variant [52]). ENST00000344749.9 also
had 94 opposite associations with ENST00000588136.5, 44 with ENST00000590605.2
(retained intron [52]), 39 with ENST00000395423.7 (protein-coding [52]), 25 with
ENST00000585731.5 (protein-coding), 22 with ENST00000586318.1 (protein-coding),
19 with ENST00000610756.4 (retained intron [52]), 15 with ENST00000590436.5
(protein-coding [52]). 7 with ENST00000262965.9, 4 with ENST00000585855.2 (non-
sense mediated decay splice variant [52]), and 1 with ENST00000453954.6 (protein-
coding [52]). ENST00000262965.9 has not yet been characterized, but 5 splice vari-
ants, including ENST00000585855.2 and ENST00000592395.5, have been identified as
‘nonsense mediated decay’ splice variants [52], indicating that the transcript includes
Page 41 of 72
==PAGE:45==
Master’s thesis
3.3
Analysis of associations
a premature termination codon (PTC) that triggers a decay pathway to prevent the
production of a potentially harmful truncated protein.
• NME1-NME2 (777 opposite associations): The NME familty of proteins, which
consists in 10 isoforms (9 were included in this study) can regulate gene expres-
sion programs in a variety of cellular settings and have the ability to supress the
metastatic phenotype of cancer cells [53].
Moreover, some isoforms are implicated
in reparing single and double-stranded breaks in DNA, implying that a reduced ex-
pression of these proteins could lead to genomic stability and contribute to cancer
progression [53]. The highest number of opposite associations between sister isoforms
encoded by NME1-NME2 was found between transcripts ENST00000503064.5 and
ENST00000513177.5, with 144 opposite associations. ENST00000513177.5 also had 81
opposite associations with ENST00000512737.5, 79 with ENST00000485076.1, 62 with
both ENST00000393183.7 and ENST00000393190.4, and 2 with ENST00000514264.6.
• USF2 (774 opposite associations): This gene encodes a transcription factor that
is involved in regulating multiple cellular processes [54], and has been associated with
hepatocellular carcinoma [55] and lung cancer [56]. It encodes 15 isoforms. The tran-
script ENST00000343550.9 (protein-coding splice variant [57]) had 61 opposite asso-
ciations with ENST00000602164.5 (nonsense mediated decay splice variant [57]), 54
with ENST00000222305.7, 20 with ENST00000607959.5 (retained intron splice variant
[57]), 10 with ENST00000600341.5 (which does not produce a protein [57]), 3 with
ENST00000594064.5 (protein-coding [57]), and 3 with ENST00000600898.1 (retained
intron [57]).
• CREM
(721 opposite associations):
The CREM gene encodes for 48 iso-
forms which can enhance or repress the transcription of diverse target genes,
28 were considered in this study.
This gene is known to be involved in sper-
matogenesis and has also been identifyed as a partner gene in multiple neo-
plastic diseases, such as mesenchymal tumors and salivary gland carcinoma [58].
MOVE found multiple opposite associations between transcript ENST00000348787.6
(protein-coding [59]) and its sister isoforms; 8 with ENST00000472813.1 (which
does not generate any protein [59]), 5 with ENST00000356917.9 (protein-coding
[59]), 4 with ENST00000488741.5 (protein-coding) and ENST00000469949.6 (protein-
coding [59]), 3 with ENST00000482633.5 (retained intron [59]), ENST00000473940.5,
ENST00000374734.7 (protein-coding [59]), ENST00000337656.8 (protein-coding [59])
and ENST00000469517.1 (results in no protein [59]), 2 with ENST00000344351.5
(protein-coding [59]), ENST00000474931.5 (protein-coding [59]), ENST00000495960.5
(nonsense mediated decay [59]) and ENST00000374726.7 (protein-coding [59]), and 1
with ENST00000496626.5 (no protein [59]), ENST00000489321.5 (protein-coding [59]),
ENST00000487132.5, and ENST00000479070.5 (protein-coding [59]). As can be ob-
served, in the case of CREM, the number of opposite associations per isoform was
not as high as in other isoforms, but each isoform shared opposite associations with
multiple sister isoforms.
Page 42 of 72
==PAGE:46==
Master’s thesis
3.3
Analysis of associations
• ATF1 (712 opposite associations):
ATF1 encodes for a transcription factor
which belongs to the ATF subfamily.
It is implicated in multiple cellular pro-
cesses by regulating the expression of genes which a diveristy of celullar activities
[60].
It has been associated with histiocytoma, clear cell sarcoma, colorectal can-
cer, and the development of other malignant tumors [61, 62].
Remarkably, the
first and second pair of isoforms where more opposite associations were found be-
longed to the ATF1 gene.
354 opposite associations were found between isoforms
ENST00000262053.7 and ENST00000551831.5 (nonsense mediated decay [63]), and 302
between ENST00000262053.7 and ENST00000552510.5 (protein-coding [63]). Given
that ENST00000262053.7 was also involved in opposite associations with two other
sister isoforms, 13 with ENST00000549612.5 (nonsense mediated decay [63]) and 10
with ENST00000552487.1 (protein-coding [63]), this isoform might be an interesting
target for further studies regarding isoforms’ functions.
• ZNF414
(601 opposite associations):
This gene encodes proteins are pre-
dicted to be involved in the regulation of transcription by RNA polymerase II [64],
and in the regulation of cancer cell growth [65].
The gene encodes for 8 iso-
forms.
Among them, ENST00000599379.1 (nonsense mediated decay [66]) stands
out, with 140 opposite associations with ENST00000596772.5 (protein-coding [66]),
134 with ENST00000593661.5 (protein-coding [66]), 112 with ENST00000602128.1
(retained intron [66]), 71 with ENST00000595348.1 (retained intron [66]), 63 with
ENST00000393927.8, and 6 with ENST00000255616.8 (protein-coding [66]). The fact
that ENST00000599379.1 has been characterized as a ‘nonsense mediated decay’ splice
variant could perhaps explain why it cannot perform the same functions as its protein-
coding sister isoforms.
• NR4A1 (511 opposite associations): This gene encodes for 22 isoforms (14 were
used in this study) and is very interesting in terms of function, as the transloca-
tion of the transcription factor from the nucleus to the mithocondria induces apop-
tosis [67]. In fact, it has opposite functions, as an anti-apoptotic or pro-apoptotic
protein, depending on its location [68].
Isoform ENST00000562373.1 (protein-
coding [69]) had 30 opposite associations with ENST00000562373.1 (retained in-
tron [69]), 26 with ENST00000547206.5 (which also does not generate any protein
[69]), 16 with ENST00000360284.7 (protein-coding [69]), 13 with ENST00000546842.5
(protein-coding [69]), 9 with ENST00000553200.1 (protein-coding [69]), 7 with
ENST00000545748.5 (protein-coding [69]), and 1 with ENST00000394825.5 and
ENST00000394824.2 (protein-coding [69]).
• PLAGL1
(344
opposite
associations:)
PLAG1L encodes for a transcrip-
tion factor that suppresses cell growth, hence this gene is often silenced in can-
cer cells [70].
It encodes for 27 isoforms, out of which 13 were considered in
this study.
ENST00000416623.5 (protein-coding [71]) had 84 opposite associations
with ENST00000392307.2, 61 with ENST00000367571.3 (protein-coding [71]), 39
with ENST00000360537.6 (protein-coding [71]), 39 with ENST00000360537.6 (pro-
tein coding [71]), 30 with ENST00000493898.1 ([71]), 16 with ENST00000625622.2
Page 43 of 72
==PAGE:47==
Master’s thesis
3.3
Analysis of associations
(protein-coding [71]), 15 with ENST00000417959.4 (protein-coding [71]), 15 with
ENST00000367572.3 (protein-coding [71]), ENST00000354765.6 (protein-coding [71]),
4 with ENST00000444202.5 (protein-coding [71]), 3 with ENST00000628069.2 (which
does not generate a protein [71]) and ENST00000629195.2 (protein-coding [71]),and 2
with ENST00000628630.2 (not used for translation [71]).
• NR1H3 (338 opposite associations:) This gene is involved in the regulation of
macrophage function by controlling transcriptional programs that are important in
lipid homeostasis and inflammation [72]. Moreover, low expression of NR1H3 has been
found to correlate with macrophage infiltration and is an indicator of worse survival
in breast cancer [73]. It encodes for 35 isoforms, but 24 where included in this study.
For instance, isoform ENST00000467728.5 (protein-coding [74]) had 51 opposite as-
sociations with ENST00000532630.1 (no protein [74]), 46 with ENST00000616973.4
(protein-coding [74]), 68 with ENST00000494018.1 (retained intron [74]), 7 with
ENST00000481020.5 (retained intron [74]) and ENST00000481889.6 (protein-coding
[74]), 6 with ENST00000476086.6 (no protein [74]), 5 with ENST00000498548.1 (re-
tained intron [74]), 4 with ENST00000441012.6, ENST00000467728.5 (protein-coding
[74]), ENST00000462051.5 (retained intron), and 3 with ENST00000487913.5).
• ZNF331 (335 opposite associations:)
ZNF331 encodes for a transcriptional
represor and may be methylated and silenced in cancer cells [75].
It encodes for
28 isoforms [76], of which 14 were considered in this study.
ENST00000253144.13
(protein-coding
[76])
had
23
opposite
associations
with
ENST00000509047.5,
21 with ENST00000505426.1 (protein-coding [76]) and ENST00000504493.5, 14
with ENST00000509069.1 (retained intron [76]),
12 with ENST00000502616.5
(protein-coding [76]), 24 with ENST00000513999.5 (protein-coding [76]), 6 with
ENST00000514022.5, 4 with ENST00000512387.5, 4 with ENST00000449416.5, and
3 with ENST00000513929.5.
These results give an idea of the vast amount of isoforms that could potentially have opposite
functions when compared with their sisters isoforms. As mentioned above, we only explored
the functions of the top-10 genes with more opposite associations within their sister isoforms,
due to lack of time. However, a more thorough study could be performed by examining the
851 remaining genes where opposite associations were also found, and the specific opposite
associations between the pairs of isoforms could also be studied to obtain more relevant
information.
Opposite associations between sister isoforms with the highest differences be-
tween Bayes factors.
Selecting the genes with a highest number of opposite associations between the isoforms they
encoded for was interesting and informative, but it biased the selection towards genes that
encoded for a higher number of isoforms. Hence, we decided to perform a second analysis,
Page 44 of 72
==PAGE:48==
Master’s thesis
3.3
Analysis of associations
examining the associations with the largest difference between the Bayes factors of the pair
of sister isoforms.
This, however, turned out to be a challenge, as there were 39 associations with the highest
possible absolute value for the difference between Bayes factors: (|−18.42−(18.42)| = 36.84).
Out of them, 38 were associations with features in the Phenotypes_continuous dataset,
indicating, as mentioned above, that multiple isoforms might be preferentially expressed at
specific ages or stages in the development and progression of cancer.
Besides the features in the Phenotypes_continuous dataset, multiple opposite associations
were found with features listed in the Isoforms_IF dataset; specifically 5,640. However, after
examining them, it became clear that most of them had been found within sister isoforms.
Since IF is a relative measure, if the IF of an isoform increases, that of its sister isoforms
decreases. As a result, we considered these associations irrelevant for the purpose of the
study and did not perfom further analyses regarding them.
The first opposite association between sister isoforms that did not include the Phe-
notypes_continuous
or
Isoforms_IF
dataset
was
between
ENST00000551831.5
and
ENST00000262053.7, two isoforms encoded by ATF1, which were associated with oppo-
site directionality with ENST00000360538.6, from the Isoforms_TPM dataset. This isoform
is encoded by TOPORS, a gene that has been reported to induce p53 symoylation, an event
that is accompanied by an increase in p53 levels [77]. The p53 protein, often referred to as the
"guardian of the genome," plays a crucial role in preventing cancer development. It functions
primarily as a tumor suppressor, and its activity is regulated by forming a tetramer that
can regulate the expression of target genes involved in cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, and DNA
repair [78]. This finding is very interesting, as it suggests that isoform ENST00000551831.5
might result in a decrease in p53 (Bayes factor of −7.51), facilitating the development of
cancer, while ENST00000262053.7 may have the opposite effect and protect against cancer
(Bayes factor of 18.42).
Furthermore, these transcripts (ENST00000262053.7 and ENST00000551831.5) presented
opposite associations (Bayes factors of 6.73 and −18.42, respectively) with isoform
ENST00000393313.5. ENST00000393313.5 is encoded by ZNF800, which has been shown
to be involved in the regulation of cancer stem cell properties and tumor growth in colorec-
tal cancer [79]. Isoforms ENST00000493083.5 and ENST00000487436.1, encoded by gene
GPBP1L1 also presented opposite associations with ENST00000393313.5 (Bayes factors of
5.79 and -3.09, respectively), as well as pairs of sister isoforms encoded by the genes SKIL,
CREBZF, AEBP2, ZNF776, GPBP1L1, YBX3, PLSCR1, and ELF1.
In addition, ENST00000262053.7 and ENST00000551831.5, mentioned in the paragraphs
above, were also associated with ENST00000342435.8 with Bayes factors of 4.41 and -18.42,
respectively. ENST00000342435.8 is encoded by PLSCR1, which is overexpressed in many
cancer types [80]. They were also associated, with Bayes factors of -9.12 and 7.18, with
ENST00000330796.9, encoded by PRMT3. This gene is related to oxaliplatin resistance in
Page 45 of 72
==PAGE:49==
Master’s thesis
3.3
Analysis of associations
liver cancer [81].
Hence,
it
appeared
very
likely
that
the
sister
isoforms
ENST00000262053.7
and
ENST00000551831.5 have opposite biological functions. As a matter of fact, a total of 355
opposite associations were found between these two isoforms. Interestingly, as mentioned in
section 3.3.3, ENST00000551831.5 has been reported as a ‘nonsense mediated decay’ splice
variant [63], hence it is likely that it lacks any function. If ENST00000262053.7 is a protein-
coding transcript, these findings could be due to ENST00000551831.5 not resulting in a
protein that can perform the necessary functions normally assigned to ATF1.
The list of opposite associations found was so long that it was infeasible to analyze all of them
carefully. However, by examining some of them we were able to hypothesize that the cases
in which sister isoforms are associated with opposite directionality with features that are
relevant to cancer are abundant. For instance, other than the case of ENST00000262053.7
and ENST00000551831.5, isoforms ENST00000592395.5 and ENST00000588136.5, encoded
by TCF3, were associated with Bayes factors of 18.42 and -2.93 with ENST00000370447.3.
This isoform is encoded by ZNF326, which has been reported to promote proliferation of non-
small cell lung cancer cells [82]. Moreover, ENST00000595879.5 and ENST00000596750.2,
encoded by AKAP8L were associated with ENST00000325333.9 with Bayes factors of -2.64
and 18.42, respectively. ENST00000325333.9 is encoded by ZNF580. Many more associations
of this sort were found.
Regarding the Pathways dataset, the opposite association with the largest difference between
Bayes factors was found between isoforms ENST00000552382.5 and ENST00000352268.10,
encoded by ZNF385A. They were associated with Bayes factors of -4.65 and 5.23 to the
pathway ‘Activated_FGFR3_Y373C_mutant_dimer_(complex)’. The Activated FGFR3
Y373C mutant dimer pathway is involved in several cellular processes, and is primarily asso-
ciated with abnormal signal transduction that can lead to various cancers, such as multiple
myeloma, cervical cancer, and bladder carcinoma [83, 84]. FGFR3 (Fibroblast Growth Fac-
tor Receptor 3) mutations, including Y373C, result in constitutive activation of the receptor,
without the need of ligand binding, promoting uncontrolled cell proliferation and survival
[83].
ENST00000552382.5 and ENST00000352268.10 were also associated with the pathway
‘FGFR3_S371C_mutant_dimer_(complex)’, with Bayes factors of -4.66 and 5.21.
The
FGFR3 S371C mutant dimer is involved in abnormal signal transduction associated with sev-
eral diseases. As was the case of the Y373C mutation, S371C leads to constitutive dimeriza-
tion and activation of the FGFR3 receptor [85]. This can result in uncontrolled cell prolifera-
tion, leading to oncogenesis [85]. As matter of fact, these two isoforms were associatiated with
opposite directionalities to more mutant dimers regarding the FGFR3 receptor, particularly
FGFR3_G380R_mutant_dimer_(complex), FGFR3_G370C_mutant_dimer_(complex),
FGFR3c_P250R_mutant_dimer_(complex), Activated_FGFR3_K650Q_mutant_(complex),
Activated_FGFR3_G382D_mutant_(complex),
and
Acti-
vated_FGFR3_K650Q_mutant_(complex).
Remarkably, while ENST00000352268.10
Page 46 of 72
==PAGE:50==
Master’s thesis
3.4
Analysis of the latent space
is a protein-coding transcript, ENST00000552382.5 is not translated into any known
protein.
As a final analysis regarding opposite associations between sister isoforms, we inspected the
presence of p53 in the obtained list of opposite associations. Isoforms ENST00000448100.6
and ENST00000478385.5 were associated with the pathway ‘p53_(tetramer)_(complex)’,
with Bayes factors of 2.69 and -3.87. These transcripts are encoded by ZGPAT. This gene
encodes for a transcription repressor that negatively regulates expression of the gene EGFR,
which is involved in cell proliferation, survival and migration [86]. Hence, ZGPAT may act
as a tumor suppressor [86].
3.4
Analysis of the latent space
As described in Section 2.3.3, MOVE allows for the analysis of the latent space by project-
ing the samples into the latent space (using the first two dimensions) and predicting the
importance for all features importance across all datasets.
3.4.1
Prediction of feature importance
As a first step, MOVE sorted the features of each dataset according to their predicted impor-
tance. As described in Section 2.3.3, this is done by removing each feature and calculating
the impact this action has on the latent space. Figure 14 shows how much each sample moves
in the latent space upon removal of specific features of each continuous dataset and of the
categorical variable OS, which was chosen for the representation of the categorical variables.
For the continuous variables, only the 10 “most important” features, whose removal resulted
in the biggest impact in the latent space, are displayed.
Page 47 of 72
==PAGE:51==
Master’s thesis
3.4
Analysis of the latent space
(a) 10 most important features for Genes_TPM
(b) 10 most important features for Isoforms_TPM
(c) 10 most important features for Isoforms_IF
(d) 10 most important features for Pathways
(e)
10
most
important
features
for
Pheno-
types_continuous
(f) Importance of OS.
Figure 14: Importance of top-10 features for the continuous datasets, and for the categorical feature OS.
As shown in Figure 14, the removal of features in the Phenotypes_continuous datast (Figure
14e) had the highest impact in the distribution of samples in the latent space, followed by
Page 48 of 72
==PAGE:52==
Master’s thesis
3.4
Analysis of the latent space
Genes_TPM (Figure 14a) and Isoforms_TPM (Figure 14b) datasets. The impact on the
removal of features in Pathways (Figure 14d) and Isoforms_IF (Figure 14c) was less.
This analysis might be interesting for a more general approach and to better understand how
the model works and how it builds connections between features. However, for the aim we
were pursuing, studying if sister isoforms can have different functions, it was not as useful.
Other than CREM (ENSG00000095794.19), none of the features marked as “more important”
by MOVE had been higlighted in Section 3.3. Nonetheless, we explored the projection of
these features in the latent space, in case they provided some interesting information. In
the case of the Genes_TPM dataset, the most important feature, ENSG00000067646.11,
was not considered, as it refers to the gene ZFY that, as mentioned in Section 3.3.3, is
located in the Y chromosome. The isoforms encoded by this gene, ENST00000383052.5,
ENST00000155093.7, and ENST00000478783.1, also were marked as important features in
the “Isoforms_TPM” or “Isoforms_IF” datasets.
Figure 15 shows the projection of the samples in the latent space, colored according to
selected “important” features from the Genes_TPM (Figures 15a and 15b), Isoforms_TPM
(Figures 15c and 15d) and Isoforms_IF (Figures 15e and 15f). As can be appreciated, no
clear clusters regarding expression levels could be observed. Additionally, Figure 16 colors
the projected samples according to selected features from the Pathways (Figures 16a and
16b) and Phenotypes_continuous datasets (Figures 16c and 16d). As was the case before,
the samples did not cluster according to the values of these features.
Page 49 of 72
==PAGE:53==
Master’s thesis
3.4
Analysis of the latent space
(a) Projection of samples in the latent space, colored ac-
cording to the TPM values of gene ENSG00000183309.11
(ZNF623)
(b) Projection of samples in the latent space, colored ac-
cording to the TPM values of gene ENSG00000124613.8
(ZNF391)
(c)
Projection
of
samples
in
the
latent
space,
colored
according
to
the
TPM
values
of
isoform
ENST00000551514.1 (encoded by gene ZNF740)
(d) Projection of samples in the latent space, colored ac-
cording to the TPM values of isoform ENST00000383052.5
(encoded by gene CREM )
(e) Projection of samples in the latent space, colored ac-
cording to the IF values of isoform ENST00000258382.9
(encoded by gene SP110)
(f) Projection of samples in the latent space, colored ac-
cording to the IF values of isoform ENST00000594028.1
(encoded by gene ZNF600)
Figure 15: Projection of samples in the latent space, colored according to selected “important” features of
the datasets Genes_TPM, Isoforms_TPM and Isoforms_IF.
Page 50 of 72
==PAGE:54==
Master’s thesis
3.4
Analysis of the latent space
(a) Projection of samples in the latent space, colored ac-
cording to the values of the HIST1H2BC pathway
(b) Projection of samples in the latent space, colored ac-
cording to the values of the PFKFB1 pathway
(c)
Projection
of
samples
in
the
latent
space,
colored
according
to
the
values
of
‘age_at_initial_pathologic_diagnosis
(d) Projection of samples in the latent space, colored ac-
cording to the values of OS.time
Figure 16: Projection of samples in the latent space, colored according to selected “important” features in
the Pathways and Phenotypes_continuous datasets.
3.4.2
Latent space analysis for selected features
As a final analysis regarding the latent space, we colored the samples according to some
of the features highlighted in Section 3.3.3. Figure 17 shows the projection of the samples
colored according to the expression levels of TCF3 and NME1-NME2, the two genes with
the highest number of opposite associations between sister isoforms. Some clustering for the
samples with very low expression of these genes can be observed in each gene, but it is not
possible to extract more meaningful conclusions.
Page 51 of 72
==PAGE:55==
Master’s thesis
3.4
Analysis of the latent space
(a) Projection of samples in the latent space, colored ac-
cording to the values of TCF3 (ENSG00000071564.14)
(b)
Projection
of
samples
in
the
latent
space,
colored
according
to
the
values
of
NME1-NME2
(ENSG00000243678.11)
Figure 17: Projection of samples in the latent space, colored according to the expression levels of the two
genes with the highest number of opposite associations between its sister isoforms: (a) TCF3 and (b)NME1-
NME2.
Figure 18 shows the projection of the samples colored according to ENST00000551831.5
(Figure 18a) and ENST00000262053.7 (Figure 18b), two sister isoforms associated with
opposite directionalities to isoform ENST00000448100.6 (Figure 18c), as described in Section
3.3.3. However, no clear conclusions can be extracted from these plots.
Finally, when coloring according to features in the Pathways dataset, some clustering could
be observed in comparison to the plots obtained with the other datasets (Figure 19). More-
over, all the pathways involving FGFR3 showed almost identical representations in the latent
space (two examples are provided in Figures 19a and 19b. However, it is still not possible to
extract any meaningful conclusions. We compared the possible clusters with possible clus-
ters obtained by coloring according to categorical variables (phenotypic data), such as the
type of cancer (Figure 19d), but the results did not align. Furthermore, no clusters where
observed according to the rest of phenotypic variables, both continuous and categorical.
Thus, analyzing the latent space was not the most suitable technique to extract meaningful
conclusions in this study. The features that were predicted to have more importance in the
model did not align with the ones with more interesting associations, and the projections of
the samples in the latent space did not result in any clear clustering. However, this MOVE's
functionality can be useful for exploring the distribution of the values of the different features,
or if the aim of the study is more oriented towards studying the trained model and examining
its properties.
Page 52 of 72
==PAGE:56==
Master’s thesis
3.4
Analysis of the latent space
(a) Projection of samples in the latent space,
colored according to the TPM values of isoform
ENST00000551831.5
(b) Projection of samples in the latent space,
colored according to the TPM values of isoform
ENST00000262053.7
(c) Projection of samples in the latent space,
colored according to the TPM values of isoform
ENST00000448100.6
Figure 18: Projection of samples in the latent space, colored according to the expression levels of the sister
isoforms (a) ENST00000551831.5 and (b) ENST00000262053.7, encoded by ATF1, which where associated
with opposite directionality to isoform (c) ENST00000448100.6, encoded by TOPORS.
Page 53 of 72
==PAGE:57==
Master’s thesis
3.5
Exploring other perturbation types
(a)
Projection
of
samples
in
the
latent
space,
colored
according
to
the
values
of
the
“Acti-
vated_FGFR3_Y373C_mutant_dimer_complex”
pathway
(b)
Projection
of
samples
in
the
latent
space,
colored
according
to
the
values
of
the
“Acti-
vated_FGFR3_G382D_mutant_complex” pathway
(c) Projection of samples in the latent space, colored
according to the values of “p53_(tetramer)_(complex)”
pathway
(d) Projection of samples in the latent space, colored ac-
cording to the values of “cancer_type_abbreviation”
Figure
19:
Projection
of
samples
in
the
latent
space,
colored
according
to
the
expres-
sion
levels
of
the
pathways
(a)
“Activated_FGFR3_Y373C_mutant_dimer_complex”,
(b)
“Acti-
vated_FGFR3_G382D_mutant_complex”, and (c) “p53_(tetramer)_(complex)” pathway, and (d) accord-
ing to to the categorical variable “cancer_type_abbreviation”.
3.5
Exploring other perturbation types
To this point, all the results presented and analyzed in this study were obtained by using
MOVE to perturb each feature in the target dataset (Isoforms_TPM) to its maximum value.
However, as reported in Section 2.3.4, MOVE allows for other types of perturbations: to
the minimum of each feature, or by adding or subtracting one standard deviation. In this
section, we briefly examine the results we would have obtained if we had decided to follow
one of these alternative approaches.
Page 54 of 72
==PAGE:58==
Master’s thesis
3.5
Exploring other perturbation types
3.5.1
Perturbation to the minimum value of each feature
One of the reasons for choosing the ’maximum’ perturbation for the main analysis was that,
by making more drastic changes in the features'values, we expected to be able to capture
more associations. Following this reasoning, in theory perturbing to the minimum value
would have also been a valid approach. However, when exploring this option, we obtained a
total of zero significant associations. In order to understand such a result, we explored the
maximum and minimum values for the features included in the Isoforms_TPM, as well as
the mean and median for each of them (Figure 20).
Figure 20: Distribution of the maximum and minimum values for all features in the Isoforms_TPM dataset,
as well as the mean and median for each of them
Figure 20 shows how the minimum value for most features was very close to zero. Moreover,
it can be appreciated that perturbations to the maximum value implied a much larger change
for most features than perturbations to the minimum value, as in many cases the minimum
values were much closer to the mean and median. Given that the expression values for most
isoforms in many samples is very low, it is possible that perturbing to the minimum value
does not introduce enough variability or distinguishable change in the data for the VAE to
Page 55 of 72
==PAGE:59==
Master’s thesis
3.5
Exploring other perturbation types
detect associations. In other words, perturbing to the minimum value in this case, where
many of the values for isoforms expression are already close to zero, might not generate
significant deviations from the baseline, leading to no detectable associations. In contrast,
perturbing to the maximum introduces substantial variability, and the differences between
the perturbed datasets’ reconstructions and the baseline's reconstructions are large enough
to identify significant associations.
To address this hypothesis, we examined the distribution of the values for all features and
all samples in the Isoforms_TPM dataset. Indeed, as shown in Figure 21, zero or close-to-
zero values were clearly dominant in the dataset. This could explain why perturbing to the
minimum value yielded no significant differences between the baseline's and the perturbed
dataset's reconstructions.
Figure 21: Distribution of the values for all samples and features in the Isoforms_TPM dataset
3.5.2
Perturbation by adding or subtracting one standard deviation
When performing perturbations by adding one standard deviation (calculated for the feature,
taking all samples into account), we obtained 27 associations.
This a considerably low
number, specially when compared to the predicted 2,336,630 associations when perturbing
to the maximum value of each feature. This discrepancy is understandable given the nature
of the perturbations. When a feature is perturbed by adding one standard deviation, the
change is relatively moderate, and thus the reconstructed values after the perturbation may
not differ substantially from the baseline reconstruction. This smaller perturbation results in
fewer detectable associations, as the model 's response to such a change is less pronounced.
In contrast, perturbing to the maximum value represents a much more extreme alteration,
Page 56 of 72
==PAGE:60==
Master’s thesis
leading to larger deviations in the reconstructed values and, as a consequence, a higher
number of predicted associations.
Furthermore, out of the 27 associations identified by adding one standard deviation, 23 were
also found among the associations predicted when perturbing to the maximum value. The
consistency of these 23 associations across both perturbation methods suggests that they
are likely to be robust and biologically meaningful. Associations that remain significant
despite different perturbation intensities are likely to represent genuine relationships within
the data, as they are confirmed by multiple independent approaches. However, these asso-
ciations were not interesting for our purpose, as all of them involved the gene ZFY or the
isoforms it encodes: ENST00000383052.5, ENST00000155093.7, and ENST00000478783.1.
As explained in Section 3.3.3, associations involving ZFY were also frequently found when
performing the ’maximum’ type of perturbation, but they were removed from the analysis as
this gene is located in chromosome Y , which means it is only present in males. Consequently,
the associations involving ZFY might be biased due to the presence of this gene in only one
sex.
When perturbing the Isoforms_TPM dataset by subtracting one standard deviation, similar
results were obtained. Only 10 significant associations were found, all of them involving ZFY
and its isoforms. In this case, only 2 of the associations were common to those found when
perturbing to the maximum value for each feature.
Thus, while for the study of other datasets, adding or subtracting one standard deviation
might be a good perturbation choice to restrict the number of found associations and possibly
increase the confidence in the results, in our case it was not a useful method, as the performed
perturbations introduced such small changes in the data that very few associations were
predicted by the model.
4
Discussion and Future perspectives
4.1
Tuning of hyperparameters and model's performance
In this study, we demonstrated that a deep learning approach can be implemented to capture
the relationships between isoform expression data, and multi-omics and multi-modal data,
specifically gene and pathway expression data and clinical data. Even if, due to lack of time,
we did not focus on obtaining a model with an optimal performance, we were able to train
one that performed satisfactorily, as proven by the results obtained after applying the sanity
checks (Section 3.3.1). It is safe to say that, with more available time, plenty of different
combinations for a wide range of hyperparameters could be defined to train different models
and compare their performances.
Page 57 of 72
==PAGE:61==
Master’s thesis
4.2
Multiprocessing and memory usage decrease regarding MOVE
All of the hyperparameters listed in Section 2.3.2 could potentially be tuned to boost the
model's performance, but perhaps the most interesting among them would be the number of
neurons in the hidden layer. As can be observed in Section 3.2, and from more approaches
we tried but did not include in this report due to lack of relevance, it can be presumed that
the increase in the value of this parameter significantly increases the model 's performance.
However, as setting high values for this parameter comes with high demands in time and
memory, we set the limit at 5,000 neurons. The reduction in dimensionality from the input
data, with 21,383 features, to 5,000 in the hidden layer is considerable. Due to some of the
data being highly correlated (Section 2.2.3), the performance of more than acceptable, but
could probably be improved by increasing this hyperparameter.
Moreover, the focus should probably be set on increasing the reconstruction metrics for the
Isoforms_IF dataset. The categorical variables already have an almost perfect reconstruc-
tion with the current model, and the reconstruction metrics for rest of continuous datasets
could be improved but already exceeds 80% with the model we implemented in this study.
However, the reconstruction for Isoforms_IF has more room for improvement. Besides, a
better reconstruction for the features in this dataset would probably result in a higher score
for sanity check 2, which was lower than sanity check 1 in this study (Section 3.3.1). For
this purpose, it could be considered to increase the weight of this dataset during the training
process, something that MOVE allows. As a matter of fact, the categorical features were
reconstructed flawlessly because, as explained in Section 2.3.1, each categorical variable was
treated as a separate dataset and given its own separate term loss. Consequently, each cat-
egorical feature significantly impacted the total loss, leading the VAE to achieve a perfect
reconstruction for them.
As mentioned above, it might be interesting to explore different values for all the other
hyperparameters, such as the batch size or the learning rate, and examine the consequences
of introducing dropout or batch dilatation steps, for instance. It would also be advisable
to test if it is possible to increase the value of β without excessively compromising the
reconstruction metrics.
In addition, it would be interesting to study the stability of the model (MOVE provides this
functionality) and to check the consistency of the found associations by running the “identify
associations” task repeatedly using a variety of different models.
4.2
Multiprocessing and memory usage decrease regarding MOVE
By incorporating the option of implementing multiprocessing into MOVE's code, we made
it possible to apply MOVE on our data and obtain the results in a reasonable amount of
time. Additionally, we reduced the amount of memory needed by this method to perform
the “analyze_latent” and “identify_associations” taks, which was crucial to complete our
analysis (Section 3.1). As MOVE is a multi-omics and multi-modal data integration tool,
this addition can be potentially used in multiple future studies, for a huge variety of datasets
Page 58 of 72
==PAGE:62==
Master’s thesis4.3
Isoforms that are encoded by the same gene can have different functions
and purposes. With this new functionality, MOVE is now able to handle vast datasets.
Regarding the future, it might be interesting to extend the multiprocessing usage for the
t-test and KS options in the “identify_associations” task. Due to time limitations, we im-
plemented it exclusively for the Bayesian approach, but this new functionality could easily
be replicated for the other options to allow the users to choose the more suitable one for
their purposes.
4.3
Isoforms that are encoded by the same gene can have different
functions
As mentioned before, the primary goal of this study was to assess the following hypothesis:
isoforms that are encoded by the same gene (referred to as “sister isoforms” in this report)
can have different functions. The results we obtained, although only preliminary, strengthen
this affirmation.
For a start, as indicated in Section 3.3.2, the majority of the found associations were not
common for all sister isoforms, and in many cases they were unique for each isoform.
In addition, a high number of sister isoforms were predicted to have opposite associations
(Section 3.3.3), indicating not only that isoforms that are encoded by the same gene can
have different functions, but also that those functions can in some cases be conflicting. If
this is true, it could potentially revolutionize the way gene-expression analyses are carried
out at the moment, as it would not be enough to measure the levels of expression of each
gene; in the cases where sister isoforms can have opposite functions it would be necessary
to carry the analyses at the isoform level. For instance, the multiple associations found
between isoforms and the feature OS.time are particularly worthy of mention, as they could
hold significant implications for cancer research and treatment. As described in Section 2.2,
this variable refers to the “Overall survival time” and measures the duration from diagnosis
to death in deceased patients, or the time until the last contact in surviving patients, hence it
can be used as an indicator of the prognosis of patients suffering from cancer. The fact that
a substantial number of sister isoforms are associated with OS.time in opposite directions
would suggest that different isoforms which are encoded by same gene can have differing
impacts on patient survival. This would imply that the expression levels of specific isoforms
might influence the progression of the disease or the response to treatment, affecting in this
way the overall survival time.
Furthermore, besides OS.time, plenty of other phenotypic variables were found to be associ-
ated with sister isoforms with opposite directionalities. Understanding these associations is
essential, as it could lead to the identification of isoform-specific biomarkers that can predict
patient outcomes or therapeutic responses. What is more, it highlights the potential for
developing isoform-targeted therapies that could improve survival rates by modulating the
Page 59 of 72
==PAGE:63==
Master’s thesis4.3
Isoforms that are encoded by the same gene can have different functions
expression of beneficial isoforms while suppressing those that are detrimental, such as ASOs
or SSOs (Section 1.1).
Due to time limitations and the vast amount of found associations, it was not possible for us
to look into all the predicted opposite associations or to hypothesize their possible functions.
However, in more specific studies, centered around a specific set of features (genes, pathways,
isoforms, phenotypic traits, etc), it would be very interesting to get into the details and delve
deeper into what each predicted opposite association could imply.
Moreover, it would be important to study thoroughly the isoforms involved in a predicted
opposite association. As can be inferred from some of the cases studied in Section 3.3.3,
plenty of these opposite associations might have been found between functional isoforms and
isoforms that do not code for proteins, hence it would be very informative to determine if
the opposite associations are due to opposite functions, or to the lack of functionality of one
of the isoforms.
Additionally, for more specific studies, a more thorough analysis of the latent space might
be interesting, as the one we performed in this study was mainly exploratory.
Nonetheless, it is important to note that this was a pilot study, and further studies are
needed to confirm all the hypothesis we proposed and analyze all its implications. It would
also be necessary to conduct further research on the specific associations found, as many of
them could turn out to be untrue. Improving the performance of the model, as discussed in
Section 4.1, would increase the confidence in the results, in conjunction with better scores
for the sanity checks (specially sanity check 2). However, even with a better performance
of the model, the results would be obtained using a predictive model, and thus should
not be considered as true without further research. Moreover, it would be convenient to
delve deeper into the types of perturbations MOVE can conduct and assess if perturbing
all features to its maximum value, as was done in this study, creates such a disturbance
in the data that impairs the veracity of the results. It might be interesting to explore the
possibility of performing a perturbation with more impact than adding or subtracting one
standard deviation, as this was proven to not introduce enough differences in the data, but
not as drastic as the maximum type.
In any case, even if the veracity of some of the associations should be addressed, it appears
evident that isoforms that are encoded by the same gene can have different functions, and
that more research should be performed in this field.
Page 60 of 72
==PAGE:64==
Master’s thesis
5
Conclusions
1. Isoforms encoded by the same gene can exhibit distinct, and sometimes even opposing,
functions. This diversity in isoform functionality suggests that traditional transcrip-
tomics analyses, which focus solely on overall gene expression levels, may not be com-
pletely accurate and informative in its conclusions. Therefore, a more precise approach
that quantifies transcripts at the isoform level would most probably be more reasonable
and adequate. This isoform-specific analysis would likely offer deeper insights into the
functional complexity of gene expression, ultimately improving the accuracy of tran-
scriptomic studies and advancing our understanding of gene regulation and function.
2. Specifically for cancer, the amount of sister isoforms associated with genes, isoforms,
pathways, or phenotypical data appears to be high, specially for the latter. If these
associations are confirmed, this knowledge could potentially be used for developing
isoform-targeted therapies that could improve survival rates. However, further research
is needed to verify the found associations.
3. Deep learning models have the potential to elucidate the relationships between isoform
expression data and various types of multi-omics and multi-modal data. Generative
models, such as Variational Autoencoders (VAEs), show promise in generating novel
data from these complex datasets. However, further research is necessary to refine
these models for improved accuracy and to rigorously validate the authenticity and
reliability of the generated data.
4. Multi-omics Variational Autoencoder (MOVE) has been successfully enhanced to han-
dle large datasets through the incorporation of multiprocessing capabilities and reduced
memory usage.
Page 61 of 72
==PAGE:65==
Master’s thesis
References
References
[1] M. K. Sakharkar, P. Kangueane, B. S. Perumal, V. T. K. Chow, E. Sorscher, K. R.
Sakharkar, and A. Hill, “Human genome – from pieces to patterns,” Frontiers in Bio-
science: A Journal and Virtual Library, vol. 10, pp. 2576–2584, Sept. 2005.
[2] M. K. Sakharkar, V. T. K. Chow, and P. Kangueane, “Distributions of exons and introns
in the human genome,” In Silico Biology, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 387–393, 2004.
[3] Y. Lee and D. C. Rio, “Mechanisms and Regulation of Alternative Pre-mRNA Splicing,”
Annual Review of Biochemistry, vol. 84, pp. 291–323, 2015.
[4] C. L. Will and R. LĂźhrmann, “Spliceosome structure and function,” Cold Spring Harbor
Perspectives in Biology, vol. 3, p. a003707, July 2011.
[5] L. E. Marasco and A. R. Kornblihtt, “The physiology of alternative splicing,” Nature
Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, vol. 24, pp. 242–254, Apr. 2023.
[6] W. Jiang and L. Chen, “Alternative splicing: Human disease and quantitative analysis
from high-throughput sequencing,” Computational and Structural Biotechnology Jour-
nal, vol. 19, pp. 183–195, 2021.
[7] D. F. Grabski, L. Broseus, B. Kumari, D. Rekosh, M. Hammarskjold, and W. Ritchie,
“Intron retention and its impact on gene expression and protein diversity: A review and
a practical guide,” WIREs RNA, vol. 12, p. e1631, Jan. 2021.
[8] E. Viggiano, “Molecular Research in Medical Genetics,” International Journal of Molec-
ular Sciences, vol. 23, p. 6625, June 2022.
[9] Q. Liu, L. Fang, and C. Wu, “Alternative Splicing and Isoforms: From Mechanisms to
Diseases,” Genes, vol. 13, p. 401, Feb. 2022.
[10] V. P. Eswarakumar, I. Lax, and J. Schlessinger, “Cellular signaling by fibroblast growth
factor receptors,” Cytokine & Growth Factor Reviews, vol. 16, pp. 139–149, Apr. 2005.
[11] V. Orian-Rousseau and H. Ponta, “Perspectives of CD44 targeting therapies,” Archives
of Toxicology, vol. 89, pp. 3–14, Jan. 2015.
[12] H. L. Granzier and S. Labeit, “The giant muscle protein titin is an adjustable molecular
spring,” Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews, vol. 34, pp. 50–53, Apr. 2006.
[13] M. Bergoug, M. Doudeau, F. Godin, C. Mosrin, B. VallĂŠe, and H. BĂŠnĂŠdetti,
“Neurofibromin Structure, Functions and Regulation,” Cells, vol. 9, p. 2365, Oct. 2020.
[14] S. Belluti, G. Rigillo, and C. Imbriano, “Transcription Factors in Cancer: When Alter-
native Splicing Determines Opposite Cell Fates,” Cells, vol. 9, p. 760, Mar. 2020.
Page 62 of 72
==PAGE:66==
Master’s thesis
References
[15] F. Qi, Y. Li, X. Yang, Y.-P. Wu, L.-J. Lin, and X.-M. Liu, “Significance of alternative
splicing in cancer cells,” Chinese Medical Journal, vol. 133, pp. 221–228, Jan. 2020.
[16] J. Zhang and J. L. Manley, “Misregulation of Pre-mRNA Alternative Splicing in Cancer,”
Cancer Discovery, vol. 3, pp. 1228–1237, Nov. 2013.
[17] N. Martinez-Montiel, N. H. Rosas-Murrieta, M. Anaya Ruiz, E. Monjaraz-Guzman,
and R. Martinez-Contreras, “Alternative Splicing as a Target for Cancer Treatment,”
International Journal of Molecular Sciences, vol. 19, p. 545, Feb. 2018.
[18] W. K. Ma, D. M. Voss, J. Scharner, A. S. Costa, K.-T. Lin, H. Y. Jeon, J. E.
Wilkinson, M. Jackson, F. Rigo, C. F. Bennett, and A. R. Krainer, “ASO-Based
PKM Splice-Switching Therapy Inhibits Hepatocellular Carcinoma Growth,” Cancer
Research, vol. 82, pp. 900–915, Mar. 2022.
[19] J. Kim, S. Woo, C. M. De Gusmao, B. Zhao, D. H. Chin, R. L. DiDonato, M. A.
Nguyen, T. Nakayama, C. A. Hu, A. Soucy, A. Kuniholm, J. K. Thornton, O. Riccardi,
D. A. Friedman, C. M. El Achkar, Z. Dash, L. Cornelissen, C. Donado, K. N. W. Faour,
L. W. Bush, V. Suslovitch, C. Lentucci, P. J. Park, E. A. Lee, A. Patterson, A. A.
Philippakis, B. Margus, C. B. Berde, and T. W. Yu, “A framework for individualized
splice-switching oligonucleotide therapy,” Nature, vol. 619, pp. 828–836, July 2023.
[20] A. A. Balachandran, P. Raguraman, K. Rahimizadeh, and R. N. Veedu, “Splice-
Switching Antisense Oligonucleotides Targeting Extra- and Intracellular Domains of
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor in Cancer Cells,” Biomedicines, vol. 11, p. 3299,
Dec. 2023.
[21] A. Goyenvalle, A. Babbs, D. Powell, R. Kole, S. Fletcher, S. D. Wilton, and K. E.
Davies, “Prevention of Dystrophic Pathology in Severely Affected Dystrophin/Utrophin-
deficient Mice by Morpholino-oligomer-mediated Exon-skipping,” Molecular Therapy,
vol. 18, pp. 198–205, Jan. 2010.
[22] S. K. Mishra, V. Muthye, and G. Kandoi, “Computational Methods for Predicting
Functions at the mRNA Isoform Level,” International Journal of Molecular Sciences,
vol. 21, p. 5686, Aug. 2020.
[23] N. N. Narisetty, “Bayesian model selection for high-dimensional data,” in Handbook of
Statistics, vol. 43, pp. 207–248, Elsevier, 2020.
[24] Dataloop, “The Curse of Dimensionality, Dimension reduction..” https://dataloop.
ai/blog/the-curse-of-dimensionality-dimension-reduction/. [Accessed 13-04-
2024].
[25] “The
Curse
of
Dimensionality
in
Machine
Learning:
Challenges,
Im-
pacts,
and
Solutions
—
datacamp.com.”
https://www.datacamp.com/blog/
curse-of-dimensionality-machine-learning. [Accessed 13-04-2024].
Page 63 of 72
==PAGE:67==
Master’s thesis
References
[26] “Casella, M., Dolce, P., Ponticorvo, M., & Marocco, D. (2021). Autoencoders as an
alternative approach to principal component analysis for dimensionality reduction. An
application on simulated data from psychometric models. Symposium on Psychology-
Based Technologies.,”
[27] M. Tschannen, O. Bachem, and M. Lucic, “Recent Advances in Autoencoder-Based
Representation Learning,” 2018.
[28] J.
Rocca,
“Understanding
Variational
Autoencoders
(VAEs)
—
towardsdatascience.com.”
https://towardsdatascience.com/
understanding-variational-autoencoders-vaes-f70510919f73.
[Accessed
17-04-2024].
[29] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes,” 2013.
[30] C. Doersch, “Tutorial on Variational Autoencoders,” 2016.
[31] D. P. Kingma, D. J. Rezende, S. Mohamed, and M. Welling, “Semi-Supervised Learning
with Deep Generative Models,” 2014.
[32] “Variational autoencoders — mbernste.github.io.” https://mbernste.github.io/
posts/vae/. [Accessed 15-04-2024].
[33] N. Malingan, “Variational Autoencoders - Scaler Topics — scaler.com.” https://www.
scaler.com/topics/deep-learning/variational-autoencoder/.
[Accessed 15-04-
2024].
[34] C. Kormaris and M. Titsias, “Postgraduate Thesis - Variational Autoencoders &amp;
Applications,” 2018.
[35] R. Lopez, J. Regier, M. B. Cole, M. I. Jordan, and N. Yosef, “Deep generative modeling
for single-cell transcriptomics,” Nature Methods, vol. 15, pp. 1053–1058, Dec. 2018.
[36] “Li, Y., Li, X., & Li, X. (2020). BIVA-Seq: a variational autoencoder model for joint
analysis of DNA sequences and epigenetic modifications. Bioinformatics, 36(19), 4688-
4697.,”
[37] F. F. Alam and A. Shehu, “Variational Autoencoders for Protein Structure Prediction,”
in Proceedings of the 11th ACM International Conference on Bioinformatics, Compu-
tational Biology and Health Informatics, (Virtual Event USA), pp. 1–10, ACM, Sept.
2020.
[38] R. L. Allesoe, A. T. Lundgaard, R. HernĂĄndez Medina, A. Aguayo-Orozco, J. Jo-
hansen, J. N. Nissen, C. Brorsson, G. Mazzoni, L. Niu, J. H. Biel, C. Leal RodrĂguez,
V. Brasas, H. Webel, M. E. Benros, A. G. Pedersen, P. J. Chmura, U. P. Jacobsen,
A. Mari, R. Koivula, A. Mahajan, A. Vinuela, J. F. Tajes, S. Sharma, M. Haid, M.-
G. Hong, P. B. Musholt, F. De Masi, J. Vogt, H. K. Pedersen, V. Gudmundsdot-
tir, A. Jones, G. Kennedy, J. Bell, E. L. Thomas, G. Frost, H. Thomsen, E. Hansen,
Page 64 of 72
==PAGE:68==
Master’s thesis
References
T. H. Hansen, H. Vestergaard, M. Muilwijk, M. T. Blom, L. M. âT Hart, F. Pattou,
V. Raverdy, S. Brage, T. Kokkola, A. Heggie, D. McEvoy, M. Mourby, J. Kaye, A. Hat-
tersley, T. McDonald, M. RidderstrĂĽle, M. Walker, I. Forgie, G. N. Giordano, I. Pavo,
H. Ruetten, O. Pedersen, T. Hansen, E. Dermitzakis, P. W. Franks, J. M. Schwenk,
J. Adamski, M. I. McCarthy, E. Pearson, K. Banasik, S. Rasmussen, S. Brunak, IMI
DIRECT Consortium, P. Froguel, C. E. Thomas, R. Haussler, J. Beulens, F. Rutters,
G. Nijpels, S. Van Oort, L. Groeneveld, P. Elders, T. Giorgino, M. Rodriquez, R. Nice,
M. Perry, S. Bianzano, U. Graefe-Mody, A. Hennige, R. Grempler, P. Baum, H.-H.
StĂŚrfeldt, N. Shah, H. Teare, B. Ehrhardt, J. Tillner, C. Dings, T. Lehr, N. Scherer,
I. Sihinevich, L. Cabrelli, H. Loftus, R. Bizzotto, A. Tura, K. Dekkers, N. Van Leeuwen,
L. Groop, R. Slieker, A. Ramisch, C. Jennison, I. McVittie, F. Frau, B. Steckel-Hamann,
K. Adragni, M. Thomas, N. A. Pasdar, H. Fitipaldi, A. Kurbasic, P. Mutie, H. Pomares-
Millan, A. Bonnefond, M. Canouil, R. Caiazzo, H. Verkindt, R. Holl, T. Kuulasmaa,
H. Deshmukh, H. Cederberg, M. Laakso, J. Vangipurapu, M. Dale, B. Thorand, C. Nico-
lay, A. Fritsche, A. Hill, M. Hudson, C. Thorne, K. Allin, M. Arumugam, A. Jonsson,
L. Engelbrechtsen, A. Forman, A. Dutta, N. Sondertoft, Y. Fan, S. Gough, N. Robert-
son, N. McRobert, A. Wesolowska-Andersen, A. Brown, D. Davtian, A. Dawed, L. Don-
nelly, C. Palmer, M. White, J. Ferrer, B. Whitcher, A. Artati, C. Prehn, J. Adam,
H. Grallert, R. Gupta, P. W. Sackett, B. Nilsson, K. Tsirigos, R. Eriksen, B. Jablonka,
M. Uhlen, J. Gassenhuber, T. Baltauss, N. De Preville, M. Klintenberg, and M. Abdalla,
“Discovery of drugâomics associations in type 2 diabetes with generative deep-learning
models,” Nature Biotechnology, vol. 41, pp. 399–408, Mar. 2023.
[39] “About the method &x2014; MOVE 1.4.10 documentation — move-dl.readthedocs.io.”
https://move-dl.readthedocs.io/method.html. [Accessed 16-04-2024].
[40] J.-S. Lee, “Exploring cancer genomic data from the cancer genome atlas project,” BMB
reports, vol. 49, pp. 607–611, Nov. 2016.
[41] K. Tomczak, P. CzerwiĹska, and M. Wiznerowicz, “The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA):
an immeasurable source of knowledge,” Contemporary Oncology (Poznan, Poland),
vol. 19, no. 1A, pp. A68–77, 2015.
[42] K. A. Hoadley, C. Yau, T. Hinoue, D. M. Wolf, A. J. Lazar, E. Drill, R. Shen, A. M. Tay-
lor, A. D. Cherniack, V. Thorsson, R. Akbani, R. Bowlby, C. K. Wong, M. Wiznerowicz,
F. Sanchez-Vega, A. G. Robertson, B. G. Schneider, M. S. Lawrence, H. Noushmehr,
T. M. Malta, Cancer Genome Atlas Network, J. M. Stuart, C. C. Benz, and P. W.
Laird, “Cell-of-Origin Patterns Dominate the Molecular Classification of 10,000 Tumors
from 33 Types of Cancer,” Cell, vol. 173, pp. 291–304.e6, Apr. 2018.
[43] C. J. Vaske, S. C. Benz, J. Z. Sanborn, D. Earl, C. Szeto, J. Zhu, D. Haussler, and
J. M. Stuart, “Inference of patient-specific pathway activities from multi-dimensional
cancer genomics data using PARADIGM,” Bioinformatics (Oxford, England), vol. 26,
pp. i237–245, June 2010.
Page 65 of 72
==PAGE:69==
Master’s thesis
References
[44] J. Liu, T. Lichtenberg, K. A. Hoadley, L. M. Poisson, A. J. Lazar, A. D. Cherniack, A. J.
Kovatich, C. C. Benz, D. A. Levine, A. V. Lee, L. Omberg, D. M. Wolf, C. D. Shriver,
V. Thorsson, H. Hu, S. J. Caesar-Johnson, J. A. Demchok, I. Felau, M. Kasapi, M. L.
Ferguson, C. M. Hutter, H. J. Sofia, R. Tarnuzzer, Z. Wang, L. Yang, J. C. Zenklusen,
J. J. Zhang, S. Chudamani, J. Liu, L. Lolla, R. Naresh, T. Pihl, Q. Sun, Y. Wan, Y. Wu,
J. Cho, T. DeFreitas, S. Frazer, N. Gehlenborg, G. Getz, D. I. Heiman, J. Kim, M. S.
Lawrence, P. Lin, S. Meier, M. S. Noble, G. Saksena, D. Voet, H. Zhang, B. Bernard,
N. Chambwe, V. Dhankani, T. Knijnenburg, R. Kramer, K. Leinonen, Y. Liu, M. Miller,
S. Reynolds, I. Shmulevich, V. Thorsson, W. Zhang, R. Akbani, B. M. Broom, A. M.
Hegde, Z. Ju, R. S. Kanchi, A. Korkut, J. Li, H. Liang, S. Ling, W. Liu, Y. Lu, G. B.
Mills, K.-S. Ng, A. Rao, M. Ryan, J. Wang, J. N. Weinstein, J. Zhang, A. Abeshouse,
J. Armenia, D. Chakravarty, W. K. Chatila, I. De Bruijn, J. Gao, B. E. Gross, Z. J.
Heins, R. Kundra, K. La, M. Ladanyi, A. Luna, M. G. Nissan, A. Ochoa, S. M. Phillips,
E. Reznik, F. Sanchez-Vega, C. Sander, N. Schultz, R. Sheridan, S. O. Sumer, Y. Sun,
B. S. Taylor, J. Wang, H. Zhang, P. Anur, M. Peto, P. Spellman, C. Benz, J. M.
Stuart, C. K. Wong, C. Yau, D. N. Hayes, J. S. Parker, M. D. Wilkerson, A. Ally,
M. Balasundaram, R. Bowlby, D. Brooks, R. Carlsen, E. Chuah, N. Dhalla, R. Holt,
S. J. Jones, K. Kasaian, D. Lee, Y. Ma, M. A. Marra, M. Mayo, R. A. Moore, A. J.
Mungall, K. Mungall, A. G. Robertson, S. Sadeghi, J. E. Schein, P. Sipahimalani,
A. Tam, N. Thiessen, K. Tse, T. Wong, A. C. Berger, R. Beroukhim, A. D. Cherniack,
C. Cibulskis, S. B. Gabriel, G. F. Gao, G. Ha, M. Meyerson, S. E. Schumacher, J. Shih,
M. H. Kucherlapati, R. S. Kucherlapati, S. Baylin, L. Cope, L. Danilova, M. S. Boot-
walla, P. H. Lai, D. T. Maglinte, D. J. Van Den Berg, D. J. Weisenberger, J. T. Auman,
S. Balu, T. Bodenheimer, C. Fan, K. A. Hoadley, A. P. Hoyle, S. R. Jefferys, C. D.
Jones, S. Meng, P. A. Mieczkowski, L. E. Mose, A. H. Perou, C. M. Perou, J. Roach,
Y. Shi, J. V. Simons, T. Skelly, M. G. Soloway, D. Tan, U. Veluvolu, H. Fan, T. Hinoue,
P. W. Laird, H. Shen, W. Zhou, M. Bellair, K. Chang, K. Covington, C. J. Creighton,
H. Dinh, H. Doddapaneni, L. A. Donehower, J. Drummond, R. A. Gibbs, R. Glenn,
W. Hale, Y. Han, J. Hu, V. Korchina, S. Lee, L. Lewis, W. Li, X. Liu, M. Morgan,
D. Morton, D. Muzny, J. Santibanez, M. Sheth, E. Shinbro, L. Wang, M. Wang, D. A.
Wheeler, L. Xi, F. Zhao, J. Hess, E. L. Appelbaum, M. Bailey, M. G. Cordes, L. Ding,
C. C. Fronick, L. A. Fulton, R. S. Fulton, C. Kandoth, E. R. Mardis, M. D. McLellan,
C. A. Miller, H. K. Schmidt, R. K. Wilson, D. Crain, E. Curley, J. Gardner, K. Lau,
D. Mallery, S. Morris, J. Paulauskis, R. Penny, C. Shelton, T. Shelton, M. Sherman,
E. Thompson, P. Yena, J. Bowen, J. M. Gastier-Foster, M. Gerken, K. M. Leraas,
T. M. Lichtenberg, N. C. Ramirez, L. Wise, E. Zmuda, N. Corcoran, T. Costello,
C. Hovens, A. L. Carvalho, A. C. De Carvalho, J. H. Fregnani, A. Longatto-Filho,
R. M. Reis, C. Scapulatempo-Neto, H. C. Silveira, D. O. Vidal, A. Burnette, J. Es-
chbacher, B. Hermes, A. Noss, R. Singh, M. L. Anderson, P. D. Castro, M. Ittmann,
D. Huntsman, B. Kohl, X. Le, R. Thorp, C. Andry, E. R. Duffy, V. Lyadov, O. Paklina,
G. Setdikova, A. Shabunin, M. Tavobilov, C. McPherson, R. Warnick, R. Berkowitz,
D. Cramer, C. Feltmate, N. Horowitz, A. Kibel, M. Muto, C. P. Raut, A. Malykh,
J. S. Barnholtz-Sloan, W. Barrett, K. Devine, J. Fulop, Q. T. Ostrom, K. Shimmel,
Y. Wolinsky, A. E. Sloan, A. De Rose, F. Giuliante, M. Goodman, B. Y. Karlan, C. H.
Page 66 of 72
==PAGE:70==
Master’s thesis
References
Hagedorn, J. Eckman, J. Harr, J. Myers, K. Tucker, L. A. Zach, B. Deyarmin, H. Hu,
L. Kvecher, C. Larson, R. J. Mural, S. Somiari, A. Vicha, T. Zelinka, J. Bennett,
M. Iacocca, B. Rabeno, P. Swanson, M. Latour, L. Lacombe, B. TĂŞtu, A. Berg-
eron, M. McGraw, S. M. Staugaitis, J. Chabot, H. Hibshoosh, A. Sepulveda, T. Su,
T. Wang, O. Potapova, O. Voronina, L. Desjardins, O. Mariani, S. Roman-Roman,
X. Sastre, M.-H. Stern, F. Cheng, S. Signoretti, A. Berchuck, D. Bigner, E. Lipp,
J. Marks, S. McCall, R. McLendon, A. Secord, A. Sharp, M. Behera, D. J. Brat, A. Chen,
K. Delman, S. Force, F. Khuri, K. Magliocca, S. Maithel, J. J. Olson, T. Owonikoko,
A. Pickens, S. Ramalingam, D. M. Shin, G. Sica, E. G. Van Meir, H. Zhang, W. Ei-
jckenboom, A. Gillis, E. Korpershoek, L. Looijenga, W. Oosterhuis, H. Stoop, K. E.
Van Kessel, E. C. Zwarthoff, C. Calatozzolo, L. Cuppini, S. Cuzzubbo, F. DiMeco,
G. Finocchiaro, L. Mattei, A. Perin, B. Pollo, C. Chen, J. Houck, P. Lohavanichbutr,
A. Hartmann, C. Stoehr, R. Stoehr, H. Taubert, S. Wach, B. Wullich, W. Kycler,
D. Murawa, M. Wiznerowicz, K. Chung, W. J. Edenfield, J. Martin, E. Baudin, G. Bub-
ley, R. Bueno, A. De Rienzo, W. G. Richards, S. Kalkanis, T. Mikkelsen, H. Noush-
mehr, L. Scarpace, N. Girard, M. Aymerich, E. Campo, E. GinĂŠ, A. L. Guillermo,
N. Van Bang, P. T. Hanh, B. D. Phu, Y. Tang, H. Colman, K. Evason, P. R. Dot-
tino, J. A. Martignetti, H. Gabra, H. Juhl, T. Akeredolu, S. Stepa, D. Hoon, K. Ahn,
K. J. Kang, F. Beuschlein, A. Breggia, M. Birrer, D. Bell, M. Borad, A. H. Bryce,
E. Castle, V. Chandan, J. Cheville, J. A. Copland, M. Farnell, T. Flotte, N. Giama,
T. Ho, M. Kendrick, J.-P. Kocher, K. Kopp, C. Moser, D. Nagorney, D. OâBrien, B. P.
OâNeill, T. Patel, G. Petersen, F. Que, M. Rivera, L. Roberts, R. Smallridge, T. Smyrk,
M. Stanton, R. H. Thompson, M. Torbenson, J. D. Yang, L. Zhang, F. Brimo, J. A.
Ajani, A. M. Angulo Gonzalez, C. Behrens, J. Bondaruk, R. Broaddus, B. Czerniak,
B. Esmaeli, J. Fujimoto, J. Gershenwald, C. Guo, A. J. Lazar, C. Logothetis, F. Meric-
Bernstam, C. Moran, L. Ramondetta, D. Rice, A. Sood, P. Tamboli, T. Thompson,
P. Troncoso, A. Tsao, I. Wistuba, C. Carter, L. Haydu, P. Hersey, V. Jakrot, H. Kaka-
vand, R. Kefford, K. Lee, G. Long, G. Mann, M. Quinn, R. Saw, R. Scolyer, K. Shan-
non, A. Spillane, J. Stretch, M. Synott, J. Thompson, J. Wilmott, H. Al-Ahmadie,
T. A. Chan, R. Ghossein, A. Gopalan, D. A. Levine, V. Reuter, S. Singer, B. Singh,
N. V. Tien, T. Broudy, C. Mirsaidi, P. Nair, P. Drwiega, J. Miller, J. Smith, H. Zaren,
J.-W. Park, N. P. Hung, E. Kebebew, W. M. Linehan, A. R. Metwalli, K. Pacak,
P. A. Pinto, M. Schiffman, L. S. Schmidt, C. D. Vocke, N. Wentzensen, R. Worrell,
H. Yang, M. Moncrieff, C. Goparaju, J. Melamed, H. Pass, N. Botnariuc, I. Caraman,
M. Cernat, I. Chemencedji, A. Clipca, S. Doruc, G. Gorincioi, S. Mura, M. Pirtac,
I. Stancul, D. Tcaciuc, M. Albert, I. Alexopoulou, A. Arnaout, J. Bartlett, J. Engel,
S. Gilbert, J. Parfitt, H. Sekhon, G. Thomas, D. M. Rassl, R. C. Rintoul, C. Bifulco,
R. Tamakawa, W. Urba, N. Hayward, H. Timmers, A. Antenucci, F. Facciolo, G. Grazi,
M. Marino, R. Merola, R. De Krijger, A.-P. Gimenez-Roqueplo, A. PichĂŠ, S. Chevalier,
G. McKercher, K. Birsoy, G. Barnett, C. Brewer, C. Farver, T. Naska, N. A. Pennell,
D. Raymond, C. Schilero, K. Smolenski, F. Williams, C. Morrison, J. A. Borgia, M. J.
Liptay, M. Pool, C. W. Seder, K. Junker, L. Omberg, M. Dinkin, G. Manikhas, D. Al-
varo, M. C. Bragazzi, V. Cardinale, G. Carpino, E. Gaudio, D. Chesla, S. Cottingham,
M. Dubina, F. Moiseenko, R. Dhanasekaran, K.-F. Becker, K.-P. Janssen, J. Slotta-
Page 67 of 72
==PAGE:71==
Master’s thesis
References
Huspenina, M. H. Abdel-Rahman, D. Aziz, S. Bell, C. M. Cebulla, A. Davis, R. Duell,
J. B. Elder, J. Hilty, B. Kumar, J. Lang, N. L. Lehman, R. Mandt, P. Nguyen, R. Pi-
larski, K. Rai, L. Schoenfield, K. Senecal, P. Wakely, P. Hansen, R. Lechan, J. Powers,
A. Tischler, W. E. Grizzle, K. C. Sexton, A. Kastl, J. Henderson, S. Porten, J. Wald-
mann, M. Fassnacht, S. L. Asa, D. Schadendorf, M. Couce, M. Graefen, H. Huland,
G. Sauter, T. Schlomm, R. Simon, P. Tennstedt, O. Olabode, M. Nelson, O. Bathe,
P. R. Carroll, J. M. Chan, P. Disaia, P. Glenn, R. K. Kelley, C. N. Landen, J. Phillips,
M. Prados, J. Simko, K. Smith-McCune, S. VandenBerg, K. Roggin, A. Fehrenbach,
A. Kendler, S. Sifri, R. Steele, A. Jimeno, F. Carey, I. Forgie, M. Mannelli, M. Carney,
B. Hernandez, B. Campos, C. Herold-Mende, C. Jungk, A. Unterberg, A. Von Deim-
ling, A. Bossler, J. Galbraith, L. Jacobus, M. Knudson, T. Knutson, D. Ma, M. Milhem,
R. Sigmund, A. K. Godwin, R. Madan, H. G. Rosenthal, C. Adebamowo, S. N. Ade-
bamowo, A. Boussioutas, D. Beer, T. Giordano, A.-M. Mes-Masson, F. Saad, T. Bock-
lage, L. Landrum, R. Mannel, K. Moore, K. Moxley, R. Postier, J. Walker, R. Zuna,
M. Feldman, F. Valdivieso, R. Dhir, J. Luketich, E. M. Mora Pinero, M. Quintero-
Aguilo, C. G. Carlotti, Jr, J. S. Dos Santos, R. Kemp, A. Sankarankuty, D. Tirapelli,
J. Catto, K. Agnew, E. Swisher, J. Creaney, B. Robinson, C. S. Shelley, E. M. Godwin,
S. Kendall, C. Shipman, C. Bradford, T. Carey, A. Haddad, J. Moyer, L. Peterson,
M. Prince, L. Rozek, G. Wolf, R. Bowman, K. M. Fong, I. Yang, R. Korst, W. K. Rath-
mell, J. L. Fantacone-Campbell, J. A. Hooke, A. J. Kovatich, C. D. Shriver, J. DiPersio,
B. Drake, R. Govindan, S. Heath, T. Ley, B. Van Tine, P. Westervelt, M. A. Rubin,
J. I. Lee, N. D. Aredes, and A. Mariamidze, “An Integrated TCGA Pan-Cancer Clini-
cal Data Resource to Drive High-Quality Survival Outcome Analytics,” Cell, vol. 173,
pp. 400–416.e11, Apr. 2018.
[45] “SEER Training Modules, U. S. National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute|
SEER Training — training.seer.cancer.gov.” https://training.seer.cancer.gov.
[Accessed 15-04-2024].
[46] M. Sokolova and G. Lapalme, “A systematic analysis of performance measures for clas-
sification tasks,” Information Processing & Management, vol. 45, pp. 427–437, July
2009.
[47] A. Huang, “Similarity measures for text document clustering,” in Proceedings of the Sixth
New Zealand Computer Science Research Student Conference (NZCSRSC), pp. 49–56,
2008.
[48] “Esrum Cluster documentation — cbmr-data.github.io.” https://cbmr-data.github.
io/esrum/index.html. [Accessed 06-06-2024].
[49] “Multiprocessing
best
practices
&x2014;
PyTorch
2.3
documentation
—
py-
torch.org.”
https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/notes/multiprocessing.html#
avoid-cpu-oversubscription,%20rewrite. [Accessed 26-06-2024].
Page 68 of 72
==PAGE:72==
Master’s thesis
References
[50] “TCF3
transcription
factor
3
[Homo
sapiens
(human)]
-
Gene
-
NCBI
—
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.” https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/6929.
[Accessed 21-06-
2024].
[51] C. Escherich, W. Chen, S. Miyamoto, Y. Namikawa, W. Yang, D. T. Teachey, Z. Li,
E. A. Raetz, E. Larsen, M. Devidas, P. L. Martin, W. P. Bowman, G. Wu, C.-H.
Pui, S. P. Hunger, M. L. Loh, M. Takagi, and J. J. Yang, “Identification of TCF3
germline variants in pediatric B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia,” Blood Advances,
vol. 7, pp. 2177–2180, May 2023.
[52] Ensembl, “Gene:
Tcf3.” https://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/Summary?
db=core;g=ENSG00000071564;r=19:1609291-1652615. [Accessed on 22-06-2024].
[53] G. S. Puts, M. K. Leonard, N. V. Pamidimukkala, D. E. Snyder, and D. M. Kaetzel,
“Nuclear functions of NME proteins,” Laboratory Investigation; a Journal of Technical
Methods and Pathology, vol. 98, pp. 211–218, Feb. 2018.
[54] “USF2 upstream transcription factor 2, c-fos interacting [Homo sapiens (human)] - Gene
- NCBI — ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.” https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/7392, June 2024.
[Accessed on 21-06-2024].
[55] W.-y. Huang, Z.-b. Liao, J.-c. Zhang, X. Zhang, H.-w. Zhang, H.-f. Liang, Z.-y. Zhang,
T. Yang, J. Yu, and K.-s. Dong, “USF2-mediated upregulation of TXNRD1 contributes
to hepatocellular carcinoma progression by activating Akt/mTOR signaling,” Cell Death
& Disease, vol. 13, p. 917, Nov. 2022.
[56] M. Ocejo−Garcia, T. A. Baokbah, H. Louise Ashurst, D. Cowlishaw, I. Soomro, J. M.
Coulson, and P. J. Woll, “Roles for USFâ2 in lung cancer proliferation and bronchial
carcinogenesis,” The Journal of Pathology, vol. 206, pp. 151–159, June 2005.
[57] Ensembl, “Gene:
Usf2.” https://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/Summary?
db=core;g=ENSG00000105698;r=19:35268962-35279821. [Accessed on 22-06-2024].
[58] H. Kaprio, V. D. Heuser, K. Orte, M. Tukiainen, I. Leivo, and M. Gardberg, “Expres-
sion of Transcription Factor CREM in Human Tissues,” Journal of Histochemistry &
Cytochemistry, vol. 69, pp. 495–509, Aug. 2021.
[59] Ensembl, “Gene: Crem.” https://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/Summary?
db=core;g=ENSG00000095794;r=10:35126791-35212958. [Accessed 22-06-2024].
[60] “ATF1 activating transcription factor 1 [Homo sapiens (human)] - Gene - NCBI —
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.” https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/466. [Accessed 21-06-2024].
[61] J. Mei, Y. Liu, Y. Sheng, Y. Liu, L. Chen, H. Wang, M. Cheng, Z. Zhai, and L. Xu,
“ATF1 promotes the malignancy of lung adenocarcinoma cells by transcriptionally regu-
lating ZNF143 expression,” Acta Biochimica Et Biophysica Sinica, vol. 55, pp. 769–782,
May 2023.
Page 69 of 72
==PAGE:73==
Master’s thesis
References
[62] “ATF1
-
My
Cancer
Genome
—
mycancergenome.org.”
https://www.
mycancergenome.org/content/gene/atf1/. [Accessed 22-06-2024].
[63] Ensembl, “Gene: ATF1.” https://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/Summary?
db=core;g=ENSG00000123268;r=12:50763710-50821162. [Accessed 23-06-2024].
[64] “ZNF414 zinc finger protein 414 [Homo sapiens (human)] - Gene - NCBI —
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.” https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/84330.
[Accessed 22-06-
2024].
[65] E. M. Vuorinen, N. K. Rajala, H. E. Rauhala, A. T. Nurminen, V. P. HytĂśnen, and
A. Kallioniemi, “Search for KPNA7 cargo proteins in human cells reveals MVP and
ZNF414 as novel regulators of cancer cell growth,” Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta.
Molecular Basis of Disease, vol. 1863, pp. 211–219, Jan. 2017.
[66] Ensembl, “Gene: ZNF414.” https://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/Splice?
g=ENSG00000133250;r=19:8509678-8514167. [Accessed on 22-06-2024].
[67] “NR4A1 nuclear receptor subfamily 4 group A member 1 [Homo sapiens (human)] - Gene
- NCBI — ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.” https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/3164. [Accessed
on 22-06-2024].
[68] Z.-q. Pu, T.-f. Yu, D. Liu, C.-w. Jin, E. Sadiq, X. Qiao, X. Li, Y. Chen, J. Zhang,
M. Tian, S. Li, R.-x. Zhao, and X.-d. Wang, “NR4A1 enhances MKP7 expression to di-
minish JNK activation induced by ROS or ER-stress in pancreatic Î˛ cells for surviving,”
Cell Death Discovery, vol. 7, p. 133, June 2021.
[69] Ensembl,
“Gene:
NR4A1.”
https://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/
Summary?db=core;g=ENSG00000123358;r=12:52022832-52059507.
[Accessed
22-
06-2024].
[70] “PLAGL1 PLAG1 like zinc finger 1 [Homo sapiens (human)] - Gene - NCBI
—
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.”
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/5325#:~:text=
Plagl1%20is%20a%20transcription%20factor,altered%20after%20assisted%
20reproductive%20technologies. [Accessed on 22-06-2024].
[71] Ensembl,
“Gene:
PLAGL1.”
https://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/
Summary?db=core;g=ENSG00000118495;r=6:143940300-144064599.
[Accessed
22-06-2024].
[72] “NR1H3 nuclear receptor subfamily 1 group H member 3 [Homo sapiens (human)] - Gene
- NCBI — ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.” https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/10062. [Accessed
on 22-06-2024].
[73] J. Zhang, J. Zhang, W. Zhao, Q. Li, and W. Cheng, “Low expression of NR1H3 correlates
with macrophage infiltration and indicates worse survival in breast cancer,” Frontiers
in Genetics, vol. 13, p. 1067826, 2022.
Page 70 of 72
==PAGE:74==
Master’s thesis
References
[74] Ensembl,
“Gene:
NR1H3.”
https://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/
Summary?db=core;g=ENSG00000025434;r=11:47248300-47269033.
[Accessed
22-
06-2024].
[75] “ZNF331 zinc finger protein 331 [Homo sapiens (human)] - Gene - NCBI —
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.” https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/55422. [Accessed on 22-06-
2024].
[76] Ensembl,
“Gene:
ZNF331.”
https://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/
Summary?db=core;g=ENSG00000130844;r=19:53519527-53580269.
[Accessed 22-06-
2024].
[77] S. Weger, E. Hammer, and R. Heilbronn, “Topors acts as a SUMO-1 E3 ligase for p53
in vitro and in vivo,” FEBS letters, vol. 579, pp. 5007–5012, Sept. 2005.
[78] K. Vishnoi, N. Viswakarma, A. Rana, and B. Rana, “Transcription Factors in Cancer
Development and Therapy,” Cancers, vol. 12, p. 2296, Aug. 2020.
[79] V. Rengganaten, C.-J. Huang, M.-L. Wang, Y. Chien, P.-H. Tsai, Y.-T. Lan, H. T. Ong,
S.-H. Chiou, and K. B. Choo, “Circular RNA ZNF800 (hsa_circ_0082096) regulates
cancer stem cell properties and tumor growth in colorectal cancer,” BMC cancer, vol. 23,
p. 1088, Nov. 2023.
[80] H. G. Behuria, S. Dash, and S. K. Sahu, “Phospholipid Scramblases: Role in Cancer
Progression and Anticancer Therapeutics,” Frontiers in Genetics, vol. 13, p. 875894,
2022.
[81] Y. Shi, Y. Niu, Y. Yuan, K. Li, C. Zhong, Z. Qiu, K. Li, Z. Lin, Z. Yang, D. Zuo, J. Qiu,
W. He, C. Wang, Y. Liao, G. Wang, Y. Yuan, and B. Li, “PRMT3-mediated arginine
methylation of IGF2BP1 promotes oxaliplatin resistance in liver cancer,” Nature Com-
munications, vol. 14, p. 1932, Apr. 2023.
[82] J. Wu, X. Zhang, Q. Han, X. Han, X. Rong, M. Wang, X. Zheng, and E. Wang,
“ZNF326 promotes proliferation of non-small cell lung cancer cells by regulating ERCC1
expression,” Laboratory Investigation; a Journal of Technical Methods and Pathology,
vol. 99, pp. 169–179, Feb. 2019.
[83] A. N. Meyer, C. W. McAndrew, and D. J. Donoghue, “Nordihydroguaiaretic Acid In-
hibits an Activated Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor 3 Mutant and Blocks Down-
stream Signaling in Multiple Myeloma Cells,” Cancer Research, vol. 68, pp. 7362–7370,
Sept. 2008.
[84] “Reactome | FGFR3 Y373C mutant dimer [plasma membrane] — reactome.org.” https:
//reactome.org/content/detail/R-HSA-2038353. [Accessed 23-06-2024].
[85] “Reactome | FGFR3 S371C mutant dimer [plasma membrane] — reactome.org.” https:
//reactome.org/content/detail/R-HSA-2038352. [Accessed 23-06-2024].
Page 71 of 72
==PAGE:75==
Master’s thesis
References
[86] “ZGPAT
(human)
—
phosphosite.org.”
https://www.phosphosite.org/
proteinAction.action?id=13948&showAllSites=true. [Accessed 23-06-2024].
Page 72 of 72
