==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Investigation of First- and Last-Mile Operation Distances and Public
Transport Station Granularity, to Enhance Public Transport
Accessibility and Reduce Socioeconomic Health Losses
Marte Larsen
s223686
Supervisor: Jeppe Rich
June 29, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
Abstract
In transport planning high utilization of public transport (PT) is related to many positive benefits
for the society [28]. First- and last mile services (FLMS) has been shown to improve accessibility and
connectivity of PT, which has made FLMS an attractive and interesting topic for researchers and city
planners. A neglected backside of FLMS is identified, as when people ride FLMS they lose a positive
socioeconomic health effect of being active [31]. Health effects of physical activity is shown to have a
high impact on a population’s social economics, and should therefore highly be considered if FLMS
are to be introduced to a population. The objective of this thesis is to offer a critical view on FLMS’
benefit in accessibility versus loss in socioeconomic health effects. In addition, how granularity and
operation distances influence the success or failure of implementing FLMS considering health effects
and accessibility. Agent-based mode choice modelling is used to measure the impacts of FLMS in
two different models. One model depicting an artificial random simulated population, although
based on reality, and the other the population in Copenhagen and Frederiksberg municipalities. In
headlines, the results imply that FLMS are not beneficial in terms of limiting socioeconomic health
losses, when operated on distances less than 1km. It also gives insights of how the granularity of
PT stations impact the accessibility, moreover how individuals with different Value of Time benefit
from FLMS. The study also concludes that FLMS are not socioeconomically beneficial for the urban
municipalities of Copenhagen and Frederiksberg.
Keywords:
First- and Last Mile Service, Socioeconomic Health Effects, Agent-Based Modelling, Multi-Objective
Optimization, Mode Choice Modelling, Transport Modelling
Declarations
Jeppe Rich’s article "Lets walk! The fallacy of first- and last-mile public transport" [31] has been an
inspiration and starting point for the Artificial Mode Choice Model developed for this thesis. The
results can therefore be correlated and biased to the results in the inspiration literature.
The Copenhagen Mode Choice Model used in the thesis is owned by Dimitrios Argyros, Technical
University of Denmark (DTU). The specification of this model is therefore not given in detail in
the thesis, as the model is only used for simulating results. Insight into this model needs to be
agreed with the owner. The model is using data from the Danish National Travel Survey 2006-2023,
although with own calculations. This data cannot be included in its raw form in this thesis, as it is
only available through approval from DTU.
ChatGPT have been used for the limiting purposes of inspiration of framework and reformulation of
sentences throughout the thesis, although not for direct content reasons. The written content of the
thesis is considered as the writers own text.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Dimitrios Argyros for lending out his model and giving technical help with
data and the use of the model. A big thank you goes to my supervisor Jeppe Rich for great
guidance in terms of exploring an interesting research topic, providing invaluable insights and a deep
understanding within the topics of the thesis.
I would also like to thank my good friend Regina Marie Hansen for proofreading, and my colleagues
at Rambøll for support and discussions through the period of writing the thesis.
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Contribution to the Field
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Organization of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Accessibility of Public Transport
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
First- and Last Mile Services
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Socioeconomic Benefits of Physical Activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Theory
5
3.1
Cost-Benefit Assessments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Transport Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2.1
Demand and Supply . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2.2
Level of Detail
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2.3
The Classical 4-Stage Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2.4
Mode Choice Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2.5
Route Choice Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Methodology
10
4.1
Research Design and Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.2
Validity and Reliability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
Artificial Mode Choice Model
14
5.1
Model Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.1.1
Do-Nothing Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.1.2
Do-Something Scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2
Input Data and Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2.1
Simulated Input Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2.2
Parameter Definitions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2.3
Calibration of Alternative Specific Constants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3.1
Welfare Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3.2
Change in Mode Share . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3.3
Multi-Objective Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Copenhagen Mode Choice Model
25
6.1
Model Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.1.1
Do-Nothing Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.1.2
Do-Something Scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
Input Data and Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2.1
Gathered Input Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2.2
Parameter Definitions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.3.1
Welfare Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.3.2
Change in Mode Share . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
ii
==PAGE:4==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
Contents
7
Discussion
31
8
Conclusion
35
8.1
Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
References
I
Appendices
IV
.1
Variable Description - Artificial Mode Choice Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV
.2
Variable Description - Copenhagen Mode Choice Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV
.3
List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
V
iii
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
1
Introduction
A persistent obstacle in public transport (PT) planning and design is the "first- and last mile"
challenge. First- and last mile refers to the initial and final segments of a journey that connect a
traveler’s origin or destination with a PT station [34]. As PT doesn’t bring the traveler directly from
the starting point of the travel or directly to the end point, this creates a dis-connectivity in the
service. A much documented follow of this is under-utilization of PT systems, as the attractiveness
of PT drops due to travel- and waiting times for access and egress (AE). High utilization of public
transport is connected with positive benefits like reduced needs for road infrastructure, reduced
emissions from cars, improved mobility for all, social inclusion and [28]. Achieving high utilization is
therefore a priority for most cities, as this increases the socioeconomic value of investments in PT
infrastructure. In the search of increasing the utility of PT, many alternative door-to-door modes
have been researched and tested to investigate the impact on first- and last mile connectivity, going
under the umbrella term on-demand "First- and Last Mile Services" (FLMS). Many of the FLMS
have been proved to increase the connectivity and accessibility of PT, which results in increased
utilization of PT [31]. These finds has increased the popularity of the research topic significantly in
the later years. Due to the complexity in operating a profitable and attractive door-to-door service,
numerous researchers have studied the social efficiency of the services. Although, a less researched
aspect is the fact that people will lose a positive health effect related to active traveling if riding
with FLMS. Health effects of active traveling has in later years been tried defined and measured to
see how physical activity influence the social economy. The results from this has shown that physical
activity has a significantly positive value for a population’s socioeconomic [12]. Losing socioeconomic
health effects can therefore have a great influence on a society, and should therefore highly be
considered if FLMS are to be introduced to a population. The objective of this thesis is therefore to
offer a critical view on FLMS benefit in accessibility versus loss in socioeconomic health effects with
the problem statement: How does FLMS impact the socioeconomic of a population, and how does
granularity of public transport and operation distances influence the success or failure of implementing
FLMS considering socioeconomic health effects and accessibility. To help structure and focus the
study of the problem statement, research questions and hypotheses have been defined as stated below.
Research Questions:
1. If active mobility correlates with positive socioeconomic health effects, how should we strategize
the design of our public transport infrastructure when introducing FLMS?
2. Can we utilize TU data to identify success or failure for active modes versus first- and last-mile
modes within the present Copenhagen and Frederiksberg municipalities?
3. Can we use ABM modelling to address 1) and 2)?
Hypotheses:
I. First- and last mile transport is not beneficial for society if operated for combined access and
egress trips under 1 km, based on socioeconomic health effects.
II. First- and last-mile services are not beneficial for individuals with low Value of Time, considering
socioeconomic health effects.
III. An optimal granularity exists for public transit systems that limit competition between FLMS
and active access and egress travel modes, while increasing public transport accessibility.
1
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
1.1
Contribution to the Field
IV. First- and last-mile services are not suited for urban areas like Copenhagen and Frederiksberg,
considering socioeconomic health effects.
To investigate the proposed research questions and hypotheses, two mode choice models with
different purposes has been developed to measure impacts of FLMS. Both models build on the
theory of transport models and uses the approach of agent-based modelling to study individual travel
behavior trends. The models’ parameters and input data are based on realistic, however conservative
assumptions in pursuit of not overestimate the impact of FLMS. The simulated results from the
models are used to calculate a defined welfare function, which build on theory from cost-benefit
analysis and consumer surplus calculations. These calculations are used to measure the socioeconomic
value of health effect losses versus travel associated costs.
1.1
Contribution to the Field
The anticipation for this thesis is to contribute to added knowledge about what implementation of
FLMS can mean for a population. This relates to both PT accessibility matters and the socioeco-
nomic outcome of the implementation. The thesis can contribute to an added understanding of how
FLMS and PT granularity can impact accessibility and especially, under which conditions FLMS
may or may not be beneficial due to the loss of socioeconomic health benefits in a broader picture. It
also provides observations of possible travel behavior of a population in a real city regarding FLMS,
and show a possible socioeconomic outcome of introducing FLMS. All contributions can be seen as
important aspects if planning or assessing for FLMS implementation in a city.
The research in this paper is inspired by Jeppe Rich’s article "Lets walk! The fallacy of first- and
last-mile public transport" [31], and insights can therefore highly relate to Rich’s research. This
thesis underlying goal is to add complementary knowledge to Rich’s research, while also expanding
the scope of the research to a real city. Together with Rich’s research, the hope for this thesis is to
offer a critical take on FLMS implementation by adding focus to a more neglected backside of the
service.
1.2
Organization of the Thesis
The thesis is organized with the background of providing information so that the reader gradually
understand the methodology and extent of the thesis’ research. As the introducing and background
is given in this chapter, the following provides the reader of relevant excising research regarding
accessibility of PT, FLMS and socioeconomic value of physical activity that relate to this research.
Chapter 3 provide theory, which forms the basis of the methodology, moreover chapter 4 presents
the general methodology of the thesis which bases on two mode choice model simulations. These
are elaborated in chapter 5 and 6, where the specification, input data, parameters and results
from the model simulations are described. Lastly the results of both models is discussed in 7 in
connection with the research’s objective, while the conclusion from the study is given in chapter 8.
Additionally, the appendices gives a description of variables for both mode choice models and the
list of abbreviations.
2
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
2
Literature Review
This chapter is intended to give an insight into the research that is already done on the relevant topics
of this thesis. Divided into themes, the chapter will present existing research for the accessibility of
public transport, different FLMS and socioeconomic value of physical activity.
2.1
Accessibility of Public Transport
For a PT system to be attractive, research show that is needs to be easy accessible for the users
[30]. One aspect of PT accessibility is making the station reachable in terms of access and egress
distances to and from PT stops/stations. Research showed early that AE distance have a direct
impact on the usage of PT [2]. In an Australian study, Daniels et al. describe the "rule of thumb"
used for PT system designs, which is approx. 400 meters from the nearest stations or stops [30].
Traditionally this distance has been acknowledged as a comfortable and acceptable walk for most
people under normal conditions. Hence, this has impacted and shaped the design of the PT systems
we see today. The design can be characterized with high density of stops, as this was shown to have
a positive impact on PT’s accessibility [14]. These "rule of thumb" characteristics can be observed
in European cities today [5], with purpose of increasing accessibility.
In a study conducted in Montreal Canada, they challenge this "rule of thumb", as they conducted a
study on peoples willingness to walk. The research showed that the willingness depended on the
purpose of the trip, household, neighborhood, trip, and route characteristics [1]. The results from
this study also concluded that the willingness to walk for home-based trips in the suburbs was
significantly higher (1,259m) than in the more dense areas (524m), and higher for routes with shorter
wait times. The study revealed that the willingness to walk was greater than initially assumed, which
challenges the traditional way of designing PT system. Daniels et al. conducted similar research
in Sydney, demonstrating that the willingness to walk was significantly higher for rail transport
compared to buses [30].
2.2
First- and Last Mile Services
As mentioned in the previous section, the attractiveness of PT depends among other things on
accessibility [30]. In relation to this a much discussed theme in PT planning and design is the
barrier of first and last mile challenges [31]. In the search of solving the first and last mile challenge,
numerous research has been conducted to both challenge and compliment today’s PT systems and
operations. In this thesis these proposed solutions are considered as First- and Last Mile Services,
although their service can differ. FLMS can primarily be divided into two groups: On-demand
services and fixed-route services [18]. On-demand services covers different kinds of vehicle services
that provide door-to-door transport booked by a traveler. Fixed-route services means vehicles
with designated stops within areas, similar to a conventional bus. As fixed-route services are not
considered in the thesis, the emphasis in the literature review will be on on-demand services.
As stated in Rich’s paper, the focus FLMS studies has mostly been on the optimization of operations,
service levels and profitability of the services [31]. Results from the majority of these studies is that
FLMS can increased the accessibility of PT, followed by an increasing in PT utilization. This could
be seen in Lau et al.’s research on shared autonomous vehicles (SAVs) [34] where the findings show
a positive contribution to PT accessibility and first- and last-mile connectivity in an urban area.
3
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
2.3
Socioeconomic Benefits of Physical Activity
Moreover, the results also showed how SAVs implementation was dependent on waiting times and
pricing in influencing ridership behavior. Their findings complement Imhof et al.’s investigation
into SAVs’ economic viability, although this study was conduced in a rural PT system [32]. Their
research demonstrated that integrating SAVs with existing regional rail services could significantly
boost PT demand and operational efficiency. Similar finds could also be found in Yanet al.’s study,
there a ride-sourcing service like Uber and Lyft was tried integrated with PT [36]. Additionally,
this study also showed that the number of users varied based on transfers and additional pickups,
as users preferred direct and efficient travel options. Ride-sourcing was also tested implemented
in a more conseptual study by Stiglic et al. where they found that the service-to-rider matching
rate improved when more than one passenger was picked up, making it a better service despite an
increase in travel time for the travelers.This impacted the market of the service.
To investigate the market of automated vehicles as a last mile service Yap et al. conducted a
stated-preferences survey for train travelers [26]. The results from the study showed that first class
train riders on average valued last mile automated vehicles higher, compared to other alternative
egress modes. Second class train riders valuated last mile automated vehicles more negatively
compared to other egress modes, and compared to the first class riders. Similar finds was found in a
U.S. study including 3 different cities, that higher income households benefited more from FLMS [7].
For lower income households they found that the cost of FLMS still exceeded the value of travel
time savings, despite subsides. Additionally, a research paper from Monrovia, California, showed
that users of the last mile mode were less likely to have access to private car, more likely to live
more than 1.6 km away from the metro and earn less than $100,000 a year [16]. They were also
more likely to be female, aged 25-44 and have at least a bachelor’s degree.
An agent-based model assessment of automated last mile vehicles in Delft, Netherlands investigated
the potential of automated vehicles (AVs) to enhance the last mile connectivity of train trips [4].
This study uncovered that the AVs were only competitive to walking, as additional performance
measures for the AVs needed to increase to be competitive with biking. In 4 of the operational
strategies, the introduction of automated vehicles impacted the last mile performance refarding
system capacity and travel time positively.
Rich’s research paper explores the welfare impact of FLMS, specifically addressing the potential
drawbacks such as reduced walking and associated health benefits [31]. The findings imply that
FLMS tend to perform poorly unless trip distances exceed 1 km due to high costs, waiting times,
and the health implications of reduced walking. His research show a critical view on popular FLMS
operational findings, and emphasize the potential great losses in socioeconomic health effects from
implementation of FLMS. These relations are also supported by Saif et al.’s literature review [28],
that state the importance of PT facilitating a minimum level of physical activity has a great impact
on socioeconomic.
2.3
Socioeconomic Benefits of Physical Activity
There are strong indications suggesting that physical activity may have significant benefits for the
health and wellness of a population [21]. This was also shown in Saif et al.’s literature review of PT
accessibility, where finds support the fact that physical activity has socioeconomic benefits [28]. In re-
cent years researchers have attempted to quantify the socioeconomic benefit, and found that physical
activity might have a greater benefit than first assumed. One research related to this was conducted
4
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
by Fishman et al. [12]. In their research they found that cycling levels in the Netherlands have great
health benefits for the whole population. The results showed that biking could give an average of 0.5
years longer life expectancy and prevented 6500 deaths every year. These health benefits gained the
Netherlands an socioeconomic benefit corresponding to €19 billion per year, which is 3% of the gross
domestic product. Compared to the investments in bicycle infrastructure the benefit is 38 times
greater than the investment. This showed the significance of physical activity in a socioeconomic
view. In Denmark COWI carried out a study measuring the value of health effects in relation to
biking. For quantifying matters, the final health effects where defined based on the socioeconomic
value of physical activity, costs related to accidents and costs of climate emission [35]. In their report
they found that normal biking gives an average socioeconomic benefit of 10.3 DKK per km. The
research also showed that the cost of electric bikes represents approx. half of the benefit compared to
normal bikes, due to a higher risk of accidents. As stated in Rich’s research paper, there is evidence to
suggest that the socioeconomic benefit for walking is similar to the benefit for biking in Denmark [31].
3
Theory
In this chapter some basic theory is presented, to give an understanding of the theories behind
the method in the following chapter. Subjects like cost-benefit assessments and general transport
modelling will be described, although is limited to the relevant themes in terms of understanding
the method.
3.1
Cost-Benefit Assessments
A widespread method of measuring impacts of changes in the society is cost-benefit analysis [11]. A
cost-benefit analysis searches to measure the positive or negative impact of a change in the society
based on defined costs and benefits produced by the change [19]. Inputs to a cost-benefit analysis
can be divided into four main categories: maintenance, external effects, construction, and consumer
surplus. The number of categories in an analysis depends on the proposed analysis and purpose.
Following, this section will mainly focus on consumer surplus, which is the primary focus in this thesis.
Rich and E. Mabit describes consumer surplus as "... a measure of the "net welfare" from a given
action" [19]. In a consumer surplus calculation, the net welfare will be different depending on
each consumer’s attributes. The general logic behind the calculation is: if the willingness to pay
for an article or service is higher than the actual price, the consumer is considered to receive a
positive welfare. As consumers have different willingness to pay, only the group of people that have
a willingness to pay larger than the price, have a positive welfare. This groups welfare is given by
the leftmost triangle C in figure 1. The demand is considered linear. Although in a scenario where
the price drops (from P0 to P1), there will be more people having a willingness to pay over the
price and the market expands from X0 to X1. This is equivalent to the expansion of rectangle B
and triangle A in the rightmost graph in figure 1, which gives the added welfare. The net welfare
equals the added areas of rectangle B and triangle A in the figure. To calculate the net welfare the
"rule-of-the-half" can be used and is given by: CS = (P0 −P1)(X0 + X1)/2.
5
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
3.2
Transport Modelling
Figure 1: Illustration of consumer surplus calculations [19]. Left: Scenario before price drop. Right: Scenario
after price drop.
To provide input data to a cost-benefit analysis, different kinds of methods can be used based on the
proposed case. One way of providing data to measuring changes in systems is transport models. A
rule of thumb in transport modelling is to calculate the consumer surplus at the most dis-aggregated
level, to avoid aggregation bias, as mentioned in section 3.2.2 [19]. In this thesis mode choice models
are used to provide market shares and prices as input to the defined welfare function. In the following
chapter the basic theories behind transport models and discrete choice models are described.
3.2
Transport Modelling
Traffic is produced by interactions between humans and social elements [13]. And as a human is
complex, analyzing traffic is also complex. In the mid 20th century researchers started to analyze the
complexity of traffic, resulting in early transport models in the 60s and 70s. These models provided
the planners with a tool to help understand how humans behave in a transport system and to assess
how a population could react to changes in a transport system. Today transport models has gained
great trust and power in supporting transport planning and assessment [19].
Transport models is a mathematical method of trying to replicate the traffic situation in a real-world
transportation system [22]. The purpose of the models varies, although the common factor is to
analyze behavior change due to changes in the transport system. Transport models’ purpose is
always specific, meaning that a model is only realistic when looking at it from a certain point of
view [22]. The model’s objective therefore highly impact the method of modelling in terms of level
of detail, input data etc.
To analyze behavior change in a model, a common practice is to define a base scenario, also called a
"Do-Nothing" scenario [19]. This scenario is used for comparison to other scenarios and serves as a
base scenario, often depicting the current transport system and demand in a geographical area. The
comparison scenarios are called "Do-Something" scenarios and picture the same transport system,
although with implemented changes. The system changes can apply both in terms of demand, supply
or a combination of both, depending on the analysis. The results from the analysis highly depend
on the definition of the scenarios, which makes thoroughly definition of the scenarios crucial.
6
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
3.2
Transport Modelling
3.2.1
Demand and Supply
Ennio Cascetta explains that "A transportation system can be defined as the combination of elements
and their interactions, which produce the demand for travel within a given area and the supply of
transportation services to satisfy this demand." [13]. The elements in his definition can be described
as e.g. households, workplaces, roads, speed-limits etc. The interaction arises when there is a need
to travel to different activities like school, work, training etc. This creates a demand for travel in
the system, where the roads, public transport network etc. will support the demand in supplying a
way of traveling through the system.
Transport modelling starts with defining the demand and supply in the transport system [13]. These
features define the characteristics and performance of the transport system in the model. The
demand can be defines based on different sampling techniques. This thesis includes simulated-based
sampling based on close to reality defined parameters and random sampling from surveys interviews.
Simulated sampling is the method of generating synthetic data that mimic real-world choice behavior.
Especially, it can be used when data do not exist or data is to expensive to gather [24]. Simulated
sampling can showcase potential combinations of variables, which enables exploration of a wide
range of potential combinations than in a real-life dataset. This makes it great for conceptual and
exploring models. Although this might make the dataset and model less applicable and comparable
to real-world situations.
Random sampling is the method of selecting individuals randomly from the population to form a
representative sample [23]. Survey interviews can be used to gather such data, although with the
emphasis on sampling a representative number of individuals. Survey interviews gather data directly
from individuals to understand attitudes, behavior, or opinions on specific topics [6]. For a dataset
to be representative of the studied population, it is important that the interviews cover a width in
the research population. Furthermore, the wording of the questions plays an crucial role in terms of
measuring the requested trends. Some challenges in interview surveys are respondent bias, which can
occur when individuals provide socially desirable answers rather than truthful responses or recalling
events inaccurately. Interviewer variability can also introduce bias, as interviewers can influence
respondents’ answers through variations in questioning.
The data collection method used for a transport model depends on the purpose and defined level of
detail on the model. Although it is always crucial that the data is reliable in terms of the specific
model purpose, as the results depend on the input data.
3.2.2
Level of Detail
An important aspect of modelling transport is the level of detail and aggregation [22]. A best practice
principle is that the model should be as detailed and close to reality at possible, in other words as
dis-aggregated as possible [19]. A property in an aggregated travel model is that the behavior of a
group is the same for all of the individuals within the group [19]. Despite that there are similarities
in the individuals’ attributes, it is wrongly assumed that they act exactly the same. This is called
aggregation bias, which introduces uncertainty to the model. Using dis-aggregated models lowers
the uncertainty of aggregation bias. Dis-aggregated models captures a greater width in individual
behavior, and can therefore show a greater diversity in trends throughout the population. Although,
dis-aggregated models come at a cost of budget, time and computational resources and the level of
7
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
3.2
Transport Modelling
detail is therefore often a trade-off in terms of error and complexity [22].
Agent-Based Modelling (ABM) is a branch within Individual-Based Models that simulates behavior
on a most dis-aggregated level [3]. The agents in the model are usually defined as individuals or
households. The agents interact based on defined interaction rules, which decides their interaction
with other agents in the system. The complexity and level of interaction between agents differ based
on the definitions of the models. By combining individual simulations with the unique properties of
agents’ decision-making, the models can provide detailed and valuable insights into complex human
behavior within a system.
3.2.3
The Classical 4-Stage Model
Transport models builds on the theory of the 4-Stage Model Framework [19]. The framework was
put forth in the 60s and 70s and has been a field practice ever since. The model divides the process
of transport modelling in 4 stages: Trip Generation, Trip Distribution, Modal Split and Assignment.
In trip generation, the objective is to estimate a model of the generated total number of trips and
the attraction within and between each zone in the study area. This is done based on the input data
given to the model. There are different approaches in how to successfully calculate the generation, e.g.
cross classification. In the next stage the trips are distributed to find the flow trends of trips between
origins and destinations, creating origin-destination matrices (OD-matrices). Gravity models are
the most common method of estimating the distribution in the OD-matrices. In the third stage the
modal split is found, estimating the mode of the trips in the OD-matrices. This is often modelled
using discrete mode choice models [23]. In the last stage the trips are assigned to the network, which
creates a demand in the network. Assignment models are widely used, which bases on route choice
models with shortest path and/or equilibrium assumptions. Each stage in the model introduce new
iterations, as all stages are connected and depend on each other. The iterations depend on the
complexity of the model.
As this thesis only consider mode choice and route choice, these two stages will be elaborated in the
following chapters.
3.2.4
Mode Choice Models
As mentioned, mode choice is most often modelled through discrete mode choice models. Discrete
choice models describe travelers’ choices between alternatives [23]. Choice models builds on the
assumption that the decision maker try to maximize their utility of their choice. The decision maker
is influenced by both observed and unobserved characteristics, the unobserved making mode choice
challenging to model. Therefore, random utility models (RUM) are often used in discrete choice
models to consider a randomness in the choices, to consider the unobserved characteristics. A RUM
take the form of Unj = Vnj + ϵnj for decision maker n for mode choice j. It consists of two elements:
Vnj representing the observed attributes of the alternative and ϵnj a stochastic element representing
the unobserved factors affecting choices. This component says something about the error in the
model and can be modelled with different distributions based on the difference between modelled
and observed choice behavior [23].
The deterministic and observed part, Vnj, can be modelled. And is defined based on a combination
of alternative specific constants (ASC), and β parameters multiplied with a traveler’s observed
attributes [23]. ASC and β parameters is used to say something about the utility of the travel mode
8
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
3.2
Transport Modelling
given the travelers attributes. The ASC’s and β values are often estimated using mode choice model
estimation based on observed data. The goal of the estimation is to fit the parameters and ASC
to replicate the observed choice behavior. The fit of the estimation can be determined based on
different validation methods e.g maximum likelihood estimation, significance of parameters, and
calibrating estimated mode shares to observed [23].
When using the calibrated and validated model for predicting mode shares, there are different ways of
calculating demand probabilities of each mode. One of the most widely used discrete choice models
is the multinomial logit (MNL) model. The MNL model assumes that the random components
are independently and identically distributed with a Gumbel distribution [23]. The MNL model is
given by Pni =
exp(Vni)
P
j exp(Vnj), where the probability that a traveler n will choose mode i is given by
Pni [23]. MNL treat the demand probability ratio between every pair of alternatives independent
of the other alternatives, called the property of Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives (IIA).
This property can make the MNL inappropriate in some situations, as unobserved factors related
to one mode can also relate to another mode. This can introduces an unknown uncertainty to a model.
To address the introduced uncertainties and limitation of IIA, various extensions of the MNL model
have been developed. These include e.g. the nested logit model which relaxes the IIA assumption by
grouping similar alternatives into nests, allowing for correlated utilities within the same nest [23].
While, the mixed logit model accounts for differences in individual preferences, allows substitution
between choices, and include random parameters in the utility function [23]. Lastly, the probit
model assumes normally distributed error terms and more flexible substitution patterns, although
increased computational complexity [23].
3.2.5
Route Choice Models
When travelling from an origin to a destination, it is possible to choose different routes in a transport
system. To estimate a traveler’s route and assign travelers to a route, route choice models can be
used [19]. Route choice can be modelled based on different assignment assumptions which include
all-or-nothing assignment, user equilibrium, stochastic user model and stochastic user equilibrium.
All-or-nothing assignment is the most simple, where all travelers are assigned to the least costly route.
The property of the assignment is that all travelers have full knowledge of all of their alternatives,
and which one is the least costly. Also, there are no capacity constraints on the routes due to
congestion or crowding. This may make the route choice model a simplification of the reality,
although its computational complexity has great benefits. User equilibrium is a more complex
assignment that takes into account capacity constraints and assumes, although the traveler still
has full knowledge of the least costly route and alternatives. This may make the assignment less
realistic. Stochastic user equilibrium introduces an uncertainty about travelers knowledge about
their least costly route. Travelers are therefore not assumed to not have full knowledge of the least
costly routes and alternatives while also considering capacity constraint on routes. Choosing an
assignment model is often a trade-off between computational complexity and reality-closeness as
each model offer different approaches and benefits.
In this thesis an all-or-nothing assignment is used for modelling PT route choice in the Artificial
Mode Choice Model. To find and assign the least costly route in the PT system for each traveler, a
Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm is used. Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm is a efficient algorithm
used to find the shortest paths between nodes in graphs with a reasonable number of nodes and
9
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
links, due to computational complexity[27]. A property and limitation of the algorithm is that all
weight on the edges needs to be positive. The algorithm searches to find the shortest path through a
system based on the weights dij on the links between nodes [8], given in the figure below.
Figure 2: Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm [8]
The algorithm’s method is described in simplicity as follows [8]: Initially the cost in each node is
set to infinity except the staring node, which is set to 0. Then the cost of moving to a connected
node is calculated. The cost is calculated on the weight on the connection link plus the cost in the
current node. If the cost of moving from the current node to the next node is less than the current
cost assigned to it, the cost in the node is updated. When all outgoing edges are explored, the
current node is marked as visited. Then, we move on to the next unvisited node with the shortest
distance from the source node to be the current node. The algorithm is repeated until all nodes are
visited. The algorithm visits each node only once, which makes it an effective algorithm with low
computational time.
4
Methodology
The design of the methodology is developed to help explore the proposed research questions and
hypotheses. In this chapter the general methodology will be presented, furthermore explained in
depth in chapters 5 and 6 for the representative models. The chapter presents the framework of
research design, how validity and reliability are handled and how limitations impact the research
findings.
4.1
Research Design and Method
This thesis utilizes a quantitative research approach to examine travelers’ mode choice behavior using
agent-based mode choice models, enabling the identification, and understanding of patterns and
relationships within the models. The aim of this thesis is to find trends within a population when
introducing a new travel mode. The application of mode choice modelling is therefore particularly
appropriate for this study, as it provides a robust framework for quantifying the influence of differ-
ent variables on mode selection, facilitating a deeper understanding of travelers’ decision-making
processes [23]. The thesis uses two very different models to capture tendencies, the Artificial Mode
Choice Model and Copenhagen Mode Choice Model.
10
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
4.2
Validity and Reliability
The Artificial mode choice model’s purpose is to measure general and theoretical trends when
introducing FLMS to a PT system, through the approach of Scenario Discovery [17]. Scenario
discovery is used as a vulnerability and optimization analysis for finding changes in health outcomes
and accessibility when changing PT granularity and introducing FLMS. The granularity of PT is
defined as the density of the stops within the system. The model uses simulated-based sampling to
describe an artificial population within a defined geographical area for exploration purposes. Key
variables such as socioeconomic attributes (e.g., VoT and health benefit), and trip characteristics
(e.g., origin, destination, waiting time) were generated based on possible distributions and ranges
explored in literature from trusted research. The dataset’s purpose is to mimic possible combinations
of characteristics from real-world travelers. On these terms, the dataset is considered representative
for exploration of a wide range of potential scenarios and their implications for mode choice behavior.
Additionally, it offers possible insights into welfare and accessibility trends that might not be captured
in a single real-world dataset with a fixed PT network. Although, the use of randomly generated
data presents certain limitations such as potential deviations from actual travel behavior, which
must be considered when analyzing the results. The results from the model is used to investigate
research questions 1 and 3, and hypotheses I, II and III as proposed in the introduction of this thesis.
The full specification of the model is presented in Chapter 5.
In the search of filling the gap between the Artificial model and capturing real-world travel behavior,
the Copenhagen model was developed. The purpose of the model is to showcase the possible
impact on health effects when introducing FLMS to a real population, and is used for exploration of
research questions 2 and 3, and hypotheses I, II and IV. The Copenhagen Model uses data collected
through the Danish National Transport Survey (Transportvaneundersøgelsen) [9]. This survey
gathers extensive information on the travel behavior of Danish residents, including trip purposes,
modes of transportation, travel distances, and duration and background information such as gender,
age, income, education and car ownership. The data is obtained from daily interviews conducted
year-round with individuals aged over 6 years (10-84 years up to 2015) residing in Denmark. The
individuals are selected to form a representative considered sample of the Danish population older
than 6 years. The model is presented in its entirety in Chapter 6.
In pursuit of measuring the social economic changes in the models, the approach of cost-benefit
analysis is applied to both models. The cost-benefit analysis is limited to measure the net welfare of
introducing a FLMS to a PT system, here called the welfare function (WF). The WF uses demand
probabilities and defined prices for walking and FLMS as AE to/from PT. The prices are a function
of cost increasing travel times and -costs and cost decreasing health benefits from active travel modes.
A positive value from the WF gives the population a welfare in terms of balancing travel times,
-costs and health effects when introducing a FLMS, while a negative value gives a greater loss of
health effects. The definition of the WF is specified for each model in chapter 5 and 6, although
to ensure consistency in the analysis the WFs builds on the same premises for all models. In the
Artificial Model, the WF incorporates in a multi-objective optimization study of granularity, in
terms of accessibility and welfare. This is further described in the respective chapter.
4.2
Validity and Reliability
The validity of the research bases on the input data and purpose of the models described in the
previous chapter. The Artificial Model is designed based on random simulated data and realistic
parameters, moreover calibrated based on real mode shares in a city. All features with the purpose of
11
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
4.3
Limitations
depicting a close to realistic representation of a population. Although the model has great limitations
due to the model’s simple design, it can be argued to represent a valid model in terms of the models
objective, to exploring possible trends in travel behavior in a system with changing granularities.
As the model is theoretical and provides a simplified representation of the real world, it can be
argued to give somewhat generalized results for a population. Hence, can be applicable for a broader
conceptual understanding rather than specific real-world applications. However the model highly
relies on the specified parameters, which are based on Danish research and urban conditions. This
may make the findings less applicable to populations with different attributes.
The Copenhagen model is borrowed from model owner Dimitrios Argyros, DTU, as will be elab-
orated in Chapter 6. The validity of the model is therefore ensured by the owner, although it is
considered a somewhat validated model by researchers at DTU.The model is estimated based on TU
data for the whole of Denmark, although is simulated only for the Copenhagen and Frederiksberg
municipalities. This can introduce uncertainties based on the validity of the results. Although
comparing the simulated mode shares to the observed mode shares in the TU data for Copenhagen
and Frederiksberg, the model gives a good approximation. This strengthens the validity of the
model. In this thesis, the model is assumed valid for predicting mode shares for the scenario without
FLMS. As the mode share for FLMS in Copenhagen is unknown due to limited research, this mode
share cannot be validated although serves as an estimate of a potential mode share. In terms of
generalization, the model provides specific real-world applications on the contrary to the Artificial
Model. The level of generalization is therefore considered low, as the results are less applicable to
other populations.
Reliability can be viewed based on the consistency and repeatability of the research findings. In
both models, the findings rely on the input data and defined parameters. The Artificial Model uses a
random seed to simulate the same 4000 individuals throughout the granularities. As the simulation
is defined based on covering a width of individuals with potential combinations of attributes. As
the simulation embrace many different combinations of individual attributes, changing the seed
of the simulation is therefore expected to show somewhat similar results within the definition.
This strengthens the reliability of the study. Although, changing the definition of the simulation
and parameters are expected to largely impact the findings, which challenges the consistency and
repeatability of the research. However in this thesis’ research, the model is considered reliable in
terms of definition and purpose of the model.
In the Copenhagen Model, the reliability of the findings lies in the data collection. The comprehen-
siveness of the TU dataset is trusted to capture a representative replication of the Danish population.
Hence, an update of the TU data is expected to show somewhat the same trends as in this study.
This strengthens the reliability of the results. Like in the Artificial Model, the findings are highly
dependent on the defined parameters. Changing these will therefore impact the results from the
findings. Although, the model is trusted as reliable in terms of the purpose and definition of the
study.
4.3
Limitations
The design of the models used in this research introduces limitations to the study. Understanding
the limitations of a research is crucial in terms of understanding and interpreting the results. The
models are highly dependent on the defined parameters and can only be interpreted in terms of these.
12
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
4.3
Limitations
The use of randomly generated data in the Artificial Model, may show greater variability compared
to actual travel behavior. Consequently, the findings must be interpreted with caution based on this.
The data in the Copenhagen model relies on reported information from individuals regarding their
travel activities and socio-demographic characteristics. Self-reported data can be subject to biases
such as recall bias, social desirability bias, and non-response bias, which may affect the accuracy and
reliability of the data. As the data for both models were designed to represent a Danish population,
the findings may not be directly applicable to populations with different socioeconomic or cultural
characteristics. This limits the generalizability of the results to other contexts as differences in
transportation infrastructure, economic conditions, and cultural attitudes can influence mode choice
behavior.
The Multinomial Logit models used in this study rely on certain assumptions, such as the inde-
pendence of irrelevant alternatives. This assumption implies that the relative odds of choosing
between any two modes of transportation are unaffected by the presence or characteristics of other
alternatives. In real-world scenarios, this assumption may not always hold true, potentially leading
to biased estimates and conclusions which must be considered when assessing the results.
The models are based on the assumption and limitation that walk is the only competing mode
to FLMS [4]. Therefore, in both the Artificial and Copenhagen model only walk and FLMS are
considered as AE modes. As there are several more AE modes (bike, e-bike, car, scooter etc.) with
shorter travel times than walking, simulations may show an overestimate of potential walk and
FLMS users. Although the models are assumed to capture the seeking trends of the thesis due to
the mentioned limitation. Also, the design of travel mode choices limits the analysis, as different
travel modes on access or egress is not considered. Using a FLMS may be attractive for either access
or egress to some travelers. However, due to the design of the study this will not be measured in the
models. If FLMS is not attractive for one part of the trip (either access or egress), this will have a
decreasing effect on demand probabilities and welfare. This is simply a limitation in the research
and defines the research findings.
Another limitation in the study is the definition of the FLMS. The FLMS is defined as a door-to-door
vehicle service with defined parameters, although can be considered loosely defined. This can make
the FLMS challenging to generalize, although shown conseptual results for a possible FLMS. When
modelling FLMS, hidden waiting time and order penalty is not included in the specification. These
measures can decrease the demand for FLMS, which means an over-estimation of FLMS users in the
models. This needs to be considered when interpreting the results. Related to FLMS loose definition,
if the FLMS drives in normal traffic, the demand will impact and be impacted by the travel time
on the roads. As more vehicles will drive on the roads, the travel time of cars will increase due to
congestion. This can imply that more car drivers consider changing to other modes. This again
will decrease the travel time for cars, although imply increase in crowding and travel time for other
modes. These relations are not considered in the proposed models, thus will have an effect on mode
share.
In the Artificial Model, there are no capacity constraint on any of the travel modes. This impacts
the mode choice of the travelers, as there are no road congestion or PT crowding for the traveler to
take into consideration. This may make the model less realistic. Although, as the model is used to
shows conceptual trends, the model still serves it’s purpose regardless of the limitation. Another
13
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
limitation in the Artificial Model is the comparison of the scenarios. As described in Chapter 5
the comparison of scenarios is done based on a network with a given granularity without FLMS,
with the same network and granularity with FLMS. The comparison of results is not done across
granularities and needs to be considered when interpreting the results.
The Copenhagen Model has been simulated with a fixed demand to the current PT mode share. As
the overall PT demand was fixed, the model did not capture potential PT travelers from other modes.
This was a used as a simplification to the model, although it is expected that the demand across all
modes will change due to introducing a new travel mode [22]. Although, due to uncertainties of how
FLMS will impact the overall mode share, the limitation was used to reduce the uncertainties of the
model output.
5
Artificial Mode Choice Model
The following chapter will describe the definition of the Artificial Mode Choice Model, and the
assumptions behind. Moreover, the chapter will present the input data, parameters and lastly the
results from the model simulation. An important note is that the model only consider walk for both
access and egress, or FLMS for both access and egress. The results are therefore presented based on
the sum of access and egress distances.
5.1
Model Specification
The Artificial Mode Choice Model is used to calculate a FLMS’ impact on health effects for constant
individuals within a public transport system with varying granularity. The model simulates results
for granularity scenarios 1000, 1500, 2000, 2500, 3000 and 3500 meters. For each granularity a
Do-Nothing and Do-Something Scenario is defined. The Do-Nothing Scenario considers a population
with alternative mode choices Walk+PT, Car, Walk and Bike. In the Do-Something Scenario the
alternative mode FLMS+PT is introduced.
The goal of the model is to calculate a WF that measure individuals net welfare when introducing a
FLMS. The WF builds on the theory of consumer surplus described in subsection 3.1, and measures
loss in health effects vs. travel time and -cost based on the change in demand probabilities for
PT. The function takes as input defined prices and demand probabilities for the Do-Nothing and
Do-Something scenarios to measure the change in the system. The price is defined as a function of
cost increasing travel time and -cost, and cost decreasing health effects of physical activity. The
model’s prices for modes car, bike and walk is constant in both scenarios, hence the prices for these
cancels out in the WF. The WF therefore only consider the change modes related to PT. As the
potential demand of FLMS in the Do-Nothing scenario is unknown we assume for model simplicity,
that demand is half the demand for PT in this scenario. This assumption builds on the method
proposed in Rich’s related research [31], and creates a value of comparison and shows theoretical
changes in the demand probabilities. The WF is shown below.
WF = (pWalk+PT,2 −pFLMS+PT )(dWalk+PT,2 + dFLMS+PT )
2
(5.1)
Additionally the model will be used to explore a multi-objective optimization case of minimizing
14
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
5.1
Model Specification
the loss in health effects and maximize the increase in accessibility based on granularity of PT. The
optimization will be calculated by multiplying the net welfare from the WF with the percentage
change in PT demand for each granularity scenario.
The welfare and change in demand are
equally weighted in the optimization. Following is the detailed specification of the Do-Nothing and
Do-Something scenarios.
5.1.1
Do-Nothing Scenario
The Do-Nothing scenario is structured with mode choices; Walk+PT, Car, Walk and Bike. An
assumption is made that all PT travelers in the system use walk as access and egress mode to/from
stations. This will lead to an overestimation of people walking to and from public transport, as there
are additional access and egress modes such as e.g. biking and scooters. Although the assumption
bases on the research from Delft, that only walking is competitive to FLMS [12]. For model and
comparison reasons the demand for Walk+PT is divided into two travel mode choices as described
in the previous section. Although, the two mode choices have identical utility functions and will
therefore take 50% of the demand each. The utility functions are a combination of alternative
specific constants, β-values, travel time and -cost for each mode as given below. A description of the
variables can be found in Appendix .1, while descriptive statistics of the variables and parameter
definition can be found in section 5.2.
UWalk+PT,1 = kWalk+PT + β1TTWalk + β2GTPT
(5.2)
UCar = kCar + β2GTCar
(5.3)
UWalk+PT,2 = UWalk+PT,1
(5.4)
UWalk = kWalk + β1TTWalk
(5.5)
UBike = kBike + β1TTBike
(5.6)
The demand probabilities for modes are calculated with a multinominal logit model, as shown in
section 3.2.4 and seen for the Artificial Model below.
dWalk+PT,1 =
eUW alk+P T,1
eUW alk+P T,1 + eUCar + eUW alk+P T,2 + eUW alk + eUBike
(5.7)
dCar =
eUCar
eUW alk+P T,1 + eUCar + eUW alk+P T,2 + eUW alk + eUBike
(5.8)
dWalk+PT,2 =
eUW alk+P T,2
eUW alk+P T,1 + eUCar + eUW alk+P T,2 + eUW alk + eUBike
(5.9)
dWalk =
eUW alk
eUW alk+P T,1 + eUCar + eUW alk+P T,2 + eUW alk + eUBike
(5.10)
dBike =
eUBike
eUW alk+P T,1 + eUCar + eUW alk+P T,2 + eUW alk + eUBike
(5.11)
The WF’s prices in the Do-Nothing scenario is defined as travel time and -cost giving an increase
in cost for each individual, while health effects of walking a decrease. Travel time and -costs are
multiplied with the individual Value of Time for conversion into a comparable unit with health
effects, DKK. The health effect is given based on θ, which is expressed by DKK per km. It is
modelled as a random parameter that differs between 0, 3.34, 6.87 and 10,3 DKK/km to take into
account a varying outcome of physical activity for different individuals. The intervals of θ are defined
15
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
5.1
Model Specification
based on measured transport economic benefits of biking in Denmark [35], which was shown to be
similar to walking. As the average health effect was reported to be 10.3 DKK/km, the varying θ is
assumed to not overestimate the health effect of physical activity. The price for Walk+PT is the
same for both travel modes considering PT. pWalk+PT,2 works as a price comparison with FLMS in
the Do-Something Scenario. A description and definition of the variables can be found in Appendix
.1, and the description of the parameters follows in section 5.2.
pWalk+PT = (TTWalk + GTPT )V oTV −θ(DistAccess + DistEgress)
(5.12)
pCar = GTCarV oTV + UnitCostCarDistMain
(5.13)
pWalk+PT,2 = pWalk+PT,1
(5.14)
pWalk = TTWalkV oTV −θDistMain
(5.15)
pBike = TTWalkV oTV −θDistMain
(5.16)
5.1.2
Do-Something Scenario
The Do-Something scenario builds on the definition of the Do-Nothing scenario, although introduces
a new travel mode FLMS+PT instead of Walk+PT,2. This is done to calculate the impact of
introducing a FLMS to a system, by compared it to a mode that has half of the mode share of PT.
The utility functions for Walk+PT,1, Car, Bike and Walk stays constant, while the utility function
for FLMS+PT takes the place of Walk+PT,2. The new utility function for FLM+PT is given below.
UFLMS+PT = kFLMS+PT + β3GTFLMS + β2GTPT
(5.17)
The demand probabilities are calculated using the same theory as in the Do-Nothing scenario,
although this time using the utility for FLMS+PT instead of Walk+PT,2.
dWalk+PT =
eUW alk+P T
eUW alk+P T + eUCar + eUF LMS+P T + eUW alk + eUBike
(5.18)
dCar =
eUCar
eUW alk+P T + eUCar + eUF LMS+P T + eUW alk + eUBike
(5.19)
dFLMS+PT =
eUF LMS+P T
eUW alk+P T + eUCar + eUF LMS+P T + eUW alk + eUBike
(5.20)
dWalk =
eUW alk
eUW alk+P T + eUCar + eUF LMS+P T + eUW alk + eUBike
(5.21)
dBike =
eUBike
eUW alk+P T + eUCar + eUF LMS+P T + eUW alk + eUBike
(5.22)
In the same manner, the prices are equal the Do-nothing scenario prices except for the Walk+PT,2
where the defined price for FLMS+PT is used. The price for FLMS+PT is a combination of travel
time and travel cost and is defined below. The definition of the variables can be found in Appendix
.1.
pFLMS+PT = (GTPT + GTFLMS)V oTV
(5.23)
16
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
5.2
Input Data and Parameters
5.2
Input Data and Parameters
5.2.1
Simulated Input Data
For each granularity scenario 4000 individual trips are randomly simulated within a given geographical
frame with random, yet constant origin and destination coordinates throughout the granularities.
The consistency of the individuals are secured by defining a seed for the random simulation. Within
the geographical frame, a PT system with a Manhattan grid structure is simulated, based on the
defined granularity between PT stations in the scenario. An example for granularity 1000m is shown
in figure 3.
Figure 3: Simulated origins, destinations and PT stations in the model with granularity 1000 m.
The direct distance is calculated between the origin and destination, and the distance to the nearest
stations for access and egress using the Haversine formula [15]. For finding and assigning the shortest
path through the PT system, an all-or-nothing assignment i used. The all-or nothing assignment
uses the approach of Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm based on travel time as described in section
3.2.5. The PT-lines are considered as straight lines in x- and y direction. In the examples above,
this means 15 lines running in y-direction and 9 in x-direction. The travel time in the PT is the
same between every station as the algorithm does not take into account congestion in the PT system.
However, a transfer fee and waiting time is assigned to the traveler if the traveler has to change
between x- and y-lines. Descriptive statistics for the simulated haversine distances between origins
and destinations can be seen in table 1 and the trip length distribution in figure 4. The individual
trips are kept constant over all granularity-scenarios, therefore descriptive statistics is the same over
all granularity scenarios. This is done to capture the impact of changing the granularity, for the
individuals.
Table 1: Descriptive statistics for simulated distances from origin to destination in km.
17
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
5.2
Input Data and Parameters
Figure 4: Trip length distribution for simulated distances from origin to destination over all granularities in
km (n=24000).
Because the granularity change for every scenario, as will AE and PT distances. The descriptive
statistics for combined access and egress distances is given in table 2 and for distances traveled on
PT in table 3. The mean AE distances increase as the density of the granularity decrease, except
for granularity 3000m, where the mean distance is 0.01 km lower than for granularity 2500m. In
the 2500m and 3000m scenario the number of stations is the same due to the geographical area
limitations, although they are not positioned in the same location. This might be the reason for the
similarities in AE distances. For PT distances the mean varies between 6.56km and 7.84km due to
the varying closeness to the simulated origin and destinations. In the 2500m scenario the mean PT
distance is 6.56km, which is a significant decrease from the rest of the granularities. This might be
caused by a random effect of how origins, destinations and stations coincide in the system.
Table 2: Descriptive statistics for simulated combined access and egress distances in km.
Table 3: Descriptive statistics for simulated distances on public transport in km.
The trip length distribution over all granularities can be seen for combined AE distance in figure 5
18
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
5.2
Input Data and Parameters
and for PT distances over all granularities in figure 6. We can see that there is a large number of
observations of access and egress trips between 0.5 - 1.5km simulated, while after 1.5km the amount
of simulated observations decrease. For PT distances the trip distribution is more spread out with
the most observations between 2 - 12km.
Figure 5: Trip length distribution for simulated combined access and egress distances over all granularities
in km (n=24000).
Figure 6: Trip length distribution for simulated distances on public transport over all granularities in km
(n=24000).
5.2.2
Parameter Definitions
The PT system is assumed to have a high frequency of approx. 10 minutes, which impacts the
waiting and transfer times within the system. Research show that for systems with a frequency of
10-minutes, 50% of the travelers time their arrival, while 50% arrive randomly [20]. In the model, it
is assumed that the waiting time have a random uniform distribution between 0 to 10 minutes. As
19
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
5.2
Input Data and Parameters
50% of the travelers might time their arrival, the distribution might be skewed to the left. Although,
to not underestimate the potential waiting times at the stations, a uniformly distribution is used.
For transfer times, it is assumed that the arrivals of the corresponding PT lines are timed. The
transfer times at all stations are defined to have a random normal distribution with mean 5 minutes
and standard deviation 1.5 minutes. The distribution takes into account some possible delays and
early arrivals in the two corresponding lines.
As there are uncertainties to what a FLMS will cost the traveler, the cost is defined as a random
parameter between 0, 0.98 and 2.25 DKK/km. It is assumed that the passenger will split the cost
between 1-2 other travelers, as there are more than one person in the FLMS. This is assumed based
on efficiency findings in the literature review. Hence, the fare cost for FLMS is low.
In addition to the already mentioned parameters, other parameters have been assigned to the model
based on assumptions and relevant literature. All parameters, their background and source can be
seen in table 4. The definition of several parameters builds on assumptions from Jeppe Rich’s paper
on the "Fallacy of First- and Last- Mile Public Transport" [31]. A written background for these
parameters is not given in the table as they can be found in the referred to literature, although they
are linked with the reference to the paper.
Table 4: Definition of parameters in the Artificial Model.
Parameter
Value
Description
Pi
1.27
Unit cost for car [31]
β1
-0.1
β for walk and bike [31]
β2
-0.03
β for PT main trip [31]
β3
-0.06
β for access and egress trips [31].
ws
6
Walking speed km/h [31]
bs
18
Biking speed km/h, defined based on TU-data, average speed for dedicated bike lanes [25].
fs
15
FLMS speed km/h [31]
msp
25
Public Transport speed km/h [31]
msc
35
Car speed km/h [31]
pc
2
Public Transport operational cost DKK [31]
cc
2
Car operational cost DKK [31]
transfer
11
Price defined value of transferring trains. Based on measured waiting times compared to
in vehicle time for S-trains in Copenhagen [29]
ptw
uniform(0,10)
Random uniformly distributed waiting time on stations between 0 and 10 minutes [20].
cht
normal(5,1.5)
Random normal distributed changing time when transferring with mean 5 min and
st. dev. 1.5 min. Defined based in times PT lines.
WTFLMS
lognormal(1,0.25)
Random lognormal distributed waiting time for FLMS with mean 1 min and
st. dev. 0.5 min. [31]
VoT
rand(1.05, 1.85, 2.65)
Modelled as a random choice between the proposed numbers to take into account different
individuals Value of Time [31].
foc
rand(0, 0.98, 2.25)
Modelled as a random choice between the proposed numbers to take into account a
varying travel cost per passenger per km with a FLMS [31].
θ
rand(0,3.43,6.87,10.3)
Modelled as a random choice between the proposed numbers to take into account different
individuals’ health benefit of walking and biking [35]. See section 5.1.1.
20
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
5.2
Input Data and Parameters
5.2.3
Calibration of Alternative Specific Constants
A simple method of calibrating a mode choice mode is through "Calibration of alternative specific
constants". The algorithm uses the estimated alternative specific constants ˆaj, observed market
shares Sk
j and simulated market shares Ak
j to calibrate the model simulated market shares to the
observed market shares, as shown in figure 7.
Figure 7: Iterative algorithm to calibrate alternative specific constants [19].
The method is used to calibrate the Alternative Specific Constants in the model to replicate
observed mode shares. As input to the calibration, the travel mode shares Sk
j is gathered from
transportvaner.dk [10], which is a recognized dataset in Denmark based on TU data. The extraction
in made based on trips (ture) with home base in the region of Copenhagen, to consider trips in an
urban area. The resulting mode shares is based on 84,388 observed trips over the past 8 years and
can be seen in table 5. The mode share is extracted over all trip purposes. The data gives a mode
share for "Other" travel modes to be 0.1%. On the basis that this is a low mode share and that the
model does not include this mode, this share is neglected in the calibration.
Table 5: Observed mode shares for Copenhagen and Frederiksberg residents used for calibration. Based on
data from TU 2023 [10].
Travel Mode
Market Share
PT
8.8%
Car
44.1%
Walk
27.5%
Bike
19.6%
Other
0.1%
In the calibration the mode shares for PT are shared 50/50 between the alternative modes Walk+PT,1
and Walk+PT,2. The calibration is conducted on the granularity scenario of 1500m, which is close
to the observed granularity of S-trains in Copenhagen. 0.003 has been used for ϵ in the calibration.
ASC for FLMS+PT is assumed based on the calibration of the the mode share of Walk+PT. The
resulting ASC parameters is shown in table 6 and is kept constant over all granularity scenarios.
21
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
5.3
Results
Table 6: Results from calibration of ASC in the Artificial Model.
ASC
Value
kW alk+P T
-0.360502433
kCar
0.003736491
kF LMS+P T
-0.503135385
kW alk
2.961423645
kBike
0.353693358
5.3
Results
In this section the results from the Artificial Mode Choice Model will be presented. The results from
each granularity scenario simulation are a dataset describing demand probabilities, travel times and
-cost for each individual, including individual WF results. The data is processed and visualized to
find relevant trends in the results.
5.3.1
Welfare Function
To analyzing trends in terms of combined AE distances and net welfare from the WF, equation 5.1,
visualizations have been created. Figure 8 shows how the simulated results over all granularities is
dependent on AE distance and net welfare. Each dot in the in the graph represents an observed trip
with corresponding net welfare and AE distance. The color of the dot determines which granularity
scenario the observation is from. The plotted line is created using a Locally Weighted Scatterplot
Smoothing (LOWESS) [33] and shows the average trend over all granularity scenarios. The LOWESS
use a smoothing of 0.05 and show trends within each granularity. The boxplot show the distribution
of AE distances for each granularity. The middle line inside the box show the average AE distance,
while the box cover the 75th percentile of AE distances in the area. The whiskers show the full
range of AE distances in the granularity scenario.
The graph shows that the trend of the relation between welfare and the AE distance is similar across
granularities. All granularities show a most negative welfare when the AE distance is low, thus
increasing with the AE distance. The average welfare over all granularities is positive after approx.
1.2 km. After the having crossed 0 DKK, the graph show a less increasing and flat trend in welfare
as the AE distance increases. In the boxplot we see that the width and average of AE distances
increase as the density of granularity decrease, with the exception of granularity scenario 3000m
as mentioned in section 5.2. Here, the width and average of AE distances is lower than the 2500m
granularity scenario.
22
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
5.3
Results
Figure 8: Descriptive statistics of AE distances, and average trend for AE distances and net welfare over all
granularities.
Figure 9 shows how AE distance and welfare impacts the different groups of VoT as an average over
all granularity scenarios. Individuals with the highest VoT show characteristics of an overall positive
trend, indicating that if AE distance increases the welfare also increases. Initially, the graph shows
a strong positive trend where the average welfare turns positive at approx. AE distance 0.8 km.
However, as the AE distance increase the slope of the positive trend decreases. For the middle VoT,
the slope of the graph is less than for the highest VoT, although still shows a positive trend. The
graph crosses 0 at AE distance approx. 1.2 km and is still slightly increasing after that. Notably,
the lowest VoT show a more flat trend compared to the other observed VoTs. The graph is slowly
moving towards 0 as the AE distance increases, and reaches its highest point at approx. AE distance
2.4 km. However, he average over individuals with low VoT it never positive.
For all individuals with VoT 1.05 DKK/min 69.3% where reported with a negative net welfare. For
the 30.7% reported with a positive welfare, the average θ was observed to be 0.97 DKK/km with
standard deviation 1.54 DKK/km. The mean AE distance reported for the same group was 1.6km
with standard deviation 0.62km. This suggests that the ones with the combination of low VoT, low
θ and a higher AE distance gain from FLMS.
23
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
5.3
Results
Figure 9: Average trend for AE distances and net welfare for different VoT over all granularities.
Over all granularities, the average net welfare for individuals with AE distance under 1km is reported
as -0.11 DKK with standard deviation 0.23 DKK. Of the ones having a AE distance under 1km,
71.5% was reported with a negative welfare. The 28.5% having a positive welfare was characterized
with a mean VoT of 2.0 DKK/min and θ 1.49 DKK/km.
The total sum of net welfare from the WF is given for each granularity in table 7. Welfare is first
positive in granularity scenario 2000m and has the highest total welfare at granularity 3500m and
second highest at 2500m.
Table 7: Total net welfare from the WF for each granularity in DKK.
5.3.2
Change in Mode Share
Table 8 and 9 show the mode shares for each granularity scenario, while table10 show the calculated
difference between the Do-Nothing and the Do-Something scenario. In the base scenario we see a
decreasing demand for PT and an increase in demand for car, walk and bike when the density of the
granularity decrease. This is expected as when travel time for PT increases due to longer walking
distances to PT, travelers will consider other travel modes. The increase in car is larger than for
walk and bike, which is also expected as distances travelled on PT is often longer and cannot be
reached withing agreeable travel time by bike or walking. Car is then the more attractive option in
terms of time and cost. While in the FLMS scenario we see the same trends, the ratio of the changes
24
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
for walk, bike and car is not that large compared to the base scenario. In the FLMS scenario, we still
see a decrease in PT+Walk share, although an increase in PT+FLMS with the decreasing density
of the granularity. Notably, for granularity scenario 2500 and 3000 the mode shares are similar for
Walk+PT in both scenarios.
Table 8: Mode share results for the Do-Nothing scenario
Table 9: Mode shares for the Do-Something scenario
Table 10: Change in mode share: Do-Something minus Do-Nothing scenario.
5.3.3
Multi-Objective Optimization
The multi-objective optimization is calculated by multiplying the total net welfare for each granularity
scenario in table 7 with the total change in mode share for PT. The values for granularity scenarios
1000, 1500, 2000, 2500, 3000 and 3500m are respectably: 0.6%, 1.9%, 2.3%, 3.4%, 3.1 % and 3.1%.
The results of the multi-objective optimization calculation are given in the table below.
Table 11: Result from the multi-objective optimization calculation.
6
Copenhagen Mode Choice Model
In this chapter the definition of the Copenhagen Mode Choice Model will be described. The input
data and defined parameters will be presented similarly as in the Artificial Model chapter. Lastly,
25
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
6.1
Model Specification
the results from the model is presented. An important note is that the model only consider walk for
both access and egress, or FLMS for both access and egress. The results are therefore presented
based on the sum of access and egress distances.
6.1
Model Specification
The Copenhagen model is a mode choice model borrowed from and build by Dimitrios Argyros,
PhD student at DTU, and simulates mode choice in Denmark on LTM zone level 3. The model
is trained and calibrated using TU data [9] for the whole of Denmark and describes mode choice
behavior based on travel times and -costs for different modes, based on gender, age, population
density, bike- and car ownership. Considered a validated model by DTU, it presents a more realistic
mode choice model compared to the Artificial Model. The full specification of this model will not be
presented in this thesis, as building and validating the model is considered outside of the scope of
this thesis. Although the relevant parameters and variables used in the simulation will be given. The
model consists of two mode choice models, one for trip purpose Work and Education, and one for
Other Activities. The models are built using the same method, meanwhile the utility function and
input data differ. The model simulation is done for the two models separated. Simulation of mode
choice in this thesis is limited to only consider internal trips within Copenhagen and Frederiksberg
municipalities, and do not include trips with origin and destination outside of the municipalities. See
figure 10 for zone limitation. This is done to capture tendencies of health effects when introducing
FLMS in densely populated areas with an extended PT system.
Figure 10: LTM zones used for simulation of mode choice in the Copenhagen and Frederiksberg model [9].
The goal of the simulation is to calculate the defined Welfare Function. The WF is defined based
on the same theory and definitions as in the Artificial Model. For simulating input to the WF,
26
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
6.1
Model Specification
a Do-Nothing Scenario and Do-Something Scenario is defined. Like in the Artificial Model, the
demand of FLMS is not known. Similarly, the demand is therefore assumed to be half of the demand
for PT for consistency and comparison reasons. The WF is given below, and builds on the same
presmisses as in the Artificial model. The following chapter will describe the definition of prices and
demand calculations for the WF.
WF = (pPT −pFLMS+PT )((dPT /2) + dFLMS+PT )
2
(6.24)
6.1.1
Do-Nothing Scenario
The Do-Nothing scenario is defined as the original model output from Argyros’ model, which includes
travel modes walk, bike, e-bike, car passenger and PT. The demand probabilities are calculated
using a multinominal logit model, as given for PT in the equation below.
dPT =
eUP T
eUW alk + eUBike + eUE−Bike + eUCarP + eUCar + eUP T
(6.25)
For consistency in the thesis the assumption that all PT travelers use walk as access and egress
mode to/from stations based on the findings that only walking is competitive to FLMS [12]. The
price of PT is defined based on the same principles as in the Artificial Model, and is given below.
pPT = (TTWalk,AE + TTPT + TCPT /V oT)V oT −θ(DistAccess + DistEgress)
(6.26)
6.1.2
Do-Something Scenario
To simulate the potential demand probabilities and prices in the Do-Something scenario, the estimated
parameters in Argyros’ original model are used to define a nested logit model (NL). The NL model
is structured as shown in figure 11. Demand is treated as fixed, as we only consider finding the
potential mode shares within the current demand of PT. Introducing changes to a transport model
will always affect the outcome of the model [19], and therefore also the demand. However, as there
is no available data to simulate or predict how mode choice shares will be affected, we assume for
simplicity that the mode choice shares do not change.
Figure 11: Structure of the nested logit model used in the Copenhagen Model.
27
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
6.1
Model Specification
Within the nest the utility for each access and egress mode is calculated, based on parameters and
utility functions from Argyros’ model. The original utility function for walk is used directly to
calculate the utility for walking to/from PT, while the utility function for car passenger is used to
represent using a FLMS to access and egress PT. The utility functions for the Work and Education
model are given below.
UWalk,AE =
ASC1 + βgtt,1TTWalk,AE + βfemale,1Female
(6.27)
+ βageG0,1AgeG0 + βageG1,1AgeG1
+ βZpop,1log(Zpop)
UFLMS,AE =
ASC5 + βgtt,4(TTFLMS,AE + TCFLMS,AE/V oT)
(6.28)
+ betagttlog4log(TTFLMS,AE + TCFLMS,AE/V oT)
+ βfemale,5Female + βageG0,5AgeG0
+ βZpop,5log(Zpop)
(6.29)
Following is the utility functions used in the Other Activities model.
UWalk,AE =
ASC1 + βgtt,1TTWalk,AE + βfemale,1Female
(6.30)
+ βageG0,1AgeG0 + βageG1,1AgeG1
+ βageG4,1AgeG4 + βZpop,1log(Zpop)
UFLMS,AE =
ASC5 + βgtt,4(TTFLMS,AE + TCFLMS,AE/V oT)
(6.31)
+ βfemale,5Female + βageG0,5AgeG0
+ βageG1,5AgeG1 + βageG3,5AgeG3
+ βageG4,5AgeG4 + βZpop,5log(Zpop)
(6.32)
The choice probabilities for each access and egress travel mode are calculated as a multinominal logit
model, as given in equations 6.33 and 6.34. The choice probabilities for Walk+PT and FLMS+PT is
calculated as the joined choice probabilities of access and egress mode, given the traveler has chosen
public transport. The equations 6.35 and 6.36 shows the calculation of the joint choice probabilities.
dWalk,AE =
eUW alk,AE
eUW alk,AE + eUF LMS,AE
(6.33)
dFLMS,AE =
eUF LMS,AE
eUW alk,AE + eUF LMS,AE
(6.34)
dWalk,AE|PT = dWalk,AEdPT
(6.35)
dFLMS,AE|PT = dFLMS,AEdPT
(6.36)
The prices for the alternative FLMS+PT are defined on the same premisses as in the Artificial
28
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
6.2
Input Data and Parameters
Model, and shown below.
pFLMS+PT = (TTFLMS,AE + TTPT + TCPT /V oT + TCFLMS/V oT)V oT
(6.37)
6.2
Input Data and Parameters
6.2.1
Gathered Input Data
The data used in the Copenhagen Model is collected through the Danish National Transport Survey
(Transportvaneundersøgelsen) [9]. This survey gathers extensive information on the travel behavior
of Danish residents, including trip purposes, modes of transportation, travel distances, and duration.
The data is used to analyze and understand travel patterns and trends within the country. The
characteristics of the simulation data will be presented, although not for the training data as
estimation is considered outside the scope of this thesis. Although the simulation of the two models
is done separately with separate data sets, trip purpose is not considered relevant in this thesis.
Therefore descriptive statistics is presented based on the combined input dataset for the two models,
and the results on the combined output dataset from the two models.
The distribution of the combined access and egress distances is described in figure 12. The distances
vary between 0.1 to 0.55 km, with a peak of distances between 0.35-0.4 km. The model consider
access and egress travel time for all PT modes in Copenhagen and Frederiksberg municipalities.
Figure 12: Trip length distribution over combined access and egress distances in the Copenhagen model
(n=7447).
The table below shows descriptive statistics of selected input data in the simulation dataset. The
data gives observed travel time (TT) in minutes and travel costs (TC) in DKK for different modes,
speeds in km/h and Value of Time in DKK/min. From the statistics we can see that the travel cost
of PT is constant 18 DKK. The mean VoT over all individuals is 2.4 DKK/min.
29
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
6.3
Results
Table 12: Descriptive Statistics of Simulation data from TU (n=7447).
6.2.2
Parameter Definitions
Many of the parameters used in the simulation is already given in the TU data, compared to the
Artificial Model where many parameters where defined and assumed. Although, some parameters
need to be defined in order to conduct the simulation for FLMS. The parameters defined for the
simulation is fs, WTFLMS, foc and θ, and uses the same values as the Artificial Model. The values
and description of these can be found in table 4.
6.3
Results
6.3.1
Welfare Function
Like mentioned, the results are presented for both trip purpose models combined. In figure 13 the
results from the WF, equation 6.24, are shown based on the AE distance. Each dot in the graphs
represents an observed trip, with corresponding net welfare and AE distance. The color of the dot
gives the individual’s observed Value of Time. The plotted lines are created with a Locally Weighted
Scatterplot Smoothing [33], and show the trend for each given Value of Time in the model. The
LOWESS use a smoothing of 0.05.
Figure 13: Average trend for AE distances and net welfare for different VoT in the Copenhagen Model.
30
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
The graph shows an overall negative and flat tendency in welfare regardless of AE distances and
VoTs. Nevertheless, 17.1% of the observations have a welfare over 0 while only 1.6% have a welfare
over 0.1. Of the ones that have a welfare over 0.1, a majority of low θs is reported. Although,
due to the low number of observations with positive welfare, there are uncertainties regarding the
significance of the results for the entire population. For the lowest VoT 84.2% reported a negative
net welfare from the implementation. The mean θ for the ones with lowest VoT and positive welfare
was 3.1 DKK/min with standard deviation 3.3 DKK/min.
The welfare over all observations sums to -1183.0, giving the population a negative net welfare when
introducing FLMS. Because of the low mode shares for FLMS simulated in the model, see section
6.3.2, a test simulation was conducted with higher ASC for FLMS. This gave a higher mode share,
although resulted in a significantly more negative total welfare.
6.3.2
Change in Mode Share
Mode shares for the Copenhagen model is simulated, and given in table 13. The model reports high
mode shares for active travel modes and a PT share of 7.5%.
Table 13: Mode Share predictions in the Do-Nothing Scenario.
As the overall mode shares is fixed in the simulation, the Do-Something scenario only simulated
mode shares for the mode alternatives within the PT nest. The resulting shares is shown in table 14.
The new travel mode takes 0.3% of the shares in PT.
Table 14: Mode Share predictions in the Do-Something Scenario.
.
7
Discussion
Throughout this study, agent-based mode choice modelling has been used to measure FLMS impact
on travel behavior and socioeconomic measures. One of the thesis’ research questions was if ABM
could be shown useful to address aimed research in this thesis. The method was shown to be
useful in capturing individual differences in mode choice, due to a width in the datasets of traveler
attributes and trip characteristics. Although, the method introduces limitations based on the design,
definition, and purpose of the models as mentioned in chapter 4.3. The models was shown useful in
giving insights into a snip of a reality, although changing the parameters and input data will impact
the results and research. The degree of generalization can therefore be discussed, due to the high
dependency on the definition and input. Understanding the limitations and definition of the model
is therefore crucial for interpreting the results and applying this thesis finds as inspiration to other
populations.
31
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
In the Artificial Model, we saw that as the less dense PT granularities increased the mode share for
car, walk and bike. As the distances between PT stations increase, the travel time on PT and AE
distances increase. This will make other travel modes more attractive due to travel time and -cost,
and as a follow increase their mode share. Although as literature showed, the willingness to walk to
PT stations decreases as the distances increase [37]. This could also apply to only walking, although
the agreeable distance may differ from the one found for PT. Therefore, it is less expected that the
mode share will increase when the distances exceed an acceptable walking distance. Notably, the
model results show differences compared to our expectation. The model does not include a limitation
of a maximum agreeable travel length for walk, and therefore the MNL model treats all travel modes
equally regardless of travel distances. Moreover because of IIA, all modes experience an increase in
share when the density of the granularity decreases. This also applies to bike, although acceptable
travel distances are expected to be longer because of the bikes’ speed. This shows a weakness in the
model, as less walkers and bikers are expected for longer distances. This can therefore imply an
under-estimation of car and PT users in the less dense granularities.
When the density of granularity decreases, biking might become a more attractive travel mode
because of biking speed. Biking will compete with FLMS, which can result in a lower share for FLMS
due to FLMS’ waiting time, travel time and -cost compared to bikes travel time only. This might
imply that there is an over-estimation of FLMS travelers in the model as bikers are not considered.
Although as mentioned in the study from Delft [4], changing from biking to FLMS is less likely
because of added travel cost and waiting times of FLMS. The level of substitution between biking
and FLMS is therefore assumed to be low. This implies that the ones biking as access and egress
to PT before implementation, will still likely bike after. This means that there is a limited loss in
socioeconomic health effects of bikers, even after implementation of FLMS and will have an assumed
minor impact on the welfare results.
TU data has been used together with agent-based mode choice modelling to analyze the socioeco-
nomic impact of introducing a FLMS in Copenhagen and Frederiksberg municipalities. The results
showed an overall total loss in socioeconomic health effects after implementation of FLMS, and even
more negative if FLMS takes a larger share of the PT share. 82.9% of the simulated population gave
a negative net welfare result. These finds may suggest that FLMS are not beneficial for Copenhagen
and Frederiksberg based on socioeconomic health losses. Although, 17.1% of the population was
reported as benefiting from it. However, only 1.6% gained a net welfare over 0.1 DKK, which may
imply that the gained benefit is small for the group gaining from it. The results may also suggest
that the group gaining most from FLMS in Copenhagen has a low health effect of physical activity.
This can be expected, as when the health effects is high, the travel time and cost must be equally as
high before individuals gain from the implementation.
The AE distances for the population in the Copenhagen Model were observed to be under 0.55km,
as given in the TU dataset. Regardless of the individual AE distance and VoT the net welfare was
reported to have an overall average negative trend. Compared to the Artificial Model, we saw that
FLMS gave an average negative socioeconomic contribution for AE distances under 1.2km. The
findings from the Copenhagen Model can therefore be discussed if they may validate the results
in the Artificial Model for AE distances under 0.55km. Although the Copenhagen Model only
considers AE distances under 0.55km and cannot be used to conclude for distances over 0.55km.
Although the results from the Artificial Model showed a negative welfare trend under 1km, 28.5%
32
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
of the population with AE distances under 1km showed a positive welfare. The results for this
group also suggest that FLMS operated under 1km will be beneficial for a limited group of people
characterized with low average health outcome of physical activity and a high mean VoT. Although,
due to the high percentage of negative net welfare under 1km, the results strengthens the hypoth-
esis that FLMS are not socioeconomic beneficial for operational distances under 1km, which was
also found in Rich’s research paper [31]. Notably, the hypothesis can also be challenged as the
Artificial Model showed an average positive welfare for all individuals after 1.2km. This might sug-
gest that the FLMS are even more beneficial for a population when operated for distances over 1.2 km.
The Artificial Model show different net welfare results for the simulated VoT based on the AE
distances. For high VoT, FLMS gave a positive welfare already after approx. 0.8km, while the middle
VoT’s average welfare was positive after approx. 1.2 km. Notably, the lowest VoT showed an average
negative trend regardless of AE distances. Similar correlated trends can be seen in several other
studies, e.g. Yap, Corriea, and van Arems’ research [26], where first class train riders valuated FLMS
higher than other riders. First class train riders were shown to be linked with high income, which again
can imply a higher willingness to pay and VoT. Furthermore, the study from USA found that higher
income households benefited more from FLMS, while lower income households did not benefit from
FLMS despite subsides [7]. The finds from this study therefore strengthens the hypothesis that lower
VoT travelers does not benefit from FLMS implementation regardless of AE distances. This can open
a discussing on socioeconomic ethics considering balancing benefiting economically stronger persons
vs. less economically positioned persons. However, 30.7% of the simulated population with the lowest
VoT was reported with a positive welfare. The finds suggest that the individuals gaining from the
service has low health outcomes of physical activity in combination with longer AE distances. These
characteristics could possibly be associated e. g. with elderly people or a person with a disability.
The same trend could be find in the Copenhagen Model, where 15.8% was reported with a positive
welfare although with a slightly higher health outcome of physical activity. This contradicts the
thesis’ hypothesis about low VoT travelers, although the average welfare is negative for the VoT group.
In the Artificial Model we saw a decreasing overall PT mode share with lower densities of PT
granularity. This is expected in terms of traditional literature on accessibility [30]. Although, the
results show that implementation of FLMS can increase the PT mode share when comparing to a
network without FLMS. These results are similar to other studies on FLMS as seen in Lau and
Susilawati study on autonomous vehicles [34], Sebastian Imhof, Jonas Frölicher, and Widar von
Arx’s research on Shares Autonomous Vehicles [32], the Agent-Based Study from Delft [12] and
more, see section 2.2. The mode share for FLMS is somewhat constant throughout the scenarios,
while the mode share for walk+PT decreases. This is expected as when the AE distances to PT
increases, the travel time of walk increases and thus lower the attractiveness of the mode. In the
most dense granularity scenario, the overall PT mode share increases by 0.6%, although many PT
travelers shift from walking to FLMS. This results in a negative welfare, as the substitution from
walk to FLMS results in lost health benefits from walking. This shows a high competition between
walking and FLMS in the more dense granularity scenarios. Decreasing the density of the granularity
in the model results in a lower percentage of the population living close to the stations. The share
of walkers to PT is therefore expected to decrease, as shown in the results. When the density of
the granularity decreases the results show an increasing effect on the total PT mode share, with
the highest increase of 3.4% for granularity scenario 2500m. For the less dense granularities, the
results show a greater increase in PT mode share and an overall greater socioeconomic benefit of
33
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
FLMS due to a lower shift from walk to FLMS. This suggests that FLMS increase the accessibility
of PT, and has a greater impact on accessibility as the density of the granularity decrease. Although,
as the mode share for Walk+PT decrease regardless of the granularity the results show that the
competition between walking and FLMS are always present despite PT granularity.
The total welfare for each granularity scenario was first positive for granulates over 2000m, while
the average welfare over all granularities was first positive for AE distances over 1.2km. Over all
scenarios, results showed that small AE distances overall gave a negative welfare result. Larger
AE distance was therefore shown to have a more positive trend in welfare, due to the balancing
of travel time and health benefits for walk vs. travel time and -cost of FLMS. In the model the
population is handled as unison distributed within the geographical limitations, unaffected by the
stations’ positions. In cities, population density is typically higher near stations and decreases as
the distance from the stations increases. A typical observation is also that many destination points
are positioned near PT stations. Notably, the Artificial Model does not consider this observation.
With a larger share of the population with lower AE distances than longer distances, the net welfare
of the implementation will be impacted even more negatively than in the results. This will also have
a negative impact on the populations’ total welfare. Applying the results to a real population can
therefore be challenging, in terms of the geographical independence between origins, destinations and
stations in the model. The results can therefore be discussed to be skewed in favor of the ones living
further away in the less dense granularities, as the ratio between origins and destinations are treated
as a unison distribution independent of the stations. However, the results can show that FLMS are
more socioeconomic beneficial when operated on more longer trips than shorter trips. The results
also shows that this can be achieved when the density of the PT granularity decreases, achieving
the highest welfare in granularity scenario 3500m and second highest for granularity 2500m. This
contradicts the traditional "rule-of-thumb" in planning for accessibility as mentioned by Mulley et
al. [30].
Due to the observation that higher AE distances give a more positive welfare, it is expected that the
welfare will increase for every decreasing granularity scenario. This is observed for all granularity
scenarios, except 3000m where the total welfare decreases. This observation might occur based
on the geographical definition of the model. As mentioned in section 5.2, the number of stations
in granularity scenario 3000m is the same as in 2500m, due to the definition of the geographical
area and how it fits with the simulated PT system. The stations in granularity scenario 3000m
is positioned at the outer edges of the simulated are, which impacts the maximum reported AE
distances in the simulation. As can be seen in figure 8 the mean and 75% percentile is similar in
the two scenarios. Although as the graph shows, there exists trips with longer AE distances in the
2500m scenario compared to the 3000m scenario. Which could be because of the defined simulation
of PT stations, origins and destinations. This skews the ratio of longer vs. shorter trips, towards
longer in the 2500m scenario. As longer trips have a tendency of giving a positive contribution to the
welfare, the total welfare is therefore more positive for granularity 2500m than granularity 3000m.
These results might imply that FLMS are more beneficial when a greater ratio of the population
has a larger AE distance as achieved in granularity scenario 2500m. Considerably, the total welfare
of granularity 3000m would be expected to be higher than showed if it included the same ratio of
longer vs. shorter trips.
The multi-objective optimization results showed that optimal granularity was 2500m due to increase
34
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
in PT mode share and net welfare results. In this scenario the total PT share was 8.8% after
implementation of FLMS, which had increased by 3.4% from the scenario without FLMS. The total
welfare benefit was the second highest. Although, results showed that the competition between FLMS
and walking was present in all granularities as the model did not limit the competition. Additionally,
due to the definition of independence of simulating origin, destinations and PT stations this impacted
both the accessibility and net welfare results fir each granularity scenario. The multi-objective
optimization method was therefore shown to be ineffective in finding the optimal granularity that
limits the competition between active travel modes and FLMS, while increasing accessibility. This
observation can also be supported due to differences in the scenarios regarding the ratio of longer vs.
shorter trips, which adds uncertainties into the scenario’s comparability.
Although the multi-objective optimization of accessibility, welfare and limiting competition was
found ineffective, the simulations was found useful in giving insight into accessibility and geographical
population characteristics. The findings suggested that the welfare of FLMS implementation increases
when operated on longer rather than shorter trips, granularity does not limit competition between
walking and FLMS, and that operating FLMS on shorter trips than 1km is not beneficial. This
might give strong implications that restricting the operational distances for FLMS could increase
the welfare for the whole population, while increasing the accessibility for people with origins and
destinations further away from the PT stops. By restricting the operational distances the competition
between active modes and FLMS are expected to be limited which will increase the result in the
WF. Additionally, forcing the ratio of longer vs. shorter trips towards longer is also expected to
increase the welfare of the population. Although, the market of FLMS is expected to decrease due
to the limitation which may influence the welfare results.
As a final note, some of the study’s results can be difficult to interpret due to the way the models
are defined. As travel modes is restricting the user to choose either walk or FLMS for both AE, the
results are given on the condition of the combined AE distance. Behavior and attractiveness for first
and last mile travels can be very different, moreover the combination of AE introduces uncertainty
into the validity of the results. Caution must therefore be exercised when interpreting the results
due to this uncertainty. Additionally, there has been raised questions regarding the modelling of a
varying θ due to an increased variance in the model results. This could be observed when comparing
to Rich’s paper on health effects and FLMS [31]. Although it is used for not over-estimating the
impact of health effects, it has made concluding considering the proposed hypotheses challenging
due to a greater variances in the results.
8
Conclusion
The objective of this thesis was to investigate how implementation of FLMS may impact the so-
cioeconomic of a population, and to see how granularity and operational distances influences the
success or failure of implementing FLMS in regard to socioeconomic health effects and accessibility.
Agent-based modelling was proved useful in providing insights into individual mode choice behavior,
however introduced limitations to the study. An understanding of the limitations and assumptions is
therefore crucial when interpreting the results from the research. As the defined models are purpose
specific, they highly depend on the defined parameters and input data. The degree of generalization
is therefore limited, and results can be less applicable to other populations.
35
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
The researches showed that the implementation of FLMS would impact 82.9% of the residents in
Copenhagen an Frederiksberg negatively, due to low walking travel time and high welfare losses
compared to travel time and cost of FLMS. Although 17.1% gained from the implementation, the
benefit was considered low with only 1.6% over a net welfare of 0.1 DKK. These findings gives strong
implications that FLMS are not beneficial for the population in Copenhagen and Frederiksberg,
based on socioeconomic health effects. Moreover, the findings from the Copenhagen Model only
consider trips under 0.55km. The Artificial Model showed an average negative net welfare for the
population before AE distances of 1.2km. Although the results from the Artificial Model showed a
negative welfare trend under 1km, 28.5% of the population with AE distances under 1km showed a
positive welfare. These finds strengthens the hypothesis that FLMS are not socioeconomic beneficial
for combined AE trips under 1km, although due to the percentage of reported positive welfare the
results from the analysis cannot reject the hypothesis.
Based on individual VoT, the Artificial Model showed differences in AE distances, indicating when
FLMS on average was beneficial for the population. For VoT 2.65 DKK/min and 1.85 DKK/min
the welfare turned positive at respective AE distances approx. 0.8 and 1.2 km. While VoT 1.05
DKK/min showed an overall negative average trend in welfare. This was also observed in the
Copenhagen, although across all VoT due to the short AE distances. However, the Artificial Model
reported 30.7% positive net welfare results over all individuals with the lowest VoT. These where
characterized with low health outcomes of physical activity in combination with longer AE distances.
The findings strongly imply that FLMS will not be socioeconomic beneficial for individuals with low
VoT, although with exceptions.
The results from the granularity scenarios in the Artificial Model showed that FLMS had a positive
effect on accessibility throughout all of the scenarios. The highest increase in mode share was
found for granularity 2500m, with a decrease of 3.4%. Considering total welfare for each granularity
scenario, it was shown to increase as the density of the granularity decreased. This could be seen in
relation to increasing AE distances for the individuals, and therefore imply that higher lower density
of PT granularity is beneficial considering socioeconomic health effects. The total welfare was first
positive after granularity 2000m, although continued to increased after. Due to the definition of
the simulated origins, destinations and PT stations the results there were evidence to suggest that
FLMS are more socioeconomic beneficial when operated on more longer trips rather than shorter trips.
The multi-objective optimization was shown to be ineffective in measuring an maximizing of welfare
and accessibility, while limiting competition between active travel modes and FLMS. This was ob-
served due to the models lacking ability to limit competition between avtive travel modes and FLMS.
Therefore the results does not provide sufficient evidence to conclude on the optimal granularity in
terms of the stated hypothesis.
Lastly, the simulations was found to give great insight into accessibility and geographical population
characteristics. The findings suggested that the welfare of FLMS implementation increases when
operated on more longer rather than shorter trips and operation of FLMS on longer trips than 1km.
This gives strong implications that restricting the operational distance for FLMS could enhance
the overall welfare of the population due to limiting competition with active travel modes, while
improving accessibility for those with origins and destinations further away from PT stations.
36
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
8.1
Future Research
8.1
Future Research
This research has presented many interesting finds in terms of FLMS relations to health effects and
accessibility, which can open doors to new research topics. Future research could include increasing
travel time for walk in the Copenhagen model to see if the results share the same trends of health
effects and distances as in the Artificial Model. Also, as mentioned restricting the operational
distances of FLMS to optimize accessibility, health effects and competition between walking and
FLMS could give invaluable insights into the field of study.
The results show that it is more beneficial when people have a larger AE distance. It could therefore
we interesting to look into if FLMS is more beneficial in rural rather than urban areas, where the
granularity of PT is less dense than in the cities. The population density of areas further away from
the stations is lower compared to in cities, which can mean a smaller number of people getting a
benefit from FLMS compared to cities. Although the ratio of people living close and further away
is different than in cities which can change the results. Higher car ownership and better parking
coverage in rural areas can also impact the results.
As the thesis has restricted the travelers to either walking or using FLMS for both access and egress,
future research could include doing the same analysis, although enable the travelers to choose FLMS
for either access or egress or both. This would contribute to a deeper understanding of FLMS
relations to health effects and accessibility.
37
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
References
References
[1] Ahmed El-Geneidy, Michael Grimsrud, Rania Wasfi, Paul Te´treault, Julien Surprenant-
Legault.
New evidence on walking distances to transit stops:
Identifying redun-
dancies
and
gaps
using
variable
service
areas.
2014.
https://www.scopus.com/
record/display.uri?eid=2-s2.0-84890866431&origin=reflist&sort=plf-f&src=s&sid=
9154dcd1bf7fd13ce441faaa769c3c97&sot=b&sdt=b&sl=84&s=TITLE-ABS-KEY%28Enhancing+
urban+mobility%3a+integrating+ride-sharing+and+public+transit%29.
[2] Alan T. Murray, Rex Davis, Robert J. Stimson, Luis Ferreira.
Public transport ac-
cess. 1998. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1361920998000108#
aep-section-id17.
[3] Andrew T. Crooks, Alison J. Heppenstall. Agent-based models of geographical systems. 2012.
Chapter 5.
[4] Arthur Scheltes, Gonçalo Homem de Almeida Correia. Exploring the use of automated vehicles
as last mile connection of train trips through an agent-based simulation model: An application
to delft, netherlands.
2017.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/317053763_
Exploring_the_use_of_automated_vehicles_as_last_mile_connection_of_train_trips_
through_an_agent-based_simulation_model_An_application_to_Delft_Netherlandss.
[5] Aud Tennøy, Marianne Knapskog, Fitwi Wolday. Walking distances to public transport in smaller
and larger norwegian cities. 2022. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1361920922000013#s0110.
[6] Danette McGilvray. Executing data quality projects. 2021. https://www.sciencedirect.com/
book/9780128180150/executing-data-quality-projects.
[7] Daniel J. Reck, Kay W. Axhausen. Subsidized ridesourcing for the first/last mile: how valuable
for whom? 2020. https://journals.open.tudelft.nl/ejtir/article/view/5314/4795.
[8] Deep Medhi and Karthik Ramasamy. Network routing. 2018. Chapter 2.3.
[9] DTU.
Om
transportvaneundersøgelsen.
2024.
https://www.man.dtu.dk/
myndighedsbetjening/transportvaneundersoegelsen-tu-/om-tu.
[10] DTU. Transportvaner.dk. 2024. transportvaner.dk.
[11] E.J. Mishan, Euston Quah. Cost-benefit analysis. 2020.
[12] Elliot Fishman, Paul Schepers and Carlijn Barbara Maria Kamphuis. Dutch cycling: Quanti-
fying the health and related economic benefits. 2015. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC4504332/.
[13] Ennio Cesetta. Transportation systems engineering: Theory and methods. 2001. Springer-
Science+Business Media, B.V.
[14] Guido Gentile, Klaus Noekel. Modelling public transport passenger flows in the era of intelligent
transport systems. 2016. Springer International Publishing Switzerland.
I
==PAGE:43==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
References
[15] Hagar Mahmoud, Nadine Akkari.
Shortest path calculation:
A comparative study for
location-based recommender system. 2016. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
312422683_Shortest_Path_Calculation_A_Comparative_Study_for_Location-Based_
Recommender_System.
[16] Hue-Tam
Jamme,
Andrew
Eisenlohr,
Deepak
Bahl,
Tridib
Banerjee.
Ride-
hailing
to
rail
in
the
suburbs:
Can
subsidized
rides
enhance
first
and
last
mile
access
for
the
carless?
2023.
https://findingspress.org/article/
82216-ride-hailing-to-rail-in-the-suburbs-can-subsidized-rides-enhance-first-and-last-mil
[17] Jan H. Kwakkel. A generalized many-objective optimization approach for scenario discovery.
2019. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ffo2.8.
[18] Jeppe Rich, Ravi Seshadri, Ali Jomeh, Sofus Clausen. Fixed routing or on-demand? agent-based
modelling of autonomous first-and last mile services in light-rail systems. 2022. https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/360109579_Fixed_routing_or_on-demand_Agent-based_
modelling_of_autonomous_first-and_last_mile_services_in_light-rail_systems.
[19] Jeppe Rich, Stefan E. Mabit. Transport models - from theory to practise. 2018.
[20] Jesper Bláfoss Ingvardson, Otto Anker Nielsen, Sebastián Raveau, Bo Friis Nielsen. Passenger
arrival and waiting time distributions dependent on train service frequency and station char-
acteristics: A smart card data analysis. 2018. https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/files/
149170756/TRC_Review3_Manuscript.pdf.
[21] João Breda, Jelena Jakovljevic, Giulia Rathmes, Romeu Mendes, Olivier Fontaine, Su-
sanne Hollmann, Alfred Rütten, Peter Gelius, Sonja Kahlmeier, Gauden Galea. Promoting
health-enhancing physical activity in europe: Current state of surveillance, policy develop-
ment and implementation. 2018. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0168851018300307?via%3Dihub.
[22] Juan de Dios Ortúzar, Luis G. Willumsen. Modelling transport, fourth edition. 2011. John
Wiley Sons, Ltd.
[23] Kenneth E. Train. Discrete choice methods with simulation, second edition. 2009. Cambridge
University Press.
[24] Law, A. M., and Kelton, W. D. Simulation modeling and analysis. 2020.
[25] Martin Hallberg, Thomas Kjær Rasmussen, Jeppe Rich. Modelling the impact of cycle super-
highways and electric bicycles. 2021. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0965856421001130.
[26] Menno D. Yap, Gonçalo Correia, Bart van Arem.
Preferences of travellers for using au-
tomated vehicles as last mile public transport of multimodal train trips.
2016.
https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0965856416307765.
[27] Muhammad Ahsan Khan.
A comprehensive study of dijkstra’s algorithm.
2023.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/373597114_A_Comprehensive_Study_of_
Dijkstra’s_Algorithm.
II
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
References
[28] Muhammad Atiullah Saif, Mohammad Maghrour Zefreh1 ,Adam Torok. Public transport
accessibility: A literature review. 2019. https://www.pp.bme.hu/tr/article/view/12072/
8027%7D%20Chapter%20PT%20accessibility%20and%20Public%20health.
[29] Otto Anker Nielsen, Morten Eltved, Marie Karen Anderson, Carlo Giacomo Prato.
Rel-
evance of detailed transfer attributes in large-scale multimodal route choice models for
metropolitan public transport passengers. 2021. https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/
relevance-of-detailed-transfer-attributes-in-large-scale-multimod.
[30] Rhonda Daniels and Corinne Mulley. Explaining walking distance to public transport: The
dominance of public transport supply. 2011. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
254609622_Explaining_walking_distance_to_public_transport_The_dominance_of_
public_transport_supply.
[31] J. Rich. Lets walk! the fallacy of first- and last-mile public transport. 2024. https://link.
springer.com/article/10.1007/s11116-024-10505-5.
[32] Sebastian Imhof, Jonas Frölicher, Widar von Arx.
Shared autonomous vehicles in rural
public transportation systems. 2020. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0739885920301232#sec4.
[33] StatisticsHowTo.
Lowess smoothing in statistics:
What is it?
2024.
https://www.
statisticshowto.com/lowess-smoothing/.
[34] Suet Theng Lau, Susilawati Susilawati. Shared autonomous vehicles implementation for the
first and last-mile services. 2021. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/353805649_
Shared_autonomous_vehicles_implementation_for_the_first_and_last-mile_services.
[35] Thomas Christian Jensen, Jens Troelsen, Mette Møller, Christina Bjørk Petersen. Trans-
portøkonomiske enhedspriser for cykling.
2020.
https://www.trm.dk/media/bu0jarmm/
dokumentationsnotat-version-6-endelig.pdf.
[36] Xiang Yan1, Jonathan Levine, Xilei Zhao. Integrating ridesourcing services with public transit:
An evaluation of traveler 2 responses combining revealed and stated preference data. 2019.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/326729725_Integrating_ridesourcing_
services_with_public_transit_An_evaluation_of_traveler_responses_combining_
revealed_and_stated_preference_data.
[37] Yong Yang and Ana V. Diez-Roux. Walking distance by trip purpose and population subgroups.
2012. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3377942/.
III
==PAGE:45==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
Appendices
.1
Variable Description - Artificial Mode Choice Model
Variable
Value
Description
DistAccess
-
Travel distance, accessing public transport from origin.
DistEgress
-
Travel distance, egress from public transport to destination.
DistMain
-
Travel distance between origin and destination.
DistPT
-
Travel distance using public transport.
TTWalk
60DistAccess
ws
+ 60DistEgress
ws
Combined travel time for walking to and from public transport.
TTFLMS
60DistAccess
fs
+ 60DistEgress
fs
Combined travel time for using a FLMS to and from public transport.
TTPT
60DistP T
msp
+ ptw + chtPTchange + transferPTchange
Travel time for PT.
TTCar
60DistMain
msc
Travel time for car.
TTBike
60DistMain
bs
Travel time for bike.
CostFLMS
focDistAccess + focDistEgress
Travel cost for First and Last Mile Service and access and egress.
CostPT
pcDistPT
Travel cost for Public Transport.
CostCar
ccDistMain
Travel cost for car.
GTPT
TTPT + CostPT /V oTV
Total travel cost for PT.
GTCar
TTCar + CostCar/V oTV
Total travel cost for car.
GTFLMS
TTFLMS + WTFLMS + CostFLMS/V oTV
Total travel cost for FLMS.
.2
Variable Description - Copenhagen Mode Choice Model
Variable
Description
TTP T
Travel time for public transport.
TCP T
Travel cost for public transport.
DistAccess
Travel distance, accessing public transport from origin.
DistEgress
Travel distance, egress from public transport to destination.
TTW alk,EA
Combined travel time for walking to and from public transport.
TTF LMS,EA
Combined travel time for using a FLMS to and from public transport.
TCF LMS,EA
Combined travel cost for using a FLMS to and from public transport.
Female
Binary variable of the traveler being female or not.
Zpop
Population in the origin zone.
AgeG0
Binary variable of age group 0 (0-18 years).
AgeG1
Binary variable of age group 1 (18-29 years).
AgeG3
Binary variable of age group 3 (54-74 years).
AgeG4
Binary variable of age group 4 (>74 years).
IV
==PAGE:46==
Master Thesis - Marte Larsen
.3
List of Abbreviations
.3
List of Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Definition
FLMS
First- and last mile services
PT
Public transport
VoT
Value of time
AE
Access and egress
ASC
Alternative spesific constants
WF
Welfare Function
MNL
Multinominal logit model
NL
Nested logit model
IIA
Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
LOWESS
Locally Weighted Scatterplot Smoothing
V
