==PAGE:1==
Scalability and Democratization of Real Time Strategy and Fighting Games:
The Deterministic Lockstep Netcode Model with Client Prediction Combined
with the Data Oriented Tech Stack.
Master Thesis
Michał Chrobot
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This master thesis investigates the process of creating deterministic games, highlighting
their benefits, particularly for real-time strategy and fighting games. In addition to provid-
ing a basic netcode infrastructure, it focuses on detecting nondeterminism in games and
methods for debugging it.
The aim is to develop a package that utilises a deterministic lockstep netcode model, a
multiplayer synchronisation technique used for deterministic games, built into the Unity
game engine on top of their Data-Oriented Technology Stack (DOTS). The package pri-
marily focuses on detecting and debugging nondeterminism, using a sample Pong game
implemented for this thesis as an example, and compares the created tools to existing
solutions while exploring alternatives.
The research begins by highlighting key multiplayer concepts and examining existing so-
lutions for determinism validation and debugging, particularly their limitations. It then de-
tails the implementation of a sample Pong game in DOTS, explaining how this framework
works and the functionalities of the game. Next, a package providing a deterministic
lockstep netcode model within Unity DOTS is created, demonstrating how the game can
utilize it. This package can be used with different games made in DOTS, and the process
of using it is explained in detail. Finally, the thesis discusses how determinism validation
is performed and how debugging tools are implemented and used to identify sources of
nondeterminism. It underlines the benefits of a data-oriented design (DOD) approach and
the entity component system (ECS) pattern in identifying the causes of nondeterminism
in simulations.
A key innovation of this thesis is the showcase of how to detect nondeterminism in DOTS
and the development of per-system validation methods that enable more precise detec-
tion and ease debugging of nondeterministic behaviour in ECS-based frameworks. The
results shall indicate that the per-system validation approach can reduce the scope of
code to be tested, facilitating more precise identification of nondeterministic sources, al-
though it is computationally expensive and more work would need to be done in order to
use it with big RTS games.
Future work should focus on enhancing the netcode model with additional features for
latency mitigation, as well as improving the validation tools performance for larger-scale
games. The findings of this thesis contribute to the broader goal of democratising game
development by providing smaller teams and independent developers with the means
needed to create deterministic multiplayer games.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
iii
==PAGE:4==
iv
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Concepts and background
5
2.1
Netcode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Lockstep and deterministic lockstep
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Determinism and deterministic game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Players connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Desynchronization and Authority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Latency and Lag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.7
CPU power and Data Oriented Design (DOD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.8
ECS - Entity, Component, System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.9
Game engines and Unity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.10 Unity Data Oriented Technology Stack (DOTS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Goal of the thesis
13
3.1
Research Focus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.5
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.6
Research Goals and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.7
Prior work and existing knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.8
Proposed approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Running example
21
4.1
Sample Pong game description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Functionalities in the game
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
Implementation overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Sample Pong game implementation
25
5.1
Technical concepts of Unity and DOTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
Pong game implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6
Deterministic Lockstep Netcode Model
41
6.1
Deterministic Lockstep theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
Deterministic Lockstep Netcode Model implementation in Unity DOTS . . . 46
7
Determinism Validation and Debugging Tools
59
7.1
Determinism validation tools implementation in DOTS . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
7.2
Determinism debugging tools implementation in DOTS . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
7.3
Debugging nondeterminism with the package tools on example of a sample
Pong game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
7.4
Common sources of nondeterminism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
8
Evaluation
85
8.1
Deterministic lockstep netcode model evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
v
==PAGE:6==
8.2
Determinism validation and debugging tools evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . 85
9
Discussion
89
9.1
Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
9.2
Current Limitations and Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
9.3
Recommendations for work with deterministic games . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
10 Conclusion
93
Bibliography
95
vi
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The gaming industry that stands behind the creation of multiplayer online games is con-
stantly pushing the boundaries of what’s achievable with technology, aiming for scenarios
where all participating players experience the same almost lag-free gameplay despite dif-
fering hardware, software, and/or network conditions. One way to achieve this is through
deterministic gameplay, which allows for the implementation of effective lag mitigation
techniques.
A simulation is considered deterministic if, given the same initial conditions and the same
sequence of inputs, the simulation will always produce the same outputs, regardless of
how many times the full simulation is run.
Deterministic simulation is employed in many different fields. One such field is simulating
a real-world object in a virtual environment [1] (for example, the behaviour of a car on the
road), and another is gaming.
Games that are deterministic come with many benefits. One of them is reducing the
amount of data that needs to be sent over the internet by primarily transmitting player
inputs rather than the entire game state. This in turn allows for the implementation of
different proven techniques that are significantly reducing perceived lag [2] [3].
This is particularly beneficial in games with hundreds of units, as it significantly reduces the
data transmission load, saves bandwidth, minimises the potential for delays, and means
that every player sees the exact same simulation. Most larger multiplayer RTS games with
a significant number of controllable units (like StarCraft 2 or Warcraft) are deterministic,
and this is an industry standard for this type of game.
Creating fully deterministic code is harder than it sounds. Game engines (i.e., hobbyist
and commercial software tooling licensed or used to develop video games) are rarely de-
terministic themselves. Additionally, there are differences in how operations are executed
on various hardware or operating systems, like Windows or Mac. Those often come from
variations in floating-point precision, processor architectures, compiler optimisations, and
system-specific libraries. These factors can lead to subtle discrepancies in calculations
on different platforms. On top of that, even if a game engine is deterministic, it’s very
easy to write non-deterministic code, especially as the vast majority of languages do not
treat determinism as correctness and therefore do not offer tooling (via the compiler, for
example) to prevent this kind of error. Moreover, the unpredictability of many operations
in multithreaded contexts, which all modern games are expected to heavily utilise, further
complicates the goal. A single bug in the code or any of the behaviours mentioned may
introduce nondeterminism, leading to the same game implementation that runs on differ-
ent machines to arrive at different game states for the same initial conditions and input
sequence. This is why determinism validation is so critical if the game does, in fact, rely
on determinism.
Because almost all game engines are not 100% deterministic and do not provide tools
for determinism validation, game studios often need to rely on different solutions. The
first is to create a deterministic game engine of their own, which requires a lot of time and
resources. In addition, this game engine will probably be used only for the purpose of a
single game or simulation made with it. The second is to use an existing deterministic
engine solution, such as Photon Quantum [4]. While Photon Quantum is objectively a
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
1
==PAGE:8==
good solution and provides general determinism validation tools, these tools could be
improved to help developers find the cause of non-determinism more precisely.
Correct implementation of some of the aforementioned lag-mitigating solutions or de-
terminism validation itself requires additional computational resources from the user’s
hardware. Some modern game engines support a programming approach called Data-
Oriented Design (DOD) [5]. DOD focuses on structuring data in memory to optimise ac-
cess patterns and improve cache efficiency [6]. This approach can reduce CPU load and
speed up the computation process, making it well-suited for creating large-scale determin-
istic RTS games by enhancing players’ hardware’s computational capabilities. Addition-
ally, the Entity Component System (ECS) pattern, often used in combination with DOD,
separates code logic from data. This separation allows for more precise identification
and narrowing down of nondeterministic behavior. Because systems typically represent
small logical parts of the program, they can be validated individually, making it easier to
pinpoint which system is causing nondeterminism in a simulation. In contrast, in object-
oriented programs, code logic and data are often intertwined, making it more challenging
to isolate the exact source of nondeterminism since entire objects and their interactions
must be considered as a whole. This can complicate the debugging process and obscure
the specific cause of nondeterministic behavior. Currently, Unity, the most widely used
game engine [7] [8], offers the most advanced support for this technology through its
Data-Oriented Tech Stack (DOTS).
If existing knowledge about determinism, its validation, and debugging were consolidated
and more tools and general methodologies were provided, it would ease the creation
of deterministic games. Additionally, offering a synchronisation method for online multi-
player games with these tools in the form of a package would further promote this way of
game creation. Simplifying the creation of deterministic games will enable smaller teams
with fewer resources to develop deterministic multiplayer games more easily, thereby
democratising their usage.
Even if a game engine is not fully deterministic, game developers would benefit from
the ability to test the potential game with built-in tools to detect non-deterministic be-
haviour. Developers could either create deterministic games using that engine or, if non-
deterministic behaviour comes directly from the engine, find a solution for it or apply the
same methodology with a different engine better suited to the game’s needs. From an-
other perspective, game engine developers could use such a tool to validate whether the
functionalities of their game engines are indeed deterministic. Deterministic validation
tools would facilitate the detection and resolution of non-deterministic behaviour, allowing
developers to save time on debugging and testing their solutions.
There are many potential sources of non-deterministic behavior. Therefore, these tools
will focus on identifying the parts of the engine or game that cause non-determinism and
pinpointing the source as closely as possible, which should be human-readable, helping
developers make the necessary changes in the code.
In conclusion this master thesis aims to assist game developers in creating fully deter-
ministic gameplay. Specifically, it seeks to provide a package containing determinism
validation and debugging tools with methodologies for Unity’s Data-Oriented Technology
Stack (DOTS) with the most common technique for network synchronisation used for de-
terministic games, known as the ”Deterministic Lockstep Netcode Model.” The application
and usage of this package is demonstrated through the development and debugging of a
showcase game. At the end, this thesis will provide a showcase example of how to debug
nondeterminism cases using the implemented package, demonstrated through the case
2
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:9==
of the implemented game.
For further clarification, this thesis initially aimed to focus on implementing the determin-
istic lockstep netcode model with lag mitigation techniques such as client prediction and
rollback within DOTS. However, during the investigation, it became evident that determin-
ism validation is an extensive and often underexplored topic. There are existing examples
of deterministic lockstep implementation without any determinism validation tools. Proper
implementation of these lag mitigation techniques would be ineffective without first ensur-
ing the game’s determinism through the development of validation tools.
Therefore, this thesis has shifted its focus towards implementing a basic deterministic
lockstep netcode model in DOTS as the foundation for the game while investigating vari-
ous techniques for detecting nondeterministic behaviour in online multiplayer games and
methods for debugging it. The goal of democratisation is achieved by explaining the con-
cepts that allow for deterministic simulation creation and providing tools that developers
can use or build upon, enabling broader access to this technique. Scalability is highlighted
by the use of a data-oriented approach in the form of DOTS, which supports faster compu-
tation processes than object-oriented programming and is recommended for large-scale
games with many simultaneous actions.
The rest of the thesis is structured in the following order:
The Concepts and Background chapter provides a summary and explanation of com-
mon terms and concepts used throughout the thesis. These terms focus on the core
concepts used in online multiplayer games and data-oriented design.
The Goal of the Thesis chapter discusses existing solutions, includes research ques-
tions, and outlines the primary objectives of this investigation.
The Running Example chapter presents a game sample in the form of a modified Pong
game used to demonstrate the implemented package and serves as a reference for the
further implementation process. This sample is used to illustrate various implementation
steps later in the thesis.
The Sample Pong game implementation chapter demonstrates the implementation steps
for the sample Pong game and provides deeper insights into how the Unity game engine
works and core DOTS concepts.
The Deterministic Lockstep Netcode Model chapter goes deeper into the theory of the
model, its implementation within the DOTS environment, and how the game is utilising it.
The Determinism Validation and Debugging Tools chapter finally provides an in-depth
discussion on determinism, nondeterministic behaviours in games, their sources, and the
tools developed for determinism validation and debugging. It also explains how these
tools can be used to locate the source of nondeterminism in the code.
The Evaluation chapter presents the results and evaluates the effectiveness of the frame-
work, determinism validation, and debugging tools. It identifies key findings, areas for
improvement, and the current limitations of these tools.
The Discussion chapter interprets the findings, discussing their significance and pointing
out what work could be done in the future in this area.
At the end, the Conclusion chapter answers the primary research question, summarising
the thesis and concluding the investigation.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
3
==PAGE:10==
4
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:11==
2
Concepts and background
Before going into the various aspects of the implementation process, it is crucial to grasp
the basic terminology commonly used in the field of games, determinism and deterministic
lockstep. This chapter will outline the terminology, concepts, and methodologies that will
be extensively used in subsequent chapters, while not going into specific details but rather
focusing on presenting the overall idea behind several concepts.
2.1
Netcode
When considering multiplayer games, the primary challenge is connecting multiple players
on different devices and allowing them to play together. This requires a mechanism to
keep all players synchronised, enabling them to see an accurate and consistent shared
game state that is influenced by their inputs.
The game state includes various elements such as player actions, movement of units,
scores, resources, and game events like shooting projectiles. These events can origi-
nate from player inputs or from the game itself, such as actions by non-player characters
(NPCs). Synchronising these events and conditions across all devices is crucial. Without
proper synchronisation, objects might appear in different locations for different players,
leading to confusing or unfair gameplay.
Achieving this synchronisation across different devices, which are usually running at dif-
ferent speeds, while dealing with the physical limitations of networks like latency or limited
bandwidth, all fall under the term “netcode.” By saying ”netcode model,” someone can
refer to a specific implementation of all concepts related to handling interactions between
remote clients.
2.2
Lockstep and deterministic lockstep
One netcode model involving the synchronisation of player actions is called the lockstep
netcode model. Lockstep refers to a synchronisation method used in multiplayer online
gaming where each client processes the same game ”simulation step” simultaneously.
In its basic form, lockstep involves clients sending their data (such as position, actions,
etc.) to a server. The server collects this information, waits for the data from all clients
for the given step, processes it, and sends back to each client the combined data about
all players’ actions for that simulation step. Each client waits to receive this information
before advancing to the next simulation step, ensuring that all clients stay in sync. This
method is called ”lockstep” because the game progresses for all clients at the same pace
once all clients have sent their data for the current step.
Deterministic lockstep improves upon this by sending only player inputs rather than full
game state updates, reducing data transmission size. This approach requires all clients
to reproduce the same game state based on these inputs, enforcing the game to be fully
deterministic. An example of this is shown in the next chapter in Figure 6.3.
Deterministic lockstep itself will not mitigate any latency. It will rather introduce it by forcing
clients to wait, but by allowing them to send only inputs and process the simulation based
on them, it creates a base for the implementation of lag-mitigating techniques. Determin-
istic lockstep also changes how the server operates. Instead of simulating the game, the
server is solely responsible for gathering and sending back player inputs, which allows for
greater scalability of games using it [9].
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
5
==PAGE:12==
One technique, known as ’forced input latency’, imposes a slight delay before the effects
of user inputs are displayed. This delay is generally slight, and players get used to it
during the game. This helps to smooth out common variations in connection speeds.
One such technique is ’forced input latency’, which imposes a small, consistent delay
before users see the effects of their inputs on the screen. This delay helps smooth out
common variations in connection latency, making these delays less noticeable and more
predictable for players.
Another one would be player prediction. Player prediction allows for the game to continue
even without receiving a remote player‘s inputs for a short period of time using predicted
inputs during temporary lag spikes. When the actual input is received, the game checks
if the previous prediction was accurate and adjusts the game state accordingly. This
approach is preferable to freezing the game during lag, as it usually provides a smoother
and more continuous gameplay experience. There is much more to how those inputs are
actually predicted, but the point is that this prediction and rollback mechanism are feasible
due to the simplicity of the network data involved, which consists solely of player inputs.
All of those lag mitigating techniques combined and built on top of the ’Deterministic
Lockstep Netcode Model’ are commonly referred to as ’GGPO’ (Good Game Paced Out).
GGPO means both the concept and the first original implementation of Deterministic Lock-
step [10] with those additional techniques to mitigate network latency.
2.3
Determinism and deterministic game
Determinism is not a concept that applies only to games, it applies broadly to various
fields in computer science. However, it is easier to explain determinism in the context of
games, where visual traces of nondeterminism are more apparent.
Nondeterminism can be defined as the characteristic of a process, system, or computation
where the outcome is not entirely predictable from the initial conditions and inputs. This
means that the same initial state and input can lead to different outcomes on different
executions.
One very important thing is that “kind of deterministic” simulation code doesn’t exist. A
single bug, race condition, uninitialized variable, or anything else can break the entire
determinism. Either a simulation is deterministic or it isn’t. This is why validation is so
critical if the game does, in fact, rely on determinism.
Deterministic games use a deterministic lockstep netcode model to exchange inputs and
simulate the same next step of the game as other clients. To ensure and validate that
these simulations are deterministic, the game state hash is computed and sent along with
the input to the server. The server then validates if every player sent the exact same hash
before sending back the combined inputs to the clients, allowing it to detect if nondeter-
minism occurred.
For simplicity, let’s for now assume the perfect case in which it is possible to efficiently
hash the entire game state, and clients send this calculation to the server for verification.
Section 7 will later explain how games handle this process, why hashing the entire game
state efficiently is not possible, and what is done instead. This section will also show
how to hash the game state efficiently and reliably to ensure that nondeterminism is de-
tectable only when it truly happens. For now, let’s just keep in mind that by comparing
the hash values from different clients, one can detect if their simulations are proceeding
in a deterministic manner.
6
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:13==
2.4
Players connection
To utilise the lockstep synchronisation method, the way how clients connect to each other
and which of those methods is good for deterministic games and lockstep needs to be
considered.
The way computers are connecting with each other is called ”network topology,” and it de-
scribes a specific arrangement of nodes (which can be visualised as clients) that interact.
Figures 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3 showcase the most common network topologies.
Figure 2.1: Example of P2P
topology
Figure 2.2:
Example of
client-server topology
Figure 2.3:
Example of
client-server with authorita-
tive client-host topology
In P2P netcode topology, each client connects to every other client in order to exchange
game states and events, as shown in Figure 2.1. In that implementation, no single player
can be defined as a game host, and instead, each client is in charge of managing their
own game while accepting updates from other clients.
In a server-client topology, all clients connect to a separate game server instead of directly
connecting to each other, as shown in Figure 2.2. This dedicated game server (DGS)
runs the game and acts as the authoritative source for game state information. It receives
updates from connected clients, integrates them into its game state, and then distributes
the updated state to each client. Most major online games, such as Counter-Strike or
League of Legends, operate under this model, with game studios running the servers
[11].
While the deterministic lockstep model can use this network topology because it requires
a server instance to gather and send back inputs, running a dedicated server is typically
the domain of large, professional game companies. This thesis aims to showcase the im-
plementation of deterministic lockstep, determinism validation, and debugging in simpler
games, making it preferable to avoid the need for a dedicated server. Additionally, using
a dedicated server presents maintainability issues, and it is more convenient for potential
users of the package to test determinism on a local machine without having to set up a
dedicated server first.
The preferred approach is to use one of the client’s machines as the server, as depicted
in Figure 2.3. This method avoids the cost of a dedicated game server while still providing
authority over the game state. The selected client becomes a client-host, simultaneously
acting as the server for the game session and a client participating in it.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
7
==PAGE:14==
2.5
Desynchronization and Authority
When clients are connected, the term ’synchronization’ refers to the process of changing
or correcting their game state in order for it to be the same on every machine for a given
point in the simulation time. Contrary to that, the term ’desynchronization’ refers to the
process in which, due to any reason, the game states on different machines start to differ
from each other. The single instance of that behaviour is commonly referred to as ’desync’.
The terms ”nondeterminism” and ”desync” are often used interchangeably in deterministic
simulations, but there is a difference between them. ”Desync” refers to the state beginning
to differ between simulations, while ”nondeterminism” means that the state started to differ
specifically because the simulation, given the same starting point and inputs, produced a
different state. Therefore, every nondeterministic behaviour results in a desync, but not
every desync is caused by nondeterminism, depending on the type of game.
As an example of a desync, one could consider a first-person shooter (FPS) game involv-
ing Player 1 and Player 2. In this scenario, let’s imagine Player 1 sees Player 2 and shoots
him with perfect timing according to his own screen. This will trigger an event that is sent
simultaneously to Player2 (or the server) while also being processed on Player1’s com-
puter, confirming the hit and displaying Player2 as dead. However, due to signal delay,
by the time the shot was processed on Player2’s end, Player2 was no longer in the firing
line, and, therefore, the shot missed. In this situation, Player1 perceives Player2 as elim-
inated while, according to Player2’s, he remains alive, as in Figure 2.4. At this point, the
game states of those clients are not syncronized anymore, and the that desyncronization
occurred.
Figure 2.4: Player one sees player two as eliminated, but the state on player two’s ma-
chine is different.
The only way for the game to continue would be to consider one of the players to have
the “correct” version of events. This is called ”authority.” When a server or client is con-
sidered authoritative, the updates or events it sends to other clients are considered to be
the correct sequence of events. Even if it conflicts with existing game states, the other
client must update their game state to line up with the authoritative data. This is why
more important game events, like scoring points or shooting another player, should not
be visually executed until the game authority confirms that they really happened.
In the previous example of Figure 2.4, if Player1 is authoritative over Player2, then re-
gardless of what Player2’s machine calculates, the hit would be confirmed. Therefore,
authority prevents desynchronization and allows both players to resynchronize. However,
while authority may prevent desynchronization, it does not address issues caused by la-
tency, which can manifest as seemingly perfect shots missing or apparently bad shots
hitting.
8
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:15==
Additionally, in deterministic games, the server is not responsible for processing the game
state to provide authority over what really happened in the game. Instead, it collects and
redistributes inputs, only being able to detect desynchronization without being able to de-
termine which game version is correct. Since the server is not processing the simulation,
it cannot ascertain which client processed the game incorrectly or what the current game
state is.
2.6
Latency and Lag
Latency corresponds to the time it takes for a signal to go from point A (the source of
the signal) to point B (the signal destination). When dealing with Netcode, one can never
assume that a signal can get from one place to another instantaneously. A large part of
netcode exists only to deal with this fact.
Network connection latency is primarily caused by several factors. One of them is the limit
of the speed of light, which in itself wouldn’t cause practically any delay, and it just means
that data can’t travel instantaneously from place to place. Light also travels slower in optic
fibre glass or Ethernet cables. With that, various drawbacks of the way our technology
works need to be taken into consideration. First of all, the way from point A to point B
while using cables is never a straight line and can be unexpectedly prolonged by various
factors. During this journey, the data needs to be read by network equipment at numerous
points to determine its onward path, which may not always be the fastest one. It may also
require multiple round trips if any part of this data is lost or corrupted. For example, if
one of the routers (a piece of software that determines the next destination of the data) is
overloaded with requests, it can simply drop our data. All of those factors can contribute
to the to the additional time it takes for the data to arrive.
In terms of lockstep, each simulation step (also referred to as a tick) requires the client to
wait for data to be received by the server along with all other clients’ data. This process
can take as much time as the delay experienced by the slowest client, as the simulation
needs to gather all the data first. Then the data needs to be sent back, and only then
can the game proceed. During this ’waiting time’ the game seems to be frozen in place. 
If this delay is sufficiently long and thus noticeable, it is referred to as ’lag’. Again, it its
pure implementation, detersministic lockstep netcode model does nothing to prevent the
appearance of such lag.
From another aspect, every game has a pace of how many frames per second (FPS) it
should simulate. The higher the value, the more smooth the game seems. Currently, all
fast-paced games aim to enforce a rate of around 60 FPS, which is deemed responsive
enough for the player. This translates to roughly 16.66667 milliseconds, during which the
client should complete all calculations and send its data for the current game step to the
server. If this process takes longer, it may also be a source of latency. Because of that,
several more approaches were developed, which allow the simulation to run faster.
2.7
CPU power and Data Oriented Design (DOD)
Games, particularly real-time strategy (RTS) games, can consume a significant amount of
processing power (referred to as CPU power). This is due to the high number of entities
and interactions in the game world that need to be processed. That demand is critical
because the traditional object-oriented programming approach tends to be inefficient, pri-
marily due to its scattered memory access patterns. These patterns result in a substantial
portion of the simulation step time being spent waiting for data to be accessed.
Data-oriented design is an umbrella term for a large collection of techniques and the condi-
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
9
==PAGE:16==
tions under which those techniques should be used. In general, the goal is to analyse the
access patterns of the different kinds of data in an application and select data structures
that, for those access patterns, optimally leverage the underlying hardware. Hardware
optimisations are often related (but not limited) to optimising usage of the CPU cache,
limiting loading and storing to RAM (cache misses).
Object-oriented programming is about creating a model of the world in the programme
and then solving problems by querying and modifying the model. Data-oriented design is
about looking for what actually needs to happen in the real world and then structuring the
programme around that. DOD is already a proven to work approach for resource intensive
games as RTS or fighting games [12].
An example of DOD improvement could be in cache handling. In normal hardware, when
a request for a certain piece of data is created, a whole chunk of data next to it is loaded
into the cache. This is because cache is extremely fast to access compared to accessing
the main memory [13]. In an object-oriented approach, the specific data a user wants to
query, such as information about bullet objects, is scattered in memory. This scattering
results in many memory requests to modify or read information about the same type of
object, which does not utilise the cache efficiently.
In data-oriented design, objects that have the same type of data on them (are of the same
archetype) are stored next to each other in memory. In the case of bullets, a data-oriented
approach allows for requesting data from memory once and then utilising cache memory
to the fullest. This approach focuses on updating or modifying one type of data at a time.
When all bullet data is fetched, the data pulled into the cache is used efficiently, enabling
the CPU to utilise its processing power more effectively instead of waiting for data to arrive
from the main memory.
A good overview of Data-Oriented Design (DOD) and the differences between DOD and
Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) is provided in the Unity tutorial [14], with the com-
parison illustrated in Figure 2.5 and visually represented in Figure 2.6.
In Object-Oriented Programming (OOP), once the player starts moving green balls around,
the code iterates over an array of sphere objects to check the colour of each one and set
the position of the green ones. Although the array is packed with contiguous data, it only
contains references to Sphere objects, and the actual data can be scattered throughout
memory, resulting in cache misses. In Data-Oriented Design (DOD), spheres would be de-
composed into colour and position components and then packed into contiguous buffers
which are easy to iterate on, resulting in fewer cache misses and much faster processing.
Figure 2.5: Comparison of data structure between
OOP and DOD taken from Unity tutorial
Figure 2.6: Visual representation of
data used for comparison between
DOD and OOP taken from Unity tu-
torial
10
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:17==
In the context of games, reducing delays in data access can lead to significantly improved
performance and smoother gameplay, especially when numerous data access actions
and calculations need to be executed simultaneously. Consequently, DOD has been in-
corporated into several widely used game engines as an option. This shift represents a
major change in how code and data are conceptualised and requires a different program-
ming approach from developers.
2.8
ECS - Entity, Component, System
The Entity-Component-System (ECS) pattern is a software architectural pattern that is
particularly well-suited to the principles of data-oriented design (DoD). It is important to
note that while it is possible to write code that uses DoD principles without employing ECS,
and vice versa, the ECS pattern naturally aligns with DoD optimisations.
An entity is a general-purpose object, typically represented by a unique identifier. Entities
themselves do not contain any data or behaviour. Components are data containers that
hold the informations about state of an entity. Each component represents a single aspect
of the entity, such as its position, velocity, or health. Entity is thus used to group compo-
nents together to represent certain element of the game (for example a player). Systems
contain the logic that operates on entities with specific components. They change the
state of the game by performing operations on the entities’ components.
Figure 2.7: Example of ECS design
The components that constitute an entity are grouped into archetypes, meaning entities
with the same types of components. These entities’ components are stored next to each
other in memory, allowing ECS to make better use of the CPU cache, reducing cache
misses, and improving performance. For example, when changing the colors of balls,
iterating through the same archetype maximizes cache memory usage by reducing the
time spent fetching data from memory, leading to faster and more efficient processing.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
11
==PAGE:18==
Entities within the same archetype share the same set of components, even if their values
differ. This contiguous memory arrangement enables systems to operate on entities of a
single archetype at a time, improving performance through optimized cache usage.
The ECS pattern lends itself well to DOD due to its separation of data and logic. It cleanly
separates data from behaviour, making it easier to manage and reason about each system
and for what behaviour it’s responsible.
In practice, many ECS frameworks adopt a storage design that allows applications to
leverage the optimisations enabled by DOD. For example, Unity’s DOTS framework uses
an ECS pattern that iterates over contiguous arrays of components, thereby maximising
the benefits of data locality.
This is why ECS and DOD are often incorrectly used interchangeably. However, they are
almost always used together, especially in the context of games and game engines.
An example of ECS design is shown in Figure 2.7 where components are grouped together
by entities, and systems query specific components to modify them.
2.9
Game engines and Unity
In order to implement or use either DOD or any tools and frameworks for the game devel-
opment process, the game developers can choose between two options. Either they can
create all of the necessary tools themselves from scratch to, in essence, build software
that would facilitate the creation of the game (called a game engine), or they can already
use one of the existing game engines on the market. Those game engines represent
years of development and hundreds of different functionalities aiming to help developers
create games faster and easier.
Game engines like, for example, Unity, Unreal Engine, or Godot are usually built with a
modular architecture, where each module provides functionalities of different types for
the game, like, for example, netcode, physics, or AI. Game engines help developers save
time and resources by providing a foundation that handles the core elements of a game,
allowing developers to focus more on the unique functionalities.
Unity, in this context, is one of the better-known game engines in the industry [7]. Accord-
ing to several sources, like Wikipedia [15], apps made with Unity game engine account for
50 percent of all mobile games. It is renowned for its flexibility, ease of use, and extensive
feature set, which includes a strongly developed Data-Oriented Design (DOD) approach.
2.10
Unity Data Oriented Technology Stack (DOTS)
The DOD approach in the Unity game engine is represented in the form of Data Oriented
Technology Stack (DOTS), which is a combination of technologies and packages that
delivers a data-oriented design approach to building games. DOTS incorporates several
essential packages, including, among others, ECS and the job system.
DOTS, which was for the first time announced in 2018 and production ready for release on
May 25, 2023, represents a shift towards a data-oriented design in Unity, leveraging tech-
nology to ensure high-speed execution and efficient use of memory and resources. This
in turn allows for the creation of much bigger, more complex, and performance-intensive
games. Examples of those include games like ’diplomacy is not an option’ which features
hundreds of units [16] or Unity’s own sample ’Megacity Metro’ which allows for concurrent
online play for up to 128 players online [17].
12
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:19==
3
Goal of the thesis
This chapter aims to provide an overview of existing work in the field of deterministic
games, determinism validation and debugging, highlighting the areas this thesis aims to
address and contribute to. It defines the specific goals to be achieved, the questions to
be answered, and the hypotheses to be tested.
3.1
Research Focus
The primary focus of this thesis, beyond investigating how to implement a deterministic
lockstep netcode model in DOTS as a package, which serves as a base for the creation
of online multiplayer deterministic games and has been implemented by various devel-
opers [18], is to explore existing approaches in the area of determinism validation and
debugging, and investigate how to build such tools in DOTS, incorporating them into the
package.
The package is developed in Unity DOTS, researching how validation and debugging
can be performed in Data-Oriented Design (DOD) and Entity Component System (ECS)
based software. It examines the benefits of working with ECS in the validation process
and explores how to build these tools in software that is not itself 100% deterministic.
3.2
Problem Statement
Creating a deterministic online multiplayer game which allows for implementation of proven
lag-mitigating techniques [3] is challenging and currently not many solutions exist which
help with its creation. Especially in terms of determinism validation and debugging which
is essential for ensuring that all players experience the same simulated game state, de-
spite differences in hardware, software, and network conditions. If the game states were
to frequently diverge in production, the resulting player dissatisfaction would be enormous,
likely harming the game, business, and associated brands. Players have a right to have
a product work as advertised, and therefore to return faulty games.
Determinism is essential because if clients will desync, this breaks the entire gameplay
experience of the user. It’s not possible to recover after a desync because game in this
case is not synchronising state. It’s the core point of the entire architecture, so game don’t
have full determinism, its not playable
The topic of determinism validation and debugging is often overlooked, with some existing
solutions providing necessary netcode infrastructure without providing tooling to detect
desyncs [19] and making sure that the simulation needs to be acceptably deterministic
(i.e. encountering an acceptably low frequency of desync bugs in testing, and in the
wild). For such infrastructure to function effectively, it is essential to ensure that the game
simulation is deterministic. This is the main focus of this thesis. Currently, developers
have limited solutions and would benefit from an alternative that helps to debug issues
related to nondeterminism, as well as a foundational framework for deterministic lockstep
to build upon.
3.3
Objective
The primary objective of this thesis is to develop a package for Unity DOTS that includes
determinism validation and debugging tools along with an implementation of a determin-
istic lockstep netcode model. These tools are designed to aid in the creation of deter-
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
13
==PAGE:20==
ministic multiplayer online games based on a deterministic lockstep model, providing a
foundation that can be later improved upon. The package will offer essential debugging
tools to identify and resolve nondeterminism issues, easing the implementation and vali-
dation of deterministic networking features in games. On top of that this methodology will
help with verifying determinism in functionalities of even a game engine that is not fully
deterministic which in turn will help the engine developers to locate the issues and game
developers to see if an engine is suitable for their determinism needs.
The usage of this package will be demonstrated with a sample game and can be down-
loaded from the GitHub page [20].
3.4
Hypothesis
The central hypothesis of this research is that, in addition to implementing a deterministic
lockstep netcode model in DOTS, effective determinism validation and debugging are
possible within a not fully deterministic DOD/ECS framework like DOTS. The developed
determinism validation tools will demonstrate that using ECS can result in more accurate
detection of the sources of nondeterminism by pinpointing, in addition to the usual game
frame and field, the exact system causing the nondeterministic behavior.
The hypothesis will be evaluated by assessing the accuracy and effectiveness of the pack-
age’s determinism validation and debugging tools in detecting and resolving nondetermin-
ism issues in code that aims to be deterministic.
3.5
Research Questions
To validate the hypothesis, the research will focus on several key questions:
1. How can the Deterministic Lockstep Netcode Model be effectively incorporated within
Unity’s DOTS?
2. How nondeterministic behaviour can be efficiently detected in DOTS?
3. How can the source of nondeterministic behaviour in DOTS-based games be iden-
tified?
4. What are the most common sources of non-deterministic behaviour?
3.6
Research Goals and Methods
The goals and methodologies implemented within this master thesis and outlined below
aim to address the research questions previously identified, guiding the exploration into
the integration of determinism validation tools and the deterministic lockstep netcode
model within Unity’s DOTS package which may be used by Unity projects to build de-
terministic multiplayer online games.
• Goal 1: Design and implement integration of the Deterministic Lockstep Netcode
Model within Unity’s DOTS framework.
• Goal 2: Create a sample game that will showcase the usage of the lockstep model
and be the basis on which determinism validation will be tested.
• Goal 3: Create and describe a methodology for detecting nondeterministic behaviour
within the DOTS environment, and explain how developers can use it to detect
sources of nondeterminism and debug them.
14
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:21==
• Goal 4: Offer insights, recommendations, and best practices for developers aiming
to implement deterministic games within modern game development frameworks,
particularly focusing on Unity’s DOTS.
To accomplish the outlined research goals, the following methodologies will be employed:
• Review of existing solutions: Conduct a review of existing literature and software
related to the deterministic lockstep netcode model, Unity’s DOTS, and determinism
validation and debugging.
• Case Studies: Investigate existing examples of determinism validation tool integra-
tion within game engines. The aim is be to identify common patterns, challenges
encountered, and best practices.
• Prototyping: Develop a prototype game that integrates the package containing
determinism validation and debugging tools and the deterministic lockstep netcode
model within Unity’s DOTS framework.
• Evaluation: Evaluate the effectiveness of determinism validation and how to locate
the source of nondeterminism.
• Documentation: Create a package README document, as well as an overall de-
scription of the investigation process, critical findings, and insights obtained through-
out the study.
By utilising these research methods, this study aims to accomplish its intended goals,
provide valuable insights and recommendations, and make the creation of multiplayer
online games more accessible for developers.
3.7
Prior work and existing knowledge
Numerous studies highlight the impact of different game development techniques on
player reception and gameplay. Evidence suggests that games employing determinis-
tic lockstep with built-in lag mitigation techniques see substantial improvements in player
experience and immersion [21]. This is primarily due to better handling of network latency,
which is a major challenge for developers of multiplayer online games [22]. However, im-
plementing forced input latency, player prediction, or other lag mitigation techniques on
top of deterministic lockstep requires deterministic code. To use this netcode model, a
set of determinism validation tools is necessary to properly identify and address any non-
deterministic behaviour in the game.
The concepts of deterministic lockstep and GGPO are well-established [10], [19], with
many open-source implementations available in GitHub repositories claiming to provide
deterministic functionalities. However, most of these repositories are outdated, not de-
signed for DOTS, or lack support for validating determinism [23], [18], [24]. None of these
repositories offer a clear and practical method for verifying determinism in games. This
can be mostly due to the many factors that can introduce non-deterministic behaviour and
the fact that it’s not so complicated to tell that a desync has occurred, but it’s difficult to do it
efficiently and point to where in the code nondeterminism originates. In addition to those
repositories, there are several written sources about deterministic prototyping in DOTS
[25], deterministic networking in general [26] [27], and lockstep concepts in general [28]
which can be utlised as a learning resource.
When it comes to creating a deterministic game and validating it with existing public game
engines, most are not 100% deterministic and do not provide built-in tools for determinism
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
15
==PAGE:22==
validation and debugging. Factors contributing to the fact that this is not supported out
of the box include the non-deterministic nature of many engine functionalities and the
significant development effort required to change this. Additionally, the complexity and
scale needed to support a wide range of features and genres, the limited demand for
deterministic behavior, and the availability of third-party tools like Photon Quantum [4] also
play a role. Although detailed information about the exact state of determinism in DOTS
is scarce, features like deterministic float mode [29] and the deterministic nature of ECS
as stated on the Unity webpage [30] suggest potential for future support for determinism
in Unity and by this also other game engines.
Developers aiming to implement GGPO-style deterministic gameplay currently often re-
sort to creating custom deterministic game engines tailored to their specific game require-
ments, such as the Snowplay engine used for the ”Stormgate” game [31]. This approach,
also seen in games like Warcraft 3 and StarCraft 2, yields the best results but requires
significant resources and time, making it feasible primarily for large studios planning to
create massive games that will offset the costs.
An example of such a private deterministic game engine is the one used by Riot for League
of Legends.
3.7.1
Riot approach
Since this is a private engine, its code and implementation details are not publicly acces-
sible, making it necessary to rely solely on available public information for insights. Riot’s
blog about League of Legends provides an excellent example of how they support de-
terminism in their League of Legends game [32] and how they implemented determinism
validation tools [33]. While the specifics of what happens from a player’s perspective when
a nondeterminism is detected remain unclear due to limited public information, the blog
offers a valuable overview of the determinism validation implementation and debugging
of such cases.
Riot, first, emphasises the importance of ensuring that their game behaves determinis-
tically to support their netcode model, which differs from lockstep in the sense that their
servers are also simulating the game state in order to control the correct state of the game
and prevent cheating. Recognising that making 100% of their game engine and server
deterministic was not feasible, they focused on the validation of the gameplay-essential
state.
A common technique for evaluating game determinism is to hash the game state and
compare the results between all connected players after some period of game update
frames. To support later debugging, Riot chose to log the game state hashed changes
during the game in readable form as a set of hierarchical key-value pairs in a file. This
approach allows them to compare the outputs of these logs and use them to see what
exact variable caused the desync.
The drawback of this method, as they are stating, is that log file sizes can be huge, and
recording to and reading from these logs has severe performance implications. The logs
are captured by them at the end of every frame, though the sampling rate can be de-
creased or logging can be limited to specific segments of frames to save space. Addi-
tionally, they log the state of game variables only when their values change, which helps
manage file sizes.
Riot uses two levels of detail for game state logging. Basic logging is fast enough for
real-time recording, determines if the game state is sufficiently similar by considering only
the most important subset of the game state (for example, players, moving objects, etc.),
16
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:23==
and results in file sizes of tens of megabytes. This option won’t guarantee that the game
is 100% deterministic, but it will guarantee that it is as deterministic as necessary for fair
gameplay. The other option is Detailed logging, which captures more data, is too slow
for real-time recording but is detailed enough to allow to find the first exact variable that
diverged, and results in file sizes of tens of gigabytes.
To process these logs, Riot developed a script that compares the game logs and returns a
sufficient ”diff-log,” highlighting the details of the first known desync. As discussed in their
blog, only the first divergence really matters, since the game state will quickly diverge into
chaos after a single discrepancy.
In addition to saving game state recordings from each game, Riot also maintains server
network recordings. These recordings contain all the data exchanged between the server
and clients, allowing them to replay the game on Riot’s machines to replicate and analyse
the same nondeterministic behaviour.
Their workflow involves the following steps:
1. Record a server network recording and basic game state log on one of the Riot
environments for a real-world game.
2. On a separate PC, play back the server network recording and create a new basic
game state log.
3. Compare the two basic game-state logs to see if the issue can be replicated.
4. If the basic game state logs are different, re-run the playback twice using detailed
logging, comparing the detailed logs to each other.
5. Investigate the desync, starting with the variables that diverged.
Additionally, they built a test automation process that runs on dedicated hardware con-
figured to closely resemble the actual servers used for League’s game instances. This
automated process operates on a large set of games, replaying beta-phase games where
users expect occasional errors. This setup helps catch divergence-causing bugs before
they go live or reach e-sports environments.
This approach presents really good and advanced software with many hints and tips for
implementation.
3.7.2
Photon Quantum approach
In contrast to pre-made game engines, there exists one publicly accessible deterministic
game engine known as ”Photon Quantum”. Photon Quantum brands itself as the only
100% deterministic multiplayer game engine on the market [4] that can be used by other
developers. It offers more practical approach for smaller studios or individual developers
then implementing deterministic engine from scratch. Photon Quantum integrates with
Unity, managing code execution while Unity handles presentation, input gathering, and
platform support. It incorporates its own variant of the ECS, job system, GGPO imple-
mentation, and general multiplayer-focused functionalities. Many games requiring deter-
minism use this solution, including the popular ”Stumble Guys” game.
It’s important to note that this investigation knowledge is based on Quantum 2, as Quan-
tum 3 is only available to paid users. Therefore, while the new version may contain im-
provements and new functionalities related to determinism validation, focus of the thesis
will be on the features available in Quantum 2.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
17
==PAGE:24==
Photon Quantum’s approach involves performing game state hashes once per frame and
identifying the frame where nondeterminism occurred. If nondeterminism is detected, the
game is stopped permanently, and logs of the first frame where nondeterminism was de-
tected are shown on the screen. Similar to Riot’s approach, these logs provide a readable
game state, helping developers pinpoint the exact frame and component/variable where
the nondeterminism originated, narrowing down the search for the source of nondetermin-
istic behavior.
For local validation, developers can control the hashing interval value, which determines
how often game state hashes are sent to the server for verification. Quantum recom-
mends using this feature during development but setting it to zero for release, meaning
no verification. This is because, currently, when a divergence is detected, the log is dis-
played and the game stops without the possibility of further play which would drastically
disturb the game.
While this approach could lead to the possibility of divergence in the released game, Quan-
tum’s engine is deterministic, and the assumption is probably that any nondeterminism
results from user code and will be eliminated during testing. This is not a perfect solution
but is probably considered sufficient given other priorities.
Additionally, there are various log options that specify the level of detail in the logs, similar
to Riot’s approach, in case the default settings are insufficient. The basic log shows which
component caused the desync, but it is possible to generate more advanced logs that
include component values, allowing developers to see precise variable values instead of
just hashes or component names. These options provide more detailed information to
pinpoint the differences, as illustrated in Figures 3.1 and 3.2.
When a divergence is detected, the logs show which field caused the desync, the frame
it occurred on, and data related to all object values and initial files that may affect the
simulation. The debugging options also allow for manual hashes checks, enabling custom
implementations.
Since most game engines used for creating deterministic games likely offer some form
of determinism validation tool, it is difficult to claim that the list provided is explaining all
existing and best determinism validation and debugging tools. There are probably other,
even more advanced, solutions. However, based on publicly available examples, one can
only really consider the ones mentioned.
18
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.1: Photon Quantum log shown when divergence was detected with basic log
options
Figure 3.2: Photon Quantum log shown when divergence was detected with all log options
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
19
==PAGE:26==
3.8
Proposed approach
First of all, Unity and DOTS were chosen as the base framework for the thesis because
of its potential to provide greater computational speed, which is beneficial for runtime
determinism validation and potential future extension of the framework with lag mitiga-
tion techniques like prediction and rollback, as these require additional computational re-
sources. The use of the DOD paradigm enhances performance from this perspective [5].
Moreover, creating a publicly available package for the most popular game engine has
significant value. It can serve as a foundation for implementing more complex systems
and act as a learning resource for developers. On top of that ECS frameworks like DOTS
are showing potential for implementing more precise determinism debugging tools. Due
to these factors, Unity DOTS was chosen as the base framework for implementing the
proposed solution.
The validation process is similar to Quantum in that the game stops when a desync is
detected, and a log detailing the first frame that diverged will be created. However, unlike
Quantum, this thesis investigates whether validation during runtime can be fast enough
to be continuously active in the game (same as Riot).
Additionally, a replay functionality is created, similar to Riot’s approach, allowing for re-
playing the game with different validation options. The replay logs the entire game state,
and the computational expense of this approach will be evaluated. Showcase example
on how to debug nondeterminism cases is also provided in form of debugging the sample
Pong game.
While proposing a better solution is challenging, one potential improvement involves lever-
aging the ECS pattern. ECS separates system logic from data, leading to a clear division
of code into distinct parts. This separation allows for per-system validation, which can
pinpoint the exact system causing divergence, thereby limiting the code base that devel-
opers usually need to investigate. It’s unclear why Photon Quantum is not utilizing this
option since they implemented and use their version of ECS. It may be part of Quantum
3, was deemed too resource-intensive for games, or their current priorities are different.
Because systems are usually responsible for very specific operations (e.g., only the move-
ment of the balls), this method could significantly reduce the scope of a code that needs
to be checked, making the debugging process more efficient and precise.
This thesis also proposes building determinism validation tools in an environment that
is not 100% deterministic. This presents an interesting investigation into the potential
problems that may arise and how they could be overcome.
The general steps to implement this solution involve first creating a sample game in Unity
DOTS. Next, a package is developed to facilitate the use of the deterministic lockstep
netcode model as a base for deterministic games, which the sample game utilizes. The
goal of this package is to enable various game implementations to leverage it. Finally,
determinism validation and debugging tools are integrated into the package.
More concepts are explained in detail in the following sections, but it is important to un-
derstand the general aim of this thesis. The created framework serves as an example of
implementation that can be expanded upon. Further expansion ideas are discussed in
the Discussion section.
20
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:27==
4
Running example
This chapter introduces a game that will serve as the showcase example for all code
implementations throughout the remainder of the thesis. The primary goal is to guide
the reader by providing visualizations, demonstrating the implementation steps, and ulti-
mately detecting and debugging nondeterministic behavior in the game and what steps
the developer would need to take in order to find the source of it and fix it. Additionally, it
aims to illustrate the integration process with the developed package.
4.1
Sample Pong game description
The game itself is relatively simple and involves two players competing in a modified
version of the classic ’Pong’ game. Each player controls a paddle that can move vertically
along their side of the screen, with the objective of hitting a ball back and forth across the
field. The goal is to prevent the ball from passing their paddle while attempting to get it
past their opponent’s paddle, scoring points in the process. The game continues until a
predetermined score is reached.
This version differs in that, besides counting points and determining a winner, it features
not one ball but a thousand, which are spawned over the span of the game. This design
choice is intended to demonstrate the handling of a large amount of data in a deterministic
lockstep/DOTS-based game and to make nondeterminism detection more comparable to
real-life scenarios in terms of entities number. Additionally, this game features only two
players because the approach is easier to explain and would work similarly with more
players.
Due to the limited time frame of several months for this investigation, it was not feasible to
implement a larger game that would present real-life nondeterminism examples. Instead,
this game focuses on simpler cases, demonstrating the methodology and potential of
these validation tools in real-life scenarios.
Because of that, it won’t provide realistic estimates for numbers, such as the time it takes
to validate determinism in each frame. To provide a comparison, Unity’s own sample
”Megacity Metro” is used as a reference point [17]. Megacity Metro is a vertical slice (a
proof of concept) and it is large enough and accessible to provide a realistic estimate in
terms of amount of entities and systems existing in a production game. Megacity Metro
will be used for comparison of potential validation time and file sizes for bigger games in
Section 7.
4.2
Functionalities in the game
The Pong sample game consists of a menu where the player can choose to either host or
connect to a game, with the option to play locally on one computer, as shown in Figure 4.1.
If a player wants to connect to a game, the player only needs to enter the host machine’s
address and the port on which the game is running, as all other game settings will come
directly from the host machine. When hosting a game, the player can specify the port on
which the game will run and the simulation speed (ticks per second).
In this case, some validation parameters can be chosen in the game menu. This feature
would not typically be available in a released game, where such settings would be config-
ured by the developer. It was added to simplify the validation process and eliminate the
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
21
==PAGE:28==
need to rebuild the game each time a validation option is changed. Additionally, there is
a checkbox that allows the player to replay the game from a file by reading inputs saved
in it. The process of how this is done is explained in Section 7. This feature, like the
validation options, is intended for deterministic debugging and would not normally be part
of a normal game but is used here for simplicity.
When hosting or connecting to a game, the player will first see a lobby screen as in Figure
4.2, indicating that other players can still join the game and that the game has not started
yet. Joining will not be possible after the game starts, as this would require additional
logic to connect the player to an already-running deterministic simulation.
Figure 4.1: ”In game” menu
Figure 4.2: Lobby screen which signifies
that other players can join the game
Figure 4.3: Visualization of the sample Pong game
Several gameplay modes were implemented. The first mode is initiated by pressing ”host”
and starting the game without anyone joining, allowing the game to be played in single-
player mode. This allows for validation if the game behaves as expected (i.e., if balls are
visually bouncing correctly between the walls and player’s paddle). The second mode,
activated by pressing ”Play locally,” enables two players to play on the same machine (one
player uses the arrow keys and the other uses the ”W” and ”S” keys). This mode allows
for local game simulation where each paddle represents a separate client, which aids
22
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:29==
in debugging same-platform determinism since the validation will be performed between
them. Finally, if a remote player joins to control the second paddle, the game is normally
played in online multiplayer mode. The general game looks like in Figure 4.3
4.3
Implementation overview
Regarding the deterministic lockstep netcode model and simulation, developers creating
a game will have control over its basic settings. These settings will be implemented in
Section 6. For the initial step, which is the game implementation, one will only consider
a local game without any netcode functionality to keep things simpler. Later settings will
include options like frame rate, the number of allowed connections, and other tuning pa-
rameters that may vary depending on the type of game. Right now, local game settings
only include parameters related to the game itself, like, for example, the number of balls
to spawn and their speed.
The diagram in Figure 4.4 illustrates the necessary parts of the sample Pong game in Unity
DOTS, which are implemented in Section 5. The details of this diagram will be discussed
and explained in the following sections, expanding on them during the implementation of
the deterministic lockstep as well as the determinism validation and debugging tools. It
provides an overview of what is being implemented.
Figure 4.4: Illustration of Pong game elements which are implemented in the next section
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
23
==PAGE:30==
24
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:31==
5
Sample Pong game implementation
This section provides insights into the implementation of the sample Pong game. First,
an overview of the most important Unity and DOTS technical concepts will be provided
to understand how it works. Then, this implementation will focus on the local game setup
without using the lockstep netcode model or any network connection so the basic game
implementation can be understood. The networked version, utilizing the lockstep netcode
model, will be implemented and showed in the next section and this will focus on pure
game implementation.
5.1
Technical concepts of Unity and DOTS
Unity is one of several game engines, where each offers unique benefits for game develop-
ment [34]. However, Unity stands out with its advanced implementation of Data-Oriented
Design principles and computational speed through DOTS. Practically all DOTS-based
games are known for handling numerous moving units efficiently and delivering better
performance.
5.1.1
Unity base concepts
Let’s begin by exploring the concepts generally used by the Unity game engine that are
not associated with DOTS. Unity’s traditional method of implementing games has been
object-oriented, and not everything can yet be solved by a data-oriented approach. This
is why DOTS is optional and can be mixed with object-oriented functionalities within a
single game. Additionally, since DOTS represents a different way of thinking about data
and code, it couldn’t simply replace object-oriented coding but had to be added as an
optional feature. By starting with an exploration of object-oriented functionalities, the basic
concepts that will also be used in the sample Pong game can be understood.
Game objects and prefabs
In Unity, GameObjects and Prefabs are fundamental building blocks used to create and
manage game elements. As the name suggests, a game object is the most basic object
in games made with Unity. It acts as a container for various components that define its
properties and behaviour. These components can include physical attributes like trans-
form, which defines the game object’s position, rotation, and scale, as well as scripts,
colliders, renderers, and more. GameObjects are versatile and can represent anything
from characters and props to cameras and lights, making them essential for constructing
the game world. GameObject has essentially the same function as an entity, which is to
group components and script into a singular object.
Prefabs, in turn, are saved instances of GameObjects. The usual approach is to create
a GameObject in the editor, modify it, and then drag and drop it into one of the folders,
which automatically converts it into a Prefab. This Prefab can then be referenced by
scripts, such as a spawning script, to instantiate the premade GameObject. For example,
a ball Prefab with all its components and scripts already assigned can be spawned as a
fully functional object within the game.
Those concepts will be used in the sample Pong game in order to create saved instances
of objects such as ball or player.
Scenes in Unity
In Unity, a scene serves as a container for the environments, objects, and settings that
comprise separate game levels. It allows for loading and unloading groups of objects or
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
25
==PAGE:32==
entities without needing to destroy all entities in the world and create new ones, which
would constitute a new level.
This approach is particularly useful for creating distinct sections of a game, such as a
menu scene and a game scene in Pong, as these are completely different in terms of
content and functionality.
DeltaTime
DeltaTime is a crucial parameter in game development. It represents the time it took to
process the previous frame. DetlaTime is calculated as the difference between the current
frame’s timestamp and the previous frame’s timestamp. This value, referred to as “delta
time” or “elapsed time,” is used in most per-frame calculations.
Because different machines have varying computational power, the simulation of a full
game frame might take 16 ms on one machine and 30 ms on another. These values are
then saved as DeltaTime and can be used for various purposes in the next frame.
For example, if developer wants a player object to move 1 metre per second, he cannot
simply use its velocity and move it by this value every frame because it would result in
the player object moving faster on a more powerful machine, introducing nondeterminism.
Instead, he must multiply the velocity by DeltaTime. This ensures that both machines
will experience the same movement, maintaining consistent gameplay across different
hardware since, after 1 second, the player will have moved the same distance on both
machines.
Another application is ensuring that all clients process the game simulation at the same
speed (i.e., 60 FPS). The method for enforcing this is explained in detail in Section ??.
The concept of delta time is used both in DOTS and in traditional game development
within Unity.
Managed and unmanaged variables
Another concept used both by standard Unity and DOTS is understanding the difference
between managed and unmanaged variables. Managed variables are those whose mem-
ory management is automatically handled by the garbage collector. This simplifies de-
velopment, as developers do not need to manually allocate and deallocate memory be-
cause garbage collector automatically detects which parts of memory can be set free
(deallocated) to be used by other parts of the simulation. However, the convenience of
managed variables comes with a performance cost due to the overhead introduced by
the garbage collector.
In contrast, unmanaged variables require developers to manually manage memory allo-
cation and deallocation. This manual management can lead to significant performance
improvements and more determinism because memory operations are more predictable
and efficient without the intervention of the garbage collector. Unmanaged memory man-
agement is crucial for performance-sensitive applications, such as games, where consis-
tent and high-speed performance is required.
In Unity, both managed and unmanaged variables are used, but in DOTS, the recommen-
dation is to use unmanaged variables to speed up code execution. There are specific
types of systems, which will be explained later, that use only unmanaged code or allow a
mix of unmanaged and managed code.
An example of utilising unmanaged variables in Unity’s DOTS is the NativeList, which
is an unmanaged version of a standard list. Developers are responsible for managing
its memory, which involves explicitly allocating and freeing memory when it is no longer
26
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:33==
needed. This responsibility gives developers better control over memory usage and helps
avoid the performance overhead associated with garbage collection.
Using NativeList and other native collections prefixed with ”Native” when used with DOTS
can lead to performance gains. These structures are optimised for use with the Job Sys-
tem and Burst Compiler in Unity’s DOTS, enabling more efficient parallel processing and
deterministic behaviour.
5.1.2
DOTS related concepts
Now let’s understand the basic concepts which will be used from DOTS side in the Pong
implementation.
ECS in DOTS
Entities in DOTS are represented by a unique identifier, as shown in Figure 5.1. Entities
themselves do not contain any data or behaviour; instead, their purpose is to allow to
group different components together. An entity can conceptually represent anything in
the game environment, such as a player or a ball. However, it is important to remember
that entities only group together components that constitute such objects (e.g., a player).
In DOTS, entity creation, destruction, associating components with entities, and other
operations are performed using the EntityManager. The EntityManager handles the nec-
essary memory restructuring based on the intended action. An example usage is shown
in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: An example of entities in Unity
A Component in DOTS is a data container. Each component represents a single aspect
of an entity, such as a transform component (containing position, rotation, and scale),
ball velocity, or input values, but contains no logic related to them. Components do not
possess any behaviour on their own, they are purely data. For instance, a ”Velocity”
component stores the speed and direction of the ball entity.
In summary, a component is a container of data, and an entity is a container of compo-
nents. Figure 5.2 illustrates the view of components associated with an entity in the Unity
editor. This view allows to inspect various data contained within the components.
A component can either have associated data or be created without any data, in which
case it is treated as a ”tag component.” Tag components are used to mark entities for
specific purposes. For example, an entity can be marked as spawned by adding the
PlayerSpawned tag component.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
27
==PAGE:34==
In Unity, an example of component implementation and its association with an entity is
shown in the code listing 5.1. First one can see how component can be implemented and
then how to add it to a newly created entity by using EntityManager.
It is worth to mention that there are two ways to connect a component to an entity. One
way is via the EntityManager, as demonstrated in the same code listing 5.1. The other way
is to manually add components to an entity in the editor, which is useful for pre-making
objects that exist in the game, eliminating the need to perform this operation in the code.
As an example in Figure 5.2 an example of components added to an entity through the
editor is shown, which can then be accessed, modified, added, or removed via code.
Figure 5.2: An example of components in Unity
1
public struct ExampleComponent : IComponentData // definition of a component
of name "ExampleComponent"
2
{
3
public Entity exampleEntity; // data field containing reference to an
entity
4
public int Value; // data field containing integer value
5
}
6
7
public partial class ExampleSystem : SystemBase // definition of a system of
name "ExampleSystem"
8
{
9
var testEntity;
28
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:35==
10
11
protected override void OnUpdate()
12
{
13
testEntity = EntityManager.CreateEntity(); // creation of a new entity
and assigning its reference to testEntity variable
14
var newComponent = new ExampleComponent(){ // declaration of a new
ExampleComponent component , its fields don't need to be defined
straight away but otherwise those can store unpredictable data
from their assigned place in memory
15
exampleEntity = testEntity ,
16
Value = 5
17
}
18
19
EntityManager.AddComponentData(testEntity , newComponent); // using
EntityManager to assign newly created component to created entity
20
}
21
}
Listing 5.1: Example component holding data in Unity DOTS and operations on it with
EntityManager
A System in DOTS and in the context of ECS architecture is a piece of logic or func-
tionality that operates on a set of entities containing specific components. Systems are
responsible for processing and updating the state of these components, often based on
specific criteria or events. Systems focus on a single aspect of the game logic, such as
spawning balls in the Pong game, moving players, etc., making the code modular and
easier to maintain. They interact with the data stored in components, reading, modifying,
and updating components to drive the behaviour and state of entities. A system typically it-
erates over all entities that possess the necessary components to perform its operations,
for example, a BallMovementSystem processes all entities with a ”Velocity” and Trans-
form components. Systems operate independently of each other and do not maintain
direct references to entities, instead, they operate on component data, promoting decou-
pling and flexibility in the architecture. Systems are usually executed in a specific order
within the game loop, ensuring that the game logic is processed correctly, which is crucial
for maintaining proper game behaviour. By using systems in ECS, the architecture pro-
motes a clean separation between data (components) and behaviour (systems), which is
particularly beneficial when debugging nondeterministic issues.
As an example, let’s consider the following DOTS systems from the Pong game (just their
limited example scope) listed in Code Listing: 5.2
This example highlights several features of DOTS systems. Firstly, it demonstrates the
ability to control the order of system execution using attributes. By using attributes such as
”[UpdateInGroup]” and ”[UpdateAfter]”, one can specify the relative positioning of systems
within system groups, which act as containers for grouping systems together. In this case,
both systems will run in the DeterministicSimulationSystemGroup, with the BallSpawnSys-
tem being executed before the BallMovementSystem.
Secondly, ”SystemAPI,” which provides a set of methods and properties for interacting
with the ECS framework, allows for querying for specific components. BallMovementSys-
tem modifies the position value based on the Velocity component value. The foreach
loop iterates over entities that have both Transform and Velocity components, which in
this game will exist together only on ball entities, and updates their values.
Furthermore, the use of RefRW (reference ReadWrite) and RefRO (reference ReadOnly)
helps indicate whether a component is read-only or read-write, improving access security,
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
29
==PAGE:36==
especially when executing parallel jobs.
By adding, removing, or changing components, one can influence which entities will be
processed by a given system. For example, if the Velocity component is removed or
disabled, the Transform component on the same entity will not be updated by the Ball-
MovementSystem.
This dynamic component-based structure is a key feature of DOTS, enabling flexible and
efficient entity processing and can be visualised as in Figure 5.3.
It’s also worth noting that DOTS can be mixed with standard object-oriented classes,
which are often used for tasks like connecting buttons and executing commands. Not
everything in Unity can be implemented using DOTS (e.g., User Interface (UI) elements
and scene management), so these approaches can be combined to use the benefits of
both paradigms.
1
[UpdateInGroup(typeof(DeterministicSimulationSystemGroup))] // this system
will be updated in DeterministicSimulationSystemGroup system group
2
[UpdateBefore(typeof(BallSpawnSystem))] // this system will be updated at some
point before BallSpawnSystem system , if BallSpawnSystem doesn't exist
this will throw an error
3
public partial struct BallMovementSystem : ISystem
4
{
5
public void OnUpdate(ref SystemState state) // OnUpdate function executes
every time system runs
6
{
7
float deltaTime = SystemAPI.Time.DeltaTime;
8
9
foreach (var (transform , velocity) in SystemAPI
10
.Query<RefRW<LocalTransform >, RefRO<Velocity >>()) // operation
will be performed for each entity that has both LocalTransform
and Velocity components assigned to it. In this case
references to those components are already set to transform
and velocity variables. In the query the code indicates that
it may write to LocalTransform but it will only read from
Velocity (by usage for RefRO)
11
{
12
transform.ValueRW.position += velocity.ValueRO * deltaTime;
13
}
14
}
15
}
16
17
[UpdateInGroup(typeof(DeterministicSimulationSystemGroup))]
// this system
will be updated in DeterministicSimulationSystemGroup system group
18
[UpdateAfter(typeof(MovementSystem))] // this system will be updated at some
point after MovementSystem
19
public partial struct BallSpawnSystem : ISystem
20
{
21
public void OnUpdate(ref SystemState state)
22
{
23
var ball = EntityManager.Instantiate(prefab);
24
EntityManager.SetComponentData(ball, new LocalTransform
25
{
26
Position = new float3(0, 0, 13),
27
Scale = 0.2f,
28
Rotation = quaternion.identity
29
});
30
}
31
}
Listing 5.2: Example of system in DOTS
30
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.3: ECS flow in DOTS
Worlds
A world in Unity is a context or scope within which entities, components, and systems exist
and operate. Each world contains its own set of entities and systems, allowing for isolated
or parallel processing of different parts of a game or application. A world contains its own
unique EntityManager, which developers use to create, destroy, and manage entities.
The difference between a scene and a world is that while Unity scenes are about visually
arranging and managing game elements, DOTS worlds are about optimising the underly-
ing data and processing for better performance.
By default, Unity creates a ”Default World,” where most gameplay logic occurs and to
which every system and entity is assigned. Developers have the option to create addi-
tional worlds, which is useful for isolating systems, components, and entities for specific
situations or logical groupings. For example, in online multiplayer games, it is common
to separate client and server logic. DOTS provides world flags such as ClientWorld or
ServerWorld, allowing developers to create distinct worlds for server and client opera-
tions. This enables grouping specific systems to run exclusively on the client, server, or
both.
To assign and run a system in a specific world, an attribute can be used, as shown in the
modified BallSpawnSystem in Listing 5.3.
This division ensures that only server-related systems run in the server world, while client-
related systems run in the client world. The server world typically does not need to perform
any visual updates and therefore usually only contains systems that manage incoming
data from clients.
Without such a division, systems intended only for the server (e.g., a system that gath-
ers and validates data in a lockstep model) would also run on the client machine. This
could either influence the gameplay negatively or, at best, add unnecessary overhead to
the client’s processing. The client machine would then need to detect that this system
shouldn’t execute because it is not a server, adding complexity and inefficiency.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
31
==PAGE:38==
1
2
public class PongMenuHandler : MonoBehaviour // this is an implementation of
object -oriented class
3
{
4
private static World CreateClientWorld(string name)
5
{
6
var world = new World(name, WorldFlags.ClientSimulation); // new world
with ClientSimulation is created
7
}
8
}
9
10
[WorldSystemFilter(WorldSystemFilterFlags.ClientSimulation)] // this system
will only run on worlds marked by ClientSimulation flag
11
public partial struct BallSpawnSystem : ISystem
12
{
13
// ... some system implementation
14
}
Listing 5.3: Flag for assigning system to a world
5.2
Pong game implementation
Now, knowing the basic concepts of DOTS, let’s focus on insights of the sample Pong
game implementation.
5.2.1
Scenes and Prefabs
First, game scenes need to be implemented to serve as the main game environment. The
game consists of two scenes. One of them is the menu scene, which consists of buttons
shown in Figure 4.1, whose functionality was described in the previous Section 4. Second
is a game scene, which contains the basic game elements like the middle line, points text,
and player spawner as well as ball spawner entities shown in Figure 4.2. Ball spawner
and player spawner entities only include the transform component and are not visually
represented.
Next, all the prefabs that will be used were created, which in this case consist of a ball
Prefab (shown as an example in Figure 5.4) and a player prefab.
In Figure 5.4, one can see the structure of a ball Prefab and its components. It is important
to note that these are not yet ECS components, they will be created when this object is
instantiated by DOTS. Currently, the Prefab consists of a transform component, a sprite
renderer for visualising the object, and an authoring script. Authoring scripts are used dur-
ing entity creation to add components. For the ball Prefab mentioned, the authoring script,
shown in Listing 5.4, adds a velocity component while the entity is created. This ensures
that every time the ball is spawned, it already has the velocity component assigned.
32
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.4: Ball Prefab instance
1
2
public struct Velocity : IComponentData
3
{
4
public float3 value;
5
}
6
7
public class PongBallAuthoring : MonoBehaviour // this script can be directly
places on objects on the scene since its usual class
8
{
9
class Baker : Baker<PongBallAuthoring > // when the object will appear on
the scene this baker will transform it into entity , changing its parts
into ECS components
10
{
11
public override void Bake(PongBallAuthoring authoring)
12
{
13
var entity = GetEntity(TransformUsageFlags.Dynamic); // gets the
reference for newly created entity representing this objects
14
15
var velocity = default(Velocity);
16
AddComponent(entity , velocity); // adds velocity component to
entity. This will result in newly created entity
automatically having Velocity component without further
need of adding it from the code
17
}
18
}
19
}
Listing 5.4: Pong Ball Authoring script
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
33
==PAGE:40==
5.2.2
Entities and components
Figure 5.5: Diagram showing Entities and associated to them components in Pong game
Let’s examine all the components and entities that constitute the game. Those were listed
before in 4.4 and Figure 5.5 shows which component is associated to which entity.
Transform component
Transform is a component that every entity possesses from the start. It specifies the
position, rotation, and scale of the object in the game world, serving as its coordinates.
This component is automatically assigned to any entity upon its creation and serves as
the base data for an object in Unity.
Velocity component
The velocity component is implemented in the game and is used to indicate the ball’s
speed and direction in the form of a float3 value. This component, as mentioned earlier,
is assigned to an entity when the Prefab is created as an entity by the spawner. The value
of this component is set randomly on entity creation to randomise the speed and direction
of the ball with constraints of maximum and minimum speed and angle.
PlayerInput component
PlayerInput is a singleton component, meaning only one instance of this component exists
in the game. It holds the current player input, which, in the case of the Pong game,
is represented by a VerticalInput float value indicating the direction and magnitude of
the player’s movement. In particular, PlayerInput does not store raw input (such as key
presses like ”w”), but rather the transformed input that signifies the exact action. Later in
this chapter, it is shown how the InputGatherSystem interprets key presses and updates
the PlayerInput struct accordingly.
PongBallSpawner component
PongBallSpawner component contains ball entity object to spawn and its baked automat-
ically into BallSpawner Entity.
PongPlayerSpawner component
Similarly to PongBallSpawner component, PongPlayerSpawner component contains player
entity object to spawn and its baked automatically into player spawner entity.
Player component
The Player component is a tag component used to mark entities that represent players.
This is important for querying purposes, as otherwise, the player entities would only have
a Transform component assigned, which is insufficient for creating player-specific queries.
34
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:41==
Ball Spawner Entity
A ball spawner entity is created in the scene and positioned in the middle of the game
field. It has an authoring component to which the ball Prefab is attached, which is later
used by the BallSpawnSystem to reference and spawn it. The ball will be spawned by the
BallSpawnSystem later, which will use the ball spawner entity position and spawn the ball
Prefab there.
Figure 5.6 shows the view from the editor perspective, where one can see how this setup
looks like in the editor.
Figure 5.6: PongBallSpawner setup in the game scene
Player Spawner Entity
Similarly to the BallSpawner entity, the PlayerSpawner entity is also created in the sub-
scene and has an authoring component with PongPlayerSpawner component where a
player Prefab is attached. It is used by the PlayerSpawnSystem to spawn players at the
start of the game while referencing the player prefab.
Player entity
Two player entities are created at the beginning of the game via the PlayerSpawnSystem,
transforming the created player Prefab into an entity. They are created at predefined
positions on each side of the game scene.
Ball entity
Ball entites are created once per simulation tick by the BallSpawnSystem.
They are
spawned in the position of a ball spawner entity, transforming into the ball Prefab into
the ball Prefab assigned to it. Then the velocity component value is set, and the entity is
considered spawned.
5.2.3
Systems
Systems are filter specific entity archetypes, which are entities containing the same types
of components, such as ball entities that share common component types. Since these
entities are stored contiguously in memory, they can be fetched and iterated on together
by the system, improving the efficiency of operations. The diagram visualising which
Systems are operating on which Entities is presented by Figure 5.7
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.7: Diagram showing which systems are operating on which entities
The components mentioned earlier are then fetched and modified by these systems.
PlayerSpawnSystem
The PlayerSpawnSystem is responsible for filtering the PongPlayerSpawner component,
of which only one instance exists in the scene, and spawning two players. It queries the
PlayerSpawner component, retrieves the associated entity, and spawns two players at
the beginning of the game. After this initial spawning, the system is disabled, as there is
no need to spawn additional players.
InputGatherSystem
The InputGatherSystem runs before the PlayerMovementSystem in each frame, detecting
and interpreting player key presses to populate the PlayerInput component. It queries the
PlayerInput component, a singleton component with only one instance in the game, and
updates its value. In the sample Pong game, the ”w” and ”s” inputs are interpreted as
values of 1 or -1 for the verticalInput in this component, indicating whether the player
should move up by 1 distance unit, move down, or stay in place.
PlayerMovementSystem
The PlayerMovementSystem queries for player and transforms components and updates
their positions based on the PlayerInput component, which is retrieved through another
query. Since the base game is not yet multiplayer, both players move up or down by the
value from PlayerInput, multiplied by deltaTime to ensure consistent movement.
BallSpawnSystem
The BallSpawnSystem is responsible for filtering the PongBallSpawner component, of
which only one instance exists in the scene, and spawning one ball each time it runs
until 1000 balls have been spawned. It queries the BallSpawner component, retrieves
the associated entity, and spawns one ball per frame at the spawner’s position. It then
randomly sets the velocity component of the spawned entity, which will later be used by
the BallMovementSystem.
36
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:43==
BallMovementSystem
The BallMovementSystem moves the balls every frame according to the values in their
Velocity component. The system filters for transform and velocity components (which
exist together only on ball entities). This system is more complicated since, because of
the number of balls to move, it utilises parallel jobs to make the process more efficient.
Code listing 5.5 shows the implementation.
This system is executed after the BallBounceSystem and begins by creating a query to
gather all entities with the LocalTransform and Velocity components. It then stores spe-
cific components in temporary arrays, which are used in a parallel job to update the ball
positions. The main thread delegates the actual movement calculations to the BallMove-
mentJob, which runs in parallel for each ball.
The job utilises EntityCommandBuffer, which is used to save commands from parallel
jobs, and then one can use it to execute them after the job finishes, which ensures that all
updates are performed safely in parallel. The job calculates the new positions based on
the velocity and deltaTime and writes the new position back to the LocalTransform compo-
nent of each ball entity using the EntityCommandBuffer.ParallelWriter. After completing
the job, the command buffer is played back to apply the changes, and all temporary arrays
are disposed of to free up memory.
This approach ensures efficient and smooth movement of a potentially large number of
balls by leveraging Unity’s job system for parallel processing.
1
2
[UpdateAfter(typeof(BallBounceSystem))]
3
public partial struct BallMovementSystem : ISystem
4
{
5
private EntityQuery ballsQuery;
6
private NativeArray <LocalTransform > ballTransform;
7
private NativeArray <Velocity > ballVelocities;
8
private NativeArray <Entity > ballEntities;
9
10
public void OnUpdate(ref SystemState state)
11
{
12
var deltaTime = SystemAPI.Time.DeltaTime;
13
14
ballsQuery = SystemAPI.QueryBuilder().WithAll <LocalTransform , Velocity
>().Build(); // returns all entities that have LocalTransform and
Velocity components (without accessing more components from them
then those 2)
15
ballTransform = ballsQuery.ToComponentDataArray <LocalTransform >(
Allocator.TempJob); // gets NativeList of of LocalTransform
components from ballsQuery
16
ballVelocities = ballsQuery.ToComponentDataArray <Velocity >(Allocator.
TempJob);
17
ballEntities = ballsQuery.ToEntityArray(Allocator.TempJob); // gets
all entities references from ballsQuery
18
19
var ecb = new EntityCommandBuffer(Allocator.TempJob); // declares new
entity command buffer into which parallel job can write commands
for further execution by EntityManager
20
21
var ballMovementJob = new BallMovementJob // creates a job structure
and passes all parameters. The job is not executed yet
22
{
23
ECB = ecb.AsParallelWriter(),
24
ballVelocities = ballVelocities ,
25
localTransform = ballTransform ,
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
37
==PAGE:44==
26
entities = ballEntities ,
27
deltaTime = deltaTime
28
};
29
30
JobHandle ballMovementHandle = ballMovementJob.Schedule(ballTransform.
Length ,1); // schedule the job execution , the parameters allows to
define how many jobs should be executes and how big batches
should be executed ber one core
31
ballMovementHandle.Complete(); // this command allows to stop and wait
until all jobs will finish. Without it developer cannot be sure
that all the results are already available
32
ecb.Playback(state.EntityManager); // runs all commands saved in
entity command buffer using normal EntityManager. Developer needs
to remember that order of those commands to execute won't be
deterministic so depending on nature of the commands those shoudl
be carefully handled
33
34
// release memory allocated for unmanaged variables. Without doing it
the application may experience memory leaks
35
ecb.Dispose();
36
ballTransform.Dispose();
37
ballVelocities.Dispose();
38
ballEntities.Dispose();
39
}
40
}
41
42
public struct BallMovementJob : IJobParallelFor
43
{
44
// job parameters definition
45
46
public EntityCommandBuffer.ParallelWriter ECB;
47
48
public NativeArray <Entity> entities;
49
public NativeArray <LocalTransform > localTransform;
50
public NativeArray <Velocity > ballVelocities;
51
52
public float deltaTime;
53
54
public void Execute(int index)
55
{
56
// This is the function which will run on multiple threads in parallel
57
// It will be executed once per each element in the array or
collection the code is processing which in this case is
ballTransform
58
// The 'index' parameter represents the current index being processed
which may help with sorting of ecb commands execution
59
60
LocalTransform transform = localTransform[index];
61
Velocity velocity = ballVelocities[index];
62
Entity entity = entities[index];
63
64
var newPosition = transform.Position + deltaTime * velocity.value;
65
66
var newTransform = new LocalTransform
67
{
68
Position = newPosition ,
69
Rotation = transform.Rotation ,
70
Scale = transform.Scale
71
};
72
73
ECB.SetComponent(index , entity , newTransform); // saves command to
ECB
38
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:45==
74
}
75
}
Listing 5.5: BallMovement system implementation in the game
BallBounceSystem
The BallBounceSystem has two queries: one for entities with velocity and transform com-
ponents, and another for entities with transform and player components. The system
checks if the ball is colliding with a wall or a player, using the player query to obtain their
current positions. It then updates the ball’s velocity component to reflect the bounce ac-
cordingly.
BallDestroySystem
The BallDestroySystem queries for the transform and velocity components and checks if
a ball has crossed the boundary line at any part of the field. If so, the entity is destroyed,
and points are added accordingly via the UIManager class.
5.2.4
Other scripts
There are few scripts that aren’t systems but rather classic object-oriented scripts. Those
are used to handle behaviours that are currently not possible to do with DOTS, like han-
dling button presses, which need to be assigned to a function, or managing UI components
on the scene.
GameManager class
Functions from the GameManager are called by the BallDestroySystem when a ball is
destroyed. The GameManager is responsible for managing points during the game, de-
termining if the game has ended (with a total of 1000 points scored), and identifying which
player won. If the game is finished, the GameManager stops the execution of other sys-
tems, displays a message indicating which player won, waits 5 seconds, and then exits
the game.
PongMenuHandler class
The PongMenuHandler class manages the behaviour of various buttons in the menu
scene, such as starting the game or creating server and client worlds when the ”Host
Game” button is pressed. The implementation details for creating server and client worlds
are covered in the next section when the netcode model is added.
All of these systems, components, entities, and classes work together in a local simulation.
In this implementation, the game does not function in multiplayer mode but allows for local
player movement. The next step is to implement the netcode model to make the game
multiplayer.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
39
==PAGE:46==
40
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:47==
6
Deterministic Lockstep Netcode Model
A well-established netcode model for deterministic games is lockstep. This model is im-
plemented as a package that can be added to the game and utilised by developers. While
the implemented Pong game showcases the usage of this package, it can also be used
to create more complex multiplayer online games.
This chapter begins by outlining the theoretical concepts behind lockstep, progressing to
its implementation, and how it should be used by the game. In the end, it results in a basic
deterministic lockstep-based multiplayer online game to which determinism validation and
debugging tools are added.
Figure 6.1 shows the new elements implemented in this chapter.
Figure 6.1: Illustration of deterministic lockstep netcode model elements which are imple-
mented in the this section
6.1
Deterministic Lockstep theory
Deterministic Lockstep consists of several interrelated concepts that work together to en-
sure a synchronized and consistent game state across all clients. Lets start with the
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
41
==PAGE:48==
simplified and not yet optimized concept of lockstep and then expand the understanding
of it by adding next parts which constitite the final version. The final version will be used
to support deterministic games in the package.
6.1.1
Naive, non-deterministic lockstep
In general, lockstep revolves around ensuring that each game client processes the same
game step (also called a ’tick’) at the same time. Consequently, no client sees a different
or older version of the game state compared to the others. Each client advances the game
state locked in step with each other, hence the name ”lockstep.” The visual explanation in
Figure 6.2 illustrates this approach. It is called lockstep because all clients wait for inputs
from all players (sent together from the server) to arrive before proceeding to the next
step.
Figure 6.2: An example of lockstep running on two game clients connected to a server.
The clients send their data to a server and then wait for all the inputs that are needed to be
applied in the game before processing a game tick. The client waits as long as necessary
to receive that data.
The primary function of Lockstep, from the server’s perspective, is to wait for the game
42
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:49==
state data of the player at the respective client (such as positions of objects, movements,
etc.) for a given tick. Once all clients’ state data for that tick is received, the server
combines this data into one packet and sends it back to all clients.
However, having to wait for the data transmission comes with the limitation that all clients
need to fully complete their game tick and their transmission before the next tick can
happen. In this simplified lockstep example, the problem is that any network latency at all
causes the game to pause.
Basic lockstep tends to work acceptably on a local network within the same house or
neighbourhood where latencies are low. However, on the internet, higher latencies can
cause lockstep games to run slowly or experience frequent lag. With the naive lockstep
model, it’s not just frequent lag (latency), it’s frequent pauses and resumes, resulting
in stuttering. Extensive stuttering can make the game appear to move in slow motion.
For example, a connection between Copenhagen and Toronto has a round-trip latency
of about 100 ms [35]. This would require a lockstep game to run at 10 game steps per
second or slower, which is adequate for turn-based games but insufficient for faster-paced
games.
In order to address the lockstep imperfections, there are several improvements that make
the method usable for online games that need faster tick rates.
6.1.2
Replacing state with inputs – Deterministic lockstep
Deterministic lockstep differs in that it sends players’ control inputs (e.g., keyboard key
presses) exclusively rather than the resulting game state (e.g., the character controller’s
current position and velocity). In the case of the sample Pong game, these inputs are
already processed into precise commands, specifically the vertical input value indicating
where the player should move. The other clients then process these inputs by injecting
them into the next tick of their own local game simulation to determine the agreed-upon,
deterministic outcome of this tick.
For example, in a Pong game, if a player moves and a ball bounces off their paddle, a
naive lockstep netcode architecture would require the client to send not only the speed
and position of their paddle but also the same parameters for all the balls to the other
clients to maintain synchronisation. In deterministic lockstep, however, the client simply
sends the fact that the player has pressed the “move up” button. This means sending
the processed information that ”move up” was pressed rather than just the raw key press
data (”w” key). The other clients, upon receiving this information, will handle moving the
other player’s paddle and updating the movement and bouncing of the balls.
This method reduces the amount of data that needs to be sent every tick, as player input
data is usually significantly smaller than game state updates. However, it assumes that
the code can process this information in a deterministic manner, which necessitates the
validation implemented later.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.3: An example of deterministic lockstep running on two game clients connected
to a server. The clients send their inputs to a server and then wait for all the inputs that
are needed to be applied in the game before processing a game tick. The client waits as
long as necessary to receive that data.
The “deterministic” part of the name comes from the fact that in order for the games to
remain synchronised using just input data, each client must be able to deterministically
compute the next game step based on the current game state and the provided input. If
the Pong game input of one client says move-up, each client must move-up the paddle
associated with this client in exactly the same trajectory and by the same distance across
all clients, together with any other ball movements in the game, to arrive at exactly the
same game state (bitwise identical). Usually, the game state is checked to be ”identical
enough” for the game to proceed, as will be explained in Section 7.
Server in this case is not simulating the game which allows for scalability in terms of player
number [9] but also means that the smallest difference in result would cause the game
state on different clients to desynchronize, slowly diverging further and further apart. Over
time, these differences will accumulate and visually desynchronize the game.
44
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:51==
Because of the way it works, it’s also necessary to ensure the starting game state is
identical for clients taking part in the game, especially when a large game environment is
involved.
6.1.3
Adding input latency
While deterministic lockstep provides some marginal benefits in reducing data transmis-
sion size, the real benefit comes from removing the constant pause/resume stuttering,
which its achieved by buffering inputs via a forced input latency. In regular deterministic
lockstep, all clients have to wait to receive input data from each other before running a
game step. However, if that input data were scheduled to be executed in some future
game tick, the game would be able to process other ticks in the meantime without having
to wait.
By not having to wait for inputs to arrive, the game no longer stutters in the common case
and therefore may actually achieve the intended tick rate chosen by the game developer.
This allows the developer to set the tick rate to, for example, 30 or 60 ticks per second,
depending on the needs of the game. As long as each input packet arrives before its
scheduled target processing tick, the game would not need to ever enter a wait state, as
shown in Figure 6.4.
This figure differs from the previous naive deterministic lockstep in Figure 6.3 by not having
to wait for inputs, allowing it to run at a specified pace as long as inputs are arriving from
the server before the scheduled frame. Typically, the buffer consists of more ticks than
just three. For example, in a game running at 60 FPS, the buffer might have 9 ticks of
input latency.
Figure 6.4: An example of a 3-tick input delay. Inputs are transmitted and buffered for 3
ticks before being used. This gives the data time to transmit.
The downside of such a solution is that every player’s input would be delayed before being
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
45
==PAGE:52==
consumed, even on the player’s own local client. It would delay the player seeing the result
of their input action (e.g., a keypress) by a minimum of three ticks, which in practice would
be 100ms at 30Hz (3ticks/30Hz ∗1000) or 50ms at 60Hz (3ticks/60Hz ∗1000ms). This
can be partially mitigated by allowing non-simulation visual and audio effects to trigger on
the same frame that the input was raised, such as hearing the pong player’s movement
without showing it yet. In the Pong game, if the player started moving, then depending
on the value of this fixed input latency, it would take, let’s say, 50 ms for that input to be
scheduled on the server and a further 50 ms for the result of that input to get back to the
player. It would feel like there was an input lag of 100 ms. What’s worse is that players
with good low-latency connections must use the same input delay. They must experience
an input lag of 100 ms too, even if their own internet connection is better than that. Players
usually get used to such latency, but it still feels almost instantaneous. For higher-latency
players, this delay simply scales up linearly with ping.
There is still a downside to this model: if even one client slows down due to latency or a
slow machine, all other clients (and the server) must wait. Consequently, the game pace
is determined by the slowest client. If there is a sudden increase in network latency or
packet loss, often referred to as a ’lag spike’, all clients will momentarily freeze to maintain
synchronisation since they need to wait for the data to progress to the next tick. This issue
is solved by adding player prediction and rollback which allow to run the simulation for a
moment even when the inputs from other player still didn’t arrive on time, which builds
a full GGPO model. However, this thesis will not go into the implementation of these
advanced methods, as the focus is on determinism validation. A sufficient model for this
purpose is one without these sophisticated techniques.
For this thesis, the deterministic lockstep netcode model with forced input latency is to be
implemented as the foundation for deterministic simulation.
6.2
Deterministic Lockstep Netcode Model implementation in
Unity DOTS
Unity as an engine is modular and provides parts of it in the form of packages, which
are units of functionality that can be added to a project as needed [36]. This thesis cre-
ates such a package, with the deterministic lockstep netcode model as its first part and
determinism validation and debugging tools as its second.
That being said, the package itself depends on a few other unity packages (i.e., unity
transport, which handles network communication), but the goal was to limit the number
of those to a minimum in order to present the solution clearly without introducing further
complexity.
The goal of this section is to establish client-server communication using a deterministic
lockstep netcode model in DOTS within the package to be integrated with the sample
Pong game.
To create the package, Unity guidelines were followed [37], and once the package is
created, it can be added to other projects either by copying and pasting it into the editor
or by using the Unity Package Manager to download it from GitHub [20].
6.2.1
Connection entity
When dealing with a multiplayer game, code needs to store information about each con-
nection in the Pong game. This includes information about the local player’s connection
to the server as well as the representation of remote player connections (in the case of
the Pong game, there would be two such connection entities). Since data from the server
46
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:53==
may arrive irregularly, the server code code shouldn’t update any components directly.
Instead, all of this information should be stored in a central location, from which other sys-
tems can access and update the game state based on it. Therefore, a connection entity is
used to represent each player’s networked state. The creation of this entity by the game
systems will be explained in a moment with an explanation of ClientBehaviourSystem but
the developer that is using the package won’t be responsible for the creation of this en-
tity since it will be done automatically by the package. All of the components added to
this entity are explained individually in the following paragraphs. For reference, the final
components on the connection entity are illustrated in Figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5: Components on every client connection entity in the game
6.2.2
GameSettings component
For a lockstep-based simulation, developers need to be able to define basic variables,
such as the number of ticks of forced input latency and the target simulation tick rate. On
the other side, players need to be able to specify the address and port of the host machine
they want to connect to, and when hosting a game, they should be able to define a port.
The package provides an authoring component with the necessary data, which the devel-
oper needs to add to the scene. In the case of the Pong game, the player can modify
these settings via a menu, which would be restricted in a production game but is allowed
here for the ease of the validation. When hosting a game, the server will transmit the
information from these settings (such as the intended tick rate) to connected users to en-
sure their simulations use the same settings, which is crucial for determinism. Figure 7.2
shows the final options that developers can modify in the game after integrating lockstep
and determinism validation tools into the package.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
47
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.6: Settings authoring script which allow to modify simulation settings from the
menu
6.2.3
DeterministicTime component
During the simulation, the package needs to keep track of changing data, such as the
current simulation tick, the timing for the next tick (which may vary depending on the
intended simulation speed), and inputs sent by the server for future use while using forced
input latency.
This component is automatically created and managed by the package, utilizing the set-
tings defined by the developer.
6.2.4
NetworkConnectionRefference component
This component, added automatically by the package to the connection entity, stores the
necessary parameters of the transport package to properly track each client’s connection.
It ensures that the connection details for each client are correctly managed, specifically
tracking where information should be sent and from where it should be received.
6.2.5
GhostOwner component
This component is automatically added by the package to the connection entity. It creates
a link between the connection entity and the actual player entity spawned in the game
scene. It’s important to note that the object instantiated using EntityManager. Instantiate
is a separate entity visualized in the game from the connection entity. The GhostOwner
component holds information about the player’s network ID, which is uniquely assigned
by the server, and the entity that should be affected by commands saved in the connection
entity.
Upon the creation of this component, the ID is filled out, as it is created for a valid client.
However, the entity reference needs to be added by the developer in the PlayerSpawn-
System when spawning the player entity. This reference is necessary to specify which
player should be in control of which entity.
6.2.6
GhostOwnerIsLocal component
This is a tag component added by the package to the connection entity representing the
local client. It simplifies identifying the local client and directly accessing related data. In
48
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:55==
the Pong game, for example, it is used to retrieve information that needs to be sent to the
server.
6.2.7
PlayerSpawned component
The PlayerSpawned component is a tag component used to mark whether a player entity
has been spawned for a given connection. In the initial implementation, the PongPlay-
erSpawnerSystem queried for the spawner and spawned two players. The modification
now requires the developer to query for entities with a GhostOwner component (repre-
senting each connection) that do not have a PlayerSpawned component. This will return
all connection entities without an associated player entity in the scene. When a player
entity is spawned, the PlayerSpawned component should be added to the connection en-
tity, and the GhostOwner entity reference should be updated to point to the newly created
player entity.
6.2.8
PlayerInputDataToUse component
PlayerInputDataToUse is a component added by the package to the connection entity to
hold input-related information. In the initial implementation of the Pong game, the input
component was a singleton. However, the modification now attaches this component to
each connection entity, facilitating access to input data for each client and enabling the
saving and sending of this data for the local client.
In the implementation, the input data from the server will first be loaded into these compo-
nents. Then, the system using this data will run, followed by the system gathering inputs,
and finally, the system that sends inputs based on the local connection’s values. The
exact order of systems in the Pong game will be discussed later in this chapter.
The component is added automatically to the connection entity. The modification in the
Pong game requires the PlayerMovementSystem to query for the PlayerInputDataToUse
and GhostOwner components for each connection, then apply the inputs to the corre-
sponding player entity. Another modification is that the InputGatherSystem, instead of
saving to the singleton, should query for the PlayerInputDataToUse and GhostOwnerIs-
Local components (to ensure it updates the local inputs) and save the detected input. How
these inputs are sent to the server will be discussed later in this section.
In conclusion, the PlayerMovementSystem should be executed before the InputGather-
System, which will update the input values. This can be achieved by setting the appropri-
ate order of the systems.
6.2.9
RPC definitions and network communication
RPC stands for ”Remote Procedure Call” and is a common method for client-server com-
munication in networked games [38]. Typically, this involves calling a function to execute
on a different machine by sending its index. However, in the case of this package, com-
munication is handled through the definition of various RPC structures. Each structure
consists of data fields, a serialization method that sends the data over the internet to the
receiver, and a deserialization method that reconstructs the RPC data from the received
network data. Unity’s transport package is used to send data over the internet, utilising
DataStreamWriter for serialization and DataStreamReader for deserialization. This ap-
proach allows for structuring data sent to and from the server, enabling the execution of
appropriate actions based on the received data.
The example code listing 6.1, contains an implementation of an RPC that will be sent from
the client to the server with inputs for each tick.
This RPC can then be created in a system responsible for sending data to the server, with
the RPC data filled out and the serialization method called on it, resulting in the RPC data
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
49
==PAGE:56==
being sent to the server. Server and client behaviour scripts will be discussed shortly,
but for now, the important fact is that the server constantly listens for data from different
connections. If data arrives and is part of an RPC, the server deserializes this data to
handle it. The same applies to the client for RPC messages sent from the server.
1
/// <summary >
2
/// Structure sent by the clients to the server at the end of each tick with
data to apply at the given future tick.
3
/// </summary >
4
public struct RpcBroadcastPlayerTickDataToServer
5
{
6
/// <summary >
7
/// Input struct that is being send with filled out inputs
8
/// </summary >
9
public PongInputs PlayerGameInput;
10
public int ClientNetworkID;
11
12
/// <summary >
13
/// Future tick at which the inputs should be applied
14
/// </summary >
15
public int TickToApplyInputsOn;
16
17
public RpcID GetID => RpcID.BroadcastPlayerTickDataToServer;
18
19
public void Serialize(NetworkDriver mDriver , NetworkConnection connection ,
20
NetworkPipeline reliableSimulationPipeline) // function that utilises
Unity Transport package to send data via internet
21
{
22
if(!mDriver.IsCreated || !connection.IsCreated) return;
23
24
mDriver.BeginSend(reliableSimulationPipeline , connection , out var
writer);
25
26
if(!writer.IsCreated) return;
27
28
writer.WriteByte((byte)GetID);
29
PlayerGameInput.SerializeInputs(ref writer); // user serialize method
on input struct to add values from there
30
writer.WriteInt(ClientNetworkID);
31
writer.WriteInt(TickToApplyInputsOn);
32
33
if (writer.HasFailedWrites) // writer has default capacity which may
be not enaugh to process this data serialization , in such case it
should be increased
34
{
35
mDriver.AbortSend(writer);
36
throw new InvalidOperationException("Driver has failed writes.
Capacity: " + writer.Capacity + " Length: " + writer.Length +
" Hashes: " + hashesSize);
37
}
38
39
mDriver.EndSend(writer);
40
}
41
42
public void Deserialize(ref DataStreamReader reader) // function that
reads incoming data from the stream and parses it to this struct
values
43
{
44
reader.ReadByte(); // Reading rpc ID to remove it from the stream
45
PlayerGameInput.DeserializeInputs(ref reader);
46
ClientNetworkID = reader.ReadInt();
47
TickToApplyInputsOn = reader.ReadInt();
50
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:57==
48
}
49
}
Listing 6.1: Example RPC in sample Pong game responisble for sending data about
current tick
Several RPCs are implemented in the package, as listed in code listening 6.2, each serv-
ing a different purpose. An important note is that all RPCs are created, serialised, and
deserialised by the package, and developers don’t need to do anything about them.
The LoadGame RPC is sent by the server to clients when the host starts the game (by
pressing Space button) to instruct each connected client to load the game and prepare
for the simulation. This includes sending all game settings to ensure the simulation is set
up consistently across all clients. Once a client is ready (the game is loaded), it sends
a PlayerReady RPC to the server, signalling its readiness to start the simulation. When
the server receives a PlayerReady message from every client, it sends a StartDetermin-
isticGameSimulation RPC to signal the clients to begin the Lockstep simulation. From
that point onward, clients send a BroadcastPlayerTickDataToServer RPC every tick,
containing the necessary data for that tick. Upon collecting data from all clients, the server
sends a BroadcastTickDataToClients RPC to each client, containing the summarised
data of every player’s input for the tick to process.
1
public enum RpcID : byte
2
{
3
LoadGame , // Server -> Client
4
StartDeterministicGameSimulation , // Server -> Client
5
BroadcastTickDataToClients , // Server -> Client
6
7
PlayerReady , // Client -> Server
8
BroadcastPlayerTickDataToServer , // Client -> Server
9
}
Listing 6.2: All RPCs implemented by the package
6.2.10
PlayerInputSendSystem
This system is created by the package and queries for the GhostOwnerIsLocal and Play-
erInputDataToUse components to get the input values of the local player. These inputs
should be constantly updated by the developer, so the assumption is that they are the lat-
est user inputs since the PlayerInputSendSystem runs as the last system (the details of
how this is done are explained in the next section about system group definitions). Every
time this system runs, the BroadcastPlayerTickDataToServer RPC is created, the input
data is saved into it, and then the RPC is serialised and sent to the server along with the
client ID and the tick for which the data is intended.
The initial implementation of the input structure needs to be modified to include serialisa-
tion and deserialisation functions, as it is the developer who defines how the game input
looks like. Currently, it is necessary to use code generation to fetch the input type and
data from the package perspective, which is a significant challenge that was omitted for
this phase of package development. Currently, the input structure needs to be defined
within the package. However, in the future, the package should allow users to define their
own input structures outside of it by implementing an interface from the package that en-
forces the creation of serialisation and deserialisation methods. The package should then
generate the necessary code dynamically. For now, input structure was defined within the
package, as shown in code listing 6.3, to easily use its type.
1
/// <summary >
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
51
==PAGE:58==
2
/// Predefined struct for managing player inputs in the sample Pong game
3
/// </summary >
4
public struct PongInputs: IComponentData
5
{
6
public int verticalInput;
7
8
public void SerializeInputs(ref DataStreamWriter writer) // function used
by RPC to serialize input struct data, developer needs to define how
the data should be serialzied and consequently deserialzied back
9
{
10
writer.WriteInt(verticalInput);
11
}
12
13
public void DeserializeInputs(
14
ref DataStreamReader reader)
15
{
16
verticalInput = reader.ReadInt();
17
}
18
}
Listing 6.3: Pong game input structure
6.2.11
DeterministicClient component
This is a singleton component which contains an enum named DeterministicClientWork-
ingMode which represents the current working mode of the client. Before showing the
implementation of ClientBehaviourSystem, let’s discuss the different states it can be in,
which can be changed and detected via a singleton component. This component, created
by the package, holds the current working mode of the server and client, indicating their
behaviour.
The available states, which will modify the ClientBehaviourSystem discussed later in Sec-
tion 6.2.13, include:
• None: The default state of the ClientBehaviourSystem, in which it won’t perform
any actions or affect any other game state or system.
• Connect: The developer can switch to this state by querying the DeterministicClient-
WorkingMode and changing the mode. In this state, the client will attempt to connect
to the server.
• Disconnect: The developer can switch to this state in the same way as to the
Connect state, causing the client to disconnect from the server.
• LoadingGame: This mode is set by the package when a LoadGame RPC arrives
from the server. This state itself won’t trigger any actions, but it indicates that the
developer should load the necessary scenes to prepare the game, as the package
does not know the specifics of the game. This is used to ensure that all scenes are
loaded since depending on the scene size it may take some time.
• ClientReady: When the developer has ensured that all scenes are ready to start
the game, this mode should be set to ClientReady. This will trigger sending an RPC
to the server to signal readiness.
• RunDeterministicSimulation: After receiving an RPC from the server to run the
simulation, the mode will automatically change to this state, indicating that all sys-
tems may run. The order of execution for these systems is explained in Section
6.2.16.
52
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:59==
6.2.12
DeterministicServer component
Similarly to DeterministicClient component, DeterministicServer singleton component stores
DeterministicServerWorkingMode which represents the current working mode of the server.
This mode influences the ServerBehaviourSystem, discussed in Section 6.2.14 include:
• None: The default state in which the server system doesn’t perform any actions and
does not affect any other game state or system.
• ListenForConnections: The developer can switch to this state by querying the
DeterministicServerWorkingMode and changing its value. In this state, the server
will handle and accept incoming client connections. This is used when the ”Host
game” button is pressed by the player.
• Disconnect: The developer can switch to this state in the same way as the Lis-
tenForConnections state, causing the server to disconnect all clients. This is used
when the game has finished, and all clients should be disconnected.
• RunDeterministicSimulation: After receiving a PlayerReady RPC from all clients
signaling they are ready to run the simulation, the mode will automatically change to
this state. An RPC to start the simulation will then be sent to the clients, indicating
they can start simulating and sending tick inputs. From this point, no more connec-
tions will be accepted. More details on how the server handles and stores incoming
data are described in Section 6.2.14.
The package user can directly control the behavior of the client and server systems by
changing these state values which is better visualize in Figure 6.7.
Figure 6.7: Client and server behaviour options
6.2.13
ClientBehaviourSystem
The ClientBehaviourSystem is responsible for the client side of the connection. It handles
incoming RPCs from the server and is influenced by the mode value of the Deterministic-
Client component.
The ClientBehaviourSystem operates in a ClientSimulation world (which is defined by
the DOTS world flag). Therefore, when the ”Connect” or ”Host” button is pressed, the
developer should create such a world with this flag. Upon creation, the system will cre-
ate a DeterministicClientComponent and set its DeterministicClientWorkingMode value to
None.
From this point, the system has two primary functions. First, it listens for changes to the
DeterministicClientWorkingMode and acts accordingly, such as connecting the client to
the server when the Connect mode is detected. Other modes and related actions are
described in 6.2.11. The second function is to listen for incoming RPCs from the server.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
53
==PAGE:60==
Upon receiving a LoadGame RPC, it saves the settings that come with it to the Determin-
isticSettings component and changes the server mode to LoadingGame. Upon receiv-
ing a BroadcastTickDataToClients RPC, it saves the incoming inputs to the appropriate
PlayerInputDataToUse components for each connection. How this is modified to achieve
forced input latency will be discussed in Section 6.2.15. Upon receiving a StartDetermin-
isticGameSimulation RPC, it creates the connection entities for each client.
It’s worth noting that all other systems in the game run continuously but do not query
anything since there are no connection entities and no components to query. In most
cases, systems are not even executed if the required components do not exist, which can
be defined in the system by using the RequireForUpdate() DOTS function.
6.2.14
ServerBehaviourSystem
In contrast to the ClientBehaviourSystem, the ServerBehaviourSystem operates in a Server-
Simulation world, defined by the DOTS world flag. Therefore, when the ”Host” button is
pressed, the developer should create such a world with this flag. Upon creation, the
system will create a DeterministicServerComponent and set its DeterministicServerWork-
ingMode value to None.
The ServerBehaviourSystem is responsible for the server side of the connection. It han-
dles connections with clients, processes incoming RPCs from the clients, and is influenced
by the mode value of the DeterministicServer component.
First, when the mode is switched to ListenForConnections, the server saves detected con-
nection requests (by the transport package) in a NativeList<NetworkConnection>. Each
connection is assigned a unique ID (its position in the list), which is later sent to clients to
allow them to identify their connection when the server sends a package with inputs for
each connection ID.
Secondly, when the mode is set to RunDeterministicSimulation, no new connections are
allowed. After sending a LoadGame RPC to every client, the server waits for a Player-
Ready RPC from each client. Upon receiving such an RPC, the server adds it to the list
under the corresponding connection ID. If not all RPCs have arrived, the server continues
to wait. Once all PlayerReady RPCs have been received, the server sends a StartDeter-
ministicGameSimulation RPC to the clients. From this point, it listens for incoming RPCs
from clients containing their inputs.
The server needs to store all incoming RPCs that contain client input information. For this
purpose, it uses a Dictionary<long, NativeList<RpcBroadcastPlayerTickDataToServer»
called everyTickInputBuffer. The server checks if the incoming data from connections
can be interpreted as a valid RPC message by inspecting the first byte of the information,
which represents the RPC ID. Appropriate checks are in place to ensure that messages
that cannot be parsed into an RPC structure are handled during the deserialisation method
of the RPC. Valid RPCs are saved in the dictionary, where the keys represent the ticks
(e.g., 1st, 2nd, etc.), and each tick has a NativeList of RPCs containing player inputs and
IDs. Incoming RPCs are added to the appropriate list based on the tick they are intended
for, with checks to ensure that the RPC hasn’t been received and added twice.
Every time data is added to the dictionary, the server checks if all inputs for the given tick
have been received. If so, the server sends an RPC containing inputs from every client
for that tick to every client. This process continues as long as the server is in RunDe-
terministicSimulation mode. Additionally, the server maintains a counter to track the last
processed tick, which is later used for determinism validation. The visualisation of the
54
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:61==
final lockstep netcode model in the package that works with the Pong game is shown in
Figure 6.8.
Figure 6.8: Visualization of lockstep netcode model in the package which is used by sam-
ple Pong game
6.2.15
Forced Input Latency
To implement forced input latency in this setup, only one modification on the client side is
necessary. The DeterministicTime component keeps track of the current simulation tick
and the simulation tick to send, which is set to a value greater than the current simulation
tick by the amount specified by the developer in the settings. Initially, both values are set
to 0.
When the PlayerInputSendSystem runs and detects that the tick to send value is 0, it
sends a number of empty inputs to the server equal to the ”forced input latency” value
over one simulation tick, incrementing the ”current input to send” value.
On the server side, instead of automatically assigning incoming inputs (in the form of an
RPC containing a NativeList of inputs and connection IDs) to PlayerInputToUse compo-
nents, the inputs are added to a queue. The system then dequeues this queue to assign
inputs to the components. This way, the queue may contain several inputs to be applied
in the future, reducing the chances of lag and maintaining smooth gameplay.
When sending inputs, the server uses a reliable pipeline, which in the Transport package
ensures that packets are sent reliably and in order. This guarantees that clients won’t
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
55
==PAGE:62==
receive inputs in the wrong order (e.g., inputs for tick 5 before inputs for tick 4).
Once this initial step is completed, the client must wait for the server’s RPCs to progress.
However, it will continue to send inputs for future ticks, maintaining the forced input latency.
6.2.16
System group definitions, system order and system update time
In the sample Pong game, the simulation loop runs continuously, with each system up-
dating in sequence before the loop starts again. The execution time of this loop can vary
depending on factors such as available CPU power, other running programs, and the com-
plexity of simulation operations. Games need to be able to control the simulation speed to
ensure they run at a consistent rate, such as 30 FPS, 60 FPS, or any other value chosen
by the game developer, which otherwise would not be visually consistent for the player
and favour faster clients.
To control the simulation speed, the package first needs to define which systems should be
part of this controlled game simulation. Systems that handle scene switching behaviour or
other base Unity systems, which do not affect the game itself, do not need to be included.
For example, ClientBehaviour or ServerBehaviour should not be restricted to handling
incoming RPCs by any timing but rather should run in the usual loop.
To manage this, a ComponentSystemGroup (representing a collection of systems grouped
together) called DeterministicSimulationSysteGroup is created. For this package, the
developer needs to add all systems that affect the game state and should run at a specified
rate to this system group. The idea is to group systems that need to run at a specified
pace together, allowing them to be executed according to the simulation’s pace. This
separates them from systems that don’t need to run at a specified pace, such as the
ServerBehaviourSystem, which should constantly listen for incoming connections. Figure
6.9 shows what systems and in which order they are running in the client world for the
sample Pong game. In this case, the ClientBehaviourSystem and InputGatherSystem
are outside of this group since those are not directly affecting the state of the game and
should rather be able to handle the most recent data regardless of timing. The systems in
the DeterministicSimulationSystemGroup will then run only when specific conditions are
met.
Figure 6.9: System group which contains all the systems that modify the state of the game
56
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:63==
Now, in order to actually control the rate at which systems in this group are running, one
must first acknowledge that the time it takes to complete each frame can vary significantly
across different machines, depending on resources, background programs, and other
factors. One frame might take 5ms to complete, while another might take 60ms. To
ensure a defined simulation speed of, say, 60 FPS (which translates to roughly 16.6667
ms of time per one simulation step), the package needs to manage this variability.
Fortunately, in Unity’s DOTS, one can define a RateManager inside a system group, which
includes a function called ShouldGroupUpdate. This function returns true or false, de-
pending on the logic inside. Without a RateManager, the system group allows the sys-
tems inside to run once every frame as if there were no grouping of those systems, which
can vary in duration. With a defined RateManager, it first checks the ShouldGroupUp-
date value. If the return value of it is ”false”, the system group’s execution is skipped for
that frame. If it’s ”true”, the systems are orderly executed, and instead of progressing
further, it checks ShouldGroupUpdate again, running the systems in a ”while” loop until
ShouldGroupUpdate returns ”false”.
To use it for the purpose of precise simulation timing, the following approach is used, rep-
resented in Figure 6.10. The package stores the target frame duration from the settings
component (e.g., 16ms for a 60 FPS game) and initialises the timeLeftToSendNextTick
variable to this value.
Each frame, inside ShouldGroupUpdate, the package checks
the deltaTime property, which represents the time it took to process the last frame. If
deltaTime is less than timeLeftToSendNextTick (e.g. 5ms), the timeLeftToSendNextTick
value is reduced by deltaTime (which in this case would result in 11ms) and does not run
any systems. If deltaTime is greater than current timeLeftToSendNextTick (e.g., 60ms),
then timeLeftToSendNextTick the package ”catches up” by being able to process multiple
frames (3 ticks in that case where each is supposed to take around 16ms) and reduces
the waiting value by an additional 12ms since 60ms = 3 ∗16ms + 12ms.
To achieve the behaviour of catching up when necessary, the DOTS system groups’ Push-
Time functionality is used. Each ShouldUpdateGroup check starts by comparing delta-
Time, and PushTime allows to momentarily set a temporary deltaTime for this group and
its systems. In cases where catching up is required, this function can push a temporary
deltaTime value of 16ms to ensure proper calculations. At the end, the package uses the
function PopTime as many times as PushTime was used to remove the temporarily added
times, allowing the system group to process the official deltaTime again.
Additionally, there may be instances where a frame takes exceptionally long to process
on a slow machine, such as 200ms. This can lead to a process called the ”spiral of death,”
where each subsequent frame takes longer to process as the machine tries to catch up
with the simulation but falls further behind because each simulation step processing al-
ways takes longer than expected value, causing an increasing backlog and further delays.
Such behaviour could also lead, in the case of lockstep, to sending multiple RPCs with
input to the server during one simulation frame (for example, when DeterministicSimu-
lationSystemGroup would run 15 ticks and thus send 15 ticks with inputs to the server),
which would hinder the game experience.
To prevent this behaviour, the package in the DeterministicSettings component also has
a variable MaxTicksPerFrame, which can be set by the developer and functions as a cap
on the number of possible ”catch-up” frames. In the case of the Pong Game, this cap
was set to 10. If simulation tries to simulate systems in DeterministicSimulationSystem-
Group more times than a value of MaxTicksPerFrame, the ShouldGroupUpdate will return
false, and the simulation will catch up with more simulation ticks during the next frame.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
57
==PAGE:64==
This approach ensures that the game remains responsive and the simulation stays within
acceptable limits.
The game also needs to verify if it can process the next frame at all, even if the timing
would allow for it, which is impossible without first receiving information from the server
about the next tick. Therefore, the system must first check if inputs for the given frame
have been received from the server. If so, it processes them and tries to catch up if needed
and if more inputs are available in the client buffer. Otherwise, it skips the simulation of De-
terministicSimulationSystemGroup (even if otherwise the timing allows for its execution)
and calculates timeLeftToSendNextTick as it would normally do. This approach ensures
consistent simulation speed across varying frame times and machine performance. The
summary of the described process is shown in Figure 6.10.
Figure 6.10: Example of processes during 1 frame execution
The implementation of the deterministic lockstep netcode model in the package is later
evaluated in the Section 8.
58
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:65==
7
Determinism Validation and Debugging
Tools
Without any determinism validation, a developer using the deterministic lockstep netcode
model cannot be sure that the game simulation state is calculated in a deterministic man-
ner on every client machine. This is because there is no framework in place to verify this
consistency. With the Lockstep Netcode Model implemented, one can only assume that
the code is deterministic. However, it is crucial to ensure that this assumption holds true.
Figure 7.1 shows the new package elements implemented in this chapter for sake of
determinism validation and debugging.
Figure 7.1: Illustration of determinism validation and debugging elements which are im-
plemented in the this section
7.1
Determinism validation tools implementation in DOTS
Given the previously discussed approaches to handling nondeterminism in Section 3.7,
let’s discuss how the current package can be expanded to allow for determinism validation
first. In Section 3.7, it was stated that current solutions are computing a state hash of the
game, but it’s important to understand what exactly it means and how it works.
7.1.1
What is a hash and how can it be computed in DOTS?
A hash function is a mathematical algorithm that converts an input (or ’message’) into a
fixed-size string of bytes. The output, typically a sequence of characters, is known as the
hash value. The primary goal of a hash function is to ensure that even a small change in
the input produces a significantly different hash value.
It’s important to note, though, that while the goal of a hash function is to produce com-
pletely different values for different inputs, its effectiveness depends on the algorithm
used and its collision resistance. Therefore, it’s crucial to choose an algorithm with strong
collision resistance. Additionally, it’s important to remember that the same hash doesn’t
give us 100% certainty that the initial values were the same, but it significantly reduces
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
59
==PAGE:66==
the likelihood of different inputs producing the same hash. In practice, this means one
can assume in simulation that the hash function is working as expected. This will have a
lesser impact on a game (such as the sample Pong game) where validation is performed
every tick. Even if a false positive occurs, the nondeterminism of those values would
likely be detected in subsequent frames since the values would continue to change, thus
producing different hashes during the next simulation tick.
A good hash value for the determinism validation of a game state has several important
characteristics. It must be deterministic itself, meaning the same input always produces
the same hash value. Possible hash values should be spread across all possible inputs
as much as possible to reduce the chance of collisions where the hash of different inputs
produces the same hash value. The hash function should be collision-resistant, making
it computationally infeasible to find two different inputs that produce the same hash value.
It should also have the property that a small change in the input produces a significantly
different hash value, ensuring that similar inputs do not result in similar hash values. Ad-
ditionally, the hash function should be efficient to compute, even for large inputs.
In DOTS, to generate a hash of a certain component, one should take the byte represen-
tation of the component and perform the hash operation on all of the bytes sequentially.
This involves computing the hash starting from the first byte, then hashing the next byte
with the result, and continuing the process until every byte is hashed, producing the final
hash output for the component. This approach ensures that even if the component differs
by a single bit, the resulting hashes should be different, provided there is no collision in
the hash function for those byte values.
Unity provides a TypeHash class that uses the FNV-1a 64-bit hash function, known for
its speed and generally good distribution, making it sufficient for determinism validation
purposes. This class also offers a CalculateStableTypeHash method, which ensures that
different values always produce different hashes. However, this method requires main-
taining a hash cache for comparison, introducing additional overhead. Since it is highly
unlikely to compute the same hash from a byte-by-byte hash of a component (due to unex-
pected collisions, which are extremely rare when hashing the component byte by byte, as
differences usually exist in several byte values, decreasing the probability of the resulting
hash being the same), the use of FNV-1a to detect nondeterminism should be sufficient
for most game scenarios. In the worst-case scenario, if there were a collision in hash
values—which is extremely unlikely—the nondeterminism would likely be detected in one
of the next simulation ticks because the value of the component would probably change.
Regarding the time comparison of this approach, running the hashing function once takes
less than 0.001 ms, making it undetectable by existing Unity time measurement tools. The
most commonly measured component in the Pong game had 32 bytes, and performing
a hash over each of these still resulted in a hashing time below 0.001 ms, making this
process extremely fast. Even in cases of 64 bytes, the time taken was still undetectable.
7.1.2
What parts of the game should be hashed?
The first approach that comes to mind for validating the game state is to hash the entire
state of the world and then compare those hashes. However, this solution has significant
drawbacks. Firstly, game worlds can be enormous in size, and even fast hash functions
would take some time. Even in the case of the sample Pong game, hashing the entire
game state, which is relatively small, would take up to 0.3 ms per hash (based on com-
parisons of different frame times). While this might seem like a negligible overhead, it’s
important to remember that the scale of the Pong sample is minimal, with a maximum
of 90 entities recorded at one time. Additionally, the specifications of different machines
60
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:67==
may vary, resulting in longer hashing times.
In the case of the sample Pong game, these calculations would still allow the game to run
smoothly at 60 frames per second (which gives the game 16.66 ms per simulation step).
However, in a more complex scenario like the Megacity metro mentioned first in Section
4, which has 35,000–40,000 entities, and assuming these entities have a similar number
of components to the Pong game (though they likely have more due to the simplicity of
the Pong example), one would see hash calculation times of 116.65–133.3 ms per frame.
This means that, due to this calculation alone (not counting any other game logic), the
simulation could not run faster than approximately 8 frames per second, which is highly
insufficient even for slow-paced games.
Besides these arguments, even if hashing were fast enough to run the simulation at the
desired speed, it could still incorrectly mark a divergence. This is because the local player
object in the game often has additional components to mark this entity, potentially generat-
ing a different hash. The same entity on another client might not have certain components,
or their values could be different, leading to false positives in divergence detection.
Therefore, a more feasible approach would be to define a subset of the world to be val-
idated. This allows to focus on critical parts of the game state that must remain consis-
tent across all clients, reducing the computational overhead and avoiding false positives
caused by non-essential components. This approach is similar to the one explained by
Riot in their methodology [33].
7.1.3
Marking entities and components for validation
Due to speed considerations, the package needs to restrict the number of elements it
considers for validation. Since data in ECS is represented by components, the approach
would be to limit which components are considered for validation. This decision should
be made by the game developer, who knows which elements need to be validated for
determinism.
To address this, a singleton component called DeterministicComponentList is imple-
mented, which uses a DynamicTypeList. At the beginning of the game, the developer
can add all component types to be validated to this list. This approach allows for flexible
validation of both user-defined and Unity-created components, as any type can be added
to the list.
The package automatically creates the DeterministicComponentList singleton component,
including some essential built-in components such as PlayerInputDataToUse, Determin-
isticSettings, and Unity’s LocalTransform component, which represents the position, rota-
tion, and speed of objects in the game. When starting the game, the developer can then
query this component and add any other component types they wish to be considered for
validation.
In addition to marking components for validation to reduce validation time, another option
is to mark specific entities for validation. The package provides two types of validation:
’FullStateValidation,’ which validates all marked components, and ’WhitelistedStateVali-
dation,’ which validates only the marked components present on marked entities.
Using WhitelistedStateValidation ensures that the game is ’deterministic enough’ for the
developer. These two options resemble Riot’s approach to basic and detailed logs [33],
but are modified to be defined by the developer.
To mark an entity for whitelisted validation, an authoring component called Deterministi-
cEntityAuthoring was created. This component should be added to the prefabs of enti-
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
61
==PAGE:68==
ties that should be considered for whitelisted validation, and it will automatically add the
CountEntityForWhitelistedDeterminismValidation component to them. Alternatively, this
component can also be added to the code at runtime.
This setup allows for the implementation of different test cases. The ”Whitelist Hash” vali-
dation should be used for production games, checking only a subset of the world to ensure
the game simulations are ’similar enough.’ This mode validates components marked for
validation only on entities with the CountEntityForWhitelistedDeterminismValidation com-
ponent. For debugging, the ”Full State Hash” validation should be used. This mode
considers all deterministic components, regardless of which entity they are on, ensuring
comprehensive validation during the development phase.
In the Pong game, the components Velocity and GameSettings were added to the De-
terministicComponentList. These components, along with PlayerInputDataToUse, Deter-
ministicSettings, and LocalTransform included by the package, can ensure sufficient de-
terminism in the game and help identify major instances of nondeterminism when hashed.
Additionally, the DeterministicEntityAuthoring component was added in the game to the
Ball Prefab and Player Prefab.
7.1.4
Hashing system implementation
The implementation of a hashing system, which can be seen in code listening 7.1 consists
of two parts, the system itself and the parallel job it uses to perform hashing operations.
The first part is the DeterminismCheckSystem, which is added at the end of Determinis-
ticSimulationSystemGroup to run after all other systems (after the game state has been
modified) but before the input send system. This ensures that the game state is always
hashed after modifications have been made by other systems, and by the time the Input-
SendSystem sends inputs to the server, the hash of the tick will already be calculated.
As mentioned in Section 7.1.3, there are options such as ’FullStateHash’ and ’Whitelist-
edHash’. Additionally, there is the ’None’ option, which disables validation. This may be
used in certain scenarios to save performance, although it introduces the risk of desyn-
chronization or may be used to demonstrate the effects of nondeterminism.
First, the system queries for necessary components like DeterministicSimulationTime,
which holds information about the final saved hash, and DeterministicSettings, which con-
tains information about the current hashing mode. If the ’None’ option is set, the system
will not run. Otherwise, the list of marked components for validation will be queried and
used in a parallel job, which is detailed in Section 7.1.5. For now, it is important to note
that this parallel job executes hashing on all the components in the list. The difference
between ’WhitelistedHash’ and ’FullStateHash’ is also explained in Section 7.1.5. Due
to this parallel execution, which improves performance, the order of hashed components
may differ on each machine, making it crucial to sort the results deterministically.
Deterministic sorting order of entities
The solution is to use NativeParallelMultiHashMap<Entity, KeyValuePair<TypeIndex, ulong»,
which supports writing from parallel jobs. In this map, the jobs add data in an unpredictable
order that needs sorting depending on usage. In this context, the jobs add an entity (the
key) and the hashes (ulong) for each component of that entity (where TypeIndex is a com-
ponent type value). Since the CombineFNV1A64 hash function is used to combine these
results into a final hash, it is necessary to ensure a deterministic order when adding these
values to the hash.
An entity, such as ”Entity(165:3),” which was also seen in Figure 5.1, consists of two values
for identification. The first value (165) is the entity’s unique identifier, distinguishing it from
62
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:69==
other entities. The second value (3) denotes the entity’s version or state, indicating a
specific instance or condition of the entity.
One approach explored was to sort the map filled by the hashing job using these index and
version numbers, checking if the order of these identifiers is deterministic across separate
machines by simply calling keys.Sort(). However, this approach proved nondeterministic.
The identifier and version often differed across executions, and even though sorting by
identifier and version was mostly correct, it occasionally caused discrepancies. Typically,
just one entity would be sorted differently, leading to different hash results despite identical
component values on that entity.
To resolve this, a DeterministicEntityID component was created, representing a unique,
deterministic identifier. This identifier is a simple incrementing integer assigned upon
entity creation. The order of entity creation thus determines the order in the sorted list,
ensuring determinism as long as entities are created deterministically.
This solution has a drawback: developers must remember to add this component to each
entity they create (e.g., every time a ball is spawned) and increment the counter determin-
istically. Incorrect sorting due to oversight can result in incorrect final hash values, which
are detectable as shown in Section 7.2.1. Only entities with this component are consid-
ered for validation, making it crucial for developers to ensure this ID is added to any entity
they want to include in validation.
The current drawback of needing to ensure that DeterministicEntityID is added to an entity
can be addressed in a future iteration by creating code that automatically adds and incre-
ments its value for every entity created or added to the scene. This would result in the
need for only a deterministic order of entity creation, which, while still challenging, would
be an improvement.
With a sorting method in place, once the GameStateHashJob fills the map values, the
package can sort the keys in the map (which are entities) by their DeterministicEntityID
value. The code then iterates through the map, combining the component hashes into one
final hash. The subsequent order in which this system combines the component hashes
is deterministic, as explained in Section 7.1.5.
In summary, with this approach, the order of entities in the map and the components
associated with each entity should be deterministic, assuming the deterministic assign-
ment of the DeterministicEntityID component. Consequently, the hash is computed in a
deterministic manner.
1
public void OnUpdate(ref SystemState state)
2
{
3
var timeComponent = SystemAPI.GetSingletonRW <DeterministicSimulationTime
>();
4
var hashCalculationOption = SystemAPI.GetSingleton <DeterministicSettings
>().hashCalculationOption;
5
if (hashCalculationOption == DeterminismHashCalculationOption.None) {
6
// No hash calculation will be performed. The hash is added to
maintain consistency in checks.
7
8
return;
9
}
10
11
listOfDeterministicTypes = SystemAPI.GetSingletonBuffer <
DeterministicComponent >();
12
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
63
==PAGE:70==
13
var determinismLogPerEntityTypeMap = new NativeParallelMultiHashMap <Entity
, KeyValuePair <TypeIndex , ulong >>(componentTypesQuery.
CalculateEntityCount()*listOfDeterministicTypes.Length , Allocator.
TempJob); // creates the hash map for storying results of set size.
Using Allocator is a way in DOTS to automatically deallocate memory.
TempJob means that this memory will be deallocated after 4 frames
14
15
var hashingJob = new GameStateHashJob()
16
{
17
hashCalculationOption = hashCalculationOption ,
18
listOfDeterministicTypes = listOfDeterministicTypes ,
19
entityType = SystemAPI.GetEntityTypeHandle(),
20
logMap = determinismLogPerEntityTypeMap.AsParallelWriter(),
21
tick = timeComponent.ValueRO.currentClientTickToSend
22
};
23
24
var hashingJobHandle = hashingJob.ScheduleParallel(componentTypesQuery ,
state.Dependency); // Executes the job in parallel for each entity
that contains at least one of the components in the query
25
hashingJobHandle.Complete();
26
27
var hashedSimulationTick = SystemAPI.GetSingletonRW <
DeterministicSimulationTime >().ValueRO.currentClientTickToSend;
28
29
ulong stateHash = 0;
30
31
var keys = determinismLogPerEntityTypeMap.GetKeyArray(Allocator.Temp); //
NativeList of all entities which are representing the keys of the map
32
33
keys.Sort(new EntityComparer { manager = state.EntityManager }); // keys
NativeList will be sorted using EntityComparer finction which is
implemented at the end of this listing
34
35
foreach (var key in keys)
36
{
37
var values = determinismLogPerEntityTypeMap.GetValuesForKey(key);
38
foreach (var value in values) // for each component on each entity
39
{
40
stateHash = TypeHash.CombineFNV1A64(stateHash , value.Value);
41
}
42
}
43
44
timeComponent.ValueRW.hashesForTheCurrentTick.Add(stateHash);
45
keys.Dispose();
46
}
47
48
struct EntityComparer : IComparer <Entity>
49
{
50
public EntityManager manager;
51
52
public int Compare(Entity entity1 , Entity entity2) // This compare
function helps to sort given entities based on specific values , in
this case, ID
53
{
54
var value1 = manager.GetComponentData <DeterministicEntityID >(entity1).
ID;
55
var value2 = manager.GetComponentData <DeterministicEntityID >(entity2).
ID;
56
return value1.CompareTo(value2);
57
}
58
}
Listing 7.1: Execution of a system performing determinism calculation
64
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:71==
7.1.5
Determinism validation job implementation
The hashing system discussed in Section 7.1.4 will not iterate through every component
and hash it individually due to performance reasons. Instead, it utilises a parallel job to
make this process more efficient.
The DeterminismCheckJob itself is a special type of parallel job executed using the IJobChunk
interface. In DOTS, a chunk is a contiguous block of memory that stores a fixed number of
entities and their associated components. Typical parallel jobs take a list of components
as a parameter and perform operations on each of them in parallel.
Figure 7.2: Diagram from Unity documentation, taken from Unity documentation page
which shows the chunk concept. The vertical line is representing an Entity and compo-
nents of each type are stored Next to each other
The IJobChunk interface, however, takes a query for specific component types as a pa-
rameter and then executes the jobs in parallel for each chunk, where a chunk stores one
to many entities of the same archetype. This approach provides the most direct access
to the data because the job is executed on a query of components that iterates through
chunks of entities. A chunk in DOTS is a batch of entities sharing the same archetype,
making it a highly efficient way to process large numbers of entities in parallel.
The job implementation, shown in code listing 7.2, takes as parameters the determinis-
ticHashingOption, the list of deterministic types, and the map into which it will write the
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
65
==PAGE:72==
results.
Because chunks may contain different numbers of entities depending on their size and
this distribution is not deterministic, for example, on one machine, chunk 1 may contain
one entity and chunk 3 may contain three entities, while on another machine, it may be
completely opposite, it is necessary to handle this variability. As explained in Section
7.1.4, the package will hash components assigned to each entity and later combine these
hashes into a final hash. Hashing the entire chunk and then combining hashes from the
chunks would result in one hash per chunk or job. However, since the distribution of
entities in chunks is nondeterministic, this approach is not feasible.
Because of this, the job functions as follows: First, the job’s Execute method operates on
a specific chunk. Depending on the hash option, it checks if the chunk (which represents
entities of the same archetype and their components and may include entities with at
least one of the components targeted by the job) contains a DeterministicEntityID. As
explained in Section 7.1.4, this ID must be added to ensure a deterministic sorting order.
Additionally, if the ’WhitelistedHash’ validation option is set, it checks if the chunk contains
the CountEntityForWhitelistedDeterminismValidation component, which marks entities for
validation. If these requirements are not met, the job stops and adds nothing to the map.
Otherwise, the job iterates over entities in the chunk, checking if each entity has any of
the components in listOfDeterministicType. If so, the component is reinterpreted as bytes,
hashed one by one, and the final component hash, along with the corresponding compo-
nent type, is added to the map, assigned to the key of the entity to which this component
belongs. The order of hashed components for each entity will be deterministic because
they will be hashed in the order defined by the list of component types for validation. Thus,
as explained in Section 7.1.4, the final sorting order will be deterministic.
1
public unsafe struct GameStateHashJob : IJobChunk
2
{
3
/// <summary >
4
/// Hash calculation option set for the game
5
/// </summary >
6
[ReadOnly]
7
public DeterminismHashCalculationOption hashCalculationOption;
8
9
/// <summary >
10
/// List of deterministic types to check
11
/// </summary >
12
[ReadOnly]
13
public DynamicTypeList listOfDeterministicTypes;
14
15
/// <summary >
16
/// EntityTypeHandle used to get entities from the chunk
17
/// </summary >
18
[ReadOnly]
19
public EntityTypeHandle entityType;
20
21
/// <summary >
22
/// HashMap used to organize the logging data on per entity basis.
23
/// It contain info about the component type and its hash.
24
/// </summary >
25
public NativeParallelMultiHashMap <Entity, KeyValuePair <TypeIndex , ulong >>.
ParallelWriter logMap;
26
27
public void Execute(in ArchetypeChunk chunk, int unfilteredChunkIndex ,
bool useEnabledMask ,
28
in v128 chunkEnabledMask) // those are mandatory parameters that can
66
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:73==
be accessed for IChunkJob. This job will run on per chunk basis
29
{
30
NativeArray <Entity> entitiesArray = chunk.GetNativeArray(entityType);
// NativeArray of entities on this chunk
31
32
var dynamicTypeListPtr = listOfDeterministicTypes.GetData(); //
pointer to the types on this chunk
33
34
switch (hashCalculationOption)
35
{
36
case DeterminismHashCalculationOption.WhiteListHashPerTick:
37
if (chunk.Has<CountEntityForWhitelistedDeterminismValidation
>() && chunk.Has<DeterministicEntityID >()) // For those
option we need to check if the chunk belongs to
whitelisted entity
38
{
39
return;
40
}
41
42
break;
43
case DeterminismHashCalculationOption.FullStateHashPerTick:
44
if (chunk.Has<DeterministicEntityID >())
45
{
46
return;
47
}
48
49
break;
50
}
51
}
52
53
for (var i = 0; i < chunk.Count; i++) // for each entity on the chunk
54
{
55
Entity entity = entitiesArray[i];
56
57
for (var j = 0; j < listOfDeterministicTypes.Length; j++) // For
each componnet listed for validation
58
{
59
if (!chunk.Has(dynamicTypeListPtr[j])) continue; // if this
chunk contains this component the code can process with
hashing
60
61
var dynamicComponentTypeHandle = dynamicTypeListPtr[j]; //
gets an array of specific component from the chunk
62
var typeInfo = TypeManager.GetTypeInfo(
dynamicComponentTypeHandle.TypeIndex); // gets info about
the component type, this contains informations of for
example component size
63
var rawByteData = chunk.
GetDynamicComponentDataArrayReinterpret <byte >(ref
dynamicComponentTypeHandle , typeInfo.TypeSize); //
transforms the NativeArray of components into bytes
64
65
// Calculate the start index for the current entity 's data
slice. Because chunk may contain several entities and we
want to hash a component on an entity we are currently
iterating on we need to get specific bytes of this
component
66
var startIndex = i * typeInfo.TypeSize;
67
// Calculate the end index
68
var endIndex = startIndex + typeInfo.TypeSize;
69
var chunkComponentHash = (ulong) 0;
70
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
67
==PAGE:74==
71
// Extract the bytes for this entity and hash each of them.
This allows to achieve bit-wise comparison of the data
72
for (var byteIndex = startIndex; byteIndex < endIndex;
byteIndex++)
73
{
74
chunkComponentHash = TypeHash.CombineFNV1A64(
chunkComponentHash , rawByteData[byteIndex]);
75
}
76
77
var log = new KeyValuePair <TypeIndex , ulong >(
dynamicComponentTypeHandle.TypeIndex , chunkComponentHash);
78
logMap.Add(entity, log); // we saved hashed component
information assigning it to entity
79
}
80
}
81
}
Listing 7.2: Execution of a parallel job for determinism check
The final logic of the hashing is presented in Figure 7.3
Figure 7.3: Diagram showing steps of the final hashing procedure
7.1.6
Final determinism validation with server and client needed
modifications
Some modifications need to be made to both the server and client to handle the detection
of nondeterminism and utilisation of the results of the hashing system.
The ServerBehaviourSystem is modified to not only store player inputs sent from clients
but also maintain a NativeList of each player’s hashes corresponding to the sent inputs,
signifying their current state to compare with other clients’ hashes. With this approach,
the RPC containing player inputs is modified to include the hash. Upon receiving each
player’s RPC with data for a given tick, the server first compares their hash values to
determine if nondeterministic behaviour occurred.
68
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:75==
Additionally, the value of hashesForTheCurrentTick is added to the DeterministicTime
component, from which it is accessed to populate the data for the RPC message. This
value is updated with the new result of the hashing system each time it runs, ensuring it
always contains the latest value by the time the InputSendSystem executes.
The server won’t compare hashes between each client but will take the first hash (repre-
senting the host) and compare it with every other hash. This way, if a desync is detected,
it’s always between the host and one of the other clients. If a desync happens between
two clients, it will also be detected because the host hash will differ from at least one of
them.
Next, a new PlayerDesynchronized RPC is used to notify all clients that nondeterministic
behaviour occurred and they should stop the simulation. For this, a new client working
mode, Desync, is added, and the package will automatically set it. The role of the devel-
oper is to detect this change and perform an appropriate action to visually indicate that it
happened. Otherwise, the game will just appear frozen, and it will be hard to determine
whether it’s due to a lack of inputs coming from the server or a desync.
The final flow of the validation is summarized in Figure 7.4
Figure 7.4: Steps of determinism validation
7.1.7
Random values handling by the package
The use of random values, which can cause different values to influence the game state,
is one of the most common sources of nondeterminism, as explained in more detail in
Section 7.4. This package addresses this issue by having the server generate a random
seed at the start of the game. This seed is used by random functions to achieve the
same continuous values when performing the same operations. The server includes this
seed in the DeterminismSettings, which are then sent to every client to ensure consistent
game settings. The developer is responsible for calling the random function on this seed
in a deterministic manner, meaning the same number of times on different clients. This
approach ensures that the perceived randomness is consistent across clients during the
same simulation.
7.2
Determinism debugging tools implementation in DOTS
The second part of this investigation into determinism is to demonstrate the tools that can
be built to utilize the deterministic validation explained in Section 7.1. It also aims to show
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
69
==PAGE:76==
how the source of nondeterminism can be identified using the provided implementation in
the package, illustrated with on the example of a sample Pong game.
7.2.1
Log file generation
An important aspect of debugging nondeterministic behavior is the generation of log files
upon desynchronization, which allows the developer to identify the cause of the desync,
similar to the approaches used by Riot and Photon as explained in Section 3.7.
For this reason a DeterministicLogger singleton class is created which handles for ex-
ample storying mentioned NativeParallelMultiHashMap<Entity, KeyValuePair<TypeIndex,
ulong» on per tick basis, meaning that it would be possible to again access the values
which were used for generation of a final hash for the frame on a given tick. This class
is also responsible for saving the values to the file in a readable format explained a bit
further in this section.
The server stores every player’s RPC with inputs that arrive for the game in a list and
writes this information to a file in a readable form when desynchronization is detected, as
illustrated in Figure 7.5. When a desync occurs, this file is generated by the server.
Figure 7.5: Server input recording file
The rest of the log files that this tool generates are generated by the client upon receiv-
ing RPC from the server informing about desyncronisation. Each client keeps track of
generated hashes for the last ”forced input latency” ticks because the server can pinpoint
70
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:77==
any of these as the desynchronized tick. This method allows for storying less data in
the memory as its ensured that when new hash cannot be generated if server wouldn’t
confirm the determinism of a tick that happend ”forced input latency” ticks ago. When a
desync message is received from the server, logs for the tick specified in the message
are generated, which look as in Figure 7.6.
When examining Figure 7.6, developers will note that components like LocalTransform
have readable values, whereas user-defined components like Velocity do not in the cur-
rent implementation. This limitation arises because the package does not know at runtime
which components the user will create or what fields they will have. Addressing this limi-
tation is one of the future improvements discussed in Section 9, as it would require more
advanced code generation to stringify any component in the list of deterministic compo-
nents.
For now, the workaround is that the most important components, such as LocalTransform
and DeterministicSettings, are manually saved with their values in the DeterministicLog-
ger.
Figure 7.6: Per Tick log file
Another detail is that entities are initially listed with their version numbers, allowing for
their detection when the game stops. However, these version numbers will differ across
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
71
==PAGE:78==
clients, leading to unreadability. To address this, the package also lists the names of the
entities, aiding debugging by letting developers know which entity is being referenced. By
default, entities do not have names, so if developers want to see entity names in the log,
they need to assign names to entities using the EntityManager.
Additional files generated by the client together with the log include the system info file
shown in Figure 7.7, which helps developers with information about machine parameters,
facilitating the replication of issues (e.g., issues that might only affect Windows machines).
The last file, shown in Figure 7.8, displays the game settings used.
Figure 7.7: System info file
Figure 7.8: Game settings file
72
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:79==
One disadvantage of the current setup, where the developer does not operate their own
server but allows players to host their games, is that the server log will be generated on
the host machine, while the three other files will be generated on each client machine
upon encountering a desync. This means that, to investigate the issue, players would
need to either send the files to the developer, or the files would need to be automatically
transmitted to the developer, which may be hindered if, for example, a client quits the
game. How to resolve this issue should be a topic for future work, as discussed in Section
9.
If developer has access to those 4 files, in order to see where exactly nondeterminism
occured and which variable caused it developer should use any diff toll (like for example
Visual Studio Code editor), this solution is one step behind Photon Quantum which does
this comparison automatically, and then he can compare file from host and from client that
desyncronized as in Figure 7.9.
Figure 7.9: Diff comparison of log files
7.2.2
Per-system vs per-tick validation
One of the main goals of this investigation was to explore if the ECS structure and the
division of behaviour into distinct systems could be leveraged for validation. Consequently,
in contrast to per-tick validation discussed in the previous section of this chapter, a more
advanced option of per-system validation is implemented.
With per-tick validation, developers can usually pinpoint the exact tick and variable that
caused the desync. Based on this information and an understanding of common reasons
for nondeterministic code, as explained in Section 7.4, they can investigate the code for
possible sources of the issue. This can be a significant challenge, as illustrated by the
nondeterminism case discussed in the Riot blog [33].
Taking advantage of the ECS structure, which separates logic from data and executes
code system by system, the package modifies the DeterministicSystemGroup implemen-
tation to allow for ”per-system” validation. If this option is chosen, the hashing system
is injected at the beginning of the group as well as between each pair of systems. The
modification includes storing hash values in a list, with the hashing system adding a hash
to the list each time it completes its calculations. This setup allows sending an empty list
(indicating no validation was performed), a list containing one hash (indicating per-tick val-
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
73
==PAGE:80==
idation), or a list containing multiple hashes (indicating per-system validation). The size
of the list in the per-system case will vary depending on the number of systems running
in the group.
If nondeterminism is detected during per-system validation, the package can identify which
hash, and thus which system, caused the desync. If the first hash differs, it means that
some system or functionality outside of the DeterministicSystemGroup caused the desync.
If a hash after a particular system differs, the package can pinpoint that system as the
source of nondeterminism.
This method has its advantages and drawbacks.
The advantage is that, with per-system validation, the generated log file, as shown in
Figure 7.10, will display hashes generated on a per-system basis. These hashes are
referenced by their index in the DeterministicSystemGroup, which developers can use to
locate the specific system in the group. Running a diff operation on two files reveals the
first desynced variable and the system after which the desync occurred, allowing devel-
opers to narrow down the code base they need to investigate to find the source of non-
determinism. For example, in the Megacity Metro project mentioned in Section 4, which
has around 35–40 systems and larger games that can have hundreds of systems, being
able to pinpoint the exact system is extremely helpful in drastically reducing the number
of potential sources of nondeterminism.
The drawback of this solution is the increased time required to run this many hash op-
erations. The time increase compared to per-tick validation is proportional to the time
taken for per-tick validation multiplied by the number of systems in the DeterministicSys-
temGroup. For example, in the Pong game, per-system validation can take up to 2 ms
per tick, which is significantly longer than per-tick validation multiplied by the number of
systems. The precise time comparisons of these methods are discussed in Section 8.
Due to this increased time requirement, per-system validation is not recommended for
production games. Instead, this method is better suited for debugging nondeterminism
using the game replay option discussed in Section 7.2.3. Combined with per-system
validation, this allows for more precise debugging of nondeterminism.
74
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:81==
Figure 7.10: Per system log file
7.2.3
Game replay framework
To leverage per-system validation, similar to Riot’s replay framework, the package in-
cludes a replay framework. To use it, the developer needs to copy the server recording
input file and settings file and place them in the main NondeterministicLogs folder, where
all files are generated in different subfolders. Then, they need to click the ”replay from
file” button in the Pong game. In a more professional scenario where this button is not
available, the developer needs to set the replayFromFile variable to true in Deterministic-
Settings. When the game starts, instead of taking inputs from the keyboard or sending
inputs to the server, it will replay the game as if those inputs saved in the server replay
file were arriving from the server.
The advantage of this approach is that the developer can choose a different validation
method for the replay (e.g., per-system validation) and examine the logs of the simula-
tion again. Since this is a local resimulation, it will only create log files on one device.
Therefore, it is important to use a machine with the same specifications as the one where
nondeterminism was detected, which can be specified based on the ClientSettings file.
Nondeterminism issues may be stable, appearing on the same tick every time (e.g., an
issue related to spawning the last ball on tick 1000 in the sample Pong game), or they
may be unstable, appearing on seemingly random ticks. To address this, the replay file
will not only hash the final state but also generate a file with hash information for every tick
in the game. This allows for detecting the first variable that diverged between two runs.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
75
==PAGE:82==
This approach adds significant computational overhead and is currently extremely slow,
as discussed in Section 8, and should be addressed in future work.
7.3
Debugging nondeterminism with the package tools on
example of a sample Pong game
To showcase the proper usage of the implemented tools, let’s explore it from a Pong game
developer’s perspective. First, the developer hosts the game on their machine, choosing
WhitelistedHashing_PerTick hash validation, which this package proposes for production
games. Then, another client connects, and the game starts. At some point during the
game, the developer sees a message about nondeterminism detected, as shown in Figure
7.11.
Figure 7.11: The Pong sample game upon nondeterminism is detected.
The next step is to investigate the generated files from both clients and the server, which
the developer needs to gather. As discussed in Section 7.2.1, easing this process should
be a focus of future work. The developer can then compare the generated client log files
to identify what happened. In this case, they would see the difference between the two
files, as shown in Figure 7.12.
The developer would notice that the divergence occurred on tick 12 and was caused
by different values of the x position and velocity component on one of the balls. With
this information, the developer, being familiar with the game implementation, may already
have some clues. For example, in the Pong game, the position is influenced by the velocity
component, so the issue could be related to velocity. The developer might also know if
something special happens on tick 12. If not as familiar with the game code, the developer
would need to look into each system that potentially changes the velocity component to
investigate the issue further. Alternatively, they can use the replay framework to get closer
to the source of the nondeterminism.
76
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:83==
Figure 7.12: Differences between two generated files in per-tick validation
Before using the replay framework, an important step is to compare the settings files
generated by each client to ensure they are the same. If the settings differ, the issue
is related to this discrepancy. If the settings are the same, the developer should ideally
check the machine parameters of the client they want to replay, as shown in Figure 7.7.
Running the resimulation on a machine with similar parameters is crucial since the issue
may be related to specific conditions, such as differences between Windows and Mac
operating systems.
The next step is to place both the server input recording file and the client settings file
in the main NondeterminismLogs folder, which should be located inside the game folder
along with the game executable and other important files.
First, the developer should replay the game with the same determinism validation used in
the game that desynced, using the ”FullStateHash” option. The developer should replay
the game on two machines that closely resemble the client machines that experienced
the desynchronization. After running it once on each machine, they should compare the
generated files to see if the issue was replicated or if another issue appeared. Ideally,
the developer should run it multiple times, comparing the file differences each time, until
nondeterminism is detected. However, it may be possible that the game is being replayed
on a different machine than the one where the issue occurred or that the issue is unstable
and manifests differently in different iterations, often caused by the use of random values.
The developer needs to decide whether to continue the replays if nondeterminism does
not appear after several consecutive attempts.
If nondeterminism is detected, it confirms that it is possible to experience it between the
two machines used for testing. In this case, if the developer wants more information
about the source of nondeterminism, they can continue replaying the game with the per-
system validation option. Although this option is slow, it can accurately identify a system
containing nondeterministic code when used correctly.
In this example, the developer may see the log as shown in Figure 7.13.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
77
==PAGE:84==
Figure 7.13: Differences between two generated files in per-system validation
Figure 7.14: System number after which values in both files are different
Since the file contains a recording from every tick and for each tick for every system,
78
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:85==
developer after seeing the first instance of different variables, should go up in the file to
see after which system it happened, as in Figure 7.14.
If no difference between components is observed and a different hash for the frame is still
generated, it indicates an issue on the package side or a case of nondeterministic usage
of the DeterministicID component, which influenced sorting in some way.
When examining the game, the developer should identify which system corresponds to
the number in the group and investigate potential sources of nondeterminism within that
system. This approach can drastically reduce the number of code areas that need to be
examined in ECS-based frameworks.
Sources of nondeterminism often fall into well-known categories and are usually easy
to fix. However, the challenging part is identifying when and where the nondeterminism
occurred in the code, especially in large games where many functionalities overlap. To
assist with this, Section 7.4 discusses the most common sources of nondeterminism that
the developer should look for.
In the case of the sample Pong game investigated here, the issue was caused by gener-
ating the direction using sine and cosine mathematical functions, which are notorious for
causing nondeterminism issues.
Figure 7.15: List of systems running in DeterministicSystemGroup
7.4
Common sources of nondeterminism
There are several well-known causes of nondeterminism to consider.
Understanding
these causes can help in identifying and pinpointing the potential sources of nondeter-
minism in the code.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
79
==PAGE:86==
7.4.1
Random number generators
The most obvious example is generating a random value on different clients and using it
to affect the game state. This will inevitably result in different game states if those values
are not synchronised between clients.
Despite their implications, random number generators in most software are already deter-
ministic. Most of what we call random number generators (RNGs) in computing are more
accurately called pseudorandom number generators (PRNGs). This is because nearly
all random number APIs rely on formulas that ”twist” or ”shift” a given seed value into
another value, always producing the same series of outputs from a given starting seed.
Divergences begin when the developer can’t control the order, the number of calls, or the
initial seed of a random number generator.
The usual solution for maintaining perceived randomness in each game is to generate a
starting seed on the server and share it with all clients, ensuring everyone uses the same
seed to generate random numbers. It’s important to make sure that random numbers from
that generator are generated the same number of times and in the same order for every
client.
If it is impossible to guarantee the same order using a single generator, games can em-
ploy multiple random number generators for different purposes. This helps maintain con-
sistency across all clients while allowing for varied pseudo-random processes.
As discussed in Section 7.1.7, the package generates the random seed on the server and
sends it to every client along with the game settings. The developer is then responsible
for generating random values based on this seed in a deterministic way.
7.4.2
Uninitialized variables
A cause of non-determinism can also be not initialising variables. A primitive type that is
not explicitly given an initial value will simply pick up whatever garbage values are stored
at its memory address when it is allocated.
The code listening 7.4 shows this code, which gives a better understanding of the descrip-
tion. This wouldn’t usually be the case in professional games since this issue is obvious to
spot, but it serves as an explanation of what can happen when a variable is not initialised.
1
public class ExampleSystem
2
{
3
private int variableValue;
4
5
public void OnUpdate(ref SystemState state)
6
{
7
for (; variableValue < 10; variableValue++)
8
{
9
DoSomething();
10
}
11
}
12
13
private void DoSomething()
14
{
15
// For example , code generating new ball positions
16
}
17
}
Listing 7.3: Example usage of an uninitialized variable
In this example, variableValue is not initialised, so it may contain any value, depending on
how it’s allocated. With typical compiler settings, this code won’t even throw a compiler
80
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:87==
warning. As a result, OnUpdate might call DoSomething() anywhere from 0 to 10 times.
The obvious course of action would be for developers to zero-initialise everything all the
time. In theory, identifying uninitialized variables at the beginning would be straightforward
with simple program analysis. However, this approach has some drawbacks. A great
example from the League of Legends game, as described in the Riot Games blog post
[33], illustrates this issue.
The blog describes a common Vector3f struct used extensively throughout the code to
represent properties like positions, velocities, directions, and other geometric concepts.
While the performance impact of forcing an individual Vector3f instance to be zero-initialised
is minimal, the cumulative performance hit becomes significant when considering the mil-
lions of times these types are constructed in a game.
Therefore, the developers of League of Legends chose not to zero-initialise these in-
stances by default. Instead, they focus on detecting potential nondeterminism early and
only initialise the variables when necessary, keeping in mind that those would be edge
cases that weren’t predicted by the developer.
7.4.3
Asynchronous processing
As the complexity of games has increased over time, games have become increasingly
multithreaded and capable of modifying behaviour based on the timing of asynchronous
tasks. While parallelism can greatly enhance performance, it also introduces a significant
source of non-determinism if handled poorly. There are possible to find sources describing
more in detail the problem of deterministic applications on multi-core architectures [39].
When multiple threads execute concurrently, the order in which operations are performed
can vary from one run to another. This variability can lead to different game states even
if the same initial conditions and inputs are provided. For example, if two threads are
responsible for updating the position of two different game entities, the order in which
these updates occur can influence the final state of the game. If thread A updates entity 1
before thread B updates entity 2 in one run, and thread B updates entity 2 before thread
A updates entity 1 in another run, the resulting game states could be different.
In DOTS, parallel processing is managed through careful control of data access patterns,
utilising ECS to structure data and jobs efficiently.
Variables and components in DOTS can be marked as either read-only or read-write.
When a variable or component is marked as read-only, it means that multiple threads
can access and read its value simultaneously without any risk. This is because the value
will not be modified during the read operations, ensuring safe concurrent access and elim-
inating the possibility of race conditions.
For read-write variables or components, DOTS uses a dependency management system
instead of traditional locking mechanisms. Each job specifies its dependencies, indicating
which data it will read from or write to. The Unity Job System then schedules these jobs
in a way that respects these dependencies. If a job needs to write to a variable, the
Job System ensures that no other job can read from or write to that variable until the
write operation is complete. This approach prevents concurrent modifications and race
conditions while avoiding the performance overhead associated with locking.
To handle changes to entity components, DOTS uses an Entity Command Buffer (ECB).
This buffer collects commands to modify entities during the execution of parallel jobs (i.e.,
EntityManager.SetComponentData). Once all jobs are finished, the commands in the
buffer are executed, applying all changes at once. This method ensures safe and efficient
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
81
==PAGE:88==
modifications without conflicts, as all the commands are based on the same previous
values.
The order in which these commands are executed is still random by default. However,
depending on the need, one can specify sorting criteria for the ECB to ensure that com-
mands are applied in a particular sequence. This sorting can be based on factors such as
the type of component being modified or the priority of the operation, allowing developers
to control the execution order to meet specific requirements within their application.
Using the Entity Command Buffer (ECB) is one approach. However, for the determinism
validation implementation in the package, ECB was not used since the package does not
modify any entity components but only collects data.
7.4.4
Different CPU architectures and floating point precision
This problem refers to the ability of a simulation running on two different CPU architec-
tures to use floating-point math or fixed-point math. Floating point numbers are a common
source of non-determinism in game development because the implementation of floating
point arithmetic can vary across different hardware and software environments. While es-
sential for representing real numbers in computing, floating point math introduces several
challenges that can lead to inconsistencies in game simulations.
Floating point numbers follow the IEEE 754 standard [40], which defines how numbers
are represented and manipulated in binary. However, despite this standardisation, the
implementation details can differ between processors, compilers, and operating systems.
These differences can cause the same floating-point calculations to yield slightly different
results on different platforms.
The primary issue lies in the precision and rounding behaviours of floating-point arithmetic.
When operations involve very large or very small numbers, or when many operations
are chained together, tiny differences in precision can accumulate, leading to significant
discrepancies over time. This phenomenon can be extensive, and numerous sources
provide detailed guidance on where developers should pay attention regarding floating-
point arithmetic [41].
One classic example of non-determinism caused by floating-point arithmetic is the addi-
tion of numbers in different orders. Due to the finite precision of floating-point represen-
tations, adding a sequence of numbers in a different order can lead to different results.
For instance, summing a list of floating point numbers from smallest to largest can yield
a different total than summing them from largest to smallest 7.4.
1
float a = 1e10;
2
float b = 1;
3
float c = -1e10;
4
5
float sum1 = (a + b) + c; // Result: 1.0
6
float sum2 = a + (b + c); // Result: 0.0
Listing 7.4: Example of floating point arithmetic operation which yields different results
In the above code, sum1 and sum2 will yield different results due to the order of operations,
illustrating how floating-point arithmetic can introduce non-determinism.
In game development, non-deterministic behaviour can lead to significant issues, partic-
ularly in multiplayer games that rely on deterministic lockstep models. For example, if
a physics simulation uses floating-point calculations to determine object positions, small
82
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:89==
differences in these calculations can cause the game state to diverge between clients,
leading to inconsistent gameplay experiences.
This issue is typically not a problem when all players use the same platform, like Windows.
However, it becomes problematic when players are on different platforms, such as one
on Windows and another on Mac. The differences in floating-point arithmetic implemen-
tations across platforms can result in diverging game states.
To address this, the game industry generally uses fixed-point numbers, which involve
handling floating-point numbers with integer numbers. Games that use GGPO-style net-
code and frameworks like Quantum have adopted this approach to ensure consistency
across different CPU architectures. Fixed-point arithmetic represents numbers with a
fixed number of decimal places, eliminating many of the issues associated with floating-
point precision. Several fixed-point arithmetic libraries are available for developers to use
[42]. However, implementing fixed-point arithmetic can be cumbersome and may sacrifice
some performance due to additional casting and processing overhead.
7.4.5
Caching
Caching refers to the practice of storing certain variables or data for use over several
frames. This is not the case when using lockstep, but in the GGPO implementation, when
performing player prediction and rollbacks, it starts to affect the simulation. While caching
can significantly enhance performance by reducing the need to recompute values repeat-
edly, it can also introduce nondeterministic behaviour. This is a common reason why, for
example, a physics engine may be nondeterministic.
It’s worth noting that in a pure lockstep game, caching won’t cause any issues. Problems
may arise only if the simulation requires going back in time, as is the case with rollback—a
more advanced technique implemented on top of lockstep for deterministic games. De-
velopers should be aware of this when implementing a full GGPO-style game.
There are two types of systems one can distinguish stateless and stateful.
In a stateless system, the state is entirely derived from the current inputs, and the system
does not retain any information between frames. This approach ensures that the same
input will always yield the same output, promoting determinism. For instance, a state-
less physics engine calculates object positions and velocities purely based on the current
forces acting upon them without relying on past states.
In contrast, a stateful system retains information between frames, relying on past states
to influence current computations. While this can improve efficiency and performance, it
introduces the risk of divergence. For example, a stateful physics engine might cache
object positions and velocities, using these cached values to update the object’s state in
subsequent frames.
Stateful systems can cause divergence during rollback. In deterministic lockstep simula-
tions, rollback involves rewinding the game state to a previous frame and re-simulating
forward with new inputs. If a system caches values, the re-simulation might use stale or
incorrect cached data, leading to inconsistencies across different clients.
Let’s consider an example of a simple caching mechanism 7.5.
1
public class MovementSystem
2
{
3
private Boolean didPlayerJumpedWhileStanding = false;
4
5
public void Update()
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
83
==PAGE:90==
6
{
7
Input input = GetPlayerInput();
8
9
if (!wasUsed && GetPlayerMovement() == 0) {
10
PlayerJump();
11
didPlayerJumpedWhileStanding = true;
12
}
13
14
if (GetPlayerMovement() != 0)
15
{
16
didPlayerJumpedWhileStanding = false;
17
}
18
}
19
}
Listing 7.5: Example of caching in a game system
In this example, the developer wants the player to jump once if they stand still. Under
normal circumstances, this code might work as intended. However, problems arise when
rollback is used.
During a rollback, the game state is reverted to an earlier point, and the simulation is
replayed from there. If the ‘didPlayerJumpWhileStanding flag is not properly reset during
the rollback, it can cause inconsistencies. For instance, if the player was supposed to
jump but didn’t due to the rollback, the flag may remain ‘true‘, preventing the jump from
occurring again when the state is replayed.
To properly execute rollback, one option is to use only stateless systems. Another is to
store a verified state of the game separately. When ”rolling back,” the system should refer
to and start from this verified state, eliminating unwanted cached values and allowing for
accurate game simulation.
7.4.6
Methematical functions
Some system-implemented mathematical functions can also be a source of nondetermin-
ism. This can be due to the handling of floating-point numbers or functions like sinus and
cosinus, which are notoriously nondeterministic when values become smaller. Develop-
ers should be aware of which mathematical functions may be nondeterministic and avoid
using them.
7.4.7
Other, not possible to predict issues
Even if a game is thoroughly tested and no nondeterministic issues are detected, nonde-
terminism can still occur during gameplay. Such issues can manifest in the wild for various
unpredictable reasons. These include hardware failures like a corrupt RAM stick or a CPU
bug, data corruption during transmission, or even external factors like an electromagnetic
pulse (EMP) wave from solar activity.
Given these unpredictable and unpreventable potential sources of nondeterminism, it is
crucial for game developers to utilise determinism validation to ensure that their game is
deterministic enough to not cause unfair games and player frustration.
84
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:91==
8
Evaluation
This chapter focuses on evaluating the provided solution in terms of usability and effec-
tiveness.
8.1
Deterministic lockstep netcode model evaluation
The implementation of the deterministic lockstep netcode model follows standard prac-
tices and applies the theoretical model in DOTS as a package. This package is demon-
strated with a sample Pong game but can also be utilised by any game that follows the
usage guide and README documentation present on GitHub. One limitation prevent-
ing this implementation from being ”production ready” is that the input structure for the
game currently needs to be defined within the package rather than user code due to code
generation reasons previously mentioned.
Regarding computational overhead, the cost of running this server on the host, which
must run it alongside the normal client simulation in the Pong game sample, is minimal,
averaging 0.3 ms over 10 consecutive game runs. This overhead would naturally increase
with more clients, but because the server only gathers inputs and sends them back without
simulating the game alongside the clients, this overhead shouldn’t increase significantly,
and the only increase would be in the need to possibly gather a few more inputs during the
same frame. Additionally, since the host has almost no latency (with the server running on
the same machine), the time to send the input is negligible. Therefore, this lockstep server
should be manageable on the client machine even for larger games with more players,
although more testing with real-life game examples would be needed in this case.
The main advantage and disadvantage of a lockstep server both stem from the fact that
it does not process the simulation but only handles inputs. On one hand, this allows it to
run easily on the client machine without introducing significant computational overhead.
On the other hand, if a client desynchronizes (nondeterminism detection is explained in
Section 7), there is no way to continue the simulation, unlike a server-controlled simulation
that could send correct state information to the clients. This makes detecting and ensuring
the deterministic lockstep simulation, which is indeed deterministic, crucial for utilising the
benefit of not running the simulation on the server.
8.2
Determinism validation and debugging tools evaluation
Let’s evaluate separately both parts of the implementation, which are determinism valida-
tion tools and determinism debugging tools.
8.2.1
Determinism Validation Tools Evaluation
The implemented solution can be considered a proof of concept, as there are many areas
where it can be improved.
The validation part generally works effectively. For the sample Pong game, the results
of ”Whitelisted_PerTick” validation were calculated in 0.25 ms. This time depends on
machine specifications and may take longer on slower devices, highlighting the impor-
tance of the developer thoughtfully choosing a subset of the world for validation. ”Full-
State_PerTick” validation took 0.3 ms on the same computer. Similarly, this time will vary
depending on the same factors as whitelisted validation but will generally be longer due
to the lack of restrictions on entities.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
85
==PAGE:92==
Per-system validation took an average of 2 ms for the Pong game. While this is relatively
fast in this case, the time depends first on the duration of the usual per-tick validation,
and this time should be approximated by multiplying it by the number of systems in the
DeterministicLockstepSystemGroup, which can result in a significant increase. Hashing
per-system introduces a substantial performance overhead (multiplying the normal hash-
ing time by the number of systems) but offers potential benefits in narrowing down the
code scope for harder-to-diagnose nondeterminism cases.
Another aspect is the sorting of entities for validation. In cases where entities are nonde-
terministically sorted due to their IDs, discrepancies can be identified by examining the
generated log file. If the final hash differs but none of the components appears different,
this indicates a sorting issue rather than a validation failure.
However, this solution has limitations: the user must remember to add the DeterministicID
component, which introduces the potential human error of either assigning the id in a
nondeterministic manner or forgetting to assign it to an important entities. This could
be improved by automating the ID assignment process, ensuring each entity receives a
unique deterministic ID upon creation.
In summary, ”Whitelisted_PerTick” hash validation should be used for games employing
this package since it takes the least time. However, it may result in game interruptions
and player frustration if the code isn’t thoroughly tested and nondeterminism is detected
too often. Despite this, it ensures that two different simulations won’t continue if the state
diverges significantly.
8.2.2
Determinism debugging tools evaluation
Starting with file generation, it must be pointed out that writing to a file, especially for a
large game, poses a significant challenge. For the sample Pong game, log file generation
took 6 ms with per-tick validation and up to 61.69 ms for per-system validation. This
time may be significantly longer for larger games, particularly with per-system validation,
which results in much larger files. The log file size may also become enormous, similar
to what is described in the Riot blog. For example, in the Pong game, the file size for
”Whitelisted_PerSystem” validation, which contains information about 1333 ticks, is 14
MB, with a maximum of 138 entities being considered for validation at the peak moment.
This size could be reduced by considering what information is essential to include in the
file.
Currently, this delay is not noticeable to the player since their game stops regardless, and
they won’t realise that some time is used to generate the file after stopping the game.
However, in the current approach, where the developer needs to obtain these files from
all clients to debug instances of nondeterministic behaviour, if the player simply quits the
game, the file won’t be generated due to a lack of time. Additionally, when generating a
replay file, all tick information needs to be logged, which is currently done on a per-frame
basis. This makes the game very slow and laggy, as every frame requires around 6–60
ms for file writes, depending on the validation option.
For debugging, logs containing client machine information, logs of the nondeterministic
frame, and client settings are generated on the client side, while the server input recording
is generated on the server side. For later replay, it is important to use machines similar to
those on which the divergence occurred.
The current replay functionality is slow, taking up to 70 ms to simulate one frame of the
sample Pong game, making it impractical for larger games where these portions of time
would be even longer. Additionally, larger games would have bigger log files and longer
86
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:93==
replay times. For example, replaying a 1-hour online game with file logging would take
at least several times longer with per-system validation, with the actual time likely being
much higher.
Nevertheless, this approach shows the potential to identify the exact system causing the
divergence, which can drastically reduce the number of places the developer needs to
investigate. Additionally, the replay functionality can be used for validating determinism
within the same architecture by running the same input recordings multiple times with
per-tick validation to ensure consistent results. Besides game validation, game engine
developers might use these tools to validate certain functionalities of their engine by cre-
ating a small sample game utilising this system and employing the same validation and
debugging approach.
At the end this investigation proves the hypothesis that in addition to implementing a deter-
ministic lockstep netcode model in DOTS, effective determinism validation and debugging
are possible within a not fully deterministic DOD/ECS framework like DOTS. However, this
validation and debugging are not yet perfect within the implemented package and require
improvements discussed in Section 9.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
87
==PAGE:94==
88
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:95==
9
Discussion
This section discusses the findings of this thesis in a more theoretical manner, discussing
key results, their interpretations, implications, and potential improvements.
9.1
Findings
The most significant finding of this thesis is the method for per-system validation, which
is not detailed in other available solutions.
This approach can effectively reduce the
code scope for testing, making it more precise to pinpoint sources of nondeterminism,
but comes with a huge computational cost.
Additionally, the integration of deterministic lockstep netcode with the Unity DOTS frame-
work provides a foundation for developing deterministic multiplayer games or creating a
full GGPO model.  The validation tools developed in this thesis have proven effective in
detecting and debugging nondeterministic behaviour, providing a clear methodology for
ensuring consistency across game clients. This can be useful for smaller teams and de-
velopers who might not have the resources to create their own deterministic engine or use
”Photon quantum” software.
Moreover, the implemented package can be used not only by game developers to imple-
ment deterministic games but also by game engine developers to validate the determin-
ism of their game engines. Although the package is currently tailored for the Unity game
engine, the same methodology could be adapted to other engines.
Furthermore, the research highlights that proper determinism validation and debugging
are incredibly challenging, especially in game engines that are not entirely deterministic.
9.2
Current Limitations and Future Work
Currently, the package should be viewed as a foundational implementation and example
rather than a complete solution. It serves as a base for further development and refine-
ment, demonstrating the basic principles of the deterministic lockstep netcode model and
determinism validation and debugging tools, but it lacks some advanced features neces-
sary for full production use.
Several areas for improvement have been identified for the current package. These im-
provements can be divided into two main areas: improving the netcode model for better
game synchronisation and advancing the determinism validation and debugging toolset
for more effective validation and testing.
9.2.1
Possible netcode model improvements
The current implementation of the deterministic lockstep netcode model is a basic version
that serves as an implementation base. Future work should focus on several enhance-
ments.
Adding player prediction and rollback would create a fully functional GGPO solution, ad-
dressing latency issues and improving the overall gaming experience.
Allowing players to join the game after it has started would require transferring the cur-
rent game state to the new player and synchronising them with the ongoing game. This
would help address the problem of the game stopping when nondeterminism is detected.
If a client desynchronizes, the host could send the authoritative game state to the client,
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
89
==PAGE:96==
allowing the game to continue while still generating logs for later verification. In this con-
figuration, the server would need to perform game simulation in addition to transferring
inputs, which would likely require separating client and server instances but would have
its benefits, working similarly to Riot’s engine.
Finally, using code generation to allow users to implement their own input structures within
the package would provide greater flexibility and customisation.
9.2.2
Possible determinism validation and debugging tool improvements
At the current moment, implementing a fully production-ready deterministic game remains
a challenging task, especially in game engines that are not 100% deterministic. The imple-
mented determinism validation and debugging tools show potential and serve as a proof
of concept for such implementations in DOTS, which represents a Data-Oriented Design
(DOD) and Entity Component System (ECS) framework, demonstrating its potential to
ease debugging.
First, the automatic assignment of the DeterministicID component value to every entity
created in the scene would ensure that all components marked by the developer are con-
sidered for validation. This would also eliminate the possibility of human error in assigning
the ID in a nondeterministic manner.
Secondly, using code generation during runtime can enable writing the fields of even user-
created components to the file. For example, in the case of the Velocity component in the
sample Pong game, it would be possible to see not just the hash but also the actual values.
Next, the resimulation framework could be optimised for speed, as it doesn’t need to wait
for the server or other clients since it’s a local simulation. The developer is interested in
the fastest possible simulation without needing to play the game. For example, the simu-
lation could skip any visual updates and iterate through the DeterministicSystemGroup as
quickly as possible, disregarding any enforced framerate. In this case, if one simulation
step can be completed in 5 ms, the framework would not need to wait an additional 11 ms
before simulating the next step, thereby avoiding wasting of time.
Another option is for the server to simultaneously perform the simulation, allowing the
possibility of continuing the simulation from where it stopped. This could be faster but
might introduce problems. The exact state must be identical to that on the other client,
which cannot be guaranteed without validating the entire world.
Lastly, a tool for performing automated file comparisons would be highly beneficial. It
would eliminate the need to manually scroll through the file to find the system and field
that were first desynchronized. Instead, it could automatically provide a summary of the
comparison, highlighting the exact data that diverged.
9.3
Recommendations for work with deterministic games
When working on a deterministic game or wanting to implement a deterministic function-
ality, one should acknowledge the difficulty of such a task, and this thesis offers some
recommendations based on the knowledge gained during this investigation.
Understanding the deterministic limitations of the software that is being used is crucial.
This awareness helps developers anticipate potential issues and plan for alternative solu-
tions or workarounds.
Regularly testing the software’s deterministic behaviour using various scenarios and hard-
ware configurations helps identify and resolve issues early in the development process.
90
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:97==
Building such software should be incremental, meaning that after adding new functional-
ity, the game is tested and verified to ensure no obvious sources of nondeterminism are
introduced. This approach makes it easier to locate the source of nondeterminism, as it
is most likely caused by the recently added functionality.
Leveraging Data-Oriented Design (DOD) and the Entity Component System (ECS) pat-
tern to structure data and logic efficiently improves performance and makes it easier to
identify and address nondeterministic behaviour because of such separation than usual
object-oriented solutions.
Automation of as many functionalities related to detecting and debugging nondeterminism
cases helps to decrease the time it takes to fix potential problems, or at least helps to avoid
causing them.
In conclusion, while the challenge of creating fully deterministic games is significant, the
tools and methodologies developed in this thesis provide a solid foundation for future
research and development.
By following these recommendations, developers can be more aware of potential prob-
lems and speed up the process of achieving a satisfactory level of determinism in their
software.  It is important to note that one can never claim software is 100% deterministic,
but these practices can help to be as close to this goal as possible.
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
91
==PAGE:98==
92
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:99==
10
Conclusion
To conclude, the thesis has demonstrated the possibility of implementing determinism vali-
dation and supporting debugging tools within the Unity DOTS framework. The developed
tools enable the detection and debugging of nondeterministic behaviour by providing a
way to identify specific frames, fields, and systems responsible for such behaviour. The
integration of these tools with the deterministic lockstep netcode model provides a solid
foundation for exploring ways of developing deterministic multiplayer games, democratis-
ing their creation by providing a new resource to developers that they can build upon.
The research began with an exploration of existing netcode models and determinism val-
idation techniques. A basic deterministic lockstep netcode model was implemented and
integrated with the Unity DOTS framework. Subsequently, various validation tools were
developed to detect and debug nondeterministic behavior. The Pong game served as the
primary test case, demonstrating the practical application of these tools.
Throughout the process, the focus remained on creating a solution adaptable to different
game scenarios by separating non-game-related functionalities into a separate package
that could be used with various games. This goal was partially achieved because some
parts of the code, such as the input struct implementation, still require more work with
runtime code generation to fully separate the package code from the game code.
Key findings of this thesis include the successful development of per-system validation
methods, which are not described in other publicly available solutions. This approach
effectively reduces the code scope for testing, making it easier to locate the exact source
of nondeterminism. While this method can be time-consuming, it can be highly useful
in the debugging process and can complement the usual validation methods outside of
gameplay. Additionally, the integration of deterministic lockstep netcode with Unity DOTS
provides a foundation for developing deterministic multiplayer games. The validation tools
developed have proven effective in ensuring consistent game state across connected
clients on a simple showcased game.
The research answered the stated research questions by demonstrating how the Deter-
ministic Lockstep Netcode Model can be effectively incorporated within Unity’s DOTS, as
discussed in Section 6, providing a solid foundation for future development. It showed
how nondeterministic behavior can be efficiently detected in DOTS, as explained in Sec-
tion 7, proving that this goal is achievable. However, to be truly efficient, the detection
does not cover 100% of the game state but rather a subset of it. It addressed how the
source of nondeterministic behavior in DOTS-based games can be identified by present-
ing the methodology and an example usage on a sample Pong game in Section 7, and
by providing recommendations for future work to improve this process, as detailed in Sec-
tion 9.3. Lastly, it identified the most common sources of nondeterministic behavior, as
discussed in Section 7.4.
The entire implementation is available on GitHub [20], allowing developers to use it as a
base for custom implementations.
Future research should focus on optimizing the determinism validation and debugging
tools for larger-scale and different types of games. Enhancements such as automatic diff
tools, improved, faster game replay functionality, code generation for complete separation
of the package from game code, automatic baking of DeterministicEntityID into every
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
93
==PAGE:100==
existing entity or work on minimising generated log file sizes and time it takes to write
to them can further refine the process. Currently, many aspects of the validation require
manual user input, such as adding names to entities, marking components and entities for
validation, and adding the deterministic ID component, which can introduce user errors.
These processes should be automated to minimize potential issues.
Additionally, integrating more advanced lag mitigation techniques like player prediction
and rollback with the lockstep model will enhance the usability of this implementation.
Exploring the use of code generation for custom input structs and field value display in
user-defined components will also add flexibility and precision to the tools.
In conclusion, this thesis proves the hypothesis that, in addition to implementing a deter-
ministic lockstep netcode model in DOTS, effective determinism validation and debugging
are possible within a not fully deterministic DOD/ECS framework like DOTS. It demon-
strates how to validate the determinism of a game and debug its sources within the Unity
DOTS framework. The tools and methodologies developed provide a foundation for future
research and development in deterministic multiplayer games. There is a hope, that, by
addressing the challenges of nondeterminism and providing practical solutions, this work
will add value in the field of creating deterministic simulations and multiplayer gaming ex-
periences. However, the validation and debugging in the implemented package are not
yet perfect and should be improved in the future.
94
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
[1]
Greg Chance et al. “On Determinism of Game Engines Used for Simulation-Based
Autonomous Vehicle Verification”. In: IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transporta-
tion Systems 23.11 (Nov. 2022). Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Intelli-
gent Transportation Systems, pp. 20538–20552. ISSN: 1558-0016. DOI: 10.1109/
TITS.2022.3177887. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9793395
(visited on 06/13/2024).
[2]
The lag-fighting techniques behind GGPO’s netcode. URL: https://www.gamedeveloper.
com/programming/the- lag- fighting- techniques- behind- ggpo- s- netcode (visited on
06/13/2024).
[3]
Connor Van Ligten. “Rollback Netcode: How to Sustain a Competitive Fighting Game
Community”. In: (May 1, 2022). URL: https://keep.lib.asu.edu/items/166176 (visited
on 06/13/2024).
[4]
Deterministic Multiplayer Engine | Photon Quantum. URL: https://www.photonengine.
com/quantum (visited on 06/13/2024).
[5]
Jessica D. Bayliss. “Jessica D. Bayliss, Developing games with data-oriented de-
sign | Proceedings of the 6th International ICSE Workshop on Games and Software
Engineering: Engineering Fun, Inspiration, and Motivation”. In: GAS ’22: Proceed-
ings of the 6th International ICSE Workshop on Games and Software Engineering:
Engineering Fun, Inspiration, and Motivation (Dec. 2022), pp. 30–36. DOI: 10.1145/
3524494.3527626. URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3524494.3527626 (visited on
06/13/2024).
[6]
Data-oriented design. In: Wikipedia. Page Version ID: 1221817444. May 2, 2024.
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Data-oriented_design&oldid=
1221817444 (visited on 06/13/2024).
[7]
Technologies. SteamDB. URL: https://steamdb.info/tech/ (visited on 06/26/2024).
[8]
Game engines on Steam: The definitive breakdown. URL: https://www.gamedeveloper.
com/business/game-engines-on-steam-the-definitive-breakdown (visited on 06/26/2024).
[9]
Paul Mieschke. “Deterministic Lockstep in Networked Games”. In: (2024). URL:
https://hdms.bsz-bw.de/frontdoor/index/index/docId/7107 (visited on 06/13/2024).
[10]
GGPO | Rollback Networking SDK for Peer-to-Peer Games. GGPO. URL: https:
//www.ggpo.net (visited on 06/13/2024).
[11]
Servers. League of Legends Wiki. June 13, 2024. URL: https://leagueoflegends.
fandom.com/wiki/Servers (visited on 06/13/2024).
[12]
K. Fedoseev et al. “Application of Data-Oriented Design in Game Development”. In:
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1694.1 (Dec. 2020). Publisher: IOP Publish-
ing, p. 012035. ISSN: 1742-6596. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/1694/1/012035. URL:
https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1694/1/012035 (visited on 06/13/2024).
[13]
Alan Jay Smith. “Cache Memories”. In: ACM Computing Surveys 14.3 (Sept. 1,
1982), pp. 473–530. ISSN: 0360-0300. DOI: 10.1145/356887.356892. URL: https:
//dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/356887.356892 (visited on 06/13/2024).
[14]
Understand data-oriented design. Unity Learn. URL: https : / / learn . unity . com /
tutorial/part-1-understand-data-oriented-design (visited on 06/29/2024).
[15]
Unity (game engine). In: Wikipedia. Page Version ID: 1231235691. June 27, 2024.
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Unity_(game_engine)&oldid=
1231235691 (visited on 06/28/2024).
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
95
==PAGE:102==
[16]
Diplomacy is Not an Option. URL: https://store.steampowered.com/app/1272320/
Diplomacy_is_Not_an_Option/ (visited on 06/13/2024).
[17]
Megacity Metro – Large-Scale Multiplayer Demo. Unity. URL: https://unity.com/
demos/megacity-competitive-action-sample (visited on 06/13/2024).
[18]
SnpM/LockstepFramework: Framework for lockstep RTS, TD, and MOBA games.
URL: https://github.com/SnpM/LockstepFramework (visited on 06/13/2024).
[19]
Tony Cannon. pond3r/ggpo. original-date: 2019-10-03T15:56:50Z. June 12, 2024.
URL: https://github.com/pond3r/ggpo (visited on 06/13/2024).
[20]
Thesis: Scalability and Democratization of Real Time Strategy and Fighting Games:
The Deterministic Lockstep Netcode Model with Client Prediction Combined with
the Data Oriented Tech Stack. GitHub. URL: https://github.com/michalooo/Thesis-
Deterministic-Lockstep-Netcode-DOTS-with-Validation/tree/thesis_submission (vis-
ited on 07/09/2024).
[21]
Otto Tolppanen. “How Fighting Games Use Rollback Netcode to Improve the User
Experience”. In: (May 31, 2023). URL: https://aaltodoc.aalto.fi/handle/123456789/
121399 (visited on 06/13/2024).
[22]
Shengmei Liu et al. “The Effects of Network Latency on Competitive First-Person
Shooter Game Players”. In: 2021 13th International Conference on Quality of Mul-
timedia Experience (QoMEX). 2021 13th International Conference on Quality of
Multimedia Experience (QoMEX). ISSN: 2472-7814. June 2021, pp. 151–156. DOI:
10.1109/QoMEX51781.2021.9465419. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9465419 (visited on 06/13/2024).
[23]
proepkes. proepkes/UnityLockstep. original-date: 2019-01-14T16:34:17Z. June 10,
2024. URL: https://github.com/proepkes/UnityLockstep (visited on 06/13/2024).
[24]
mrdav30. mrdav30/LockstepRTSEngine. original-date: 2018-12-06T19:03:23Z. May 28,
2024. URL: https://github.com/mrdav30/LockstepRTSEngine (visited on 06/13/2024).
[25]
Deterministic Prototyping in Unity DOTs – jdxdev. Aug. 2, 2019. URL: https://www.
jdxdev.com/blog/2019/08/02/deterministic-unity-dots/ (visited on 06/13/2024).
[26]
Game Networking Demystified, Part II: Deterministic. URL: https://ruoyusun.com/
2019/03/29/game-networking-2.html (visited on 06/13/2024).
[27]
Deterministic Lockstep. Gaffer On Games. Nov. 29, 2014. URL: https://gafferongames.
com/post/deterministic_lockstep/ (visited on 06/13/2024).
[28]
Yuan Gao (Meseta). Netcode Concepts Part 3: Lockstep and Rollback. Medium.
Sept. 22, 2019. URL: https://meseta.medium.com/netcode-concepts-part-3-lockstep-
and-rollback-f70e9297271 (visited on 06/13/2024).
[29]
Enum FloatMode | Burst | 1.4.11. URL: https://docs.unity3d.com/Packages/com.
unity.burst@1.4/api/Unity.Burst.FloatMode.html (visited on 06/13/2024).
[30]
ECS for Unity. Unity. URL: https://unity.com/ecs (visited on 07/11/2024).
[31]
Stormgate Hub. What is Stormgate’s SnowPlay Engine? Stormgate Hub. Dec. 11,
2022. URL: https://stormgatehub.com/what-is-stormgates-snowplay-engine/ (visited
on 06/13/2024).
[32]
Determinism in League of Legends: Introduction. June 20, 2017. URL: https://
technology.riotgames.com/news/determinism-league-legends-introduction (visited on
06/13/2024).
[33]
Determinism: Fixing Divergences. May 1, 2018. URL: https://technology.riotgames.
com/news/determinism-league-legends-fixing-divergences (visited on 06/13/2024).
[34]
Eleftheria Christopoulou and Stelios Xinogalos. “Overview and Comparative Analy-
sis of Game Engines for Desktop and Mobile Devices”. In: International Journal of
Serious Games (2017). Accepted: 2019-10-28T11:06:52Z. ISSN: 2384-8766. DOI:
96
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:103==
10.17083/ijsg.v4i4.194. URL: https://ruomo.lib.uom.gr/handle/7000/180 (visited on
06/13/2024).
[35]
Global Ping Statistics. WonderNetwork. URL: https://wondernetwork.com/pings/
(visited on 06/16/2024).
[36]
Unity Technologies. Unity - Manual: Unity’s Package Manager. URL: https://docs.
unity3d.com/Manual/Packages.html (visited on 06/17/2024).
[37]
Unity Technologies. Unity - Manual: Creating custom packages. URL: https://docs.
unity3d.com/Manual/CustomPackages.html (visited on 06/17/2024).
[38]
RPCs | Netcode for Entities | 1.2.3. URL: https://docs.unity3d.com/Packages/com.
unity.netcode@1.2/manual/rpcs.html (visited on 06/16/2024).
[39]
Adrien Barbot. “An innovative technology solution to design deterministic safety-
critical applications on multi-core architectures”. In: (). URL: https://www.asterios-
technologies . com / wp - content / uploads / dlm _ uploads / 2017 / 07 / KRONO - SAFE -
innovative-technology-solution.pdf.
[40]
IEEE Standards Association. IEEE Standards Association. URL: https://standards.
ieee.org (visited on 06/15/2024).
[41]
What every computer scientist should know about floating-point arithmetic | ACM
Computing Surveys. URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/103162.103163 (visited
on 06/13/2024).
[42]
Jere Sanisalo. XMunkki/FixPointCS. original-date: 2018-04-19T18:15:32Z. June 10,
2024. URL: https://github.com/XMunkki/FixPointCS (visited on 06/15/2024).
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
97
==PAGE:104==
98
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
==PAGE:105==
Scalability and Democratization of RTS and Fighting Games: Deterministic Lockstep with DOTS.
99
==PAGE:106==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 101, Building 101A
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
