==PAGE:1==
Potential for carbon capture and storage and
carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
Potentiale for kulstoffangst og ­lagring og kulstoffangst og ­udnyttelse i Danmark
Master Thesis
Spring, 2024
By
Maria Argibay Alló
Copyright:
Reproduction of this report in whole or in part must include the customary bibli­
ographic citation, including author attribution, title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Department:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Bygningstorvet,
Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months at DTU Sustain, the Department of Environmen­
tal and Resource Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Environmental Engineering.
Working on this thesis has been both incredibly interesting and challenging. Throughout this
journey, I have gained knowledge about CCUS technologies and their projected role in the
Danish context. Additionally, I have delved into the LCA methodology and standards. LCA is
a field that fascinates me, and I was delighted to have the opportunity to learn more and work
in this area. This project also afforded me the opportunity to explore EASETECH software in
detail and to familiarize myself a bit with QGIS.
I would like to give a huge thanks to my supervisor, Valentina Bisinella, for all her help, guid­
ance, and support over these months. Her expertise and encouragement have been incredibly
valuable. I also want to thank all my family and friends for always being there for me, listening,
and supporting me throughout all my academic years. Your constant encouragement has been
a real source of strength and motivation.
María Argibay Alló ­ s222901
July, 2024
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis explores the potential for Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Storage (CCUS) in Den­
mark, focusing on integrating these technologies into the Danish context. Denmark’s commit­
ment to reducing CO2 emissions aligns with the global urgency to combat climate change. De­
spite significant strides in renewable energy adoption, hard­to­abate sectors will face challenges
in mitigating CO2 emissions in the near term. CCUS technologies present a viable solution to
address these challenges by capturing CO2 from major point sources and either utilizing it in
various applications or storing it permanently in geological formations.
This study provides an inventory of carbon dioxide emissions in Denmark, offering a detailed
analysis of emissions from point sources and current emission levels. This inventory serves
as a foundational element for understanding the scope and scale of CO2 emissions that CCUS
technologies need to address. Moreover, this study delves into various CCUS technologies,
providing a comprehensive overview of their mechanisms, applications, and current state of
development. It also discusses the specific challenges and opportunities associated with im­
plementing these technologies in Denmark.
Ten scenarios and subscenarios were identified as potential big scales scenarios for a CCUS
context in Denmark, build upon the combination of the different technologies identified as most
relevant in the Danish context. Finally, a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) was conducted using
EASETECH software, guided by the International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD)
Handbook and adhering to LCA ISO standards. The study involved analyzing different individ­
ual CCUS technologies, as well as potential big scale scenarios, to determine their environ­
mental performance and identify main hotspots. The research also incorporated sensitivity and
uncertainty analyses to prove the robustness of the obtained results.
To conclude, the study highlights the key findings, emphasizing the critical role of CCUS in com­
plementing renewable energy efforts to maximize carbon savings. The limitations of the study
are also discussed, including data availability and the assumptions made in the LCA models.
Finally, recommendations for future research and policy development are provided, stressing
the importance of continued exploration of onshore and offshore storage options, optimizing the
reuse of generated waste heat, and addressing the economic aspects to enhance the feasibility
and adoption of CCUS technologies.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviation list
AC­ Acidification impact category
BM­ Buidling materials
CC­ Climate change impact category
CCS­ Carbon capture and storage
CCU­ Carbon capture and utilization
CCUS­ Carbon capture, utilization and storage
CH4­ Methane
CO2­ Carbon dioxide
CO2U­ Carbon dioxide utilization
CV­ Coefficient of variation
DEA­ Danish Energy Agency
DE­ Germany
DK­ Denmark
DME­ Dimethyl ether
EC­JRC­ European Commission­ Joint Research Centre
EFW­ Eutrophication, freshwater impact category
EM­ Eutrophication, marine impact category
ES­ Energy system
ET­ Eutrophication, terrestrial impact category
ETFW­ Ecotoxicity freshwater impact category
EU­ European Union
FA­ Formic acid
GEUS­ National Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland
HTC­ Human toxicity, cancer impact category
HTNC­ Human toxicity, non­carcinogenic impact category
IEA­ International Energy Agency
ILCD­ International Reference Life Cycle Data System
ILs­ Ionic Liquids
IPCC­ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IR­ Ionising radiation impact category
LCA­ Life cycle assessment
LCI­ Life cycle inventory
LCIA­ Lice cycle impact assessment
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
iv
==PAGE:6==
LU­ Land use impact category
MEA­ Monoethanolamine
MSW­ Municipal solid waste
MSWI­ Municipal solid waste incineration
MTO­ Methanol­to­olefins
NG­ Natural gas
NSC­ Normalized sensitivity coefficient
NSR­ Normalized sensitivity ratio
OD­ Ozone depletion impact category
P­ Propylene
PC­ Portland cement
PM­ Particulate matter impact category
POF­ Photochemical ozone formation impact category
PP­ Polypropylene
PtX­ Power to X
RU­ Resource use impact category
SA­ Sensitivity analysis
SC­ Sensitivity coefficient
SD­ Standard deviation
SR­ Sensitivity ratio
UA­ Uncertainty analysis
WU­ Water use impact category
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review
3
3
Inventory of carbon dioxide emissions
5
3.1
Emissions by sectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Biogenic, fossil and process specific emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Inventory of available technologies
11
4.1
Carbon capture technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Transportation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.3
Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.4
Utilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.5
CCUS hubs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Scenarios overview
19
5.1
Scenario 0
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Scenario 1 and Scenario 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.3
Scenario 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.4
Scenario 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.5
Scenario 5
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.6
Scenario 6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.7
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6
Life cycle assessment study
24
6.1
Goal definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.2
Scope definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.3
Life cycle inventory analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.4
Life cycle impact assessment results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7
Discussion
52
8
Conclusions
56
9
Limitations
57
10 Recommendations
58
11 Future work
59
Bibliography
60
A Inventory of point source emissions
65
B Hubs details
70
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
vi
==PAGE:8==
C Data quality assessment
74
D Life cycle inventory details
76
E
Life cycle impact assessment further results
77
E.1 Single technologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
E.2 Big scale scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
F
Sensitivity and uncertainty analysis
103
F.1
Single technologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
F.2
Big scale scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
vii
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In recent years, the urgent need to fight against climate change has become increasingly clear.
Transitioning to a global economy with net­zero greenhouse gas emissions has emerged as
an essential goal in the global climate change discourse. This level of ambition is crucial, as
the planet continues to warm and the impacts of human activity on the climate system become
more pronounced. Without decisive action, the consequences of climate change will be se­
vere. Therefore, accelerating investment in various technologies aimed at achieving near­zero
emissions is imperative [1]
Particularly in Denmark, several parallel efforts are in progress aimed at mitigating CO2 levels
in the atmosphere and ensuring compliance with the Danish Climate Act. Efforts focus mainly
on energy efficiency and shifting away from fossil fuels towards renewable energy. But even
if the Danish targets in these areas are met, hard­to­abate sectors will not be able to reduce
their emissions to a sufficient degree [2]. It is in these cases, where it is currently either too
expensive or impossible to reduce emissions, that Carbon Capture, Utilization and Storage
(CCUS) is intended to play a role in Danish climate targets.
Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Storage involves capturing CO2 either directly from the atmo­
sphere or from large point sources, such as power generation or industrial facilities. Once the
CO2 is captured, if not used on­site, it can be transported to be used elsewhere in a range of
applications, or injected into deep geological formations for permanent CO2 storage. Figure 1.1
shows an overview of the CCUS context.
Carbon capture has been identified by the International Energy Agency as an integral part of
a least­cost portfolio of technologies needed to support the transformation of power systems
globally. They are particularly relevant in countries where fossil­based power generation will
likely maintain an important role, due to existing infrastructure or plenty available domestic re­
sources. At the other hand, other options may be constrained, for example, where renewable
energy potential is limited due to poor solar radiation or wind potential, or limited land availability
[3].
Figure 1.1: Overview of the CCUS context, from State of green [4].
In the Danish Context, it is key to remark that Denmark’s plans concerning the use of CCS/CCU
technology, established at the Danish Climate Agreement for Energy and Industry of 22 June
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
1
==PAGE:10==
2020, do not mean reduced ambitions in relation to the green transition. These technologies will
only be applied to CO2­sources where it makes sense ­ both for the climate and economically
[2].
Following this narrative, this Master thesis will explore future potential scenarios for CO2 cap­
ture and storage/capture and utilization in Denmark. This will be done by first constructing an
inventory of CO2 emissions from point sources for the whole country, based on literature re­
view. This inventory will help in understanding current and future CO2 emissions trough point
sources, where are they located and how much do they account in relation to Denmark’s total
CO2 profile. Moreover, main contributing sectors can be identified.
The inventory of CO2 emissions from point sources will be followed by a review and analysis of
the available technologies to capture, transport, use and storage the CO2 emitted in Denmark.
Furthermore, links between the available technologies and the previous identified point sources
will be explored, considering the nature of the emissions and technological restrictions, with the
aim of constructing potential scenarios that oversee future possibilities for a CCUS context.
Once the potential scenarios have been constructed, their environmental performance will be
quantitatively analyzed trough a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). Life cycle assessment is a tool
that evaluates the environmental impact of a product or service. LCA is particularly relevant from
a sustainability perspective, since it covers the entire life cycle, avoiding that local improvements
only result in shifting the environmental impact elsewhere [5].
Future scenario analysis is also an established management­engineering method for exploring
future situations in corporate strategy, political transition and natural resource management
and today it is experimenting a renewed popularity. Future scenario analysis combined with
LCA is gaining attention as a powerful tool to provide early sustainability assessments of novel
products, technologies and systems [6].
The Life Cycle Assessment performed in this Master thesis aims at helping to identify the pri­
mary environmental hotspots associated with potential scenarios for a CCS/CCCU context in
Denmark, as well as strategies to address them effectively. Furthermore, the outcomes of the
LCA will be tested with sensitivity analysis. Ultimately, the study’s findings could serve as a
guiding light for the development of CCU/CCS projects in Denmark, offering a perspective on
the future of these technologies in the country.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
2
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature review
The growing concern over climate change has driven research and development of many dif­
ferent technologies aimed at reducing CO2 atmospheric levels. Carbon capture and storage
and carbon capture and utilization are some of the technologies that can help in the transition
towards a more sustainable world and numerous studies have already been carried in relation
to these technologies, focusing on addressing specifically the different issues of the processes
and technologies or on the economic feasibility [7].
Just to outline a few examples, Vandeweijer et al. [8] explored the technology readiness of differ­
ent critical elements for developing a low­cost, early­warning CCS site monitoring system, a key
part of CCS projects. Zhao et al. [9] reviewed various existing storage technologies, compar­
ing their advantages, disadvantages, and development stages. Moreover, there are numerous
ongoing research projects, addressing different aspects of CO2 storage, such as monitoring
fugitive emissions or adapting existing infrastructure for CO2 storage in current reservoirs [10].
There are also many studies exploring different CO2 utilization technologies, to produce fu­
els, for example Wang et al. [11] explored superior catalysts to boost CO2 hydrogenation to
methanol, and chemicals, like Moreno et al. [12], that studied the electrochemical CO2 conver­
sion to formic acid using engineered enzymatic catalysts [12] or Grignard et al. [13], that focused
on the advances in the use of CO2 for the synthesis of polymers. Furthermore, there are many
ongoing pilot projects related to CO2 utilization, for instance, for the production of future sus­
tainable food or developing the microorganism potential to produce different compounds trough
CO2 [10].
LCA methodology has also been widely incorporated in the evaluation and research of CCS
and CCU technologies. It provides a holistic assessment of the environmental impacts of these
technologies from cradle to grave and helps in the early identification of environmental hotspots
that can be improved with further research.
To name some examples, Bodenan et al. [14] evaluated the environmental performance of
mineral carbonation for CO2 storage trough LCA, and Bacatelo et al. [15] provided a life cy­
cle assessment of synthetic natural gas production from captured cement’s CO2 and green H2.
There are numerous papers performing a LCA on the production of CO2 derived methanol. For
example, Cordero et al. [16] combined an in­depth kinetic analysis of one of the most promis­
ing recently reported methanol­synthesis catalysts, trough a process simulation and techno­
economic assessment, with a life cycle assessment and Khojasteh et al. [17] compared trough
a life cycle assessment various methanol production processes, including the conventional nat­
ural gas reforming process. Hoppe et al. [18] evaluated the production of polyoxymethylene,
polyethylene, and polypropylene using CO2 as feedstock trough LCA. And Uddin et al. [19]
perfomed a techno­economic and greenhouse gas emission analysis of a new route to produce
dimethylether trough waste CO2.
There is extensive research on CCU and CCS technologies and their environmental impacts.
However, there is a lack of research on the environmental impacts of deploying CCU and CCS
technologies at a national scale, taking into account annual emissions and the integration of
multiple technologies.
Research often examines individual CCU or CCS technologies in isolation. However studies
that assess the combined impact of multiple technologies, including their interactions and cu­
mulative effects, are needed to provide a comprehensive understanding of their potential.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
3
==PAGE:12==
To fill this research gap, this study addresses four research questions:
1. What sectors with point source CO2 emissions have the potential to play an important role
in a CCUS context in Denmark?
2. Where are the point source CO2 emissions from the different sectors located? How much
do they emit? Which of the identified sectors is contributing the most? How these CO2
emissions from the different identified sectors are expected to change towards the future?
3. What could be the most relevant CO2 fates in a Danish CCUS context? What could be the
demand for different potential CO2 based products in Denmark? How is the environmental
performance of the identified technologies?
4. What could potential big scale CCUS scenarios look like? And how is the environmental
performance of those scenarios? Which would be the environmental hotspots of the potential
big scale scenarios?
This study focuses on the potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and
utilization in Denmark, therefore the first two research questions aim to provide a comprehensive
understanding of the current CO2 emissions in the country and project how these emissions
might evolve in the future
The last two research questions focus on identifying relevant carbon capture and storage and
carbon capture and utilization technologies within the Danish context, as well as in identifying
potential big scale scenarios and evaluating their environmental performance.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
4
==PAGE:13==
3
Inventory of carbon dioxide emissions
Global carbon dioxide emissions were estimated to a total of 37.15 billion tonnes (GtCO2) in
2022 and they are projected to have risen 1.1% in 2023 to reach a record high of 37.55 GtCO2
[20].
The European Union (EU) is the fourth biggest emitter in the world, behind China, the United
States and India, and followed by Russia and Brazil [21]. In 2021, the EU produced 3 billion
tonnes, which represented around 8% of worldwide CO2­emissions. Of these, some 2.4 billion
tonnes served final demand (consumption) within the EU, and some 0.6 billion tonnes served
consumption in the rest of the world e.g. through exports out of the EU. The EU’s consumption
(final demand of goods and services) caused 3.5 billion tonnes of global CO2­emissions, which
is about 9% of worldwide emissions. Of these, some 1.1 billion tonnes originated from non­EU
countries e.g. through imports into the EU [22].
In Denmark emissions were estimated to be around 27.7 million tonnes of carbon dioxide in
2022, a slight decrease in comparison to the previous year [23].
To determine the most effective ways to reduce emissions and identify which emissions can and
cannot be eliminated, it is key to first understand where emissions come from. As depicted in
Figure 3.1, energy was responsible for 77.01% of greenhouse gas emissions in 2019 in the EU,
which includes transport. Greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture contributed with 10.55%,
industrial processes and product use with 9.10% and waste management accounted for 3.32%.
Figure 3.1:
Greenhouse
gases in the EU by sectors
in 2019, all sectors exclud­
ing
land­use
change
and
forestry
(Percentages
do
not add up to 100% due
to
rounded
figure
used,
extracted from [24])
Currently, the process of capturing the CO2 from an exhaust gas is only commercially available
and technologically mature for stationary sources [25]. Moreover, the concentration of CO2
plays a very important role, as the work required for the separation decreases when the CO2
concentration increases [26]. Taking these factors into consideration, emissions from trans­
portation, included in the energy sector, agriculture and product use are going to be disregarded
in this study, to focus the analysis on CO2 emissions from stationary point sources, with an ad­
dressable concentration to capture the CO2. Therefore, there are four sectors that arise with
great potential for a Danish CCU/CCS context; the waste incineration sector, the biogas indus­
try, industry processes and the electricity and district heating sector.
Municipal solid waste incineration (MSWI) is an important waste management technology in
Denmark, accounting for around 25% of the waste treatment in the country. Energy recovery
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
5
==PAGE:14==
from the combustion process covers around 6% of the Danish electricity supply and 24% of
the Danish heat supply [27]. However, due to the fossil carbon present in the residual MSW,
incineration plants are net fossil CO2 emitters, therefore, amending existing MSWI with carbon
capture can be a solution to this challenge.
The biogas industry is rapidly increasing in Denmark, and during the upgrading process, methane
is separated from the CO2 to be injected in the grid. Once the CO2 is captured, it can also be
potentially used or storage.
In the industry sector, there are several cases in which emissions are generated from the pro­
duction processes themselves, like in the cement production or in the iron and steel manufac­
turing, and in many of these cases, there are still no alternatives to the materials created from
these processes. Industry also produces emissions due to combustion of fuels to generate
mainly heat. Therefore these emissions could be potentially addressed with CCU/CCS.
In Denmark, there are many facilities using different technologies to generate electricity and
heat, in which the use of different fuels is included. Although, the use of fossil fuels, such as
coal, oil and natural gas, is expected to be phased out, the use of biomass as a source of energy
also emits CO2 when burned. Therefore these emissions could be again potentially addressed
with CCU/CCS.
3.1
Emissions by sectors
Based on the four presented sectors and on the work done by the Danish Energy Agency (DEA)
[28], an inventory of CO2 point sources was created, including estimated emissions of each of
the identified locations, for the present (year 2024) and for the future (year 2040). In both cases,
present and future, a map with CO2 point sources presented by the DEA [29] was used as basis
and a cut­off criterion of 25,000 tonnes of CO2 emissions per year was applied. However, for the
biogas industry, all the existing biomethane upgrading plants, regardless of yearly emissions,
were included in the analysis, as they are already separating the CO2 for biomethane to be
injected into the grid. Further discussion on the cut­off criterion is presented in Appendix A.
For estimating the present emissions of the waste incineration facilities, the treatment capacities
(tonnes waste/year) were taken from the Confederation of European Waste­to­Energy plants
[30], and it was considered that 1 tonne of incinerated waste produces close to 1 tonne of CO2
[31]. In the case of the biogas industry, the production capacity of each plant was taken [32],
together with volumetric percentage of CO2 in a typical biogas mixture (55% CH4, 45% CO2)
and the density of CO2 [33], to estimate the current emissions. For the present emissions of
industry processes and of electricity and district heating producing facilities, estimations were
taken from [34] when available, else, the high end value of the ranges presented by the DEA in
[29] for year 2040 were used.
For estimations of 2040 year emissions for all the sectors, averages from the ranges presented
by the DEA on [29] were taken.
The detailed inventory, including each point source, with its location and estimated emissions
for 2024 and for 2040 is presented in Appendix A. Moreover, a map was created, for a better
understanding of the geographical distribution of point sources, which is displayed in Figure 3.2.
It can also be accessed trough Google Earth.
Figure 3.2 shows that overall, the biggest emitters are mainly situated close to urban areas, like
Copenhagen or Aarhus, or to industrial sites, like Kalundborg and Fredericia. It can also be
observed that biogas plants are located all over the country, but with bigger presence in North
Jutland.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
6
==PAGE:15==
By summing up all the emissions corresponding to each of the sectors, Figure 3.3 was con­
structed. In this Figure 3.3 the overall estimated yearly emissions divided by sectors is pre­
sented, for year 2024 and for year 2040.
Figure 3.2: Map with the location of CO2 point source emitters.
Figure 3.3: Estimation of CO2 emissions from point sources in DK divided by sector for year
2024 and year 2040.
As depicted in Figure 3.3, for year 2024 overall CO2 estimated emissions trough point sources
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
7
==PAGE:16==
account up to 16.19 million tonnes/year, while for year 2040, estimations account for 10.99
million tonnes/year. These numbers are smaller than the estimations presented by the Danish
Energy Agency [28], which account for approx. 24 million tonnes/year in 2025, falling to approx.
15 million tonnes/year in 2040. However both estimations are in the same order of magnitude
and differences could be explained due to the fact that in the report of the DEA estimations
account for total emissions trough point sources, while in this analysis a cutt­off criterion of a
minimum of 25 ktonne/year was used (except for the biogas upgrading sector).
If we take into account total Denmark CO2 emissions presented at the beginning of this sec­
tion, 27.7 million tonnes of CO2/year (in 2022), the obtained 16.19 million tonnes/year of CO2
emissions trough point sources represent around 60% of the total DK CO2 profile.
Currently, the electricity and district heating is the main contributing sector, with around 43% of
the emissions, followed by the industry sector, with 30% of the emissions. In the industry sector,
there are three big emitters accounting for almost 80% of the emissions, the cement production
plant in Aalborg and the refineries in Kalundborg and Fredericia. After these emitters, there are
a number of small emitters that fall mainly in the food and beverage sector, but also in the bricks,
glass and construction materials industry, chemicals production, steel production or paper and
pulp industry. Following the industry sector in the present emissions is the waste sector, with
22% of the emissions, and lastly the biogas sector, with 4% of the emissions.
Figure 3.3 shows that the waste incineration sector is estimated to maintain a similar level of
emissions in 2040. This could be explained by the fact that although action is being taken
to increase sorting efficiencies in waste management systems, growing consumption patterns
also mean increasing waste production. Moreover, the biogas sector is estimated to increase its
emissions to more than the double, a fact that aligns with the increase of the biogas production
in Denmark in the last years.
On the other hand, it is estimated that the main decrease, almost a 60% reduction, occurs in the
industry sector, mainly due to ongoing work on the implementation of renewable energies and
the optimization of the processes. The electricity and district heating sector is also estimated
to experiment a major decrease, close to 50% reduction, due to some plants being stopped
towards 2040, while other plants are expected to have their operating time reduced, as a result
of renewable energies expansion [28].
3.2
Biogenic, fossil and process specific emissions
Another important fact to consider in this analysis is the type of CO2 being emitted. Depending
on its origin, CO2 can be classified as fossil CO2, when it comes from the combustion of fossil
carbon, biogenic CO2, coming from biomass related process, or process specific CO2, in these
cases the CO2 comes, for example, from specific chemical reactions taking place in a production
process.
It is important to make this distinction because the CO2 emitted from biomass related processes
has a “neutral” effect on climate change, as it belongs to the biogenic carbon cycle, meaning
that it used to be in the atmosphere before being taken up by the biomass resource and that it
will be taken up by new biomass again [35]. By contrast, CO2 emitted from the combustion of
fossil carbon originates in carbon that belongs to the much slower geological carbon cycle and
can be considered as effectively isolated from the atmosphere, because it would have stayed
in the ground for millions of years, had it not been extracted to be used as fuel or in other fossil
based products [35].
For this analysis the percentages of CO2 types presented in Table 3.1 were used.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
8
==PAGE:17==
For the waste sector, percentages were based on the waste composition of typical waste man­
agement schemes in Denmark [31]. These base percentages were slightly modified for year
2040, as it is expected that in the future a higher rate of C fossil will be collected in the recyclable
fractions.
For the industry, an estimation of the percentages was made analyzing the processes tak­
ing place at the different identified point sources. For the year 2040, these percentages were
adjusted to reflect an increase in biogenic CO2 emissions, attributed to an expected rise in
bioprocesses and the use of biobased materials and shifting away from fossil fuels.
For the electricity and district heating sector, an estimation was made after analyzing the used
fuels in the identified generating plants. Most of them run on solid biomass, some on natural gas
and only a minority is still reliant on coal.The Danish government has a clear goal of phasing
out coal from the electricity supply by 2030 [36]. Therefore, it has been estimated that the CO2
emissions of this sector will be 100% biogenic by 2040, due to the established use of solid
biomass and the increasing biogas being injected in the national gas pipeline.
The Fortum Waste line in Table 3.1, corresponds to a waste to energy facility located in Nyborg
treating hazardous waste, therefore not following the typical composition of waste. The percent­
ages were estimated based on the type of materials they treat [37] and some small changes
were estimated for year 2040.
Table 3.1: Fossil, biogenic and process CO2 % of each of the considered sectors.
Year
2024
2040
Sector
%Biogenic
%Fossil
%Process
%Biogenic
%Fossil
%Process
Waste
61
39
0
75
25
0
Biogas
100
0
0
100
0
0
Industry
15
50
35
25
40
35
El and district heating
90
10
0
100
0
0
Fortum waste
20
80
0
30
70
0
Taking the presented percentages into account and the constructed inventory, an overview of
the total fossil, biogenic and process specific emissions for year 2024 and year 2040 was obtain,
which is displayed in Figure 3.4.
In present emissions, biogenic CO2 accounts for around 61% of the emissions, while fossil CO2
accounts for 28% and process specific CO2 for around 11% of the emissions. As Figure 3.4
shows, biogenic CO2 emissions are estimated to be maintained at a similar level in year 2040,
while fossil and process CO2 emissions are expected to decrease, representing together less
than 25% of the estimated emissions trough point sources for year 2040. Moreover, a map was
constructed, to also display the geographical distribution of point sources accounting for the
type of CO2 being emitted. The constructed map is shown in Figure 3.5.
In the map in Figure 3.5, the size of the dots represents the amount of CO2 being emitted in
each location, the green represents the biogenic CO2 while the black represents the fossil CO2.
From this point of the study, and after reviewing the processes taking place at the identified
industry facilities, the process specific CO2 is considered as fossil CO2. This is explained by
the fact that in most of the processes, the CO2 being delivered to the atmosphere was not before
part of the biogenic carbon cycle.
In Figure 3.5, no distinction is made between sectors, for reference to each point source corre­
sponding sector, see map on Figure 3.2.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.4: Estimation of CO2 emissions from point sources in DK divided by type for year 2024
and year 2040.
Figure 3.5: Map with the location of CO2 point source emitters with type of CO2.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
10
==PAGE:19==
4
Inventory of available technologies
This chapter provides an overview of the technologies currently employed, under development
or future technologies for the capture, transportation, storage, and utilization of the CO2 emitted
trough point sources in Denmark.
The overview of the technologies for the entire value chain is key for understanding how the
identified emissions can be addressed and for tracking technological restrictions, so that later
future potential scenarios can be constructed rooted in scientific principles. It is important to
note that the inventory presented here is not intended to be exhaustive or detailed, rather, it
aims to provide an idea of some of the available technologies.
4.1
Carbon capture technologies
Carbon capture technologies encompass a range of methods designed to capture CO2 from a
gas mixture. The focus in this inventory is on capture technologies for stationary point sources,
however there are also existing technologies for direct air CO2 capture.
Absorption with amine­based solvents stands out as the most established and extensively
demonstrated method for capturing CO2 available today. This approach involves the removal of
CO2 from flue gas using an amine solvent, followed by the thermal regeneration of the solvent
to produce a purified CO2 stream [38]. An ofen­used solvent is monoethanolamine (MEA). MEA
is relatively cheap and with high CO2 absorption capacity, but it is also toxic and corrosive at
elevated temperatures. Moreover, its strong binding with CO2 makes the regeneration energy
intensive. Therefore finding alternative absorbents is an active area of research [39].
Ammmonia stands as an alternative solvent, since it does not form any toxic degradation or
corrosive products. However, the full potential of ammonia based carbon capture has never
been realized because of the formation of solid particles that lower the concentration to non
optimal operating conditions [39].
Ionic liquids (ILs) are also interesting, since they are highly tunable. An important requirement
for any novel material is that their production does not create another environmental problem.
For this it is important to carry out a life cycle assessment. The problem is that for novel materials
essential data are lacking. Recent studies show that for the current synthesis of most promising
ILs, the environmental impacts are worse than for MEA [39].
An alternative to liquid absorption is the utilization of solid adsorbents. The primary focus of
the scientific research is to discover novel materials capable of capturing CO2 more effectively.
However, from a process engineering point of view, solids are more difficult to handle than liq­
uids. For instance, liquids can be easily pumped, which makes it simple to develop a continuous
process with full heat integration [39]. Solid adsorption is typically conceptualized as a batch
process involving two beds of adsorbents: one bed operates in adsorption mode while the other
undergoes regeneration. Continuous operation with solids can be achieved by employing a flu­
idized bed or a simulated moving bed. Alternatively, one can create a slurry of solid particles
in a solvent, which can then be pumped [39]. Some of the absorbent materials that can be
potentially used are activated carbon, zeolite, silica gel or metal­organic frameworks.
An alternative for either solid adsorption or liquid absorption is to use membranes to separate
CO2. As a capture method, CO2­selective membranes are in the developmental phase and
have undergone pilot­scale testing with some success. The main challenge is the low partial
pressure of the CO2 in the flue gas, which makes it difficult to generate a proper driving force
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
11
==PAGE:20==
in the membrane [38]. This issue can be addressed by compressing the flue gas and/or main­
taining a high vacuum on the permeate side (CO2 side) of the membrane. But both methods
increase the electricity consumption. Moreover, as the membrane area required for separation
is inversely proportional to the driving force, there will always be trade­off between membrane
area and driving force. Additionally, membrane technology is susceptible to the presence of
dust and pollutants in the flue gas [38].
Another emerging technology is the formation of gas hydrates. Under high pressure and low
temperature conditions, the water molecules, form crystalline lattices. The gas hydrate crystals
are solid like ice and the CO2 is one of the gases that can form gas hydrate crystals [40]. The
challenging part of the technology is developing a method with a short hydrate induction time
and a high gas consumption rate with a high separation factor. Increasing pressure in the reactor
increases the gas consumption rate, but decreases the selectivity [40]. Moreover, the higher
pressure requirement increases the energy consumption [40]. It is a promising technology, but
it is still under development.
Cryogenic separation is another technique for separating CO2 at very low temperatures. Based
on variations in desublimation characteristics and boiling point temperatures of the components
in the gas mixture, the cryogenic process occurs. Prior to cooling, all components of the flue gas
except N2 and CO2 are removed. The remaining gas is transferred into a cryogenic chamber
where the pressure and temperature are adjusted to liquefy the CO2. It is a very established
technique in the chemical industry, however it is a very energy intensive process [40].
Once the CO2 has been captured by any of the presented capture technologies, the CO2 stream
typically requires further treatment/conditioning to remove water and trace gas impurities before
it can be transported or used, since most capture technologies will recover a concentrated CO2
stream at fairly low pressure and saturated with water vapour [38].
4.2
Transportation
Transport of CO2 is a key stage for linking the CO2 capture facilities (sources) with the uti­
lization/storage sites (sinks). The cost of transportation is much lower than the capturing and
conditioning costs, however transportation can be one of the most important stages in terms of
planning for CCS/CCU projects [40].
There are two commercial­scale transport categories: land and maritime, as seen in Figure 4.1.
Land CO2 transportation includes rail, tanker trucks, and pipeline networks, while marine trans­
portation comprises ships and pipelines, as shown in Figure 4.1 [40].
Selecting the most adequate transportation mode depends on the distance of transportation,
specifications and the amount of CO2 to be transported. In general, pipeline transportation is
the most cost­effective and reliable mode of transport. But for very large distance or large water
bodies, ship transport becomes more economical. Transport by rail or by tanker trucks is limited
to small scale and special applications [40].
For the pipeline transport, there are two distinct possibilities, transporting the CO2 in gas phase
or in dense phase. For gas phase transport a pressure below 40­50 bar has to be maintained,
while in the dense phase transport, carbon dioxide’s pressure is raised to 80­120 bar through
multi­stage compressors before injection into the pipeline system [41].
For transport by ship, trucks or by rail, CO2 is in liquid phase. Presently, medium­pressure CO2
transport, operating at approximately ­25/­30°C and 13­16 bar, represents the state of the art,
but efforts are ongoing investigating transport possibilities at low pressure (7­10 bar, ­50°C) and
at high pressure (40­50 bar, >0°C) [41].
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
12
==PAGE:21==
Figure 4.1: CO2 transport chain, adapted from [40].
In Denmark, there is an existing natural gas (NG) transmission and distribution network. The
potential reuse of this NG network for CO2 transport trough pipeline could be achieved at low
pressure conditions for CO2 transport in gaseous phase, due to the operational pressures of
the network. Although, it needs to be evaluated in greater detail [38].
Transport of CO2 by ship is as previously mentioned feasible for medium to long transport dis­
tances of medium to large amounts of CO2. Typically, a CO2 terminal with interim storage tanks
will be required at one or both ends. Today some projects are already exploring large­scale
CO2 transport employing ships and experience exists with ship transport of smaller volumes of
liquid CO2 for industrial consumers around Europe [38].
Today road transport of liquid CO2 by tanker truck is common from distribution hubs to industrial
consumers. Trailers with capacities up to 25­30 m³ liquid CO2 is typical. In the Danish context,
CO2 transportation by rail is not intended to play a significant role, since very few emission
sources are linked to the railroad network [38].
4.3
Storage
Storage of CO2 is a mature technology, which has been used for decades. It is estimated that
globally around 300 years of current emissions could be geologically stored. However, the
potential for storage is constrained by large costs and complex legal issues, such as liability for
potential leaks, as well as the jurisdictional complexities associated with underground property
ownership and use. Still, by 2030 storage potential could account for 200 million tonnes per
year of CO2 abatement [42].
There are different options for geological storage of CO2: offshore depleted oil or gas reservoirs
and onshore or near shore unused saline aquifers.
In terms of offshore or out of Denmark territory storage, there are some relevant storage projects
that are already being developed. For example, Northern Lights project, starting operation in
2024, will offer companies across Europe the opportunity to store their CO2 safely and perma­
nently deep under the seabed in Norway [43]. The CO2 will arrive on ship to a nearest port and
sent by pipeline to the storage site, which is an offshore saline aquifer 100 km off the cost of
Norway [43]. Phase one of the project will be completed mid­2024 with a capacity of up to 1.5
million tonnes of CO2 per year. The ambition is to expand capacity by an additional 3.5 million
tonnes to a total of 5 million tonnes [43]. The ability of Northern Lights to receive CO2 captured
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
13
==PAGE:22==
across Europe means that it can play an important role in meeting climate goals in the entire
region, including Denmark.
The Greensand project, located in the western part of the Danish North Sea, aims to storage
between 0.5 and 1.5 Mt of CO2 per year in the depleted reservoir of Nini Field by 2025, extending
to 8 Mt per year in all the Siri Area Fields by 2030 [10]. The CO2 will arrive to the offshore
installation by ship, avoiding the construction of new pipelines [38]. The Project Greensand is
currently in the pilot phase and the consortium consists of 23 Danish and international partners
who contribute with expertise from capture, transportation, storage, and monitoring of CO2 in
the subsoil [10].
Bifrost project aims to evaluate the transport and storage of CO2 til Harald Field location in the
Danish part of the North Sea [38]. The project has a starting storage capacity of 3 Mt per year,
with an ambition to qualify for storing up to 16 Mt per year [10]. Moreover, the project seeks to
demonstrate the reuse of existing North Sea infrastructure and the CO2 storage using depleted
gas fields, while using the exiting pipeline connected to the Danish shore, in order to a achieve
a future cost and climate effective transport system [38].
Acorn is a Scottish project, with strong support of the government. The CO2 storage is intended
to be in an offshore depleted oil reservoir, re­using the existing pipeline and platform. After the
project is initiated, there are plans for linking different CO2 supplies along the east cost, re­using
the existing pipeline infrastructure [38].
In terms of onshore and near shore CO2 storage in Danish territory, the National Geological
Survey of Denmark and Greenland (GEUS) estimates that the total storage potential in the
Danish subsoil is between 12 and 22 billion tonnes [2]. This is between 400­700 times greater
than Denmark’s total annual CO2 emissions at current levels [2]. There are many known suitable
sites around the country with a sealing layer of clay stone on top and CCS has also been
researched for several decades [44]. However, it is crucial that studies of the geology at specific
locations continue to be carried out, to be absolutely sure that the most suitable storage areas
are selected [44].
Figure 4.2 shows the location of the possible storage sites, explored (dark green), not yet ex­
plored (light green) and the gas and oil fields (orange), together with the location of some of the
most important point source emitters (red, orange and yellow dots) and a table with the storage
capacity of the sites.
The company Gas Storage Denmark is actively developing Denmark’s first onshore CO2 storage
facility in Stenlille, with an overall storage capacity of 51 Mt [45]. The company has over 30 years
of experience in storing natural gas and already has a fully established process plant. In 2025,
it is expected to enable storage of between 0.2 and 0.3 Mt of CO2 per year, extending to around
1 Mt/year by 2027 [45].
Havnso is a very large and promising structure, with a storage capacity of 926 Mt. Potential
CO2 sources are located in the Kalundborg area, requiring a 20 km pipeline to the injection site,
and Copenhagen area. The emissions from Copenhagen area could reach the site trough a
pipeline crossing Zealand or by ship to Kalundborg port [38].
The Vested structure, with a storage capacity of 162 Mt, is another structure ready for further
development. It could potentially serve as sink for the emissions of Aalborg area, requiring a
30 km pipeline, or Aarhus area, requiring approx. 100 km of pipeline [38].
Gassum structure (630 Mt), Voldum structure (288 Mt) and Paarup structure (91 Mt) could be
developed as storage options for central eastern Jutland. Transport could be trough pipeline or
by ship to a nearby port [38].
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
14
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.2: Map with the location of possible CO2 storage sites in DK, extracted from [46].
In relation to near shore storage sites, Hanstholm is a very large structure, 2753 Mt of capacity,
that could potentially be the sink for CO2 emissions of Aalborg area and Northern Jutland [38].
Røsnæs is another interesting structure, with a storage capacity of 227 Mt, located under the
Great Belt near Kalundborg . It could also serve as sink for CO2 sources located in the Kalund­
borg area, requiring a 10­15 km pipeline, or in the Copenhagen area [38].
4.4
Utilization
Carbon dioxide utilization (CO2U) technologies encompass the practical application of captured
CO2. The goal is to reduce or remove net CO2 emissions while simultaneously obtaining finan­
cial benefits [47].
Despite the potential to establish a market for waste CO2, not all carbon utilization technolo­
gies are equally effective [47]. For example, many CO2U methods involve temporary carbon
sequestration, where the CO2 utilized is eventually released into the atmosphere upon prod­
uct consumption. In contrast, some technologies allow for permanent CO2 storage. From an
economic perspective, numerous CO2U pathways prove to be significantly costlier than their
fossil­based counterparts due to high energy demands, low yields, or the necessity for expen­
sive feed stock such as green hydrogen or catalysts [47]. Therefore several considerations
should be taken into account to choose the most beneficial CO2U technologies.
In Figure 4.3, an overview of various possible CO2 applications is presented, including the
needed inputs, manufacturing pathways and final obtained products.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.3: Different utilization technologies for captured CO2, extracted from [47].
CO2 can be used directly in a range of processes and products. It is used in intensive horticul­
ture, such as greenhouses, to improve plant growth [48]. CO2 is also utilized in food preservation
by displacing oxygen from packages containing easily degradable items. Moreover, it is com­
monly added to beverages. CO2 serves as a coolant, as dry ice in specific purposes and as a
fire extinguishing gas [48].
CO2 can also be used for enhanced oil recovery to improve oil extraction from fields, however
it is important to remark that Denmark has inside its climate goals to shift away from fossil fuels
and to finally stop extracting oil and gas by end of 2050 [49].
CO2 can be used in the production of building materials to replace water in concrete, called CO2
curing, or as a raw material in its constituents. These applications involve the reaction of CO2
with calcium or magnesium to produce low­energy carbonate molecules, which are essential
constituents of concrete [50]. CO2­cured concrete stands out as one of the most mature and
promising applications of CO2 utilization, while integrating CO2 into the production of cement
itself is still in the early stages of development [50].
Construction aggregates can also be produced by reacting CO2 with waste materials from power
plants or industrial processes (iron slag and coal fly ash), which would otherwise be stockpiled
or stored in landfill. This could potentially make this option competitive, as it offsets the cost
associated with conventional waste disposal [50].
CO2 has also the potential to be used as raw material in the production of different chemicals
and fuels via chemical synthesis. Based on several technical, economical and environmen­
tal considerations; methanol, methane, dimethyl ether and formic acid are some of the most
common proposed chemicals to produce using CO2 as feedstock [48].
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
16
==PAGE:25==
Methane is produced from H2 and CO2 by the Sabatier reaction via heterogeneous catalysis,
usually involving nickel [48].
Methanol is also produced from H2 and CO2 by a catalytic process. Some of the CO2 is reduced
by H2 to CO, which is fed back to the reactor after methanol condensation and subsequently
reacts with H2 to form CH3OH [48].
DME is produced by dehydrating methanol over a solid acid catalyst and thus also from CO2
and H2 [48].
Formic acid (HCOOH) can be obtained from CO2 and H2 via an electrochemical or a catalytic
process, both of which are still under development. In the electrochemical process, CO2 and
H2O are fed to the cathode, where CO2 is reduced to HCOO−(formate) and H2O to OH−. At the
anode, H2O is split into O2 and H+. The products migrate through the membranes to a central
compartment, where they form formic acid and H2O [48]. For the catalytic process, technologies
differ according to the type of catalyst used [48].
CO2 can also be used to generate polymers. The advantages of polymers is that they can fix
carbon in a product for longer duration than other CO2U­based products. Unlike fuels, which are
combusted during usage, polymers are used as their end­product forms [51]. Also, after the end
of product life polymers may be recycled to reproduce polymers, which prevents re­emission
of CO2. Various economically viable CO2U­based polymers have been commercialized and
recent studies focus on developing new pathways for polymer precursors, to reduce energy
usage and to enhance profitability and carbon footprint of the products [51].
Using the natural ability of microorganisms to convert CO2 into chemicals and fuels also arises
as a potential utilization technique.
While some methods for biological conversion of CO2
into fuels and chemicals are well developed, others are in their infancy. Moreover, all exist­
ing and emerging approaches have technical challenges and limitations, as well as barriers to
commercial­scale implementation [52].
Despite the barriers, there are numerous opportunities for advancing biological utilization of
CO2 and ongoing research. For example, established methods using photosynthetic green al­
gae offer promise, with potential for optimization to enhance cost competitiveness and create
valuable products [52]. Cyanobacteria also represent a particularly promising platform for bio­
logical conversion, due to their efficient photosynthesis and genetic manipulability. However,
further research is required to improve their yields and scalability [52]. On the other hand,
non­photosynthetic biological carbon utilization systems offer versatility and scalability to gen­
erate a range of products, avoiding the use of high­cost carbohydrates. These systems allow
for continuous cultivation, enabling both photosynthetic and nonphotosynthetic CO2 fixation as
well as methane conversion. Additionally, bioelectrochemical systems also show potential, as
electricity can address the inherent inefficiencies of photosynthesis [52].
4.5
CCUS hubs
An important aspect to remark, in line with a CCS/CCU context in Denmark, is that the costs of
capturing, transporting, storing and using CO2 are always significant, and it is therefore essential
to focus on how they can be reduced [53].
As seen previously on Figure 3.2 some of the biggest emitters in the country are located near
the urban and industrial areas and many of the CO2 emitters are also close to each other.
This provides the opportunity to create common infrastructure for CCUS, whereby the total
costs can be reduced. By implementing shared infrastructure, Denmark can achieve its climate
goals more cost­effectively [53]. Managing risks, organization, and market dynamics of common
infrastructure remains uncertain and requires careful consideration [53], therefore the Danish
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
17
==PAGE:26==
Klima­, Energi­ og Forsyningsministeriet has already initially established cluster collaborations
and tasked them with investigating the possibilities, needs and costs for the establishment of a
CO2 infrastructure [54].
The established initial cluster collaborations are listed below, but this is subjected to the inclusion
of other major Danish cities in the future [54]:
• Copenhagen: C4
• Esbjerg: Business Esbjerg
• Fredericia: Business Fredericia
• Odense: Odense kommune
• Aalborg: Green Hub Denmark
• Aarhus: Kredsløb
The Copenhagen + Kalundborg hub could be one of the most important hubs, addressing the
emissions from the capital area. Main point sources from this hub account together for approx­
imately 4.81 Mt of CO2 per year in 2024 and 3.65 Mt of CO2 per year in 2040. Further details
on this and the other hubs can be seen in Appendix B.
In Copenhagen + Kalundborg hub, we can find Asnæsværket and Avedøreværke operated by
Ørsted, that has already planned to capture the emissions of both plants and export them to­
gether to Northern Lights storage site [41]. Inside this hub, HOFOR, operator of the power plant
Amagerværket, and ARC, operator of waste­to­energy plant Amager Bakke, are also investi­
gating possibilities for CCS [41].
The main point sources in Odense + Fredericia hub account for approximately 2.14 Mt of CO2
per year in 2024 and 1.35 Mt of CO2 per year in 2040. In relation to this hub, the Odense waste
incineration facility and the Fortum waste facility have planned a joint project to capture CO2
with later use/storage. Moreover, Fredericia port have expressed interest in CCS [41].
Aarhus also arises as a potential CCUS hub. In Aarhus hub, main point sources together ac­
count for approximately 2.01 Mt of CO2 per year in 2024 and 1.05 Mt of CO2 per year in 2040.
Aalborg also presents potential for the development of a CCUS hub. The main point sources
of this hub account for approximately 2.45 Mt of CO2 per year in 2024 and 0.99 Mt of CO2 per
year in 2040. Inside this hub, the Aalborg cement plant is found, one of the biggest emitters in
the country and that has several ongoing projects involving CCU/CCS. A CCS port terminal is
also expected to be finalized in 2026 in Aalborg port [41].
Finally, Esbjerg municipality also presents potential to become a hub. The main point sources
in this hub account for approximately 1.35 Mt of CO2 per year in 2024 and 0.38 Mt of CO2 per
year in 2040. The construction of a port terminal is expected to start in 2024 [41].
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
18
==PAGE:27==
5
Scenarios overview
In the following subsections a description of the identified future potential CCS and/or CCU
scenarios is presented.
Scenario 0 represents a baseline scenario in which all CO2 is emitted, while Scenarios 1 and
2 represent storage options, offshore and onshore/near shore respectively. Scenarios 3, 4, 5
and 6 represent a mix between storage and utilization technologies. As described in section 4.4
Utilization, there exist many different technologies trough which CO2 can be put into value by
being transform into different products. It would be extremely difficult to address the modelling
of all the existing processes and technologies, therefore the modelling was limited to a number
of CCU process that could be more relevant in the Danish context and that are represented
through Scenarios 3, 4, 5 and 6.
All the scenarios are modelled for both year 2024 and year 2040, adapting the level of emissions,
the CO2 fossil/bio mix of each sector and the energy system accordingly. Further details about
the modelling of the selected technologies and the scenarios are presented in section 6.3 Life
cycle inventory analysis.
5.1
Scenario 0
Scenario 0 is presented as a baseline scenario to compare the rest of the scenarios with. In this
scenario all the CO2 emissions of all the sectors are emitted, none of the CO2 being emitted
goes trough a capture process, neither to storage or to a transformation process to become a
new product. This Scenario covers the case in which nothing is done with the emissions.
5.2
Scenario 1 and Scenario 2
Scenario 1 and Scenario 2 represent two storage scenarios. Both in Scenario 1 and in Scenario
2 100% of the Danish CO2 emissions are stored underground, but in Scenario 1 the storage
takes places in an offshore storage site, while in Scenario 2 the storage takes place in an
onshore or near shore Danish subsoil storage site.
The technology for CO2 storage has existed for more than 40 years and has been deployed in
various locations worldwide since the 1970s [10]. The International Energy Agency (IEA) has
consistently highlighted CCS a critical part of the portfolio of technologies needed to achieve
climate goals [50]. The very significant emissions reductions needed to meet Paris Agreement
ambitions will only be achieved with the inclusion of CCS technologies [3], therefore the storage
of 100% of the Danish emissions arises as a potential scenario that would help in meeting
Denmark’s climate targets. Moreover, currently in Denmark there are 29 ongoing research
projects related to CO2 storage [10].
For Scenario 1, after being captured and liquefied, the CO2 is assumed to be transported by road
from point sources to the closest CO2 exporting port. For this purpose, and taking into account
the possible identified hubs, four ports were considered as CO2 exporting points: Aalborg Port,
Aarhus Port, Esbjerg Port and Kalundborg Port.
These ports were selected due to their declared interest in being part of a CCS infrastructure
and their availability of space [41], and their location is displayed in Figure 5.1. Copenhagen port
was not included in this study because it is already quite busy with passengers and cargo and is
limited due to its urban location [41]. Despite this, there are plans for CO2 infrastructure buildout
[41]. The inclusion or exclusion of Copenhagen harbour in this study only affects the average
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
19
==PAGE:28==
distances assumed for CO2 transport. However, when moving forward with the development of
CCS project, further analysis on Danish ports availability should be conducted.
After the road transport, the CO2 is assumed to be transport by ship to the storage site. Three
storage sites were selected for this study: Northern Lights, Bifrost project and Greensand
project, due to their convenient location in relation to Denmark.
Figure 5.1: Hypothetical selected ports for CO2 export.
Figure 5.2: Hypothetical CO2 pipeline with connecting points and some of the most relevant
onshore/near shore storage sites.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
20
==PAGE:29==
As already mentioned, the onshore storage of CO2 in the Danish subsoil is still in the research
stage and several investigations of the geology at different locations are being carried out, how­
ever Scenario 2 will represent in this study an hypothetical future case in which the onshore
storage is demonstrated to be safe and specific sites for onshore or near shore storage are
defined across the Danish geography.
For Scenario 2, it was assumed that an hypothetical CO2 pipeline is established for CO2 trans­
port, along with several connection points. These assumed connecting points were selected
based on the identified possible hubs, and they are displayed in Figure 5.2, together with an hy­
pothetical simple pipeline, that would connect the different hubs with some of the most relevant
onshore storage sites. Prior to the pipeline transport it was assumed that CO2 is transported by
road from capture points til connecting points.
5.3
Scenario 3
Scenario 3 focuses on the production of e­fuels, combining hydrogen production through Power­
to­X with captured CO2 as carbon source.
The Danish Energy Agency’s analyses have shown that direct electrification is the most cost­
effective and optimal way to use electricity generated from renewable sources when transi­
tioning transport and industry to fossil­free fuels [55]. However, electrifying certain types of
transport, such as long­distance flights, freight shipping, and parts of the heavy road transport
sector, will be challenging in the short term [55].
In these cases, Power­to­X combined with carbon capture can facilitate a transition to sustain­
able energy consumption. Therefore this study models the production of three different fuels:
methanol, methane, and kerosene using captured CO2 as feedstock. Methanol is suitable for
shipping and heavy­duty road transport, while kerosene can be used in long­distance aviation.
Methane was chosen as it can contribute to the replacement of Denmark’s natural gas con­
sumption, together with the production of biomethane.
In Scenario 3 part of the captured CO2 will be allocated to the production of kerosene, methanol,
and methane based on the projected demand for these e­fuels in Denmark. The remaining
captured CO2 will be stored offshore.
MissionGreenFuels, a partnership within the four missions established by the Danish govern­
ment for investment in mission­driven green initiatives, has outlined a Roadmap for Green Fuels
in Transport and Industry. According to this roadmap, by 2030, approximately 30% of Danish
aviation could be powered by sustainably produced jet fuel (kerosene), with this figure rising
to around 85% by 2050 [56]. For heavy­duty land transport, MissionGreenFuels estimates that
about 20% of energy requirements could be met by sustainable methanol by 2030. However,
this percentage is expected to decrease to nearly 0% by 2050 as most of the fleet transitions
to hydrogen or electricity in the long term [56]. In the case of shipping, sustainable methanol
could cover around 4% of the energy needs of the Danish fleet by 2030, increasing to 7% by
2050, as hydrogen and ammonia are projected to play a more significant role in the long term
[56].
For methane, the Danish Energy Agency estimates that upgraded biogas can cover almost the
entire demand of methane in Denmark in 2030 and in 2040, that rises up to around 40 PJ per
year [57]. It was assumed that around 25% of this upgraded biogas could be actually coming
from the methanation of CO2.
Scenario 3 is particularly relevant, as the transport sector is expected to account for 39% of
Denmark’s CO2 emissions by 2030, making it crucial for the country’s climate goals [58]. Con­
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
21
==PAGE:30==
sequently, Scenario 3 will be further examined through sub­scenarios that vary some of the key
assumptions.
In Scenario 3B, the amount of CO2 allocated to e­fuels production remains the same as in
Scenario 3. However, in this case, the remaining CO2 is emitted instead of being stored offshore.
This scenario reflects the possibility that, without sufficient incentives for capturing and storing,
the CO2 might not be stored effectively, as it does not present an economic incentive. Scenario
3C will examine the impacts of using CO2 emissions to meet the entire estimated aviation fuel
consumption in Denmark producing kerosene, while Scenario 3D will explore the impacts of
using CO2 emissions to cover the entire expected energy requirements of the heavy­duty land
transport and the shipping industries in Denmark producing methanol.
5.4
Scenario 4
Scenario 4 is a chemical focus scenario, in which part of the captured CO2 covers the expected
demand of formic acid and polypropylene in Denmark, while the rest of captured CO2 will be
stored offshore.
Formic acid (FA) was selected as it is a potentially CO2 derived product that is experimenting an
emerging interest. It is used in the textile industry, for cleaning and as a preservative, to name
a few. Formic acid demand may significantly rise due to the development of efficient catalysts
for formic acid dehydrogenation, which could have extensive applications within the hydrogen
economy. Given that formic acid has a high volumetric hydrogen density per liter, is low in
toxicity, and remains liquid at ambient conditions, it stands out as an ideal hydrogen storage
material for certain applications [12] [59].
Formic acid global market size is estimated to account for around 1300 ktonne in 2035 [60],
adapting this number to a Danish scale, a maximum market of around 5 ktonne per year of
formic acid could be expected in the near term future in Denmark.
Polypropylene (PP), together with polyethylene, accounts for over half of global plastics de­
mand. Due to their versatility and affordability, plastics have become widespread across vir­
tually every sector of society. The growth rate of plastic production has far exceeded that of
other bulk materials, and demand for plastics could quadruple by 2050. Currently, the plastics
industry is a significant contributor to climate change because their production is mainly based
on fossil fuels [61]. Plastics alone could account for 10­15% of the global cumulative fossil
carbon emissions by 2050 [61]. Thus, it is clear that substantial reductions in greenhouse gas
emissions are urgently needed in the feedstock and production stages of plastics, in which CO2
based polypropylene could be part of the solution, but also on recycling stages [61].
The Danish Ministry of Environment and Food in a Preliminary assessment of plastic material
flows in Denmark study, reported the import of 390 ktonne of polypropylene to Denmark in 2016,
and the export of 190 ktonne of polypropylene [62]. Therefore it has been estimated that Danish
polypropylene market could be around 200 ktonne per year.
5.5
Scenario 5
Scenario 5 focuses on the production of building materials using CO2 trough mineral carbon­
ation. Mineral carbonation involves the capture of CO2 in a mineral form by its reaction with
alkaline materials, to form solid carbonate products that can be used, as mentioned, in con­
struction activities. The alkaline materials for mineral carbonation can be naturally occurring
rocks and minerals, or residues from industrial processes, such as steel or cement manufactur­
ing [63].
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
22
==PAGE:31==
It has been decided to focus one of the potential Scenarios in the production of building materials
(BM) due to the relevance of this market at a worldwide level and the great climate change
mitigation potential of this utilization route, because of the permanent retention of carbon in
the product [50]. In relation to this, the International Energy Agency has stated that several
estimates have been made on the global amount of CO2 that could technically be absorbed by
building materials with waste streams, mostly in the range of 100 Mt/yr to 1 200 Mt/yr. Taking
a low end value from this range, the Danish market for building materials could be estimated to
absorb around 1.2 Mt/year of CO2
5.6
Scenario 6
Scenario 6 represents a mix of different utilization technologies, and it is constructed using
Scenarios 3, 4 and 5 as basis. In this Scenario part of the captured CO2 is used for covering the
demand of expected e­fuels in Denmark, just like in Scenario 3, as well as to cover the expected
demand of formic acid, polypropylene and building materials, as explained in Scenarios 4 and
5 respectively.The remaining captured CO2 is assumed to be stored in offshore storage sites.
5.7
Summary
Figure 5.3 presents a summary of the previous described scenarios for a clearer understanding.
The scenarios are described in more detail in subsection 6.3.2.
Figure 5.3: Summary of the presented scenarios.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
23
==PAGE:32==
6
Life cycle assessment study
This Life Cycle assessment study uses as guideline the International Reference Life Cycle Data
System (ILCD) Handbook, from the European Commission­Joint Research Centre­Institute for
Environment and Sustainability (EC­JRC), which follows LCA ISO standards and provides de­
tailed methodology descriptions [35].
6.1
Goal definition
This LCA study aims at comparing the environmental performance of different identified po­
tential scenarios for a big scale CCS/CCU context in Denmark, while pointing out the main
environmental hotspots of each of the options. The main reason for carrying out this study
is to support decisions, based on an environmental perspective, in the process of developing
CCS/CCU projects in Denmark.
The Environmental Footprint 3.1 life cycle impact assessment methodology with long term im­
pacts is going to be used, therefore it is important to remark that the study will be limited by this
method assumptions. This and other recommended methods by the ILCD Handbook currently
do not allow for consistent spatially explicit impact assessment [35]. Given that the study fo­
cuses on Denmark, those impacts which occur within this region may be subject to bias, since
global­generic characterisation factors are used.
Based on the ILCD Handbook, the decision context of this study is Situation B [35], as the
results are intended to support decisions and the scale of the system is such that some of the
decisions could cause structural changes in different processes inside the system.
The target audience of this study is all the possible stakeholders involved in the CCS/CCU
value chain, like national governments and regulators, technology providers, emitting industries,
environmental organizations or local communities.
6.2
Scope definition
This study will deliver a life cycle inventory and the corresponding life cycle impact assessment
results, as well as an interpretation of the results and conclusions, limitations and recommen­
dations.
The function of the identified scenarios is to address the CO2 being emitted in Denmark trough
point sources with carbon capture and storage and/or carbon capture and utilization. Taking
this function into account, the functional unit was defined to be the abatement with CCS and/or
CCU of 1 tonne of CO2 being emitted trough point sources in Denmark with a time scope of
2024­2040.
It is important to mention that this 1 tonne of CO2 being emitted trough point sources is com­
posed by the mix of the emissions of the sectors as estimated in section 3.1, accordingly the
composition of 1 tonne of CO2 being emitted trough point sources in Denmark is presented in
Table 6.1. Furthermore, this 1 tonne of CO2 being emitted trough point sources has 61% of
biogenic content and 39% of fossil content in 2024 and 78% of biogenic content and 22% of
fossil content in 2040.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
24
==PAGE:33==
Table 6.1: Composition of 1 tonne of CO2 being emitted trough point sources in Denmark.
Sector
Percentage 2024 (%)
Percentage 2040 (%)
Waste
22.3
33.9
Industry
30.4
19.0
El and distric heating
43.3
33.7
Biogas
4.0
13.4
As defined before, the decision context of this study is Situation B, so a consequential modeling
framework is followed, based on the ILCD Guidelines [35]. Accordingly, marginal processes
are used for the background processes, and multifunctionalities are modelled with system ex­
pansion.
The system boundaries include the energy and the materials needed for operating the different
technologies (capture, transportation, storage implications and utilization processes) as well
as the possible CO2 losses during these processes, in most cases also the recovered energy
and materials and the carbon utilization products and by­products. The system boundaries do
not include the facilities of the sectors (waste incineration plants, biogas production plants, co­
generation power plants and other industries production plants are not included nor the impacts
related to their operation) neither the infrastructure needed for operating the technologies, as
for example, the carbon capture absorption columns, pipeline, trucks for road transport or ships.
A simple schematic of the system boundaries is depicted in Figure 6.1
Figure 6.1: Simple schematic of system boundaries.
In terms of Life cycle Inventory (LCI) Data representativeness, when modelling CCS/CCU tech­
nologies latest available data on needed inputs and obtained performance was used, having in
mind the different readiness levels of the technologies. The geographical representativeness
of the LCI data was also taken into account, selecting Denmark or Europe for the modelled
process. Moreover, the temporal representativeness of the LCI Data was also considered. The
selected data should be representative for the time period (2024­2040), therefore latest avail­
able data was used. However since the LCA follows a future scenario approach, it has to be
taken into account that results are subjected to a high degree of uncertainty.
The assessment is carried out in EASETECH model (v 3.6) using the Environmental Footprint
3.1 life cycle impact assessment methodology with long term impacts.The following impact cate­
gories are included in the mentioned method: Climate change (kg CO2­Eq), Ozone depletion (kg
CFC­11­Eq), Human toxicity, cancer (CTUh), Human toxicity, non­carcinogenic (CTUh), Par­
ticulate matter (disease incidence), Ionising radiation (kg Bq U235­Eq), Photochemical ozone
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
25
==PAGE:34==
formation (kg NMVOC­Eq), Acidification (mol H+ Eq), Terrestrial eutrophication (mol N­Eq),
Freshwater eutrophication (kg P­Eq), Marine eutrophication (kg N­Eq), Freshwater ecotoxicity
(CTUe), Land use (dimensionless), Water use (m3 world Eq deprived), Resource use: mineral
and metals (kg Sb­Eq) and Resource use: energy carrier (MJ, net calorific value). However,
special focus is given to the Climate change impact category in this study, since the constructed
model is mainly a carbon based model, as the focus is on CO2 emissions.
The Ecoinvent database v 3.10 was used to model the different selected processes, using a
consequential approach. It is also important to have in mind that Climate change impacts are
quantified according to the following characterisation factors as describe in [48]: (i) 0 kg CO2
eq/kg CO2 for biogenic CO2 emissions; (ii) 1 kg CO2­eq/kg CO2 for fossil CO2 emissions; (iii)
­1 kg CO2­eq/kg CO2 for avoided emissions of biogenic CO2 and (iv) 0 kg CO2­eq/kg CO2 for
avoided emissions of fossil CO2. This approach is mathematically stringent and well­suited for
assessing the climate change impact category [48].
6.3
Life cycle inventory analysis
In this section, details on the modelling of the different technologies and scenarios are going
to be presented. All data used for the modelling was obtained trough literature review or from
public information of projects working with CCS/CCU.
The method developed by Weidema and Wesnæs was used as described in [64] to keep truck of
and to quantify the quality of the data. Further details on the data quality assessment procedure
are presented in Appendix C.
6.3.1
Technologies modelling
Capture
As presented in section 4.1 Carbon capture technologies, there are many technologies to cap­
ture the CO2 from a gas mixture. However many of them are still under development or there
is a limited experience in the big scale use of them.
Due to this, it has been decided to model the capture of the CO2 with one technology: the
absorption with monoethanolamine. The MEA technology was selected since there is a high
amount of available data at industrial scale application. Moreover, amine scrubbers are already
implemented in many of the Danish biogas upgrading facilities, meaning that the investment is
already made and most probably will not be changed.
The inventory used to model MEA technology is presented in Table 6.2. Moreover, it is estimated
that this technology can capture around 85­95% of the CO2 in the flue gas and that around 60%
of the used heat/steam could be potentially recovered to be used in district heating [31].
Table 6.2: Inventory of MEA technology, extracted from [48].
Input
Amount
Heat/Steam
3.70 GJ/ton CO2
Electricity
100.00 kWh/ton CO2
MEA
1.60 kg/ton CO2
NaOH
0.12 kg/ton CO2
Transport
Prior to transport, the CO2 should go under further treatment to meet the requirements to be
transported. The inventory of this further treatment is shown in Table 6.3.
To model the transport of CO2 by truck and by ship, the Ecoinvent processes shown in Table D.1
in Appendix D were selected, to address the temperature requirements for CO2 transport as
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
26
==PAGE:35==
liquid. Moreover, in the case of ship transport, electricity is also needed for the loading and
unloading. These inputs are collected in Table 6.4.
For modelling the transport of CO2 by pipeline, the only input taken into account was the elec­
tricity consumption due to pumping. As described in [38], this electricity is estimated to account
for 0.018 kWh/(ton CO2*km).
Table 6.3: Inventory for CO2 further treatment, as described in [38].
Inputs
Amount
Compression CO2 [Electricity]
70 kWh/ton CO2
Drying CO2 [Electricity]
2 kWh/ton CO2
Liquefaction CO2 [Electricity]
65 kWh/ton CO2
Overall electricity
137 kWh/ton CO2
Outputs
Amount
Heat output from Pre­Cooler
78 kWh/ton CO2
CO2 condenser heat remove
97 kWh/ton CO2
Heat output from liquefaction
170 kWh/ton CO2
Overall heat output
345 kWh/ton CO2
Table 6.4: Electricity needed for ship loading and unloading [40].
Input
Amount
Electricity for loading
0.2 kWh/ton CO2
Electricity for unloading
6.5 kWh/ton CO2
A crucial aspect to model the CO2 transportation are the distances between sources and sinks.
Based on the location of the point sources and the different selected ports, an average distance
of 80 km was assumed for modelling the road transport. After the road transport, the CO2
was assumed to be transport by ship to the storage site, therefore based on the location of the
selected storage sites and on the selected ports, an average ship transport distance of 600 km
was assumed.
For the onshore storage case, taking into account the location of the connecting points, an
average distance of 40 km was assumed for road transport between the CO2 sources and the
connecting points. Finally having in mind the location of some of the most relevant onshore stor­
age sites in Denmark (Havnso, Gassum, Valdum and Paarup, Vedsted and Thisted), displayed
in light orange in Figure 5.2, and the location of the connecting points, an average distance of
120 km was assumed to model CO2 pipeline transportation.
For the case of CO2 utilization technologies, it was assumed that production sites will be located
near the possible identified hubs. Therefore an average distance of 40 km was assumed to
model the road transport between the capture and the utilization points.
Table 6.5 summarizes all the average distances used for modelling the CO2 transportation.
Another important aspect to take into account in the modelling of transportation are the CO2
losses during transport. Based on IPCC suggestions, the losses shown in Table 6.6 were con­
sidered in this study.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
27
==PAGE:36==
Table 6.5: Average distances assumed for the modelling of CO2 transportation.
Average distance (km)
Transport by road to closest port
80
Transport to offshore storage by ship
600
Transport by road to pipeline connecting point
40
Transport by pipeline to onshore storage
120
Transport to CO2U facilities
40
Table 6.6: CO2 losses during transportation.
Transport
% CO2 lost
Source
Pipeline
1.0 (per 1000 km)
[27]
Ship
2.5
[27]
Road
3.0
Own estimation based on two previous ones
Storage
For modelling the storage of CO2, main consumptions are those related with the injection pro­
cess. The inventory of the injection process is shown in Table 6.7. It was decided to assume
that it will not be possible to reuse the waste heat coming from the injection process, as the stor­
age locations, both offshore and onshore, will not be close enough to be properly connected to
district heating networks.
Table 6.7: Inventory of injection process for CO2 storage.
Inputs
Amount
Electricity use injection
90 kWh/ton CO2
Electricity use reliquefaction
44 kWh/ton CO2
Heat use offshore injection
396 MJ/ton CO2
Outputs
Amount
Cooling (waste heat)
299 MJ/ton CO2
Utilization
The production of methanol and methane were modelled as catalytic processes as described
in [48] and the inventory is shown in Table 6.8.
The inventory data for the methanol production from [48] was compared with similar studies,
and it was found that a higher electricity demand was reported. Cordero­Lanzac et al. [16],
reported an electricity consumption of 279 kWh/ton of methanol, while Khojasteh­Salkuyeh et
al. [17] reported 350 kWh/ton of methanol and Pérez­Fortes et al. [65] reported around 169
kWh/ton of methanol. Therefore it was decided to take an average of these three values for the
modelling of methanol production.
The inventory of the methane production process from [48] was also compared with similar
studies and a slightly higher electricity consumption was found. Therefore, in the inventory pre­
sented in Table 6.8, the electricity consumption for the methane production process represents
the data presented by Bacatelo et al. [15]
Moreover, it was estimated that 60% of the heat coming out of both the methanol and the
methane production processes is made available for use in district heating [48].
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
28
==PAGE:37==
Table 6.8: Inventory for methanol, methane and formic acid production.
Technology
Inputs
Outputs
Methanol production
CO2: 1450 kg/ton methanol
Reusable water: 570 kg/ton methanol
H2: 190 kg/ton methanol
CO2 lost: 75 kg/ton methanol
Electricity: 266 kWh/ton methanol
Heat/Steam: 1.4 GJ/ton methanol
Methane production
CO2: 3000 kg/ton methane
Reusable water: 2500 kg/ton methane
H2: 500 kg/ton methane
CO2 lost: 250 kg/ton methane
Electricity: 107 kWh/ton methane
Heat/Steam: 9 GJ/ton methane
As described in the inventory in Table 6.8, hydrogen is needed in the production of methane
and methanol. Hydrogen production was modelled using the alkaline electrolysis technology as
described in [48] and the inventory is shown in Table D.2 in Appendix D.
In the hydrogen case, based on the results of a case study [66], it was estimated that around 80%
of the heat coming out of the production process can be made available for district heating. It is
also important to remark that the oxygen substitution on the market with the oxygen produced
as byproduct was not consider in the modelling, as it was beyond the scope of this study to
evaluate whether there will be a proper market for the oxygen produced in large volumes during
the electrolysis processes and how the market could look like.The effect of this modelling choice
on the scenarios results will be checked later with a sensitivity analysis.
Kerosene production was modelled according to [67], with the inventory described in Table 6.9.
Again, the inventory shown in Table D.2 was used to model the hydrogen production needed for
kerosene synthesis. Following the approach taken for the methanol and methane production,
it was assumed that around 60% of the output heat can be made available for district heating.
Table 6.9: Inventory for kerosene production.
Inputs
Amount
CO2
4.96 kg/kg kerosene
Hydrogen
1.05 kg/kg kerosene
Electricity
2.49 kWh/kg kerosene
Outputs
Amount
CO2 lost
0.29 kg/kg kerosene
Heat
14.21 MJ/kg kerosene
Water
1.63 kg/kg kerosene
In this study, the production of formic acid was modelled as the electrochemical process de­
scribed in [48] and the inventory is shown in Table 6.10. This inventory was compared with the
data presented in other studies and similar values were reported by Aldaco et al. [68] and Kang
et al. [69]. It was also assumed that the hydrogen produced as byproduct during the production
process enters the market, as it is a market already experimenting high momentum and there
are different ongoing initiatives under the Danish PtX agreement of 15 March 2022 related to
hydrogen, like exploring the opportunity to establish and operate an hydrogen infrastructure in
Denmark [70].
Another CO2 utilization route modelled in this study is the production of polypropylene. In this
study polypropylene production was modelled using the methanol­to­olefins (MTO) technology
as described in [61] and the inventory is displayed in Table 6.11 for the polypropylene production
(PP) and in Table 6.12 for the propylene production (P). The methanol production needed for
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
29
==PAGE:38==
the production of propylene was modelled as previously described, as well as the hydrogen
needed for it.
Table 6.10: Inventory for formic acid production.
Technology
Inputs
Outputs
Formic acid production
CO2: 1000 kg/ton formic acid
Reusable water: 180 kg/ton formic acid
Water: 1410 kg/ton formic acid
H2: 92 kg/ton formic acid
Electricity: 12000 kWh/ton formic acid
O2: 1090 kg/ton formic acid
Steam/heat: 20 GJ/ton formic acid
CO2 lost:40 kg/ton formic acid
Table 6.11: Inventory for polypropylene production.
Inputs
Amount
Propylene
1.02 kg/kg PP
Water
3.60 kg/kg PP
Heat
0.84 MJ/kg PP
Electricity
1.27 MJ/kg PP
Table 6.12: Inventory for propylene production.
Inputs
Amount
Methanol
1.96 kg/kg P
Water
9.39 kg/kg P
Heat
7.39 MJ/kg P
Electricity
0.90 MJ/kg P
Outputs
Amount
Wastewater
1.39 kg/kg P
In this study, the inventory described by Di Maria et al. [63] was taken to model the production of
carbonated blocks from captured CO2 to substitute traditional PC­based concrete blocks avail­
able in the market. The inventory for the carbonated blocks production process is displayed in
Table 6.13, however this inventory described by Di Maria et al. does not include the require­
ments for the pretreatment of the sludge, neither the accounting of the impurities of the sludge.
Therefore some amendments were included in this inventory according to the pretreatment re­
quirements described by Ostovari et al [71].
Table 6.13: Inventory for carbonated blocks production.
Inputs
Amount
Sludge from stainless steel
44.2 kg
Heat
20.9 MJ
Water
9.8 kg
Electricity for mixing
2.5 kWh
Sand
44.2 kg
Electricity for curing
0.2 kWh
CO2
8.5 kg
Outputs
Amount
Waste water
7.9 kg
Carbonated blocks
92 kg
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
30
==PAGE:39==
Table D.3 in Appendix D displays the inventory for the production of the PC based concrete
traditional blocks that the carbonated blocks substitute.
Energy system considerations
As it can be seen trough the presented inventory, the energy system (ES) is closely related to all
the different technologies, as energy is used by almost all the processes and some of them also
have the potential to recover part of the used energy as heat so that it can be made available
for district heating. Thus it is important to properly model the market for electricity and heat.
In this study two energy systems were set, the first one to represent the heat and electricity mar­
ket when modelling present scenarios (in this case the 2024 emissions, the 2024 CO2 fossil/bio
mix and the ES1 are taken) and the second one to represent the heat and electricity market
when modelling future scenarios (in this case the 2040 emissions, the 2040 CO2 fossil/bio mix
and the ES2 are taken).
After reviewing different market mixes for electricity and heat in Ecoinvent, it was concluded that
the processes shown in Table 6.14 and Table 6.15 were the most suited to model both electricity
and heat in a current (ES1) and in a future (ES2) energy system.
Germany’s market for electricity was selected for modelling the electricity in ES1 since its re­
ported climate change potential (0.145 kg CO2 eq/kWh) nearly matches with the CO2 emissions
per kWh electricity reported by Energinet [72]. While Denmark’s market for electricity was se­
lected to model the electricity in ES2 as the climate change potential is lower than the previous
one (0.0353 kg CO2 eq/kWh), fitting well a future electricity market and the technologies inside
this Ecoinvent process are also fitted for a future scenario. Heat pumps were selected to model
the heat market in ES2 as in the Danish Climate Action Plan from 2020 one of the strategies for
reducing the CO2 emissions is to convert oil and gas boilers to heat pumps, making this tech­
nology the one with greater expected increase [73]. It must be remarked that an amendment
was made to this Ecoinvent process, substituting the input of the already established electricity
source by the electricity defined in ES2.
Table 6.14: Energy system 1 modelling details.
Energy System 1
Electricity
market for electricity, high voltage­DE
Heat
market for heat, district or industrial, other than natural gas­ Europe without Switzerland
Table 6.15: Energy system 2 modelling details.
Energy System 2
Electricity
market for electricity, high voltage­DK
Heat
heat production, at pump, 30 kW, allocation exergy
6.3.2
Scenarios modelling
Scenario 0
In Scenario 0 there are no special modelling choices to remark, all the fossil CO2 emissions
from the different sectors are summed up to calculate the climate change impact. However, in
this Scenario there is no way to characterize the impact in the remaining categories, as it will
mean exploring in detail how the impact of the current system looks like in each of them.
Scenario 0 is modelled the same way in 2024 and 2040, just adapting the level of emissions and
the CO2 bio/fossil mix of each sector. A basic schematic of Scenario 0 is shown in Figure 6.2.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 6.2: Simple schematic of Scenario 0.
Scenario 1 and Scenario 2
As Scenario 1 and Scenario 2 are two cases in which all the CO2 emissions go 100% to storage
this two scenarios were modelled as already described when detailing the modelling of the single
technologies. The different assumptions made to model these scenarios were as described
previously in Transport and Storage inside subsection 6.3.1.
Scenario 1 and Scenario 2 are also modelled the same way in 2024 and 2040, adapting the
level of emissions, the CO2 bio/fossil mix of each sector and the energy system.
A simple schematic of Scenarios 1 and 2 is shown in Figure 6.3.
(a) Scenario 1
(b) Scenario 2
Figure 6.3: Simple schematic of Scenario 1 and Scenario 2.
Scenario 3
As mentioned, Scenario 3 covers the estimated demand of the e­fuels methane, methanol and
kerosene. Based on the data from MissionGreenFuels and the Danish Energy Agency [56][57],
Table 6.16 shows the expected demand of each of these e­fuels, together with the correspond­
ing consumption of CO2. The CO2 was calculated using the inventory presented before for the
production of each of the compounds and accounting for the capture efficiency.
Table 6.16: Expected demand of e­fuels and needed CO2 as input.
2024
2040
E­fuel
Demand (Mt/year)
Needed CO2 (Mt/year)
Demand (Mt/year)
Needed CO2 (Mt/year)
Kerosene
0.32
1.97
1.14
6.27
Methanol
0.57
1.02
0.20
0.37
Methane
0.18
0.54
0.18
0.54
For year 2024, taking into account the emissions of each of the sectors presented in Table A.1,
it was decided to assumed that all the CO2 from the biogas sector is destined to methane
production, as the required amount of CO2 (0.54 Mt/y) matches closely with the emissions of
that sector (0.65 Mt/y).
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
32
==PAGE:41==
On the other hand, it was assumed that the waste, the electricity and district heating and the
industry sectors will produce kerosene and methanol according to the demand. Dividing the
required amount of CO2 needed for kerosene and for methanol by the sum up all the emissions
of these three sectors, it results in using 12% of the emission to kerosene production and 6%
of the emissions to methanol production.
For year 2040, the emissions of the biogas sector (1.48 Mt/y) exceed the required amount of
needed CO2 for methane production, therefore it was assumed that the remaining emissions
will be destined to kerosene production, as it is the product with the highest CO2 demand.
As before, the waste, the electricity and district heating and the industry sectors will produce
kerosene and methanol according to the demand, resulting in using 57% of their emissions to
kerosene production and 4% of their emissions in methanol production.
A sum up of Scenario 3 is displayed in Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Simple schematic of Scenario 3.
Scenario 3B
Scenario 3B is assumed to look like Scenario 3, but instead of storing the non­use emissions
for e­fuels production, these are emitted. Figure 6.5 shows an schematic of this Scenario. As
in Scenario 0, all the non­used fossil CO2 emissions from the different sectors are summed up
to calculate the climate change impact.
Figure 6.5: Simple schematic of Scenario 3B.
Scenario 3C
Scenario 3C explores the impacts of covering the entire aviation fuel demand in Denmark.
Based on the data from MissionGreenFuels, Table 6.17 shows the expected entire aviation
fuel demand, together with the corresponding consumption of CO2.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
33
==PAGE:42==
Table 6.17: Expected demand of kerosene and needed CO2 as input.
2024
2040
E­fuel
Demand (Mt/year)
Needed CO2 (Mt/year)
Demand (Mt/year)
Needed CO2 (Mt/year)
Kerosene
1.07
6.63
1.32
8.18
The biogas sector is modelled as in Scenario 3, using 100% of the emission to produce methane
in 2024 and using the remaining part of them to produce kerosene in 2040. The remaining
amount of required CO2 is divided by the sum up of the other sectors emissions resulting in the
use of 43% of the emissions to produce kerosene in 2024 and the use of 77% of the emissions
to produce kerosene in 2040.
Figure 6.6 summarizes in a simple schematic Scenario 3C.
Figure 6.6: Simple schematic of Scenario 3C.
Scenario 3D
Scenario 3D explores the impacts of covering the entire energy requirements for heavy duty
road transport and shipping in Denmark with methanol in 2024. In 2040, only the entire demand
of the shipping industry is covered, as in 2040 any methanol consumption is expected in the
heavy duty road transport. These methanol demands, together with the needed input of CO2,
are shown in Table 6.18, based on the data from MissionGreenFuels [56].
Table 6.18: Expected demand of methanol and needed CO2 as input.
2024
2040
E­fuel
Demand (Mt/year)
Needed CO2 (Mt/year)
Demand (Mt/year)
Needed CO2 (Mt/year)
Methanol
4.43
8.02
2.62
4.75
The biogas sector follows the same approach as in the previous scenarios (3, 3B and 3C), while
the other sectors destine part of their emissions to methanol production, resulting in 52% of the
emissions in 2024 and 50% of the emissions in 2040.
A sum up of Scenario 3D is displayed in Figure 6.7.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
34
==PAGE:43==
Figure 6.7: Simple schematic of Scenario 3D.
Scenario 4
Scenario 4 represents the production of FA and PP to cover the expected demand of this prod­
ucts. Using data from Danish material flow analysis and market analysis [62] [60], Table 6.19
illustrates the expected demand for this products with the required input CO2. It was not possible
to define different demands for 2024 and 2040, therefore the same numbers were used.
Table 6.19: Expected demand of PP and FA and needed CO2 as input.
Product
Demand (Mt/year)
Needed CO2 (Mt/year)
PP
0.20
0.72
FA
0.06
0.06
In this Scenario all the sectors, both in 2024 and in 2040, designate part of their emissions
to cover the expected demand of these products, resulting in all of them using 4.5% of the
emissions for PP production and 0.04% of the emissions for FA production in 2024 and 7% of
the emissions for PP production and 0.06% of the emissions for FA production in 2040.
In Figure 6.8 a simple schematic of Scenario 4 is shown.
Figure 6.8: Simple schematic of Scenario 4.
Scenario 5
In Scenario 5, the expect demand of CO2 based building materials (BM), according to the In­
ternational Energy Agency [50], is modelled. The expected demand is presented in Table 6.20,
together with the required input CO2. It was not possible to define different demands for 2024
and 2040, therefore the same numbers were used.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
35
==PAGE:44==
Table 6.20: Expected demand of BM and needed CO2 as input.
Product
Demand (Mt/year)
Needed CO2 (Mt/year)
BM
12.76
1.20
In this Scenario all the sectors, both in 2024 and in 2040, designate part of their emissions to
cover the expected demand of BM, resulting in all of them using 7% and 11% of the emissions for
BM production in 2024 and in 2040, respectively. Figure 6.9 summarizes in a simple schematic
Scenario 5.
Figure 6.9: Simple schematic of Scenario 5.
Scenario 6
Scenario 6 represents a mix of Scenarios 3, 4 and 5, with the goal of modelling the cover of the
demand of several products: kerosene, methanol, methane, PP, FA and BM.
In Figure 6.10 a simple schematic of Scenario 6 is shown.
Figure 6.10: Simple schematic of Scenario 6.
6.4
Life cycle impact assessment results
In this section the results from the life cycle impact assessment are going to be presented.
First, each of the selected technologies for CO2 storage or utilization was modelled individually
and per sector.
Secondly, the LCIA focuses on the results obtained trough the modelling of the big scale sce­
narios described in chapter 5.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
36
==PAGE:45==
6.4.1
Single technologies results
As mentioned, each of the possible CO2 fates was modelled per tonne of CO2 adressed for
each of the sectors. The Climate change (CC) impact category results are shown in Figure 6.11
for 2024 and in Figure 6.12 for 2040. In both Figures, the dots represent the CC per tonne of
CO2 addressed depending on the sector and the white bars represent the range in which the
CC impact is situated for 1 tonne with 100% bio CO2 vs 1 tonne with 100% fossil CO2.
Figure 6.11: Climate change impact category results for individual technologies in 2024. The
results in this graph are also presented in Table E.1 in Appendix E.
Figure 6.12: Climate change impact category results for individual technologies in 2040. The
results in this graph are also presented in Table E.2 in Appendix E
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
37
==PAGE:46==
Figures 6.11 and 6.12 show that the CC impact for offshore and onshore storage is in the same
order of magnitude both in 2024 and in 2040, with onshore storage performing slightly better for
all the sectors. This is explained because off the small role that offshore vs onshore implications
play against the big contribution of capture, liquefaction, CO2 losses and the storage itself. A
detailed contribution analysis for offshore and onshore storage is displayed in Figures E.7 and
E.8 in Appendix E.
The production of methane and methanol have similar CC impact, both in 2024 and in 2040,
while kerosene production has notable higher impacts, being around the double if comparing 1
tonne of 100% biogenic CO2 being used for kerosene production vs 1 tonne of 100% biogenic
CO2 being used for methane production. Methane and kerosene production have a lower CC
impact in 2024 versus 2040. This is explained by the heat obtained as output in these two pro­
duction processes. The market for heat has a higher CC impact in 2024 than in 2040, therefore
producing output heat that avoids production has higher CC savings in the present than in the
long term. During the production of methane and kerosene, the waste heat contributes to the
reduction of the CC impact, but as the heat mix becomes greener this contribution is reduced,
making the overall impact to increase, as it can be seen in Figures E.10 and E.14 in Appendix E.
In the case of methanol, the amount of heat produced as output is lower, thus the obtained re­
sults are not affected at the same level, resulting in overall lower CC impact in the future, as
shown in Figures E.11 and E.12 in Appendix E.
The highest change it can be appreciated trough Figures 6.11 and 6.12 is in the formic acid
production CC impacts. In 2024 and for all the sectors, the production of formic acid has very
high CC impact loading, while in 2040 CC impacts are reduced significantly, achieving significant
CC savings. This is explained because of the high electricity and heat consumption rates of the
formic acid process. In 2024, with an energy system with high CC impact, the high electricity
and heat consumption of the process does not contra­rest the savings coming from the avoided
production of formic acid. However, as the ES becomes greener, the loadings added due to
electricity and heat consumption are less significant. A detailed contribution analysis of the
formic acid production is presented in Figure E.15 and Figure E.16 in Appendix E.
Producing polypropylene using CO2 as feedstock has similar CC impacts than producing methanol
in 2024, however in 2040, the CC impacts of producing polypropylene are lower than the im­
pacts of producing methanol. The reduction in the CC impacts of PP production is explained
by the decrease in the impact of the heat needed as input and due to the CC reduction in the
capture process, as it can be seen in Figure E.17 and Figure E.18 in Appendix E. In 2024,
the impacts of using heat make the savings of the PP substitution to be around 60% less in
comparison with 2040.
The production of building materials experiments a significant change when transitioning to a
greener ES, achieving CC impact savings in 2040 for all the sectors. Again the heat consumed in
the building materials production process and the capture process are the main reasons behind
the decrease in the CC impact, as it can be seen trough Figures E.19 and E.20 in Appendix E.
Another important fact to remark in relation to the building materials production process is that
the differences in the impacts between sectors are not as big as in other technologies. This
is because in this technology the only differentiating item between sectors are the CO2 losses,
as there is no final release of the product neither geological storage, two items that make a
significant difference between sectors in the other technologies.
For an overall better understanding of the different technologies, a contribution analysis with all
the technologies together was constructed. It is displayed in Figure 6.13 and in Figure 6.14, for
the waste sector only, which has a share of fossil and biogenic carbon of 39% vs 61% in 2024
and 25% vs 75% in 2040. Same figures for the other sectors are presented in Appendix E.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
38
==PAGE:47==
Figure 6.13: Overall contribution analysis for the different singles technologies for 2024.
Figure 6.14: Overall contribution analysis for the different singles technologies for 2040.
As it can be seen in Figure 6.13 and in Figure 6.14, the processes contributing more to the overall
picture are the storage and the different production processes depending on the technology. The
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
39
==PAGE:48==
final release of the different CCU products also has a relevant contribution in all the utilization
technologies, expected for the building materials. This contribution decreases towards 2040,
as the content of CO2 bio increases. In both cases, 2024 and 2040, the impact of the final
release of the CCU product can only be reduced in the case of polypropylene, if this compound
is recycled to substitute new raw materials.
The capture process has a relevant contribution in all the technologies in 2024, but this contri­
bution decreases towards 2040. Since the capture process is highly heat consuming, as the
heat transitions towards a greener mix, the impacts are reduced significantly, as it can be seen
trough the contribution analysis of the MEA capture technology in Figure E.21 in Appendix E.
Liquefaction plays a consistent role in the CC impact category trough all the technologies, but
its contribution is significantly reduced in the future. The heat obtained as output provides great
CC savings in 2024, but these savings are reduced in the future, as Figure E.22 in Appendix E
shows. Losses also have a consistent contribution trough all the technologies in 2024, but the
impact of these is reduce in the future as the CO2 mix becomes more bio based. CO2 losses
come from different stages of the processes, like the capture, the transportation or during the
CO2 transformation to other products. Injection has a notable contribution in the storage tech­
nologies, but it is reduced as the ES reduces its impact, since the main inputs for the injection
process are heat and electricity.
The hydrogen production process has a notable contribution when producing e­fuels and also
polypropylene, as e­methanol is needed as input and therefore also hydrogen. Both heat and
electricity play key roles in the hydrogen production process. In the present, the heat obtained
as output can potentially help in contrarresting the high CC impact related to the high electricity
consumption, however in the long term, the CC saving obtained from the waste heat is not
enough to reduce the CC loadings associated to electricity consumption, as it can be seen in
Figure E.23 in Appendix E.
Based on the results of the contribution analysis presented trough Figure 6.13 and Figure 6.14 a
sensitivity analysis (SA) and an uncertainty analysis (UA) were performed, to test the robustness
of the results.
Due to the relevant contribution of the capture process, four parameters in relation to this pro­
cess were tested; the capture efficiency, the electricity and heat needed and the amount of
MEA required. The results were also tested against changes in the amount of CO2 lost due to
the transport process by truck, ship and pipe. Because of the relevance of the production pro­
cess in the utilization technologies, the ratio of substitution of the different compounds was also
tested. The hydrogen production also plays an important role in the e­fuels production, thus the
electricity needed in the process was tested. The heat obtained as output in the liquefaction
and the heat needed for injected were also tested, due to the notable impact of both process,
the second one only in relation to storage technologies. Finally, other parameters were tested
because of their higher degree of uncertainty, like transport distances, the electricity needed for
pumping or the amount of sludge needed as input for the building materials production. The
full list of tested parameters is displayed in Table 6.21, together with the name of the parameter
used in EASETECH.
A one­at­a­time perturbation analysis with a 10% change with all the parameters shown in Ta­
ble 6.21 was performed, to calculate the Sensitivity Ratio (SR), the Normalized Sensitivity Ratio
(NSR), the Sensitivity Coefficient (SC) and the Normalized Sensitivity Coefficient (NSC). And
uncertainty analysis was also performed to obtain the Coefficient of Variation (CV) and the Stan­
dard Deviation (SD), both the SA and the UA according to the methodology described by Varling
et al. in [33]. The results from the SA and the UA are presented in Appendix F.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
40
==PAGE:49==
Table 6.21: Tested parameters in the SA and UA of the single technologies.
Explanation
Name of the parameter in EASETECH
NSR or NSC>0.1 for 2024 or 2040
Efficiency of the amine capture technology
capture_eff
x
Average distance to closest port
distance_port
Average distance to storage sites
distance_storage
% of CO2 transported (Not lost) when transported by road
transport_road
x
% of CO2 transported (Not lost) when transported by ship
transport_ship
x
Average distance to a short distance destination
distance_short
% of CO2 transported (not lost) when transported by pipe
transport_pipe
x
Electricity needed for CO2 pumping b pipeline
pumping_el
Average distance of CO2 transport by pipeline
distance_pipe
Methane ratio of substitution
methane_ratio
x
Methanol ratio of substitution
methanol_ratio
x
Kerosene ratio of substitution
kerosene_ratio
x
Formic acid ratio of substitution
fa_ratio
x
PP ratio of substitution
PP_ratio
x
Heat used for CO2 capture
heat_capture
x
Electricity used for CO2 capture
el_capture
x
MEA used for the CO2 capture
mea_capture
x
Electricity for hydrogen production
hydrogen_el_methane
x
Electricity for hydrogen production
hydrogen_el_methanol
x
Electricity for hydrogen production
hydrogen_el_kerosene
x
Waste heat from liquefaction process
heat_liquefaction
x
Heat needed for injection
heat_injection
Use of sludge from stainless steel in BM production
sss
x
Substitution ratio of PC blocks
subst_blocks
x
All parameters in Table 6.21 were used for the SA and UA of the single technologies, but the
ones with a NSR or a NSC >0.1, marked with an ’x’ in the third column of Table 6.21, were the
ones selected for the SA and UA of the big scale scenarios.
In the storage technologies, the capture efficiency is one of the most relevant parameters, along­
side the CO2 losses associated with transportation. The output heat obtained in the liquefaction
process is more important than other parameters, however this roles decreases towards the fu­
ture. Currently in the e­fuels technologies, the electricity needed to produce hydrogen is the
most important parameter, followed by the capture efficiency and the losses associated with
transport. Towards the future the ratio of substitution of the different e­fuels gains more atten­
tion, except in the case of kerosene production; in this case the electricity for hydrogen is still
more relevant due to the higher quantity of hydrogen needed.
In the formic acid production, the ratio of formic acid substitution is the most important parameter,
followed by the CO2 losses associated with transport and the capture efficiency. Towards the
future, the capture efficiency gains more attention, but the formic acid substitution ratio and the
CO2 losses still play a relevant role. In the polypropylene production, the electricity needed for
producing hydrogen is the most important parameter, followed by the ratio of substitution of PP,
the capture efficiency and the CO2 losses. Towards 2040, the PP substitution ratio becomes
more important and the relevance of the electricity needed for the hydrogen decreases. In the
case of building materials, the ratio of substitution of PC based blocks is the most important
parameter, followed by the amount of sludge needed as input for the process and the capture
efficiency. The same picture is maintained towards 2040.
From the calculation of the standard deviations, shown in Figure 6.13 and Figure 6.14, it can
be seen that the storage technologies are the ones with less uncertainty, due to their modelling
being composed of less parameters. The different e­fuels technologies have similar uncertainty
levels, but these are reduced around 70% towards 2040, due the decrease in the relevance
of the ES impact. The highest uncertainty is seen for the formic acid production, due to the
big changes that the variation of the formic acid substitution ratio provokes in the results. The
production of PP and BM have similar uncertainty levels than producing e­fuels, however they
are not reduced towards 2040. Because even tough the ES systems decreases its impacts
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
41
==PAGE:50==
inside these two technologies, there are other parameters that still have a high impact in the
results in the future, like the PP substitution ratio, the sludge used as input for BM or the PC
based blocks substitution ratio.
Figure 6.15: Overall climate change impact for 100% Scenarios in 2024.
Figure 6.16: Overall climate change impact for 100% Scenarios in 2040.
Based on the CC results presented in Figure 6.11 and Figure 6.12, 100% Scenarios were con­
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
42
==PAGE:51==
structed for 2024 and 2040, to understand what the picture could look like if all current and future
CO2 emissions trough point sources are used only for each of the selected single technologies.
The obtained results are shown in Figure 6.15 and Figure 6.16. These two figures show the
overall CC impact (kg CO2 eq./year) of using all estimated Danish CO2 emissions in each of the
identified technologies.
In 2024, all the 100% scenarios provide CC savings compared to emitting all the CO2, except for
the formic acid case. The storage technologies offer the highest savings, followed by methane
production, methanol production, and polypropylene production. Kerosene production reduces
the CC impact to around 60% relative to 100% emissions, and building materials production
reduces it around 32%. However, producing formic acid with all the emissions in the current
system increases the CC impact to over 200%. In 2040, all the 100% scenarios provide CC
savings except for the kerosene production case. Contrary to 2024, the greatest savings in
2040 come from formic acid production, followed by storage technologies and polypropylene
production. Producing building materials results in savings of a similar magnitude to producing
methane or methanol, while kerosene production increases the CC impact to 40% compared to
emitting all the CO2.
In Figure 6.15 and Figure 6.16 it is also displayed the contribution of the different sectors. Both
Figures show that the contribution of the waste sector provides CC savings or loadings in 2024
depending on the technology, but that in 2040 the waste sector always contributes with CC
savings, except for the kerosene case, due to the increase in the CO2 bio content. The industry
sector contributes only with positive CC impacts in 2024, but the contribution of this sector is
notably reduced towards 2040 as the level of emissions of this sector decreases. The increase
towards 2040 in the contribution of the biogas sector can also be appreciated, as this is the
sector experimenting the biggest increase in the level of emissions.
The results in Figure 6.15 and Figure 6.16 are also shown in Table format in Table E.3 and
Table E.4 in Appendix E. Moreover, they are also displayed per tonne of CO2 in Figure E.24
and Figure E.25 in Appendix E.
As already mentioned, the constructed models are really carbon­based and all the analysis pre­
sented have been only focused on the Climate change impact category. However, for under­
standing the overall picture of the different CCS or CCU technologies all the impact categories
are key.
Further details of the normalized results for all the impact categories and for all the single tech­
nologies are presented in Appendix E, however Figure 6.17 and Figure 6.18 present the nor­
malized results for all the impact categories in 2024 and in 2040.
Overall in 2024, there are three impact categories dominating in various of the technologies; the
Human toxicity, carcinogenic (HTC), the Freshwater eutrophication (EFW) and the Resource
use (RU), minerals and metals, as it can be seen trough Figure 6.17. Mainly the processes
contributing the most to these three impact categories are linked to heat and electricity. In
some technologies, for example methane, methanol or kerosene production, the amount of
heat produced as output that can be reused provides big savings in the EFW impact category,
while at the same time some other technologies, like formic acid or building materials production,
have high impacts in this category due to the high heat consumption. In most cases, the high
impacts in HTC and the RU, minerals and metals impact categories are associated with the
electricity consumption.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.17: Normalized results for all impact categories for single technologies in 2024.
Figure 6.18: Normalized results for all impact categories for single technologies in 2040.
In 2040, the relevance is spread between more impact categories. As before the HTC, the EFW
and the RU, minerals and metals have a greater impact than other categories, but towards
2040, the Land use (LU) and the Resource use (RU), energy carrier also gain attention. In
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
44
==PAGE:53==
2040, the processes related to high impacts or savings are more diverse than in 2024, however
big impacts in the HTC category are mainly associated with electricity consumption. The big
savings in the EFW come mainly from the substitution of the different compounds, like methane,
formic acid or polypropylene. In the case of the RU, minerals and LU loadings are associated
with heat and electricity, while in the RU, energy impact category big savings are mostly due to
the substitution of the different compounds.
Moving forward with this research, further study and analysis should be conducted on all impact
categories, but specifically in the mentioned ones (HTC, EFW, LU, RU, minerals and metals and
RU, energy carrier). This would help in providing a deeper understanding of the environmental
impact of CCS/CCU technologies.
6.4.2
Scenarios results
According to the description of the Scenarios presented in chapter 5 the different technologies
were combined to model each of the Scenarios and obtain the overall CC results (kg CO2
eq/year), displayed in Figure 6.19 for 2024 and in Figure 6.20 for 2040, together with the Energy
use (MJ/year). The CC and Energy use results per tonne of CO2 addressed are also displayed,
in Figure E.42 and Figure E.43 in Appendix E. It should be remarked that the Energy use in
Scenario 0 was established as 0 since there are no additional energy requirements from the
system if all the CO2 is just emitted.
Figure 6.19 and Figure 6.20 show that storage scenarios (S1 and S2) provide the biggest CC
savings both in 2024 and in 2040. The chemicals and building materials scenarios provide
very similar CC savings, mainly because in these scenarios (S4 and S5) most part of the CO2
is also stored. It can also be appreciated that these four Scenarios are the ones with highest
Energy use, ranging from 22 PJ/year to 37 PJ/year in 2024, which would mean between 3% to
5% of the total Danish energy consumption in 2022 (678 PJ) as reported by the Danish Energy
Agency [74]. The high energy requirements in these Scenarios come mainly from the capture
and the injection processes. In Scenario 5, the carbonated blocks production process also plays
a significant role.
Inside the e­fuels Scenarios, S3 is the one with biggest CC savings in 2024, but in 2040, S3D
provides bigger CC savings. Scenario 3D is the one providing biggest savings also in terms of
energy use, however it must be noted that to achieved the level of methanol production of that
Scenario, similar levels of the energy consumed in storage scenarios are needed, to capture
the CO2 and to produce the required amounts of hydrogen, but in this case this consumption is
contra­rested with the big saving associated to the avoided production of methanol.
Scenario 3B shows the big increase in the CC in the case that non­used emissions are not
stored, highlighting the relevance of always combining the utilization technologies with storage,
so that larger CC savings can be achieved. Scenario 3C provides less CC benefits than Sce­
nario 3 or 3D, in 2024 and in 2040, even achieving CC loadings in 2040. This highlights that
it is not beneficial to cover the entire demand of kerosene trough CO2 utilization. Moreover,
the energy requirements of this Scenario in 2024 do not contra­rest the savings coming from
the avoided kerosene production. However the energy use impact category of Scenario 3C is
significantly reduced towards 2040.
Scenario 6 provides less CC benefits than Scenarios 1 and 2, and 3, 4 and 5, however the
energy use of this scenario is more than 100% less than in those mentioned scenarios. Towards
2040, Scenario 6 increases the CC impact, achieving CC loadings, but on the other hand, the
energy savings are increased significantly, being the scenario with the second highest energy
savings, after Scenario 3D.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.19: CC impact and Energy use for the big scale scenarios in 2024.
Figure 6.20: CC impact and Energy use for the big scale scenarios in 2040.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
46
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.19 and Figure 6.20 also show the contribution of the different sectors to the overall
picture. The electricity and district heating sector is the one contributing the most in 8 out of
10 scenarios in 2024 and in 6 out 10 scenarios in 2040, and always with negative CC impact,
due to the high content of CO2 bio. The industry sector has a notable contribution in all the
scenarios in 2024, but its contribution is reduced towards the future due to the decrease in the
level of emissions of this sector. The biogas sector is expected to contribute more significantly
by 2040, driven by the rising levels of emissions. The waste sector is also expected to increase
its contribution towards 2040, due to maintaining a similar level of emissions and increasing the
content of CO2 bio. The waste sector contributes with CC savings in 8 out 10 scenarios in 2024
and in 6 out of 10 scenarios in 2040.
A Sensitivity Analysis and an Uncertainty Analysis were performed to further understand the
obtained results. The parameters for the analysis were selected based on those having a NSR
or a NSC >0.1 when conducting the SA and UA for the single technologies. These parameters
are marked with an ’x’ in the third column of Table 6.21. This criterion was established based
on the fact that parameters with NSR or a NSC lower than 0.1 have little impact in the results of
the single technologies modelling, therefore they are also expected to have little impact in the
big scale scenarios results.
The results from the SA and the UA for the big scale scenarios are presented in section F.2 in
Appendix F.
In most of the scenarios, the capture efficiency is the most important parameter in 2024, followed
by the CO2 losses during transportation. In Scenario 3B, the electricity needed to produce
hydrogen for kerosene production is the most important parameter, followed by the capture
efficiency, the CO2 losses during transportation and the electricity needed to produce hydrogen
for methanol production. The heat needed for the capture and the heat obtained as output
in the liquefaction are two parameters that also present more relevance than other selected
parameters.
In 2040, the capture efficiency remains as the most important parameter in most of the scenarios
with the the CO2 losses associated to transportation also playing an important role. In scenarios
3B and 3C the electricity needed to produced the required hydrogen for kerosene is the most
important parameter. Still, the capture efficiency and the CO2 losses during transportation are
important. In this two scenarios the ratio of kerosene substitution also plays a more significant
role than other parameters. In Scenario 3D the electricity related to hydrogen for methanol
production and the methanol substitution ratio are also important. In Scenario 6, the electricity
related to hydrogen for methanol production is again more relevant than other parameters, as
well as the ratio of substitution of the PC based blocks, the amount of sludge used as input for
the carbonated blocks and the polypropylene ratio of substitution.
The results from the standard deviation calculations are also shown in Figure 6.19 and Fig­
ure 6.20. In 2024, Scenarios 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 have similar levels of uncertainty, this is be­
cause in this scenarios most part of the CO2 is stored, even if part of it is utilize in S3, S4, S5
and S6, therefore they are mainly dominated by the storage, which is composed of less model
parameters than the utilization technologies. Scenario 3B has a small uncertainty as it is gov­
erned by the emitted part, which has none parameters to variate. Scenario 3C and 3D have
higher uncertainty levels because more CO2 goes to utilization technologies than in the other
scenarios. The utilization technologies modelling is composed of more parameters and many of
them are linked to the ES, which in 2024, has a high CC impact, therefore affecting significantly
the results. In 2040, the uncertainty levels of S1, S2, S3B, S4 and S5 are similar than in 2024,
while in S3, S3C, S3D and S6 the uncertainty levels are reduced. This is because in 2040 these
scenarios are governed by the utilization part, and although the modelling is composed of more
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
47
==PAGE:56==
parameters, as it was mentioned before, the relevance of these is reduced since most of them
are linked to the ES, which has a considerable lower CC impact in 2040.
During the modelling process of the different technologies two big choices were made that
could have a significant impact on the obtained results for the big scale scenarios: the pos­
sibility of reusing the heat obtained as output in some processes for district heating and the
non­introduction on the market of the oxygen obtained as byproduct in the hydrogen produc­
tion. Therefore, it was decided to test the sensitivity of the results against these two assumptions
to provide a better understanding of the potential scenarios. The results obtained from the sen­
sitivity analysis on the mentioned modelling choices are displayed in Figure 6.21 for 2024 and in
Figure 6.22 for 2040. The results are also presented in table format in Table F.27 and Table F.28
in Appendix F.
In Figure 6.21 and in Figure 6.22 the light blue bars represent the CC results per tonne on
CO2 addressed with the baseline model, while the the dark blue bars represent the CC results
per tonne on CO2 addressed without heat recovery for district heating and the orange ones
present the CC results with the recovery of oxygen from the hydrogen production process to be
introduced in the market.
Figure 6.21 shows the big impact that the non­recovery of heat has on the CC results of all the
scenarios, changing from CC saving to CC loadings in all of them (except Scenario 3B). The
differences in the results between the baseline model and the model without heat recovery are
reduced towards 2040, being around 10% in Scenarios 1, 2, 4 and 5 and a bit more pronounced
in the other ones, as seen in Figure 6.22. This highlights once again the big interconnection
between the CCS and CCU technologies with the energy system, and that working towards the
reuse of the heat obtained as output can really help in the environmental performance of these
technologies specifically in the near term.
In the case of the model with oxygen recovery, no changes are appreciated in Scenarios 1, 2, 4
and 5 neither in 2024 nor in 2040, since no to only few amount of hydrogen is produced in these
scenarios. However, the recovery of oxygen is relevant in the e­fuels scenarios and in Scenario
6, providing bigger CC savings. The difference between the CC results with this model and with
the baseline model are reduced towards 2040, but still in the future the oxygen recovery model
provides further CC savings.
Moving forward with this study, further investigations should be done to asses whether or not and
how much of the produced oxygen can be introduced on the market, due to the big implications
it has specifically in the near term in the e­fuels scenarios. In the long term, it would also be
key to explore further what the substituted oxygen market could look like, because although
the energy source to produce the oxygen was change to match with the future ES, the method
use in the future modelling was the cryogenic distillation of air, which is the current most used
method, but this could be completely different towards 2040, which could reduce the CC savings
that oxygen recovery provides.
As it has already been mentioned, the environmental performance of CCS and CCU technolo­
gies, therefore the environmental performance of the potential scenarios can only be fully un­
derstood trough the complete analysis of all LCA impact categories. This study focuses a lot on
the CC impact category, however the normalized results in the other impact categories for the
big scale scenarios are displayed in Figure 6.23 for 2024 and in Figure 6.24 for 2040, with the
goal of providing a quick overview.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
48
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.21: Climate change impact category results from the sensitivity analysis on the mod­
elling choices for 2024.
Figure 6.22: Climate change impact category results from the sensitivity analysis on the mod­
elling choices for 2040.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 6.23: Normalized results for all impact categories for big scale scenarios in 2024.
Figure 6.24: Normalized results for all impact categories for big scale scenarios in 2040.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
50
==PAGE:59==
As it was already concluded when studying the different single technologies and as displayed in
Figure 6.23, in 2024 there are three impact categories that dominate the overall picture: HTC,
EFW and RU, minerals and metals. As it was studied in more detailed with the single technolo­
gies, high loadings in the HTC and RU, minerals and metals impact categories are associated
to high electricity consumption, while high loadings or savings in the EFW are associated to
high heat consumption or high amount of heat obtained as output, that avoids production.
As it was already observed when exploring the results of the single technologies and as ob­
served in Figure 6.24, in 2040 more impact categories gain attention, but HTC and RU, minerals
and metals maintain their relevance. As studied in further detail in the single technologies case,
Scenarios with big loadings in HTC, LU and RU, minerals and metals impact categories are due
to high electricity and heat consumption. Savings in the RU, energy carrier impact category are
mainly related to the avoided production of the different compounds.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
51
==PAGE:60==
7
Discussion
In this section a discussion over the questions outlined in the problem definition is presented,
based on the findings that have emerged during the research process and the LCA study.
1. What sectors with point source CO2 emissions have the potential to play an important role
in a CCUS context in Denmark?
After reviewing where CO2 emissions come from, four sectors were identified that could be
some of the main players in a CCS/CCU context in Denmark: the waste incineration sector,
industry processes, the electricity and district heating sector and the biogas sector. These four
sectors are unlikely to reduce their CO2 emissions to the required level to effectively combat
climate change in the near term. However, their activities remain important in the Danish context
and, in some cases, cannot be easily replaced. Therefore, addressing these emissions with
CCS or/and CCU arises as a potential solution that could help in the transition towards a more
sustainable world.
2. Where are the point source CO2 emissions from the different sectors located? How much
do they emit? Which of the identified sectors is contributing the most? How these CO2
emissions from the different identified sectors are expected to change towards the future?
Point source CO2 emissions are located all over the country, however the biggest point source
emitters are mainly situated close to urban and industrial areas. The biogas sector shows a
bigger presence in the north part of Jutland.
All the sectors together were estimated to account for up to 16.19 million tonnes of CO2 per
year in 2024, falling to 10.99 million tonnes of CO2 per year in 2040.
Currently, the electricity and district heating sector is the main contributor to emissions, account­
ing for 43.3% of the total. This is followed by the industry sector at 30.4%, waste incineration
at 22.3%, and the biogas sector at 4%. Looking ahead, emissions from the waste incineration
sector are expected to remain stable. The industrial sector is projected to reduce its emissions
to around 60% of current levels, while emissions from electricity and district heating are ex­
pected to decrease to approximately 50%. In contrast, emissions from the biogas sector are
estimated to more than double. Moreover, all the sector are estimated to increase its CO2 bio
content towards 2040, expect for the biogas sector, which is already composed by 100% bio
CO2 in 2024.
3. What could be the most relevant CO2 fates in a Danish CCUS context? What could be the
demand for different potential CO2 based products in Denmark? How is the environmental
performance of the identified technologies?
There are many existing possible fates for the CO2 once it has been captured, however eight
possible CO2 fates were identified as the most relevant ones in a Danish CCUS context: off­
shore storage, onshore storage, methane production, methanol production, kerosene produc­
tion, formic acid production, polypropylene production and building materials production.
The storage of CO2 was selected because of the beforehand great potential that this technology
has to achieve the CO2 reduction level in the atmosphere required to fight climate change.
Although some of the most advanced CO2 storage projects are offshore, the GEUS estimates
that the Danish subsoil has the potential to storage between 400 to 700 times current Denmark’s
total annual CO2 emissions. Due to this, onshore storage was also selected as one of the most
relevant CO2 fates in Denmark.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
52
==PAGE:61==
Methane, methanol and kerosene production were selected due to the potential of this com­
pounds to substitute fossil fuels, in combination with hydrogen obtain from electrolysis. Specif­
ically methanol and kerosene can substitute fossil fuels in some industries that are still difficult
to electrify, like shipping or aviation.
The production of formic acid was selected due to the emerging interest on this compound,
as it can serve as hydrogen storage material in some applications. Polypropylene production
was estimated to have an interesting relevance in the Danish context due to the widespread
that plastics have all over the world and across all sectors of society. However, it it also an
industry with big contributions to climate change, therefore addressing new ways to produce
them is compelling. Finally, building materials production was selected because of the relevance
worldwide of this industry and the capacity of these materials to permanently store the CO2.
Assessing the future market for CO2­derived products and services is challenging, as most CO2
conversion technologies are still in an early stage of development and neither their technical
performance nor their cost­effectiveness is well understood. This is also reflected in extremely
wide­ranging global estimates, from 1 Gt per year to 7 Gt in 2030 [50]. In this study some
rough estimations for the Danish market demand of the selected products were made. It is
clear that e­fuels have the biggest potential for CO2 absorption. This absorption potential is
only comparable with the absorption potential of building materials, as chemicals production
presents between 5 to 10 times less potential to absorb CO2. This is explained just by the big
market size differences between the compounds.
After the evaluation of all the selected single technologies individually and per sector trough
the LCA study, it was concluded that there are no big CC impact differences between offshore
and onshore storage. Methane and methanol production have a better environmental perfor­
mance than kerosene production. While methanol production reduces its environmental impact
towards the future, methane and kerosene production do not. Formic acid production is the
technology experimenting the biggest change between 2024 and 2040. In 2024 and for all sec­
tor big CC loadings are associated with formic acid production, while in 2040 and for all sectors
big CC savings are achieved by producing formic acid. Polypropylene production has similar
impacts than producing methanol in 2024, however in 2040, PP production has a lower CC
impact than producing methanol. Building materials production is also one of the technologies
experimenting a big change between 2024 and 2040. What is interesting about this technol­
ogy is that depending on the sector bigger or lower CC impact than producing, for example,
methanol is achieved.
In both pictures 2024 and 2040, the storage of the CO2 and the different production processes
are main contributions to the overall CC impact. The final release of the carbon contained in
the CO2 derived products after utilization has also an important contribution in the utilization
technologies in 2024, but this contribution is reduced towards the future. The capture process,
the liquefaction and the CO2 losses also present a notable contribution in 2024, but they are
significantly reduced in 2040. Hydrogen production is a process with relevant contribution in
some of the utilization technologies, both in 2024 and in 2040. The role of the ES in this process
is quite relevant and the interaction with it changes the CC impact results notably.
Some of the most important parameters in the technologies modelling in 2024 are the capture
efficiency, the CO2 losses associated to the different transport modes and some parameters
closely related to the energy system, like the electricity needed to produce hydrogen or the heat
obtained as output in the liquefaction process. In 2040, the substitution ratios of the different
CO2 derived products gain more attention, still the electricity needed for hydrogen production
plays an important role, specifically in the case of kerosene production.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
53
==PAGE:62==
When examining the other impact categories in more detail, it was found that in 2024, the Fresh­
water eutrophication, the Resource use, minerals and metals and Human­toxicity, carcinogenic
impact categories have higher normalized impact results than the rest of the impact categories.
In the case of EFW high loadings and saving are linked to the heat consumption or the heat
produced as output reused in district heating. In the case of RU, minerals and metals and HTC
big loadings are linked to high electricity consumption. In 2040, EFW, RU minerals and metals
and HTC remain important but Land use and RU, energy carrier also gain attention. In 2040, big
savings in EFW and RU, energy are mainly associated to the avoided production of the different
compounds. Loadings in the HTC impact category are mainly linked to high heat consumption
and loadings in the LU and RU, minerals and metals impact categories are linked to high heat
and electricity consumption.
4. What could potential big scale CCUS scenarios look like? And how is the environmental
performance of those scenarios? Which would be the environmental hotspots of the potential
big scale scenarios?
Ten scenarios and subscenarios were identified as potential big scales scenarios in a CCUS
context in Denmark. Scenario 0 represents a baseline scenario in which all CO2 is emitted,
while Scenarios 1 and 2 represent two scenarios in which all the CO2 is stored, offshore and
onshore respectively. Scenario 3 represents an e­fuels scenario, in which part of the CO2 is
destined to producing methane, methanol and kerosene according to the expected demand of
these e­fuels and the remaining CO2 is stored. Scenario 3B, 3C and 3D are subscenarios that
vary some of the assumptions made in Scenario 3. Scenario 4 is a chemicals focus scenario,
that represents the use of part of the CO2 to cover the expected demand of formic acid and
polypropylene, the remaining CO2 is again stored. Scenario 5 is a mix between producing the
expected demand of building materials using CO2 and storage. Finally Scenario 6 is a mix
between Scenarios 3, 4 and 5, to cover the expected demand of methane, methanol, kerosene,
formic acid, polypropylene and building materials, the remaining CO2 is also stored.
As it was previously mentioned, no significant differences were identified between the CC impact
of Scenario 1 and Scenario 2. Scenarios 1, 2, 4 and 5 are the ones providing biggest CC savings
both in 2024 and in 2040, as all of them are mainly based on CO2 storage. These scenarios
are also the ones with biggest energy use. These energy requirements are mainly due to the
capture and the injection processes.
Inside the e­fuels scenarios, Scenario 3 is the one providing biggest CC savings in 2024, but in
2040 Scenario 3D becomes the best one in terms of CC impact. Scenario 3D is also the best
one across all scenarios in terms of energy use, however it is important to remark that to achieve
these levels of energy savings high energy requirements are also needed, but in this case they
are compensate with the high benefits of avoided methanol production. Scenario 3B highlights
the importance of always combining utilization technologies with storage. Scenario 3C shows
that is not beneficial to cover the entire aviation fuel demand, as it presents a higher CC im­
pact than other scenarios, moreover, the energy savings associated to the avoided kerosene
production are not enough to contrarrest the energy requirements of the overall process in 2024.
Scenario 6 provides less CC benefits than other scenarios, however the energy requirements
are also less than in other scenarios.
Some of the most important parameters in the modelling of the scenarios in 2024 are the capture
efficiency, the CO2 losses associated with the different transport modes, the electricity needed
to produce hydrogen and the heat obtained as output in the liquefaction process. Towards 2040,
these parameters remain important in the modelling, but the substitution ratios of the different
compounds also gain attention.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
54
==PAGE:63==
Sensitivity analysis performed on the modelling choices showed how important is the reuse of
heat in the near term, as all scenarios change from CC savings to CC loadings if there is no
heat recovery to be used in district heating. This modelling choice shows the big interconnec­
tion between CCS and CCU technologies and the ES at the moment. As the energy system
becomes less fossil fuel based, the CC results of the different CCS/CCU technologies are not
that highly linked to the ES. In relation to the oxygen modelling choice, it was concluded that
it has a relevance specifically in the e­fuels scenarios in 2024. In the future the differences
between the CC savings with the baseline and the oxygen model are smaller.
Some of the other impact categories that present high normalized impact results in big scale
scenarios in 2024 are the HTC, EFW and RU, minerals and metals. Towards 2040, HTC and
RU, minerals and metals maintain their relevance, but other impact categories, like HTNC, LU
and RU, energy carrier also gain attention.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
55
==PAGE:64==
8
Conclusions
To finalize the study, the following conclusions are presented:
I. Four sectors were identified as potential main players in a CCUS context in Denmark: The
waste incineration sector, the industry sector, the electricity and district heating sector and
the biogas sector.
II. Point source CO2 emissions form the identified sectors are located over the entire country,
but the biggest ones are near urban and industrial areas. The biogas sector has a higher
presence in the north part of Jutland.
III. Potential for CCS/CCU in Denmark rises up to around 16 Mt of CO2 per year in 2024 and
around 11 Mt of CO2 per year in 2040.
IV. There exist many possible CO2 fates, but eight routes were identified with great poten­
tial in the Danish CCUS context: offshore storage, onshore storage, methane production,
methanol production, kerosene production, formic acid production, polypropylene produc­
tion and building materials production.
V. Assessing the market demand of CO2 derived products and services remains challenging,
due to the early stage of development of the technologies, but it is clear that CO2 derived
fuels have the biggest absorption potential, only comparable with the production of building
materials using CO2.
VI. Exploring all single technologies trough a LCA study reveled that Climate change impacts
are similar for offshore and onshore storage. All fuels and different materials produc­
tion processes show lower impacts in 2040 thanks to a greener energy system, expect
methane and kerosene production.
VII. Ten scenarios and subscenarios were identified as potential big scale scenarios for a
CCUS context in Denmark, based on the combination of storage and utilization technolo­
gies.
VIII. Scenarios with big percentage of CO2 going to storage provide the biggest CC savings
but also the highest energy use.
IX. Mix scenarios, where storage is combined with the production of various compounds to
meet the expected demand, appear to offer a favorable compromise between mitigating
climate change impact and energy requirements.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
56
==PAGE:65==
9
Limitations
Some of the major limitations of this study and the performed LCA are:
1. A cut­off criteria of 25,000 tonnes of CO2 emissions per year was established. This cut­off
criteria was established based on the minimum required full load operating hours and on
the output capacities of the already implemented capture facilities. However as more and
more capture project are established smaller output capacities could be achieved. This
would mean introducing the possibility of capturing CO2 from smaller emitting facilities,
increasing the captured amount of CO2 emissions to later be stored or utilized and the
abatement potential to fight against climate change.
2. The overall emissions and sector­specific emissions for 2040 in this study are only es­
timations, therefore the uncertainty associated with potential changes in emissions is a
limiting factor. Similarly, the future bio/fossil CO2 mixes are also based on estimations
and are subject to uncertainty.
3. The different readiness levels of the different technologies limited the amount of technolo­
gies included in the study. Some of the technologies are still in the development process
and there is no available data for the industrial scale application. However some of them
are showing great potential in the early stages of development, which could mean that if
in the future new technologies are established, the results obtained trough the LCA study
can change. At the same time, the modelled technologies could also be improved as more
CCS/CCU projects are developed, which could mean the optimization of different inputs
and overall results.
4. Assessing the demand of different CO2 based products is challenging and more uncertain
as we move into the future, as the CO2 market is still in its infancy. At the same time, when
modelling the substitution of different products and byproducts in the future, the study is
limited to the use of the current picture of the market.
5. Although a brief analysis was conducted to evaluate the impact on other impact categories
through normalized results, the constructed model is primarily carbon­based. This means
that the interpretation of the results was mainly focused on the Climate change impact
category, therefore limiting some of the findings to exclusively this impact category.
6. The study is also limited to the availability of processes in Ecoinvent database. In some
cases, the processes needed were not available at a Denmark level, therefore Europe
was mostly selected, while in other cases similar processes had to be selected.
7. In this study, the environmental impacts associated with equipment production and man­
ufacturing were excluded. Typically, these impacts are relatively minor. Nonetheless, it
remains a factor to have in mind, especially if when exploring the technologies further
in detail it is determined that some of them might reuse existing equipment while others
could require entirely new equipment.
8. The conclusions of this study focus on the environmental performance of individual tech­
nologies and large­scale scenarios, excluding economic considerations. Nevertheless, it
is crucial to acknowledge that CCUS projects typically entail significant initial investments
and ongoing operational costs. Therefore, integrating robust economic analysis would
enhance the LCA results and contribute further to the advancement of viable CCUS solu­
tions.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
57
==PAGE:66==
10
Recommendations
The following recommendations are given based on the findings of the study:
A. Although offshore and onshore storage exhibit very similar environmental performance, it
is worthwhile to continue exploring potential safe sites for onshore storage in the Danish
subsoil. If proven safe, the Danish subsoil could give Denmark more independence in
terms of CO2 storage and serve as a storage hub for other countries, thereby contributing
to the fight against climate change.
B. Scenario 3B demonstrated the importance to always combine CCU technologies with CCS
to achieve higher CC savings. Therefore, it is essential to develop and establish policies
that enhance both storage and utilization projects.
C. Utilizing CO2 to meet the entire demand for aviation fuel through kerosene production is
less advantageous than other scenarios, even achieving CC loadings in 2040, due to the
substantial energy requirements. Furthermore, it is important to consider that alternative
sustainable pathways for kerosene production may exist, which could be combined with
CO2 derived kerosene to yield greater CC benefits.
D. It is recommended to focus on optimizing the integration of heat generated as output
in certain processes into the district heating networks. This significantly enhances CC
savings, especially in the short term, and aligns with the principles of a circular economy.
E. It is crucial to establish policies that regulate the amount of CO2 to be stored and utilized as
feedstock in various production processes to mitigate the overproduction of CO2 derived
compounds. Exploring alternative production methods, which may or may not offer im­
proved environmental performance, and considering the potential for integrating different
technologies to meet projected demands, is advisable.
F. It is also important to continue working towards enhancing energy efficiency and develop­
ing renewable energy projects. This approach ensures that CO2 emissions are reduced
where feasible, emphasizing CCUS technologies for addressing only the emissions that
are difficult or costly to eliminate.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
58
==PAGE:67==
11
Future work
This section outlines key recommendations for future work that can build upon the findings of
this study, to keep exploring and advancing the understanding of a CCUS context in Denmark.
Some of the recommendations in terms of future work are linked to the limitations of this study,
therefore this study could be enriched by further exploring the implications of the yearly emis­
sions cut­off criterion, as this directly relates to the capture and CO2 abatement potential.
To obtain a more comprehensive picture of the environmental performance of different CC­
S/CCU technologies and large­scale scenarios, it is essential to conduct detailed analyses of
other impact categories. This includes performing a deeper contribution analysis, running sen­
sitivity and uncertainty analysis, and looking more into how the specific governing processes
generate the impact in the corresponding category.
Moreover, further exploration of the expected market demand of different CO2 based products
and byproducts and production routes changes can benefit informed decisions during the de­
velopment of CCS/CCU projects, specially if looking into the future. Detailed market analyses
can help in clearly identifying the most promising applications for CO2 utilization.
Additionally, conducting an in­depth economic analysis and comparison of the different CC­
S/CCU technologies would be beneficial and provide a clearer understanding of the trade­offs
involved.
The LCA results indicated that the production of some CO2­based compounds have similar
impacts. Therefore, it would be worthwhile to explore the different existing production routes
within each utilization technology. Comparing these routes can help determine which ones offer
the best environmental performance.
It can also be interesting to construct more scenarios that explore different utilization and storage
combinations or the possibilities of limiting the type of CO2 (fossil vs biogenic) being used in
certain applications.
Furthermore, future research could also consider the broad social and political implications of
deploying CCS/CCU technologies in Denmark, examining public acceptance, regulatory frame­
works or international collaborations, which are essential for the scaling up of these initiatives.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
59
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
[1]
Global CCS Institute. Global status of CCS 2022. 2022. URL: https://status22.globalccsinstitute.
com/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/GCCSI_Global-Report-2022_PDF_FINAL-01-03-23.pdf.
[2]
Danish Energy Agency. About CCS. URL: https://ens.dk/en/our- responsibilities/ccs-
carbon-capture-and-storage/about-ccs.
[3]
International Energy Agency. The role of CCUS in low­carbon power systems. URL: https:
//iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/ccdcb6b3-f6dd-4f9a-98c3-8366f4671427/The_role_of_
CCUS_in_low-carbon_power_systems.pdf.
[4]
State of green. Carbon capture, utilisation, and storage. Picking the high­hanging fruits
of CO2 mitigation. 2022. URL: https://stateofgreen.com/en/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/
SoG_WP_CarbonCapture_210x297_V08_Web-1.pdf.
[5]
Olivier Jolliet et al. Environmental Life Cycle Assesment. Taylor and Francis Group, 2016.
[6]
V. Bisinella, T. H. Christensen, and T. F. Astrup. “Future scenarios and life cycle assess­
ment: systematic review and recommendations”. In: International Journal of Life Cycle
Assessment (2021). URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11367-021-01954-6.
[7]
Christiano B. Peres et al. “Advances in Carbon Capture and Use (CCU) Technologies: A
Comprehensive Review and CO2 Mitigation Potential Analysis”. In: Clean technologies
(2022). URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/cleantechnol4040073.
[8]
Vincent Vandeweijera et al. “A technology readiness assessment for CCS site monitoring
systems”. In: International Conference on Greenhouse Gas Control Technologies (2022).
URL: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4286443.
[9]
Kaiyin Zhao et al. “Recent Advances and Future Perspectives in Carbon Capture, Trans­
portation, Utilization, and Storage (CCTUS) Technologies: A Comprehensive Review”. In:
Fuel (2023). URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2023.128913.
[10]
INNO­CCUS. State of CCUS.Danish research and innovation driving CCUS solutions to
combat climate change. 2023. URL: https://inno-ccus.dk/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/
State-of-CCUS-onlineudgave.pdf.
[11]
Xilong Wang et al. “PdCu supported on dendritic mesoporous CexZr1­xO2 as superior
catalysts to boost CO2 hydrogenation to methanol”. In: Journal of Colloid and Interface
Science (2022). URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2021.11.172.
[12]
Daniel Moreno et al. “Electrochemical CO2 conversion to formic acid using engineered
enzymatic catalysts in a batch reactor”. In: Journal of CO2 Utilization (2023). URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jcou.2023.102441.
[13]
Bruno Grignard et al. “Advances in the use of CO2 as a renewable feedstock for the
synthesis of polymers”. In: Chemical Society Reviews (2019). URL: https://doi.org/10.
1039/C9CS00047J.
[14]
F. Bodénan et al. “Ex situ mineral carbonation for CO2 mitigation: Evaluation of mining
waste resources, aqueous carbonation processability and life cycle assessment (Carmex
project)”. In: Minerals engineering (2014). URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mineng.2014.
01.011.
[15]
M. Bacatelo et al. “Life cycle assessment of synthetic natural gas production from captured
cement’s CO2 and green H2”. In: Journal of CO2 Utilization (2024). URL: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jcou.2024.102774.
[16]
Tomas Cordero­Lanzac et al. “A techno­economic and life cycle assessment for the pro­
duction of green methanol from CO2: catalyst and process bottlenecks”. In: Journal of
Energy Chemistry (2022). URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jechem.2021.09.045.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
60
==PAGE:69==
[17]
Yaser Khojasteh­Salkuyeh, Ehsan Mostafavi Omid Ashrafi, and Philippe Navarri. “CO2
utilization for methanol production; Part I: Process design and life cycle GHG assessment
of different pathways”. In: Journal of CO2 Utilization (2021). URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jcou.2021.101608.
[18]
Wieland Hoppe, Nils Thonemann, and Stefan Bringezu. “Life Cycle Assessment of Car­
bon Dioxide–Based Production of Methane and Methanol and Derived Polymers”. In:
Journal of Industrial Ecology (2017). URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12583.
[19]
Mosleh Uddin, Amanda Simson, and Mark Mba Wright. “Techno­economic and green­
house gas emission analysis of dimethyl ether production via the bi­reforming pathway for
transportation fuel”. In: Energy (2020). URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.119031.
[20]
Statista. Annual carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions worldwide from 1940 to 2023. 2023.
URL: https://www.statista.com/statistics/276629/global-co2-emissions/.
[21]
European Commission. Emissions Database for Global Atmospheric Research. 2023.
URL: https://edgar.jrc.ec.europa.eu/report_2023?vis=co2tot#emissions_table.
[22]
Eurostat. Greenhouse gas emission statistics ­ carbon footprints. 2024. URL: https://
ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics- explained/index.php?title=Greenhouse_gas_emission_
statistics_-_carbon_footprints.
[23]
Statista. Annual carbon dioxide emissions in Denmark from 1970 to 2022. 2023. URL:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/449517/co2-emissions-denmark/.
[24]
European Environment Agency. Greenhouse gas emissions by country and sector (info­
graphic). 2023. URL: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/pdfs/news/expert/2018/3/story/
20180301STO98928/20180301STO98928_en.pdf.
[25]
Alexander K. Voice and Esam Hamad. “Evaluating the thermodynamic potential for carbon
capture from internal combustion engines”. In: Transportation Engineering (2022). URL:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.treng.2022.100144.
[26]
Jennifer Wilcox. Carbon Capture. Springer Science and Business Media, 2012.
[27]
V. Bisinella, J. Nedenskov, and Christian Riber. “Environmental assessment of amend­
ing the Amager Bakke incineration plant in Copenhagen with carbon capture and stor­
age”. In: Waste Management and Research (2022). URL: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
0734242X211048125.
[28]
Danish Energy Agency. Punktkilder til CO2 – potentialer for CCS og CCU. 2022­opdatering.
2022. URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/CCS/punktkilder_til_co2_-_potentialer_for_
ccs_og_ccu_2022-opdatering.pdf.
[29]
Danish Eenrgy Agency. Forventet årlig udledning fra punktkilder i 2040. 2022. URL: https:
//ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/CCS/forventet_aarlig_udledning_fra_punktkilder_i_2040_0.
pdf.
[30]
Confederation of European Waste­to­Energy plants. Interactive Map of Waste­to­Energy
Plants. 2017. URL: https://www.cewep.eu/interactive-map/#chart_div.
[31]
V. Bisinella et al. “Environmental assessment of carbon capture and storage (CCS) as
a post­treatment technology in waste incineration”. In: Waste Management (2021). URL:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2021.04.046.
[32]
Dansk Gasteknisk Center. Bionaturgaskort 2022. 2022. URL: https://www.google.com/
maps/d/u/0/viewer?mid=1BplE3JdTnkv6G3-EFukUCRQFEmH-e_vt&ll=55.19131996618534%
2C12.164458546308996&z=8.
[33]
Anna S. Varling, Thomas H. Christensen, and Valentina Bisinella. “Life cycle assessment
of alternative biogas utilisations, including carbon capture and storage or utilisation”. In:
Waste Management (2023). URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2022.12.005.
[34]
Climate trace. Independent Greenhouse Gas Emissions Tracking. 2022. URL: https://
climatetrace.org/explore.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
61
==PAGE:70==
[35]
Michael Z. Hauschild, Ralph K. Rosenbaum, and Stig Irving Olsen. Life Cycle Assess­
ment. Theory and practice. Springer International Publishing, 2018.
[36]
State of green. Denmark to be Coal­Free by 2030. 2017. URL: https://stateofgreen.com/
en/news/denmark-to-be-coal-free-by-2030/.
[37]
Fortum. Waste types. Accessed on March 2024. URL: https://www.fortum.dk/services/
farligt-affald/affaldstyper.
[38]
Danish Energy Agency. Technology data: Carbon capture, transport and storage. 2021.
URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Analyser/technology_data_for_carbon_capture_
transport_and_storage.pdf.
[39]
Berend Smith. “Carbon Capture and Storage: introductory lecture”. In: Faraday Discus­
sions (2016). URL: https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/2016/fd/c6fd00148c.
[40]
Mohammad Khalid et al. Emerging Carbon Capture Technologies. Towards a Sustainable
Future. Elsevier, 2022.
[41]
DNV. Denmark as an European CO2­hub. 2024. URL: https://co2hubeurope.dk/wp-
content/uploads/2024/01/Denmark-as-a-European-CO2-hub-Final-Report.pdf.
[42]
Krysta Biniek et al. “Driving CO2 emissions to zero (and beyond) with carbon capture,
use, and storage”. In: McKinsey Sustainability (2020). URL: https://www.mckinsey.com/
capabilities/sustainability/our- insights/driving- co2- emissions- to- zero- and- beyond- with-
carbon-capture-use-and-storage#/.
[43]
International Energy Agency. Northern Lights. 2021. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/
ccus-around-the-world-in-2021/northern-lights.
[44]
National Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland. CO2 capture and storage. URL:
https://www.geus.dk/udforsk-geologien/fangst-og-lagring-af-co%e2%82%82-ccs.
[45]
ENERGINET. CO2RYLUS: CO2 storage in Stenlille. URL: https://energinet.dk/anlaegsprojekter/
projektliste/corylus-ccs-i-stenlille/.
[46]
National Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland. CO2­lagring. 2020. URL: https:
//issuu.com/geoviden/docs/geoviden_1_2020_book?fr=sYTM3YjIzODE0OTA)..
[47]
IDTechEX. Carbon Dioxide Utilization 2024­2044: Technologies, Market Forecasts, and
Players. 2024. URL: https : / / www . idtechex . com / en / research - report / carbon - dioxide -
utilization-2024-2044-technologies-market-forecasts-and-players/982.
[48]
Valentina Bisinella and Thomas H. Christensen. “Climate change impacts of introduc­
ing carbon capture and utilisation (CCU) in waste incineration”. In: Waste Management
(2021). URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2021.03.046.
[49]
Poul Thøis Madsen et al. “Abandoning fossil fuel production: What can be learned from
the Danish phase­out of oil and gas?” In: Energy research and Social Science (2023).
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2023.103211.
[50]
International Energy Agency. Putting CO2 to Use. Creating value from emissions. 2019.
URL: https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/50652405-26db-4c41-82dc-c23657893059/
Putting_CO2_to_Use.pdf.
[51]
Changsoo Kim et al. “Review of carbon dioxide utilization technologies and their potential
for industrial application”. In: Journal of CO2 Utilization (2022). URL: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jcou.2022.102239.
[52]
National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine. “Gaseous Carbon Waste
Streams Utilization: Status and Research Needs”. In: The National Academies Press,
2019. Chap. 5 Biological Utilization of CO2 into Chemicals and Fuels. URL: https://nap.
nationalacademies.org/read/25232/chapter/7.
[53]
C4­Carbon Capture Cluster Copenhagen. Omkostningseffektiv CO2­infrastruktur i hov­
edstadsområdet. 2023. URL: https://usercontent.one/wp/www.c4cph.dk/wp-content/
uploads / 2023 / 01 / Omkostningseffektiv - CO2 - infrastruktur - i - hovedstaden . pdf ? media =
1702547083.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
62
==PAGE:71==
[54]
Energi og Forsyningsministeriet Klima. Kommissorium for klyngesamarbejder om ud­
vikling af infrastruktur til og transport af CO2. 2022. URL: https://www.kefm.dk/Media/
637837154879507058/Kommissorium%20for%20klyngesamarbejder%20om%20udvikling%
20af%20infrastruktur%20til%20og%20transport%20af%20CO2.pdf.
[55]
Energy Danish Ministry of Climate and Utilities. The Goverment’s strategy for PtX. 2021.
URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/ptx/strategy_ptx.pdf.
[56]
MissionGreenFuels. Roadmap for Green Fuels in Transport and Industry Innomission 2.
2021. URL: https://missiongreenfuels.dk/wp- content/uploads/2023/06/Roadmap- for-
Green-Fuels-in-Transport-and-Industry-Innomission-2-2021-Updated-2023.pdf.
[57]
Energy Danish Ministry of Climate and Utilities. Green gas strategy: The role of gas in
the green transition. 2021. URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Naturgas/groen_
gasstrategi_en.pdf.
[58]
Technical University of Denmark. Green transportation. 2024. URL: https://www.dtu.dk/
english/news/topics/green-transportation#how-important-is-the-transportation-sector-to-
denmarks-co2-emissions.
[59]
Séverine Moret, Paul J. Dyson, and Gábor Laurenczy. “Direct synthesis of formic acid from
carbon dioxide by hydrogenation in acidic media”. In: Nature Communications (2014).
URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms5017.
[60]
ChemAnalyst. Decode the future of formic acid. 2023. URL: https://www.chemanalyst.
com/industry-report/formic-acid-market-688.
[61]
K. Kuusela et al. “The transformation of plastics production from net positive greenhouse
gas emissions to net negative: An environmental sustainability assessment of CO2­based
polypropylene”. In: Journal of CO2 utilization (2021). URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcou.
2021.101672.
[62]
Danish Ministry of Environment and Food. Preliminary assessment of plastic material
flows in Denmark. 2019. URL: https://www2.mst.dk/Udgiv/publications/2019/06/978-87-
7038-082-9.pdf.
[63]
Andrea Di Maria et al. “Environmental assessment of CO2 mineralisation for sustainable
construction materials”. In: International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control (2020). URL:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijggc.2019.102882.
[64]
Susanna Andreasi Bassi, Thomas H. Christensen, and Anders Damgaard. “Environmen­
tal performance of household waste management in Europe: An example of 7 countries”.
In: Waste management (2017). URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2017.07.042.
[65]
Mar Pérez­Fortes et al. “Methanol synthesis using captured CO2 as raw material:Techno­
economic and environmental assessment”. In: Applied Energy (2016). URL: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.07.067.
[66]
Fredrik Jonsson and Andrea Miljanovic. Utilization of waste heat from hydrogen produc­
tion: A case study on the Botnia Link H2 Project in Lulea, Sweden. 2022. URL: https:
//www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1670187/FULLTEXT01.pdf.
[67]
Matteo Micheli et al. “Life­Cycle Assessment of Power­to­Liquid Kerosene Produced from
Renewable Electricity and CO2 from Direct Air Capture in Germany”. In: Sustainability
(2022). URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/su141710658.
[68]
Rubén Aldaco et al. “Bringing value to the chemical industry from capture, storage and use
of CO2: A dynamic LCA of formic acid production”. In: Science of the Total Environment
(2019). URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.01.395.
[69]
Dongseong Kanga, Jaewon Byuna, and Jeehoon Han. “Electrochemical production of
formic acid from carbon dioxide: A life cycle assessment study”. In: Journal of Environ­
mental Chemical Engineering (2021). URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2021.106130.
[70]
Nicolai Sørensen. Hydrogen infrastructure. 2024. URL: https://en.energinet.dk/hydrogen/
hydrogen-infrastructure/.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
63
==PAGE:72==
[71]
Hesam Ostovari, André Sternberg, and André Bardow. “Rock ‘n’ use of CO2: carbon
footprint of carbon capture and utilization by mineralization”. In: Sustainable Energy and
Fuels (2020). URL: https://doi.org/10.1039/D0SE00190B.
[72]
Energinet. Danish electricity generation was greener than ever in 2020. 2021. URL: https:
//en.energinet.dk/About-our-news/News/2021/06/22/Danish-electricity-generation-was-
greener-than-ever-in-2020/.
[73]
Danish Energy Agency. Heat as a Service. 2021. URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/
Globalcooperation/final_ens_heatpump_as_a_service_lores_web.pdf.
[74]
Danish Energy Agency. Energy Statistics 2022: Data, tables, statistics and maps. 2023.
URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Statistik/energy_statistic_2022.pdf.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
64
==PAGE:73==
A
Inventory of point source emissions
In this section further details on the construction process of the inventory are presented.
As mentioned in section 3.1 a cut­off criterion of 25,000 tonnes of CO2 emissions per year was
established for the facilities to be included in the inventory. This criterion was established based
on the capture possibilities, although it is recognized that it could be subject to questioning.
The Danish Energy Agency technology catalogue on carbon capture [38] mentions that the
number of full load hours is a very important factor in the economics of a CO2 capture plant
and the calculations show that the capture costs increase significantly if the number of full­load
hours becomes less than 2 – 3,000 hours [28]. The DEA technology catalogue also indicates
that the size of the facility does not have such a great impact on the economics of the catchment
facilities [28], as it can be seen on Figure A.1.
Figure A.1: Capture costs as a function of plant size and full load hours, based on the technology
catalogue [28].
However, the existing amine­based carbon capture plants have only been designed with capac­
ities ranging from 10 to 200 tonnes CO2 output/h [38]. If we take the smallest capture capacity
of 10 tonnes CO2 output/h and the economical reasonable number of full load hours of 2,000,
accounting also for the capture efficiency, around 25,000 tonnes of CO2 input per year are ob­
tained. Based on this calculation the cut­off criterion was established, but it is clear that it should
be considered that this level could be lowered as we move forward with capture technologies
improvements, meaning that the CO2 capture potential could be increased.
In the following pages, the constructed inventory for CO2 point source emitters in Denmark is
presented. It includes the facility name, the corresponding sector, the exact location, comments
regarding the status of CO2 capture, if any, additional comments and the estimated emissions
for both 2024 and 2040.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
65
==PAGE:74==
Moreover, Table A.1 summarizes the obtained results for the total emissions for year 2024 and
year 2040 divided by sectors, while Table A.2 summarizes the obtained results divided by type
of CO2.
Table A.1: Summary of total emissions in 2024 and 2040 divided by sectors.
2024
2040
Waste
3.61
3.73
Industry
4.92
2.09
El and distric heating
7.00
3.70
Biogas
0.65
1.48
TOTAL
16.19
10.99
Table A.2: Summary of total emissions in 2024 and 2040 divided by type.
2024
2040
Biogenic
9.90
8.60
Fossil
4.57
1.77
Process
1.72
0.63
TOTAL
16.19
10.99
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
66
==PAGE:75==
CO2 point source 
Type
Location
Already capturing CO2?
Note
Emissions 
2024/2025 
(kton/year)
Emissions estimated for 
2040
Aalborg incinerator (RenoNord)
Waste
Troensevej 2, 9220 Aalborg
There are plans for capturing the CO2 
and using it in PtX in collaboration with 
Copenhagen Infrastructure partners
223.5
100-500 kton/year
Aarhus (Circuit Energipark Lisbjerg)
Waste
Ølstedvej 20, 8200 Aarhus
192
100-500 kton/year
Aars (Aars District Heating amba)
Waste
Dybvad Mølle Vej 1, 9600 Aars
70.3
25-50 kton/year
Amager Resource Center
Waste
Vindmøllevej 6, 2300 København
400
>500 kton/year
Esbjerg waste facility (Energist)
Waste
Måde Industrivej 35, 6705 Esbjerg Ø
165.6
100-500 kton/year
Fortum Waste Solution A/S
Waste
Lindholmvej 3, 5800 Nyborg
They have a joint project with Odense 
waste facility to capture and 
use/storage CO2
This facility works removing hazardous 
substances from complex and dangerous 
waste. They convert hazardous waste into 
energy. It does not follow regular 
composition of waste in Dk
500
100-500 kton/year
Glostrup incineration plant
Waste
Ejby Mosevej 219, 2600 Glostrup
630
100-500 kton/year
Hjorring energy plant (Nordvaerk)
Waste
Miljøvej 8, 9800 Hjørring
99.3
50-100 kton/year
Horsens waste facility (Fjernvarme Horsen Waste
Endelavevej 7, 8700 Horsens
Combination of waste and NG
82
50-100 kton/year
Hørsholm (Norfors)
Waste
Savsvinget 2, 2970 Hørsholm
99.3
100-500 kton/year
Hostelbro (MAABJERG ENERGY CENTER)
Waste
Energivej 2, 7500 Holstebro
135
100-500 kton/year
Kolding waste facility (Energist)
Waste
Bronzevej 6, 6000 Kolding
155
50-100 kton/year
Næstved Waste energy
Waste
Ved Fjorden 20, 4700 Næstved
105
50-100 kton/year
Nykøbing F (I/S REFA)
Waste
Energivej 4, 4800 Nykøbing Falster
110
50-100 kton/year
Odense waste facility  (Fjernvarme Fyn)
Waste
Havnegade 120, 5000 Odense C
They have a joint project with  Finnish 
group Fortum to capture and 
use/storage CO2
270
100-500 kton/year
Roskilde cogeneration plant (ARGO)
Waste
Håndværkervej 70, 4000 Roskilde
190
100-500 kton/year
Skanderborg (Renosyd)
Waste
Norgesvej 13, 8660 Skanderborg
72
25-50 kton/year
Sonderborg 
Waste
Vestermark 16, 6400 Sønderborg
60
25-50 kton/year
Thirsted waste facility
Waste
Industrivej 9, 7700 Thisted
53
25-50 kton/year
Aalborg Portland A/S
Industry
Rørdalsvej 44, 9220 Aalborg
Ambition to establish Denmark's first 
CO2 capture plant on an industrial 
scale by 2030. Pilot project CORT with 
DTU in 2022. New project ConsenCUS 
at 2023 with several partners
Cement production
1975
>500 kton/year
Ardagh Glass Holmegaard A/S
Industry
Glasværksvej 52,  4684 Holmegaard
Glass production
50
25-50 kton/year
Arla Foods Ingredients Arinco
Industry
Mælkevejen 2, 4,  6920 Videbæk
Animal and vegetable products from the 
food and beverage sector
100
50-100 kton/year
Arla Foods Ingredients Danmark Protein
Industry
Sønderupvej 26,  6920 Videbæk
Animal and vegetable products from the 
food and beverage sector
100
50-100 kton/year
Brødrene Hartmann A/S
Industry
Hartmannsvej 2,  6270 Tønder
Paper and pulp
50
25-50 kton/year
CP Kelco ApS
Industry
Ved Banen 16,  4623 Lille Skensved
Food and beverage industry
50
25-50 kton/year
Crossbridge Energy A/S
Industry
Egeskovvej 265, 7000 Fredericia
Second refinery in DK
619
100-500 kton/year
Dansk Salt A/S - Nobian
Industry
Hadsundvej 17,  9550 Mariager
Different chemicals, including chlorine, 
caustic…
100
50-100 kton/year
Duferco Danish Steel A/S
Industry
Havnevej 47, 3300 Frederiksværk
Steel production
100
50-100 kton/year
Egernsund Wienerberger Production (TeglbIndustry
Amtsvejen 29,  6400 Sønderborg
Bricks production/ mineral industry
50
25-50 kton/year
Kalundborg Refinery A/S
Industry
Melbyvej 10, 4400 Kalundborg
Biggest refinery in DK
1287
>500 kton/year
Kerry Glamsbjerg
Industry
Toftegårdsvej 3,  5620 Glamsbjerg
Food and beverage industry
50
25-50 kton/year
Leca Danmark A/S
Industry
Randersvej 75, 8940 Favrskov
Bricks production/ mineral industry 
100
50-100 kton/year
Nordic Sugar
Industry
Østerbrogade 2 E, 4800 Nykøbing Falster
Sugar, molasses and animal feed 
production
105
50-100 kton/year
Nordic Sugar A/S Nakskov
Industry
Tietgensvej 1,  4900 Nakskov
Animal and vegetable products from the 
food and beverage sector
66
25-50 kton/year
Protein & Oliefabrikken Scanola,                B Industry
Tongavej 5,  8000 Aarhus
Different products for the food sector
50
25-50 kton/year
Rockwool A/S
Industry
Rockwoolvej 2,  9500 Hobro
Glass production
16
25-50 kton/year
Skagen Cementstøberi A/S
Industry
Drogden 3,  9990 Skagen
Concrete and blocks production
50
25-50 kton/year
Amagerværket Block 4
El and district 
heating
Vindmøllevej 48, 2300 København S
(AMV1) is fired with wood pellets, 
producing 250 MJ/s heat and 68 MW 
electricity. AMV4 is fired with wood chips, 
producing 400 MJ/s heat and 150 MW 
electricity. 
250
Together with 
Svanemølle plant >500 
kton/year
Asnæsværket
El and district 
heating
Asnæsvej 16, 4400 Kalundborg
There are plans for capturing the CO2 
and trasnporting it, together with CO2 
from Avedore plant, it til storing site in 
Norwegian area of North Sea. Using 
Aker Carbon Capture Units
Owned by Orsted, run on wood chips and 
with a power-generating capacity: 26 MW 
and a heat-generating capacity: 125 MJ/s
500
100-500 kton/year
Avedøre plant
El and district 
heating
Hammerholmen 50, 2650 Hvidovre
There are plans for capturing the CO2, 
transporting it to Kalundborg and from 
there transporting it til storing site in 
Norwegian area of North Sea
Unit 1 runs on wood pellets producing 254 
MW electricity and 359 MWth heat. Unit 2 
runs on wood pellets and straw in two 
separate boilers to produce 394 MW 
electricity and 497 MWth heat
250
Together with HC Orsted 
> 500 kton/year
Bornholms Energi & Forsyning
El and district 
heating
Skansevej 2, 3700 Rønne
50
25-50 kton/year
Brønderslev flisværk og solvarme
El and district 
heating
Øster Kærvej 50, 9700 Brønderslev
The plant integrates two methods to heat 
thermal oil parallel: a 16.6 MW solar field 
and two 10 MW biomass boilers (local 
wood chips)
100
50-100 kton/year
Esbjerg
El and district 
heating
Sahara 2, 6700 Esbjerg
New district heating system receives 
contributions from a 50 MW seawater 
heat pump , a 60 MW wood chip boiler 
plant and a 30 MW electric cartridge .
1184
50-100 kton/year
==PAGE:76==
Fjernvarme Fyn (Odense)
El and district 
heating
Havnegade 120, 5000 Odense C
In Spring 2024, the Fjernvarme Fyn will run 
out of coal. The production willl be based 
on wood chips and straw
500
100-500 kton/year
Fjernvarme Horsens
El and district 
heating
Endelavevej 7, 8700 Horsens
Runs on natural gas and biomass. For most 
of the year, the heat demand in the 
commune can be met with waste 
incineration
100
50-100 kton/year
Grenå Kraftvarmeværk
El and district 
heating
Kalorievej 11, 8500 Grenå
Run on wood chips and wood pellets and 
producing around 50 MW
50
25-50 kton/year
H.C. Ørsted
El and district 
heating
Energiporten 1, 2450 København
Runs on natural gas and produces 21 MW 
electricity and 292 MJ7s
250 øre plant > 500 kton/year
Haderslev Fjernvarme's
El and district 
heating
Fjordagervej 15, 6100 Haderslev
Wood chip fired power plant
50
25-50 kton/year
Herningværket
El and district 
heating
Miljøvej 6, 7400 Herning
This plant is owned by Orsted and has a 
power generation capacity of 88 MW and 
heat generation capacity of 191 MJ/s. It is 
run on wood chips supplemented when 
needed with wood pellets
500
100-500 kton/year
Hillerod (various plants)
El and district 
heating
Hestehavevej 1, 3400 Hillerød
Different plants to supply Hillerod 
commune, mainly run on NG and wood 
pellets or chips. Production of around 78 
MW
50
25-50 kton/year
Hjorring energy plant (Nordvaerk)
El and district 
heating
Miljøvej 8, 9800 Hjørring
Mainly energy from waste, but also sludge 
from waste water facilities
50
25-50 kton/year
Koge CHP plant
El and district 
heating
Værftsvej 2, 4600 Køge
Runs on Wood chips, production ??
500
100-500 kton/year
Maribo-Sakskøbing Combined Heat and Po
El and district 
heating
Tømmervej 1, 4990 Sakskøbing
This straw-fired CHP plant produces 
9.7MWe output of electricityand 20 MW 
of heat
100
50-100 kton/year
Masnedø Power Plant
El and district 
heating
Danmarksvej 1, 4760 Vordingborg
Masnedøværket produces both electricity 
for the grid (approx. 36,000 Mwh/year) 
and district heating for the town of 
Vordingborg (approx. 105,000 Mwh/year). 
The production is based exclusively on 
biofuels, divided into approx. 33,000 t 
straw/year and 15,000 t wood chips/year.
50
25-50 kton/year
Nakskov tile factory                          
Nakskov straw factory                         
Nakskov emergency supply company
El and district 
heating
Savnsøvej 4, 4900 Nakskov               
Drammenvej 1, 4900 Nakskov 
Svingelsvej 2, 4900 Nakskov
Nakskov tile factory has 2 wood chip 
boilers with a total output of 19 MW. 
Nakskov straw factory has 3 straw boilers 
with a total output of 22.5 MW. At 
Nakskov emergency supply company there 
are 2 newly renovated oil boilers with a 
total output of 20 MW.
This last plant is used exclusively as an 
emergency supply plant.
50
25-50 kton/year
SK Forsyning A/S
El and district 
heating
Trafikcenter Alle 32, 4200 Slagelse
Run on straw
50
25-50 kton/year
Skærbæk 
El and district 
heating
Klippehagevej 22, 7000 Fredericia
This plant is owned by Orsted and has a 
power generation capacity of 390 MW and 
heat generation capacity of 579 MJ/s. It is 
run on wood chips 
500
100-500 kton/year
Studstrupværket
El and district 
heating
Ny Studstrupvej 14, 8541 Skødstrup
Run on wood pellets and has a power-
generating capacity: 362 MW and a
heat-generating capacity: 513 MJ/s
1120
100-500 kton/year
Svanemølle heat generating plant
El and district 
heating
Lautrupskaj 5, 2100 København
Runs on natural gas and it has a Heat-
generating capacity of 256 MJ/s
250 ck 4 plant >500 kton/year
Verdo, Kraftvarmeværk
El and district 
heating
Kulholmsvej 12, 8930 Randers
Run on wood chips and wood pellets and 
producing around 200 MW
500
100-500 kton/year
Andekærgård biogas ApS
Biogas
Kragekærvej 12, 5700 Svendborg
CO2 captured with membrane
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 900
6.5
<25 kton/year
Ausumgaard (AU Windmills I/S)
Biogas
Holstebrovej 101, 7560 Hjerm
CO2 captured with membrane
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 600
4.4
<25 kton/year
BB Biogas aps.
Biogas
Ålstrupvej 68, 9760 Vrå
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 2200
16.0
<25 kton/year
Beer good Biogas
Biogas
Hjeddingvej 8, 6870 Ølgod
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 700
5.1
<25 kton/year
Biofos Avedøre / HOFOR
Biogas
Kanalholmen 28, 2650 Hvidovre
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 300
2.2
<25 kton/year
Biogas Taagholm P/S (Rødekro)
Biogas
Tågholmvej 2, 6230 Rødekro
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 700
5.1
25-50 kton/year
Flemløse (Glamsbjerg)
Biogas
Karlemosevej 3, 5620 Glamsbjerg
CO2 captured with membrane
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 900
6.5
<25 kton/year
Fredericia Wastewater A/S
Biogas
Røde Banke 16, 7000 Fredericia
CO2 captured with water scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 200
1.5
<25 kton/year
Frijsenborg Biogas
Biogas
Fuglsangvej 102, 8450 Hammel
CO2 captured with membrane
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 1500
10.9
<25 kton/year
GFE Krogenskær P/S
Biogas
Vildmosevej 21, 9700 Brønderslev
CO2 captured with water scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 900
6.5
<25 kton/year
Grauballegaard Biogas
Biogas
Allingevej 13B, 8632 Lemming
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 700
5.1
<25 kton/year
GreenLab Skive Biogas ApS
Biogas
Kåstrupvej 22, 7860 Spøttrup
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 2800
20.3
<25 kton/year
Grøngas Vraa A/S
Biogas
Grøngasvej 13, 9760 Vrå
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 1600
11.6
<25 kton/year
Grønhøj Biogas
Biogas
Mønstedvej 32a, 7470 Karup
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 800
5.8
<25 kton/year
Horsen's bioenergy
Biogas
Ålkærgårdvej 13, 8700 Horsens
CO2 captured with amine scrubber + 
water scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 2800
20.3
25-50 kton/year
Iglsø Biogas
Biogas
Øster Børstingvej 6, 7850 Stoholm
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 900
6.5
<25 kton/year
Kalundborg Bioenergy
Biogas
Asnæsvej 14A, 4400 Kalundborg
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 3500
25.4
25-50 kton/year
Kerteminde Biogas
Biogas
Odensevej 250, 5300 Kerteminde
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 500
3.6
<25 kton/year
==PAGE:77==
Large biogas
Biogas
Storde 1, 6261 Bredebro
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 900
6.5
25-50 kton/year
LBT agro K/S
Biogas
Dammenvej 139, 9800 Hjørring
CO2 captured with water scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 800
5.8
<25 kton/year
Limfjorden's biogas
Biogas
Næssundvej 234, 7970 Morsø
CO2 captured with water scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 1500
10.9
<25 kton/year
Linkogas a.m.b.a.
Biogas
Tornumvej 15, 6660 Lintrup
CO2 captured with 2 x water scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 2400
17.4
<25 kton/year
Lykkeslund Bioenergy
Biogas
Holemarken 24, 5450 Otterup
CO2 captured with membrane
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 400
2.9
<25 kton/year
Madsen bioenergy
Biogas
Skivevej 47, 7860 Spøttrup
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 600
4.4
<25 kton/year
Naturbiogas Sode A/S
Biogas
Sodegade 12, 6100 Haderslev
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 2200
16.0
<25 kton/year
Nature Energy Båndlev
Biogas
Bjergagervej 4, 8380 Trige
CO2 captured with water scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 2000
14.5
<25 kton/year
Nature Energy Glosses
Biogas
Glansager, 6400 Sønderborg
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 2500
18.1
<25 kton/year
Nature Energy Holsted
Biogas
Grindstedvej 4, 6670 Holsted
CO2 captured with amine scrubber + 
water scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 3400
24.7
25-50 kton/year
Nature Energy Home
Biogas
Tinghøjvej 13, 6893 Hemmet
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 1100
8.0
<25 kton/year
Nature Energy König
Biogas
Næstvedvej 392, 4750 Lundby
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 2300
16.7
25-50 kton/year
Nature Energy Korskro
Biogas
Lunde Hovedvej 51, 6705 Esbjerg
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 2500
18.1
25-50 kton/year
Nature Energy Månsson
Biogas
Grarupvej 15, 7330 Brande
CO2 captured with 2 x amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 2100
15.2
25-50 kton/year
Nature Energy Midtfyn
Biogas
Lervangsvej 2, 5672 Broby
CO2 captured with amine scrubber + 
water scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 3500
25.4
25-50 kton/year
Nature Energy North Funen
Biogas
Odensevej 156, 5400 Bogense
CO2 captured with amine scrubber + 
water scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 3100
22.5
25-50 kton/year
Nature Energy Vaarst
Biogas
Torderupvej 23, 9260 Gistrup
CO2 captured with water scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 1200
8.7
<25 kton/year
Nature Energy Videbæk
Biogas
Skjernvej 55 A, 6920 Videbæk
CO2 captured with water scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 2600
18.9
<25 kton/year
OL Farm biogas
Biogas
Løjstrupvej 12b, 8870 Langå
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 600
4.4
<25 kton/year
Outrup Biogas
Biogas
Lundtangvej 171 A, 6855 Outrup
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 900
6.5
<25 kton/year
Ribe Biogas
Biogas
Koldingvej 19, 6760 Ribe
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 1800
13.1
<25 kton/year
Ringsted biogas
Biogas
Mulstrup Møllevej 10, 4100 Ringsted
CO2 captured with membrane
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 500
3.6
<25 kton/year
Rønnovsholm
Biogas
Guldagervej 404, 9800 Hjørring
CO2 captured with water scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 500
3.6
<25 kton/year
Rybjerg Biogas P/S
Biogas
Rustedmøllevej 1, 7870 Roslev
CO2 captured with membrane
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 600
4.4
<25 kton/year
SBS Kliplev
Biogas
Kliplev Hjemeshovej 10, 6200 Aabenraa
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 6000
43.5
25-50 kton/year
Sindal Biogas
Biogas
Ugiltvej 20, 9870 Sindal
CO2 captured with membrane
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 1000
7.3
<25 kton/year
Sønderjysk Biogas Bevtoft A/S
Biogas
Langvej 65, 6541 Bevtoft
CO2 captured with 2 x amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 5600
40.6
25-50 kton/year
Sunred Biogas
Biogas
Åmarken 6, 4623 Lille Skensved
CO2 captured with water scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 2000
14.5
<25 kton/year
Thorsø Biogas
Biogas
Kongensbrovej 10, 8881 Thorsø
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 1800
13.1
<25 kton/year
Vesthimmerland Biogas
Biogas
Holmevej 98, 9640 Farsø
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 4000
29.0
25-50 kton/year
Vinkel Bioenergi Aps
Biogas
Vasehøjvej 16, 7840 Højslev
CO2 captured with amine scrubber
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 5500
39.9
25-50 kton/year
Vrejlev Bioenergy
Biogas
Vrejlev Møllevej 11, 9760 Vrå
CO2 captured with 2 x membrane
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 900
6.5
<25 kton/year
West Jutland Biogas aps.
Biogas
Arnborgvej 35, 6900 Skjern
CO2 captured with membrane
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 600
4.4
<25 kton/year
Zastrow Bioenergi aps.
Biogas
Langehede 71, 5450 Otterup
CO2 captured with membrane
Biogas production (Nm3/h): 400
2.9
<25 kton/year
==PAGE:78==
B
Hubs details
In this Appendix a detailed inventory of the main point sources for the proposed hubs is pre­
sented. The smallest considered points (<50 kton/year) were eliminated from the map in Fig­
ure 3.2 just for easier identification of the hubs.
In Figure B.1 the location of the main point sources in the Copenhagen + Kalundborg hub is
presented and Table B.1 shows the list of them.
Figure B.1: Main point sources in Copenhagen + Kalundborg hub.
Table B.1: Inventory of point sources considered in Copenhagen+Kalundborg hub.
CO2 point source
Sector
Location
Emissions 2024
(kton/year)
Emissions 2040
(kton/year)
Amagerværket Block 4
El and district heating
Vindmøllevej 48, 2300 København S
250
250
Amager Resource Center
Waste
Vindmøllevej 6, 2300 København
400
500
Avedøre plant
El and district heating
Hammerholmen 50, 2650 Hvidovre
250
250
H.C. Ørsted
El and district heating
Energiporten 1, 2450 København
250
250
Svanemølle heat generating plant
El and district heating
Lautrupskaj 5, 2100 København
250
250
Glostrup incineration plant
Waste
Ejby Mosevej 219, 2600 Glostrup
630
300
Hørsholm (Norfors)
Waste
Savsvinget 2, 2970 Hørsholm
99.3
300
Koge CHP plant
El and district heating
Værftsvej 2, 4600 Køge
500
300
Roskilde cogeneration plant (ARGO)
Waste
Håndværkervej 70, 4000 Roskilde
190
300
Duferco Danish Steel A/S
Industry
Havnevej 47, 3300 Frederiksværk
100
75
Næstved Waste energy
Waste
Ved Fjorden 20, 4700 Næstved
105
75
Kalundborg Refinery A/S
Industry
Melbyvej 10, 4400 Kalundborg
1287
500
Asnæsværket
El and district heating
Asnæsvej 16, 4400 Kalundborg
500
300
Total (Mt/year)
4.81
3.65
Table B.2 below shows the main point sources corresponding to Odense + Fredericia hub,
geographically displayed in Figure B.2.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
70
==PAGE:79==
Figure B.2: Main point sources in Odense + Fredericia hub.
Table B.2: Inventory of point sources considered in Odense + Fredericia hub.
CO2 point source
Type
Location
Emissions 2024
(kton/year)
Emissions 2040
(kton/year)
Fortum Waste Solution A/S
Waste
Lindholmvej 3, 5800 Nyborg
500
300
Odense waste facility (Fjernvarme Fyn)
Waste
Havnegade 120, 5000 Odense C
270
300
Fjernvarme Fyn (Odense)
El and district heating
Havnegade 120, 5000 Odense C
500
300
Kolding waste facility (Energist)
Waste
Bronzevej 6, 6000 Kolding
155
75
Crossbridge Energy A/S
Industry
Egeskovvej 265, 7000 Fredericia
619
300
Fjernvarme Horsens
El and district heating
Endelavevej 7, 8700 Horsens
100
75
Total (Mt/year)
2.14
1.35
Table B.3 below shows the main point sources corresponding to Aarhus hub, geographically
displayed in Figure B.3.
Figure B.3: Main point sources in Aarhus hub.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
71
==PAGE:80==
Table B.3: Inventory of point sources considered in Aarhus hub.
CO2 point source
Type
Location
Emissions 2024
(kton/year)
Emissions 2040
(kton/year)
Aarhus (Circuit Energipark Lisbjerg)
Waste
Ølstedvej 20, 8200 Aarhus
192
300
Studstrupværket
El and district heating
Ny Studstrupvej 14, 8541 Skødstrup
1120
300
Leca Danmark A/S
Industry
Randersvej 75, 8940 Favrskov
100
75
Verdo, Kraftvarmeværk
El and district heating
Kulholmsvej 12, 8930 Randers
500
300
Dansk Salt A/S ­ Nobian
Industry
Hadsundvej 17, 9550 Mariager
100
75
Total (Mt/year)
2.01
1.05
Table B.4 below shows the main point sources corresponding to Aalborg hub, geographically
displayed in Figure B.4.
Figure B.4: Main point sources in Aalborg hub.
Table B.4: Inventory of point sources considered in Aalborg hub.
CO2 point source
Type
Location
Emissions 2024
(kton/year)
Emissions 2040
(kton/year)
Aalborg incinerator (RenoNord)
Waste
Troensevej 2, 9220 Aalborg
223.5
300
Aalborg Portland A/S
Industry
Rørdalsvej 44, 9220 Aalborg
1975
500
Brønderslev flisværk og solvarme
El and district heating
Øster Kærvej 50, 9700 Brønderslev
100
75
Hjorring energy plant (Nordvaerk)
Waste
Miljøvej 8, 9800 Hjørring
149.3
112.5
Total (Mt/year)
2.45
0.99
Table B.5 below shows the main point sources corresponding to Esbjerg hub, geographically
displayed in Figure B.5.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
72
==PAGE:81==
Figure B.5: Main point sources in Esbjerg hub.
Table B.5: Inventory of point sources considered in Esbjerg hub.
CO2 point source
Type
Location
Emissions 2024
(kton/year)
Emissions 2040
(kton/year)
Esbjerg waste facility (Energist)
Waste
Måde Industrivej 35, 6705 Esbjerg Ø
165.6
300
Esbjerg
El and district heating
Sahara 2, 6700 Esbjerg
1184
75
Total (Mt/year)
1.35
0.38
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
73
==PAGE:82==
C
Data quality assessment
As previously mentioned, a method to keep truck of the data and to quantify the quality was
performed. The method developed by Weidema and Wesnæs was used for each collected
parameter, as described in [64].
This method includes 5 categories: technological, geographical and time­related representa­
tiveness, completeness and reliability. Each parameter collected is assigned a value from 1
to 5 for each category, where one indicates robustness and 5 lack of data. The score in each
category for the overall processes was calculated as the average of the score of the parameters
in each category.
The overall data quality or Data Quality Rating (DQR) for each parameter and each process
was calculated following Equation C.1.
DQR = TeR + GR + TiR + C + R + Xw ∗4
i + 4
(C.1)
Where:
• TeR, GR, TiR, C and R are the data quality indicators, being TeR the Technological repre­
sentativeness, GR the geographical representativeness, TiR the time­related representa­
tiveness, C the completeness and R the reliability.
• Xw is the weakest quality level obtained, that is equal to the highest numeric value among
the data quality indicators.
• i is the numer of data quality indicators.
The DQR can be used to identify the quality level of a data set according to the ranking presented
in Table C.1.
Table C.1: Overall quality level of a data set according to the DQR [64].
Overall data quality rating (DQR)
Overall data quality level
1.6
High quality
>1.6 to 3
Basic quality
>3 to 5
Data estimate
The obtained results are presented in the table of next page.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
74
==PAGE:83==
Process
Data
Technological representativeness
Geographical correlation
Temporal correlation
Completeness
Reliability
DQR
MEA consumption
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
NaOH consumption
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Electricity
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Heat
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Carbon losses
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Average for process
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Electricity
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Heat
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Average for process
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Distance
3.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
3.00
2.33
Trucks
4.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
3.00
3.22
Carbon losses
4.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
3.44
Average for process
3.67
1.67
1.33
2.67
3.00
3.00
Loading
2.00
2.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
2.56
Shipping
4.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
3.00
3.22
Carbon losses
4.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
3.44
Unloading
2.00
2.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
2.56
Average for process
3.00
2.00
1.75
3.25
2.50
2.83
Distance
3.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
3.00
2.33
Trucks
4.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
3.00
3.22
Carbon losses
4.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
3.44
Average for process
3.67
1.67
1.33
2.67
3.00
3.00
Electricity
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Distance
3.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
3.00
2.33
Carbon losses
4.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
3.44
Average for process
3.00
1.67
1.33
2.67
2.67
2.59
Electricity
3.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
2.89
Heat
3.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
2.89
Average for process
3.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
3.00
2.89
Distance
3.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
3.00
2.33
Trucks
4.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
3.00
3.22
Carbon losses
4.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
3.44
Average for process
3.67
1.67
1.33
2.67
3.00
3.00
Water consumption
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Electricity
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Heat
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Wastewater production
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Average for process
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Electricity
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Carbon losses
4.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
3.44
Methane substitution ratio
2.00
2.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
3.33
Average for process
2.67
2.00
2.33
3.67
2.33
3.07
Electricity
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Carbon losses
4.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
3.44
Methanol substitution
2.00
2.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
3.33
Average for process
2.67
2.00
2.33
3.67
2.33
3.07
Electricity
2.00
2.00
1.00
4.00
3.00
3.11
Carbon losses
4.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
3.44
Kerosene substitution ratio
2.00
2.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
3.33
Average for process
2.67
2.00
2.33
4.00
2.67
3.30
Water consumption
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Electricity
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Heat
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Wastewater production
2.00
2.00
1.00
3.00
2.00
2.44
Carbon losses
4.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
3.00
3.44
Formic acid substitution ratio
2.00
2.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
3.33
Average for process
2.33
2.00
1.67
3.33
2.17
2.76
Consumption of sludge from stainless steel
2.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
3.11
Heat
2.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
3.11
Electricity
2.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
3.11
Water consumption
2.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
3.11
Sand
2.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
3.11
Wastewater production
2.00
2.00
2.00
4.00
2.00
3.11
PC blocks substitution ratio
2.00
2.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
3.33
Average for process
2.00
2.00
2.29
4.00
2.00
3.14
Water consumption
1.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
2.00
1.78
Sand
1.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
2.00
1.78
Gravel
1.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
2.00
1.78
Cement
1.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
2.00
1.78
Average for process
1.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
2.00
1.78
Electricity
2.00
2.00
1.00
4.00
2.00
3.00
Heat
2.00
2.00
1.00
4.00
2.00
3.00
Water consumption
2.00
2.00
1.00
4.00
2.00
3.00
Wastewater production
2.00
2.00
1.00
4.00
2.00
3.00
Polypropylene substitution ratio
2.00
2.00
4.00
4.00
2.00
3.33
Average for process
2.00
2.00
1.60
4.00
2.00
3.07
2.80 Basic quality
Methanol 
production
Kerosene 
production
Formic acid 
production
Polypropylene 
production
OVERALL DATA QUALITY LEVEL
Carbonated blocks 
production
PC based concrete 
blocks production
Methane production
Capture with amine 
absorption
Liquefaction
Transport to port
Ship transport
Transport to 
pipeline connection
Transport by 
pipeline
Storage
Transport to 
production facilities
Hydrogen 
production
==PAGE:84==
D
Life cycle inventory details
In this Appendix, tables with complementary information on the Life cycle inventory are pre­
sented.
Table D.1: Ecoinvent database selected processes for modelling the CO2 transportation by ship
and by lorry. Ecoinvent version 3.10 with consequential system model.
Activity name
Unit
Geography
transport, freight, sea, container ship with reefer, cooling
metric ton*km
Global
market for transport, freight, lorry with reefer, cooling
metric ton*km
Global
Table D.2: Inventory for hydrogen production.
Inputs
Amount
Water
16.8 kg/kg H2
Electricity
58.0 kWh/kg H2
Ouputs
Amount
Water
7.2 kg/kg H2
Oxygen
8.4 kg/kg H2
Heat
62.4 MJ/kg H2
Table D.3: Inventory for PC based concrete traditional blocks production.
Inputs
Amount
Cement
14.4 kg
Gravel
48.0 MJ
Water
7.2 kg
Outputs
Amount
PC based concrete traditional blocks
94.4 kg
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
76
==PAGE:85==
E
Life cycle impact assessment further
results
This Appendix includes complementary information related to the life cycle impact assessment
results.
E.1
Single technologies
Table E.1 and Table E.2 show the CC impact results for the evaluated single technologies for
the different sectors in 2024 and in 2040.
Table E.1: CC results for the evaluated single technologies and for each of the sectors in 2024.
Climate change (kg CO2 eq/ton CO2 adressed in corresponding sector)
Tech/Sector
100% fossil
100% biogenic
Waste
Industry
El and dh
Biogas
Emitted
1000.00
0.00
390.00
850.00
100.00
0.00
Offshore storage
386.83
­613.17
­223.17
236.83
­513.17
­613.17
Onshore storage
352.25
­647.75
­257.75
202.25
­547.75
­647.75
E­fuels methane
528.74
­471.26
­81.26
378.74
­371.26
­471.26
E­fuels methanol
583.60
­416.40
­26.40
433.60
­316.40
­416.40
E­fuels kerosene
775.64
­224.36
165.64
625.64
­124.36
­224.36
Formic acid
1949.75
949.75
1339.75
1799.75
1049.75
949.75
Polypropylene
600.43
­399.57
­9.57
450.43
­299.57
­399.57
Building materials
373.25
197.75
266.19
346.92
215.30
197.75
Table E.2: CC results for the evaluated single technologies and for each of the sectors in 2040.
Climate change (kg CO2 eq/ton CO2 adressed in corresponding sector)
Tech/Sector
100% fossil
100% biogenic
Waste
Industry
El and dh
Biogas
Emitted
1000.00
0.00
250.00
700.00
0.00
0.00
Offshore storage
246.80
­753.20
­503.20
­53.20
­753.20
­753.20
Onshore storage
211.24
­788.76
­538.76
­88.76
­788.76
­788.76
E­fuels methane
737.09
­262.91
­12.91
437.09
­262.91
­262.91
E­fuels methanol
619.40
­380.60
­130.60
319.40
­380.60
­380.60
E­fuels kerosene
1087.64
87.64
337.64
787.64
87.64
87.64
Formic acid
­1524.68
­2524.68
­2274.68
­1824.68
­2524.68
­2524.68
Polypropylene
304.92
­695.08
­445.08
4.92
­695.08
­695.08
Building materials
­48.26
­223.76
­179.89
­100.91
­223.76
­223.76
Figure E.1, Figure E.2 and Figure E.3 show the contribution analysis for the different single
technologies in 2024 for the different sectors and Figure E.4, Figure E.5 and Figure E.6 in
2040.
A detailed contribution analysis for the single technologies is presented in this study, but only for
the waste sector. The other sectors detailed contribution analysis looks similar varying the rele­
vance of the storage, the CO2 losses and the final release of the CCU products after utilisation,
as seen trough Figure E.1, Figure E.2 and Figure E.3.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure E.7 and Figure E.8 show the contribution analysis for offshore and onshore storage of
CO2.
Figure E.9 shows the contribution analysis of the entire methane production line, while Fig­
ure E.10 shows the contribution analysis inside the production process of methane itself.
Figure E.11 shows the contribution analysis of the entire methanol production line and Fig­
ure E.12 shows the contribution analysis inside the production process of methanol itself.
Figure E.1: Overall contribution analysis for the industry sector in 2024.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
78
==PAGE:87==
Figure E.2: Overall contribution analysis for the el and dh sector in 2024.
Figure E.3: Overall contribution analysis for the biogas sector in 2024.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
79
==PAGE:88==
Figure E.4: Overall contribution analysis for the industry sector in 2040.
Figure E.5: Overall contribution analysis for the el and sector in 2040.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
80
==PAGE:89==
Figure E.6: Overall contribution analysis for the biogas in 2040.
Figure E.7: Contribution analysis for the offshore storage of CO2.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
81
==PAGE:90==
Figure E.8: Contribution analysis for the onshore storage of CO2.
Figure E.9: Contribution analysis for the entire methane production line.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
82
==PAGE:91==
Figure E.10: Contribution analysis for methane production process.
Figure E.11: Contribution analysis for the entire methanol production line.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
83
==PAGE:92==
Figure E.12: Contribution analysis for methanol production process.
Figure E.13 presents the contribution analysis of the complete kerosene production line, while
Figure E.14 illustrates the contribution analysis within the kerosene production process itself.
Figure E.15 displays the contribution analysis for the entire formic acid production line, and
Figure E.16 depicts the contribution analysis within the actual production process of formic acid.
Figure E.17 shows the contribution analysis of the overall polypropylene production line, and
Figure E.18 demonstrates the contribution analysis within the polypropylene production process
itself.
Figure E.19 shows the contribution analysis of the entire building materials production line and
Figure E.20 shows the contribution analysis inside the production process of building materials
itself.
Figure E.21 shows the contribution analysis for the MEA capture technology. The great contribu­
tion of heat and electricity is displayed and also how this impact is reduced as the ES transitions
to more sustainable sources towards 2040. The MEA and NaOH compounds needed in the pro­
cess play small roles in the CC impact category. The MEA capture technology is modelled in
the same way for all the possible fates of CO2.
Figure E.22 shows the contribution analysis for the CO2 liquefaction process. This process was
modelled equally in all technologies.
Figure E.23 shows the CC contribution analysis for the production of hydrogen per tonne of CO2
addressed to produce methanol. However, the figure looks similar for the other e­fuels.
Table E.3 and Table E.4 show the results presented in Figure 6.15 and Figure 6.16, while Fig­
ure E.24 and Figure E.25 show the results per 1 tonne of CO2 addressed.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
84
==PAGE:93==
Figure E.13: Contribution analysis for the entire kerosene production line.
Figure E.14: Contribution analysis for kerosene production process.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
85
==PAGE:94==
Figure E.15: Contribution analysis for the entire formic acid production line.
Figure E.16: Contribution analysis for formic acid production process.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
86
==PAGE:95==
Figure E.17: Contribution analysis for the entire polypropylene production line.
Figure E.18: Contribution analysis for polypropylene production process.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
87
==PAGE:96==
Figure E.19: Contribution analysis for the entire building materials production line.
Figure E.20: Contribution analysis for building materials production process.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
88
==PAGE:97==
Figure E.21: Contribution analysis for the MEA capture technology.
Figure E.22: Contribution analysis for the CO2 liquefaction process.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
89
==PAGE:98==
Figure E.23: Contribution analysis for the hydrogen production process.
Table E.3: CC overalls results for the 100% scenarios in 2024.
Overall CC (kg CO eq/year)
Tech
Waste
Industry
El and dh
Biogas
Total
Emitted
1.41E+09
4.18E+09
7.00E+08
0.00E+00
6.29E+09
Offshore storage
­8.06E+08
1.17E+09
­3.59E+09
­3.99E+08
­3.63E+09
Onshore storage
­9.30E+08
9.95E+08
­3.83E+09
­4.21E+08
­4.19E+09
E­fuels methane
­2.93E+08
1.86E+09
­2.60E+09
­3.06E+08
­1.34E+09
E­fuels methanol
­9.53E+07
2.13E+09
­2.21E+09
­2.71E+08
­4.47E+08
E­fuels kerosene
5.98E+08
3.08E+09
­8.71E+08
­1.46E+08
2.66E+09
Formic acid
4.84E+09
8.85E+09
7.35E+09
6.17E+08
2.17E+10
Polypropylene
­3.45E+07
2.22E+09
­2.10E+09
­2.60E+08
­1.75E+08
Building materials
9.61E+08
1.71E+09
1.51E+09
1.29E+08
4.30E+09
Table E.4: CC overalls results for the 100% scenarios in 2040.
Overall CC (kg CO2 eq/year)
Tech
Waste
Industry
El and dh
Biogas
Total
Emitted
9.31E+08
1.46E+09
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.39E+09
Offshore storage
­1.87E+09
­1.11E+08
­2.79E+09
­1.11E+09
­5.88E+09
Onshore storage
­2.01E+09
­1.85E+08
­2.92E+09
­1.16E+09
­6.27E+09
E­fuels methane
­4.81E+07
9.12E+08
­9.73E+08
­3.88E+08
­4.96E+08
E­fuels methanol
­4.86E+08
6.67E+08
­1.41E+09
­5.61E+08
­1.79E+09
E­fuels kerosene
1.26E+09
1.64E+09
3.24E+08
1.29E+08
3.36E+09
Formic acid
­8.47E+09
­3.81E+09
­9.34E+09
­3.72E+09
­2.53E+10
Polypropylene
­1.66E+09
1.03E+07
­2.57E+09
­1.03E+09
­5.24E+09
Building materials
­6.70E+08
­2.11E+08
­8.28E+08
­3.30E+08
­2.04E+09
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
90
==PAGE:99==
Figure E.24: CC impact results in 100% Scenarios per tonne of CO2 addressed in 2024. The
results of this graph are also shown in table format in Table E.5.
Figure E.25: CC impact results in 100% Scenarios per tonne of CO2 addressed in 2040. The
results of this graph are also shown in table format in Table E.6.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
91
==PAGE:100==
Table E.5: CC results for the 100% scenarios per tonne of CO2 in 2024.
CC results (kg CO2/ton CO2 addressed)
Tech
Waste
Industry
El and dh
Biogas
Total
Emitted
87.01
258.47
43.26
0.00
388.75
Offshore storage
­49.79
72.02
­222.01
­24.63
­224.42
Onshore storage
­57.51
61.50
­236.98
­26.02
­259.01
E­fuels methane
­18.13
115.17
­160.62
­18.93
­82.52
E­fuels methanol
­5.89
131.85
­136.88
­16.73
­27.65
E­fuels kerosene
36.96
190.24
­53.80
­9.01
164.39
Formic acid
298.92
547.27
454.16
38.15
1338.50
Polypropylene
­2.13
136.97
­129.60
­16.05
­10.82
Building materials
59.39
105.49
93.15
7.94
265.97
Table E.6: CC results for the 100% scenarios per tonne of CO2 in 2040.
CC results (kg CO2/ton CO2 addressed)
Tech
Waste
Industry
El and dh
Biogas
Total
Emitted
84.76
132.99
0.00
0.00
217.75
Offshore storage
­170.59
­10.11
­253.64
­101.11
­535.45
Onshore storage
­182.65
­16.86
­265.61
­105.89
­571.01
E­fuels methane
­4.38
83.04
­88.53
­35.29
­45.17
E­fuels methanol
­44.28
60.68
­128.17
­51.09
­162.85
E­fuels kerosene
114.47
149.64
29.51
11.76
305.39
Formic acid
­771.17
­346.67
­850.18
­338.92
­2306.94
Polypropylene
­150.89
0.94
­234.06
­93.31
­477.33
Building materials
­60.99
­19.17
­75.35
­30.04
­185.55
Figure E.26 presents the normalized results for offshore storage in 2024. It can be seen that the
Eutrophication in fresh water (EFW) impact category has the highest PE. After further review
with EASETECH, it was found that the main contributing process is the capture process and
inside the capture process, the main contribution is the heat consumption. The Human toxicity
carcinogenic is also relevant, but in this case there is no process contributing a lot to the overall
results, but it is the sum up of many different processes. The Resource use (RU), energy is
relevant too and the main contribution is again the capture process. Inside the capture process
the most contributing impact is the heat consumption.
Figure E.27 presents the normalized results for onshore storage in 2024. It can be appreciated
that the overview looks similar to offshore storage but in this case all the impacts are lower.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
92
==PAGE:101==
Figure E.26: Normalized results for all the impact categories for the offshore storage 2024.
Figure E.27: Normalized results for all the impact categories for the onshore storage 2024.
Figure E.28 presents the normalized impacts for the methane production in 2024. The graph
display the big savings in the EFW impact category. The main contributions to this are the
hydrogen production process and the methane production. Because of the heat substitution
that occurs within these processes, great savings in the EFW are achieved. The RU, minerals
is also relatively high, due to hydrogen production mainly. Inside the hydrogen production the
input contributing most is the electricity consumption.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
93
==PAGE:102==
Figure E.28: Normalized results for all the impact categories for methane production 2024.
Figure E.29 presents the normalized impacts for methanol production in 2024. As before, great
saving are obtained in EFW impact category because of the hydrogen production process. In
methanol case, the role of methanol production is not as significant as in the methane case, this
is because during the methane case more heat is consumed, while in the methanol case more
hydrogen is consumed. The RU, minerals is also relevant, due to the high electricity consump­
tion of the hydrogen production. The HTC presents a higher impact than other categories and
the main contribution is the electricity associated to hydrogen production.
Figure E.29: Normalized results for all the impact categories for the methanol production 2024.
Figure E.30 presents the normalized impacts for kerosene production in 2024. The overview of
all the normalized impact categories looks very similar to methanol case. HTC, EFW and RU
minerals are the most important impact categories. The kerosene consumes a lot of hydrogen,
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
94
==PAGE:103==
producing therefore a lot of waste heat, that reduces a lot the EFW. But at the same time this
high amount of hydrogen consumes a lot of electricity, which produces high impacts in HTC and
RU minerals.
Figure E.30: Normalized results for all the impact categories for the kerosene production 2024.
Figure E.31 presents the normalized impacts for formic acid production in 2024. The EFW
impact category presents a high impact and the main contribution is the formic acid production
process. The main contribution inside the formic acid is the heat. In this case, in comparison
with the previous compounds, the heat is needed, therefore it contributes with positive impact
in the EFW category. The HTC impact category is also relevant and the main contribution is the
formic acid production process. The input that contributes more inside the FA production is the
electricity consumed. Finally, as before the RU, minerals present a relevant impact too. The
electricity consumption is the main reason behind.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
95
==PAGE:104==
Figure E.31: Normalized results for all the impact categories for the formic acid production 2024.
Figure E.31 presents the normalized impacts for polypropylene production in 2024. The EFW
plays a very important role. The main contribution is the hydrogen production needed, again
this is due to the heat produced as output, that provides big savings in this impact category.
The HTC impact category is relevant too. The main contribution is the hydrogen production and
as it has been observed this is due to the high amount of electricity being used. Just like in the
previous , the RU, minerals impact category is also relevant.
Figure E.32: Normalized results for all the impact categories for the polypropylene production
2024.
Figure E.33 presents the normalized impacts for building materials production in 2024. The
HTC plays an important role, the main contribution is the process of producing the carbonated
blocks. Inside this production process the main contribution is the treatment of the sludge so
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
96
==PAGE:105==
that it can be used in the process as input. The EFW impact category is also relevant and the
main process contributing is the production of the carbonated blocks again. In this case the
heat consumotion is the main contributing impact but the sludge treatment is the following one.
Figure E.33: Normalized results for all the impact categories for building materials production
2024.
Figure E.34 presents the normalized results for offshore storage in 2040. It can be seen that the
CC impact category provides the biggest savings across all impact categories. The HTC impact
category is also relevant and the main contributing process is the capture. Inside the capture
process, both the heat and the electricity are important. The RU, minerals is also important
and again the main contribution is the capture process. Inside the capture process, the main
contributing input is the heat.
Figure E.34: Normalized results for all the impact categories for the offshore storage in 2040.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
97
==PAGE:106==
Figure E.35 present the normalized impacts for all the categories for onshore storage in 2040.
The overview looks very similar to the offshore storage case, but the impacts are smaller.
Figure E.35: Normalized results for all the impact categories for onshore storage in 2040.
Figure E.36 presents the normalized impacts for all the categories for methane production in
2040. The EFW is the impact category providing the highest savings and the main contribution
is the methane production process. Inside the methane production, the main saving comes from
the substitution of methane itself. The Land use (LU) is also relevant and the main contribution is
the hydrogen production. Inside the hydrogen production the main contribution is the electricity.
Figure E.36: Normalized results for all the impact categories for methane production in 2040.
Figure E.37 presents the normalized impacts for all the categories for methanol production in
2040. The biggest savings are in the RU, energy impact category and the main contribution is
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
98
==PAGE:107==
the methanol production process. This high savings are due to the methanol substitution. The
HTC is also quite relevant and the main thing is the hydrogen production. The main contributing
input is the electricity. The RU, minerals is also an important impact category and the main
contribution is the electricity consumed during the hydrogen production. The LU and HTNC are
also relevant.
Figure E.37: Normalized results for all the impact categories for methanol production in 2040.
Figure E.38 presents the normalized impacts for all the categories for kerosene production in
2040. The biggest impact is in the HTC, an the main contribution is the electricity consumed in
the hydrogen production. RU, minerals is relevant too and the main thing is again the electricity
needed to produce hydrogen. Just in the same way, the LU impact category is important.
Figure E.38: Normalized results for all the impact categories for kerosene production in 2040.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
99
==PAGE:108==
Figure E.39 presents the normalized impacts for formic acid production in 2040. The RU, energy
impact category is the one providing biggest savings, with formic acid contributing the most.
Inside this process the input that provides biggest savings is the substitution of the formic acid
itself. The Water Use (WU) also presents big savings and the reason is the same as in the case
of RU, energy. The HTC presents big loadings, wiht the electricity needed in the formic acid
production contributing the most. The EFW also presents relevant savings with the substitution
of the formic acid providing the biggest contribution to these savings.
Figure E.39: Normalized results for all the impact categories for formic acid production in 2040.
Figure E.40 presents the normalized impacts for polypropylene production in 2040. The graph
shows that the RU, energy impact category is the one with biggest savings, with the substitution
of PP providing the most important contribution to these savings. The HTC impact category is
also relevant, with the electricity needed for hydrogen production contributing the most. The
EFW impact category is alsi important with the substitution of PP providing the highest benefits.
Finally the LU impact category is also relevant.
Figure E.41 presents the normalized impacts for building materials production in 2040. In this
technology, the biggest impacts are in the HTC category and the most contributing process is
the production of the carbonated blocks. Inside the carbonates production process the main
impact in the HTC category is the treatment of the sludge. The EFW shows a higher impact
than other impact categories. The main thing is the carbonates production process and inside
this process the heat consumption is contributing the most.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
100
==PAGE:109==
Figure E.40: Normalized results for all the impact categories for polypropylene production in
2040.
Figure E.41: Normalized results for all the impact categories for building materials production
in 2040.
E.2
Big scale scenarios
Figure E.42 and Figure E.43 show the CC impact results (kg CO2 eq/tonne CO2 addressed) for
the different identified scenarios, together with the energy use (MJ/tonne of CO2 addressed).
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
101
==PAGE:110==
Figure E.42: CC and Energy use per tonne of CO2 addressed for the big scale scenarios in
2024.
Figure E.43: CC and Energy use per tonne of CO2 addressed for the big scale scenarios in
2040.
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
102
==PAGE:111==
F
Sensitivity and uncertainty analysis
As previously mention, a sensitivity and an uncertainty analysis were performed following the
methodology described in the Supplementary Material of the article by Varling et al [33].
In the first section the results from the single technologies analysis are presented and in the
second section the results from the big scale scenarios are presented.
F.1
Single technologies
The SA and the UA results for the offshore technology are presented in Table F.1 for 2024 and
in Table F.9 for 2040.
The SA and the UA results for the onshore technology are presented in Table F.2 for 2024 and
in Table F.9 for 2040.
The SA and the UA results for the methane technology are presented in Table F.3 for 2024 and
in Table F.11 for 2040.
The SA and the UA results for the methanol technology are presented in Table F.4 for 2024 and
in Table F.12 for 2040.
The SA and the UA results for the kerosene technology are presented in Table F.5 for 2024 and
in Table F.13 for 2040.
The SA and the UA results for the formic acid technology are presented in Table F.6 for 2024
and in Table F.14 for 2040.
The SA and the UA results for the polypropylene technology are presented in Table F.7 for 2024
and in Table F.15 for 2040.
The SA and the UA results for the building materials are presented in Table F.8 for 2024 and in
Table F.16 for 2040.
Table F.1: SA and UA results for the offshore storage technology in 2024.
Parameter
SR
NSR
SC
NSC
CV
capture_eff
3.87
1.00
10.16
0.07
1935.48
distance_port
0.04
0.01
0.12
0.00
1.97
distance_storage
0.05
0.01
0.02
0.00
4.60
el_capture
0.06
0.02
144.80
1.00
4.37
heat_capture
1.02
0.26
61.68
0.43
621.39
heat_injection
0.22
0.06
0.12
0.00
32.15
heat_liquefaction
0.73
0.19
0.13
0.00
198.84
mea_capture
0.03
0.01
4.63
0.03
3.51
transport_road
3.26
0.84
7.50
0.05
641.33
transport_ship
3.31
0.86
7.57
0.05
717.37
SUM
4161.01
SD
64.51
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
103
==PAGE:112==
Table F.2: SA and UA results for the onshore storage technology in 2024.
Parameter
SR
NSR
SC
NSC
CV
capture_eff
3.85
1.00
10.57
0.07
2094.84
distance_pipe
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
distance_short
0.02
0.00
0.12
0.00
0.49
el_capture
0.06
0.01
144.80
1.00
4.37
heat_capture
0.89
0.23
61.68
0.43
621.39
heat_injection
0.20
0.05
0.13
0.00
33.72
heat_liquefaction
0.63
0.16
0.13
0.00
198.84
mea_capture
0.03
0.01
4.63
0.03
0.29
pumping_el
0.00
0.00
14.32
0.10
0.02
transport_pipe
0.35
0.09
0.91
0.01
6.76
transport_road
2.94
0.76
7.80
0.05
694.74
SUM
3655.48
SD
60.461
Table F.3: SA and UA results for the methane production technology in 2024.
Parameter
SR
NSR
SC
NSC
CV
capture_eff
8.88
0.63
8.49
0.01
1351.18
distance_short
0.06
0.00
0.12
0.00
0.49
el_capture
0.18
0.01
144.80
0.11
4.37
heat_capture
2.81
0.20
61.68
0.04
621.39
heat_liquefaction
2.00
0.14
0.13
0.00
198.84
hydrogen_el_methane
14.20
1.00
119.40
0.09
17774.62
mea_capture
0.09
0.01
4.63
0.00
0.29
methane_ratio
5.59
0.39
1375.00
1.00
686.30
transport_road
7.14
0.50
5.99
0.00
408.62
SUM
21046.10
SD
145.073
Table F.4: SA and UA results for the methanol production technology in 2024.
Parameter
SR
NSR
SC
NSC
CV
capture_eff
25.26
0.73
7.84
0.01
1153.66
distance_short
0.1844
0.01
0.12
0.00
0.49
el_capture
0.5484
0.02
144.80
0.18
4.37
heat_capture
8.646
0.25
61.68
0.08
621.39
heat_liquefaction
6.168
0.18
0.13
0.00
198.84
hydrogen_el_methanol
34.37
1.00
119.40
0.15
10979.30
mea_capture
0.2809
0.01
4.63
0.01
0.29
methanol_ratio
20.86
0.61
797.90
1.00
231.10
transport_road
19.91
0.58
5.42
0.01
334.99
SUM
13524.42
SD
116.29
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
104
==PAGE:113==
Table F.5: SA and UA results for the kerosene production technology in 2024.
Parameter
SR
NSR
SC
NSC
CV
capture_eff
2.87
0.32
5.58
0.01
584.64
distance_short
0.03
0.00
0.12
0.00
0.49
el_capture
0.09
0.01
144.80
0.19
4.37
heat_capture
1.38
0.16
61.68
0.08
621.39
heat_liquefaction
0.98
0.11
0.13
0.00
198.84
hydrogen_el_kerosene
8.83
1.00
119.40
0.16
28524.60
kerosene_ratio
0.93
0.10
767.50
1.00
78.54
mea_capture
0.04
0.01
4.63
0.01
0.29
transport_road
2.01
0.23
3.44
0.00
134.91
SUM
30148.08
SD
173.63
Table F.6: SA and UA results for the formic acid production technology in 2024.
Parameter
SR
NSR
SC
NSC
CV
capture_eff
0.52
0.31
8.23
0.00
1269.68
distance_short
0.00
0.00
0.12
0.00
0.49
el_capture
0.01
0.01
144.80
0.06
4.37
fa_ratio
1.70
1.00
2275.00
1.00
69008.33
heat_capture
0.17
0.10
61.68
0.03
621.39
heat_liquefaction
0.12
0.07
0.13
0.00
198.84
mea_capture
0.01
0.00
4.63
0.00
0.29
transport_road
0.63
0.37
8.67
0.00
856.50
SUM
71959.90
SD
268.25
Table F.7: SA and UA results for the polypropylene production technology in 2024.
Parameter
SR
NSR
SC
NSC
CV
capture_eff
67.92
0.72
7.65
0.00
1096.15
distance_short
0.51
0.01
0.12
0.00
0.49
el_capture
1.51
0.02
144.80
0.06
4.37
heat_capture
23.85
0.25
61.68
0.02
621.39
heat_liquefaction
17.01
0.18
0.13
0.00
198.84
hydrogen_el_methanol
94.80
1.00
119.40
0.05
10979.30
mea_capture
0.77
0.01
4.63
0.00
0.29
PP_ratio
94.54
1.00
2585.00
1.00
22274.08
transport_road
53.17
0.56
5.25
0.00
313.82
SUM
35488.73
SD
188.38
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
105
==PAGE:114==
Table F.8: SA and UA results for the building materials technology in 2024.
Parameter
SR
NSR
SC
NSC
CV
capture_eff
1.41
0.33
4.40
0.01
363.17
distance_short
0.02
0.00
0.12
0.00
0.49
el_capture
0.05
0.01
144.80
0.47
4.37
heat_capture
0.86
0.20
61.68
0.20
621.39
heat_liquefaction
0.61
0.14
0.13
0.00
198.84
mea_capture
0.03
0.01
4.63
0.01
0.29
sss
2.90
0.69
309.20
1.00
7967.05
susbt_blocks
4.23
1.00
104.10
0.34
16853.41
transport_road
0.88
0.21
2.40
0.01
65.87
SUM
26074.88
SD
161.48
Table F.9: SA and UA results for the offshore technology in 2040.
Parameter
SR
NSR
SC
NSC
CV
capture_eff
1.56
0.99
9.24
0.26
1600.83
distance_port
0.02
0.01
0.12
0.00
1.97
distance_storage
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.00
4.60
el_capture
0.01
0.00
35.25
1.00
0.26
heat_capture
0.04
0.03
5.70
0.16
5.31
heat_injection
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.27
heat_liquefaction
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00
1.70
mea_capture
0.01
0.01
4.63
0.13
3.51
transport_road
1.56
0.99
8.09
0.23
745.68
transport_ship
1.58
1.00
8.16
0.23
832.26
SUM
3196.39
SD
56.54
Table F.10: SA and UA results for the onshore technology in 2040.
Parameter
SR
NSR
SC
NSC
CV
capture_eff
1.52
1.00
9.66
0.27
1749.31
distance_pipe
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
distance_short
0.01
0.01
0.12
0.00
0.49
el_capture
0.01
0.00
35.25
1.00
0.26
heat_capture
0.04
0.03
5.70
0.16
5.31
heat_injection
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.29
heat_liquefaction
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00
1.70
mea_capture
0.01
0.01
4.63
0.13
0.29
pumping_el
0.00
0.00
3.49
0.10
0.00
transport_pipe
0.18
0.12
0.98
0.03
7.83
transport_road
1.51
0.99
8.40
0.24
805.10
SUM
2570.58
SD
50.70
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
106
==PAGE:115==
Table F.11: SA and UA results for the methane production technology in 2040.
Parameter
SR
NSR
SC
NSC
CV
capture_eff
22.86
0.65
3.47
0.00
226.03
distance_short
0.377
0.01
0.12
0.00
0.49
el_capture
0.273
0.01
35.25
0.03
0.26
heat_capture
1.634
0.05
5.70
0.00
5.31
heat_liquefaction
1.165
0.03
0.01
0.00
1.70
hydrogen_el_methane
21.77
0.62
29.07
0.02
1053.61
mea_capture
0.5742
0.02
4.63
0.00
0.29
methane_ratio
35.15
1.00
1375.00
1.00
686.30
transport_road
22.39
0.64
2.98
0.00
101.30
SUM
2075.29
SD
45.56
Table F.12: SA and UA results for the methanol production technology in 2040.
Parameter
SR
NSR
SC
NSC
CV
capture_eff
3.16
0.75
4.86
0.01
442.32
distance_short
0.04
0.01
0.12
0.00
0.49
el_capture
0.03
0.01
35.25
0.04
0.26
heat_capture
0.16
0.04
5.70
0.01
5.31
heat_liquefaction
0.12
0.03
0.01
0.00
1.70
hydrogen_el_methanol
1.69
0.40
29.07
0.04
650.81
mea_capture
0.06
0.01
4.63
0.01
0.29
methanol_ratio
4.22
1.00
797.90
1.00
231.10
transport_road
3.11
0.74
4.19
0.01
200.56
SUM
1532.84
SD
39.15
Table F.13: SA and UA results for the kerosene production technology in 2040.
Parameter
SR
NSR
SC
NSC
CV
capture_eff
0.16
0.16
0.07
0.00
0.08
distance_short
0.01
0.01
0.12
0.00
0.49
el_capture
0.01
0.01
35.25
0.05
0.26
heat_capture
0.06
0.06
5.70
0.01
5.31
heat_liquefaction
0.04
0.04
0.01
0.00
1.70
hydrogen_el_kerosene
1.06
1.00
29.07
0.04
1690.83
kerosene_ratio
0.45
0.43
767.50
1.00
78.54
mea_capture
0.02
0.02
4.63
0.01
0.29
transport_road
0.18
0.17
0.63
0.00
4.58
SUM
1782.08
SD
42.21
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
107
==PAGE:116==
Table F.14: SA and UA results for the formic acid production technology in 2040.
Parameter
SR
NSR
SC
NSC
CV
capture_eff
1.12
1.00
30.08
0.01
16965.12
distance_short
0.00
0.00
0.12
0.00
0.49
el_capture
0.00
0.00
35.25
0.02
0.26
fa_ratio
1.00
0.89
2275.00
1.00
69008.33
heat_capture
0.01
0.01
5.70
0.00
5.31
heat_liquefaction
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
1.70
mea_capture
0.00
0.00
4.63
0.00
0.29
transport_road
1.12
1.00
26.30
0.01
7890.45
SUM
93871.95
SD
306.39
Table F.15: SA and UA results for the polypropylene production technology in 2040.
Parameter
SR
NSR
SC
NSC
CV
capture_eff
1.63
0.80
8.56
0.00
1372.60
distance_short
0.01
0.01
0.12
0.00
0.49
el_capture
0.01
0.00
35.25
0.01
0.26
heat_capture
0.05
0.02
5.70
0.00
5.31
heat_liquefaction
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00
1.70
hydrogen_el_methanol
0.50
0.24
29.07
0.01
650.81
mea_capture
0.02
0.01
4.63
0.00
0.29
PP_ratio
2.03
1.00
2585.00
1.00
22274.08
transport_road
1.62
0.80
7.44
0.00
630.60
SUM
24936.13
SD
157.91
Table F.16: SA and UA results for the building materials technology in 2040.
Parameter
SR
NSR
SC
NSC
CV
capture_eff
2.57
0.41
5.44
0.02
554.27
distance_short
0.03
0.00
0.12
0.00
0.49
el_capture
0.02
0.00
35.25
0.11
0.26
heat_capture
0.12
0.02
5.70
0.02
5.31
heat_liquefaction
0.08
0.01
0.01
0.00
1.70
mea_capture
0.04
0.01
4.63
0.01
0.29
sss
4.30
0.69
309.20
1.00
7967.05
susbt_blocks
6.25
1.00
104.10
0.34
16853.41
transport_road
2.54
0.41
4.70
0.02
252.10
SUM
25634.87
SD
160.11
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
108
==PAGE:117==
F.2
Big scale scenarios
Table F.17: Sensitivity ratios for BS scenarios in 2024.
Parameter/Scenario
S1
S2
S3
S3B
S3C
S3D
S4
S5
S6
capture_eff
3.85
3.47
4.93
0.38
11.97
6.30
3.98
4.36
6.29
el_capture
0.06
0.06
0.09
0.01
0.25
0.12
0.07
0.08
0.12
heat_capture
1.02
0.88
1.40
0.15
3.92
1.89
1.07
1.20
1.89
heat_liquefaction
0.75
0.63
1.00
0.11
2.80
1.35
0.76
0.86
1.35
mea_capture
0.03
0.03
0.05
0.00
0.13
0.06
0.03
0.04
0.06
transport_road
3.24
2.92
4.09
0.29
9.60
5.15
3.35
3.64
5.15
transport_ship
3.29
3.57
6.94
2.82
3.29
3.61
4.14
transport_pipe
0.35
hydrogen_el_kerosene
1.04
0.53
10.36
1.40
hydrogen_el_methane
0.29
0.14
0.80
0.38
0.38
hydrogen_el_methanol
0.32
0.16
3.76
0.19
0.76
kerosene_ratio
0.11
0.06
1.09
0.15
methane_ratio
0.11
0.06
0.31
0.15
0.15
methanol_ratio
0.20
0.10
2.28
0.26
fa_ratio
0.00
0.01
PP_ratio
0.19
0.32
sss
0.28
0.43
subst_blocks
0.41
0.63
Table F.18: Normalized sensitivity ratios for BS scenarios in 2024.
Parameter/Scenario
S1
S2
S3
S3B
S3C
S3D
S4
S5
S6
capture_eff
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.72
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
el_capture
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
heat_capture
0.26
0.25
0.28
0.29
0.33
0.30
0.27
0.28
0.30
heat_liquefaction
0.20
0.18
0.20
0.21
0.23
0.21
0.19
0.20
0.21
mea_capture
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
transport_road
0.84
0.84
0.83
0.55
0.80
0.82
0.84
0.84
0.82
transport_ship
0.85
0.72
0.58
0.45
0.83
0.83
0.66
transport_pipe
0.10
hydrogen_el_k
0.21
1.00
0.87
0.22
hydrogen_el_methane
0.06
0.28
0.07
0.06
0.06
hydrogen_el_methanol
0.07
0.31
0.60
0.05
0.12
kerosene_ratio
0.02
0.10
0.09
0.02
methane_ratio
0.02
0.11
0.03
0.02
0.02
methanol_ratio
0.04
0.19
0.36
0.04
fa_ratio
0.00
0.00
PP_ratio
0.05
0.05
sss
0.07
0.07
subst_blocks
0.09
0.10
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
109
==PAGE:118==
Table F.19: Sensitivity coefficients for BS scenarios in 2024.
Parameter/Scenario
S1
S2
S3
S3B
S3C
S3D
S4
S5
S6
capture_eff
1.64E+08
1.71E+08
1.53E+08
2.32E+07
1.33E+08
1.45E+08
1.62E+08
1.58E+08
1.45E+08
el_capture
2.34E+09
2.34E+09
2.34E+09
4.99E+08
2.34E+09
2.34E+09
2.34E+09
2.34E+09
2.34E+09
heat_capture
9.98E+08
9.98E+08
9.98E+08
2.13E+08
9.98E+08
9.98E+08
9.98E+08
9.98E+08
9.98E+08
heat_liquefaction
2.12E+06
2.12E+06
2.12E+06
4.52E+05
2.12E+06
2.12E+06
2.12E+06
2.12E+06
2.12E+06
mea_capture
7.50E+07
7.50E+07
7.50E+07
1.60E+07
7.50E+07
7.50E+07
7.50E+07
7.50E+07
7.50E+07
transport_road
1.21E+08
1.26E+08
1.11E+08
1.54E+07
9.32E+07
1.04E+08
1.20E+08
1.16E+08
1.04E+08
transport_ship
1.23E+08
9.65E+07
6.70E+07
5.65E+07
1.17E+08
1.14E+08
8.29E+07
transport_pipe
1.47E+07
hydrogen_el_k
2.22E+08
2.23E+08
7.97E+08
2.22E+08
hydrogen_el_methane
7.76E+07
7.76E+07
7.76E+07
7.76E+07
7.76E+07
hydrogen_el_methanol
1.11E+08
1.11E+08
9.64E+08
8.69E+07
1.95E+08
kerosene_ratio
1.43E+09
1.43E+09
5.13E+09
1.43E+09
methane_ratio
8.94E+08
8.94E+08
8.94E+08
8.94E+08
8.94E+08
methanol_ratio
8.94E+08
7.43E+08
6.44E+09
7.44E+08
fa_ratio
1.47E+07
1.41E+07
PP_ratio
1.88E+09
1.81E+09
sss
3.50E+08
3.36E+08
subst_blocks
1.18E+08
1.13E+08
Table F.20: Normalized sensitivity coefficients for BS scenarios in 2024.
Parameter/Scenario
S1
S2
S3
S3B
S3C
S3D
S4
S5
S6
capture_eff
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.02
0.03
0.02
0.07
0.07
0.06
el_capture
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.35
0.46
0.36
1.00
1.00
1.00
heat_capture
0.43
0.43
0.43
0.15
0.19
0.15
0.43
0.43
0.43
heat_liquefaction
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
mea_capture
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.03
0.03
transport_road
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.05
0.05
0.04
transport_ship
0.05
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.05
0.05
0.04
transport_pipe
0.01
hydrogen_el_k
0.09
0.16
0.16
0.09
hydrogen_el_methane
0.03
0.05
0.02
0.01
0.03
hydrogen_el_methanol
0.05
0.08
0.15
0.04
0.08
kerosene_ratio
0.61
1.00
1.00
0.61
methane_ratio
0.38
0.62
0.17
0.14
0.38
methanol_ratio
0.38
0.52
1.00
0.32
fa_ratio
0.01
0.01
PP_ratio
0.80
0.77
sss
0.15
0.14
subst_blocks
0.05
0.05
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
110
==PAGE:119==
Table F.21: Coefficient of Variation and Standard Deviation for BS scenarios in 2024.
Parameter/Scenario
S1
S2
S3
S3B
S3C
S3D
S4
S5
S6
capture_eff
5.07E+17
5.48E+17
4.37E+17
1.01E+16
3.30E+17
3.92E+17
4.95E+17
4.67E+17
3.92E+17
el_capture
1.14E+15
1.14E+15
1.14E+15
5.19E+13
1.14E+15
1.14E+15
1.14E+15
1.14E+15
1.14E+15
heat_capture
1.63E+17
1.63E+17
1.63E+17
7.38E+15
1.63E+17
1.63E+17
1.63E+17
1.63E+17
1.63E+17
heat_liquefaction
5.20E+16
5.20E+16
5.20E+16
2.36E+15
5.20E+16
5.20E+16
5.20E+16
5.20E+16
5.20E+16
mea_capture
7.50E+13
7.50E+13
7.50E+13
3.40E+12
7.50E+13
7.50E+13
7.50E+13
7.50E+13
7.50E+13
transport_road
1.68E+17
1.82E+17
1.40E+17
2.69E+15
9.92E+16
1.22E+17
1.63E+17
1.52E+17
1.23E+17
transport_ship
1.88E+17
0.00E+00
1.16E+17
0.00E+00
5.62E+16
3.99E+16
1.71E+17
1.63E+17
8.59E+16
transport_pipe
1.77E+15
hydrogen_el_kerosene
9.90E+16
9.91E+16
1.27E+18
9.90E+16
hydrogen_el_methane
7.50E+15
7.50E+15
7.50E+15
7.50E+15
7.50E+15
hydrogen_el_methanol
9.52E+15
9.51E+15
7.16E+17
5.82E+15
2.92E+16
kerosene_ratio
2.73E+14
2.73E+14
3.50E+15
2.73E+14
methane_ratio
2.90E+14
2.90E+14
2.90E+14
2.90E+14
2.90E+14
methanol_ratio
1.27E+15
8.75E+14
6.59E+16
8.77E+14
fa_ratio
2.89E+12
2.66E+12
PP_ratio
1.18E+16
1.09E+16
sss
1.02E+16
9.41E+15
subst_blocks
2.17E+16
1.99E+16
SUM
1.08E+18
9.47E+17
1.03E+18
1.40E+17
1.98E+18
1.56E+18
1.06E+18
1.03E+18
9.94E+17
SD
1.04E+09
9.73E+08
1.01E+09
3.74E+08
1.41E+09
1.25E+09
1.03E+09
1.01E+09
9.97E+08
Table F.22: Sensitivity ratios for BS scenarios in 2040.
Parameter/Scenario
S1
S2
S3
S3B
S3C
S3D
S4
S5
S6
capture_eff
1.47
1.44
17.28
0.00
1.13
1.89
1.47
1.50
12.97
el_capture
0.01
0.01
0.23
0.01
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.20
heat_capture
0.04
0.04
1.37
0.06
0.18
0.07
0.04
0.04
1.18
heat_liquefaction
0.03
0.03
0.98
0.04
0.13
0.05
0.03
0.03
0.84
mea_capture
0.01
0.01
0.48
0.02
0.06
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.41
transport_road
1.47
1.43
16.99
0.02
1.09
1.87
1.47
1.50
12.68
transport_ship
1.49
17.48
1.35
1.22
1.39
1.42
8.05
transport_pipe
0.17
hydrogen_el_kerosene
13.19
0.85
2.25
0.10
11.31
hydrogen_el_methane
1.08
0.07
0.14
0.06
0.93
hydrogen_el_methanol
0.50
0.03
0.34
0.03
1.18
kerosene_ratio
5.69
0.37
0.97
0.04
4.88
methane_ratio
1.75
0.11
0.23
0.10
1.50
methanol_ratio
1.24
0.08
0.85
1.07
fa_ratio
0.00
0.07
PP_ratio
0.12
3.06
sss
0.17
4.11
subst_blocks
0.25
5.98
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
111
==PAGE:120==
Table F.23: Normalized sensitivity ratios for BS scenarios in 2040.
Parameter/Scenario
S1
S2
S3
S3B
S3C
S3D
S4
S5
S6
capture_eff
0.99
1.00
0.99
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
el_capture
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.02
heat_capture
0.03
0.03
0.08
0.07
0.08
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.09
heat_liquefaction
0.02
0.02
0.06
0.05
0.06
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.06
mea_capture
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.02
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.03
transport_road
0.99
0.99
0.97
0.02
0.48
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.98
transport_ship
1.00
1.00
0.60
0.65
0.94
0.95
0.62
transport_pipe
0.12
hydrogen_el_kerosene
0.75
1.00
1.00
0.05
0.87
hydrogen_el_methane
0.06
0.08
0.06
0.03
0.07
hydrogen_el_methanol
0.03
0.04
0.18
0.02
0.09
kerosene_ratio
0.33
0.43
0.43
0.02
0.38
methane_ratio
0.10
0.13
0.10
0.05
0.12
methanol_ratio
0.07
0.09
0.45
0.08
fa_ratio
0.00
0.01
PP_ratio
0.08
0.24
sss
0.11
0.32
subst_blocks
0.17
0.46
Table F.24: Sensitivity coefficients for BS scenarios in 2040.
Parameter/Scenario
S1
S2
S3
S3B
S3C
S3D
S4
S5
S6
capture_eff
1.02E+08
1.06E+08
3.43E+07
4.62E+04
1.72E+07
6.88E+07
1.01E+08
9.67E+07
3.00E+07
el_capture
3.88E+08
3.88E+08
3.88E+08
2.57E+08
3.88E+08
3.88E+08
3.88E+08
3.88E+08
3.88E+08
heat_capture
6.27E+07
6.27E+07
6.27E+07
4.16E+07
6.27E+07
6.22E+07
6.27E+07
6.27E+07
6.27E+07
heat_liquefaction
1.33E+05
1.33E+05
1.33E+05
8.83E+04
1.33E+05
1.33E+05
1.33E+05
1.33E+05
1.33E+05
mea_capture
5.10E+07
5.10E+07
5.10E+07
3.38E+07
5.10E+07
5.10E+07
5.10E+07
5.10E+07
5.10E+07
transport_road
8.90E+07
9.24E+07
2.96E+07
4.16E+05
1.45E+07
5.99E+07
8.86E+07
8.45E+07
2.57E+07
transport_ship
8.98E+07
3.03E+07
1.79E+07
3.88E+07
8.34E+07
7.99E+07
1.63E+07
transport_pipe
1.08E+07
hydrogen_el_kerosene
1.82E+08
1.82E+08
2.37E+08
2.41E+07
1.82E+08
hydrogen_el_methane
1.89E+07
1.89E+07
1.89E+07
1.89E+07
1.89E+07
hydrogen_el_methanol
1.11E+07
1.11E+07
1.38E+08
2.24E+07
3.44E+07
kerosene_ratio
4.80E+09
4.80E+09
6.26E+09
6.36E+08
4.80E+09
methane_ratio
8.96E+08
8.96E+08
8.96E+08
8.96E+08
8.96E+08
methanol_ratio
3.04E+08
3.06E+08
3.80E+09
3.04E+08
fa_ratio
1.50E+07
1.30E+07
PP_ratio
1.99E+09
1.72E+09
sss
3.74E+08
3.24E+08
subst_blocks
1.26E+08
1.09E+08
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
112
==PAGE:121==
Table F.25: Normalized sensitivity coefficients for BS scenarios in 2040.
Parameter/Scenario
S1
S2
S3
S3B
S3C
S3D
S4
S5
S6
capture_eff
0.26
0.27
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.05
0.25
0.01
el_capture
1.00
1.00
0.08
0.05
0.06
0.10
0.19
1.00
0.08
heat_capture
0.16
0.16
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.16
0.01
heat_liquefaction
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
mea_capture
0.13
0.13
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.13
0.01
transport_road
0.23
0.24
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.22
0.01
transport_ship
0.23
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.04
0.21
0.00
transport_pipe
0.03
hydrogen_el_kerosene
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
hydrogen_el_methane
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
hydrogen_el_methanol
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.01
0.01
kerosene_ratio
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
methane_ratio
0.19
0.19
0.14
0.24
0.19
methanol_ratio
0.06
0.06
1.00
0.06
fa_ratio
0.01
0.00
PP_ratio
1.00
0.36
sss
0.96
0.07
subst_blocks
0.32
0.02
Table F.26: Coefficient of Variation and Standard Deviation for BS scenarios in 2040.
Parameter/Scenario
S1
S2
S3
S3B
S3C
S3D
S4
S5
S6
capture_eff
1.94E+17
2.11E+17
2.21E+16
4.01E+10
5.53E+15
8.88E+16
1.92E+17
1.75E+17
1.69E+16
el_capture
3.13E+13
3.13E+13
3.13E+13
1.37E+13
3.13E+13
3.13E+13
3.13E+13
3.13E+13
3.13E+13
heat_capture
6.43E+14
6.42E+14
6.42E+14
2.82E+14
6.42E+14
6.31E+14
6.42E+14
6.42E+14
6.42E+14
heat_liquefaction
2.06E+14
2.06E+14
2.06E+14
9.02E+13
2.06E+14
2.06E+14
2.06E+14
2.06E+14
2.06E+14
mea_capture
3.47E+13
3.47E+13
3.47E+13
1.52E+13
3.47E+13
3.47E+13
3.47E+13
3.47E+13
3.47E+13
transport_road
9.03E+16
9.74E+16
9.99E+15
1.97E+12
2.39E+15
4.09E+16
8.94E+16
8.15E+16
7.55E+15
transport_ship
1.01E+17
1.15E+16
0.00E+00
3.99E+15
1.89E+16
8.70E+16
7.98E+16
3.31E+15
transport_pipe
9.47E+14
hydrogen_el_kerosene
6.61E+16
6.61E+16
1.13E+17
1.16E+15
6.61E+16
hydrogen_el_methane
4.47E+14
4.47E+14
4.47E+14
4.47E+14
4.47E+14
hydrogen_el_methanol
9.44E+13
9.56E+13
0
1.48E+16
3.86E+14
9.11E+14
kerosene_ratio
3.07E+15
3.07E+15
5.23E+15
5.39E+13
3.07E+15
methane_ratio
2.91E+14
2.91E+14
2.91E+14
2.91E+14
2.91E+14
methanol_ratio
1.46E+14
1.48E+14
2.29E+16
1.46E+14
fa_ratio
3E+12
2.25E+12
PP_ratio
1.32E+16
9.88E+15
sss
1.17E+16
8.74E+15
subst_blocks
2.47E+16
1.85E+16
SUM
3.86E+17
3.11E+17
1.15E+17
7.06E+16
1.31E+17
1.89E+17
3.83E+17
3.74E+17
1.37E+17
SD
6.21E+08
5.57E+08
3.39E+08
2.66E+08
3.62E+08
4.35E+08
6.19E+08
6.11E+08
3.70E+08
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
113
==PAGE:122==
Table F.27: CC results for the SA on the modelling choices per tonne of CO2 addressed in 2024.
Climate change (kg CO2 eq/ton CO2 adressed)
Scenario
Baseline 2024
With oxygen
Wo heat
S0
388.53
388.53
388.53
S1
­224.51
­224.51
280.56
S2
­258.86
­258.86
245.97
S3
­162.52
­383.16
642.41
3SB
319.83
65.79
727.04
S3C
­58.22
­594.91
1200.82
S3D
­120.44
­533.33
887.64
S4
­214.07
­247.82
165.61
S5
­189.99
­189.99
314.84
S6
­120.67
­196.86
723.33
Table F.28: CC results for the SA on the modelling choices per tonne of CO2 addressed in 2040.
Climate change (kg CO2 eq/ton CO2 adressed)
Scenario
Baseline 2040
With oxygen
Wo heat
S0
217.75
217.75
217.75
S1
­536.04
­536.04
­489.28
S2
­571.64
­571.64
­524.87
S3
­15.37
­121.87
130.97
S3B
239.03
132.55
369.60
S3C
117.42
­14.42
283.05
S3D
­282.13
­347.52
­180.20
S4
­533.02
­540.30
­480.46
S5
­497.50
­497.50
­450.78
S6
17.92
­94.88
169.28
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
114
==PAGE:123==
Potential for carbon capture and storage and carbon capture and utilization in Denmark
115
==PAGE:124==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.sustain.dtu.dk
