==PAGE:1==
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
A Fusion of Personalized 3D User Interface Guid-
ance and Brain-Computer Interface
Master Thesis -
Valeria Tedeschi s231945
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
A Fusion of Personalized 3D User Interface Guidance and Brain-Computer Interface
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Valeria Tedeschi
Supervisors:
Sadasivan Puthusserypady Cihan Uyanik
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
DK-2800 Kgs.Lyngby
Denmark.
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
healthtech.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Health Technology,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the exchange program
of Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Valeria Tedeschi - s231945
Signature
Date
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
2
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Stroke or physical injuries resulting from accidents are often leading causes of motor im-
pairment. To restore motor functionality, active participation of the patient and the involve-
ment of neural processes are key factors. Brain-computer interface (BCI) rehabilitation
systems are fundamental tools in pairing mental activities, namely the imagination of the
movements, with visual feedback in real-time to encourage and assess the patient’s will-
ingness. Being able to receive visual feedback through a virtual avatar can encourage
the patient to correctly imagine the movements of the upper/lower extremities.
The simultaneous activation of sensory and motor functions is a key factor for brain plas-
ticity, which enables effective recovery from neurological impairments. Virtual reality (VR)
can enhance brain plasticity and therapeutic outcomes by providing feedback through the
visualization of motor imagery (MI) on a screen. Subjects are exposed to a 3D environ-
ment where they perceive an avatar’s hands and feet as their own, creating a sense of
embodiment. The avatar executes the movements that corresponds to the subject’s MI,
which is detected by the system.
The objective of this project is to develop an innovative user interface (UI) for a 3D re-
habilitation environment that focuses on movement visualization and personalization for
individuals undergoing rehabilitation. The UI will integrate features that can be modified
by the users to enhance their rehabilitation outcomes, such as gender, environment, and
spatial location. This will allow the users to adjust the interface to their preferences and
goals, enhancing their involvment and so the effectiveness of the prescribed therapy..
The motivation for this system came from a commercial device (g.tec recoveriX [1])’s soft-
ware solution for the same problem. However, this software was restricted to be used only
with g.tec recoveriX with a limited set of configurations. Therefore, similar but more flex-
ible software is required to enable any BCI device to benefit from the system that will be
developed.
The design’s objective is to enhance the rehabilitation process’s quality and efficiency
by enabling motor-impaired individuals to interact with a 3D environment, where they can
visually observe themselves executing specific movements. Rehabilitation sessions are
customizable, allowing users to concentrate on different limbs and adjust exercises to
their distinct needs. The real-time visual feedback will stimulate correct movement imag-
ination, foster user adherence, and facilitate brain plasticity by concurrently activating
sensory and motor functions.
The designed user interface (UI), named BCI-3D ReHaB, aims to facilitate user manipula-
tion, allowing end-users to select the appropriate environment and specify the body parts
requiring training during the sessions.
After fulfilling the UI specifications, the signal collection capability will be augmented with
marker locations and recordings to monitor when users initiate movement. This enhance-
ment is crucial for accurately capturing the timing and nature of physical activities.
The final step of the project involves developing a communication module between the
UI and the Electroencephalogram (EEG) acquisition system. This module aims to ensure
the recording and alignment of the EEG stream with markers indicating the initiation of
movement. The primary objective of this procedure is to identify patterns associated with
specific body part movements and detect changes in the EEG signals during these move-
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
3
==PAGE:5==
ments.
To validate this approach, a simulation was conducted with a test group. Additionally,
futher tests could focus on the imagination of movement rather than its execution. The
stored data from these sessions can potentially be post-processed to train a classifier for
motor imagery (MI) distinction. This classifier would be capable of distinguishing the in-
tention to move specific body parts.
This analysis could lead to a potential future applications involving active feedback, where
an avatar will move if it correctly recognizes the intention to perform a movement as indi-
cated, significantly enhancing the interactivity and effectiveness of rehabilitation sessions.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
4
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Valeria Tedeschi, MSc Biomedical Engineering, DTU - Polytechnic Of Turin
[Sadasivan Puthusserypady], [Group-Leader], [Associate Professor]
[Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark]
[Cihan Uyanik], [PhD student]
[Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark]
[Marco Ghislieri], [Assistant Professor]
[Department of Electronics and Telecommunications, Polytechnic of Turin]
Huge thanks to my supervisor and co-supervisor Sada and Cihan for introducing me to
this project and their constant help and providing support and guidance throughout these
months.
A heartfelt thanks to my family and friends for always supporting me, and to the friends
I made and the people I encountered during my exchange year. Without you, this year
wouldn’t have been the same. Thank you for all the memories we’ve created together
and for being a central part of this journey.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
5
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Objectives and Expected Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
4
2.1
Stroke and Motor Impairment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Rehabilitation and Necessary Movements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Brain Computer Interfaces in Neurorehabilitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Virtual Reality in Stroke Rehabilitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Electroencephalography (EEG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
State of the Art
12
3.1
Stroke, motor impairment and rehabilitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
BCI Systems in Rehabilitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
VR in Rehabilitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4
UI Design for Rehabilitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.5
Commercial Solutions underlying BCI-3D ReHaB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.6
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4
BCI-3D ReHaB Application
23
4.1
Concept behind The App
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Chosen Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Application - User Guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5
BCI-3D ReHaB Technical Implementation
44
5.1
Scripting Classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.2
UI Technical Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.3
Build And Run
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
5.4
OVerview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
6
BCI-3D ReHaB and EEG Integration
91
6.1
System Acquisition Device
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
6.2
Communication module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
6.3
EEG Connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
6.4
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
7
BCI-3D ReHab Testing
99
7.1
BCI-3D ReHaB run testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
7.2
MI testing for classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
7.3
Classifier
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
8
Results and Discussion
105
8.1
UI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
6
==PAGE:8==
8.2
Application Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
8.3
Communication module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
8.4
EEG Integration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
8.5
First test - Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
9
Conclusions and Future Directions
114
9.1
3D Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
9.2
UI Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
9.3
Motor Imagery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
9.4
Final Remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
Bibliography
117
A Unity C# Scripts
124
B Matlab Scripts
238
C Python Scripts
256
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
7
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Stroke is the second leading cause of death worldwide and the third leading cause of
disability, occurring when blood flow to the brain is blocked or there is sudden bleeding
in the brain. It is characterized by two main types: ischemic and hemorrhagic. Ischemic
strokes, the most common type, are caused by a blockage in a blood vessel supplying the
brain, while hemorrhagic strokes result from a rupture in a blood vessel. Both types lead
to significant physiological effects on the brain, including lasting brain damage, long-term
disability, or even death [2].
Almost 80% of stroke survivors struggle with motor impairment, with only 20% regaining
some motor functions, while the highest percentage suffers from chronic motor disorder
[3]. Among motor impairments, the most common condition is hemiparesis, which in-
volves paralysis on one side of the body due to damage to the motor cortex area of the
brain [4].
Given these premises, stroke represents a global public health issue, affecting million peo-
ple each year. About a third of these individuals experience various degrees of upper limb
paresis [5]. Early and ongoing rehabilitation is crucial for improving recovery outcomes,
helping patients regain as much function and independence as possible. Rehabilitation
focuses on motor recovery through physical training sessions, aiming to enhance neuro-
plasticity — the brain’s ability to reorganize and adapt, which is essential for recovery.
The quality of recovery is highly patient-dependent, affected by the active participation
of both the patient and the therapist [3]. Thus, there is a need to enhance conventional
physical therapy, making sessions more accessible and engaging for patients.
Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs) play a crucial role in enhancing rehabilitation outcomes
by translating neural signals into actionable commands, thereby aiding in the recovery
of motor skills [6]. This technology provides a direct communication pathway between
the brain and external devices, enabling stroke patients to interact with their environment
despite severe impairments. Recent advancements in BCI have shown promising re-
sults in restoring motor functions by harnessing the brain’s neuroplasticity [7]. BCIs are
particularly relevant for patients with severe disabilities who may not fully benefit from con-
ventional therapies. BCI technology allows these patients to perform virtual movements,
which can trigger corresponding physical movements, thus promoting motor recovery and
functional improvements. One of the main benefits is that no active movement is required
to use certain BCI devices, making them suitable for individuals with moderate to severe
weakness or paralysis post-stroke [8]. These devices can often be used at home without
the requirement of a health professional present, further enhancing their accessibility [9].
In this context, visual feedback plays a vital role in enhancing motor learning and neural
plasticity. It provides patients with real-time performance metrics, helping them under-
stand and improve their movements. This feedback mechanism increases patient aware-
ness and engagement, making therapy sessions more effective [10, 11].
Moreover, rehabilitation can be less burdensome by using Virtual Reality (VR) technolo-
gies, which create immersive and interactive environments [12, 13, 14]. VR allows pa-
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
1
==PAGE:10==
tients to practice complex tasks in a safe and controlled setting, providing instant feed-
back and increasing motivation [15]. Integrating VR with interactive user interfaces (UI)
can simplify training sessions, making them more enjoyable and potentially more effective
[16].
1.1
Aim of the project
The aim of this project is to develop a customizable User Interface (UI) designed for two
primary purposes: movement visualization and personalization in rehabilitation therapy.
The inspiration for this UI comes from recoveriX [1], developed by G.tec, a leading provider
of BCI and neurorehabilitation technologies. RecoveriX has proven to be effective in both
regaining motor function and enhancing patient engagement. Building on this innovative
approach, this project aims to create an interactive UI not only limited to hands and feet
movements, but that also incorporates additional movements beneficial for stroke reha-
bilitation.
The selection of movements for rehabilitation is based on their relevance to daily activities
and recovery goals. Movements are chosen to target key muscle groups and functions
critical for regaining independence. Integrating the movements into BCI and VR -based
rehabilitation protocols ensures that therapy is comprehensive and effective.
The system provides patients with visual feedback through a virtual avatar, demonstrat-
ing the movements required during rehabilitation sessions. This feedback is crucial for
enhancing brain plasticity and improving the patient’s ability to correctly imagine and ex-
ecute the movements.
Personalization is a key feature of this UI, enabling the customization of training sessions
to meet individual patient needs. This includes adjusting the posture in which movements
are performed and specifying the actions to be undertaken. By tailoring these aspects,
the rehabilitation process becomes more effective and patient-specific.
To increase engagement and make therapy sessions feel more like interactive expe-
riences rather than conventional therapy, the project includes customization of the 3D
model avatar. Patients can adjust the avatar’s gender, complexion, clothes, hair, and en-
vironment, creating a model that closely resembles the real subject undergoing therapy.
This level of customization aims to make the sessions more immersive and enjoyable,
thereby improving patient motivation and adherence to the therapy regimen.
Customizable interfaces are crucial in rehabilitation technologies to tailor the experience
to individual patient needs. A well-designed UI can significantly improve patient engage-
ment and satisfaction, making the rehabilitation process more effective. Examples of
successful UI designs in rehabilitation demonstrate how customization can enhance the
user experience and support better recovery outcomes. This project aspires to contribute
to this body of work by offering a UI that is both interactive and personalized, ultimately
aiming to improve rehabilitation outcomes for stroke patients.
An additional aspect of this project involves building a communication layer that inte-
grates the UI with EEG acquisition. This integration allows for the collection of signals
and alignment with marker locations and recordings, enabling monitoring of movement
initiation. This setup facilitates the research of patterns in EEG signals corresponding to
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
2
==PAGE:11==
specific body part movements and monitoring changes when a movement is performed
compared to an idling state.
Moreover, since EEG data is labeled through alignment with movement markers, both
signals and markers can be recorded and stored for post-processing. This enables po-
tential future applications, such as motor imagery analysis, where a classifier could be
trained to distinguish between the intention of moving different body parts. This advance-
ment could enhance the app to actively respond to the patient’s intention to perform an
action, executing movements when the intention is recognized rather than automatically,
as it happens at the current stage of development.
1.2
Objectives and Expected Outcomes
The main objectives of this work are:
• Develop a User Interface for a 3D rehabilitation environment that allows movement
visualisation and personalization.
• Create a communication module to simplify the interaction between the UI and EEG
system.
• Send marker locations from the UI to monitor and record when movements initiate.
• Store both the EEG signal and the marker locations for further signal processing
and analysis.
To fulfill the project requirements, essential skills include knowledge of UI design and
game development engines such as Unity or Unreal Engine. These tools are crucial
for creating and optimizing the 3D environment. Additionally, an understanding of cus-
tomization options is necessary to allow users to adapt the interface to their preferences
and goals.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Background
2.1
Stroke and Motor Impairment
Stroke is a leading cause of death and disability worldwide, significantly impacting the
quality of life of survivors.
According to the World Health Organization, stroke is predicted to become increasingly
prevalent due to an aging global population [17].
In particular, it predicts a 20% increase in the global population aged 65 and over by 2050,
suggesting a rising economic and healthcare burden associated with stroke [18, 19].
Stroke occurs when the blood supply to part of the brain is interrupted or reduced, prevent-
ing brain tissue from getting enough oxygen and nutrients. This can result in significant
neurological damage, leading to motor impairments, cognitive deficits, and sensory dis-
turbances.
Motor impairment is one of the most common consequences of stroke, often resulting
in hemiparesis, which is the paralysis on one side of the body. T his condition arises from
damage to the motor cortex area of the brain, responsible for planning, controlling, and
executing voluntary movements (Fig.2.1) [20]. Rehabilitation efforts focus on improving
motor function and helping patients regain independence in their daily activities.
Figure 2.1: Primary brain regions involved in motor control
Rehabilitation approaches such as constrained induced movement therapy (CIMT) en-
courage patients to use their affected limb more often, leading to both physiological changes
in sensorimotor cortex and behavioral improvements [5].
However, this therapy only benefits patients who retain some residual movement in the
affected limb. For patients with severe impairment, passive movement therapies, such as
robotic training, have been employed in clinical settings to provide repetitive motor train-
ing [19].
The broader issue with existing therapies is that they often do not monitor patient en-
gagement in the rehabilitation process. Ensuring patient motivation and participation is
crucial for the effectiveness of these therapies.
For instance, brain–computer interface (BCI) technology has shown promises for patients
with severe limb weakness who cannot benefit from traditional therapies like CIMT.
BCI involves the use of brain signals to control external devices, which can facilitate motor
recovery even in the absence of residual movement [21].
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
4
==PAGE:13==
This technology, paired with Virtual Reality (VR), is emerging as a promising tool in en-
hancing stroke rehabilitation [22, 23, 24].
2.2
Rehabilitation and Necessary Movements
Effective rehabilitation is crucial for stroke survivors to regain motor function and improve
their quality of life.
Rehabilitation typically involves a combination of physical therapy, occupational therapy,
and other specialized interventions aimed at restoring movement joint mobility, improv-
ing voluntary movement control and strength. The primary goals of rehabilitation are to
enhance joint mobility, prevent muscle atrophy, and improve voluntary control over move-
ments [25], with the ultimate goal of ensuring that the patient can perform complex tasks
independently.
Key rehabilitation techniques include Constraint-Induced Movement Therapy (CIMT), Neu-
romuscular Stimulation (NMS), and mental practice with Motor Imagery (MI). These meth-
ods are designed to engage the patient in repetitive, task-specific exercises that promote
neuroplasticity [26]. However, traditional methods often face limitations, especially for
patients with severe impairments in the chronic stage of recovery [27].
Integrating these movements in a 3D environment could help patients in replicating ev-
eryday activities, thereby enhancing the clinical effectiveness of VR.
Specific Exercises for Stroke Rehabilitation
Several exercises can be incorporated into rehabilitation programs to enhance motor re-
covery.
[28, 29] identify some useful exercises, that can be categorized based on the level of
movement capability in the affected limbs.
Exercises for Those with Little to No Movement:
• Shoulder Blade Raise and Squeeze: this exercise targets the shoulder muscles,
enhancing their strength and coordination.
• Wrist Stretch: stretching the wrist in various directions helps in improving flexibility
and reducing spasticity.
• Imaginary Movement: visualization exercises where patients imagine performing
movements with their affected limb, aiding in neuroplasticity and motor planning.
Exercises for Those with Partial Movement:
• Active Assisted Shoulder Raise: patients lift their arms towards the ceiling, enhanc-
ing shoulder mobility and strength.
• Scapular Squeezes: squeezing the shoulder blades together improves upper back
and shoulder muscle function.
• Functional Reaches: touching different parts of the body with the affected arm to
enhance coordination and proprioception.
• Wrist Flexion and Extension: moving the wrist up and down to the full range of
motion to strengthen forearm muscles.
Exercises for Those with Almost Full Movement:
• Knee Extension: focuses on strengthening the quadriceps muscles, crucial for var-
ious functional movements such as standing and walking.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
5
==PAGE:14==
• Seated Marching: involves lifting the knees alternately while in a seated position,
improving coordination and strengthening the hip flexors and core muscles.
• Hammer Forearm Turn: rotating the forearm to improve wrist and forearm strength.
• Finger-to-Thumb Taps: tapping each finger to the thumb sequentially to improve
dexterity and fine motor control.
• Ball Squeeze & Rubber Band Opening: squeezing a ball and opening fingers against
a rubber band to enhance grip strength and finger flexibility.
• Bicep Curl: target the biceps brachii muscle, which is essential for various upper
limb movements, such as lifting, carrying, and reaching.
• Open Arm Movement: to strengthen the shoulder and upper arm muscles, particu-
larly the deltoids and biceps, essential for lifting and holding objects
These exercises are designed to be repetitive and progressively challenging to promote
neuroplasticity and motor recovery. Consistency in performing these exercises could help
in making significant improvements, since regular practice helps reinforce neural path-
ways and ensures that the gains in strength, coordination, and flexibility translate into
improved functional abilities in daily life [28].
2.3
Brain Computer Interfaces in Neurorehabilitation
A Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) is a system that facilitates direct communication be-
tween the brain and external devices using brain signals processed by a computer.
Essentially, BCIs enable individuals to control machines through their neural activity, by-
passing traditional neuromuscular pathways. BCI systems typically comprehend three
primary components: sensors to collect brain signals, a computer to process these sig-
nals, and an external device that executes the intended response based on the processed
information.
BCIs can be classified based on their signal detection methods into invasive, semi-invasive,
and non-invasive systems [22].
In Fig.2.2 is provided a block diagram of a BCI system [30].
BCIs operate by recording and decoding brain activity during motor and cognitive tasks,
mapping these signals onto useful feedback for both patients and therapists [6]. This
feedback can be visual, auditory, or haptic, and it can control external devices to provide
proprioceptive feedback.
By promoting the recruitment of brain areas involved in specific tasks, BCIs induce neu-
ral plasticity necessary for functional recovery [22]. Neural plasticity refers to the nervous
system’s ability to reorganize its structure, functions, and connections in response to train-
ing and is influenced by task specificity, environmental factors, motivation, and attention
[6].
BCI therapy has shown promise in inducing long-lasting neurological changes and im-
proving motor functions in stroke patients [22]. The use of electroencephalography (EEG)
to record brain activity during motor imagery (MI) tasks is particularly widespread [22]. MI
involves mentally simulating specific movements without physical execution, engaging
the same neural mechanisms as actual movement [6]. This mental practice activates the
primary motor cortex (M1) and related motor areas, producing Event Related Desynchro-
nization (ERD) and Event Related Synchronization (ERS) in the µ band [22]. Studies have
demonstrated that stroke patients can elicit ERD/ERS during MI of their paralyzed limbs,
facilitating motor recovery [22].
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
6
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: Block diagram of a BCI system [30]
BCIs can be combined with various external devices to assist in executing and learn-
ing movements [22].
For example, in stroke rehabilitation patients usually perform MI exercises while wear-
ing an EEG cap, and the decoded brain oscillations move a virtual reality (VR) avatar or
trigger feedback mechanisms like functional electrical stimulation (FES) [22]. This closed-
loop feedback system, which provides real-time feedback, is most effective in enhancing
co-adaptation between the user and the system [22].
The combination of MI-based BCIs with FES or VR has proven to have potential in im-
proving upper limb motor function in stroke survivors [22].
BCI systems extend therapeutic possibilities to patients with different degrees of pare-
sis by integrating bottom-up (peripheral to central nervous system) and top-down (central
to peripheral nervous system) approaches [6].
They provide feedback on intended movements to achieve effective neurorehabilitation,
which aims to drive adaptive changes in the neuronal system while avoiding maladaptive
plasticity, that can lead to abnormal, non-functional movements or chronic pain [6].
A particularly promising area of BCI application in neurorehabilitation is its integration with
Virtual Reality (VR). VR provides a three-dimensional (3D) feedback environment, allow-
ing patients to immerse themselves in a virtual setting that simulates real-world tasks.
This immersive experience can significantly enhance motivation and engagement in re-
habilitation exercises [6].
By coupling BCIs with VR, patients can receive strong visual and proprioceptive feed-
backs, which aid in motor learning and recovery. The VR environment can represent the
patient’s imagined movements in real-time, providing immediate feedback and reinforcing
correct motor patterns [22].
BCI-VR systems have been shown to effectively translate MI into overt actions using ex-
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
7
==PAGE:16==
ternal devices like hand orthoses or FES systems [6].
2.4
Virtual Reality in Stroke Rehabilitation
Virtual Reality (VR) is emerging as a powerful tool in stroke rehabilitation, offering inno-
vative solutions to improve limb motor functions and cognitive abilities in patients. By
creating immersive environments that imitate the real world, VR engages patients in the
rehabilitation process, motivating them through gamification techniques [31].
Motor functions are enhanced with VR exercises that often require patients to manipu-
late virtual objects (e.g., picking up, squeezing, moving), which helps build new neural
pathways in the brain through repetitive, goal-oriented tasks.
Furthermore, VR has a positive impact onto cognitive abilities by presenting scenarios
with varying tasks that focus on enhancing attention, memory, and spatial orientation, of-
ten impaired after a stroke [31].
The integration of machine learning algorithms with VR technology allows for real-time ad-
justment of exercise intensity based on a patient’s performance. For example, the speed
of movement can be dynamically adjusted, ensuring that the exercises remain challeng-
ing and effective.
Patients receive positive visual and audio reinforcement (e.g., scores, audio feedback)
during VR training that can boost motivation.
Moreover, telerehabilitation is a significant advantage of VR technology. Portable VR
hardware enables patients to continue their training at home, either under the supervi-
sion of a therapist or independently. This flexibility increases the opportunity for building
more efficient long-term stroke recovery programs and broadens access to rehabilitation
for more patients.
The diagram in Fig.2.3 represents a system architecture for a VR platform designed for
stroke recovery training [32].
Figure 2.3: VR system architecture [32]
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
8
==PAGE:17==
In terms of interaction workflow, the user engages with the system via input hardware,
which captures their movements. The processing software translates this data for the
training simulator, while the physics simulator ensures realistic interactions. The training
simulator then enables the exercises and sends data to the rendering engine for visual
output. Output hardware provides feedback to the user.
Regarding data flow, exercise data is sent to the AI-based performance assessment for
analysis. Performance data is stored in the database web server, accessible to therapists
through the therapist module and managed by administrators via the web admin panel.
2.5
Electroencephalography (EEG)
Electroencephalography (EEG) is a non-invasive method used to record electrical activity
in the brain. EEG measures electrical fluctuations caused by post-synaptic potentials from
thousands of neurons, with a microvolt to millivolt range, poor spatial resolution (cm2),
and good temporal resolution (ms) [33, 34]. The recording electrodes are placed over the
scalp, capturing the absolute electrical potentials generated by the neurons of the under-
lying cerebral cortex.
Macroscopic electrodes placed on the surface of the scalp measure the electrical ac-
tivity of large portions of the brain. EEG oscillations vary according to the synchronized
or desynchronized activity of the underlying neuronal populations [35].
Additionally, EEG measures postsynaptic potentials rather than action potentials, captur-
ing only a portion of the brain’s electrical activity. This limited detection is due to the fact
that EEG signals must pass through the brain tissue, skull, and scalp, which attenuates
them. Additionally, EEG signals can be influenced by other physiological electrical activi-
ties (such as those from the heart, eyes, and muscles) and environmental noise (such as
from computer screens, other electronic devices, and power lines).
The basic equipment includes electrodes (with Ag/Ag-Cl electrodes being the most widely
used), an amplifier, and an EEG system (monitor and processor) [33]. Important compo-
nents of the electrode placement are the gel and salts applied to improve scalp conduc-
tivity and thereby record waveforms. Dry electrodes are also used [33].
For EEG recording, as illustrated in Fig.2.4, the electrodes are placed at 10%, 20%, 20%,
20%, and 10% from inion to nasion along the length.
Figure 2.4: 10-20 electrodes placement [36]
The EEG can be decomposed into a series of sine waves to generate a frequency spec-
trum. The frequency bands of interest are highlighted in Fig. 2.5. The commonly encoun-
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
9
==PAGE:18==
tered waveform frequencies are alpha (8 to 12 Hz), beta (13 to 30 Hz), theta (4 to 7 Hz),
and delta (less than 4 Hz). The predominance of waveforms in an EEG varies based on
the age and state of wakefulness of the individual [33].
Figure 2.5: EEG frequency bands [37]
EEG has become an important tool in stroke rehabilitation, particularly in BCI systems.
Indeed, in a motor imagery (MI) based BCI scenario, EEG provides the sensorimotor
rhythm: imagined movements produce lower amplitude µ waves (around 10 Hz is the
feature of interest), so µ activity is largest over touch (sensory) and motor areas of the
brain.
The expected region of interest during these EEG recordings involves the placement of
electrodes on the scalp to cover the motor cortex regions [38]. This is because motor
imagery signals, which are generated by the imagination of limb movement, can reveal
human movement intentions without requiring external stimuli. To capture these signals
effectively, electrodes relevant to the motor cortex, based on the Brodmann brain function
partition and the international 10/20 electrode lead system, are highlighted in Fig. 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Electrodes placement for MI applications [38]
2.6
Overview
This chapter addressed the clinical background and key concepts of the study, focusing
on the integration of BCI and VR in post-stroke rehabilitation and EEG acquisition. The
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
10
==PAGE:19==
following chapters will analyze the current state of scientific development, emphasizing
how advanced technologies like BCI, and VR can enhance motor recovery and patient
engagement in stroke rehabilitation.
The rationale for integrating these technologies into UI-based applications will be as-
sessed to justify the development of a customizable UI, aiming to tailor training sessions
to individual needs and visualize specific movements.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
11
==PAGE:20==
3
State of the Art
3.1
Stroke, motor impairment and rehabilitation
Stroke frequently results in the reduction or loss of functional abilities, particularly impact-
ing motor skills and movement. While stroke typically affects both extremities on one
side of the body, recovery of upper limb function is notably more challenging compared to
the lower limb. Approximately 85% of stroke patients experience decreased upper limb
function, and even after 3–6 months post-stroke or completion of standard rehabilitation
programs, 50–80% still do not regain sufficient function for daily living activities (ADL) [39,
40, 41, 42, 43, 19]. In contrast, studies showed that 75–83% of patients are expected to
regain lower limb function and the ability to walk [19].
A significant obstacle in upper limb recovery is spasticity, with prevalence rates rang-
ing from 4% to 46% at different post-stroke stages, most commonly in the chronic stage
[44, 45, 46, 47, 19].
Physiotherapy is crucial in post-stroke rehabilitation, focusing on maintaining joint mobil-
ity, preventing muscle strength loss and abnormal muscle tone, and improving voluntary
movement control [25]. Effective rehabilitation of limb function post-stroke involves pro-
tocols with regular, high-intensity, task-specific exercises emphasizing repetitive move-
ments [48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 19]. Including exercises that involve prolonged
muscle stretching is essential to mitigate spasticity [56, 19].
However, implementing these high-intensity, task-specific exercise protocols, despite their
effectiveness, can be challenging. They are physically demanding and time-consuming
for therapists, requiring manual interaction and one-on-one sessions with each patient
daily for several weeks [49, 57, 27].
Thus, given the current challenges and complexities in stroke rehabilitation, particularly
for upper limb recovery, there is a critical need for innovative solutions that can enhance
the effectiveness and efficiency of rehabilitation protocols, complementing and potentially
transforming traditional rehabilitation practices.
New approaches that have been followed include the integration of Brain-Computer In-
terface (BCI) systems, which enable patients to engage in high-intensity, task-specific ex-
ercises through direct brain control, potentially enhancing neuroplasticity and functional
recovery.
Moreover, Virtual Reality (VR) provides immersive environments that can simulate real-
life tasks, making rehabilitation exercises more engaging and motivating.
Thus, it arises the need of user interfaces (UI) for rehabilitation technologies with intu-
itive and user-friendly designs, to ensure that patients can easily and effectively interact
with these systems. Good UI design is essential for maximizing the therapeutic potential
of BCI and VR technologies, ensuring that both are accessible and beneficial for stroke
patients with varying levels of impairment.
In the following sections are analyzed these three innovative approaches, including the
existing devices on the market that aim to further improve rehabilitation.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
12
==PAGE:21==
3.2
BCI Systems in Rehabilitation
A BCI creates a new output channel for the brain to a computer or a device, retrieving sig-
nals of interest from the brain and interfacing them with computerized devices for neuro-
rehabilitation. This approach employs feedback strategies to allow the brain to learn using
the BCI. Feedback can take the form of sensory information such as visual, auditory, and
tactile stimuli, or direct peripheral nerve or muscle stimulation [58].
The general architecture of a BCI system includes several components: a recorder, a
decoder, and an effector. In a non-invasive setup, the recorder acquires brain signals
from the scalp surface, typically using an electroencephalogram (EEG) to detect elec-
trical fluctuations associated with neuronal activity. The decoder analyzes the recorded
data, and the effector acts upon this information. For neurorehabilitation, the effector
might be a robotic limb or a device that provides virtual feedback to promote appropriate
neural activity patterns [59].
Figure 3.1: General architecture of a BCI system [59]
Studies have shown that integrating BCI systems with physical therapy can significantly
enhance recovery after stroke, suggesting benefits over conventional or occupational
therapy [6, 23]. This improvement is attributed to the normalization of brain activation and
the feedback-induced synaptic strengthening of motor networks, which increases neuro-
plasticity [60]. The recovery observed can result from a more normal brain activation in
terms of lateralization, motor-related functional cortical activity induced by the central ner-
vous system guided through BCI, or the contingent sensory input provided by feedback,
which increases synaptic strengthening of reduced or previously inhibited motor networks
[61, 62, 63].
BCI systems have demonstrated efficacy in promoting long-lasting functional improve-
ments in stroke survivors, attributed to enhanced neuroplasticity in the central nervous
system [7, 22]. These advanced technological solutions offer promising interventions for
post-stroke rehabilitation, though in most cases a limitation on the reliability of these stud-
ies consists of the limited sample sizes [24].
3.2.1
Existing devices
In this section are introduced some of the existing BCI devices that have made significant
contributions to the field, providing innovative solutions for the recovery and enhance-
ment of cognitive and motor functions. Their applications range from neurofeedback and
cognitive training to motor rehabilitation and communication aids.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
13
==PAGE:22==
Emotiv Epoc X and Emotiv BCI
The Emotiv Epoc X is a portable and wireless 14-channel EEG headset. By capturing
brain signals and providing real-time feedback, the device helps individuals to train their
brain activity to improve cognitive functions such as attention, memory, and stress man-
agement.
The Emotiv BCI system is designed to convert brain activity data, facial expressions,
and head movements into digital signals to control various devices and applications. It
includes mental commands, which trigger events with specific trained thoughts, perfor-
mance metrics that allow continuous control based on cognitive states like engagement
or excitement, facial expressions to trigger events without training and motion sensors to
control devices through head movements. In Fig.?? are displayed the EEG device and
the software’s interface.
(a) Emotiv X [64]
(b) Emotiv BCI [65]
Figure 3.2: Emotiv X and Emotiv BCI
OpenBCI
OpenBCI is an open-source platform that can acquire EEG, EMG, and EKG signals. Due
to its customizable nature, development of neurorehabilitation tools that facilitate the re-
covery of motor and cognitive functions is possible. Moreover, collaboration during BCI
technologies development is supported by its open-source nature. In Fig.3.3 are dis-
played both the EEG cap and the Cyton board, meaning the bio-amplifier.
The OpenBCI Graphical User Interface (GUI) allows to connect to the OpenBCI hardware
(Cyton+Daisy Biosensing Board 16-channel and EEG Electrode Cap) [66].
G.Tec g.BCIsys
The G.Tec g.BCIsys is a commercial BCI system designed specifically for rehabilitation
and communication. It allows users to control applications of perform motor rehabilitation
using their brain signals since it detects the changes in the EEG due to mental activity
and transforms them into control signal. This system includes all hard and software com-
ponents needed for biosignal acquisition, real-time and offline biosignal analysis, data
classification and neurofeedback (Fig.3.4a) [67]. One of the BCI devices suitable for neu-
rorehabilitation of upper and lower extremities is RecoveriX (Fig.3.4b) [1], described in
the later sections.
IpsiHand (Neurolutions)
Neurolutions’ IpsiHand Upper Extremity Rehabilitation System is a BCI-based device
(Fig.3.5) developed by Neurolutions that assists stroke survivors in rehabilitating their up-
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
14
==PAGE:23==
(a) OpenBCI EEG Electrode Cap [66]
(b) OpenBCI Cyton [66]
Figure 3.3: OpenBCI EEG Electrode Cap and Cyton
(a) G.Tec g.BCIsys [67]
(b) RecoveriX [1]
Figure 3.4: G.Tec g.BCIsys and recoveriX
per extremities by translating brain signals into controlling a wearable robotic handpiece.
IpsiHand recognizes the intent from the healthy parts of the brain, and in response the
system opens and closes the robotic handpiece [68].
Figure 3.5: IpsiHand devices [69]
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
15
==PAGE:24==
3.3
VR in Rehabilitation
VR environments make therapy more engaging and effective by providing immersive feed-
back. Patients perform movements and tasks in a virtual setting, which helps them to fo-
cus on exploring the environment rather than on the therapeutic aspect. This immersion
increases motivation and engagement, leading to better rehabilitation outcomes, provid-
ing real-time feedback and stimulating brain plasticity [13, 70]. For instance, interactive
VR systems that incorporate gaming elements have proven to make the rehabilitation pro-
cess more enjoyable and thus more effective [70, 16]. Additionally, the realistic feedback
in VR ensures that patients maintain a sense of performing real movements, helping them
in correcting their actions [13, 70, 16].
Real-time feedback helps patients to understand their performance and make necessary
adjustments immediately. Studies have shown that real-time biofeedback systems us-
ing VR can significantly improve the effectiveness of rehabilitation exercises by providing
continuous performance evaluation and encouraging greater effort and movement control
from patients [13, 16] .
Leeb et al. [71] demonstrated the importance of realistic virtual feedback for effective
motor learning. VR feedback that matches physical capabilities prevents the disturbance
of focused attention and maintains the sense of immersion [6].
Observational learning in VR can activate the same neural networks as actual movement,
inducing motor resonance.
Motor resonance is a phenomenon where observing an action activates similar neural
circuits in the observer’s brain as those used during the execution of the same action, pri-
marily involving the mirror neuron system. This helps understanding and imitating actions
and learning motor skills by internally simulating the observed actions. Key brain regions
involved include the premotor cortex and the inferior parietal lobule [72, 73]. This acti-
vation can facilitate plasticity, especially when the observed action matches the internal
simulated action. Combining action observation with physical training positively impacts
motor deficit rehabilitation post-stroke [6].
Holper et al. [74] advanced this concept by observing brain activity during coupled im-
agery and observation, where the patients had to imagine the movements from a first
person perspective in a virtual environment, leading to stronger brain activation. [6].
In addition to movement visualization, VR systems can adapt the training environment
and tasks to the individual needs of the patient. This customization ensures that the
rehabilitation program is appropriately challenging and engaging, which is essential for
maintaining patient motivation and promoting continuous improvement [16]. VR systems
such as those utilizing the Microsoft Kinect sensors, a line of motion sensing input de-
vices, allow for detailed tracking of patient movements, providing precise and immediate
feedback, crucial for effective rehabilitation [70, 16].
3.3.1
Existing devices
In this section are introduced some of the existing rehabilitation devices that combine
therapy with VR.
Vive Pro Eye
The Vive Pro Eye is a VR headset from HTC that includes eye-tracking technology, used to
track patient gaze and engagement in virtual environments during rehabilitation sessions.
This feedback helps tailoring rehabilitation exercises to improve focus and engagement.
[75]
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
16
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.6: Vive Pro Eye system [75]
NeuroVirt
NeuroVirt focuses on VR to enhance physiotherapy for stroke survivors through engaging
VR games that increase therapy intensity and frequency. These immersive experiences
are combined with remote monitoring and personalized guidance from healthcare profes-
sionals [76].
EvolvRehab’s Move Well Platform
EvolvRehab’s Move Well platform uses VR to assist users, especially stroke patients,
in engaging in physical activities through gamification. It supports rehabilitation goals,
particularly for upper limb mobility, by providing professional feedback and enabling home
exercises, making rehabilitation more accessible [77].
MindMaze
MindMaze combines VR and BCI technology for neurorehabilitation. Patients use an
avatar in a virtual environment to perform motor tasks visualized in real-time. The sys-
tems are designed to help stroke patients recovering motor function by engaging them in
interactive, gamified therapy sessions. [78]
The following devices have been developed for stroke rehabilitation.
MindPod Dolphin: MindPod Dolphin offers an engaging animated gaming experience
for stroke upper-limb rehabilitation. It uses an anti-gravity test to train fine motor control
and promotes motor skill and cognitive function recovery through continuous exploration
of an immersive oceanic environment. [79]
Intento PRO: Intento PRO is suitable for upper extremity training, with mlti-channel elec-
trical stimulation that enables the generation of upper-limb movements. Patients can vol-
untarily control the stimulation, and coordinate the electrically generated movements with
their intention to complete functional, goal-oriented tasks.
MindMotion PRO: MindMotion PRO is tailored for acute neurorehabilitation, featuring
17 purpose-built games to promote upper-limb control. It uses a bespoke camera system
and optical markers to capture subtle movements, amplifying them for gameplay, and
offers real-time feedback and telemedicine services. [80]
Grail (Motek Medical)
Grail from Motek Medical is a VR-based rehabilitation platform that integrates motion cap-
ture and real-time feedback to support gait and balance training in realistic virtual scenar-
ios. [81]
CAREN (Motek Medical)
The CAREN (Computer Assisted Rehabilitation Environment) system by Motek combines
virtual reality with a sophisticated motion capture system. It also provides feedback on pa-
tient performance, allowing therapists to tailor rehabilitation programs to individual needs.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
17
==PAGE:26==
[82]
Figure 3.7: Grail device [81]
Figure 3.8: CAREN device [82]
Rewellio
Rewellio is a VR-based stroke therapy app focusing on hand function improvement. It in-
tegrates VR into traditional rehabilitation methods, offering progress tracking and biofeed-
back, and it can also be used at home. [83]
Figure 3.9: Rewellio device [83]
3.4
UI Design for Rehabilitation
User interface (UI) design in rehabilitation is crucial, aiming to create interfaces that are
not only user-friendly but also highly effective and personalized for patients undergoing
therapy.
Two critical aspects of this design are movement visualization and personalization. Com-
bining accurate, intuitive visual feedback with tailored experiences, designers can create
interfaces that are not only effective but also enjoyable to use.
Movement Visualization
Movement visualization in rehabilitation UI design consists in providing clear, intuitive vi-
sual representations of the movements that patients need to perform. This aspect is cru-
cial as it directly influences the patient’s ability to understand and replicate the required
exercises. The use of visual aids, such as animations or virtual reality (VR), can enhance
the patient’s comprehension and execution of movements [84].
Effective movement visualization involves real-time feedback, allowing patients to see
their movements as they perform them, which eases immediate corrections and ensures
accuracy.
Accurate and intuitive representations, such as avatars mimicking patient actions or mo-
tion trails indicating movement paths, are essential, since visual progress tracking through
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
18
==PAGE:27==
graphs and performance scores helps patients monitoring their improvements and identify
areas needing attention.
Personalization
Personalization in UI design tailors the interface to meet the specific needs and capabili-
ties of each patient. This approach ensures that rehabilitation programs are more acces-
sible, effective, and engaging for individual patients. Personalization could be achieved
through adaptive interfaces that modify the difficulty level of tasks based on the patient’s
progress and abilities, maintaining an appropriate level of challenge and motivation.
Moreover, personalization involves creating user profiles to collect data on preferences,
abilities, and goals, guiding the customization of the interface and content to suit each
patient. Adaptive content adjusts the complexity and difficulty of exercises based on user
feedback, ensuring that the tasks remain challenging yet achievable.
3.4.1
Existing devices
In this section are described some devices on the market that combine interactive UI with
VR and BCI for neurorehabilitation purposes.
Hocoma Lokomat
The Hocoma Lokomat is a robotic gait training system designed to assist individuals with
walking impairments. It combines robotic exoskeletons with a User Interface that visual-
izes movement and progress during rehabilitation sessions. The visual feedback provided
by the system helps patients understanding their movement patterns and improve their
walking capabilities [85].
TyroS
TyroS is a comprehensive therapy software developed by Tyromotion, designed to be
the core of their rehabilitation technology. It integrates with various Tyromotion devices
to enhance their functionalities. These devices focuses on both upper and lower limb
therapy, like on finger-hand, arm-shoulder rehabilitation and gait and locomotion. The
software supports both motor and cognitive therapy, also providing visualization of therapy
progress [86].
Figure 3.10: Lokomat software [85]
Figure 3.11: TyroS software [86]
Flint Rehab
Flint Rehab is a digital health company specializing in stroke rehabilitation systems [29].
Some of their products include the FitMi and MusicGlove.
FitMi: An interactive neurorehabilitation tool that targets various muscle groups, including
legs, core, arms, and hands. FitMi provides personalized rehab exercises based on the
user’s ability level, motivating high-intensity rehabilitation at home. It benefits individuals
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
19
==PAGE:28==
with mild to severe motor impairments post-stroke [87].
MusicGlove: A music-based hand therapy device to improve hand function. It motivates
users to perform hand therapy exercises by playing a musical game [88].
Figure 3.12: FitMi [87]
Figure 3.13: MusicGlove device [88]
3.5
Commercial Solutions underlying BCI-3D ReHaB
In the following section are described some innovative and effective solutions that repre-
sented a basis and a source of inspiration for this work.
3.5.1
G.tec Medical Engineering
Founded in 1999 in Austria, G.tec Medical Engineering is a leading company in the field
of neurotechnology and BCIs. G.tec specializes in both invasive and non-invasive neu-
rotechnologies, offering high-resolution devices for measuring and analyzing brain waves.
These devices are used for various applications, including stroke rehabilitation, brain as-
sessments for severe brain injuries, and neuromarketing.
A notable product from G.tec is the recoveriX system [1], which combines BCIs with VR
to streamline neurorehabilitation process. This system employs a closed-loop mechanism
tailored for aiding individuals suffering from stroke and multiple sclerosis in recovering mo-
tor functionality of both upper and lower extremities. It operates by synchronizing mental
intent with visual and tactile feedback within a VR setup, thus fostering neural plasticity
and offering real-time feedback and adaptive responses.
Indeed, when patients mentally simulate a joint movement, they receive corresponding
visual feedback via a virtual avatar and tactile sensations through electrical muscle stim-
ulation. This rewarding feedback confirms the accuracy of the mental effort but also mo-
tivates correct execution.
The visualization of limb movement is obtained from a first-person or mirror perspec-
tive.The avatar on the screen indicates the movement that the patient should imagine.
Then, the system’s interface responds in real-time to neural signals indicating motor imagi-
nation, triggering appropriate stimulations that encourage bilateral hemisphere activation .
The recoveriX system also includes an EEG cap equipped with 16 channels.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
20
==PAGE:29==
RecoveriX UI
The RecoveriX system’s user interface (UI) is designed to be user-friendly, providing real-
time feedback to optimize patient engagement and efficacy. The system includes the
following key components:
• visual feedback: virtual avatar that mimics the patient’s imagined movements, rein-
forcing the neural connections between intention and physical execution;
• tactile feedback: delivered through functional electrical stimulation (FES), it further
strengthens neural pathways associated with the intended movements;
• real-time monitoring and adjustment: by monitoring brain activity and adjusting the
feedback in real-time, it is ensured that the rehabilitation exercises are tailored to
the patient’s current capabilities and needs;
• interactive environment: the VR component creates an immersive environment that
makes therapy sessions more engaging and less repetitive, crucial for maintaining
patient motivation and adherence to the rehabilitation program.
Clinical Impact and Research
The effectiveness of the RecoveriX system in promoting motor function recovery is sup-
ported by various studies. Its application in upper extremity rehabilitation for chronic stroke
patients has led to significant improvements, surpassing clinical thresholds of motor en-
hancement. Similarly, for lower extremity mobility, RecoveriX has outperformed other
electromechanical gait training methods, notably without the need for body weight sup-
port [1].
Cho et al., [89] demonstrated the use of paired associative stimulation using recoveriX
for stroke rehabilitation, highlighting the importance of combining mental and physical
feedback for enhancing neuroplasticity.
Irimia et al., [90] discussed the positive impact of recoveriX in paired associative stimula-
tion (PAS) for upper limb rehabilitation post-stroke, finding that the high accuracy, coupled
with rewarding feedback, motivated the patients to perform the MI effectively.
Saba et al., [91] showcased that RecoveriX can effectively incorporate EEG activity within
a closed loop neurofeedback paradigm, and lead to improved functional outcomes. Promis-
ing results were found even during the post-acute stage, after conventional therapy was
ineffective.
Sebastián-Romagosa et al. [22], demonstrated that he use of recoveriX shows signif-
icant positive outcomes in stroke rehabilitation for upper extremity motor function, with
improvements maintained for at least six months post-therapy. The system’s closed-loop
feedback mechanism enhances user engagement, leading to better compliance and more
significant functional recovery.
Other studies [92] have shown high classification accuracy in motor imagery tasks, crucial
for the success of RecoveriX system, where stroke patients were able to control a MI BCI
system with high accuracy relative to healthy persons. This may have occurred due to
the high motivation of these patients.
These studies demonstrate the clinical efficacy of the RecoveriX system and its success
in enhancing patient’s engagement during rehabilitation sessions, but also suggest signif-
icant potential for future research, particularly in enhancing user interface customization
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
21
==PAGE:30==
and exploring new rehabilitative paradigms with advanced VR capabilities.
Thus, building a customizable UI that provides a variety of configuration options and a
tailored exercise regimen enhances the adaptability and accessibility of rehabilitation sys-
tems, contributing to personalized patient care and optimizing therapeutic outcomes.
3.5.2
ExciteBCI
As previously mentioned, VR technology offers numerous benefits for neurorehabilitation.
However, there are still limitations to consider. The initial cost of VR systems can be
high, and the need for specialized equipment and space can be a barrier to widespread
adoption. Additionally, some patients may experience discomfort or motion sickness when
using VR, which can limit the duration and effectiveness of the therapy sessions.
Using applications with user interfaces (UI) have demonstrated promising results in en-
hancing rehabilitation processes. The rationale for incorporating a UI-based application
in stroke rehabilitation relies in increased engagement, reduced stress, and improved re-
habilitation outcomes.
The study by Alder et al. [93] supports the use of UI-based applications in stroke reha-
bilitation. The research focused on the exciteBCI, a complex neuromodulatory wearable
technology integrated with a mobile application. The iterative user-centered design ap-
proach adopted in this study emphasized the importance of involving end-users (patients
and physiotherapists) in the design process to ensure the technology met their needs and
preferences.
The study identified that participants viewed the exciteBCI as a means to enhance reha-
bilitation through increased engagement and challenge. The UI facilitated a structured
and interactive environment.
Participants highlighted that the technology simplified communication and collaborative
goal-setting with physiotherapists. Additionally, the ability to customize and adapt the UI
to individual needs further enhanced its acceptability and usability.
The UI’s intuitive design and the provision of real-time feedback allowed patients to focus
on their rehabilitation tasks without feeling overwhelmed by the technology.
Moreover, sustained use of the exciteBCI over three weeks led to significant improve-
ments in balance and walking for stroke patients. This sustained engagement is crucial
for translating short-term rehabilitation gains into long-term functional improvements.
3.6
Overview
Given the advantages of UI-based applications in stroke rehabilitation in terms of en-
hancing patient engagement, reducing stress, and improving rehabilitation outcomes, as
supported by the findings from the study by Alder et al. and from the RecoveriX system,
a user-centered design needs to be incorporated.
The application should be tailored to meet the specific needs of stroke patients, thereby
maximizing their therapeutic potential, thus arising the need to develop a UI with a broader
range of movements.
As also highlighted by Shi et al. in their work [16], Unity3D software can be used to develop
a VR-based User Interface, where features can be customize to create an environment
that better adheres to the patients’ needs.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
22
==PAGE:31==
4
BCI-3D ReHaB Application
In this section is introduced how the idea behind the BCI-3D ReHaB Application emerged,
including its main objectives and reasons behind its implementation. An User Guide is
provided, with the explanation of the different UI panels and their functionalities.
4.1
Concept behind The App
Choosing an interactive and customizable interface for stroke rehabilitation purposes is
driven by several reasons. Personalization and adaptability are crucial in this context,
since stroke survivors have different needs depending on the severity and location of
their stroke.
A customizable interface enables the application to provide exercises tailored to the indi-
vidual needs and abilities of each user, thereby enhancing the efficacy of the rehabilitation
process. Customization plays a crucial role in making the rehabilitation experience more
engaging with respect to conventional therapy. This is important because rehabilitation
can be morally challenging and frustrating for patients, particularly if they struggle with
movements or do not observe significant improvements over time. The ability to cus-
tomize movements, in terms of both body part and execution speed, enables session
tailoring to individual patient needs.
One of the possible applications of this app is for the rehabilitation process which follows
hemiparesis, making it beneficial to create sessions that focus for example on movements
of the left hand, arm, and leg.
Engagement and motivation are significantly enhanced through the incorporation of in-
teractive elements, thus boosting patient motivation and adherence to the rehabilitation
regimen. Ideally, patients are more likely to remain engaged with their rehabilitation pro-
gram if they feel involved and have some degree of control over their therapy, and cus-
tomizable interfaces empower users to set their preferences and goals, encouraging a
sense of ownership and commitment to the rehabilitation.
The ability to track and monitor progress is another key advantage. For example, connect-
ing the interface to an EEG recording platform, detailed data on the patient’s performance
and progress can be collected and analysed. With this data, the application could offer
personalized feedback, aiding users in understanding their progress and identifying areas
needing improvement.
Cost-effectiveness and accessibility are also significant considerations. Interactive appli-
cations simplify remote monitoring and therapy, reducing the need for frequent in-person
visits and making rehabilitation more accessible to those who may face mobility or trans-
portation challenges. Once developed, the application could be distributed widely at a
relatively low cost, potentially reaching a larger number of stroke survivors compared to
traditional in-person therapy.
4.2
Chosen Platform
The chosen platform for developing the Application and the UI is Unity. Unity is a cross-
platform game engine and integrated development environment (IDE) used for creating
video games, simulations, and other interactive 3D and 2D content. Developed by Unity
Technologies, it was first released in 2005 and represents one of the most popular game
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
23
==PAGE:32==
development platforms available, known for its flexibility, ease of use, and wide range of
features.
Among its main functionalities, Unity provides a visual interface that enables developers
to construct their games and applications in a what-you-see-is-what-you-get environment,
meaning that assets can be dragged and dropped, and game scenes and objects can be
set up and configured directly.
About scripting, Unity uses C# as its primary programming language. Moreover, the Unity
Asset Store is a marketplace where developers can buy and sell assets, tools, and ex-
tensions. These assets can include models, textures, sounds, scripts, and also project
templates.
Starting from a blank scene, the 3D environment was developed by the author, in terms
of the avatar, environment and camera customization.
All the functionalities were implemented either through C# scripting or by customizing the
Unity Scene (meaning the working environment).
4.3
Application - User Guide
The BCI-3D ReHaB Application comprehends the UI for configuring the rehabilitation ses-
sion and the Scene, that is interactively modified, mirroring the user choices during the
training.
4.3.1
User Interface Design
The User Interface’s main goal is to provide the user with a variety of options to customize
the 3D model, including gender, complexion, initial posture, and the environment, in or-
der to provide a setup that is the closest to the real person, potentially enhancing the
engagement of the rehabilitation session. Indeed, seeing a more realistic and close to
the truth model could result in a better and less anonymous experience, since the users
do not see a Prefab 3D model, but they can actively participate in creating their 3D version.
The chosen platform for implementing the UI is Unity UI Toolkit, a user interface frame-
work designed for developing User Interfaces scalable across different screen sizes and
device types. It leverages a combination of UXML (Unity XML) for defining the structure
of the UI and USS (Unity Style Sheets) for styling, mirroring HTML and CSS used in web
development. It supports both runtime and editor UI development, allowing for the seam-
less integration of UI components with Unity’s rendering capabilities and scripting.
The icons chosen for the panels have been taken from The Noun Project ([94]) and React
Icons ([95]) websites. Both resources offer icons and symbols in SVG format.
The layout of the game consists of the user interface (UI) that occupies more than half of
the screen, and that can be hidden by clicking on the vertical bar on the right, as can be
seen in Fig.4.1, a real-time view of the subject, and a icon of a camera in the upper-right
corner to control and adjust the point of view.
The workflow of the possible user choices is shown in Fig.4.2.
4.3.2
Interaction Between UI Panels and 3D Environment
In this section are described the UI panels, in the order of visualization for the user during
the use of the application, and is discussed how interactions with the UI are reflected in
the 3D environment. Each panel in the UI plays a specific role in this dynamic process.
Back and forth navigation through various panels is obtained clicking on the tab labels.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
24
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.1: Layout of the UI
Welcome Page
The Welcome Page is the cover of the application and the first panel shown upon launch-
ing the application. It contains the name of the App and a brief description of it. The Main
Menu window at the center of the panel contains three buttons:
• Quick Start, that starts the application with default options for the subject, environ-
ment and actions performed and a camera that frontally frames the avatar. Its main
purpose is for testing the application functionalities and the implemented 3D move-
ments;
• Load Saved Properties, where the user can chose among some saved files, that
assign the stored parameters to the model, environment and experiment details.
This speeds the setup for frequent and repeated training sessions, typical in reha-
bilitation. These files are saved with the custom format .rehab on the Desktop, but
are essentially json files. The saved files can be deleted by clicking onto the delete
button, on the right side of each button;
• Info, that contains an explanation about the App for new users.
Subject Customization
The Subject Customization panel is related to the customization of the 3D model to closely
resemble the patient.
Regarding the 3D models, they were both downloaded from Mixamo [96], and the textures
were changed to white to provide an empty canvas that can be customized in terms of
colors.
The user will at first chose the gender in which he/she identifies, then can personalize the
3D model by choosing the hair color, complexion, t-shirt and trousers color. These choices
affect in real time the model, and an example of user selections is shown in Fig.4.19.
Environment Customization
The Environment Customization panel provides with the possibility of customizing the
setting surrounding the subject. As it can be seen in Fig. 4.20, on the left side it can
be chosen the room, between the three possibilities Home, Office, Hospital. The default
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.2: Workflow of User Choices
selection is Home. The right part of the panel is for choosing the initial postures. Three
states can be selected - standing, sitting and laying, with the sitting as default state. This
feature could be useful given the varying conditions of the subjects, and selecting one of
these postures will drag the model to the right position, activating a frontal camera.
Depending on the combination of room and initial posture selected, the model will be in
one of the following configurations.
Home:
• sitting: armchair;
• standing: in front of a TV;
• laying: bed.
Hospital/rehabilitation and physiotherapy center:
• sitting: wheelchair;
• standing: on a walking path in front of a monitor;
• laying: on a hospital bed.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
26
==PAGE:35==
Office:
• sitting: at the desk;
• standing: in front of a coffee machine;
• laying: on a sofa.
As mentioned above, the chosen initial posture will be reflected in real time, as both the
model and the camera will be dragged in the right position, where the active camera will
be the front one, as shown in Fig.4.21. A more precise view of the subject is obtained by
momentarily closing the UI clicking on the vertical bar with the < sign (Fig.4.22. In Fig.4.23
is displayed an example of possible user selection.
For the furniture of the environment, some of them were directly downloaded from the
Unity Asset Store [97] or from BlenderKit [98], an online platform that provides a library of
3D assets and materials for use with Blender [99]. The other 3D models, for example the
wheelchair and the hospital bed, were made using GIMP [100] to measure the distances
of the various structures from a reference picture, taken as a model, and then the models
were created with Autodesk Fusion [101].
The rooms have fixed dimensions and position of the objects where the subjects will sit,
stand or lay in the initial postures. A more detailed view of the three different environments
is shown in Fig.4.6 and Fig.4.10, that display respectively the three environments from a
front and top point of view.
Figure 4.3: Home, front view
Figure 4.4: Hospital, front view
Figure 4.5: Office, front view
Figure 4.6: Different environments, front view
At the bottom of the Environment Page is shown the Default Camera Position window.
The application offers two default camera setups:
1. Top View: provides a first-person perspective.
2. Front View: enables mirrored movements, where left and right correspond to the 3D
model.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.7:
Home,
top
view
Figure 4.8:
Hospital, top
view
Figure 4.9:
Office, top
view
Figure 4.10: Different environments, top view
A tooltip, visible when the mouse is on the buttons, provides an explanation of the two
points of view.
This distinction is useful when collecting EEG signals, especially for Motor Imagery (MI)
recognition.
In addition to this default configuration, the point of view can be modified in real time
by clicking on the camera button at the upper right corner. The camera will be further
explained in the relative section (4.3.3).
Experiment Setup
The Experiment Setup panel provides the user with the possibility of choosing the list of
actions that will be performed during the rehabilitation session. Clicking one between the
Upper Body and Lower Body buttons will open a scroll view with the different body parts
that can be moved. Currently, five limb movements for the upper body (hands, fingers,
shoulders, elbows, forearms) (Fig.4.25 and Fig.4.26) and two for the lower body (feet,
legs) (Fig.4.27) are available, both for left and right side.
Clicking on one body part will cause the display of a pop up window, as shown in Fig.4.28
where the user can type the Target Angle, meaning the maximum angle that the body
part of interest will reach, and the Velocity, so the angular speed of the movement. The
default execution time is 4 seconds per movement. Additionally, the isometric option can
be added, allowing the users to stay in the target position for a certain amount of time,
decided in the Isometric Time field.
In Fig.4.28 is shown an example of the input values. When clicking the Ok button (Fig.4.28),
the chosen parameters are stored and displayed in the List Of Actions section (Fig.4.29),
and the popup is closed. Parameters can be edited, and actions can be deleted by click-
ing on the corresponding buttons under the List Of Actions window.
Each movement is selected once and performed in a random order to enhance brain plas-
ticity. This feature is also useful in MI scenarios, as it prevents users from anticipating the
pattern of actions, making it significant to distinguish between left and right movements
Clicking the Rest button will open instead an input box Fig.4.30) where the subject can
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
28
==PAGE:37==
insert the fixed rest time in seconds between each movement. The default rest time is
4s. If the rest is added, an icon is shown under the List Of Actions window (Fig.4.31), that
presents also the button for deleting or editing the resting time.
In the scroll view under the List Of Actions window are displayed the choices of the users.
As an example of user selection, in Fig.4.32 are shown Rest of 4s and Left Hand. The
parameters can be edited by clicking the Edit button (Fig.4.34), and this will cause the
popup window to open again (Fig.4.33), and they also can be deleted by clicking the
Delete button. Since each action can only be added once, if it isalready selected, it can’t
be added again, and when deleted from the List of Actions, it can be inserted again.
LSL Setup Page
The Lab Stream Layer (LSL) setup panel integrates the registration of EEG signals. In
particular, it lets the user customize some parameters that will be sent to the LSL layer.
In fact, the application supports LSL integration to collect EEG data, sending markers
when actions or rest periods start, along with their characteristic parameters that have
been selected in the Experiment page. This capability will be furtherly explained in Chap-
ter 6.
The total amount of information sent from the application side are stated under the Pa-
rameters Sent box, on the right side of the panel.
In particular, the data sent for each action is in a string format, and it contains the name
of the body part, the total duration of the movement (2*target angle/ velocity + isometric
time), the target angle, velocity, isometric boolean, time of isometric. The Rest will be
sent with its duration in seconds. Each item is sent in association with a timestamp, that
is the real time from the start of the recording at which the string is sent. Since each item
sent has always its duration and starting point, the ending point for both of them is op-
tional. Its presence can be decided by toggling the two switches in the LSL Customizable
Parameters window. In this window the user can also write in the input fields the name
of the Unity and the EEG .csv files and the number of EEG channels. These parame-
ters are saved into a json file, called config.json, on the device’s Desktop, and sent to a
customized Python script (test_both_streams) that, when called, searches for data from
Unity and the EEG stream, and, once it finds both, writes the received information into
two separate CSV files. If some parameters are not set in unity, the Python script will use
default name for the files, 8 EEG channels and won’t store the ending points.
Additionally, the application supports LabRecorder for collecting both EEG data and Unity
markers in real time, saving them into XDF format. These markers can be aligned with
the EEG stream to observe differences in collected signals during actions.
In this work, EEG data was collected with OpenBCI, an open-source platform that provides
hardware and software tools for BCI applications and EEG recordings. This communica-
tion module is examined more in depth in Chapter 6, where the attention will be focused
on how the EEG signal and data sent from Unity will interact and be synchronized.
Moreover, storing both EEG data and markers is valuable for observing changes in EEG
signals. Since the data is labeled (as markers sent from unity indicate which and when the
action is being performed), it can be post-processed to train a classifier for MI to distinguish
between rest, left, and right movements. This potential application is further analyzed in
Chapter 7 and 8, where the testing of the application is described and a classifier for MI
distinction is trained.
Summary Page
The final panel of the User Interface is the Summary, which gathers all the information
about the choices of the user, dividing them in sections ( Fig.4.36 and Fig.4.37) and al-
lowing modifications, if necessary, by clicking on the tab label to return to the relevant
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
29
==PAGE:38==
panel. For the Subject, are displayed ( Fig.4.36 ) the gender and the squares with the
colors selected ( Fig.4.19 ).
Regarding the Environment, are shown ( Fig.4.36 ) the choices for the Environment, the
Initial Posture ( Fig.4.23 ) and the Default Camera Position ( Fig.4.23 ).
For the Experiment section are viewed the list of actions that will be performed, including
the Rest time, if selected ( Fig.4.34 ).
The right part of the panel contains also two thumbnails, one for the subject and one
for the environment, that display respectively the subject from a front point of view in its
current posture and a snippet of the selected room ( Fig.4.36 and Fig.4.37). The sum-
marized parameters can be saved in a .rehab file, as previously mentioned in the Load
Saved Properties (in the Welcome Page) by clicking the Save button. Its name is unique,
based on the current date and time. Clicking this button will cause the showing of a green
popup with the text Saved Successfully. It can be hidden by clicking on it.
Finally, there is the Start Experiment section ( Fig.4.37): by clicking the Start button, the
rehabilitation session will start: the UI panel will close and the 3D model will perform in a
random order the actions displayed in the Summary panel, as can be seen in Fig.4.38.
The camera button can be set to active by clicking on it, so the point of view can be
adjusted in real-time during the game.
Moreover, the experiment can be paused during its execution. This is performed by click-
ing the Escape key (Fig.4.39 thus causing the opening of a popup with five different op-
tions:
• Resume, that closes the popup and let the experiment continue;
• Save, that saves the current configuration. The LSL setup choices are not stored in
this file, since they are handled separately in the LSL setup page;
• Main Menu, that goes back to the Welcome Page (Fig.4.16), maintaining the current
settings;
• Restart, that restarts the session from the initial panel with the default initial config-
uration, that is the one immediately visible when the game is first started;
• Quit, that exits the session, clearing all the fields in the config.json file, to avoid
overwriting problems in the csv files.
4.3.3
Camera
Regarding the camera, as mentioned above, the standard camera that is activated after
the user has chosen the environment and the initial posture is the frontal one ( Fig.4.14
). Like it can be seen in Fig.4.11, the user can adjust in real time the point of view by
clicking on the camera icon at the top-right corner of the screen: the mouse click will open
a menu with a visual explanation of how to move the camera. By pressing the arrow
keys, the camera can translate, getting closer, further, more on the left or right side with
respect to the 3D model. Mouse clicks control instead the rotation of the camera, and
by selecting one of the four configurations at the bottom (top-front-left-right) the camera
will move to frame the 3D model in the respective locations, as can be seen in Fig.4.14,
Fig.4.15, Fig.4.12 and Fig.4.13. It also needs to be highlighted that the camera position
can be adjusted only if the button is clicked, so when the hint panel is visible.
4.3.4
UI Graphical Visualisation
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
30
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.11: Camera Menu
Figure 4.12: Left Camera
Figure 4.13: Right Camera
Figure 4.14: Front Camera
Figure 4.15: Top Camera
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.16: Welcome Page
Figure 4.17: Subject Customization
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
32
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.18: Subject Customization
Figure 4.19: Example of choices for the subject
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.20: Environment Customization
Figure 4.21: Active camera after the environment and the initial posture are selected
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
34
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.22: Environment shown without the UI
Figure 4.23: Example of choices for the environment and initial posture
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.24: Experiment Setup
Figure 4.25: Upper Body Options
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
36
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.26: Upper Body Options
Figure 4.27: Lower Body Options
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.28: Popup for Upper and Lower body items
Figure 4.29: Example of Parameters Input for Left Hand
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
38
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.30: Rest popup
Figure 4.31: Rest added to the List of Actions
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.32: Example of choices for Rest and Actions
Figure 4.33: Popup for editing the parameters
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
40
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.34: Result after editing
Figure 4.35: LSL Setup Page
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.36: Summary Page
Figure 4.37: Summary Page
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
42
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.38: Experiment setup after clicking Start
Figure 4.39: Popup after clicking Esc
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
43
==PAGE:52==
5
BCI-3D ReHaB Technical
Implementation
In this chapter the technical details of the application related to the scripting part will be
discussed.
The scripts are the core of the application, since they handle the execution of the move-
ments, the reflection in real-time of the user choices and they provide the overall structure
and design of the UI.
The software implementation was executed on a Windows 11 Education N device on
Rider, an integrated development environment (IDE) developed by JetBrains, designed
to provide a platform for working with C# language. This environment was chosen due to
its potentiality in code analysis, refactoring and debugging tools.
The logic and workflow behind the scripting will be explained with the help of flowcharts.
5.1
Scripting Classes
The implemented scripts derive from two classes: MonoBehavior and VisualElement.
Monobehavior
MonoBehaviour is a base class that focuses on game logic, allowing the script to use
several key methods and properties that integrate with Unity’s game loop, such as:
• Start(): called before the first frame update;
• Update(): called once per frame;
• FixedUpdate(): called at a fixed interval, used for physics updates;
• Awake(): called when the script instance is being loaded.
The scripts that inherit from this class are attached to GameObjects (Fig. 5.1 ) to make
them components, allowing the interaction with other components on the same GameOb-
ject and influencing the GameObject itself.
Figure 5.1: GameObjects for Monobehavior scripts
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
44
==PAGE:53==
VisualElement
VisualElement is a class used within Unity’s UI Toolkit for creating and managing UI com-
ponents, offering a flexible approach to build and design user interfaces.
For each UI Toolkit panel, three scripts are necessary:
• UXML (Unity Extensible Markup Language), that defines the structure and content
of the UI;
• USS (Unity Style Sheets), which defines the styling and appearance of the UI, such
as color, font, size, layout;
• C# Scripts (.cs files), that provide the logic and behavior for UI elements, handling
user input, managing state, and performing actions in response to UI events. Scripts
can also manipulate UXML elements and apply USS styles programmatically.
5.2
UI Technical Implementation
This section is related to the scripts that govern the functionality and design of the UI and
allow the user choices to be reflected in real time on the 3D environment.
The description is divided in five sections:
• Animations: scripts related to identifying the correct body parts of an active model
and defining the movements that will be executed during the training sessions.
Those scripts are included in the folder AnimationControl;
• Camera: scripts that control the camera properties and points of view, contained in
the folder CameraControl;
• Save and load files: scripts related to saving data into .json format and applying the
saved data. They are stored in the SaveOnJsonFormat folder;
• Apply user choices to the scene: scripts related to how the user choices in the UI are
reflected to the active model, environment and their properties. They are included
in the UIControl folder;
• UI Architecture: scripts that define the design of the UI. They are under the UI folder.
5.2.1
Animations
Under the AnimationControl folder are contained the following scripts.
BodyPartMover
This serializable abstract class has derived classes such as HandMover, ForearmMover,
ElbowMover, ShoulderMover, FootMover, LegMover, and KneeMover. Those derived
classes can also be abstract and have as derived classes the left/right body part, since
specific limb rotate differently in the world coordinates. This class manages the rotation,
movement, and isometric behavior of different body parts. It uses the Timer class from
System.Timers to handle timed events.
It contains a constructor to initialize the initialPositionController and the isometricTimer.
It declares the following abstract methods, all implemented in the derived classes:
• UpdateTargetRotation, that updates the target rotation based on the isForward prop-
erty;
• Move, that starts the movement;
• StoreInitialRotatingPosition, that stores the current rotation as the initial rotation;
• Stop, that stops the movement;
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
45
==PAGE:54==
• Reset, which resets the rotation to the initial position and stops the timer;
• Update, that updates the rotation towards the target rotation and handles the iso-
metric condition.
It is also implemented the method ApplyInitialRotatingPosition to reset the body part’s
rotation to the initial state.
In the flowcharts in Fig.5.2 are provided the logic for the abstract class BodyPartMover
and an example of a class, HandMover.
ExerciseExecutor
The ExerciseExecutor script manages and performs a sequence of physical exercises
involving various body parts. This script is attached to a GameObject named Exercise-
Executor and inherits from MonoBehaviour.
First, the ExerciseCycleCompletedHandler class is defined. This class handles the com-
pletion of an exercise cycle and includes behavior based on whether it has been invoked
before. It keeps track of whether the handler has been invoked previously, ensuring spe-
cific actions are only performed after the first invocation. The Handle method processes
the completion of an exercise cycle. It takes two parameters: the source of the event and
a boolean indicating the direction of movement (whether the limb is moving towards the
target position from its resting state). This method ensures that the action is not performed
on the first call but only on subsequent calls when the direction of movement is forward.
The MotionMapsFuncs class contains two delegates, Move and Stop, representing ac-
tions for starting and stopping movements.
In the ExerciseExecutor class, the Update method, called once per frame, checks if the
Escape key is pressed and shows a popup if it is not already shown. The BeginExercise-
Execution method initializes the exercise process by setting up necessary components
and parameters. It finds and sets up the Motion Script and Exercise Planner components,
retrieves the exercise list, and maps functions to corresponding limbs. This method sets
up exercise parameters for each limb, handling special cases for legs and fingers. During
initialization, if a rest exercise is present, it is set aside, and the exercise list is updated.
For each exercise, appropriate body part movers are configured based on the limb names,
with special handling for leg movements (since legs will move differently depending on the
initial postures).
The method SetupExerciseParametersForEachLimb assigns parameters for each exer-
cise to the corresponding body part mover. An instance of ExerciseCycleCompletedHan-
dler is created to handle the completion of each exercise, with a defined action to run the
next exercise. Event handlers are set up to detect exercise cycle completions, and move-
ment functions are assigned for each limb using a mapping dictionary. The Run method
stops the current exercise and starts the next one after a rest period. A coroutine, Start-
NextExercise, is used to handle the timing and selection of the next exercise, including
special handling for finger movements to ensure synchronization among them.
For debugging purposes, the script logs the selected model, defaulting to a female model
if none is selected. If the Escape key is pressed, a popup is shown, and the script ensures
only one popup is created.
In Fig.5.3, Fig.5.4, Fig.5.5, Fig.5.6, and Fig.5.7 is shown with flowcharts the logic behind
the explained script.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
46
==PAGE:55==
ExercisePlanner
The ExercisePlanner script inherits from Monobehavior and is attached to the GameOb-
ject ExercisePlannerManager. It is used for managing a list of exercises, including their
parameters and associated actions.
The SetTimeOfRest (float time) method sets the timeOfRest variable to the chosen time,
while the GetTimeOfRest() method returns the current timeOfRest. These methods are
used to display the rest into the Summary page.
The methods SetActions (List<ActionsSaved> actionList) and GetActions() have a similar
behavior, since they set respectively the actions variable to the provided actionList, if it is
not null, and return the current actions list (if this list is null, a new empty list is initialized).
The method GetExercises() returns the list of exercises.
Then, is defined an ExerciseParameters Struct, that defines the serializable parameters
for an execise:
• name of the body part;
• target angle for the movement;
• speed of the movement;
• boolean that indicates if the exercise is isometric;
• duration of the isometric time;
• boolean that indicates if the exercise is the rest period;
• duration of the rest period.
In Fig.5.8 is summarized in a flowchart the logic behind this script.
HandsFingers
This is a serializable abstract class which has derived classes HandFingers, LeftHandFin-
gersThumbs, and RightHandFingersThumbs. These classes manage the rotation and
movement of different finger parts, including the logic behing the isometric movements.
The abstract class provides a framework for managing finger parts’ movement and ro-
tation. It contains serialized fields for managing the state and properties of three parts
(phalanxes), it uses the Timer class to handle timed events. It also declares the following
abstract methods, implemented by derived classes:
• UpdateTargetRotation, which updates the target rotation for each part based on the
isForward property;
• Move, that starts the movement;
• InitialRotatingPosition, which stores the current rotation as the initial rotation for each
part;
• Stop, that stops the movement;
• Reset, that resets the rotation to the initial position for each part and stops the timer;
• Update, which updates the rotation towards the target rotation for each part and
handles the isometric condition.
HandsFingers class implements the abstract methods for general hand finger movement
and rotation, it contains logic for updating the rotation of finger parts based on target an-
gles and current rotation speed and it handles isometric holds by starting a timer.
LeftHandFingersThumbs and RightHandFingersThumbs both derive from HandFingers
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
47
==PAGE:56==
and override the UpdateTargetRotation method to accommodate the specific rotation an-
gles for left and right thumbs, ensuring the correct rotation direction for each hand’s thumb.
In the flowcharts in Fig.5.9 are provided the flowchart for the abstract class HandsFingers
and an example of a class, HandsFingers.
MotionScript
This class inherits from Monobehavior and is attached to both the male and female mod-
els. It includes definitions for different body part movers, methods to start and stop their
movements, and additional logic to assign body parts and handle initial positions.
It defines various properties for body part movers, each with its respective type, uses lists
to store and update all body part movers and finger movements. It includes methods to
move and stop movements of different body parts and for assigning body parts to models
and initializing positions based on initial states. Each body part is represented by a spe-
cific mover class, such as HandMover and LeftHandFingersThumbs. The script initializes
these movers, assigns body parts to them, and updates their states.
The Start() method initializes an Initial Position Controller instance. It assigns body parts
programmatically by searching for child objects by name. Manual assignments are done
for certain limbs. All body part movers are added to lists for easy updating.
The Update() method iterates over all body part movers and calls their Update methods.
AssignBodyPartsToModel() method programmatically finds and assigns body parts, while
InitialPositionsAfterSelectionOfInitialState() method stores the initial positions and target
rotations.
Methods like MoveLeftHandUpDown and StopLeftHandUpDown control the movement of
individual body parts.
SearchChildByPartOfName() searches for child objects by name, and AssignFingerParts()
assigns parts for fingers.
In Fig.5.10 is summarised what previously explained in a flowchart.
MovementsOfTheLimbs
This class inherits from Monobehavior and is attached to both male and female models.
It utilizes the Property<T> class to track and handle changes in the movement properties
of various limbs. It defines various properties for limb movements, each with a Property
<bool> type to track movement state, and then registers event listeners in the Start method
to handle changes in each property, calling the appropriate Motion Script methods to
start or stop limb movements. In Fig.5.11 is summarised what previously explained in a
flowchart.
OnChangedCall
This class inherits from PropertyAttribute and it defines a custom attribute OnChanged-
CallAttribute and a property drawer to handle it. The attribute is used to specify a method
that should be called whenever a serialized property is changed in the Unity Inspector.
OnChangedCallAttribute inherits from PropertyAttribute. It takes a method name as a pa-
rameter and stores it in the methodName field.
OnChangedCallAttributePropertyDrawer is the custom property drawer for handling the
OnChangedCallAttribute. It overrides OnGUI to handle property changes in the Unity
Inspector, then checks if a property has changed using EditorGUI.BeginChangeCheck
and EditorGUI.EndChangeCheck. If the property has changed, it finds and invokes the
specified method.
In Fig.5.12 is summarised what previously explained in a flowchart.
Property
Property<T> is a class that encapsulates a property value and invokes a change event
whenever the value changes. The class is marked as serializable to allow it to be used in
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
48
==PAGE:57==
Unity’s inspector. The class uses the OnChangedCall attribute to specify the method to
call on value change.
It defines the variables _value, the serializable backing field for the property value, and
the public T Value, that is the public property that provides access to _value. When set,
it triggers the OnValueChanged() method.
The event EventHandler<T> ValueChanged is triggered whenever the value changes,
while the method OnValueChanged() is a protected method that invokes the ValueChanged
event with the current value. It can be overridden by derived classes if needed.
In Fig.5.13 is summarised what previously explained in a flowchart.
TransformData
This class stores position, rotation, and scale data for a transform, and it includes a con-
structor to initialize these properties. In Fig.5.14 is summarised what previously explained
in a flowchart.
TransformManager
This class inherits from Monobehavior and is attached to the InitialStateManager GameOb-
ject. It captures and applies transform data for specific parts of a game object’s hierarchy,
storing global transform data and individual transform data for each child in a dictionary.
It includes methods to capture and apply transform data starting from a specific child that
contains a given part name, recursively capturing and applying transform data to all chil-
dren of the specified transform. It also contains helper methods to search for children by
name and to extract keys from transform names.
The variable globalTransformData stores the global transform data of the root object,
while the Dictionary<string, TransformData> savedTransforms stores the transform data
for each child game object, with the key being the name of the game object.
It contains the method CaptureTransformsFromPart (Transform root, string partName),
which captures the global transform of the root and the specific part’s transform starting
from a child containing partName.
CaptureTransforms (Transform root) recursively captures and saves the transform data
of the root and all its children.
ApplyTransformsToPart(Transform root, string partName) applies the saved transform
data to the root and a specific part starting from a child containing partName, while Apply-
Transforms(Transform root) recursively applies the saved transform data to the root and
all its children.
SearchChildByPartOfName(Transform parent, string namePart) searches for a child trans-
form that contains namePart in its name, and GetKeyFromTransformName(string trans-
formName) extracts a key from the transform name by getting the part after the colon (:).
In Fig.5.15, Fig.5.16, Fig.5.17 is summarised what previously explained in flowcharts.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
49
==PAGE:58==
5.2.2
Animations Flowcharts
HandMover
inherit from BodyPartMover and implement all 
abstract methods
UpdateTargetRotation: update targetrotation based 
on isForward.Value
StoreInitialRotatingPosition: set it to 
part.transform.localRotation
Move: isMoving=true
Stop: isMoving=false
Reset: reset rotation to initialRotation, stop 
isometricTimer
Update:
isMoving
update rotation towards targetRotation
localRotation -target<1°
isMoving=false
start isometricTImer
isometric and isForward.Value
toggle isForward.Value
 call UpdateTargetRotation()
N
Y
BodyPartMover
mark as serializable and declare the serializable fields 
and the timer
declare abstract methods
initialize initialPositionController and initialize and 
configure isometricTimer to toggle isForward and call 
UpdateTargetRotation on elapsed
implement ApplyInitialRotatingPosition()
Figure 5.2: Flowchart for the BodyPartMover script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
50
==PAGE:59==
ExerciseExecutor
create the public variables genderSelection, escPopup
create the private variables _bodyPartMover, 
_currentExercise, _currentExerciseIndex, _exerciseList, 
_leftHandMover, _rightHandMover, 
_limbToMotionFuncsMap, _motionScript, 
_restBetweenExercises, activeModel
call ShowEscPopup()
define the ExerciseParameters struct to define the 
parameters for an exercise
Update
Esc is pressed and 
!popupAlreadyExists
Y
Figure 5.3: Flowchart for the ExerciseExecutor script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
51
==PAGE:60==
BeginExperimentExecution
finds the references for _motionScript, 
exercisePlanner, _exerciseList, 
_limbToMotionFuncsMap
create the private variables _bodyPartMover, 
_currentExercise, _currentExerciseIndex, 
_exerciseList, _leftHandMover, _rightHandMover, 
_limbToMotionFuncsMap, _motionScript, 
_restBetweenExercises, activeModel
call SetupExerciseParametersForEachLimb()
call Run()
display the active model in the console
ShowEscPopup
finds a GameObject named Popup
create a new EscPopup()
set popupAlreadyExists to true 
the GameObject exists and 
!popupAlreadyExists
Y
ExerciseCompleteHandler
create the variables _action and _invokedBefore
create the 
constructor ExerciseCycleCompletedHandler(Action 
action), that has an Action delegate as a parameter, 
initializes the _action field with it and 
sets _invokedBefore to false
define Handle(object sender, bool isForward) to invoke 
the action stored 
in _action if isForward and _invokedBefore are true 
MotionMapsFunc
create the Action delegates Move and Stop
Figure 5.4: Flowchart for the ExerciseExecutor script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
52
==PAGE:61==
SetupExerciseParametersForEachLimb
Search for the rest exercise
Add it to _restBetweenEcercises and remove it from 
_exerciseList
the rest exercise is present in 
_exerciseList
Y
call SetFingerPartParameters (string 
bodyPartName, ExercisePlanner.ExerciseParameters 
exercise)
the current exercise in 
_exerciseList contains Fingers in 
its name
Y
call BodyPartMover (string bodyPartName)
N
assign the parameters to the _bodyPartMover
handle the left and right leg cases to move also the 
thights
create a new ExerciseCycleCompleteHandler(Run) to 
handle the completion of a movement
set Move and Stop functions for each limb using the 
dictionary _limbToMotionFuncsMap
Figure 5.5: Flowchart for the ExerciseExecutor script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
53
==PAGE:62==
StopCurrentlyRunningExercise
finds a GameObject named Popup
call StopFingerMovement(ExercisePlanner.Exercise 
Parameters exercise)
call the Stop action for the body part from 
_limbToMotionFuncsMap
the name of the _currentExercise 
contains fingers
Y
N
StartNextExercise
waits for the time of rest (seconds)
call StartFingerMovement(ExercisePlanner.Exercise 
Parameters exercise)
call the Move action for the body part from 
_limbToMotionFuncsMap
the name of the _currentExercise 
contains fingers
Y
N
creates a random number and assigns to 
_currentExercise the exercise from _exerciseList at 
that index
Figure 5.6: Flowchart for the ExerciseExecutor script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
54
==PAGE:63==
GetBodyPartMover
switch between body part names and get the correct 
part in _motionScript
SetFingerPartParameters
switch between left and right hand
call ApplyExerciseParameters() for each finger
Run
call StopCurrentlyRunningExercise()
start the coroutine StartNextExercise()
StartFingerMovement
switch between left and right hand
ApplyExerciseParameters
apply the parameters for every finger part
call the functions in _motionScript to start the 
movement of the fingers
StopFingerMovement
switch between left and right hand
call the functions in _motionScript to stop the 
movement of the fingers
Figure 5.7: Flowchart for the ExerciseExecutor script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
55
==PAGE:64==
ExercisePlanner
create the public List for storing the exercises
create the private variables for storing the list of saved actions and the time of rest
define GetExercises() to return the list of exercises
define the ExerciseParameters struct to define the parameters for an exercise
define SetTimeOfRest(float time) to store the time of rest and GetTimeOfRest() to 
return the current time of rest
define SetActions(List<ActionsSaved> actionList) to set the action to the actionList 
and GetActions() to return the current actions list
Figure 5.8: Flowchart for the ExercisePlanner script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
56
==PAGE:65==
HandFingers
inherit from HandsFingers and implement all abstract 
methods
UpdateTargetRotation: update targetrotation for each 
part based on isForward.Value
InitialRotatingPosition: set initialRotation for each part 
Move: isMoving=true
Stop: isMoving=false
Reset: reset rotation to initialRotation for each part , 
stop isometricTimer
Update:
isMoving
update rotation towards targetRotation for each part 
localRotation -target<1°
isMoving=false
start isometricTImer
isometric and isForward.Value
toggle isForward.Value
call UpdateTargetRotation()
N
Y
Y
Y
HandsFingers
mark as serializable and declare the serializable fields 
for part1, part2, part3 and the timer
declare abstract methods
initialize initialPositionController and initialize and 
configure isometricTimer to toggle isForward and call 
UpdateTargetRotation on elapsed
implement ApplyInitialRotatingPosition()
Figure 5.9: Flowchart for the HandsFingers script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
57
==PAGE:66==
MotionScript
instantiate body part movers and create two lists to 
contain them, one for the fingers and one for the 
other body parts
initialize InitialPositionController; programmatically 
assign body parts; add body part movers to lists for 
updating
iterate over all body part movers and update each
Start
programmatically finds and assigns body parts; add 
body part movers to lists
call ApplyInitialRotatingPosition(), call 
UpdateTargetPosition(), call Move()
Update
MoveBodyPartUpDown()
call Stop()
StopBodyPartUpDown()
AssignBodyPartsToModel()
InitialPositionAfterSelectionOfInitialState()
store initial positions and target rotations
call Stop(), call Reset()
assign parts for fingers
AssignFingerParts
StopAllTheMovements()
recursively search for child objects by name
SearchChildByPartOfName()
Figure 5.10: Flowchart for the MotionScript script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
58
==PAGE:67==
MovementsOfTheLimbs
define the bool properties moveLimbNameUpDown
get the reference to _motionScript
Start
define moveLimbNameUpDown.ValueChanged
newValue
Y
N
_moveScript.MoveLimbNameUpDown
_moveScript.StopLimbNameUpDown
Figure 5.11: Flowchart for the MovementsOfTheLimbs script
Call EditorGUI.BeginChangeCheck(), call 
EditorGUI.PropertyField()
Find Property<T> field in target object, Get 
Property<T> instance, Find method in Property<T> 
instance, Set methodOwner to Property<T> instance 
If method exists and has no parameters, Invoke 
method on methodOwner
OnGui
check if property changed with 
EditorGUI.EndChangeCheck(). If not changed, return
Update serialized field with 
property.serializedObject.ApplyModifiedProperties()
Get target object from 
property.serializedObject.targetObject
Get method name from attribute and Split property 
path by "."
Find method in target object, Set methodOwner to 
target object
property path length is 2
Y
N
OnChangedCall
Define OnChangedCallAttribute class, inherit from 
PropertyAttribute, define methodName field; the 
constructor accepts method name and sets 
methodName
#if UNITY_EDITOR 
Define OnChangedCallAttributePropertyDrawer class, 
inherit it from PropertyDrawer and override OnGUI 
method
Figure 5.12: Flowchart for the OnChangedCall script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
59
==PAGE:68==
Property
define the serializable field of type T _value
define property Value with Getter and Setter. In 
Setter, set _value to a new valuemand call 
OnValueChanged()
trigger ValueChanged event if there are subscribers
define event ValueChanged of type EventHandler<T>
OnValueChanged
Figure 5.13: Flowchart for the Property script
TransformData
define the public fields position, rotation and scale
assign the three parameters in input to the three field 
defined above
Figure 5.14: Flowchart for the TransformData script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
60
==PAGE:69==
TransformManager
define globalTransformData to store the global 
transform of the root
define the dictionary savedTransforms to store the 
transform data for each gameObject, with the name of 
the gameObject as key
create a new TransformData called to capture global 
transforms of the root
CaptureTransformFromPart(root, partName)
call SearchChildByPartOfName and assign the 
transform in output to startingPoint
call CaptureTransforms(startingPoint)
startingPoint!=null
Y
Figure 5.15: Flowchart for the TransformManager script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
61
==PAGE:70==
for every child
SearchChildByPartOfName(parent, namePart)
return the child
call SearchChildByPartOfName and assign the 
transform to foundChild
return foundChild
child count of the child >0 
Y
name of the child contains 
namePart
Y
foundChild!= null
Y
Figure 5.16: Flowchart for the TransformManager script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
62
==PAGE:71==
apply the globalTransformData's position, rotation 
and scale to the root
ApplyTransformFromPart(root, partName)
call SearchChildByPartOfName and assign the 
transform in output to startingPoint
call ApplyTransforms(startingPoint)
startingPoint!=null
Y
globalTransformData !=null
Y
call GetKetFromTransformName to find the key
ApplyTransform(root)
apply the saved data in the savedTransformsto all the 
children recursively
call GetKetFromTransformName to find the key
CaptureTransform(root)
save data in the savedTransforms dictionary of all the 
root children
find the index of : 
GetKeyFromTransformName(transformName)
return the part of the name after the :
Figure 5.17: Flowchart for the TransformManager script
5.2.3
Camera
In this section is described the logic under the Camera component, contained in the Cam-
eraControlFolder. There are four main points of view: top, front, left and right side. There
will be four cameras for each model’s initial posture.
To create the physical cameras in Unity, the overall process is the following: at first, the
camera is positioned in its target location, either in font/top of the model or at its left/right
side. Afterwards, an empty child of this camera is created, so that it has relative coordi-
nates. Then this child is dragged outside its parent in the Hierarchy, to let it have world
coordinates. Finally, this object is dragged as a child of the 3D model, both for the male
and the female.
In Fig.5.18 is displayed the content of the CameraControl folder under the Assets folder.
As it can be seen, there are the figures and icons used in the UI, both for the hint and for
the camera options, and the uxml, uss and cs script.
In Fig.5.19 is shown the Inspector for the CameraControlMenu GameObject: it has at-
tached the CameraController script with the Main Camera assigned as the camera, and
the UI Document component, used for integrating Unity’s UI Toolkit system with the GameOb-
ject.
Panel Settings refer to the settings that control how the UI elements are rendered on the
screen. This includes settings for how the UI scales, resolution, and other rendering de-
tails.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 5.18: Content of the CameraControl folder
Source Asset specifies the UI layout to be rendered by this UI Document.
CameraControlMenu is identified as a Visual Tree Asset.
Visual Tree Assets are re-
sources created using the UI Builder tool, which define the hierarchy and styles of UI
elements.
Sort Order determines the rendering order of the UI elements. UI elements with a lower
sort order value are rendered behind those with a higher sort order value.
Regarding the UI components, in the uss file CameraControlMenu is defined the style
of the camera icon and what visually happens while hovering and clicking it. It also de-
fines the style of the hint and the four icons for left,right, front, top.
In the uxml file are instead defined the Visual Element for the hint, the Box for its image,
the Box for the four preset positions and the four buttons for these positions.
Figure 5.19: Inspector for the CameraControlMenu Gameobject
CameraController
The CameraController script controls a camera object within a Unity scene both manually
through user input and programmatically through animations. It allows for both interactive
and automatic control of the camera, with feedback provided through UI elements about
its current state.
The property IsCameraControlActive is used to get/set _isCameraControlActive, that adds/re-
moves USS classes to indicate the active state and shows/hides the camera control hint.
The Start() method initializes the references and sets up UI button callbacks: it finds the
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
64
==PAGE:73==
initial state selection and the main camera and it sets up UI elements and button click
handlers for camera control, front, top, left, and right buttons.
In the Update() method, if camera control is active, it calls methods to update input, move,
rotate, and drag the camera based on user input.
FixedUpdate() is called at fixed intervals; if the camera move animation is active, it moves
and rotates the camera towards the target position and stops the animation once the target
is reached. It uses Vector3.MoveTowards for translation and Quaternion.RotateTowards
for rotation.
OnButtonFrontClicked() handles front button click by starting camera move animation
based on the subject’s state (sitting, laying, standing).
StartCameraMoveAnimation(GameObject _camera, string targetPosRefName) starts the
camera move animation: it finds the active subject and target camera position based on
the provided reference name of the subject’s state, then it calculates translation and ro-
tation speeds and starts the animation by setting IsCameraMoveAnimationActive to true.
DragCamera() translates the camera based on mouse movement, allowing it to be dragged
with the middle mouse button.
RollCamera() rotates the camera around the z-axis based on input, allowing the camera
to be rolled with the right mouse button.
PitchYawCamera() rotates the camera around the x and y axes based on input, allowing
the camera to pitch and yaw with the left mouse button.
MoveCamera() translates the camera based on input along the x and z axes.
UpdateMotionInput() updates input values for translation and rotation based on user in-
put: it gets horizontal and vertical input axes for translation and mouse input for rotation,
modified by the sensitivity setting.
Mouse is the Enum for mouse button indices, defining constants for mouse button indices:
Left (0), Right (1), Middle (2).
The logic behind the CameraController script is summarized in the following flowcharts
(Fig.5.20, Fig.5.21 ).
5.2.4
Save and Load Files
The folder SaveOnJsonFormat contains the scripting related to creating the skeleton of
a .json file that will store the user choices, save user choices in real time and apply them
when necessary.
DefaultParameters
This script applies default experiment parameters without the need to attach the script to
a GameObject, hence it doesn’t extend MonoBehaviour. It sets up default data for a sub-
ject, environment, and experiment details, and applies these settings to the corresponding
UI elements.
At first is defined the reference to the scripts in which the user choices are assigned, for
example a reference to EnvironmentSelection, the script where is set up the environment,
to be able to assign the default values to every field.
The method ApplyDefaultParameters() applies the default experiment parameters by first
creating default data and then applying this data to the UI and relevant components. At
first, it calls CreateDefaultExperimentData(), which creates and returns a default Experi-
mentData object with preset values.
Then it visually deselects all the user choices from the UI by calling the DeselectUser-
Choices script.
Finally, it calls the ApplyLoadedData (ExperimentData data) method, which applies the
provided experiment data to the relevant components and UI elements by calling the
methods LoadExperiments (ExperimentData data), which applies the experiment actions
and rest time to the Experiment Page in the UI, LoadEnvironment (ExperimentData data),
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
65
==PAGE:74==
CameraController
define the public and private variables
Add _btnCameraController to classlist and 
remove _cameraControlHint
Add _cameraControlHint to classlist and 
remove _btnCameraController
IsCameraControlActive
_isCameraControlActive
Y
N
Start
initialize the references
for _btnFront, call OnButtonFrontClicked, which calls 
StartCameraMoveAnimation depending on the 
subjectState
for _btnLeft and _btnRight, call 
StartCameraMoveAnimation depending on the 
subjectState
Update
call UpdateMotionInput(), MoveCamera(), 
PitchYawCamera(), RollCamera(), DragCamera()
for _btnTop, call OnButtonTopClicked, which calls 
StartCameraMoveAnimation depending on the 
subjectState
Figure 5.20: Flowchart for the CameraController script
which applies the environment settings to the Environment Page in the UI, including en-
vironment name, initial posture and default camera position, LoadSubjectColors (Experi-
mentData data), which applies the subject’s colors (hair, skin, t-shirt, and trousers) to the
Subject Page in the UI and LoadSubjectGender (ExperimentData data), which applies the
subject’s gender to the Subject Page in the UI.
DeselectUserChoicesFromUI
This script inherits from MonoBehavior and is attached to the GameObject DeselectUser-
Choices; it is designed to deselect all user choices made in the UI elements of the subject,
environment, and experiment pages.
The method DeselectAllUserChoices() deselects all user choices across different pages
of the UI. It handles subject page colors, gender selections, environment selections, ini-
tial posture selections, default camera initial position and experiment actions. For each UI
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
66
==PAGE:75==
StartCameraMoveAnimation
assign the subject variable to the active model
calculate translation and rotation speed based on 
distance and angle between current and target 
camera position
compute translation and rotation in 1 second
get target camera position reference
set IsCameraMoveAnimationActive to true
DragCamera
translate camera; it is controlled with the middle 
mouse button
RollCamera
rotate camera along z; it is controlled with the right 
mouse button
PitchYawCamera
rotate camera along x and y; it is controlled with the 
left mouse button
FixedUpdate
return
IsCameraMoveAnimationActive
Y
N
set IsCameraMoveAnimationActive to 
false and return
move the camera towards the target position 
and rotation
the _camera position and rotation have 
reached the target
N
Y
MoveCamera
translate camera along x and z
UpdateMotionInput
update input values for rotation and translation based 
on user input and modified with sensitivity
Figure 5.21: Flowchart for the CameraController script
page, namely Subject Page, Environment Page, Experiment Page, it retrieves the correct
instance of the page, it queries and deselects all the items inside them.
ExperimentData
The script defines several serializable classes that can be used to store and manage data.
These classes include ExperimentData, SubjectData, EnvironmentData, ExperimentDe-
tails, and ActionsSaved.
The class ExperimentData holds all the data for an experiment, including subject data,
environment data, and experiment details.
SubjectData holds data related to the subject of the experiment. Its fields are: gender,
skin tone, hair color, t-shirt color, trousers color.
EnvironmentData holds data related to the environment of the experiment. Its fields are
the environment name, the default camera position and the initial posture of the subject
in the environment.
ExperimentDetails holds information about the experiment. Its fields are the time of rest
between actions in the experiment and the List<ActionsSaved> Actions, which stores a
list of actions to be performed in the experiment.
About the ActionsSaved class, it holds data for a single action to be performed in the ex-
periment. Its fields are the name of the action, the target angle for the action, the velocity
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
67
==PAGE:76==
of the action, whether the action is isometric and the duration of the isometric action.
QuickStartParameters
This script doesn’t inherit from MonoBehavior, so it is not attached to a GameObject. It is
designed to apply a set of predefined parameters to the customizable UI elements within
the application. It initializes subject, environment, and experiment details with default val-
ues and applies them when the ApplyQuickStartParameters method is called.
In this method, at first it is called the script DeselectUserChoicesFromUI to deselect all
the user choices. Then it is called the method CreateQuickStartData(), which creates and
returns an ExperimentData object with preset values for a quick start.
Finally, ApplyLoadedData (ExperimentData data) is called to apply the provided exper-
iment data to the relevant components and UI elements by calling the methods Load-
Experiments (ExperimentData data) to apply the experiment actions and rest time to the
experiment page UI, LoadEnvironment (ExperimentData data) to apply the environment
settings to the environment page UI, including environment name, default camera posi-
tion and initial posture, LoadSubjectColors (ExperimentData data) to apply the subject’s
colors (hair, skin, t-shirt, and trousers) to the subject page UI and LoadSubjectGender
(ExperimentData data) to apply the subject’s gender to the subject page UI.
SavePropertiesDuringGame
This script inherits from MonoBehavior and is attached to the GameObject Menu.
At first, it initializes the variables that store references to the components and controllers
that are used to collect and save user data. The references to these components are
found and assigned in the Awake() method.
The SaveUserData() method creates an ExperimentData object and serializes it to a .json
file with a unique filename based on the current date and time. It does this by calling the
method CreateExperimentData(), which creates and returns an ExperimentData object
populated with the current selections and settings, and afterwards SerializeAndSaveToJ-
son (ExperimentData data, string fileName), which serializes the ExperimentData object
to a .json string and saves it to a file on the desktop.
It is also defined the DeleteSavedItem (string filePath, string fileName), that deletes a file
specified by its path and filename.
5.2.5
Apply User Choices to the Scene
Under the UIControl folder are included the scripts ColorSelector, EnvironmentSelection,
GenderSelection, InitialPositionController and ThumbnailTexture. The main purpose of
those scripts is applying the user choices in the UI in real time, so that these changes
reflect on the active model, environment and UI panels.
ColorSelector
The script ColorSelector derives from MonoBehavior, so it is attached to the GameObject
ColorManager in the Hierarchy, and is designed to manage the color customization for
different parts of a 3D model: when the user interacts with one of the boxes on the UI’s
Subject Page, the script applies the selected color to a specific part of the model, namely
the skin, hair, t-shirt, and trousers.
Public variables are defined, that hold references to the Renderer components of different
parts of the 3D model (modelSkinRenderer, modelHairRenderer, modelTshirtRenderer,
modelPantsRenderer), which are assigned from the Unity Editor and are used to change
the material colors of the respective parts.
The private color variables will store the currently selected colors for each part of the
model.
In the Start() method, called when the script is first initialized, default colors are applied
to the model parts, specifically the female model (as the female model is activated in the
Awake() function of the GenderSelection script), by calling the respective methods with
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
68
==PAGE:77==
predefined color values.
The methods GetSelectedSkinTone(), GetSelectedHairColor(), GetSelectedShirtColor(),
GetSelectedPantsColor() return the currently selected color for each respective part of
the model. They will be used to display the selected colors in the Summary Page of the
UI.
The four methods for applying the colors to the 3D models are ApplySkinToneToModel
(Color color), ApplyHairColorToModel (Color color), ApplyTshirtColorToModel (Color color)
and ApplyPantsColorToModel (Color color).
Each one sets the color of the corresponding renderers to the chosen color and stores
the selection.
In Fig.5.22 is provided the flowchart for the ColorSelector script.
EnvironmentSelection
The EnvironmentSelection script, that inherits from Monobehavior and is attached to the
GameObject EnvironmentSelectionManager in the Hierarchy, manages the activation of
three different environments( house, hospital and office).
At first, the public Gameobject houseObject, hospitalObject and officeObject are declared:
they hold references to the GameObjects representing the house, hospital, and office en-
vironments and are assigned in the Unity Editor.
The method GetSelectedEnvironmentName() returns the currently selected environment
name, and it is used to display the corrected environment in the Summary page.
The method SelectEnvironment (string environment) at first deactivates all the environ-
ments, then with a switch statement determines which environment to activate based on
the provided ’environment’ string.
The logic behind this script is explained in Fig.5.23.
GenderSelection
This script manages the activation and configuration of male and female models, includ-
ing their associated renderers and initial positions. It inherits from Monobehavior and is
attached to the GenderManager GameObject.
In the Awake method, it initializes references and sets the default active model to the fe-
male, configuring the colorSelector with renderers from the female model.
In the ActivateMaleModel() method, at first both models are deactivated, then the male
one is activated. The initial posture and color parameters are updated with references
to the male model and, if it is the first time that this model is activated, default colors are
applied.
In the ActivateFemaleModel() method, at first both models are deactivated, then the fe-
male one is activated. The initial posture and color parameters are updated with refer-
ences to the female model.
The GetSelectedGender() method returns the currently selected gender.
The FindRendererInChildren() method searches for a child GameObject by name and
returns its Renderer component if found.
The logic behind this script is explained in Fig.5.24.
InitialPositionController
This class inherits from MonoBehavior and is attached to the GameObject InitialStateM-
anager, which also has the TransformManager script attached.
This class utilizes the TransformManager to capture and apply poses for a model based
on three different initial states (sitting, standing, and laying).
The Start() method ensures that the TransformManager is set, otherwise an error is
thrown.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
69
==PAGE:78==
ApplyPose (Transform poseTransform) method checks if the poseTransform is set, and
then it sets the _currentInitialState and initialPosture based on the poseTransform. It
captures the pose from the assigned transform and applies the pose to the model using
TransformManager.
The logic behind this script is explained in Fig.5.25 and Fig.5.26.
ThumbnailTexture
The ThumbnailTexture script inherits from MonoBehavior and is attached to the GameOb-
ject Menu in the Hierarchy. It is designed to manage and apply render textures to UI ele-
ments within a UIDocument.
The TextureEnvironment() method applies the renderTextureEnvironment to a UI element
named textureContainerEnvironment within the UIDocument. First, it gets the UIDocu-
ment component attached to the GameObject and retrieves the root visual element of the
UIDocument. Then, it searches for a visual element named textureContainerEnvironment
within the root. If the renderTextureEnvironment is assigned, it sets the background image
of textureContainerEnvironment to the renderTextureEnvironment. The renderTextureEn-
vironment is attached to the target texture of a camera named ThumbnailEnvironment,
so this thumbnail with the environment will be displayed in the Summary Page in the tex-
tureContainerEnvironment Visual Element.
The TextureSubject() method has a similar behavior, as it applies the renderTextureSub-
ject to a UI element named textureContainerSubject within the UIDocument, and it also
updates the position and rotation of the subject’s thumbnail camera based on the tar-
get camera’s position and rotation. It finds the GameObject named ThumbnailSubject,
then updates the position and rotation of ThumbnailSubject to match the target camera’s
position and rotation from _cameraController. Afterwards, it gets the UIDocument com-
ponent attached to the GameObject and checks if it is null, then retrieves the root visual
element of the UIDocument and searches for a visual element named textureContainer-
Subject within the root. If renderTextureSubject is assigned, it sets the background image
of textureContainerSubject to the renderTextureSubject. The renderTextureSubject is at-
tached to the target texture of a camera named ThumbnailSubject, so this thumbnail with
the subject, from a frontal point of view, will be displayed in the Summary Page in the
textureContainerSubject Visual Element.
The logic behind this script is explained in Fig.5.27 and Fig.5.28.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
70
==PAGE:79==
5.2.6
Apply User Choices Flowcharts
ColorSelector
create the public Renderer for skin, hair, t-shirt, trousers
create the private variables for storing the colors 
selected
modelSkinRenderer 
is null
error
Assign the color in input to the 
Renderer of the correct renderer part 
of the model
Y
N
Start
Call ApplySkinToneToModel, 
ApplyTShirtColorToModel, ApplyHairColorToModel, 
ApplyPantsColorToModel with default colors
define the functions for getting the selected colors for 
hair,skin, trousers, t-shirt
Apply...ToModel(Color color)
Figure 5.22: Flowchart for the ColorSelector script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
71
==PAGE:80==
EnvironmentSelection
create the public GameObject for house, hospital and office
create the private variable for storing the name of the selected environment
SelectedEnvironment(string environment)
deactivate all the environment gameObjects 
with a switch statement, activate the correct environment based on the 
environment string, and call SetEnvironmentName()
define SetEnvironmentName(string name) to store the name of the selected 
environment
define GetSelectedEnvironmentName() to return the curently selected 
environment name
Figure 5.23: Flowchart for the EnvironmentSelection script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
72
==PAGE:81==
ActivateMaleModel
deactivate both models and then activate the male 
one
set the selectedGender to "Male"
firstTime=false
call FindRendererInChildren with maleObject
apply default colors to the renderers
if firstTime
Y
ActivateFemaleModel
deactivate both models and then activate the female 
one
set the selectedGender to "Female"
call FindRendererInChildren with femaleObject
GenderSelection
create the public variables maleObject, femaleObject, 
positionController
create the private variables colorSelector, firstTime, 
selectedGender
call FindRendererInChildren with femaleObject
Awake
deactivate both models and then activate the female 
one
GetSelectedGender()
return the selected gender
FindRendererInChildren(GameObject, string)
for each children of the transform of the GameObject
the name of the child contains the 
string
return the renderer of the child
Y
N
Figure 5.24: Flowchart for the GenderSelection script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
73
==PAGE:82==
InitialPositionController
create the public variables transformManager, model, 
standingPose, layingPose, sittingPose
create the private variables _currentInitialState, 
initialPosture
Start
ensure TransformManager is set
SetInitialPosture(posture)
assign posture to initialPosture
GetInitialPosture(posture)
return the initialPosture
Figure 5.25: Flowchart for the InitialPositionController script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
74
==PAGE:83==
ApplyPose(poseTransform)
set _currentInitialState to sitting
call SetInitialPosture("Sitting")
poseTransform!= null
Y
poseTransform == 
sittingPose
Y
set _currentInitialState to standing
call SetInitialPosture("Standing")
poseTransform == 
standingPose
Y
set _currentInitialState to laying
call SetInitialPosture("Laying")
poseTransform == 
layingPose
Y
call CaptureTransformsFromPart to capture the pose 
from the assigned transform
call ApplyTransformsToPart() to apply the captured 
pose to the model
N
N
Figure 5.26: Flowchart for the InitialPositionController script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
75
==PAGE:84==
UIDocument is null
error
get the root visual element of 
the UIDocument
Y
N
TextureEnvironment()
get the UIDocument component 
attached to the Menu GameObject
search for a VisualElement 
named textureContainer 
Environment within the root
textureContainer 
Environment is null
error
Y
N
renderTexture 
Environment is null
error
Y
N
the background image of 
the textureContainer Environment is set 
to the renderTextureEnvironment in the 
Summary page
ThumbnailTexture
create the public Renderer for 
environment and subject
create the private variables to 
reference to the CameraController
Start
find and assign the CameraController 
component to the _cameraController 
variable
define the 
functions TextureEnvironment() and   
TextureSubject()
Figure 5.27: Flowchart for the ThumbnailTexture script
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
76
==PAGE:85==
UIDocument is null
error
get the root visual element of 
the UIDocument
Y
N
TextureSubject()
get the UIDocument component 
attached to the Menu GameObject
search for a VisualElement 
named textureContainer 
Subject within the root
textureContainer 
Subject is null
error
Y
N
renderTextureSubject is 
null
error
Y
N
the background image of 
the textureContainerSubject is set 
to the renderTextureSubject in the 
Summary page
find the 
GameObject ThumbnailSubject and 
update its position and rotation 
based on the target camera position 
of _cameraController
Figure 5.28: Flowchart for the ThumbnailTexture script
5.2.7
UI Architecture
In this section are analyzed the scripts in the UI folder. This folder contains the overall
structure of the UI Toolkit and the specific components for each panel, and its folders can
be found in Fig.5.29. In this figure it can be noticed that the UI folder is placed under
Resources to facilitate the building of the game, since it allows for dynamic loading and
unloading of assets at runtime using the Resources.Load method.
Figure 5.29: Folders in the UI Folder
In order to create a UI Toolkit component, the first step consists in creating an empty
GameObject and add the UI Document component, then in the inspector assign the uxml
file to the Source Asset field and the Panel Settings component to the Panel Settings field
of the UI Document component.
The UI Document attaches a uxml file to a GameObject, which renders the UI defined
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
77
==PAGE:86==
in the uxml. The primary function of the UI Document is to load and render uxml files,
which define the structure and layout of the user interface. It acts as a container for the
uxml file, making it an integral part of the scene. The UI Document creates a Root Visual
Element that functions as the parent for all other UI elements defined in the uxml. This
root element is the entry point for the UI hierarchy and is responsible for managing the
child elements. By attaching the UI Document to a GameObject, the UI defined in uxml is
directly bound to objects within the Unity scene. The UI Document works in conjunction
with the Panel Settings component to control various aspects of how the UI is rendered.
Indeed, the PanelSettings configures settings for the UI panel, such as theme, scale, and
text settings. This component affects the appearance and functionality of the User Inter-
face as it defines reference resolution, scale of the UI based on screen resolution, theme,
rendering and text settings, event handling, thus meaning how the event system will in-
teract with the UI.
As can be seen in Fig.5.30 and Fig.5.31, the uxml file MainMenu and PopupContainer
are Visual Tree Assets. They are attached respectively to the GameObjects Menu, which
has also attached the scripts ToggleUIVisibility, ThumbnailTextures, SavePropertiesDur-
ingGame, and Popup, that handles the visibility of popups during the game.
Figure 5.30: Menu Inspector with UI Component
A Visual Tree Asset represents a serialized version of a uxml file and is used to instantiate
UI elements dynamically. Essentially, it acts as a blueprint for building the Visual Tree of
a UI at runtime. It contains all the information about the UI elements, their properties,
and their hierarchical structure defined in the uxml, allowing to instance UI elements at
runtime. Visual Tree Assets promotes reusability, since a UI layout can be defined once
in a uxml file, serialized into a Visual Tree Asset, and reused across different parts of the
application.
In Unity’s UI Toolkit, three types of files are typically used to design and implement the UI:
.cs (C#), .uxml (UXML), and .uss (USS). Each of these files has a specific purpose and
contributes to the overall UI structure and behavior.
In particular, Unity Extensible Markup Language (uxml) files define the structure and lay-
out of the UI, specifying which UI elements are present and their hierarchy. USS files de-
scribe the style of the UI by defining visual properties like color, size, margin and padding.
The created styles can be reused across the UI. CS scripts (C#) handle the logic and
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
78
==PAGE:87==
Figure 5.31: Popup Inspector with UI Component
the interactivity of the UI, defining methods for event listeners and creating custom UI
components, or extending existing ones. The .cs scripts inherit from the base class Vi-
sualElement, ideal for objects that are part of the UIElements Visual Tree.
The Root Visual Element is the top-most container for all UI elements. It is the start-
ing point of the UI hierarchy as it serves as the top-most container for all UI elements
within a UI hierarchy defined by a uxml file. Essentially, it is the entry point for the User
Interface within a particular panel or UI document. The Root Visual Element acts as the
parent container for all other UI elements defined in the uxml file. Every UI component
(such as buttons, labels, and text fields) is a child of this root element.
It is responsible for applying to its child elements the styles and layouts defined in USS.
It also ensures that all its child elements are drawn correctly on the screen according to
their defined properties.
Figure 5.32: Structure of UI Toolkit files (.cs, .uxml, .uss)
As showcased by Fig.5.32 the uxml files include the style sheet named properties.uss. In
this file are defined the colors, spaces, font sizes, border radii, properties of text inputs,
tracker, dragger and scroller.
In the .cs file are always present the UXMLFactory and UXMLTraits, which are part of the
system that enables the creation and customization of UI elements defined in UXML.
UXMLFactory is a class that defines how a UI element is instantiated from uxml. It acts
as a bridge between the uxml file and the actual C# class that represents a UI element.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
79
==PAGE:88==
It is used to specify how an element is instantiated when the uxml is parsed: typically, is
created a custom factory class that inherits from UXMLFactory<T>, where T is the type
of the UI element that will be created.
UXMLTraits is a class that defines the properties and attributes of a UI element that can
be set via uxml. It is used to customize the deserialization process of the element’s at-
tributes. It provides metadata about the element’s properties and helps set up those prop-
erties when an element is created from uxml: typically, is created a custom traits class
that inherits from UXMLTraits.
Main Menu
In the BCI-3D ReHaB Application, the UI overall structure is defined by the MainMenu.uxml
file, in which are defined the tab buttons and the order of and the panels that will be dis-
played by clicking each tab button. The Welcome Page is set to visible, as it will be the
panel always displayed when opening the file, even when the Application is not running.
It is also defined the vertical bar for hiding the UI: by clicking it, the symbol (<) will rotate
by 180° and the UI will slide away, making only the scene visible. The style of Main-
Menu.uxml page is defined by the homonymous .uss file.
The files behind the general layout are displayed in Fig.5.33.The overall workflow is the
following: MainMenu.uxml file sets up the UI structure and styles. Custom elements like
Header, TabViewSelectors, and TabViewContents are initialized via their respective C#
classes.
TabViewSelectors handles the tab buttons, while TabViewContents manages the content
of each tab. Styles are applied via TabView.uss to define the appearance and behavior
of tabs (e.g., hover effects, visibility transitions).
When a tab button is clicked, the associated TabContent becomes visible, and others are
hidden.
Figure 5.33: Structure of the Main Menu
TabView is the container for tab-related UI elements. It holds TabViewSelectors and Tab-
ViewContents.
TabViewSelectors contains TabSelector elements, which are the buttons to switch be-
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
80
==PAGE:89==
tween tabs. Each TabSelector has a text attribute for the label and a name attribute for
identification.
TabViewContents contains the content associated with each tab. It has multiple TabCon-
tent elements, each wrapping a different page.
TabContent represents the content of a single tab. Visible=”true” indicates the default
visible tab when the UI loads.
The Style Sheets defined by TabView.uss, which are referred to by the uxml files TabCon-
tent, TabSelector, TabView, TabViewContents and TabViewSelectors are the following:
• .tabview: main container styling for the tab view.
• .tabview-selectors: styling for the container of tab selector buttons.
• .tab-selector-btn: styling for individual tab selector buttons, including hover and ac-
tive states.
• .tab-selector-selected: styling for the currently selected tab.
• .tab-contents: styling for the container of tab contents.
• .tab-content: styling for individual tab content sections, including transitions for vis-
ibility changes.
• .tab-content-hidden: hides inactive tab content.
The title and logo of the App are defined by the Header files: the Header class inherits
from VisualElement, and it allows the display of the header with a logo and a title, styled
according to the defined uss.
To locate and retrieve specific pages (elements) within the TabViewContents, the Utils.cs
file defines the GetPage method. This method finds the Menu GameObject, then retrieves
the UIDocument component from it and gets the Root Visual Element from the UIDocu-
ment. It then searches for the TabViewContents element within the Root Visual Element.
To retrieve the specific page, it searches within TabViewContents for a child element of
type T and returns it.
In the following section, the different tabs are analyzed, starting from the first one that
is displayed when the application is started. For each one, a figure with a scheme of
the scripts that manage the various elements is provided, and the working principles and
functionalities of each panel are described.
Additionally, various UI elements are customized, and they are of the type NameOf-
PageItem, where NameOfPage refers to the UI panel those items belong to. Their main
purpose is to create a reusable UI component that represents an item with a name and
an icon.
For example, the WelcomeItem.cs, WelcomeItem.uxml, WelcomeItem.uss define the cus-
tom Unity UI element that represents an item in the Welcome Page menu. The uxml file
describes the image and the label of the boxes. Its C# code inherits from VisualElement
and handles displaying an icon, a name, and managing selection states.
At first, it loads a UI template from the Resources folder and clones its template tree to the
current instance. It also registers a callback for click events ((OnClick)) on the RootBox
of the UI element.
Afterwards, it defines the properties to get or set the text for the welcome name label and
the icon for the welcome item. When setting the icon, it loads the corresponding image
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
81
==PAGE:90==
from the images folder under the Resources folder and sets it as the background image.
The Selected property manages the selection state by adding or removing a USS class:
it checks if the item is selected by checking for a specific USS class and adds or removes
the class based on the value. The event handler OnClick is triggered when the Wel-
comeItem is clicked. It sets all other WelcomeItem instances within the same container
to be deselected and sets this one as selected.
The Init method (initialization) initializes the WelcomeItem with the specified name, icon,
and selection state defined in the uxml file. With base.Init(ve, bag, cc) it calls the base
class implementation of Init, then it casts the VisualElement to a WelcomeItem and finally
it calls the Init method on the WelcomeItem, passing the values retrieved from the UXML
attributes (name, icon, selected).
The classes UxmlFactory and UxmlTraits expose the WelcomeItem to UXML, allowing it
to be used within Unity’s UI Builder, since they define how the WelcomeItem is created
and initialized from UXML attributes. In UxmlTraits are defined the UxmlStringAttribut-
eDescription for the icon, the name and the selection state, with the attribute name and a
default value.
The property UxmlChildElementDescription controls whether the custom element can
have child elements within the UXML file: if no children are allowed, yield break is used.
Welcome Page
Figure 5.34: Welcome Page Architecture
The core of the Welcome Page is managed by the PageWelcome scripts: in the uxml
file, the layout is defined, which includes the title, welcome message, and the Main Menu.
Inside the Main Menu, there are three WelcomeItem components, namely Quick Start,
Load Saved Properties, and Info. The RegisterCallback function registers a callback for
a button click event, invoking a different method every time one of the buttons is clicked.
In particular, a different popup will be displayed.
For the Quick Start case, it will create a QuickStart element, displaying the sentence
”By clicking Ok, the Experiment will start immediately with Default configuration”. The
Cancel button hides the popup, while clicking the Ok button will cause the calling of the
ApplyQuickStartParameters function in the QuickStartParameters.cs script, which can-
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
82
==PAGE:91==
cels the user selections and applies default ExperimentData options. Then the UI is hid-
den by calling the script ToggleUIVisibility, the experiment starts by calling the method
BeginExerciseExecutor in ExerciseExecutor.cs, and data will be sent to the LSL layer by
calling the method StartSendingLSLData in SendLSLData.cs.
By clicking Load Saved Properties, a LoadSavedProperties element will be created, and
its function LoadPreviousSaveFiles will be called to search the .rehab files on the Desktop
and create an item for each of them with the properties described by the LoadSavedItem
files. If the Delete button is clicked, the corresponding item is deleted from the Desktop.
On the other hand, if an item is clicked, the data stored in the file will be applied in the
corresponding field, and the LSL Setup Page will be shown by calling the GoToPageLSL()
method to set the LSL parameters.
Clicking the Cancel button will close the popup.
Clicking Info button will cause the display of an InfoAboutApp popup, which contains in-
formation about the overall process that the user should follow while using the App and
its features. By clicking Ok, the popup will close.
Figure 5.35: LoadSavedItem component
Subject Page
Figure 5.36: Subject Page Architecture
The layout of the Subject Page is defined by the PageSubject scripts. In the uxml file, a
ScrollView contains five blocks:
1. gender: it contains two GenderItems for selecting the gender (male or female);
2. hair color: it contains square boxes with different colors that will be applied to the
hair of the model;
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
83
==PAGE:92==
3. complexion: it contains square boxes with different tones that will be applied to the
complexion of the model;
4. t-shirt color: it contains square boxes with different colors that will be applied to the
t-shirt of the model;
5. trousers color: it contains square boxes with different colors that will be applied to
the trousers of the model.
Hovering over one box will enlarge it, and clicking one box changes its border color.
By choosing the gender, the corresponding model will be activated by calling the Acti-
vateMaleModel() or ActivateFemaleModel() methods in GenderSelection.cs. The choice
will be reflected on the Summary Page by calling the UpdateGender(string genderSe-
lected) method in PageSummary.cs.
By selecting a color for hair, complexion, t-shirt, or trousers, the right function in ColorS-
elector.cs will be called (ApplyHairColorToModel(), ApplySkinToneToModel(), ApplyShirt-
ColorToModel(), or ApplyPantsColorToModel()) to apply the selected colors to the ac-
tive model. These choices will be reflected on the Summary Page by calling the meth-
ods UpdateHairColor(Color hairColor), UpdateSkinColor(Color skinColor), UpdateShirt-
Color(Color shirtColor), or UpdatePantsColor(Color pantsColor).
Environment Page
Figure 5.37: Environment Page Architecture
The Environment Page structure is managed by the PageEnvironment scripts. In the
uxml file, three blocks are defined: Environments, Initial Postures and Default Camera
Position.
The first block contains three EnvironmentItem components representing the three dif-
ferent rooms (home, office, and hospital), the second one contains three InitialStateItem
elements representing the three initial postures for the model (standing, laying, sitting),
and the last one contains two InitialCameraItem elements that consists of the two default
positions for the camera (top and front).
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
84
==PAGE:93==
By clicking on one of the EnvironmentItem elements, the SelectEnvironment (string envi-
ronment) method in EnvironmentSelection.cs is called to activate the correct environment.
The Summary Page is updated with the current selection by calling its method UpdateEn-
vironment (string envSelected), and the TextureEnvironment() method in ThumbnailTex-
ture.cs is called to update the environment thumbnail in the Summary Page.
If an InitialStateItem element is clicked, the ApplyPose(string wantedState) method in
InitialPositionController.cs is called to update the initial posture of the active model, then
the OnButtonFrontClick() method of CameraController.cs is called to activate the frontal
camera. The selected item is updated in the Summary Page by calling the UpdateIni-
tialPosture (string postureSelected) method, and the subject thumbnail in the Summary
Page is updated by calling the TextureSubject() method in ThumbnailTexture.cs. Finally,
the InitialPositionsAfterSelectionOfInitialState() method of MotionScript.cs is called to as-
sign the initial position of the body parts of the active model based on the initial posture.
If the mouse is hovering one of the InitialCameraItem elements, a tooltip is shown, with
a brief explanation of the two points of view. When clicking one of the items, the OnBut-
tonFrontClicked() or OnButtonTopClicked() methods of CameraController.cs are called to
activate respectively the front or top camera. The selected item is updated in the Sum-
mary Page by calling the UpdateCamera(string camSelected) method, and the subject
thumbnail in the Summary Page is updated by calling in both cases the TextureSubject()
method in ThumbnailTexture.cs.
Experiment Page
Figure 5.38: Experiment Page Architecture
The ExperimentPage layout is defined by the PageExperiment scripts. In the uxml file,
three blocks are defined.
The block on the left side contains three ExperimentItems components: Rest, Upper Body,
and Lower Body. In the cs script, the SetupActions (ClickEvent evt) method is defined to
handle click events on the ExperimentItem components, identifying the clicked item and
showing the appropriate dynamic options or popups based on the item type (Rest, Upper
Body, Lower Body).
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
85
==PAGE:94==
If Rest is clicked, the ShowRestPopup (string timeAsString) method is called, which dis-
plays a RestPopup for entering the rest time. If the Cancel button is clicked, the popup
is hidden; if the Ok button is clicked, the AddRestItem (string newTimeAsString) method
is called to add a RestItem to the action container if the time is valid. This method sends
the time of rest to ExercisePlanner.cs and calls the AddRest(string timeAsString) method
in PageSummary.cs to add the RestItem in this page.
The RestItem added to the block on the right has two buttons, one for deleting and one
for editing the item. By clicking the Delete button, OnRestItemDeleteClicked (RestItem
item) is called to delete the item from the UI, removing it from the exercise list of Exercise-
Planner.cs, and calling the DeleteRest() method of PageSummary.cs to visually delete
the item in this page. If the Edit button is clicked, OnRestItemEditClicked (RestItem item)
is called to edit an existing rest item, updating both the UI and the exercise list of Exer-
cisePlanner.cs. The EditRest (string newTimeAsString) method in PageSummary.cs is
called to reflect this change also in the Summary Page.
When either Upper Body or Lower Body is clicked, the ShowDynamicOptions (string cate-
gory) method is called to display options for either upper or lower body parts in the central
block. Each body part item is added to the dynamicOptionsContainer and has a click
event registered to call the ShowBodyPartsPopup (ClickEvent evt) method.
If a body part is clicked, the ShowBodyPartsPopup (ClickEvent evt) method is called
to display a BodyPartsPopup for entering parameters related to the specific body part.
If the Cancel button is clicked, the popup is closed.
If the Ok button is clicked, the
AddNewDesiredActionList (string actionName, string targetAngle, string velocity, bool iso-
metric, string isometricTime) method is called to add a new ActionItem to the desired
action list block on the right side of the panel and update the exercise list of Exercise-
Planner.cs with these new parameters. The AddActionItems (string actionName, string
targetAngle, string velocity, bool isometric, string isometricTime) method of PageSum-
mary.cs is also called to add the ActionItem on the Summary Page.
The item’s design is defined by the ActionItem, which has two buttons, Delete and Edit.
By clicking the delete button, OnActionItemDeleteClicked (ActionItem item) is called to
delete an action item from the desired action container and update the exercise list of
ExercisePlanner.cs. The DeleteActionItems (string actionName) method of PageSum-
mary.cs is called to visually delete the item from the Summary Page. By clicking the
Edit button, OnActionItemEditClicked (ActionItem item) is called to edit an existing action
item, updating both the UI and the exercise list of ExercisePlanner.cs. The EditAction-
Items (string actionName, string newTargetAngle, string newVelocity, bool newIsometric,
string newIsometricTime) method of PageSummary.cs is called to reflect these changes
in the Summary Page.
LSL Setup Page
The LSL Setup Page design is described by the PageLSL scripts, which define two blocks.
The block on the left side, titled LSL Customizable Parameters, contains the parameters
that the user can change.
When the Save the Setup box is clicked, it checks if the input fields (name of the Unity
file, name of the EEG file, number of EEG channels) are both valid and not empty. If
so, their values are stored in a .json file named config.json and saved on the Desktop.
The values of the two toggles, which are defined by the customizable Switch type, are
sent to the two boolean parameters sendEndBodyPartLslData and sendEndRestLslData
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
86
==PAGE:95==
Figure 5.39: LSL Setup Page Architecture
in ExerciseExecutor.cs. A success message is shown to highlight that the file has been
saved. This green message box can be hidden by clicking on it. If some of the entries are
empty, default values will be used, both for the names of the files and the EEG channels
(in this case, 8 channels is the default condition), and the ending points won’t be stored.
The Switch is a custom sliding toggle. In its cs script, the color of the track and the handle
are defined depending on the value (on/off state).
The box on the right, titled Parameters Sent, is a bullet list of all the information that Unity
sends to the LSL layer.
Summary Page
The Summary Page layout is defined by the PageSummary scripts. In the uxml file, dif-
ferent blocks summarize the user choices.
The Subject block contains the GenderItem component with the selected gender and the
four square boxes with the chosen colors for hair, complexion, t-shirt, and trousers.
The Environment block contains the EnvironmentItem element with the chosen environ-
ment, the InitialCameraItem with the chosen default initial camera and the InitialStateItem
with the initial posture of the model.
The List of Action block contains the ActionItems components with the chosen actions
and the RestItem, if present.
The Save block contains the SummaryItem element named Save. When it is clicked,
the SaveUserData() method of SavePropertiesDuringGame.cs is called. When the con-
figuration is saved, a success message is shown. This green box, with the text ”Saved
Successfully”, can be hidden by clicking on it.
The Start The Experiment block contains the SummaryItem element named Start. When
the box is clicked, the SimulateButtonClick() method of ToggleUIVisibility.cs is called to
hide the UI panels. Then the BeginExerciseExecution() method of ExerciseExecutor.cs
is called to start the experiment, and the StartSendingLSLData() method of SendLSL-
Data.cs is called to start sending data to the LSL layer.
On the right side of the panel, there are two thumbnails, one for the subject and one for
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
87
==PAGE:96==
Figure 5.40: Summary Page Architecture
the environment.
Esc Popup
Figure 5.41: Esc Popup Architecture
The Esc Popup layout is defined by the EscPopup scripts. In the uxml file, five boxes with
different functionalities are defined. Each box has a tooltip that is shown when the mouse
enters the bounds of the target element. Its position is updated to follow the mouse cur-
sor, maintaining the same offset, and it is hidden when the mouse leaves the bounds of
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
88
==PAGE:97==
the target element. The tooltip gives a hint about what will happen if a box is clicked.
By clicking on the Resume box, the popup is hidden and the session continues.
By clicking on the Save box, the SaveUserData() method of SavePropertiesDuringGame.cs
is called to save the current configuration, and a success message is displayed. This
green box, with the text ”Saved Successfully”, can be hidden by clicking on it.
By clicking on the Main Menu box, the Esc popup is hidden, the UI panel is displayed
again. The StopAllTheMovements() method of MotionScript.cs is called to stop all the
movements of the model, and the ReturnToPageWelcome() method of EscPopup.cs is
called to go back to the Welcome Page.
By clicking the Restart() box, the Esc popup is hidden, the UI panel is displayed again.
The StopAllTheMovements() method of MotionScript.cs is called to stop all the move-
ments of the model, and the ReturnToPageWelcome() method of EscPopup.cs is called
to go back to the Welcome Page. Then the ApplyDefaultParameters() method of De-
faultParameters.cs is called to deselect all the user choices from the UI and apply default
data to the right fields, in order to start again the game with the default initial configuration.
By clicking on the Quit box, the application is closed with the line Application.Quit(). It
is relevant to notice that this line works only if the game is built, as in build mode the
Unity Editor is not running. This is because Application.Quit() terminates the application,
but it has no effect in the Unity Editor, which is designed to remain running to facilitate
development and debugging. Therefore, when testing in the Editor’s Play mode, the line
EditorApplication.isPlaying = false needs to be used instead to stop the Play mode and
return to the Editor.
5.3
Build And Run
Now, if everything works as expected in Play mode within the Unity Editor, the Application
can be built to create a .exe file. The first step consists in going to ‘File > Build Settings‘.
In the Build Settings window, add the scenes you want to include in your build by dragging
them from the Project window or using the ”Add Open Scenes” button.
Next, the platform where to build the game is chosen, such as PC, Mac, Linux Stan-
dalone, iOS, Android, or WebGL. Then, clicking on ”Player Settings” will open a new win-
dow where you can configure various settings, including company name, product name,
version, icon, splash screen, and other platform-specific options. Resolution and presen-
tation settings can also be adjusted.
Back in the Build Settings window, additional options can be selected, like enabling Devel-
opment Build if debugging information are needed. Afterwards, Build is clicked, a location
to save the build is chosen, and a name is given. Save is clicked to start the build process.
In this work, the application was saved under the Build folder with the same name as the
Editor file.
Once the build is complete, the executable file can be run.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
89
==PAGE:98==
5.4
OVerview
In this chapter were analysed in detail the scripts behind the UI functionalities and ca-
pabilities. Since the sections in Chapter 5 present many variables and method names,
flowcharts are provided to outline their main functionalities.
The author contributed to the overall development of the features described in Chapter 4
and 5.
Regarding the 3D environment, it was built from scratch using the Unity Engine.
Apart from the 3D avatars, downloaded from Mixamo [96], and some of the furniture,
downloaded from Unity Asset Store [97], all the subject colors were chosen by the author,
who also created and arranged the environments.
All 3D movements were programmatically implemented in C#, with each body part han-
dled separately based on side (left/right) and initial posture (sitting/standing/lying).
The UI was built using UI Toolkit: a main template with settings and colors was created,
and he different designs of the panels were programmatically implemented on C#. Both
the structures of the panels and their elements were coded.
Similarly, the camera positions were controlled through code.
In the next section, the focus shifts to an extension of the project: a communication layer
is developed between the application and EEG data handling and testing, though this is
not the main objective of the project.
The capabilities of this communication module are evaluated in a pilot study. However,
due to the limited availability of data and the absence of advanced signal processing
techniques, the results should be seen as suggestive for future work rather than definitive
conclusions based on these preliminary tests.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
90
==PAGE:99==
6
BCI-3D ReHaB and EEG Integration
After fulfilling the UI requirements, the work was extended by integrating the application
with the EEG acquisition.
The following chapter will explain the main components of this communication layer,
namely OpenBCI,Lab Streaming Layer, a custom Puthon script and LabRecorder.
The main purpose of this chapter is describing how the BCI-3D ReHaB application an
the EEG device integration can be achieved, to capture in real-time data sent from both
streams.
This involves dual sending of data: from Unity side, markers are sent with information
about the actions performed, and, at the same time, the EEG is recorded. EEG data is
streamed with the OpenBCI cap [66].
Data storage can be obtained by two means: a custom Python script, which waits for
Unity and EEG data, and once found, saves them separately into two .csv files, and
LabRecorder [102], which allows the storage of all the data in .xdf format. In the latter
possibility, data can be then loaded with Matlab or Python. In this work, Matlab’s function
load_xdf [103] was used to inspect data, though in the end the chosen tool to analyse
data was the Python script, in order to test its effectiveness.
In the following sections are examined the components that each contribute to the overall
integration process.
6.1
System Acquisition Device
OpenBCI is specialized in creating both EEG headsets and Arduino compatible biosens-
ing boards for BCI applications. For this project was used the EEG Electrode Cap [66],
displayed in Fig.6.2.
EEG Electrode Cap
The EEG Electrode Cap is a 19-channel electrode cap with Ag/AgCl coated electrodes.
In Fig.6.1 is illustrated the configuration of the electrodes used with the 8-channel bioam-
plifier (F4, C4, F3, FP2, CZ, FZ, FP1, C3 + ground + reference electrode, pink) and with
the additional 8 channels (T3, PZ, P4, O2, P3, T6, O1, T5, green).
Cyton + Daisy Boards (16 channels)
A 16-channel bioamplifier used to gather up to 16-channels of EEG data. The system
communicates via wireless.
The OpenBCI Cyton Board and OpenBCI Daisy Module
(which plugs into the OpenBCI Cyton Board) can be used to sample up to 16 channels
of EEG data. The system communicates wirelessly to a computer via the OpenBCI USB
dongle using RFDuino radio modules. The CytonDaisy Board samples data at 125 Hz
on each of its 16 channels. It has 24-bit channel data resolution and has many data
output formats, among which Lab Streaming Layer (LSL), that was used for this work’s
experiments.
OpenBCI GUI
In Fig. 6.3 is shown the Graphical User Interface (GUI) of OpenBCI that was chosen for
the testing. On the left side of the window are displayed the 8 EEG channels (8 channels
were used instead of 16 for a better visualization of the EEG signal and its pattern over
time), on the top right is shown the FFT plot, where the effect of the filters applied can be
seen. In particular, the applied filters are the following:
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
91
==PAGE:100==
Figure 6.1: Scheme of the active electrodes with 8 channels (pink) + additional 8 channels
(green)
Figure 6.2: OpenBCI EEG Cap + Cyton
• Bandstop: 24 to 26 Hz, applied only if it was observed a peak in this region, and this
behavior was present only with the 16 channels cofiguration, highlighting a recurring
problem of OpenBCI systems, due to the resampling from 250 Hz to 125 Hz when
going from 8 to 16 channels;
• Notch at 50 Hz, as the experiments were performed in Europe;
• Bandpass: 4 Hz to 30 Hz.
On the bottom right is displayed the networking window, meaning the setup of the output
signal. Particularly, the signal is transferred via Lab Streaming Layer (LSL), and filtered
data of EEG type is the format of this signal.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
92
==PAGE:101==
Figure 6.3: OpenBCI GUI
6.2
Communication module
In this section are described the core components of the communication layer and how
they are connected with each other.
The Unity script creates an LSL outlet (StreamOutlet) and sends data samples using out-
let.push_sample (data) to the LSL stream. The Python script uses UnityStreamReader
to connect to the LSL stream created by the Unity script and processes incoming data.
The UnityStreamReader continuously listens for data on the Unity_Markers stream and
invokes the callback (markerWriter.putRow) to write the data to a .csv file.
In summary, the Unity script sends markers to an LSL stream, which the Python script
listens to and processes, demonstrating how LSL manages and eases the inter-process
communication between Unity and Python applications.
Indeed, the LSL framework acts as an intermediary that simplifies the streaming and syn-
chronization of time series data between the Unity and the Python applications.
Alternatively to the LSL layer, LabRecorder can be used to record at the same time the
Unity markers and the EEG stream.
6.2.1
Lab Streaming Layer (LSL)
Lab Streaming Layer (LSL) [104] is an open-source software framework designed to sim-
plify the collection and real-time exchange of time-synchronized multi-modal data streams
across different applications and devices.
LSL offers a set of APIs and tools that enable seamless integration with different pro-
gramming environments and hardware devices. Its core functionality revolves around the
transmission, synchronization, and recording of data streams, and it supports various data
types, including EEG, EMG and ECG. For this work, EEG data type was used.
Unity is compatible with LSL through the LSL4Unity plugin [105]. This integration is par-
ticularly useful for developing virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) applications
that require synchronized data streams. LSL4Unity simplifies the process of integrat-
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
93
==PAGE:102==
ing LSL with Unity applications, since this plugin allows real-time interaction with data
streams, facilitating experiments that require immediate responses to user actions or en-
vironmental changes.
Python has also robust support for LSL through the pylsl library [106]. The pylsl library
provides Python bindings for LSL, allowing to send and receive data streams within Python
applications. Pylsl allows users to create new data streams and discover existing streams
on the network. The library supports various data formats, including numerical arrays,
strings, and markers, enabling it to handle diverse types of experimental data. Further-
more, it can synchronize data streams with high precision, as it maintains accurate time-
stamping, essential for correlating data from multiple sources. Moreover, pylsl enables
real-time data acquisition and processing, critical for applications that require immediate
feedback or live data analysis. In this work, this library was used to read and store data
sent in real time from Unity (markers type) and from EEG stream (string type).
6.2.2
Unity
In this section are described the C# script that manage the markers sending from Unity
side.
Send LSL Data
The script responsible for sending data from Unity using the Lab Streaming Layer (LSL)
is SendLSLData.cs. It establishes an LSL stream and sends marker data when specific
events occur, such as the beginning or ending of an action.
Private variables include StreamOutlet for sending data and StreamInfo for storing infor-
mation about the LSL stream, including the stream’s name, type, and other identifiers.
The OnApplicationQuit() method is automatically invoked when the application closes.
This method ensures that the LSL outlet is properly closed to prevent any issues with the
LSL stream. It also clears the config.json file to avoid potential data overwriting.
To set up and start the LSL stream, the StartSendingLSLData() method is used. This
method calls StreamInfo and StreamOutlet.
The StreamInfo object is initialized with parameters such as:
• The stream’s name.
• The stream’s type, which is ”markers.”
• The number of channels (seven in this case).
• The nominal sampling rate (0 indicates an irregular sampling rate).
• The data format (string in this case).
• A unique identifier for the stream.
The StreamOutlet is then created using the StreamInfo object, allowing data to be sent
through the stream.
When the SendEventData method is called with an array of data, it sends this event data
via the LSL stream. If the outlet is not null (meaning the stream is active), each element
of the array is sent as a separate channel sample to the LSL outlet.
The flowchart in Fig.6.4 summarises the logic of what was explained above.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
94
==PAGE:103==
SendLSLData
define StreamOutlet to send data
define StreamInlet to store info about the LSL stream
close the outlet when the application is closed
OnApplicationQuit()
create the outlet for sending the markers
instantiate the StreamInfo
StartSendingLSLData
SendEventData(string[] data)
outlet!=null
Y
each element is pushed as a separate channel sample 
to the LSL outlet
Figure 6.4: Flowchart for the SendLSLData script
Exercise Executor
The Exercise Executor script runs during the session and is responsible for sending data
in real-time from Unity to the LSL layer.
When stopping the current exercise, if the user has chosen to store the Action End Point
in the LSL Setup Page, a string is created containing details such as the body part name,
duration of the movement, target angle, velocity, an isometric flag, the duration of the
isometric hold, and a Stop marker. This string is then passed to the SendEventData
method in Send LSL Data script to transmit the data to the LSL layer.
For starting the next exercise, if there is a rest period, a string is created with the Rest
label, the rest duration, and zeros for parameters that do not apply during rest, such as
target angle. This string includes a Rest Start marker and is sent to the LSL layer via the
SendEventData method in Send LSL Data script. Once the rest period is over, if the user
has opted to store the Rest End Point in the LSL Setup Page, a similar string is created
with a Rest End marker instead of Rest Start and is sent to the LSL layer.
Additionally, if the user has chosen to store the Rest Action Point in the LSL Setup Page,
another string is created with the action parameters and a Start marker instead of Stop.
This string is also sent to the LSL layer using the SendEventData method in Send LSL
Data script.
In Fig.6.5 are shown the formats that the Action and Rest data will have.
6.2.3
Python
In this section is described the structure of the Python files.
UnityStreamReader
This script defines a UnityStreamReader class that uses the LSL to connect to and read
data from a stream of type Markers, listens for incoming data, and processes this data
using an optional callback function. The class supports starting and stopping the listening
process and can adjust timestamps.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
95
==PAGE:104==
Figure 6.5: Format of LSL data
Test_both_streams
This script integrates with PySide6 for a Qt-based application, handles EEG and Unity
data streams using the LSL, and writes the data to CSV files. Thus, it sets up an applica-
tion that listens to two types of data streams (Unity and EEG), processes incoming data
using separate threads, and writes the data to CSV files.
CSVWriter
This script defines a CSVWriter class for writing data to CSV files. It includes methods
for adding single rows, multiple rows, and closing the file, providing a simple interface
for writing data to a CSV file. It allows for adding single rows and multiple rows of data,
ensuring that the file is properly closed after writing operations are completed.
EEGStreamReader
This script defines a class EEGStreamReader that connects to and reads data from a
real-time EEG stream using LSL. It connects to an EEG LSL stream, listens for incoming
data, and processes it using an optional callback function. It supports starting and stop-
ping the listening process and can adjust timestamps.
To summarize, the Python side contains two primary components: UnityStreamReader
and EEGStreamReader.
UnityStreamReader connects to the LSL stream created by the Unity application, receives
data, and processes it using the on_data_received callback, which writes data to a CSV
file using CSVWriter.
EEGStreamReader follows a similar pattern: it connects to an EEG LSL stream, receives
data, and writes it to another CSV file using CSVWriter.
6.2.4
LabRecorder
LabRecorder [102] is a GUI tool that allows to select LSL streams to record. It is the
default recording program that comes with LSL, allowing to record all streams on the lab
network (or a subset) into a single file, with time synchronization between streams. Its
primary purpose is to ensure that timing information from different streams is accurately
aligned, guaranteeing precise data integration and analysis. It can capture data from
multiple devices at the same time. The software is highly configurable, allowing users to
select specific streams, set recording parameters, and choose file formats.
It listens to the selected LSL streams (e.g., Unity_Markers and an EEG stream, as high-
lighted in Fig.6.6) and records the data into respective files, stored in .xdf format.
Using LabRecorder removes the need for the custom Python script to handle the data
reception and storage, making it easier to manage and ensuring consistent recording of
LSL streams.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
96
==PAGE:105==
Figure 6.6: LabRecorder window
6.3
EEG Connection
To start the recording, after inserting the OpenBCI USB dongle and connecting the de-
vice to the batteries, OpenBCI GUI is opened. The steps that need to be followed for live
recording are Cython -> serial -> select the number of channels -> autoconnect.
All the coated electrodes should touch the skin and pass through hair, with a special
focus that needs to be put for ground and reference electrodes. After starting the data
stream, all channels should be checked to ensure that the signal is not railed. Railed
means that the signal presents too much noise at that channel, thus, it is necessary to get
rid of it by adjusting the electrode’s alignment on skin.
As previously mentioned, before recording the signal, filters are applied. A notch filter
and a bandpass filter are always present, while the bandstop filter (24-26 Hz) is applied
only if the FFT of the signal presents a peak at 25 Hz.
The filters’ application is obtained by clicking on the Filters button in the OpenBCI GUI
window. Then, LSL setup is done to send filtered signal from one stream.
After setting all the parameters, LSL stream can be started. In this condition, both the
custom Python script and LabRecorder are able to receive EEG data.
Alternatively, as mentioned above, this last step can be substituted with the setup of
LabRecorder, that consists on selecting both the Unity markers stream and the EEG data
stream and pressing on the LabRecorder window the Start button to start the recording
and the Stop button when finished.
6.4
Overview
In Fig.6.7 is shown the recap of the overall communication module, to visualize how it
works in terms of connection between the different platforms.
In the following chapter the possibilities of this communication layer will be assessed with
two types of tests.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
97
==PAGE:106==
Figure 6.7: Structure of the communication module
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
98
==PAGE:107==
7
BCI-3D ReHab Testing
The main purpose of the EEG integration is to test the BCI-3D RehaB Application for
possible future improvements. Indeed, if the communication layer works, it can be es-
tabilished a dual network among Unity, that can send data about the actions performed
by the models, and the EEG data, which can send data about the patients’ status. For
example, the application could be extended in a way that the 3D model, before performing
an action, waits for the active feedback of the patient: if by analysing the EEG is found
that he is thinking about performing the hinted action, the model starts moving.
In the following chapters are introduced some pilot tests that the author did to highlight
the future possibilities and extensions of the application.
It is important to notice that the main focus of the project was to develop the UI, and after
fulfilling the main requirements, the work was extended to incorporate the EEG integration
and testing part. Thus, the signal processing part is not detailed and extended, and the
data collected is not sufficient to conclude significant results, but it serves more as settling
the ground for future studies.
Two types of tests are performed: at first while executing the movements, and then the
attention is shifted to MI applications.
7.1
BCI-3D ReHaB run testing
In the first test, the main purposes are visualization, synchronization and pattern search-
ing: alignment between data entries from Unity and EEG signals is done, and afterwards
is seen if there are differences in the EEG stream while performing an action.
Subject details
The tests were executed on two healthy subjects:
• Subject 1: male, 23 years old;
• Subject 2: female, 23 years old.
The male subject was blind to the final objective of the recording, but was experienced
with BCI, and was briefly made aware of the application features.
The subjects were asked if they wanted to exploit the whole functionalities of the applica-
tion, so customizing the model and environment, or if they wanted to use a stored setup
of parameters.
This was done since the user satisfaction was not tested, due to the limited amount of
tested people and since the main point was to test the possible future extensions, and not
assessing the current status of the application.
The chosen initial posture was sitting for all cases. The camera position was top, so the
markers labeled by unity as left were considered coming from the left side, due to the first
person perspective.
Technical details
Tests were carried in the following way: at first, to graphically represent the EEG signal
across the 8 channels with markers from Unity, the chosen setup was rest = 4s, action =
4s, where action is either coming from the left or right side and from a random body part.
After collection, data was processed on Matlab. EEG data and Unity markers are aligned
over time in graphs over 8 channels, where the number of channels is chosen for a better
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
99
==PAGE:108==
visualization. Each channel is also normalized for its standard deviation (STD) for visual-
ization purposes. Unity markers highlight the beginning of each action.
The main purpose for this assessment was to test the application usability and to see if
it was possible to display offline EEG and Unity data, where offline means that data is
collected in real time, but then is post-processed and analysed after being collected.
Afterwards, additional pilot tests were performed to see if there are differences on the
EEG between rest and movement periods.
To perform this, the setup was the following:
• rest = 4s
• left hand = 4s
• right hand = 4s
EEG was recorded from 8 channels for all the subjects, with the electrodes positions
comprehending the motor cortex area. Left and right hand movements were grouped
together under the movements class, that was distinguished from rest.
Future additional tests can be made to assess differences between left and right hand,
left hand and rest or right hand and rest.
Focusing on the performed tests, the EEG data recorded from the subjects was at first
post-processed: a bandpass filter (4-40 Hz) and a notch filter (50 Hz) were applied to
get rid of unwanted frequencies that appeared in the Power Spectral Density. Then, a
frequency analysis is performed. In fact, studies have shown that alpha waves (8-13 Hz)
present lower amplitudes when thinking or performing a movement rather than the idle
state [107].
Indeed, as Calmes et al. suggest in their work, [107], µ waves (8-13 Hz) have lower am-
plitude while imagining a movement.This event is called event-related desynchronization
(ERD), and is a marker of an active cortical processing. On the other hand, event-related
synchronization (ERS) is correlated to an idling state or cortical inhibition.
Since µ waves have proven to be suppressed or blocked while observing and perform-
ing an action, a frequency analysis focusing on 8-13 Hz can be performed to distinguish
between rest and movement.
Thus, for each channel it is evaluated the power spectral density (PSD) in the alpha band
for both rest and movement periods. For each EEG channel, the signals corresponding to
rest and movement segments are combined separately. The PSD is computed for these
combined signals using the Welch method. Then, it is evaluated the power within this
frequency range for both rest and movement periods. It also calculates the total power
of the signals to normalize the alpha power. The normalized alpha power is obtained by
dividing the alpha band power by the total power.
After processing individual channels, the code averages the PSD values across all chan-
nels to get an overall representation of the PSD for rest and movement periods.
To statistically analyze the differences in alpha power between rest and movement peri-
ods, the code performs a t-test. This t-test compares the means of the normalized alpha
power values for rest and movement periods across all channels. The t-test calculates the
t-statistic, which measures the size of the difference relative to the variation in the data.
From the t-statistic, the p-value is derived, indicating the probability that the observed dif-
ference could have occurred by chance. A low p-value (typically less than 0.05) suggests
that the difference in alpha power between rest and movement periods is statistically sig-
nificant. The result of the t-test is a binary decision (h), where 1 indicates a significant
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
100
==PAGE:109==
difference and 0 indicates no significant difference. The p-value provides the confidence
level of this decision.
7.2
MI testing for classification
Afterwards, the second test is performed. This involves predictions, meaning training the
classifier to make it distinguish between two classes - left hand and right hand. This type
of test can be performed since EEG data is labeled, as by aligning Unity and EEG times-
tamps is known which and when an action is performed. This feature could potentially be
useful in Motor Imagery (MI) recognition.
Moreover, the possibility of a MI application is supported by the random order of execution
of movements, that prevents users from anticipating the pattern of actions, thus contribut-
ing in enhancing brain plasticity.
It is important to notice that while the first objective was to distinguish between three
classes, due to the small amount of data available the author preferred to focus onto the
binary classification between left and right hand, leaving room for improving this classifica-
tion method to distinguish between more classes. For example, in a rehabilitation context
it could be useful to distinguish between MI movements of the same body part, to control
a robotic arm [108], or it can be interesting to distinguish between finer movements, just
as fingers’ (i.e. to pinch [109] ). Moreover, during this binary classification, rest periods
were discarded, even though they were always included during the tests.
Subjects details
The tests were executed on two healthy subjects:
• Subject 1: male, 23 years old;
• Subject 2: female, 23 years old.
The male subject was blind to the final objective of the recording, but was experienced
with BCI, and was briefly made aware of the application features.
The chosen initial posture was sitting for all cases. The camera position was top, so the
markers labeled by unity as left were considered coming from the left side, due to the first
person perspective.
Technical details
In each test, the subjects were asked to imagine performing the actions. EEG data was
recorded from 16 channels.
The setup chosen was the following:
• Rest = 4s;
• Left Hand = 4s;
• Right Hand = 4s.
After collecting the data, even though it was already filtered with the configuration de-
scribed in Chapter 6, it was bandpass filtered between 4 and 40 Hz and a notch filter at
50 Hz was applied, since the Power Spectral Density (PSD) of the signal still presented a
peak at 50 Hz. Moreover, a bandstop filter was applied between 24 and 27 Hz. This was
done since the FFT plot in OpenBCI presented a peak at 25 Hz. This has reported to be
a common problem on OpenBCI devices, due to the resampling from 250 Hz to 125 Hz
when going from 8 to 16 channels.
Afterwards, the collected streams were post processed to train a classifier.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
101
==PAGE:110==
7.3
Classifier
It is important to notice that, due to the little amount of data, the following results and
reflections should be considered as suggestions for a possible future application of the
BCI-3D RehaB application.
As previously mentioned, the initial goal was to implement a classifier that should distin-
guish between three classes: rest, left hand and right hand.
However, due to the little amount of data and to the poor results initially obtained in terms
of accuracy, sensitivity and specificity, it was chosen not to continue further with this eval-
uation, but to focus instead on the binary classification between left and right hand move-
ment.
Furthermore, the analysis was limited to the distinction among hand movements. Since
the application includes the movement of other body parts, an interesting investigation
could involve the integration of them into the classification process, in order to see if the
same approach adopted for the hands can be extended to other body parts, or if it is pos-
sible to distinguish among them.
Collected MI data was split into 4s windows ( 4s x 125 Hz samples), since 4s was the
duration of each movement. Every window was considered as a trial, with the label of the
performed action coming from Unity markers.
The sampling frequency was 125 Hz since all 16 EEG channels were used.
EEG data was organized in the form samples x channels x trials, as displayed in Fig.7.1.
Then data was filtered as previously mentioned and it was split into training (80%) and
test (20%) set.
Figure 7.1: EEG data and labels
In the following section are briefly reported the steps that were followed during the first
3-class attempt at classification, and in the next section will be reported the 2-class MI
classification, that was finally implemented.
It should also be highlighted that in Chapter 8 only the results with the binary classifier will
be shown.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
102
==PAGE:111==
Three classes distinction
To distinguish between the classes, two approaches were at first considered. Common
spatial pattern (CSP) can be implemented to perform a binary classification.
Common Spatial Patterns (CSP) maximises the variance between two classes while min-
imizing the variance within each class. The basic idea behind CSP is to find a set of
spatial filters that project the multichannel EEG data into a low-dimensional space where
the variance of the projected data is maximally different for the two classes.
So, to distinguish between the three classes, it needs to be extended either with a One-
vs-All or a One-vs-One implementation.
One-vs-All (OvA) is a strategy for extending binary classifiers to multi-class classification
problems. In OvA, a separate binary classifier is trained for each class, with the class of
interest labeled as the positive class and all other classes labeled as the negative class.
So, this means that one classifier is trained to go against the others. Every classifier gives
a label, and it is assigned the most voted one.
The overall procedure is the following:
1. Train a binary classifier for each class k.
2. For a given test sample, compute the decision function for all classifiers.
3. Assign the sample to the class with the highest decision function value.
One-vs-One (OvO) is also another strategy for multi-class classification, where a separate
binary classifier is trained for every pair of classes. If there are K classes, this results
in K(K−1)
2
classifiers. Every classifier expresses a label, and the one with the highest
frequency is chosen.
The overall procedure is the following:
1. Train a binary classifier for each pair of classes.
2. For a given test sample, each classifier casts a vote for one of the two classes.
3. Assign the sample to the class with the most votes.
The two approaches followed the paper by Costa et al. [109] and the paper by Yong et
al. [108]. In particular, since the EEG stream is a continuous signal, a possible extension
could be applying an adaptive CSP algorithm iteratively updates the spatial features.
The overall procedure follows the logic described below.
For OvO approach, pairs were formed based on the label, and for each the features were
extracted with adaptive CSP, and labels are assigned with SVM. For OvA approach, each
class goes againts the others, while the feature extraction and classification followed the
same procedure as OvO.
Finally, the assigned labels were compared to the real ones, and accuracy, sensitivity and
specificity were assessed for each class.
Due to the little amount of data and the subsequent scale and singularity problems of the
CSP matrices and poor performances of the classifiers, they were discarded in favour of
the simpler binary classifier that distinguish between left and right MI, to prove that the
application can potentially be useful in MI scenarios and leaving room for further improve-
ments where the binary CSP algorithm is extended to a multiclass problem.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
103
==PAGE:112==
Binary classifier
For the implemented binary approach, data was split into trials with the same movement,
and only left and right hand actions were stored.
Data was split into training (80%) and test (20%) set.
CSP was performed following
Ramoser et al. approach [110].
The CSP function starts by calculating the normalized covariance matrices for each trial
of right and left movement classes. Then, the mean covariance matrices for both classes
are computed by averaging the individual covariance matrices.
The projection matrix is derived through eigenvalue decomposition of the sum of the mean
covariance matrices, and it is used to whiten the data.
The whitened covariance matrices for both classes are calculated, followed by eigenvalue
decomposition of the right class’s whitened matrix. The CSP projection matrix is formed
by selecting the most significant eigenvectors.
Finally, the function projects the EEG data into the CSP space and computes the loga-
rithmic variance of the projected signals for both classes, which are used as features for
classification.
Moving onto the classification part, two classifiers were implemented: Support Vector
Machine (SVM), a linear decision boundary method that selects a hyperplane that lies
between two classes and maximizes the distance from the nearest data point, and Linear
Discriminant Analysis (LDA), which finds the linear combinations of features that max-
imizes the separation between classes. The classifiers performances were assessed
evaluating accuracy, sensitivity and specificity.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
104
==PAGE:113==
8
Results and Discussion
In this chapter are presented and discussed the main findings and results achieved through
the development of the user interface (UI) for the BCI-3D ReHaB environment. The dis-
cussion covers the effectiveness of movement visualization and personalization, eval-
uates the implementation of upper and lower body movements, and explores the cus-
tomization options introduced.
Then, the focus moves on evaluating the EEG integration, highlighting the potential future
advantages and the current limitations. Additionally, potential improvements and future
directions for further enhancing the system’s usability and inclusiveness are considered.
8.1
UI
The main objective of this work was to develop a UI for a 3D rehabilitation environment, fo-
cusing on movement visualization and personalization. Although the development stage
has not yet undergone scientific validation or user feedback testing, both the primary
objectives were successfully achieved. Specifically, the five available upper body move-
ments and the two lower body movements were effectively implemented across all three
initial postures.
Personalization was realized through the customization of the subject, environment, and
actions. Additional customization options, such as different hairstyles, and a variety of 3D
models, could be introduced to better represent the different characteristics of individuals
undergoing rehabilitation. Moreover, incorporating more 3D models to include a broader
range of genders beyond the current male and female options would further enhance the
inclusiveness and personalization of the rehabilitation environment.
Unity’s flexibility allows for an unlimited set of customization options for both the envi-
ronment and the exercises performed during rehabilitation. This versatility means that
developers can create any scenario or exercise required, moving multiple body parts si-
multaneously, if necessary, to meet specific rehabilitation needs.
Furthermore, additional features can be integrated to enhance the rehabilitation experi-
ence. For instance, background music or audio feedback can be added to provide auditory
cues during training sessions, such as sounds indicating the start and stop of exercises.
Additionally, the body part that is in motion can be highlighted with visual aids, such as a
green arrow or circle, to clearly indicate the focus of the exercise.
The environment can be tailored to simulate real-life settings, which helps in making the
rehabilitation exercises more relatable and effective. Interactive elements like progress
bars, that show the completion status of each exercise , achievement badges, earned by
completing exercises can further enhance the experience.
Furthermore, the current stage of development allows the experiment to run for an in-
definite period, continuing until Unity is closed or the Quit button is clicked. A possible
improvement could be the addition of session duration settings, which would allow users
to define the length of their exercise sessions. Including countdown timers and repetition
counters would also help users manage their routines more effectively, providing struc-
ture and feedback throughout their rehabilitation exercises.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
105
==PAGE:114==
Interactive elements, like on-screen prompts and progress trackers, can also be incor-
porated to keep users motivated and informed about their progress. These elements
could provide instant feedback on the accuracy and quality of movements, ensuring that
exercises are performed correctly.
To summarize, leveraging Unity’s adaptability not only enhances the user experience but
could also make the system a valuable tool for both patients and healthcare providers in
achieving more beneficial rehabilitation outcomes.
8.2
Application Architecture
While developing the 3D rehabilitation environment, choosing the right UI framework is
crucial for achieving an effective and user-friendly experience. While traditional Canvas-
based UI systems have been widely used, the UI Toolkit offers several advantages that
contributed in making it the choice for this project.
UI Toolkit is designed to be more efficient than the traditional uGUI system, since it lever-
ages a retained mode graphical system, reducing the performance overhead associated
with frequent UI updates. This efficiency is particularly important in an environment where
smooth, real-time interactions and animations are critical for maintaining user engage-
ment and providing accurate feedback.
UI Toolkit provides greater flexibility in designing and customizing UI components. Since
it supports CSS-like styling and a more modular approach to UI design, it makes easier to
create complex and visually appealing interfaces. This level of customization is beneficial
in tailoring the environment to meet specific user needs and preferences, enhancing the
overall user experience.
As the project grows, the UI Toolkit offers better scalability compared to the Unity User
Interface (uGUI) system. The hierarchical structure of UI elements in UI Toolkit allows for
more manageable and organized code, which is easier to maintain and expand. This is
essential for adding new features and functionalities without compromising the system’s
stability or performance.
The UI Toolkit integrates with Unity’s editor, as it supports UI debugging and live updates,
allowing developers to see changes in real-time without needing to restart the applica-
tion. This rapid iteration capability accelerates the development process and enhances
productivity.
UI Toolkit is better suited for creating responsive designs. Indeed, it supports layouts
that automatically adjust to different screen sizes and resolutions, ensuring a consistent
and accessible user experience across various devices. This is particularly important in
a rehabilitation environment where users might access the system on different platforms.
In summary, the UI Toolkit offers several significant advantages over the traditional uGUI
system, including improved performance efficiency, greater flexibility and better scalabil-
ity, that all contributed in making it the chosen tool for developing the UI.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
106
==PAGE:115==
8.3
Communication module
A communication module was implemented to facilitate data exchange. This was achieved
using the Lab Streaming Layer (LSL), which serves as an intermediary to communicate
between the custom Python script and Unity.
The Python script is responsible for receiving EEG data and handling Unity markers, en-
suring that the data is saved for further analysis. Unity sends markers related to the
performed actions to the LSL, which can be used for various purposes. This setup not
only allows for the real-time transmission of EEG data but also opens the possibility for
Unity to send other useful information.
This successfully tested and flexible communication framework enables the integration
of additional data streams and functionalities in the future, enhancing the overall system’s
capability. For example, in a MI scenario, real-time feedback can be sent both from the
EEG side, in terms of changes of the waves amplitude, and from Unity.
8.4
EEG Integration
The integration of EEG data collection into the 3D rehabilitation environment marks a
significant advancement towards providing more personalized and adaptive rehabilitation
experiences. The EEG headset records brain activity, which can be used to monitor the
user’s cognitive state and engagement levels during rehabilitation exercises.
Currently, the EEG data recording has been successfully implemented, laying the ground-
work for future integration of Motor Imagery (MI) and active feedback mechanisms. By
incorporating MI, the system can interpret the user’s intention to move a particular body
part, even without physical movement, and provide corresponding feedback. This could
be particularly beneficial for patients with severe motor impairments who may struggle
with actual physical movements.
The future integration of MI and active feedback will enable the system to adapt in real-
time to the user’s mental and physical state, offering a more responsive and effective
rehabilitation experience. This could include adjusting the difficulty of exercises based on
the user’s cognitive load or providing visual and auditory feedback to reinforce successful
MI.
8.5
First test - Results
8.5.1
EEG data + Unity markers visualization
Firstly are displayed in Fig.8.1, Fig.8.2 and Fig.8.3 three graphs with EEG data recorded
from 8 channels, where each one is normalized for its standard deviation.
In the bottom part of each graph, a legend indicates left, rest and right actions, and red
and orange horizontal lines highlight respectively movements and rests periods.
It should be noticed that different actions are displayed in these graphs, either from left or
right side, since the main purpose is to graphically see the recorded data.
8.5.2
Frequency Analysis
In Fig.8.4 and Fig.8.5 is shown the PSD averaged across the 8 EEG channels, with the
y-axis in Fig.8.4 expressed in log scale.
Data used for this analysis was taken while performing the actions in an experiment with
the setup rest (4s), left hand (4s), right hand (4s).
It is important to notice that left and right hand movements were grouped together under
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
107
==PAGE:116==
Figure 8.1: EEG data (8 channels) + Unity markers
the movements class, so the average PSD of the movements considers actions coming
from left and right side. This was done since the primary objective was to assess if there
was a difference in the average PSD of the alpha bands between rest and action periods.
It needs to be highlighted that, by averaging along the channels, differences can be
smoothed, thus a more detailed assessment should involve the analysis of each channel,
to spot eventual differences in the PSD across certain regions of the brain.
Moreover, a more complete analysis can be done by assessing the PSD between left and
right hand, left hand and rest or right hand and rest
The t-test result for this data was 1, with p-value of 0.048.
It should be highlighted that these results are just preliminary tests of a pilot study. Due
to the limited amount of time available, since the main focus was placed on achieving the
UI design specifications, the frequency analysis and the statistical test were not deeply
explored.
This analysis was conducted by the author because the Unity and OpenBCI timestamps
can differ. In the custom Python script, it is checked if an offset-time flag is set to true. If
it is true, the script calculates an offset value to account for any discrepancy between the
system clock and the clock used by the Lab Streaming Layer (LSL). Both clocks measure
time as the number of seconds elapsed since the Unix epoch, which started at midnight
on January 1, 1970. To calculate the offset, the script subtracts the current time reported
by the LSL clock from the current time reported by the system clock.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
108
==PAGE:117==
Figure 8.2: EEG data (8 channels) + Unity markers
If the flag is false, no offset is applied, and the timestamps remain unchanged.
However, in both conditions, it is highly probable that the EEG is set up before starting the
application, so EEG and Unity timestamps might not be aligned using the Python script.
Moreover, even while using LabRecorder, the two streams can be misaligned, as LabRecorder
identifies the Unity markers only if the Unity game is running. Therefore, it is highly prob-
able that the EEG stream has already started.
The author’s main objective during this frequency analysis was to test her hypothesis
that to see if data coming from Unity and the EEG side are correctly aligned, a way of
proceeding could be assessing the overall PSD of the movements and the rest periods.
If the differences in the average PSD in the alpha band between the two groups are
significant, this could indicate that the two streams are correctly aligned, strengthening
the hypothesis that the communication module works.
However, this was just a pilot test, and the author believes that creating a scripting al-
ternative that waits for when both the EEG and Unity are set up and running and starts
sending data at the same time could be a more efficient and precise approach rather than
focusing on averages and statistical analysis.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
109
==PAGE:118==
Figure 8.3: EEG data (8 channels) + Unity markers
8.5.3
Second Test - Classifier Results
Below are reported the classifiers performances, in terms of confusion matrices, accuracy,
sensitivity and specificity, for the second test.
As mentioned in chapter 7, the setup for this test was rest (4s), left hand (4s), right hand
(4s).
The data dimensions were the following:
Matrices: (samples x channels x trials)
Left Hand Matrix = [500x16x243]
Right Hand Matrix = [500x16x78]
Training Set = [500x16x257], 80% of data
Test Set = [500x16x64], 20% of data
SVM
In Fig.8.6 are shown the SVM classifier performances.
LDA
In Fig.8.7 are shown the LDA classifier performances.
As expected and as previously mentioned, the results do not show significant perfor-
mances, primarily due to the limited amount of data and tested subjects. However, the
two classifiers seems to have promising results, so it is expected that with a larger amount
of data and training sessions the results could be improved.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
110
==PAGE:119==
Figure 8.4: Average PSD across 8 channels (log scale)
8.5.4
Considerations
In the current stage of development, a classifier was trained to distinguish between two
Motor Imagery (MI) classes: left hand and right hand. However, due to the limited amount
of data available for training, the classifier’s reliability in terms of results is currently not
optimal. Despite this limitation, the initial efforts provide a valuable foundation for future
applications and improvements.
The trained classifier, even with its current limitations, offers a promising avenue for inte-
grating MI into the 3D rehabilitation environment. For instance, MI can be used to trigger
movements of the 3D model based on the recognized intention of the user.
To improve the reliability of the classifier, future work could focus on collecting a larger and
more diverse dataset, or training the classifier with online available data (e.g., BCI Com-
petition IV datasets [111]). This would enable the development of more robust models,
capable of accurately distinguishing between different types of MI with higher confidence.
For future applications, it could be interesting to extend this binary classification in a multi
class approach, for example including more body parts. This could involve distinguishing
between movements of the legs, arms, and even finer movements such as finger or wrist
actions.
One of the most exciting future directions is the implementation of real-time MI-based
feedback. This would involve the system continuously monitoring the user’s brain activity
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
111
==PAGE:120==
Figure 8.5: Average PSD across 8 channels
Figure 8.6: SVM classifier results
and instantly reflecting their intentions through the 3D model’s movements. For example,
if the user imagines moving their left hand, the 3D model would immediately perform the
corresponding action upon correct recognition of the intention. This real-time interaction
would make the rehabilitation process more engaging and effective, providing immediate
reinforcement and motivation.
Future developments could also explore contextual adaptations, where the system adjusts
the rehabilitation exercises based on the user’s cognitive and physical state. For instance,
if the user is fatigued, the system could reduce the intensity or duration of exercises. Con-
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
112
==PAGE:121==
Figure 8.7: LDA classifier results
versely, if the user is highly engaged, the system could introduce more challenging tasks.
This adaptability would ensure that the rehabilitation process remains personalized and
effective over time.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
113
==PAGE:122==
9
Conclusions and Future Directions
9.1
3D Environment
9.1.1
Limitations
Regarding the 3D environment and the UI technical implementation, the overall objectives
were achieved. Indeed, tailoring was obtained for the avatar, environment and experiment
details. All the planned movements were implemented, even though is possible to extend
it to other body parts or multiple body part movements.
A limitation that was faced while scripting the movements is indeed the fact that they are
scripted, meaning that each body part is handled separately in terms of spatial location
and orientation of the motions. This ensures customization, but lows the implementation
process, especially if many body parts are involved. Moreover, if the avatar has a different
initial posture, the spatial location of his body parts are different, meaning that there could
be different cases for the same body part.
9.1.2
Future Directions
To solve this limitation, further Unity functionalities could be explored, such as Unity Ani-
mation System (also known as Mecanim), a feature that with animation curves and blend-
ing allows to control complex character animations using the Animator component and the
Animator window [112]. Moreover, also Unity Animation Rigging, that creates and orga-
nizes animation rigs or sets of constraints for adding procedural motion, could be explored
[113]. In this scenario, Unity’s animation system (Mecanim) could provide the foundation
for creating and managing animations, while the Animation Rigging package could extend
this functionality by allowing for more advanced, procedural animation setups.
Moreover, as mentioned in Chapter 8, additional subject features, such as hairstyles and
more 3D avatars, could be added to further enhance the customization potentials of the
application.
To make the application more engaging and game-like for the users, audio feedback can
be added, progress bars could highlight the completion of an action or a training session,
and achievement badges could be obtained when an action is correctly performed. The
actual environment is static, meaning that the avatar can be in different environments, but
the surroundings are in a fixed statw. Potentially, some elements could be dynamically
moved during the game, to create a more immersive and similar to reality environment.
Moreover, visual aids could highlight the body part in motion, and it can also added the
possibility of timing the sessions.
In this way, after the initial setup, the sessions will automatically run and stop without
manual user intervention, that in the current implementation needs to press the Escape
key and then the Quit button to end a session.
9.2
UI Implementation
The User Interface is able to handle all the customization requirements, effectively reflect-
ing the user choices on the 3D environment in real time.
Moreover, a sufficient level of automation was achieved by randomly performing the move-
ments.
The chosen engine for developing the UI was UI Toolkit, that the newest UI system in
Unity, based on standard web technologies.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
114
==PAGE:123==
This appears to be the most sensible solution in terms of implementation, since Unity
intends for UI Toolkit to become the recommended UI system for new UI development
projects [114].
The only drawback is that it is still missing some features found in Unity UI (uGUI) and Im-
mediate Mode Graphical User Interface (IMGUI). The first one is the traditional GameObject-
based UI system in which the UI is arranged, positioned and styled based on components
and the Game view. IMGUI is a code-driven UI Toolkit that uses the OnGUI function, and
scripts that implement it, to draw and manage user interfaces, but is not recommended
for building runtime UI.
Despite this disadvantage, given Unity efforts on using UI Toolkit, it is highly probable that
this tool will undergo further and rapid developments. Moreover, being code-driven and
following recognized web technologies, it ensures easier updates and improvements, and
is also more structured.
9.3
Motor Imagery
The aspect that could be investigated the most for future improvements is probably the
MI. Indeed, since it was not the main target of this project, it was briefly investigated, and
most of the results present limitations and are mainly suggestions for future directions.
9.3.1
Limitations
The communication layer was successfully estabilished between BCI-3D ReHaB appli-
cation and EEG data recording, even though at its current stage it allows only post pro-
cessing analyses, meaning that data is recorded live, but EEG information is not used
during the training sessions. Indeed, the active feedback is missing in the current stage
of development, and only offline analysis are possible.
Moreover, the implemented classifier for MI was limited to a binary classification left and
right hand, even though the application offers more possibilities for movements. Regard-
ing this binary classifier, it was not trained on much data, meaning that the results cannot
be considered significant to assess the performances of the classifier.
9.3.2
Future Directions
Regarding the communication layer, a crucial aspect in a VR for rehabilitation purposes
is active feedback. Indeed, instead of the auto-switching of the different actions, a visual
cue (for example, an arrow pointing at the body part) could highlight the part that the sub-
ject needs to move. If, by the analysis of µ waves, the correct MI is recognized, the avatar
could start moving the body part. This could create a more immersive 3D environment,
potentially enhancing the patient’s engagement. At the same time, Functional Electrical
Stimulation (FES= could be integrated to provide simultaneous feedback through electri-
cal muscle stimulation.
So, active feedback during MI could enable the system to adapt in real-time to the user’s
mental and physical state, meaning that the system could respond in real-time to the user
mental command.
Furthermore, the UI can be integrating by adding a visual feedback, like a popup message,
to display if the action is correctly recognized.
As mentioned in Chapter 7 and 8, a multiclass approach can be explored to include the
rest identification or to distinguish between more body parts (e.g. in hemiparesis, same
side with different body parts). This improvement in MI recognition and classification can
strengthen and expand the active feedback possibilities, in the way that the system can
recognise and actively respond to more body parts.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
115
==PAGE:124==
Moreover, in a scenario that includes active feedback, motion quality could be assessed,
so that the patients could receive a feedback in real time about their actions, adapting
their movements. For example, this could be obtained by integrating EMG sensors to
detect movement and AI to see if the user is compensating the movement.
9.4
Final Remarks
Before concluding, it is relevant to notice that this was the author’s first attempt at design-
ing a UI and working within a 3D environment, thus it is possible that some functionalities
can be achieved in a more efficient and faster way, and more features can be added to
improve the overall application.
Lastly, the primary objective of this thesis was to develop a User Interface that facili-
tates both customization and personalization. While communication with an external de-
vice was only minimally tested, the main goals regarding customization were successfully
achieved. This accomplishment paves the way for future improvements to make BCI-3D
ReHaB a more valuable tool in the neurorehabilitation sector.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
116
==PAGE:125==
Bibliography
[1]
recoveriX Neurotechnology for Motor Rehabilitation. g.tec medical engineering
GmbH. URL: https://www.gtec.at/product/recoverix-pro-neurotechnology/ (vis-
ited on 06/18/2024).
[2]
Stroke - What Is a Stroke? | NHLBI, NIH. URL: https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/
stroke (visited on 06/24/2024).
[3]
22053_Lecture_5_Applications - 22053 Principles of Brain Computer Interface Jan
24. URL: https://learn.inside.dtu.dk/d2l/le/content/186301/viewContent/705570/
View (visited on 06/24/2024).
[4]
Stroke Rehab Equipment: The Best Gadgets for Rehab at Home. Flint Rehab.
Dec. 2, 2021. URL: https://www.flintrehab.com/stroke-rehab-equipment/ (visited
on 06/21/2024).
[5]
Woosang Cho et al. “Hemiparetic Stroke Rehabilitation Using Avatar and Electrical
Stimulation Based on Non-invasive Brain Computer Interface”. In: International
Journal of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation 05.04 (2017). ISSN: 23299096. DOI:
10.4172/2329- 9096.1000411. URL: https://www.omicsonline.org/open- access/
hemiparetic-stroke-rehabilitation-using-avatar-and-electrical-stimulation-basedon-
noninvasive-brain-computer-interface-2329-9096-1000411.php?aid=91682 (visited on
06/11/2024).
[6]
L.E.H. Van Dokkum, T. Ward, and I. Laffont. “Brain Computer Interfaces for Neu-
rorehabilitation – Its Current Status as a Rehabilitation Strategy Post-Stroke”. In:
Annals of Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine 58.1 (Feb. 2015), pp. 3–8. ISSN:
18770657. DOI: 10.1016/j.rehab.2014.09.016. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S1877065714018338 (visited on 06/11/2024).
[7]
Yukihiro Hara. “Brain Plasticity and Rehabilitation in Stroke Patients”. In: Journal
of Nippon Medical School 82.1 (2015), pp. 4–13. DOI: 10.1272/jnms.82.4.
[8]
Floriana Pichiorri et al. “Brain-Computer Interface Boosts Motor Imagery Practice
during Stroke Recovery”. In: Annals of Neurology 77.5 (May 2015), pp. 851–865.
ISSN: 1531-8249. DOI: 10.1002/ana.24390. pmid: 25712802.
[9]
admin_n3ur01utions. How Brain-Computer Interface Treatment for Strokes Is Help-
ing Patients Recover Faster. Neurolutions. Nov. 14, 2022. URL: https://www.
neurolutions.com/treatment/how-brain-computer-interface-treatment-for-strokes-is-
helping-patients-recover-faster/ (visited on 06/24/2024).
[10]
M. Barandas, H. Gamboa, and J.M. Fonseca. “A Real Time Biofeedback System
Using Visual User Interface for Physical Rehabilitation”. In: Procedia Manufactur-
ing 3 (2015), pp. 823–828. ISSN: 23519789. DOI: 10.1016/j.promfg.2015.07.337.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2351978915003388 (visited on
06/11/2024).
[11]
Kristen M Triandafilou et al. “Development of a 3D, Networked Multi-User Vir-
tual Reality Environment for Home Therapy after Stroke”. In: Journal of Neuro-
Engineering and Rehabilitation 15.1 (Dec. 2018), p. 88. ISSN: 1743-0003. DOI:
10.1186/s12984- 018- 0429- 0. URL: https://jneuroengrehab.biomedcentral.com/
articles/10.1186/s12984-018-0429-0 (visited on 06/11/2024).
[12]
Kate E Laver et al. “Virtual Reality for Stroke Rehabilitation”. In: Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews 2018.1 (Nov. 20, 2017). Ed. by Cochrane Stroke Group.
ISSN: 14651858. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008349.pub4. URL: http://doi.wiley.
com/10.1002/14651858.CD008349.pub4 (visited on 06/11/2024).
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
117
==PAGE:126==
[13]
David B. Salisbury et al. “Virtual Reality and Brain Computer Interface in Neurore-
habilitation”. In: Baylor University Medical Center Proceedings 29.2 (Apr. 2016),
pp. 124–127. ISSN: 0899-8280, 1525-3252. DOI: 10.1080/08998280.2016.11929386.
URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/08998280.2016.11929386 (vis-
ited on 06/11/2024).
[14]
Amy Henderson, Nicol Korner-Bitensky, and Mindy Levin. “Virtual Reality in Stroke
Rehabilitation: A Systematic Review of Its Effectiveness for Upper Limb Motor
Recovery”. In: Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation 14.2 (Mar. 2007), pp. 52–61. ISSN:
1074-9357, 1945-5119. DOI: 10.1310/tsr1402-52. URL: http://www.tandfonline.
com/doi/full/10.1310/tsr1402-52 (visited on 06/11/2024).
[15]
María José Cano-Mañas et al. “Effects of Video-Game Based Therapy on Bal-
ance, Postural Control, Functionality, and Quality of Life of Patients with Suba-
cute Stroke: A Randomized Controlled Trial”. In: Journal of Healthcare Engineer-
ing 2020 (Feb. 13, 2020), pp. 1–11. ISSN: 2040-2295, 2040-2309. DOI: 10.1155/
2020/5480315. URL: https://www.hindawi.com/journals/jhe/2020/5480315/ (visited
on 06/11/2024).
[16]
Yanlin Shi and Qingjin Peng. “A VR-based User Interface for the Upper Limb Re-
habilitation”. In: Procedia CIRP 78 (2018), pp. 115–120. ISSN: 22128271. DOI:
10.1016/j.procir.2018.08.311. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S2212827118312174 (visited on 06/11/2024).
[17]
Valery L. Feigin et al. “Global, Regional, and National Burden of Stroke and Its
Risk Factors, 1990–2019: A Systematic Analysis for the Global Burden of Disease
Study 2019”. In: The Lancet Neurology 20.10 (Oct. 1, 2021), pp. 795–820. ISSN:
1474-4422, 1474-4465. DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00252-0. pmid: 34487721.
URL: https://www.thelancet.com/article/S1474-4422(21)00252-0/fulltext (visited
on 06/18/2024).
[18]
J. Mackay, G.A. Mensah, and K. Greenlund. The Atlas of Heart Disease and
Stroke. World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2004.
[19]
Ana Mandeljc et al. “Robotic Device for Out-of-Clinic Post-Stroke Hand Rehabilita-
tion”. In: Applied Sciences 12.3 (2022), p. 1092. DOI: 10.3390/app12031092. URL:
https://doi.org/10.3390/app12031092.
[20]
Shyam Prabhakaran et al. “Inter-Individual Variability in the Capacity for Motor
Recovery after Ischemic Stroke”. In: Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 22.1
(2008), pp. 64–71. ISSN: 1545-9683. DOI: 10 . 1177 / 1545968307305302. pmid:
17687024.
[21]
Ander Ramos-Murguialday et al. “Brain–Machine Interface in Chronic Stroke Re-
habilitation: A Controlled Study”. In: Annals of Neurology 74.1 (2013), pp. 100–
108. ISSN: 1531-8249. DOI: 10.1002/ana.23879. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/abs/10.1002/ana.23879 (visited on 06/21/2024).
[22]
Marc Sebastián-Romagosa et al. “Brain Computer Interface Treatment for Mo-
tor Rehabilitation of Upper Extremity of Stroke Patients—A Feasibility Study”. In:
Frontiers in Neuroscience 14 (Oct. 21, 2020), p. 591435. ISSN: 1662-453X. DOI:
10.3389/fnins.2020.591435. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fnins.2020.591435/full (visited on 06/11/2024).
[23]
Kai Keng Ang and Cuntai Guan. “Brain–Computer Interface for Neurorehabilita-
tion of Upper Limb After Stroke”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 103.6 (June 2015),
pp. 944–953. ISSN: 0018-9219, 1558-2256. DOI: 10.1109/JPROC.2015.2415800.
URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7105815/ (visited on 06/11/2024).
[24]
María A. Cervera et al. “Brain￿computer Interfaces for Post￿stroke Motor Reha-
bilitation: A Meta￿analysis”. In: Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology 5.5
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
118
==PAGE:127==
(May 2018), pp. 651–663. ISSN: 2328-9503, 2328-9503. DOI: 10.1002/acn3.544.
URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/acn3.544 (visited on 06/11/2024).
[25]
N. Chino and J.L. Melvin. Functional Evaluation of Stroke Patients. Springer: Tokyo,
Japan, 1996.
[26]
Janne Marieke Veerbeek et al. “What Is the Evidence for Physical Therapy Post-
stroke? A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis”. In: PloS One 9.2 (2014), e87987.
ISSN: 1932-6203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087987. pmid: 24505342.
[27]
Carole J. Winstein et al. “Guidelines for Adult Stroke Rehabilitation and Recov-
ery: A Guideline for Healthcare Professionals From the American Heart Associa-
tion/American Stroke Association”. In: Stroke 47.6 (June 2016), e98–e169. DOI:
10.1161/STR.0000000000000098. pmid: 27145936.
[28]
Stroke Recovery Exercises. Neurolutions. URL: https://www.neurolutions.com/
exercise/ (visited on 06/24/2024).
[29]
Flint Rehab: Neurorehabilitation Devices for the Home & Clinic. Flint Rehab. URL:
https://www.flintrehab.com/ (visited on 06/18/2024).
[30]
Figure 1. Block Diagram of a BCI System. ResearchGate. URL: https://www.
researchgate.net/figure/Block-diagram-of-a-BCI-system_fig1_329136120 (visited on
06/24/2024).
[31]
Virtual Reality (VR) for Stroke Rehabilitation in 2024. URL: https://www.scnsoft.
com/healthcare/virtual-reality/stroke-rehabilitation (visited on 06/24/2024).
[32]
Virtual Reality (VR) for Stroke Rehabilitation in 2024. URL: https://www.scnsoft.
com/healthcare/virtual-reality/stroke-rehabilitation (visited on 06/24/2024).
[33]
Appaji Rayi and Najib I. Murr. “Electroencephalogram”. In: StatPearls. Treasure
Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing, 2024. pmid: 33085442. URL: http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK563295/ (visited on 06/24/2024).
[34]
22053_Lecture_2_Recording_Stimulation Methods - 22053 Principles of Brain Com-
puter Interface Jan 24. URL: https://learn.inside.dtu.dk/d2l/le/content/186301/
viewContent/705567/View (visited on 06/24/2024).
[35]
Andrea Biasiucci, Benedetta Franceschiello, and Micah M. Murray. “Electroen-
cephalography”. In: Current Biology 29.3 (Feb. 4, 2019), R80–R85. ISSN: 0960-
9822. DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2018.11.052. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0960982218315513 (visited on 06/24/2024).
[36]
Electrode 10-20 System - Biomedical Instrumentation. Engineers Community. July 5,
2018. URL: https://engineerscommunity.com/t/electrode-10-20-system/5486 (vis-
ited on 06/24/2024).
[37]
Hooi Nee. Oon, A. Saidatul, and Z. Ibrahim. “Analysis on Non-Linear Features
of Electroencephalogram (EEG) Signal for Neuromarketing Application”. In: 2018
International Conference on Computational Approach in Smart Systems Design
and Applications (ICASSDA) (Aug. 2018), pp. 1–8. DOI: 10.1109/ICASSDA.2018.
8477618. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8477618/ (visited on 06/24/2024).
[38]
Zhiwen Zhang et al. “A Novel Deep Learning Approach With Data Augmentation
to Classify Motor Imagery Signals”. In: IEEE Access PP (Jan. 31, 2019), pp. 1–1.
DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2895133.
[39]
E. Dantes et al. “The Rehabilitation of Hemiparesis after Stroke”. In: Ovidius Univ.
Ann. Ser. Phys. Educ. Sport. Mov. Health 20 (2020), pp. 5–10.
[40]
H.M. Feys et al. “Effect of a Therapeutic Intervention for the Hemiplegic Upper
Limb in the Acute Phase after Stroke: A Single-Blind, Randomized, Controlled
Multicenter Trial”. In: Stroke 29 (1998), pp. 785–792.
[41]
H.T. Hendricks et al. “Motor Recovery after Stroke: A Systematic Review of the
Literature”. In: Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 83 (2002), pp. 1629–1637.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
119
==PAGE:128==
[42]
H. Nakayama et al. “Recovery of Upper Extremity Function in Stroke Patients: The
Copenhagen Stroke Study”. In: Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 75 (1994), pp. 394–398.
[43]
G. Gresham et al. Post-Stroke Rehabilitation. US Department of Health and Hu-
man Services, Public Health Service, Agency for Health Care Policy and Re-
search: Rockville, MD, USA, 1995.
[44]
C.L. Kuo and G.C. Hu. “Post-Stroke Spasticity: A Review of Epidemiology, Patho-
physiology, and Treatments”. In: Int. J. Gerontol. 12 (2018), pp. 280–284.
[45]
J. Wissel, A. Manack, and M. Brainin. “Toward an Epidemiology of Poststroke
Spasticity”. In: Neurology 80 (2013), pp. 13–19.
[46]
R.D. Zorowitz, P.J. Gillard, and M. Brainin. “Post-Stroke Spasticity: Sequelae and
Burden on Stroke Survivors and Caregivers”. In: Neurology 80 (2013), pp. 45–52.
[47]
H. Zeng et al. “Prevalence and Risk Factors for Spasticity after Stroke: A System-
atic Review and Meta-Analysis”. In: Front. Neurol. 11 (2021), p. 1884.
[48]
J.D. Schaechter. “Motor Rehabilitation and Brain Plasticity after Hemiparetic Stroke”.
In: Prog. Neurobiol. 73 (2004), pp. 61–72.
[49]
G. Prange et al. “Systematic Review of the Effect of Robot-Aided Therapy on Re-
covery of the Hemiparetic Arm after Stroke”. In: J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 43 (2009),
pp. 171–184.
[50]
S. Barreca et al. “Treatment Interventions for the Paretic Upper Limb of Stroke
Survivors: A Critical Review”. In: Neurorehabilit. Neural Repair 17 (2003), pp. 220–
226.
[51]
H. Woldag and H. Hummelsheim. “Evidence-Based Physiotherapeutic Concepts
for Improving Arm and Hand Function in Stroke Patients”. In: J. Neurol. 249 (2002),
pp. 518–528.
[52]
J.H. Van Der Lee et al. “Exercise Therapy for Arm Function in Stroke Patients: A
Systematic Review of Randomized Controlled Trials”. In: Clin. Rehabil. 15 (2001),
pp. 20–31.
[53]
L. Oujamaa et al. “Rehabilitation of Arm Function after Stroke. Literature Review”.
In: Ann. Phys. Rehabil. Med. 52 (2009), pp. 269–293.
[54]
I. Sarakoglou, N.G. Tsagarakis, and D.G. Caldwell. “Occupational and Physical
Therapy Using a Hand Exoskeleton Based Exerciser”. In: Proceedings of the 2004
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS)
(IEEE Cat. No. 04CH37566). Vol. 3. IEEE, 2004, pp. 2973–2978.
[55]
P. Langhorne, F. Coupar, and A. Pollock. “Motor Recovery after Stroke: A System-
atic Review”. In: Lancet Neurol. 8 (2009), pp. 741–754.
[56]
R.N. Boyd and L. Ada. “Physiotherapy Management of Spasticity”. In: Upper Mo-
tor Neuron Syndrome and Spasticity: Clinical Management and Neurophysiology.
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2001, pp. 79–81.
[57]
B.T. Volpe et al. “Robotics in the Rehabilitation Treatment of Patients with Stroke”.
In: Curr. Atheroscler. Rep. 4 (2002), pp. 270–276.
[58]
Sujesh Sreedharan et al. “Brain-Computer Interfaces for Neurorehabilitation”. In:
Critical Reviews in Biomedical Engineering 41.3 (2013), pp. 269–279. ISSN: 0278-
940X. DOI: 10.1615/CritRevBiomedEng.2014010697. URL: http://www.dl.begellhouse.
com/journals/4b27cbfc562e21b8,4863d6072e2ac4d2,5fcf0d3448340a47.html (visited
on 06/11/2024).
[59]
Fabien Lotte, Laurent Bougrain, and Maureen Clerc. “Electroencephalography (
EEG )￿Based Brain–Computer Interfaces”. In: Wiley Encyclopedia of Electrical
and Electronics Engineering. Ed. by John G. Webster. Wiley, Sept. 15, 2015,
pp. 1–20. isbn: 978-0-471-34608-1. doi: 10.1002/047134608X.W8278. url: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/047134608X.W8278 (visited on 06/14/2024).
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
120
==PAGE:129==
[60]
Raquel Carvalho, Nuno Dias, and João José Cerqueira. “Brain-Machine Interface
of Upper Limb Recovery in Stroke Patients Rehabilitation: A Systematic Review”.
In: Physiotherapy Research International: The Journal for Researchers and Clini-
cians in Physical Therapy 24.2 (Apr. 2019), e1764. issn: 1471-2865. doi: 10.1002/
pri.1764. pmid: 30609208.
[61]
Takashi Ono et al. “Brain-Computer Interface with Somatosensory Feedback Im-
proves Functional Recovery from Severe Hemiplegia Due to Chronic Stroke”. In:
Frontiers in Neuroengineering 7 (July 7, 2014). issn: 1662-6443. doi: 10.3389/
fneng.2014.00019. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fneng.2014.
00019 (visited on 06/17/2024).
[62]
Michael J. Young, David J. Lin, and Leigh R. Hochberg. “Brain-Computer Inter-
faces in Neurorecovery and Neurorehabilitation”. In: Seminars in neurology 41.2
(Apr. 2021), pp. 206–216. issn: 0271-8235. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1725137. pmid:
33742433. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8768507/ (visited
on 06/17/2024).
[63]
Surjo R. Soekadar et al. “Brain-Machine Interfaces in Neurorehabilitation of Stroke”.
In: Neurobiology of Disease 83 (Nov. 2015), pp. 172–179. issn: 1095-953X. doi:
10.1016/j.nbd.2014.11.025. pmid: 25489973.
[64]
EPOC X | 14 Channel Wireless EEG Headset. EMOTIV. url: https://www.emotiv.
com/products/epoc-x (visited on 06/17/2024).
[65]
EmotivBCI | Built for Insight, EPOC+ and EPOC X Headsets – EMOTIV. url: https:
//www.emotiv.com/products/emotiv-bci (visited on 06/17/2024).
[66]
All-in-One EEG Electrode Cap Bundle. OpenBCI Online Store. url: https://shop.
openbci.com/products/all-in-one-eeg-electrode-cap-bundle (visited on 06/17/2024).
[67]
BCI SYSTEM. g.tec medical engineering GmbH. url: https://www.gtec.at/product/
brain-computer-interface-system/ (visited on 06/17/2024).
[68]
IpsiHand System | At Home Stroke Rehabilitation. Neurolutions. url: https://www.
neurolutions.com/ipsihand/ (visited on 06/17/2024).
[69]
Sudz Niel Kar. Brain Computer Interface Device from Neurolutions Gets De Novo
Classification from FDA. MyHealthyApple. Apr. 26, 2021. url: https://www.myhealthyapple.
com/brian-computer-interface-device-from-neurolutions-ipsihand/ (visited on 06/23/2024).
[70]
Allison P. Anderson et al. “Relaxation with Immersive Natural Scenes Presented
Using Virtual Reality”. In: Aerospace Medicine and Human Performance 88.6 (June 1,
2017), pp. 520–526. issn: 2375-6314. doi: 10.3357/AMHP.4747.2017. url: http:
/ / www . ingentaconnect . com / content / 10 . 3357 / AMHP . 4747 . 2017 (visited on
06/11/2024).
[71]
Robert Leeb et al. “Navigation in Virtual Environments through Motor Imagery”. In:
9th Computer Vision Winter Workshop, CVWW (Jan. 1, 2004), pp. 99–108.
[72]
Luisa Sartori et al. “The Left Side of Motor Resonance”. In: Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience 8 (Sept. 9, 2014). issn: 1662-5161. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00702.
url: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00702 (visited on
06/23/2024).
[73]
Laila Craighero et al. “Evidence of Motor Resonance in Stroke Patients with Severe
Upper Limb Function Impairments”. In: Cortex; a Journal Devoted to the Study of
the Nervous System and Behavior 159 (Feb. 2023), pp. 16–25. issn: 1973-8102.
doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2022.11.007. pmid: 36603404.
[74]
Lisa Holper et al. “Testing the Potential of a Virtual Reality Neurorehabilitation Sys-
tem during Performance of Observation, Imagery and Imitation of Motor Actions
Recorded by Wireless Functional near-Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS)”. In: Journal
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
121
==PAGE:130==
of Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation 7 (Dec. 2, 2010), p. 57. issn: 1743-0003.
doi: 10.1186/1743-0003-7-57. pmid: 21122154.
[75]
VIVE Pro Eye Overview | VIVE Southeast Asia. url: https://www.vive.com/sea/
product/vive-pro-eye/overview/ (visited on 06/18/2024).
[76]
NeuroVirt. url: https://neurovirt.io/ (visited on 06/18/2024).
[77]
http://evolvrehab.com. Evolv Rehabilitation Technologies. url: https://evolvrehab.
com/ (visited on 06/18/2024).
[78]
Home. MindMaze. url: https://mindmaze.com/ (visited on 06/18/2024).
[79]
Evidence-Based Digital Therapies for Brain Repair. url: https://mindmaze.com/
digital-therapies-for-brain-repair/#mind-pod (visited on 06/18/2024).
[80]
MindMotion - Neurorehabilitation across the Continuum of Care. MindMaze. url:
https://mindmaze.com/digital-therapies-for-neurorehabilitation/ (visited on 06/18/2024).
[81]
GRAIL. Motekmedical.com. url: https://www.motekmedical.com/solution/grail/
(visited on 06/18/2024).
[82]
CAREN. Motekmedical.com. url: https://www.motekmedical.com/solution/caren/
(visited on 06/18/2024).
[83]
Rewellio Virtual Reality Stroke Therapy - Georg Teufl & Andy Gstoll. url: https:
//recoveryafterstroke.com/rewellio/ (visited on 06/18/2024).
[84]
Paula Alexandra Regol, Pedro Miguel Moreiral, and Luis Paulo Reis. “Natural User
Interfaces in Serious Games for Rehabilitation”. In: ().
[85]
Lokomat®. Hocoma. url: https://www.hocoma.com/solutions/lokomat/ (visited on
06/18/2024).
[86]
Easy Software for Therapy and Rehabilitation | TyroS. Tyromotion. url: https://
tyromotion.com/en/products/tyros/ (visited on 06/23/2024).
[87]
FitMi: The High-Tech Home Exercise Program. Flint Rehab. url: https://www.
flintrehab.com/product/fitmi/ (visited on 06/18/2024).
[88]
Order the MusicGlove Hand Therapy Glove for Stroke Patients. Flint Rehab. url:
https://www.flintrehab.com/product/musicglove-hand-therapy/ (visited on 06/18/2024).
[89]
Woosang Cho et al. “Paired Associative Stimulation Using Brain-Computer Inter-
faces for Stroke Rehabilitation: A Pilot Study”. In: European Journal of Transla-
tional Myology 26.3 (June 13, 2016), p. 6132. issn: 2037-7452. doi: 10.4081/ejtm.
2016.6132. pmid: 27990240.
[90]
Danut Irimia et al. “PRELIMINARY RESULTS OF TESTING A BCI-CONTROLLED
FES SYSTEM FOR POSTSTROKE REHABILITATION”. In: Sept. 18, 2017. doi:
10.3217/978-3-85125-533-1-38.
[91]
Nikolaus Sabathiel et al. “Paired Associative Stimulation with Brain-Computer In-
terfaces: A New Paradigm for Stroke Rehabilitation”. In: vol. 9743. July 17, 2016,
pp. 261–272. isbn: 978-3-319-39954-6. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-39955-3_25.
[92]
Danut C. Irimia et al. “High Classification Accuracy of a Motor Imagery Based
Brain-Computer Interface for Stroke Rehabilitation Training”. In: Frontiers in Robotics
and AI 5 (Nov. 29, 2018), p. 130. issn: 2296-9144. doi: 10.3389/frobt.2018.00130.
pmid: 33501008. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7805943/
(visited on 06/18/2024).
[93]
Gemma Alder et al. “A Brain Computer Interface Neuromodulatory Device for
Stroke Rehabilitation: Iterative User-Centered Design Approach”. In: JMIR Re-
habilitation and Assistive Technologies 10 (Dec. 11, 2023), e49702. issn: 2369-
2529. doi: 10.2196/49702. url: https://rehab.jmir.org/2023/1/e49702 (visited on
06/11/2024).
[94]
The Noun Project. The Noun Project. url: https://thenounproject.com/.
[95]
React Icons. React Icons. url: https://react-icons.github.io/react-icons/.
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
122
==PAGE:131==
[96]
Mixamo. url: https://www.mixamo.com/#/ (visited on 06/25/2024).
[97]
Unity Technologies. Unity Asset Store. url: https://assetstore.unity.com/.
[98]
BlenderKit. BlenderKit. url: https://www.blenderkit.com/.
[99]
Blender Foundation. Blender. url: https://www.blender.org/.
[100]
The GIMP Team. GIMP. url: https://www.gimp.org/.
[101]
Autodesk Inc. Autodesk. url: https://www.autodesk.com/.
[102]
Labstreaminglayer/App-LabRecorder. LabStreamingLayer submodules, June 8,
2024. url: https : / / github . com / labstreaminglayer / App - LabRecorder (visited on
06/23/2024).
[103]
Xdf-Modules/Xdf-Matlab. xdf-modules, May 27, 2024. url: https://github.com/xdf-
modules/xdf-Matlab (visited on 06/23/2024).
[104]
Introduction — Labstreaminglayer 1.13 Documentation. url: https://labstreaminglayer.
readthedocs.io/info/intro.html (visited on 06/19/2024).
[105]
Labstreaminglayer/LSL4Unity. LabStreamingLayer submodules, June 4, 2024. url:
https://github.com/labstreaminglayer/LSL4Unity (visited on 06/23/2024).
[106]
Christian Kothe. Chkothe/Pylsl. May 17, 2024. url: https://github.com/chkothe/
pylsl (visited on 06/23/2024).
[107]
C. Calmels, G. Jarry, and C.J. Stam. “Changes in Local and Distant EEG Activi-
ties before, during and after the Observation and Execution of Sequential Finger
Movements”. In: Neurophysiologie Clinique/Clinical Neurophysiology 39.6 (Dec.
2009), pp. 303–312. issn: 09877053. doi: 10.1016/j.neucli.2009.09.003. url: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0987705309001026 (visited on 06/19/2024).
[108]
Xinyi Yong and Carlo Menon. “EEG Classification of Different Imaginary Move-
ments within the Same Limb”. In: PLoS ONE 10.4 (2015). doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0121896. pmid: 25830611. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC4382224/ (visited on 06/19/2024).
[109]
Ana. P. Costa et al. “An Adaptive CSP Filter to Investigate User Independence in
a 3-Class MI-BCI Paradigm”. In: Computers in Biology and Medicine 103 (Dec. 1,
2018), pp. 24–33. issn: 0010-4825. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2018.09.021. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S001048251830283X (visited on
06/21/2024).
[110]
H. Ramoser, J. Müller-Gerking, and G. Pfurtscheller. “Optimal Spatial Filtering of
Single Trial EEG during Imagined Hand Movement”. In: IEEE transactions on re-
habilitation engineering: a publication of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society 8.4 (Dec. 2000), pp. 441–446. issn: 1063-6528. doi: 10.1109/86.
895946. pmid: 11204034.
[111]
BCI Competition IV. url: https://www.bbci.de/competition/iv/#organizers (visited
on 06/23/2024).
[112]
Unity Technologies. Unity - Manual: Animation System Overview. url: https://docs.
unity3d.com/Manual/AnimationOverview.html (visited on 06/28/2024).
[113]
Animation Rigging | Animation Rigging | 1.3.0. url: https://docs.unity3d.com/
Packages/com.unity.animation.rigging@1.3/manual/index.html (visited on 06/28/2024).
[114]
Unity Technologies. Unity - Manual: Comparison of UI Systems in Unity. url: https:
//docs.unity3d.com/Manual/UI-system-compare.html (visited on 06/28/2024).
Improving Stroke Rehabilitation
123
