==PAGE:1==
Managing Unlabeled Data for Lo-
cation Prediction Using Semantic
Data
Julius Olander
MSc Thesis
July 2024
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
Title:
Managing Unlabeled Data for Location Prediction Using Semantic Data
Type:
MSc Thesis
Date:
July 2024
Author:
Julius Olander
Supervisors:
Sune Lehmann Jørgensen
Laura Alessandretti
University:
Technical University of Denmark
Department:
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Address:
Bygning 324, 2800 Kongens Lyngby
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The goal of this work is to address the challenge of labeling unknown loca-
tions using data from the Global Human Settlement Layer Project (GHSL).
First, I conducted a literature review and a thorough analysis of the data to
understand the application domain. Second, I pre-processed the datasets to
enable spatial joining for subsequent analysis. Third, I used a random forest
classifier to validate the GHSL data against the value classes of the Swedish
data, and I employed a K-means clustering model to categorize locations
into four groupings. Lastly, I performed model evaluation using precision,
recall, F1 score, and SHAP values to assess feature impact in the classifier,
while using inertia, silhouette scores, and visual investigation to assess clus-
ters. I found that a random forest classifier trained on 100m resolution data
significantly outperformed one trained on 10m data. Additionally, K-means
clustering with four centroids provided a balanced trade-off between various
metrics and interpretability.
Ultimately, my approach labeled 93% of the
previously unknown locations, enhancing their geospatial context. All code
used in this work can be found at https://github.com/juliusolander/
Managing-Unlabeled-Data-for-Location-Prediction-Using-Semantic-Data.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Sune Lehmann for excellent guidance
and always being available to provide answers to my doubts and questions,
even the most trivial ones.
The same applies to my co-supervisor Laura
Alessandretti.
Additionally, I would like to thank my family for providing me with support
and encouragement in the final moments of writing.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
4
2.1
Geospatial Data Labeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Volunteered Geographic Information
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Limitations of VGI and OpenStreetMap
. . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Clustering as a Labeling Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Levering External Datasets With Machine Learning . . . . . .
8
2.5
A Framework for Geographic Data Mining . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Concluding Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Datasets
13
3.1
Swedish Location Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
The Global Human Settlement Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.1
GHS-BUILT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.2
GHS-POP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.3
GHS-LAND . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Methods
21
4.1
Methodology Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Data Pre-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.1
GHS Pre-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.2
Spatial Joining the GHS DataFrame with the SE data
26
4.3
Classifying locations based on Global Human Settlement data
26
4.3.1
Random Forest Classifier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Labeling Locations with Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4.1
K-Means Pre-Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4.2
Model Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4.3
Selecting the Amount of Clusters . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Summary of Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Results
39
5.1
Classifier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.1
Classifier Model 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.2
Classifier Model 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.1.3
Classifier Results Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
K-Means Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3
Elbow Method and Silhouette Scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
==PAGE:6==
iv
CONTENTS
5.4
Spatial Auto-correlation of Clustering (Moran’s I) . . . . . . .
53
5.5
Results Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Discussion
55
6.1
Selecting the Amount of Clusters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Labeling Unknown Locations with 4 GHS Profiles . . . . . . .
59
6.2.1
Analysis of the Four Clusters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.3
Evaluating the Poor Performance of Model 2 . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.3.1
A Third Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.3.2
The Bias-Variance Trade-off for Different Data Resolu-
tions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.4
Limitations and Future Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7
Conclusion
71
References
74
A Appendix
80
A.1 Link to Github Repository . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Geospatial data describing the geographical location of a point or region is
broadly applicable across a variety of domains including urban planning, land
use classification, disaster management, agriculture, transportation and rec-
ommender systems. However, extensive formatting and labeling of geospatial
data is often required before it can be processed and utilised for its use-cases,
often involving machine learning. As modern deep learning models are driven
by the volume and availability of accurate labels, labeled geospatial data is
therefore critical in training of accurate and robust models [1].
Volunteered geographic information (VGI) has enabled the labeling of large
amounts of geospatial data, through volunteer and community driven tagging
of geographic entities like i.e. gardens or parks. One of the most common
VGI projects is OpenStreetMap, an open-source platform that allows users to
contribute geographic data, such as roads, buildings, and points of interests
through a variety of tools and applications [2].
Other frameworks for labeling data leverage large geospatial datasets like
the CORINE land cover or Global Monitoring for Environment and Security
Urban Atlas (GMESUA), as inputs for machine learning models that can
be trained to identify patterns and predict land cover types in areas where
labeled data is sparse [3]. These models can then be used as a method to label
unknown locations and contribute to more comprehensive geospatial datasets
[1].
This work centers around the working paper (as of July 2024) "Next Semantic
Prediction" by Møllgaard et. al [4]. Here, the authors use semantic labels
derived from OpenStreetMap, to train a deep-learning transformer that pre-
dicts the next location a user will visit. Their approach utilises labeled data
by associating semantic categories with actual locations, allowing their model
==PAGE:8==
2
Introduction
to learn patterns across different users. However, locations without the con-
textual semantic information are a problem for predicting the next location,
as the model does not have information about what these locations represent.
The paper argues that unknown locations, those without assigned semantic
labels, are not simply random noise but reflect real-world limitations in VGI
and how places are mapped. The absence of semantics, for a location marked
as unknown, can therefore be an informative clue about the location in itself
the paper argues. The authors also mention two methods for dealing with
unknown locations:
1. Global "unknown" token: All unknown locations are replaced with
a single "unknown" token, assuming they all have the same contextual
meaning. This approach overestimates predictability, as it assumes all
unknown locations are similar.
2. Unique "unknown" token: Each unknown location is given a unique
"unknown" token, which underestimates predictability as it assumes all
unknown locations are different.
The paper recognizes that both methods are imperfect, as they either over-
simplify or overcomplicate the true nature of unknown locations. Ultimately,
dealing with unknown locations requires a balance between simplifying as-
sumptions and overly complex representations, both of which can lead to
inaccurate predictions. The paper suggests that further research is needed to
develop more sophisticated methods for handling unknown locations, taking
into account the inherent biases and limitations of geospatial data.
In this work, I use the unknown locations from Møllgaard et al.’s [4] as a case
study on how to manage unlabeled data. I therefore explore the locations
and develop a solution that provides additional geospatial context to them. I
review the current literature around labeling of geospatial data, and follow a
framework using machine-learning techniques to label the ’unknown’ locations
present in the location data. The data was originally gathered from a global
smartphone and electronics company from 2015 up to 2019 and consists of
==PAGE:9==
3
locations visited by 7.1 million individuals. This work uses a subset of the
data covering the country of Sweden, where the dataset is reduced to 5.1
million locations.
First, I develop a model to validate an external geospatial dataset from the
Global Human Settlement Layer (GHSL) project [5], based on its ability to
predict the semantic labels of Swedish locations. I provide an overview of the
Swedish location data and the GHSL data, and later merge them to train a
classifier, that predicts the most high-level semantic descriptor of a location
based on its unique GHSL attributes.
Secondly, I train a clustering model using the merged dataset, and use it to
label the ’unknown’ locations, while providing both quantitative and qualita-
tive assessments of the results. Lastly, I discuss the strengths and weaknesses
of the proposed solution and make suggestions regarding novel methods and
testing that is worth exploring in future research. All code used to develop the
methods in this work can be found at https://github.com/juliusolander/
Managing-Unlabeled-Data-for-Location-Prediction-Using-Semantic-Data.
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Literature Review
In the following literature review, I will discover the current research on
geospatial data labeling.
First, I will provide an introduction to labeling
of geographic data and follow up by outlining methods and techniques that
have been used in previous scientific literature for similar problems like this
work is tackling.
2.1
Geospatial Data Labeling
Geospatial data labeling is the process of assigning meaningful labels to ge-
ographic features and objects in geospatial data. Labels help to categorize
and group similar features, revealing patterns and trends within a geographic
area.
In essence, labeled geospatial data acts as a guide for spatial algo-
rithms, enabling them to make informed predictions by leveraging existing
knowledge about geographic features and relationships. These labels can be
used to train machine learning models for various tasks related to geographic
information, such as land use classification, object detection, change detection
and environmental analysis.
Another use-case of labeled geospatial data is in next location prediction, as
discussed in Møllgaard et al.’s working paper [4]. Here the authors discuss
how semantic labeling of locations can be used for next-location prediction
and proposes a two-step model: first, predict the semantics of the next loca-
tion, and then predict the actual location. This approach aims to improve
next-location prediction by leveraging the similarities in sequences of visited
location categories among users. Specifically, Møllgaard et al.[4] state that
predicting the semantics of the next location (e.g., home, work, or other) can
help in predicting the actual location. Since predicting "home" or "work"
directly translates to a specific physical location, knowing the semantic cate-
gory can significantly reduce the search space for the actual location. Krumm
==PAGE:11==
2.2 Volunteered Geographic Information
5
et al.[6] highlight the importance of labeling, particularly for inferring activ-
ities associated with different places. For example, the same location can be
labeled "school" for a student and "workplace" for a teacher, demonstrating
the need for nuanced labeling.
Labels therefore make it easier to organize and search geographic data, al-
lowing users to quickly find specific features of interest. In example, a user
could search for all hospitals within a specific radius, or for all areas with a
specific land use classification. Miller[7] highlights the importance of labeled
geospatial data in managing the process of uncovering hidden information
and knowledge from massive georeferenced databases, known as geographic
knowledge discovery (GKD). The document emphasizes that the complex-
ity of spatial objects and relationships in georeferenced data, along with
the computational intensity of many spatial algorithms, makes geographic
background knowledge crucial for guiding the GKD process. Labeled data
provides this background knowledge, allowing for efficient analysis and pre-
diction tasks. Specifically, geographic concept hierarchies, which are built
using labeled data, are particularly useful for guiding knowledge discovery at
different levels of spatial aggregation. These hierarchies help manage compu-
tational complexity by providing a framework for organizing and analyzing
data at different scales. This, in turn, allows for more accurate and efficient
predictions based on the specific level of detail required for the task.
2.2
Volunteered Geographic Information
Bill et al.[8] discuss the use of Volunteered Geographic Information (VGI) and
OpenStreetMap as sources for geospatial data. Millions of people voluntarily
contribute to the collection of geoinformation in projects like OpenStreetMap
or citizen science projects, or share posts with spatial references on social
networks. This creates VGI, which is a valuable source of labeled geospa-
tial data., where users contribute to creating a free map of the world. The
OpenStreetMap project is therefore a significant source of labeled geospatial
data providing a massive, crowd-sourced dataset for training machine learning
==PAGE:12==
6
Literature Review
models. Møllgaard et al.[4] leverage OpenStreetMap data to create semantic
labels for locations, which are then used to predict the next semantic location
a user will visit. The paper explains that OpenStreetMap provides valuable
information about the types of places, such as "home," "work," "restaurant,"
and "retail," which allows them to assign semantic meanings to 142 million
unique locations worldwide. This semantic information is then used to train
a transformer-based model to predict the next semantic location a user will
visit.
2.2.1
Limitations of VGI and OpenStreetMap
Spatial data quality is an essential aspect of VGI’s fitness for specific appli-
cations as stated by Hagenauer et al.[3]. However, as Ali et al.[2] points out,
the increasing number of OpenStreetMap contributors, the vast amounts of
daily contributions, and the loose classification system raise questions about
the resulting data quality.
They also discuss that a large number of het-
erogeneous contributors fosters data of mixed quality, leading to the need
for classification-based approaches for identifying entities with inappropri-
ate classification. Additionally, the completeness of the data can be also an
issue Hagenauer et al.[3]. This issue is particularly evident in the context
of OpenStreetMap. To accomodate accuracy issues, Ali et al.[2] propose a
classification-based approach for identifying entities with inappropriate clas-
sification, underscoring the need for reliable labeling to maintain data quality.
Møllgard et al.[4] acknowledges OpenStreetMap’s limitations, particularly re-
garding the completeness of the data, as "unknown" locations, can influ-
ence the accuracy of their predictions.
They suggest that in areas where
OpenStreetMap has comprehensive coverage, the absence of points of inter-
est (POIs) can be an informative clue in itself. This highlights the importance
of understanding the inherent biases and limitations of geospatial data, like
OpenStreetMap, when developing next-location prediction models.
Hage-
nauer et al.[3] propose a methodological framework to predict urban areas in
Europe that are currently not mapped or only partially mapped by using ma-
chine learning consisting of artificial neural networks and genetic algorithms.
==PAGE:13==
2.3 Clustering as a Labeling Method
7
This approach can help to mitigate the effect of completeness errors.
Ali et al.[2] explores a novel approach to address classification ambiguity and
plausibility in VGI. While they focus on a machine learning approach, they
mention other ways to address the cons of volunteered labeling. One way
is to analyze semantic similarity, as suggested by Ali et al.[2]. This means
examining the relationships between different tags and identifying outliers
in the data based on how similar tags are used.
By understanding these
relationships, it is possible to suggest more appropriate tags to volunteers
and improve data quality. Another method is to design more user-friendly
interfaces for data submission. Ali et al.[2] demonstrate that task-specific
interfaces can guide users towards more accurate contributions even under
challenging circumstances.
In conclusion, while VGI data can be useful for many purposes, its limitations
include accuracy and completeness. Validation methods like the classification-
based approach presented in Ali et al.[2] can be used to identify and manage
inaccuracies and improve the quality of VGI data.
2.3
Clustering as a Labeling Method
Clustering can be used to label location data by grouping similar locations to-
gether based on their attributes. This can then be used to infer labels for each
cluster. Krumm et al.[6] describe a system called Placer which uses clustering
to identify locations from GPS data and then uses the information from each
visit to the location, along with other features like temporal, demographic,
and nearby businesses, to infer the most likely label for each location.
However, Krumm et al.[6] highlights several issues with this approach, some
which overlaps with the limitations of VGI:
• Multiple labels for the same location: As described earlier in this
section, the authors mention how a location might have different labels
for different individuals. For example, a school could be a workplace for
==PAGE:14==
8
Literature Review
teachers and a school for students.
• Time of day variation: A location’s function can change depending
on the time of day.
• GPS warm-up issues: Data collection issues can lead to inaccurate
data for some visits, making label inference difficult.
Another issue with clustering is highlighted by Araújo et al.[9]. Here the
issue of lack of inherent meaning in clusters is discussed. While clustering
can group locations, it does not inherently provide labels to describe those
clusters. This requires additional work to interpret the clusters and identify
meaningful labels. The document describes the labeling problem as: Given
a set of clusters, the goal is to present a set of labels that can express the
associated cluster. This means that the clustering process itself does not offer
any direct interpretation of what the clusters represent. Additional work is
needed to analyze the characteristics of each cluster and assign meaningful
labels. This can be a complex process, as clusters might contain diverse ele-
ments with overlapping features. The document focuses on automatic cluster
labeling, a technique to identify the characteristics of each cluster formed in
unsupervised machine learning. It explores the application of the Automated
Labeling Method (ALM) in conjunction with the DAMICORE clustering al-
gorithm to label clusters based on their most relevant attributes and their
respective value ranges. This approach is particularly relevant for labeling
location data as it can identify specific characteristics of geographic clusters,
potentially revealing insights into spatial patterns, population demographics,
or environmental factors. Araújo et al.[9].
2.4
Levering External Datasets With Machine Learning
Hagenauer et al.[3] proposes a framework for predicting urban areas in Europe
that are currently not mapped or only partially mapped in OpenStreetMap
using a machine learning approach. This method leverages external datasets
like CORINE (coordination of information on the environment) to address
==PAGE:15==
2.4 Levering External Datasets With Machine Learning
9
missing geospatial data. Specifically, the authors use a combination of artifi-
cial neural networks and genetic algorithms to build a model that estimates
missing urban areas based on existing OpenStreetMap data and informa-
tion from the CORINE land cover data. This model takes advantage of the
detailed spatial information provided by CORINE land use to improve the
accuracy of urban area predictions in areas where OpenStreetMap data is
sparse or incomplete. The paper highlights the importance of data prepara-
tion, variable selection, model building, and sensitivity analysis for achieving
accurate predictions. The process involves deriving relevant attributes from
both OpenStreetMap and CORINE datasets and using them to train the
model. The study highlights that this methodology can be particularly use-
ful for improving the completeness of OpenStreetMap data and enhancing
its fitness for use in various applications such as planning tasks and Next
Location Prediction.
Bill et al.[8] also mention the use of CORINE data as input for machine
learning models that can be trained to identify patterns and predict land cover
types in areas where data is lacking. These models can then be applied to
label unknown locations, contributing to the creation of more comprehensive
and accurate geospatial datasets.
The paper "AutoGeoLabel: Automated Label Generation for Geospatial Ma-
chine Learning" [1] addresses the challenge of acquiring and labeling large
geospatial datasets, particularly remote sensing data, which is often time-
consuming and costly.
This process is crucial for tasks such as land use
classification and object detection. The proposed framework, AutoGeoLa-
bel, utilizes statistical features from raw, unlabeled geospatial data, focusing
on LiDAR measurements that provide a 3D point cloud of the Earth’s sur-
face.
By analyzing features like density, height, and elevation of LiDAR
points, AutoGeoLabel generates labels for land cover classes such as vegeta-
tion, buildings, and roads. It employs "weak supervision," using simple sta-
tistical methods to create potentially noisy labels, and leverages combinations
of statistical features to distinguish between different classes. Applications
of AutoGeoLabel include estimating carbon sequestration in urban forests
==PAGE:16==
10
Literature Review
and aiding disaster response by quickly labeling flood-affected areas. This
demonstrates its potential for environmental analysis and emergency scenar-
ios. Overall, AutoGeoLabel aims to leverage abundant geospatial data for
automated label generation, reducing the need for manual annotation and
accelerating machine learning adoption in geospatial applications.
In summation, external datasets like CORINE can be used to label geographic
data, particularly for large-scale analysis and providing a general overview.
It can be leveraged for broad thematic classification and as a base layer for
further analysis. However, for more detailed analysis and labeling of specific
features, like urban areas, data sets with higher spatial resolution are recom-
mended. Hagenauer et al.[3] also recognizes that the Global Monitoring for
Environment and Security Urban Atlas (GMESUA) data, is a more suitable
option for their task due to its higher spatial resolution and detailed urban
land-use categories. The Global Human Settlement Layer (GHSL) project
[10], provides similar geospatial data in a variety of resolutions and is de-
scribed in Chapter 3.2. It produces global spatial information derived from
satellite data, describing the human presence on the planet, based on mainly
two quantitative factors: the spatial density of built-up structures and the
spatial density of resident people.
2.5
A Framework for Geographic Data Mining
A challenge when levering large geospatial datasets is the general approach to
"mine" the large amounts of data (often required for labeling tasks), which
Harvey[7] refers to as the knowledge discovery process.
He describes the
knowledge discovery process as a multi-step approach for extracting valuable
information and knowledge from large datasets. Data mining is one crucial
step within this broader process. It involves the application of techniques to
distill data into information or facts that are implied by the data.
The knowledge discovery process involves several key steps:
==PAGE:17==
2.6 Concluding Remarks
11
• Background: This stage involves developing a deep understanding of the
application domain, often referred to as background knowledge.
• Data Pre-processing: This step focuses on preparing the data for analysis
by performing data selection, cleaning, and reduction.
• Data Mining: This step involves selecting a data mining task (e.g., clas-
sification, clustering, association rule mining) and applying appropriate
techniques to discover patterns within the data.
• Knowledge Construction: Finally, the mined patterns are interpreted,
often through visualization, and consolidated into meaningful knowledge.
• The knowledge discovery process is not necessarily linear, but rather
iterative, allowing for re-sequencing and revisiting steps based on the
information uncovered.
Harvey[7] therefore provides a valuable overall approach that is directly ap-
plicable to the process of labeling large geospatial datasets.
2.6
Concluding Remarks
In conclusion, labeling of geospatial data is crucial for tasks like Next Loca-
tion Prediction, improving predictive accuracy by narrowing the search space
for actual locations, as noted in Møllgard et al.[4] and Krumm et al.[6]. Here,
Volunteered Geographic Information like OpenStreetMap can provide valu-
able labeled data but face quality and completeness issues due to diverse
contributor bases and classification ambiguity [2], [3]). Also, clustering tech-
niques can infer labels by grouping similar locations, yet they struggle with
interpretability and multiple labels for single locations [6], [9].
Additionally, external datasets like CORINE and the Global Human Settle-
ment Layer improve labeling accuracy and completeness, offering detailed
spatial information to predict land cover types and urban areas [3], [8]. As a
structured and iterative approach, the knowledge discovery process helps to
==PAGE:18==
12
Literature Review
manage and analyze large geospatial datasets, ensuring efficient and accurate
labeling [7].
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Datasets
3.1
Swedish Location Data
This work centers around a dataset used in the working paper (as of July 2024)
"Next Semantic Prediction" by Møllgaard et al. [4]. Here, location data for
142 unique locations is attached semantic information extracted from Open-
StreetMap. The data was originally collected globally by a smartphone and
electronics company from 2015 up to 2019 and consists of locations visited
by 7.1 million individuals. The work uses a subset of the data covering Swe-
den, for which the global dataset has been reduced to 5.1 million stops across
14,000 users. User data is omitted from this work, as I instead focus on the
unique locations in the dataset. Throughout this work, the subset containing
unique locations in Sweden will be referred to as the SE dataset. All data
analysis is carried out in accordance with the EU’s General Data Protection
Regulation 2016/679 (GDPR).
The SE dataset consists of 6 columns and 5,450,375 rows. The columns are:
1. unique_loc: A unique id for the location.
2. lat: The latitudinal coordinate for the location.
3. lon: The longitudinal coordinate for the location.
4. value: A semantic attribute describing the type of location. Contains 5
different labels.
5. category: A second attribute describing the type of location. Contains
29 different labels.
6. key: A third semantic attribute describing the type of location. Con-
tains 727 different labels.
==PAGE:20==
14
Datasets
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1: (a) The distribution of locations for each of the five labels in the value attribute.
amenity is the largest class with over 1.5 million locations, closely followed by
landuse, whereas tourism is the smallest class with 217,518 locations. (b) The
fraction and counts of labeled and unlabeled locations. 83.2% of locations have
been labeled with semantics given by their value, category, and key. 16.8% of
the locations have no attached semantics.
Throughout this work, I emphasize the value attribute. This attribute con-
tains the 5 labels, amenity, landuse, shop, leisure and tourism. It is an overall
descriptor of the location and the most general of the three semantic attribute
columns, evident by its small number of classes. In Figure 3.1a, the distri-
bution of the locations in terms of the value that they are associated with is
plotted. As seen in the plot, amenity is the largest class with 1.535 million
locations, followed by landuse with 1.412 million, shop with 945,248, leisure
with 424,523 and lastly tourism containing 217,518 locations. In total, 4.53
million locations are labeled with a value class. As the total dataset contains
5.4 million locations, this therefore means that 915,411 locations have not
been assigned a value label. If a location has not been assigned a label for
value, neither has it been assigned any of the labels from the attributes cate-
gory and key. These locations without any semantic descriptors are through-
out E. Møllgaard, Peter et al.’s work reffered to as ’unknown’ locations. In
this work, I will use the words ’unknown’ and ’unlabeled’ interchangeably. In
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Swedish Location Data
15
Figure 3.1b the fraction of labeled and unlabeled locations is shown.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2: (a) Choropleth map of Sweden and its administrative regions with the color
of a region corresponding to the ratio of unlabeled locations (out of total lo-
cations for the region). Over 30% of locations are unlabeled in some larger
northern regions, while southern regions tend to exhibit better data coverage.
(b) Correlation matrix for the Swedish administrative region’s geographic and
demographic profiles [11][12] and the SE data coverage. There is clear corre-
lation between the area size of the regions, the latitudinal placement of their
centers and the unlabeled ratio. Northern regions therefore tend to have worse
data coverage. A region’s population and population density show negative
correlation with the ratio of unlabeled locations, indicating how the coverage
of the SE data is better in highly populated areas.
A general overview of how the coverage of the SE data geographically can
be seen in Figure 3.2a. Here, coverage is defined as the ratio of unlabeled
locations to total locations, and is depicted for each administrative region in
Sweden. Interestingly, some regions show a much higher fraction of unlabeled
data points, with over 30% of locations being unlabeled. Other regions, like
Skåne and Stockholm have a much lower fraction of unlabeled locations. As
Skåne and Stockholm have some of Sweden’s largest cities and high population
densities [12], the plot suggests how the SE data coverage may be correlated
==PAGE:22==
16
Datasets
with both geographical location and the demographic profile of that location.
Figure 3.3: A closer look at the unlabeled and labeled locations in the city center of Stock-
holm. The map illustrates how data coverage is greater in highly urbanised
areas. Most unlabeled locations tend to be located in more remote rural areas.
The plot is created from a smaller sample of the SE data for enhanced visual-
ization.
Figure 3.2b investigates this further, depicting demographic data for the
Swedish administrative regions, their geographical positions given by the lati-
tudinal and longitudinal of the region and how they correlate with the ratio of
unlabeled locations. The correlation matrix shows how the ratio of unlabeled
locations correlates negatively with population size and density of different
regions, confirming the initial assumptions made from Figure 3.2a. As popu-
lation density is high in cities and lower in rural areas, the urbanisation of a
location likely also correlates with data coverage.
This is confirmed in Figure 3.3, where the labeled and unlabeled locations are
visualized in the highly urbanised city of Stockholm. In the figure, it is clear
how there are few unlabeled locations, especially in the innermost part of the
city. A similar trend can be found in other cities, where coverage seems to
==PAGE:23==
3.2 The Global Human Settlement Layer
17
increase the larger the city gets.
This initial exploration of the SE data suggests that using demographic, geo-
graphic and urban data to profile unknown locations, may be a useful method
to gain contextual information about an unknown location that has not been
semantically labelled. In the following section I will describe data from the
Global Human Settlement Layer project, which can provide such context.
3.2
The Global Human Settlement Layer
The second dataset used in this work is produced by The Global Human
Settlement Layer (GHSL or GHS) project. The GHSL project produces spa-
tial information on a global scale, about the human presence on the planet
over time. This is produced in the form of built-up maps, population density
maps and settlement maps. The data is generated using spatial data mining
technologies on global archives of fine-scale satellite imagery, census data and
Volunteered Geographic Information. The project is supported by the Joint
Research Center and the DG for Regional and Urban Policy of the European
Commission, together with the international partnership GEO Human Planet
Initiative [10].
All GHSL datasets are available for open and free download at the GHSL
website [13]. The data is organized in 12 epochs: from 1975 to 2030 in equal
time intervals of 5 years.
15 different data products are available, which
can be downloaded for different epochs, resolutions and coordinate systems,
although not all combinations are available. For the purpose of this work
I will make use of 5 different data products.
These are: built-up surface
(GHS-BUILT-S), built-up height (GHS-BUILT-H), built-up volume (GHS-
BUILT-V), population grid (GHS-POP) and land fraction per pixel derived
from Sentinel2 data composite and OpenStreetMap (GHS-LAND). I make
use of these five products as they are all available in the same epoch and
resolution combination. All products are downloaded as geo-spatial raster
datasets in the World Mollwide (EPSG:54009) coordinate system. The rasters
are downloaded as individual tiles represented by rows and columns of a grid
==PAGE:24==
18
Datasets
covering the globe. In this work I use tile R2C19, R2C20, R3C19 and R3C20.
3.2.1
GHS-BUILT
The GHS-BUILT-S dataset depicts the distribution of built-up surfaces es-
timates between 1975 and 2030 in 5 year intervals. It is made by spatial-
temporal interpolation of five observed collections of multiple-sensor, multiple-
platform satellite images. In this work I use the 10x10m resolution, 2018
epoch which is supported by a Sentinel-2 satellite image composite, along
with the 100x100m resolution, 2020 epoch. The 2-year epoch difference is
due to differences in availability.
A built-up surface is defined as the gross surface (including wall-thickness)
bounded by a building wall perimeter with a spatial generalization that
matches a 1:10K topographic map specification, informally known as the
"building footprint". The implicit GHSL definition of a building is: "any
roofed structure erected above ground for any use". GHS-BUILT-S covers
two domains: the residential domain (RES) and the non-residential domain
(NRES). The RES domain is defined as the built-up surface dedicated to
residential use, defined as "Areas used predominantly for housing of people"
while NRES is defined as "any built-up surface not included in the RES class"
[14][15]. Both domains are used in this work to accommodate the use-case
of labeling unknowns, as visited locations in the SE dataset can be found in
both domains. The BUILT-S values for the 10m resolution data is expressed
as 8bit integers and represent the amount of square metres of built-up sur-
face in the cell, ranging from 0-100 with 255 corresponding to no data for
the cell. The 100m resolution data is represented similarly, but expressed
as 16bit integers and ranges from 0-10.000 with "NoData" indicated by the
value 65535.
The GHS-BUILT-H dataset depicts the distribution of building heights and
is only available in 100m resolution referenced to the year 2018.
The in-
put data used to predict building heights in GHS-BUILT-H, are the ALOS
Global Digital Surface Model "ALOS World 3D - 30m (AW3D30) [16], the
==PAGE:25==
3.2 The Global Human Settlement Layer
19
NASA Shuttle Radar TopographicMission Data - 30m (SRTM30) [17] and
the Sentinel-2 global pixel based image composite for the period 2017 to
2018. A single 100x100m cell captures the average gross building height. The
GHS-BUILT-V uses the same input data as GHS-BUILT-H and depicts the
distribution of built-up space above ground, expressed in cubic meters. It is
an aggregate data measurement of BUILT-S and BUILT-H as defined by:
Built-up Volume = Built-up Surface ∗Built-up Height
The 100m resolution BUILT-H data values are expressed as decimals report-
ing the amount of built cubic meters per surface unit in the cell [18]. The
100m resolution BUILT-V data values are expressed as 32bit integers and
represent the amount of cubic metres of built-up volume in the cell, ranging
from 0 to infinity where the value 4294967295 indicates "NoData" for the cell
[19].
Figure 3.4: An image from Copernicus EMS, illustrating an example use of the GHS-POP
Epoch 2020 dataset. The visualization shows the population density in France
expressed vertically from low to high.
==PAGE:26==
20
Datasets
3.2.2
GHS-POP
The GHS-POP spatial raster dataset depicts the distribution of human pop-
ulation expressed as the number of people per cell. Residential population
estimates are derived in 5 year intervals from the raw global census data har-
monized by CIESIN for the Gridded Population of the World, version 4.11
[20] and disaggregated from census on administrative units to grid cells, in-
formed by the distribution, classification and volume of built-up as mapped
in the GHSL global layers for the corresponding epochs. The method of dis-
aggregation is described by Freire et al. 2016 [21][22]. In this work I use the
2020 epoch in 100m resolution. The GHS-POP data values are expressed as
decimals and represent the absolute number of inhabitants of the cell, where
"NoData" is indicated by the value -200.
3.2.3
GHS-LAND
The GHS-LAND dataset depicts the distribution of the land surfaces esti-
mated by joint assessment of satellite image data and Open Street map data
[23]. The main satellite data used as input data is created from the Sentinel-2
data. The approach for the production of this GHS layer is quite intricate and
besides the scope of this work. For further information on the dataset and its
production, I refer to the GHSL Data Package 2022 dataset documentation
[5]. I make use of both the 10m and 100m resolutions for the 2018 epoch in
this work. The distribution of the land surface values ranges from 1:100 for
the 10m resolution data and 1:10.000 for the 100m resolution data.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4
Methods
In the following chapter, I will initially describe the overall methodology
framework used in this research, with the goal of providing additional insight
into unlabeled locations in Sweden, that have not been assigned semantic
context through OpenStreetMap. This methodology follows the knowledge
discovery process as a structured framework [7]. Thereafter, I will cover the
exact methods and tools that are used to validate the GHS data and label
the unknown locations.
4.1
Methodology Overview
To tackle the problem of locations marked as unknown, I apply a structured
approach using the knowledge discovery process. This follows four main steps
which are iterative by design [7] as discussed in Chapter 2.5. Up until this
point, the Background step has mostly been conducted in Chapter 2 and 3,
but extends slightly throughout this chapter. Secondly, I apply Data Pre-
processing to the SE dataset and GHS raster data. In the Data Mining
step, I select two techniques that I apply to the data. The first technique
aims to validate the GHS data as a useful data source for labeling unknown
locations in the SE dataset.
The second technique, once validated, then
utilises the GHS data as a means to label the unknown locations. The two
techniques and their scopes are as follows:
1. Train Random Forest Classifiers on the GHS attributes and use it to
predict the most high-level semantic in the SE data: value.
I train
two models, Model 1 and Model 2 using 100m and 10m resolution data
respectively. Model 2 uses the only available GHS attributes for 10m res-
olution BUILT-S and LAND. Model 1 is trained on all labeled locations
in the SE dataset, while Model 2 is trained on a subset for Stockholm
==PAGE:28==
22
Methods
County, due to the high computational costs imposed by the high reso-
lution.
2. Train a K-Means clustering model on the locations and their GHS at-
tributes and use it to label the unknown locations.
This creates an
additional feature to be used in Next Location Prediction, that provides
the unknown locations with context.
Lastly, in Knowledge Construction I validate, analyse and discuss the
findings made using the two techniques and address their strengths and lim-
itations. This step is largely covered in Chapter 5 and 6.
4.2
Data Pre-processing
The goal of data pre-processing is to retrieve GHS values for each location in
the SE dataset, and thereby aggregate the two datasets together. However,
before conducting this join, the GHS rasters must be clipped and merged.
An overview of the steps involved in this initial pre-processing can be seen in
Table 4.1
4.2.1
GHS Pre-processing
As I described in Section 3, the GHS rasters are downloaded as tiles, each
covering separate areas. For Sweden specifically, four tiles are needed for each
of the five GHS value, corresponding to a total of 20 rasters. Each tile covers
some fraction of Sweden’s total area, so that when merged, all of Sweden is
covered. However each tile covers area beyond Sweden’s borders, and includes
data from nearby countries. To lessen the computational load of merging the
tiles, I clip each tile to cover only the area of Sweden, using a shapefile
for Sweden in .json format. As the GHS rasters are downloaded in World
Mollweide (EPSG:54009) projection format, I first convert the coordinate
reference system of the Sweden shapefile to match the rasters.
The four
rasters are each clipped to all of Sweden for the 100m GHS data, while the
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Data Pre-processing
23
10m GHS data is clipped to Stockholm County. After clipping, each raster
tile only covers the area of Sweden (or Stockholm), while the rest of the raster
is discarded.
#
Pre-Processing Steps
1.
Clip GHS rasters to shape of Sweden
2.
Merge GHS rasters into one raster for each GHS attribute
3.
Convert rasters into pandas DataFrames
4.
Merge all GHS attributes into one DataFrame containing all attributes
5.
Aggregate GHS data and SE data
Table 4.1: Overview of the pre-processing steps involved in aggregating the GHS data with
the SE data.
After clipping the four rasters, I merge them together into one raster that
covers Sweden. The original 20 rasters are now reduced to five, as each GHS
raster that previously consisted of four tiles is now merged to one. What
is left is a raster covering Sweden for the GHS datasets BUILT-S, BUILT-
H, BUILT-V, LAND and POP, which from now on will refer to as Surface,
Height, Volume, Land and Population.
In Figure 4.1, the Land raster is
visualized after being clipped and merged. Note, that no merging is needed
for the 10m resolution data, as Stockholm County is found within one tile.
==PAGE:30==
24
Methods
Figure 4.1: Raster visualization of the GHS-LAND (Land) raster after all four GHS-Land
tiles have been clipped to cover only the area of Sweden and successively merged
together to form one raster file. The Value represents the land fraction per pixel
as made up by each combination of Column and Row. Values at 6000 indicate
no data.
Next, I convert each of the rasters containing a distinct GHS value to a pan-
das DataFrame.This utilises the rasterio.transform.xy function to transform
each pixel coordinate given by its mosaic column and row into geographical
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Data Pre-processing
25
coordinates. As the rasters are converted to dataframes, I merge them into
one using the pandas.merge function, keeping the column and row, x and y
coordinates and the five GHS values for each xy pair. The preprocessed GHS
dataframe for the 100x100m resolution data now contains all five GHS val-
ues, Surface, Height, Volume, Land and Population and covers all of Sweden,
while the 10x10m resolution dataframe contains Surface and Land and covers
Stockholm County.
Figure 4.2: Visualization of the GHS-BUILT-S (Surface) data after clipping to Stockholm
County.
The image depicts the built-up surface for Stockholm County in
10x10m resolution. It can clearly be seen how the city of Stockholm has the
highest built-up surface values, while rural areas of the county are generally
lower. The scale of the Surface value is cut off at 60 for enhanced visualization.
==PAGE:32==
26
Methods
4.2.2
Spatial Joining the GHS DataFrame with the SE data
Lastly, I aggegate GHS dataframewith the SE data through spatially joining
the two dataframes based on proximity. This transfers GHS attributes to
each location in the GHS data. An overview of this process is seen in Figure
4.3.
First, I convert both dataframes to GeoDataFrame format using the
Python package geopandas and align their coordinate reference systems to
ESRI:54009 to prepare them for the join. I then make use of a kd-tree using
the scipy library and its spatial.cKDTree algorithm.
I create a cKDTree using the coordinates from the GHS dataframe and query
for the nearest neighbor for each point/location in the SE data. Here I set
a maximum allowable distance threshold for when a point can no longer be
considered as a neighbour. This threshold is set according to the center of
the GHS square to the farthest corner of the square, and thus is found by
calculating the diagonal distance of the 100x100m GHS square and dividing
by 2.
For a 100m square this gives a distance threshold of
√
1002+1002
2
=
70.71 meters. For the 10x10m data I set the threshold accordingly with a
value of 7.071.
Note that this in theory can allow a point to fall within
multiple squares, as it allows for points not located in corners but outside the
square radius of 50m (or 5m). However, the kd-tree prioritises the nearest
neighbours, so that a point always falls within the square whose center it lies
the closest to. The output of the spatial join is an aggregated dataframe,
where each SE location now possesses the corresponding GHS values for its
location.
4.3
Classifying locations based on Global Human Set-
tlement data
As explained in Section 3 (Datasets), the most high level semantic descriptor
of a labeled location is given by its ’value’, consisting of five classes; amenity,
landuse, leisure, shop and tourism. By training a classifier on labeled data,
the idea is to use the GHS features for a given location to predict its value.
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Classifying locations based on Global Human Settlement data
27
Figure 4.3: An overview of the spatial join processing and its inputs (red), processing
(yellow) and output (green). Once spatially joined, the aggregated dataframe
is retrieved which can be used for data mining.
As we are dealing with five classes of value, this presents a multi-class classi-
fication problem [24].
4.3.1
Random Forest Classifier
To investigate whether the GHS data is useful for labeling unknown locations,
I utilise a Random Forest Classifier (RFC). Random Forest Classifiers support
multi-class classification problems and can handle high-dimensional feature
spaces [25]. Therefore, I use the package ensemble.RandomForestClassifier
from the Python machine learning library scikit-learn, to predict the value
class labels.
4.3.1.1
Feature Engineering
From the datasets described in Section 3, I derive the GHS features for the
RFC. For Model 1 trained on the full SE dataset, using 100m resolution data,
these are Surface, Population, Land, Volume and Height. For Model 2 trained
on the Stockholm County subset, using 10m resolution data, these are Surface
and Land.
For tree-based models like the RFC, it is not necessary to normalize or scale
the features, as the model is invariant to the scale of the features. However,
==PAGE:34==
28
Methods
for the sake of later clustering and further research using alternate models,
the features are normalized using scikit-learns MinMaxScaler to scale them
within a range from 0 to 1.
The training data is balanced, so that each class of the target variable ’value’
occurs a similar amount of times in training. To do this, I derive the number
of times that the least frequent class occurs in the dataset, and sample an
equal amount from the other classes. For Model 1, the smallest class size is
217299, and for the Model 2 it is 58569, which for both models is the tourism
class.
4.3.1.2
Hyper-parameter tuning
With regards to hyper-parameters it should first be noted, that the aim of
the RFC is not necessarily to perform as good predictions on the target vari-
able (value) as possible, but rather to validate whether the GHS features
provide meaningful information about the SE locations. As this is the case,
a further increase in performance above a certain threshold is trivial. Thus,
the importance of finding the absolute best hyperparameters is, to an extent,
de-emphasized. However, I do want to ensure that the RFC hyperparame-
ters perform well enough to accomomdate the original scope of validaiting
the GHS features and I therefore perform a Randomized Grid Search to con-
sider. Here, multiple parameter combinations are tested, while I avoid the
high computational cost required by a full exhaustive grid search. Instead,
the randomized grid search samples parameters from a either a distribution
of possible values or a list of discrete choices.
For the Randomized Grid Search I use the scikit-learn RandomizedSearchCV
library to consider different parameter combinations from a grid of parameters
that I define. The grid search is performed for both Model 1 and 2, where the
best fit for each have identical parameters. The grid search values and the
resulting best values found can be seen in table 4.2. Note that the number of
estimators n_estimators, the minimum number of samples required to split
an internal node min_samples_split and the minimum number of samples
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Classifying locations based on Global Human Settlement data
29
required to be at a leaf node min_samples_leaf are all randomly sampled
from a distribution of numbers between the lowest and highest value declared.
For further documentation of the RandomizedSearchCV library, I refer to the
scikit-learn documentation page [26].
Parameter
Grid Search Values
Best Value Found
n_estimators
{100, 200}
117
max_depth
{None, 10, 20, 30}
30
min_samples_split
{2, 20}
4
min_samples_leaf
{1, 20}
1
max_features
{‘auto‘, ‘sqrt‘, ‘log2‘}
’sqrt’
bootstrap
{True, False}
True
class_weight
{None, ‘balanced‘}
None
Table 4.2: Parameter Grid for the Randomized Grid Search and the best values found
according to F1-score.
4.3.1.3
Training, Testing and Validation splits
When deciding how to validate a machine learning model there are several
things to factor.
In areas like medicine, the choice of validation method
becomes critical, as sample sizes are often relatively small and predictions are
required to be highly reliable for single instances [27]. Therefore, methods
such as k-fold cross validation and more rigorous validation techniques are
often used, instead of the more traditional single split. However, the SE data
contains millions of locations and classifications of single instances are not
of great concern. This is the case, as the purpose of classifying locations
is to validate the GHS data for use in clustering, and thus the individual
classifications will not be used for anything beyond this scope. I therefore
follow a simple and pragmatic approach to validation, using an 80/20 train-
test split - a common approach for multi-class classification problems [28].
Additionally, as there is little hyperparameter tuning conducted besides the
grid search, the need for an additional validation set becomes redundant. The
large size of the dataset will ensure that both the training and validation set
capture much, if not all of the variance in the data, likely also ensuring that
bias becomes manageable [29]. After balancing, the training size is 869.196,
==PAGE:36==
30
Methods
while the test set consists of 217.299 data points for Model 1, classifying
locations all across Sweden. For Model 2, using locations from Stockholm
County, the train set consists of 234.276 instances and the test set 58.569.
4.3.1.4
Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the classifier, I use a combination of methods.
To assess the
general performance of the model, I use Precision, Recall and F1 score. Pre-
cision is the fraction of instances that are correctly classified as belonging to
a certain class out of all instances that are assigned to that class [30]:
Precision =
True Positives
True Positives + False Positives
Recall deals instead with the fraction of instances that are correctly classified
as belonging to a certain class, out of all the instances that should have been
assigned to the class:
Recall =
True Positives
True Positives + False Negatives
The F1 score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, and thus extreme
values of either are penalized:
F1 Score = 2 ∗Precision ∗Recall
Precision + Recall
The three evaluation metrics are retrieved using scikit-learn’s classification
report. However, relying on single metrics does not provide the full picture,
as a model can have decent recall, precision and F1 scores for the majority of
classes, but may still struggle with one or two specific classes. I therefore also
use the confusion matrix from scikit learn to compare the true labels with
the predicted labels for each combination of classes.
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Labeling Locations with Clustering
31
4.3.1.5
Shapley Values
For additional performance evaluation, and to explore how the GHS features
impact the model predictions, I make use of the Shapley Additive Explana-
tions (SHAP) methodology. SHAP is a method from coalitional game theory
that, in the context of classification, aims to reveal how features contribute
to a machine learning models predictions. SHAP values therefore represent
estimates of feature importance, more specifically the magnitude of the con-
tribution and the direction; either positive or negative [31]. The method will
therefore provides insight into how the GHS features effect the predictions
of the different ’value’ classes. Specifically, the Shapley value explains the
importance of a feature i according to Equation 4.1.
ϕi =
1
|N|!
X
S⊆N\{i}
|S|!(|N| −|S| −1)![f(S ∪{i}) −f(S)]
(4.1)
Where, f(S) is the model output explained by the set of features S, and
N is the full set of all features.
The SHAP value of feature i (ϕi) (the
final contribution), is given by the average of all its contributions across all
possible permutations of a set of features. The SHAP value for feature value
i can be interpreted as follows: the value of the i-th feature contributed
ϕi to the prediction of the particular instance, as compared to the average
prediction for the dataset [32]. A downside of using SHAP values are their
large computational requirements. Therefore, for practical reasons, I calculate
SHAP values for a subset sampled from the test set. This subset consists of
500 predictions. To calculate and plot the SHAP values for the model features,
I make use of the shap python package [33]. Further explanation of the plots
and their applications is discussed in Chapter 5.
4.4
Labeling Locations with Clustering
Supervised learning allows for the validation of the GHS data using the la-
beled locations in the SE data. However, classifying the unknown locations
==PAGE:38==
32
Methods
requires a different approach, as no semantic labels are available for these
locations. Unsupervised Learning is a machine learning approach that deals
with pattern detection in datasets with unlabeled or unstructured data-points
[34]. A simple five-class label like the SE data’s value attribute can provide
useful context when predicting the location a user is most likely to visit next.
Levering unsupervised learning, more specifically clustering, I aim to catego-
rize the unknown locations using their GHS attributes and provide contextual
insight into a user’s last visited location, specifically where the SE dataset
previously has been inadequate.
There are multiple options for clustering data. For the purpose of this work,
I select K-means clustering due to its computational efficiency when handling
large datasets [34], as is the case with the SE data. The K-means clustering
algorithm divides datapoints into groups based on their similarity, which is
calculated using Euclidean distance. The goal is then maximize the expected
similarity between the values of the GHS attributes and the cluster centroids
associated with them [35]. A notable disadvantage of K-means, is that it is
highly sensitive to size [34], and it is therefore good practise to scale the data
using normalization or standardization and remove any outliers which an dis-
proportionately affect the positioning of cluster centroids. Additionally, the
number of clusters, denoted k, must be determined upfront. The input, out-
put and logic of the K-means algorithm can be described using the following
pseudo code [36]:
4.4.1
K-Means Pre-Processing
Due to K-means high sensitivity to outliers, I first remove any outliers that
may lead to sub optimal clustering. To remove outliers, I calculate the z-
score for each data point and consider points with a z-score greater than 3 to
be outliers. Following outlier removal, the GHS attributes are standardized
using sci-kit learn’s, preprocessing.MinMaxScaler as used previously with the
RFC. The resulting GHS distributions after outlier removal and MinMax
standardization can be seen in Figure 4.4.
==PAGE:39==
4.4 Labeling Locations with Clustering
33
Input:
• Set of n data items: D = {d1, d2, . . . , dn}
• Number of desired clusters: k
Output:
• A set of k clusters.
Steps:
1. Arbitrarily choose k data items from D as ini-
tial centroids.
2. Repeat
(a) Assign each item di to the cluster which
has the closest centroid;
(b) Calculate new mean for each cluster;
Until convergence criteria is met.
Table 4.3: Pseudocode of the K-means Clustering Algorithm
4.4.2
Model Parameters
To perform the K-means, I use scikit-learn’s cluster.KMeans class. For the
inital step of determining k, I set the init variable to k-means++ - a variation
of K-Means used to seed the initial cluster centroids, where random starting
centers with specific probabilities are chose, with the scope of avoiding k-
means tendency to provide bad placement of starting centers [37]. I set the
n_init parameter to 10, running 10 different centroid seeds to find the most
optimal one for each iteration. I set the max_iter parameter to 100, to declare
the maximum number of iterations of the K-means algorithm for a single run.
4.4.3
Selecting the Amount of Clusters
Selecting the number of clusters k is crucial in the scope of this work. The
amount of clusters produced, will effectively be the amount of classes I seg-
regate the ’Unknown’ locations into. Thus, careful selection of clusters is not
a trivial matter, as I need to find balance between explaining the geo-spatial
==PAGE:40==
34
Methods
Figure 4.4: Violin plot of the scaled value distribution for each of the GHS categories.
Surface, Height, Population and Volume all have right skewed distributions,
whereas Land has a left skewed distribution following a clear power-law pattern.
However, the skewness of each value distribution has become less pronounced
after outlier removal. The K-means clustering is performed on the standardized
and cleaned data visualized in the plot, to prevent outliers from disproportion-
ately effecting the positioning of cluster centroids.
variance in the GHS data, while not overfitting with an excess amount of
classes that will generate noise in future Next Location Prediction.
4.4.3.1
Elbow Method
As the first step in determining the number of clusters, I make use of the
Elbow Method. This method looks at the inertia as a function of the number
of clusters. Inertia measures how well a dataset is clustered by K-means,
and is calculated according to Equation 4.2. This relationship between k and
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Labeling Locations with Clustering
35
the amount of inertia can then be plotted, and the number of clusters where
the most apparent ’breaking point’ of the curve occurs is selected, hence the
"elbow criterion", which implies that a good clustering model is one with low
inertia in conjunction with a low number of clusters [38]. Thus, the K-means
algorithm must be run iteratively for k=1 and increasing each time by 1.
For the purpose of this work, I select a maximum k of 7, as the variance
explained beyond that will be marginal. Additionally, the ’value’ attribute,
used to validate the GHS data with the RFC, only has 5 classes. I therefore
consider this amount of classes as part of the scope for the clustering part of
this work, and k should therefore not far exceed that.
Inertia =
n
X
i=1
min
µj∈C ∥xi −µj∥2
(4.2)
Where: n is the number of data points, xi is the i-th data point, µj is the
centroid of the j-th cluster, and C is the set of all centroids.
4.4.3.2
Silhouette Analysis
For additional decision support, I make use of a Silhouette analysis. The
Silhouette index is another method for evaluating clustering performance,
and measures how similar a data point is to its own cluster compared to
other clusters. The Silhouette width s(xi) is defined as [39]:
s(xi) =
b(xi) −a(xi)
max{a(xi), b(xi)},
(4.3)
where xi is an element in cluster πk, a(xi) is the cluster within-dissimilarity,
which is the average distance of xi to all other elements in the cluster πk, and
b(xi) = min{dl(xi)}, among all clusters l ̸= k.
where dl(xi) is the cluster between-similarity, which is the average distance
from xi to all points in cluster πl for l ̸= k. The Silhouette index for a cluster
==PAGE:42==
36
Methods
is then the average width s(xi) for all points in the cluster, whereas for the
entire clustering it is the average width s(xi) of all points in every cluster.
I distinguish between the individual, the cluster and the total score using
the terms "individual", "local" and "global" Silhouette score. The Silhouette
width can range between -1 and 1 as given by equation 4.3.
The closer
to -1, the greater xi is than b(xi), which indicates that within-dissimilarity is
greater than between-dissimilarity and thus many data-points have likely been
assigned to the wrong cluster. The opposite is true as the width approaches
1, and thus the likelihood that the point is clustered correctly increases.
I perform an initial inspection of the average Silhouette score for the entire
clustering with different values of k (global score), using sci-kit learns met-
rics.silhouette_score. Here, I compare cluster sizes for k ∈{2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7},
emitting 1 as the Silhouette Score is meaningless for k<2, as between-similarity
dl(xi) is non-existent. Due to the computational complexity of calculating Sil-
houette scores for the full dataset with over 5 million locations, I compute
Silhouette scores for a subset, sampling 100.000 datapoints.
I perform deeper inspection of Silhouette scores including the local perspective
with the clustering visualizer tool SilhouetteVisualizer from the Yellowbrick
library yellowbrick.cluster to view the global and local silhouette scores, while
displaying the amount of observations that fall into each cluster.
4.4.3.3
Moran’s Index
As the Elbow Method and Silhouette Scores simply evaluate K-Means ability
to cluster the GHS data, they do not provide insight into the clustering per-
formance from a geo-spatial perspective. Considering the scope of this work;
the spatial component that is the SE locations, this is an important perspec-
tive to include. I therefore use Moran’s Index, a statistical measure of spatial
auto correlation, as an additional geographical analysis and evaluation met-
ric for clustering performance. In essence, I use Moran’s I to detect patterns
of spatial autocorrelation in the clustering data, by combined analysis of a
locations cluster label and geographical coordinates. This can reveal whether
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Labeling Locations with Clustering
37
locations with similar cluster labels also cluster together in nearby locations,
or whether they are dispersed of randomly distributed across geographical
space. The index is calculated as follows [40]:
I = N
W ·
PN
i=1
PN
j=1 wij(xi −¯x)(xj −¯x)
PN
i=1(xi −¯x)2
Where:
• N is the total number of spatial units, indexed by i and j.
• xi is the observed value at location i.
• ¯x is the mean of x over all locations.
• wij represents the spatial weight between locations i and j.
• W is the sum of all spatial weights wij, calculated as W = PN
i=1
PN
j=1 wij.
A simplified overview of the steps in calculating Moran’s I can be described
using the following approach [40][41].:
To calculate Moran’s I for the clustered data, I use the Queen class from the
libpysal.weights library to retrieve the spatial weights matrix based on Queen
contiguity, which defines the neighbours as those who share a vertex, thus
how each data point relates to its neighbours [42]. Weights are standardized
by row, so that the sum of weights for each observation amounts to 1 and
thus the influence from each unit’s neighbours can be compared on a similar
scale, and is not skewed by the number of neighbours or the scale of the
weights. I use the Moran class from esda.moran to compute Moran’s I on the
clustered data. This calculates the auto correlation based on the similarity or
dissimilarity of neighbouring values relative to the overall mean, considering
the spatial weights.
==PAGE:44==
38
Methods
Input:
• Data:
Array
X
of
observed
values
(x1, x2, . . . , xN)
• Spatial weights: Matrix W defining spatial re-
lationships between data points
Output:
• Moran’s I statistic indicating the level of spa-
tial autocorrelation
• p-value assessing the significance of the ob-
served spatial pattern
Steps:
1. Calculate the mean of the data
2. Compute deviations from the mean for each
data point
3. Initialize the sum of weighted deviations prod-
ucts
4. Initialize the sum of squared deviations
5. Compute the total sum of all spatial weights
6. Calculate Moran’s I
Table 4.4: Pseudocode for Calculating Moran’s I
4.5
Summary of Methods
After pre-processing of the GHS data and aggregating with the SE data the
data, I first use it to validate the GHS data with two Random Forest Classifier
models and evaluate them using precision, recall, F1 along with the confusion
matrix and SHAP values. Thereafter, I proceed to clustering using the best
performing model and evaluate it using the Elbow Method, Silhouette score
and Moran’s I. In the following chapter, I will present the results of the RFC
and clustering, and later discuss the final approach to labeling the unknown
locations.
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
Results
5.1
Classifier
In the following section, I present the results of the RFC using GHS features
to predict the five value classes from the SE data; amenity, landuse, leisure,
shop and tourism. As described in Section 4, two models are used to test
different resolutions of the GHS rasters. A recap of the two models is given
in Table 5.1 below.
Model #
Resolution
Area coverage
GHS features
1
100x100m
Sweden
Surface, Land, Population, Volume, Height
2
10x10m
Stockholm County
Surface, Land
Table 5.1: The two classifier models and their respective resolutions, area coverage and
features.
5.1.1
Classifier Model 1
In Table 5.2 the resulting precision, recall and F1 scores for Model 1’s predic-
tions on the validation set are found. The RFC has the highest F1 score for
the class tourism of 0.82. As we recall from Chapter 3.1, tourism is the class
with the fewest instances, however after class-balancing the training data, the
RFC has good recognition of this class. It performs slightly worse on shop,
leisure and landuse with similarity in their respective F1 scores of 0.76, 0.76
and 0.75. The worst performance is seen on the amenity class with an F1
score of 0.64. This is the class with the most instances, however after bal-
ancing the RFC actually performs the worst on the class. The bias that an
overly represented class can introduce has therefore been avoided, however
the model seems to have difficulty with this class. With an F1 Macro average
of 0.75, the RFC is overall doing a decent job using the GHS attributes for
predicting the value. The combined profile of GHS attributes therefore does
==PAGE:46==
40
Results
seem to describe the geo-spatial intricacies of a given instance of the value
class quite well.
Class
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
amenity
0.71
0.58
0.64
landuse
0.79
0.72
0.75
leisure
0.71
0.82
0.76
shop
0.75
0.78
0.76
tourism
0.79
0.85
0.82
Macro average
0.75
0.75
0.75
Table 5.2: Precision, recall, and F1 scores for each class and the macro average for the
multi-class random forest classifier.
In Figure 5.1, the confusion matrix for Model 1 is seen. Here, the matrix
exhibits clear diagonal dominance, indicating that the RFC has correctly
classified a significant number of instances for each class.
However, upon
closer inspection there is some confusion evident among the classes, in par-
ticular between leisure and landuse and shop and amenity. Here, the model
misclassifies 6906 instances of landuse as being leisure and 6947 instances of
amenity as being shop. This is somewhat expected, as locations with the
leisure class are often more remote locations, such as playgrounds, parks,
golf courses, camping grounds etc. that do not exhibit a high degree of ur-
baness, similar to the landuse class. This would all indicate low values in all
five GHS features (except Land) and the model therefore occasionally con-
fuses the classes. In contrast, it is reasonable to assume that locations with
the value-class tourism are mostly present in highly urbanised areas. These
assumptions are confirmed by exploring an interactive plot of the locations la-
beled by color (due to GDPR regulations I can not provide the full interactive
plot). On the opposite, locations in the landuse class have a high likelihood
of being less urban and more remote. This dissimilarity is captured well by
the model, as the RFC rarely confuses the two, predicting landuse when the
class is tourism only 534 times.
In Figure 5.2, the feature importance given by the SHAP values are seen.
Here, the impacts of features on each class is accumulated for the full feature
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Classifier
41
Figure 5.1: Confusion Matrix for Model 1. The matrix shows diagonal dominance, indicat-
ing how the RFC has classified a significant number of instances correctly for
each class. The plot shows how the model tends to confuse leisure and landuse.
importance. It is apparent how the model overall used the Surface feature to
the largest extend, although Height, Population and Volume are also used to a
significant extend, whereas Land has the lowest feature importance. Overall,
the model seems to have made good use of each feature, with none having a
redundant impact on the predictions. Interestingly, there is no clear discrep-
ancies between how much each class uses the features, which provides further
explanation of the confusion seen in Figure 5.1. However, the difference in
feature use between landuse and tourism is apparent, especially for the Land
feature, further demonstrating how the model is good at distinguishing be-
tween the two. To better separate between the classes, the model would likely
benefit from additional features that can uniquely target the classes and thus
magnify the differences between them.
The summary plots for each class is seen in Figure 5.3. This plot allows us to
get an overview of how the SHAP values are distributed for each class. In the
==PAGE:48==
42
Results
Figure 5.2: Feature importance plot for the five GHS features Surface, Height, Population,
Volume and Land in Model 1, explained by the mean SHAP values for each.
The average impact of a feature is accumulated for each class. Notably, Surface
has been used the most with a mean SHAP value of 0.33, whereas Land has
been used to a lesser extend with a mean SHAP value of 0.14.
figure we see the combined feature importance and feature effects. Each point
in the plots represents the SHAP value for a feature and a prediction instance,
while the colouring represents the feature value from low to high. Points that
overlap are jittered vertically, and thus help identify the distribution of SHAP
values for each feature, which are arranged in order of importance, with the
most important feature at the top. As we recall from Chapter 4.3.1.5, the
SHAP value for a feature is magnitude of how much the feature contributed
to the prediction of a particular instance, compared to the average prediction
of the dataset [32].
For the landuse class, it is clear how higher values of the Surface feature
results in lower SHAP values, therefore negatively contributing to the pre-
diction of this class as when compared to the average. The model therefore
generally believes there is a reduced probability that landuse is the actual
class for higher values of the Surface feature. Surface and Height are con-
sistently the most used features for most classes, but for tourism, Population
nudges out Height. Here it is clear how low values of the Population fea-
ture reduces the probability of predicting the class. The same goes for shop,
which are typically found in the most urbanized areas, where low values of
Surface, Height and Volume tend to contribute negatively towards the predic-
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Classifier
43
tion probabilities. Land, which as we recall had a skewed distribution with a
long tail, is the least use feature for all classes, and the model may struggle to
make useful predictions due to its low variance [29]. This becomes apparent
as most instances are centered around the average prediction for the feature.
It is notable however, how low values of Land tend to increase the probability
of the tourism class, while reducing the probability of the classes shop and
leisure by quite a large magnitude for some instances.
Figure 5.3: Summary plots for each value class. The figure shows the distribution of SHAP
values for each class, along with combined feature importance and feature ef-
fects. Each point represents a prediction instance while its color represents the
feature value from low to high. Points that overlap are jittered vertically. In
example, high values of the Surface feature contribute negatively towards the
probability of the model predicting the landuse class.
To get a better sense of how the relationship between the features and the
class predictions, I plot the dependencies as seen In Figure 5.4. This plot
displays the marginal effect that a feature has on the models predictions and
can therefore help discover if the target class and a feature has a linear or
==PAGE:50==
44
Results
more complex relationship. Again, each dot represents an instance, where
the x-axis is the actual feature value and the y-axis the SHAP value for
that feature instance. Any potential interaction effects between the features
are modeled by the color chart. This is automatically selected by the shap
package. Thus, if any significant interaction effect is present, it will display
as a vertical pattern of coloring.
It is notable how the Surface feature tends to exhibit clear relationships with
the classes, perhaps with the exception of amenity.
As the feature value
increases, the feature SHAP value for leisure and shop increases as well,
indicating that the larger the value, the more positive the feature contributes
towards the models prediction.
For tourism there looks to be an inverse
relationship, and the larger the value of Surface gets, the less the feature
contributes to the predictions. For landuse we see a similar pattern, however
more of a logarithmic relationship than with tourism. There does not seem
to be any clear relationships between the remaining features and the classes,
except for some linearity explained by the Height feature.
In terms of interaction effects between the features, it is clear how Surface,
Volume and Height exhibit such effects. Between these there are clear vertical
color patterns, indicating that if the value of one feature increases, so does
the other, especially for Height and Volume. This is to be expected as the
features are highly related (as discussed in Chapter 3.2) and clearly indicates
that using more than one of these features may not provide the RFC with
much additional context. During early model experimentation, I tested out a
smaller set of features, which did in fact produce similar results in terms of F1
scores. Only slight improvements were achieved by adding additional features.
However, as seen in Figure 5.4, there are instances which are exceptions to
the rule, and these seem to have made marginal improvements to the model.
5.1.2
Classifier Model 2
Precision, Recall and F1 scores for Model 2 can be seen in Table 5.3. The
model trained on the 10m resolution data for Stockholm County performs
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Classifier
45
Figure 5.4: The dependency plots for Model 1. Each plot shows the relationship between a
feature (x-axis) and its corresponding SHAP values for a class (y-axis). Addi-
tionally, interaction effects with other features are displayed by the color. The
feature Surface tends to exhibit linear relationships with the class predictions
and often interacts with the Volume and Height features.
much worse than Model 1, despite its high resolution. With a macro average
F1 of only 0.31, having higher resolution for the features Surface and Land
does not seem to provide added nuance to the model, which I initially ex-
pected. There is much larger differences in the respective class scores than
for Model 2, with landuse achieving an F1 Score of only 0.18, while leisure
reaches 0.45, even though the classes have been balanced equally. In Figure
5.5, the confusion matrix for Model 1 is seen. There is no clear diagonal show-
ing, indicative that Model 2 struggles to classify the Stockholm County data
for most classes. Notably, it performs best on leisure, with 5484 correctly
==PAGE:52==
46
Results
predicted labels. In addition, the model seems to default towards predicting
amenity or shop, if the True label is any class besides leisure, clearly having
trouble separating the classes based on the two GHS features Surface and
Land.
It should be noted that the poor results of the model can not strictly be
assigned to its smaller training-set size, neither its reduced spatial coverage
as a result of only training on Stockholm County data (although they do
play a small role), as similar experiments have been conducted with the low-
resolution data for comparison. It seems that it is the inherent nature of the
high resolution data, that causes the poor performance. I present a third
model and discuss this in Chapter 6.
Class
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
amenity
0.25
0.29
0.27
landuse
0.26
0.14
0.18
leisure
0.43
0.46
0.45
shop
0.33
0.40
0.36
tourism
0.29
0.30
0.29
Macro average
0.31
0.32
0.31
Table 5.3: Precision, recall, and F1 scores for Model 2.
The summary plots for each class, along with the feature importances given
by the mean absolute value of the SHAP values are seen in Figure 5.6. As
samples are only drawn for Stockholm County, it is clear how the SHAP
values are less scattered when compared to Model 1, where the Land feature
is highly represented at a SHAP value of 0.0, and have little impact on the
models class predictions. This is summarized in the feature importance plot,
where the mean absolute SHAP value for all entries on average only contribute
0.05 to the class predictions. Again, the Land feature is used most for tourism
and landuse as in Model 1, but overall to a much lesser extend. Interestingly,
the use of Surface has changed from being quite evenly distributed among the
classes in Model 1, to now having a larger impact on the landuse class, whereas
it has little impact on leisure. In the dependency plots seen in Figure 5.7, we
see how the data is mostly centered around SHAP values of 0.0, exhibiting
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Classifier
47
Figure 5.5: Confusion matrix for Model 2. The matrix exhibits no strong diagonal, as the
model struggles to seperate the classes based on the GHS features Surface and
Land. It performs best on leisure with 5484 correctly labeled instances.
no clear relationships with any of the classes. It seems as though there is a
lack of data for the Land dependency plots, however upon closer inspection
it can be seen how a large amount of values overlap at a feature value of 1.0
and SHAP value of 0.0. The model therefore struggles to use Land’s highly
skewed distribution with low variance to make meaningful predictions.
5.1.3
Classifier Results Summary
The results of the classifier showed two significantly different outcomes for
Model 1 and Model 2.
Model 1 showed promising results with an F1 of
0.75, as it made good use of all the features in class predictions according to
analysis of its SHAP values. The lower resolution of 100m therefore proved
to be of good utility for predicting the five classes of value. I therefore deem
the Model 1 performance satisfactory, and thus it has validated the 100m
resolution GHS dataset. On the contrary, Model 2 had an F1 score of 0.31,
==PAGE:54==
48
Results
Figure 5.6: SHAP summary plots and Feature Importance plot (lower right corner) for
Model 2.
The Land feature takes a SHAP value of 0.0 in the majority of
prediction instances, and thus has little impact on model predictions.
On
average, only 0.05 according to the Feature Importance plot.
despite its ten times higher resolution of 10m. In addition, the Land feature
was used minimally and the model relied heavily on the Surface feature,
effectively rendering the Land feature redundant. The higher resolution data
may have had more noise, while the lack of features also made the model
fell short. Why Model 2 falls short, I will discuss further in the Discussion
section 6. To summarize, Model 1’s satisfactory results showed great promise
for the clustering of GHS values to provide additional context in next location
prediction, and thus clustering is done exclusively on the low resolution data.
==PAGE:55==
5.2 K-Means Clustering
49
Figure 5.7: Dependency plots for Model 2. Instances are centered around SHAP values of
0.0 for all classes, having little impact on the models predictions. The features
exhibit no clear relationships with any of the classes.
5.2
K-Means Clustering
In the following section, I present the results of using K-Means to cluster the
GHS attributes into different cluster sizes k ranging from 1 to 7. Furthermore,
I present the results of the spatial auto-correlation analysis using Moran’s I,
for the best performing clustering candidates.
5.3
Elbow Method and Silhouette Scores
In Figure 5.8, the results of the K-means clustering for k ∈{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7} is
shown for Inertia (Elbow Method) and Silhouette scores. In terms of inertia,
the largest change in slope occurs at k = 2, and from then it becomes less
notable towards k=7. As the Elbow-Method aims to find a middle ground
==PAGE:56==
50
Results
between low inertia and a low amount of clusters, it is difficult to decipher
at what value for k this trade-off is best accomplished. Relying solely on the
Elbow Method therefore does seem to be uncertain, as the literature has also
suggested.
The Silhouette Scores in Figure 5.8 show how a cluster size of k=2 results
in the highest global Silhouette score. We see a drop for k=3 and k=4, and
interestingly a spike for k=5, which is equal to the amount of classes described
by the value attribute in the SE dataset. The spike then drops off for k=6 and
onwards to k=7. The Silhouette scores fall within a range of 0.395 to 0.52,
indicating that the clustering for all values of k produce decent results, and
that the overall between-dissimilarity is greater than within-dissimilarity as
scores are in between 0 and 1, thus most ideally close data points are within
a cluster and far away from other clusters.
Figure 5.8: The Elbow Method and Silhouette Scores s(xi) for k ∈{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7}. There
is a rapid reduction in inertia at k = 2, but no clear ’Elbow’ beyond that. k = 2
also has the highest overall Silhouette score of 0.515. Interestingly, k=5 has
a higher score just below 0.44; a similar amount of clusters as the amount of
value classes in the SE data.
In Figure 5.9 the Silhouette scores with the inclusion of local clustering infor-
mation are plotted using the yellowbrick.clustering SilhouettVisualizer. For
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Elbow Method and Silhouette Scores
51
all values of k, there is a larger cluster forming, with the remaining clusters
being relatively small in size. The red line indicates the average score for the
entire set (global score), where as a general rule, each local Silhouette scores
for the cluster should exceed the global score [43]. k = 2 falls just short of
accommodating this, as seen for the smaller green cluster. Values of k from
3-7 do all meet this criterion. Additionally, large size differences between
clusters are generally not desired, and thus values of k from 5 to 7 have some
clusters that are extremely small as when compared to the other clusters in
their respective sets, given by the y-axis that indicates the amount of data
points present in the cluster. However, as the scope of this work covers lo-
cations visited by users, a large amount of locations included in the dataset
will fall in densely populated areas. Therefore, if the clustering picks up on
more niche combinations of GHS values, for example in the yellow cluster for
k = 5, this might actually be a good indicator of performance given the use-
case. It is therefore not necessarily a sign of bad clustering to see some size
discrepancies for the specific scope of this work. However, a balance between
the unique use-case and the general rule of cluster-size discrepancy should be
found.
The Elbow Method and Silhouette scores give a good indication of which
values of k to consider. However, the domain knowledge gained of the SE data
and its attributes, in addition with the geo-spatial scope of this work should
also play a role in deciding the clustering amounts. From an initial assessment
of the Elbow Method and Silhouette analysis I find k = 3, k = 4 and k = 5 to
be the most promising. As k = 2 does not meet the local score requirements,
and lacks detail given the use-case it is neglected. Furthermore, while k = 6
and k = 7 may capture nuances in the GHS data that accomplish the use-case,
they have lower Silhouette scores than for k = 5 and the trade-off between
cluster sizes and inertia is not accommodated. Additionally, these "nuances"
may simply be noise, rather than capturing the underlying structure of the
data. I therefore move on to analyse Moran’s I for the three number of clusters
that are of interest.
==PAGE:58==
52
Results
Figure 5.9: Silhouette scores for different cluster sizes of k ∈{2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7}. k = 2 has the
highest overall score of just above 0.5, with a much higher score reached by the
larger cluster whereas the smallest cluster has a score below this average for
the entire set.
==PAGE:59==
5.4 Spatial Auto-correlation of Clustering (Moran’s I)
53
5.4
Spatial Auto-correlation of Clustering (Moran’s I)
Moran’s I is computed for the best performing values of k in the Elbow
Method and Silhouette Scores. The results can be seen in Table 5.4. As we
recall from Section 4, Moran’s I can range from -1 to 1, where values closer to 1
indicate strong positive spatial auto correlation. Therefore, Moran’s I for k ∈
{3, 4, 5}, indicate that there is significant spatial auto correlation, and thus
the K-means clustering has managed to capture meaningful spatial patterns
in the GHS attributes. At k = 4, we see the highest Moran’s I at 0.915,
followed by k = 3 and lastly k = 5, all with a highly statistical significant
p-value of 0.001. The spatial auto correlation is therefore highly unlikely to
have occurred by chance. This seems to indicate that the inherent spatial
structure of the clusters is coherent, and that there is a high similarity within
clusters and good differentiation between clusters. The drop in k = 5 might
suggest that with more clusters, the K-means slightly overfits the spatial
structure, and that coherent regions or distinct areas may be mixed together
once k increases. However, in the scope of things, all three values of k result
in similar spatial auto correlation. Further analysis of the amount of clusters
to select to label unknown locations will be conducted in the Discussion,
Chapter 6.
Amount of clusters
Moran’s I
p-value
k = 3
0.897
0.001
k = 4
0.915
0.001
k = 5
0.861
0.001
Table 5.4: Moran’s I for k ∈{3, 4, 5}.
5.5
Results Summary
In summary, of the two random forest classifiers, Model 1 significantly out-
performs Model 2 which was trained on higher resolution data, as judged by
F1 score and feature use given by the SHAP values. Therefore, the 100m res-
olution GHS data used in Model 1 is used to train K-means clustering models
==PAGE:60==
54
Results
with different amounts of cluster centroids. Using 3, 4 and 5 centroids proved
to be the best performing options in terms of inertia and Silhouette analysis,
while all showing high spatial autocorrelation as given by Moran’s I. In the
following chapter, I analyse the clusters and select a final amount of centroids.
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 6
Discussion
In this section, I discuss which amount of clustering centroids is best for
labeling unknown locations, in the context of the specific use case. Thereafter,
I provide further analysis of the selected solution. Additionally, I lay out why
RFC Model 2 performs poorly, as I assess it in the context of the bias-variance
trade-off. Lastly, I present limitations in this work and make suggestions for
future research.
6.1
Selecting the Amount of Clusters
As discovered in Section 5, clustering on k = 3, k = 4 and k = 5 proved to be
the most promising labeling solutions. This excretion of the clustering from
six different options to three (3, 4 and 5 clusters) was mostly based on the
conventional clustering evaluation methods, namely the Elbow Method and
Silhouette Analysis. To further narrow down the options, and determine the
final amount of clusters that will be used to label the ’unknown’ locations,
the unique use-case of the SE locations plays a crucial role. In the following
section, I will put an enhanced emphasis on the use-case, and qualitatively
assess whether it allows for exceptions in the conventional evaluation methods.
An important aspect of the use-case is interpretability. As locations are la-
beled into either 3, 4 or 5 clusters, the clusters should make intuitive sense
when assessed from a geographical standpoint. The clusters should visibly
be intuitive, both on a large scale, looking at the entire country or regions
of Sweden, and on smaller scales, looking at cities or even neighborhoods.
Given the large values of Moran’s I, it is safe to assume that each of the three
options do in fact provide a solution where datapoints that belong to the
same cluster, tend to lie geographically close to one another. However, if we
consider the GHS features in either a major city, suburban or on the country-
side, we would likely not expect to see similar buildings, parks, skyscrapers
==PAGE:62==
56
Discussion
etc. homogeneously grouped together. In fact, in many cases we see different
structures occupying a common space, for example small parks in the middle
of cities, that if viewed in isolation may resemble the GHS profile of a for-
est, or a large supermarket in a suburban city, that may resemble the GHS
profile of a tall office building found in the inner city. Therefore, it is not
necessarily desired to have the maximum spatial auto-correlation given by
Moran’s I, as that is rarely how real infrastructure is situated. Regardless,
when viewing the locations and their clusters geographically, patterns in the
location and the clusters they belong to, will be a good indicator of which
clustering amount to select. The clusters should be interpretable on both a
macro, meso and micro level.
Figure 6.1: Maps showing a part of Skåne County with locations from the SE data colored
by their cluster label using 3, 4, and 5 clusters respectively.
In Figure 6.1, a sample of the locations have been labeled with their corre-
sponding cluster, for the three clustering options. The plot shows Malmö to
the left, along with more remote areas, including a few suburbs. For each
of the three options, there is clearly a pattern forming. One cluster looks to
represent more remote locations like cluster 3 for k = 3, cluster 4 for k = 4
and k = 5, while another looks to represent more densely urbanized locations
like cluster 2 for k = 3, cluster 1 for k = 4 and cluster 1 or 5 for k = 5. Then,
there is cluster 2 for k = 3, which seems to represent something in between.
This is were the three options separate themselves. k = 4 differs more be-
tween these "in-between" locations, along with k = 5, which also tends to
differ between locations in highly populated areas. Upon visual inspection,
==PAGE:63==
6.1 Selecting the Amount of Clusters
57
at least one of these additional clusters make intuitive sense, and seem to be
especially present in large cities.
We get a closer view at the "in-between" locations in Figure 6.2, with the
perspective of the innermost part of Malmö. Here, it can seen how what I
first assumed to be "remote" locations, are in fact still present in the inner
parts of the city, confirming the statements I made prior, about how the GHS
profile of a park can be similar to a forest. Thus, the clustering has managed
to both capture the "macro-scale" of the locations and the "micro-scale", as
it distinguishes well between points on different scales. On the macro-scale
it becomes clear how the 100m GHS resolution offers quite a high amount of
detail in the scope of the entire country, and offers perspective as to why the
10m resolution data may result in noise. If we take a look at the different
options for k, it looks as if k = 3 fails to offer nuance about the more urban
locations, and I therefore exclude it from further analysis. k = 4’s cluster 1,
2 and 3, looks to be varying degrees of urbaness.
Figure 6.2: Maps showing the inner city of Malmö with locations from the SE dataset
colored by their cluster label, using 3, 4 and 5 clusters respectively.
A visual analysis of the map plot shows that generally cluster 2 is mostly
present in the outermost ring of a city, then comes cluster 1 and in the center
of major cities there is an abundance of cluster 3. Similar cluster patterns
are seen with k = 5, with the additional cluster 1 that is mostly present deep
within cities and often occurs around shorelines. However, from a qualitative
assessment of the maps, I find it difficult to interpret and distinguish between
the cluster 3 and 1 through visual analysis and therefore suspect that k = 5
==PAGE:64==
58
Discussion
is overly sensitive to noise in the data. This may also be indicative by its
lower Moran’s I score. Separating between unique locations as much as is
feasible without overfitting is desired, and k = 5 may cross this threshrold.
However, the GHS features that the clustering is based upon did prove to be
good predictors of the Label classes. Therefore, it is relevant to recall that
these classes did not form highly intuitive patterns on a similar map plot per
se, and therefore class 1 may resemble locations similar to niche classes like
tourism.
Figure 6.3: A comparison of the distribution of label and the clusters for k = 5.
The
distributions are similar, however the clusters are less balanced than the value
classes.
To compare the Label attribute and clustering with k = 5, Figure 6.3, shows
the distribution of each.
In the plot it can be seen how the locations is
distributed similarly for each, although there are some differences. The dif-
ferences in size for Cluster 4, 2 and 3 are more pronounced than amenity,
landuse and shop, while the same is true for the smaller clusters 5 and 1
when compared to leisure and tourism. If the distributions were strikingly
similar, this would have spoken in favor of selecting k = 5. Additionally, as
the value labels are well-defined semantic descriptors of a location derived
from Open Street Map, I can not necessarily allow for a similar geographi-
cal pattern with the clusters, even though they are distributed equally. As
the inherent logic in the combinations of GHS attributes that the clusters
==PAGE:65==
6.2 Labeling Unknown Locations with 4 GHS Profiles
59
are derived lack inherent meaning. The quantitative nature of the GHS at-
tributes lack the intuitive precision that the categorical labels have, if they
were to be assessed on a similar basis geographically. As k = 5 only distin-
guishes between the classes on a microscopic scale (it is hard to see a pattern
from a zoomed out view), and as both the classes are tiny in size, I find its
interpretability too limited and exclude it from further consideration.
6.2
Labeling Unknown Locations with 4 GHS Profiles
Figure 6.4: The distributions of all locations, unlabeled locations and labeled locations
when clustering using four centroids. Cluster 1 and 3 are rare among unlabeled
locations, whereas cluster 4 is used to label a large fraction of these.
As a result of the visual assessment, I therefore end up selecting k=4 as
the desired amount of clusters. This is therefore used to label the unknown
locations. In Figure 6.4, it can be seen how the clusters are distributed for
all locations, the unlabeled (unknown) and labeled locations. Interestingly,
the majority of unknown locations belong to cluster 4, whereas cluster 1, 3
and especially 2 are much more represented amongst the labeled locations.
In Figure 6.7 map plots on a macro, meso and meso scale for k = 3 is plotted.
Here we can see how locations in Cluster 4 are highly present in the more
remote areas between cities, as we initially saw with the unknown locations
in Chapter 3.
==PAGE:66==
60
Discussion
Figure 6.5: Pairplot of the four clusters and their distribution along the GHS features as
axes. Cluster 3 shows the most urban combination of features, while cluster 4
exhibits the opposite pattern, generally having low values for Volume, Surface
and Height.
6.2.1
Analysis of the Four Clusters
Figure 6.5 shows the pairplot for the four clusters. Here the clusters can be
viewed in two-dimensional space with all possible combinations of the GHS
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Labeling Unknown Locations with 4 GHS Profiles
61
features as axes. Notably, cluster 1 (orange) shows a tendency towards higher
values for Population and Height, and spans across a wide range for the re-
maining features. Visual analysis of the mapplot seen in Figure ?? shows,
that locations labelled with this cluster are located deep within major cities,
and are only found in the innermost parts of smaller surburban neighbour-
hoods, while rarely found in rural areas, likely capturing GHS profiles of
apartment complexes and other highly populated locations. As seen in the
distribution plot in 6.4, this is the least occurring cluster, and is especially
rare for the unlabeled locations, indicating that most of the highly urban and
highly populated locations have been labeled by Open Street Map.
Cluster 2 shows a wide spread across most features, while it is between the
average and lower end of Population and Volume. On the map plot, this is
expressed geographically as well, as it tends to be present in the outer rings
of cities and the most frequently occurring cluster within rural cities. It tends
to be the most frequent cluster in urban areas that are not particularly high
or low in any GHS attribute, explained by its large spread in the pairplot.
It is the second most frequent cluster as seen in 6.4, but is relatively a lot
less frequent for the unlabeled locations, while almost just as frequent for the
labeled locations.
Figure 6.6: The shopping mall Väla Centrum and an IKEA located near Helsingborg.
Locations like these are typically labeled with Cluster 3, with large values
for the GHS attributes Volume, Height and Surface, but with middle to low
Population.
==PAGE:68==
62
Discussion
In the pairplot, locations in cluster 3 (purple) tend to take the largest values
for Surface, Height and Volume with a relatively large spread, and interest-
ingly has a large spread for Population, with both middle and lower values of
this feature. Locations with this cluster are highly present in inner parts of
large cities, but upon closer view they occur frequently in industrial quarters
as well in the outskirts of cities. Notably, when discovering the locations us-
ing the interactive map plot, they are found in large shopping centers, sports
halls, warehouses, office buildings and are occupied by brands like IKEA,
H&M and Bauhaus. In 6.6, a typical example of where locations with cluster
3 can be found is seen, displaying Väla Centrum and IKEA, a large shopping
mall near Helsingborg.
Figure 6.7: Clustering with k = 4 as seen from a macro perspective (right) and meso
perspective (left) showing the county of Stockholm with 120.000 sampled loca-
tions. Cluster 4 (red) is highly present in rural areas and is spread out across
Sweden, whereas Cluster 3 and 4 group together much closer and are mostly
present in larger cities.
As visible in the pairplot (Figure 6.5), Cluster 4 (red) is low in almost every
GHS attribute except Land. It therefore occurs in the most remote areas,
which becomes especially clear when viewing Sweden on a meso- and macro-
scale as in Figure 6.7, where it is scattered throughout rural areas in between
==PAGE:69==
6.2 Labeling Unknown Locations with 4 GHS Profiles
63
cities. Locations fall into this cluster most frequently, and the cluster is largely
over represented amongst the unknown locations as expected. Most of the
unknown locations will therefore be labeled with this cluster. This may be a
limitation for the purpose of next location prediction.
It can be difficult to clearly assess the unique space taking up by each cluster
in the pairplot. To get a more coherent look at how the closely the clusters
seperate from one another, I perform a principal component analysis (PCA)
[44] on the five GHS features and plot a sample of 50.000 locations using 3
components and coloring by the label. In Figure 6.8, the PCA plot can be
seen. Here it looks as if the clusters are well separated and each occupy a
unique space in the three dimensional space built by the components. Cluster
4 is evenly distributed across principal component 3, which looks to heavily
capture the Land feature, when compared with the behaviour of the cluster
in the pairplot.
==PAGE:70==
64
Discussion
Figure 6.8: The four clusters visualized in a three dimensional space using Principal Com-
ponent Analysis. In the plot is is clear how cluster 3 and 4 are split along
Principal Component 2, providing further insight into the observations made
on how they exhibit varying degree of urbanness.
In conclusion, I find four clusters to accommodate the criteria imposed by the
Elbow Method and Silhouette analysis, while having a higher Moran’s I than
using three or five clusters. Additionally, as discovered in this chapter, four
clusters has through qualitative assessment proven to optimally balance inter-
pretability while maximally differentiating between the locations and captur-
ing as much nuance as feasible. I therefore, label the unknown locations with
these four clusters to improve data coverage for Next Location Prediction.
This can be done for 858,159 previously unknown locations out of the initial
==PAGE:71==
6.3 Evaluating the Poor Performance of Model 2
65
915,411, as locations with GHS values indicating "NoData" remain unknown.
Therefore 93.7% of the unknown locations are now labeled with a cluster.
6.3
Evaluating the Poor Performance of Model 2
The poor performance of Model 2 may be attributed to several factors, and
is indicative of an important consideration to make for classification tasks
that this work tackles. In the following section, I will attempt to cover the
potential causes of its lack of performance even though its resolution is much
higher than Model 1, while also discussing causes that may at first seem to
impact the model, but should not be of concern.
6.3.1
A Third Model
Upon first review, it may seem as though the two primary reasons Model 2
performs worse than Model 1 are:
1. Model 2 is trained on a smaller subset of the GHS data for Stockholm
County, while Model 1 is trained on GHS data for all of Sweden.
2. Model 2 uses only two features; Land and Surface, while Model 1 uses
all five GHS features.
A simple method to confirm whether these statements hold true or not is to
introduce a third model. This model (Model 3) is, like Model 2, trained on
only two features; Surface and Land, also only using data from Stockholm
County. However, instead it uses 100m resolution data. This allows me to
directly compare the use of 10m resolution data against 100m resolution data,
and thus Model 3 represents a scaled down version of Model 1. The same
hyper-parameters as Model 1 and 2 for the RFC is selected. Similar pre-
processing is conducted; all classes are balanced, producing a training set of
234264 and a test set of 58566. The minor differences in train and test set
sizes between Model 2 and 3 is due to the different spatial join using the 100m
data. in The resulting precision, recall and f1 scores can be seen in Table 6.1.
==PAGE:72==
66
Discussion
Class
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
amenity
0.60
0.47
0.53
landuse
0.70
0.65
0.67
leisure
0.65
0.71
0.68
shop
0.65
0.65
0.65
tourism
0.68
0.82
0.74
Macro average
0.66
0.66
0.65
Table 6.1: Classification report for Model 3.
As seen in the classification report of Model 3 6.1, Model 3 performs signifi-
cantly better than Model 2, despite having similar conditions for its inclusion
of features and spatial training data. Its confusion matrix is seen in Figure
6.9. Here it there is a clear diagonal pattern present, again with tourism and
leisure being the least confused classes as we saw with Model 1. It displays
much less confusion than Model 2. I therefore conclude the following:
1. Training on fewer features and on the Stockholm County subset do con-
tribute to worse classification results.
These factors do not however,
explain all performance discrepancy between Model 2 and 3, but only
for Model 1 and 2.
2. Training on the high resolution GHS data is the main factor for why
Model 2 performs poorly, compared to the lower resolution data that
Model 1 and 3 are trained on.
6.3.2
The Bias-Variance Trade-off for Different Data Resolutions
To investigate what causes the high resolution data to result in worse perfor-
mances, I assess the feature variance for the data used in each of the three
models. The can be seen in Table 6.2.
Initially, I expected the high resolution data (SC10) to be able to produce
better results, as it would provide a more detailed insight into the GHS profiles
of locations. However, its poor performance can likely be attributed to a
==PAGE:73==
6.3 Evaluating the Poor Performance of Model 2
67
Figure 6.9: Confusion matrix for Model 3. It displays diagonal dominance and indicates
significantly less confusion amongst the predicted and true labels than Model
2.
phenomenon within machine learning known as the bias-variance trade off
[29]. This phenomenon describes the relationship between variance and bias in
relation to model complexity and performance. In the context of a multi-class
classification problem, this trade-off directly influences a model’s precision,
recall and F1 score. When bias is high, the RFC makes strong and simplified
assumptions about the training data which leads to under-fitting.
It will
therefore fail to capture the underlying patterns in the data. When bias is low,
the model makes fewer assumptions, and captures more complex patterns.
When variance is high, the model is highly sensitive to the training data, and
therefore it may capture noise along with the underlying patterns which leads
to overfitting. When variance is low, the model will be less sensitive to the
training data and may generalize better to unseen data, however it may fail
to capture important patterns. The goal is to balance bias and variance so
that F1 is maximized. The bias-variance trade off with added hypothetical
context of the three models is depicted in Figure 6.10.
==PAGE:74==
68
Discussion
Feature Variance
Feature
SE100
SC10
SC100
Surface
0.0399
0.1032
0.0388
Land
0.0076
0.0122
0.0086
Height
0.0140
-
-
Population
0.0106
-
-
Volume
0.0140
-
-
Table 6.2: Feature variance for Model 1’s 100m resolution data for all of Sweden (SE100),
Model 2’s 10m resolution data for Stockholm County (SC10) and Model 3’s
100m resolution data for Stockholm County (SC100). The features have been
standardized.
As seen in Table 6.2, variance is much higher for the SC10 data which Model
2 was trained on, especially for Surface which had the highest feature im-
portance according to the SHAP values. The RFC may therefore capture a
high amount of noise in the data, which makes it miss the overall patterns of
the Surface and Land features and how they relate to the five value classes.
SE100 and SC100 is less detailed with its lower resolution, and therefore it
has lower feature variances, likely smoothing out noise and leading to better
generalizations [45].
I must emphasize that neither Model 1 or 3 likely achieves optimal results
and has perfectly balanced the bias-variance trade off, as optimal classifica-
tion results has been besides the scope of this work. The differences in the
performance of Model 1 and 3 can likely be attributed to their data set sizes.
With more training data Model 1 has more information to generalize, thereby
affecting bias and variance [46]. Model 1’s results were sufficient as an ap-
proval stamp for the use of the GHS clustering, but may be improved with
further hyper-parameter tuning, validation, train-test set size modifications
and experimenting with other classification models. However, Model 1 and
SE100 has solidified how a resolution of 100m offers a high amount of detail
in the context of Sweden with an area 450.295 km2 , and even for a smaller
subset like Stockholm County with an area of 6.488 km2. For a different use
case, where predictions on a much smaller scale is needed, i.e. areas of 100,
10 or 1 km2, the high resolution might prove to outperform the lower reso-
==PAGE:75==
6.4 Limitations and Future Research
69
Figure 6.10: An illustration of how bias, variance and F1 score change as a function of
model complexity, in this case expressed by the resolution of the GHS training
data. A hypothetical example of where the each of three models could be
located is depicted. Usually an optimal point exists where F1 is maximized
by balancing bias and variance. The visualization is hypothetical and adapted
from Doroudi, S. (2020), The Bias-Variance Trade-off: How Data Science Can
Inform Educational Debates. AERA Open, 6(4) [29].
lutions. In next location prediction details matter, and a clustering solution
using 10m resolution data might be worth exploring in future work.
6.4
Limitations and Future Research
In this work, I have used clustering to label the unknown locations with
geospatial attributes from the Global Human Settlement Layer project. How-
ever, a limitation with this approach is the lack of inherent meaning as I
presented in Chapter2.3. As [9] states, clustering can group locations, or in
this geospatial attributes, but does not inherently provide labels to describe
the clusters. The "labels" I have retrieved given by the clusters do therefore
==PAGE:76==
70
Discussion
not say anything about the locations themselves, besides the interpretation
of them I have discussed earlier in this Chapter (6.2).
Depending on the
specifics of the use-case this may be sufficient, but for clear interpretability of
the "labels" one has to conduct a similar analysis on the clusters themselves.
In future work, I would further explore the Automated Labeling Method de-
scribed in Chapter 2.3, along with the DAMICORE clustering algorithm [9]
or Placer [6], to achieve more meaningful labels.
In addition, in the qualitative assessment of the clusters I arrived at a solution
using four clusters. However, for more robust validation, I would recommend
testing different values of k in the actual environment of a Next Location
Prediction model, like the transformer model described in [4], as it has been
outside the scope of this work.
Lastly, in this work I have only used data from the Global Human Settlement
Layer. However, more robust solutions, both for classification and cluster-
labeling, will likely be achievable by levering additional geospatial datasets,
like CORINE and GMESUA as used in Hagenauer et al.’s work [3]. These
might also contribute to labeling the remaining 7% of unknown locations that
have had "NoData" values for the GHS attributes. However, it will likely com-
plicate data pre-processing, as the different resolutions and temporal epochs
will require additional processing for alignment. I theorize that additional
features with less interaction between them may provide the classifier with
additional nuance, while clustering will capture more spatial patterns, popu-
lation demographics and specific characteristics of the locations. If the feature
space becomes overly complex for models besides K-means that do not handle
large feature spaces well, I recommend aggregating features using Principal
Component Analysis or similar feature reduction techniques [44].
In gen-
eral, I would recommend experimenting with a further variety of clustering
methods, especially if one has access to machines that can manage the high
computational requirements of more sophisticated methods.
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In this chapter, I will present the key findings of this work, and make con-
cluding remarks on the methods and results I have used to solve the problem
of labeling unknown locations.
This work has demonstrated the use of the Global Human Settlement Project
data in labeling of unknown locations as described in [4]. By using the knowl-
edge discovery process as described in [7] as a methodological framework, I
was able to divide the work into four key steps.
First, research and analysis of both the Swedish location data and GHSL
datasets along with Mollgard et al. study of Next Location prediciton was
conducted to gain a deep understanding of the application domain. Secondly,
by pre-processing both the SE and GHS data I prepared both datasets for
analysis and data mining through a spatial join. In the third step, the data
mining tasks were selected, involving a random forest classifier to validate the
GHS data on the value classes from the SE data. Additionally, a K-means
clustering model was trained on the GHS data to divide the locations into
four different groupings. Lastly, in knowledge construction, I reviewed the
classification models through the use of precision, recall and F1 score, and
conducted a deep analysis of the impact of the GHS features on the model
predictions with the use of SHAP values. Additionally, I visualized and ana-
lyzed the results of clustering with 3, 4 and 5 centroids, and conducted further
investigation the best performing solution with four centroids, given both tra-
ditional evaluation metrics and a qualitative interpretability assessment.
Through pre-processing of the GHSL data, I was able to extract five main
attributes in a resolution of 100m for the entire country of Sweden and 10m
for Stockholm County. I then retrieved the GHSL data for each location in the
SE dataset through a spatial join using a cKDTree. The method proved to be
==PAGE:78==
72
Conclusion
a robust solution for both resolutions, as both the 100m and 10m data could
be seamlessly aggregated with the GHS features. Further preprocessing was
conducted to standardize and balance the GHS features to provide training
data for the classification model.
Two multi-class classification models were trained on the GHSL data us-
ing a random forest classifier. Model 1 was trained on the 100m resolution
data for all of Sweden using five features, while Model 2 was trained on the
10m resolution data for Stockholm County using two features. I used two
different resolutions to assess the highest performing one through multiple
evaluation metrics. Model 1 significantly outperforms Model 2 in terms of
precision, recall and F1 with an F1 macro average of 0.75 against Model 2’s
0.31. Additionally, Model 1 shows diagonal dominance in its confusion matrix
as it predicted all of the classes well, however performed best on the tourism
and leisure classes, with amenity being the worst performing classes. Using
SHAP values to evaluate the feature importance, I demonstrated how Model
1 made better use of the 100m resolution features, where the Surface feature
was highly utilised as it tended to show linear relationships with the class
predictions.
Through additional discussion of the two models, I demonstrate how Model
2’s poor performance can not be fully attributed to its deficit in features and
smaller training data size, by training a third model under similar conditions,
but using the 100m data. As an additional explanation for the performance
gap, I discuss how the Bias-Variance tradeoff plays a role in the use of high
resolution versus low resolution geospatial data, and thus demonstrate the
need for careful GHSL data selection when dealing with millions of locations,
as high variance can be interpreted as noise, which significantly affects model
performance.
I demonstrate how K-means clustering can be used to segregate the Swedish
location data into four clusters, which outperforms alternate amounts of clus-
tering centroids. I demonstrate the need for thorough selection of the amount
of clusters k, and how the Elbow method, Silhouette Analysis and spatial au-
==PAGE:79==
73
tocorrelation given by Moran’s I, each can be used as quantitative assessments
in the selection process. However, I find that a more use-case contextual eval-
uation is needed by qualitatively assessing the three methods in relation to
the scope of Next Location Prediction, along with an assessment of their
interpretability. I show how clustering with four centroids accommodates a
good trade-off between the quantitative and qualitative evaluation methods.
I demonstrate how intepretability of the clusters can be assessed by visual-
izing the cluster’s distribution along the GHS attributes and through visual
analysis of their geospatial patterns. I show how locations in the most highly
populated and urban areas tend to be labeled in Cluster 1, while surburban
areas with medium urbaness are often labeled with Cluster 2. Large con-
structions with low populations like warehouses and shopping malls tend to
be labeled in Cluster 3, while more remote and rural locations most often are
labeled with Cluster 4. In total, I am able to label 858,159 of the 915,411 un-
known locations using the GHSL data, therefore providing geospatial context
to 93% of the locations.
Lastly, I assess the limitation of the clustering-based labeling method used in
this work, as the labels lack inherent meaning. I recommend further research
using methods like Placer, or the Automated Labeling Method in conjunction
with DAMICORE to achieve more meaningful labels. Additionally, for more
robust assessment of the cluster-labels, I recommend testing the clustering
in the use-case environment of Next Location Prediction using a variety of
cluster centroids.
Furthermore, I recommend using more data sources for
enhanced classification and clustering performance, like CORINE and GME-
SUA, while improving data coverage for labeling the remaining 7% of un-
known locations.
==PAGE:80==
References
[1] Conrad M. Albrecht, Fernando J. Marianno, and Levente J. Klein. Au-
togeolabel: Automated label generation for geospatial machine learn-
ing. 2021 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pages
1779–1786, 2021.
[2] A. L. Ali, F. Schmid, R. Al-Salman, and T. Kauppinen.
Ambiguity
and plausibility. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSPATIAL Inter-
national Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems -
SIGSPATIAL ’14, 2014.
[3] J. Hagenauer and M. Helbich.
Mining urban land-use patterns from
volunteered geographic information by means of genetic algorithms and
artificial neural networks. International Journal of Geographical Infor-
mation Science, 26(6):963–982, 2012.
[4] Peter E. Møllgaard, Sune Lehmann, and Laura Alessandretti. Next se-
mantic prediction. Working paper, Department of Applied Mathemat-
ics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark, November
2023.
[5] European Commission, Joint Research Centre, M Schiavina, M Mel-
chiorri, M Pesaresi, P Politis, S Freire, L Maffenini, P Florio, D Ehrlich,
K Goch, P Tommasi, and T Kemper. GHSL data package 2022 – Public
release GHS P2022. Publications Office of the European Union, 2022.
[6] J. Krumm and D. Rouhana. Placer. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing
- UbiComp ’13, 2013.
[7] May Yuan, Barbara Buttenfield, Mark Gahegan, and Harvey Miller.
Geospatial Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, pages 365–388. 08
2004.
[8] Ralf Bill, Jörg Blankenbach, Martin Breunig, Jan-Henrik Haunert, Chris-
tian Heipke, Stefan Herle, Hans-Gerd Maas, Helmut Mayer, Liqui Meng,
==PAGE:81==
REFERENCES
75
Franz Rottensteiner, Jochen Schiewe, Monika Sester, Uwe Sörgel, and
Martin Werner. Geospatial information research: State of the art, case
studies and future perspectives. PFG, 90:349–389, 2022. Published on-
line: 19 September 2022.
[9] F. N. C. De Araujo, V. P. Machado, A. H. M. Soares, and R. M. S. de
Veras. Automatic cluster labeling based on phylogram analysis. In 2018
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2018.
[10] The Global Human Settlement Layer Project.
About the ghsl.
https://human-settlement.emergency.copernicus.eu/about.php.
[11] SimpleMaps. Sweden Administrative Region GIS Map files. Accessed:
2024-06-06.
[12] Statistikmyndigheten SCB. Befolkningsstatistik, 2023. Accessed: 2024-
06-06.
[13] The
Global
Human
Settlement
Layer
Project.
Down-
load
the
data
produced
by
the
ghsl.
https://human-
settlement.emergency.copernicus.eu/download.php?ds=bu.
[14] Schiavina M, Melchiorri M, Pesaresi M, Politis P, Carneiro Freire SM,
Maffenini L, Florio P, Ehrlich D, Goch K, Carioli A, Uhl J, Tommasi P,
and Kemper T. Ghsl data package 2023. (KJ-03-23-103-EN-N (online)),
2023.
[15] Martino Pesaresi and Panagiotis Politis. Ghs-built-s r2023a - ghs built-up
surface grid, derived from sentinel2 composite and landsat, multitempo-
ral (1975-2030), 2023. [Dataset].
[16] Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency. ALOS World 3D 30 meter DEM.
V3.2, Jan 2021. Distributed by OpenTopography, 2021. Accessed: 2024-
07-06.
[17] NASA Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM). Shuttle Radar To-
pography Mission (SRTM) Global.
Distributed by OpenTopography,
2013. Accessed: 2024-07-06.
==PAGE:82==
76
REFERENCES
[18] Martino Pesaresi and Panagiotis Politis. Ghs-built-h r2023a - ghs build-
ing height, derived from aw3d30, srtm30, and sentinel2 composite (2018),
2023. [Dataset].
[19] Martino Pesaresi and Panagiotis Politis. Ghs-built-v r2023a - ghs built-
up volume grids derived from joint assessment of sentinel2, landsat, and
global dem data, multitemporal (1975-2030), 2023. [Dataset].
[20] Center for International Earth Science Information Network - CIESIN
- Columbia University.
Gridded population of the world, version 4
(gpwv4): Population count, revision 11, 2018. Accessed: 2024-07-06.
[21] Sergio Freire, Kytt Macmanus, Martino Pesaresi, Erin Doxsey-Whitfield,
and Briar Mills. Development of new open and free multi-temporal global
population grids at 250 m resolution. 06 2016.
[22] Marcello Schiavina, Sergio Freire, Alessandra Carioli, and Kytt Mac-
Manus. Ghs-pop r2023a - ghs population grid multitemporal (1975-2030),
2023. [Dataset].
[23] Martino Pesaresi and Panagiotis Politis. Ghs-land r2022a - land fraction
as derived from sentinel-2 image composite (2018) and osm data, 2022.
[Dataset].
[24] Margherita Grandini, Enrico Bagli, and Giorgio Visani.
Metrics for
multi-class classification: an overview, 2020.
[25] Anita Prinzie and Dirk Van den Poel. Random forests for multiclass clas-
sification: Random multinomial logit. Expert Systems with Applications,
34(3):1721–1732, 2008.
[26] Scikit-Learn.
RandomizedSearchCV Documentation page.
Accessed:
2024-07-06.
[27] Vikash Singh, Michael Pencina, Andrew J Einstein, Joanna X Liang,
Daniel S Berman, and Piotr Slomka. Impact of train/test sample regimen
on performance estimate stability of machine learning in cardiovascular
imaging. Scientific Reports, 11(1):14490, July 2021.
==PAGE:83==
REFERENCES
77
[28] Anita Rácz, Dávid Bajusz, and Károly Héberger.
Effect of dataset
size and train/test split ratios in qsar/qspr multiclass classification.
Molecules, 26(4), 2021.
[29] Shayan Doroudi. The bias-variance tradeoff: How data science can inform
educational debates. AERA Open, 6(4):2332858420977208, 2020.
[30] Steven A Hicks, Inga Strümke, Vajira Thambawita, Malek Hammou,
Michael A Riegler, Pål Halvorsen, and Sravanthi Parasa. On evalua-
tion metrics for medical applications of artificial intelligence. Scientific
Reports, 12(1):5979, April 2022.
[31] Ricardo Rodríguez-Pérez and Jürgen Bajorath. Interpretation of machine
learning models using shapley values: application to compound potency
and multi-target activity predictions. Journal of Computer-Aided Molec-
ular Design, 34(10):1013–1026, 2020.
[32] Christoph Molnar. Interpretable Machine Learning, chapter 9.5: Shapley
Values. 2 edition, 2022.
[33] Scott Lundberg.
Shap library documentation page.
https://shap.
readthedocs.io/en/latest/, 2018.
[34] Samreen Naeem, Aqib Ali, Sania Anam, and Munawar Ahmed. An un-
supervised machine learning algorithms: Comprehensive review. IJCDS
Journal, 13:911–921, 04 2023.
[35] Eric U. Oti, Michael O. Olusola, Francis C. Eze, and Samuel U. Enogwe.
Comprehensive review of k-means clustering algorithms. International
Journal of Advances in Scientific Research and Engineering (ijasre),
7(8):1–15, August 2021.
[36] Muhammad
Firman
Saputra,
Triyanna
Widiyaningtyas,
and
Aji
Wibawa. Illiteracy classification using k means-naÃ¯ve bayes algorithm.
JOIV : International Journal on Informatics Visualization, 2:153, 05
2018.
==PAGE:84==
78
REFERENCES
[37] David Arthur and Sergei Vassilvitskii. k-means++: The advantages of
careful seeding. In Proceedings of the eighteenth annual ACM-SIAM sym-
posium on Discrete algorithms, pages 1027–1035. Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics, 2007.
[38] Purnima Bholowalia and Arvind Kumar. Ebk-means: A clustering tech-
nique based on elbow method and k-means in wsn. International Journal
of Computer Applications, 105(9), 2014.
[39] Meshal Shutaywi and Nezamoddin N Kachouie. Silhouette analysis for
performance evaluation in machine learning with applications to cluster-
ing. Entropy, 23(6):759, 2021.
[40] Yanguang Chen. Spatial autocorrelation equation based on moran’s in-
dex. Scientific Reports, 13(1):19296, November 2023.
[41] Yufan Wang, Wangyong Lv, Minjian Wang, Xu Chen, and Yao Li. Ap-
plication of improved moran’s i in the evaluation of urban spatial devel-
opment. Spatial Statistics, 54:100736, 2023.
[42] K Suryowati, R D Bekti, and A Faradila. A comparison of weights ma-
trices on computation of dengue spatial autocorrelation. IOP Conference
Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 335(1):012052, apr 2018.
[43] Duy-Tai Dinh, Tsutomu Fujinami, and Van-Nam Huynh. Estimating the
optimal number of clusters in categorical data clustering by silhouette
coefficient. In Jian Chen, Van Nam Huynh, Gia-Nhu Nguyen, and Xijin
Tang, editors, Knowledge and Systems Sciences, pages 1–17, Singapore,
2019. Springer Singapore.
[44] I. T. Jolliffe and J. Cadima. Principal component analysis: a review and
recent developments. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A:
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 374(2065):20150202,
Apr 2016.
[45] Pankaj Mehta, Marin Bukov, Ching-Hao Wang, Alexandre G.R. Day,
Clint Richardson, Charles K. Fisher, and David J. Schwab. A high-bias,
low-variance introduction to machine learning for physicists.
Physics
==PAGE:85==
REFERENCES
79
Reports, 810:1–124, 2019. A high-bias, low-variance introduction to Ma-
chine Learning for physicists.
[46] Damien Brain and Geoffrey I. Webb. On the effect of data set size on
bias and variance in classification learning. 1999.
==PAGE:86==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Link to Github Repository
https://github.com/juliusolander/Managing-Unlabeled-Data-for-Location-Pr
