==PAGE:1==
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
Integrating Service Life Dependencies, Dynamic Fac-
tors, and Reuse/Recycling Potential into Life Cycle
Assessment. Case studies on two Danish Residential
Buildings.
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Master’s Thesis
==PAGE:2==
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
Integrating Service Life Dependencies, Dynamic Factors, and Reuse/Recycling Potential
into Life Cycle Assessment. Case studies on two Danish Residential Buildings.
Master’s Thesis
July, 2024
By
Helena Maria Hammershaimb and Rikke Krag Hansen
Supervisor
Kristoffer Negendahl
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
GXN Innovation, CIRCuIT project, 2019-2023
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was prepared over five months at the Section for Architectural Engineering,
Department of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfillment of the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. The thesis was done
in collaboration with architecture company 3XN/GXN.
Commercial AI tools, e.g. Grammarly, were used for spell-checking.
Helena Maria Hammershaimb and Rikke Krag Hansen - s183611 s183629
Signature Helena Maria Hammershaimb - s183611
Signature Rikke Krag Hansen - s183629
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
ii
==PAGE:4==
Nomenclature
BaU
Business as Usual
BR18 Building Regulation 2018
CLT
Cross Laminated Timber
DFA
Design for Assembly
DfD
Design for Disassembly
DLCA Dynamic Life Cycle Assessment
EoL
End of Life
EPD
Environmentation Product Declaration
EPS
Expanded Polystyrene
EPW Energy Plus Weather
ESL
Estimated Service Life
GHG Greenhouse Gas
GSA
Global Sensitivity Analysis
GWP Global Warming Potential
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment
MTTF Mean Time to Failure
PDLCA Partial Dymanic Life Cycle Assessment
RSL
Reference Servide Life
SD
Standard Deviation
WWR Window Wall Ratio
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The building industry is under increasing pressure to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emis-
sions and improve the adaptability of buildings to future scenarios. Design for Disassembly
(DfD) has been argued as a promising strategy to address these challenges, but traditional
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) methods do not fully capture its alleged benefits. The pur-
pose of this study is to identify critical parameters influencing the Global Warming Poten-
tial (GWP) of DfD in LCA. This study proposes a modified LCA method that incorporates
future uncertainties related to DfD, focusing on service life and reuse/recycling potential
of materials. The method is tested on two case studies of Danish residential buildings,
one designed with conventional methods (Business as Usual) and one with DfD strate-
gies. The results show that the modified LCA method significantly reduces the Global
Warming Potential (GWP) of the DfD case compared to the traditional LCA method,
highlighting the importance of considering future uncertainties in LCA. The study will
discuss the methodological limitations and the implications of implementing the modified
LCA method in the building industry to incentivize DfD. The findings contribute to the
ongoing debate on the effectiveness of DfD as a sustainability strategy and provide insights
for policymakers and practitioners seeking to promote circular economy principles in the
built environment.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
iv
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
From Helena Maria Hammershaimb and Rikke Krag Hansen, MSc Civil Engineer-
ing, DTU
Kristoffer Negendahl, Associate Professor at DTU, Supervisor
We extend our gratitude to Kristoffer for his supervision throughout this project. His
extensive knowledge in the field has significantly shaped the direction and outcomes of
this research. Kristoffer provided weather files representing weather data for Fredericia,
which were instrumental in conducting energy simulations in EnergyPlus.
Ann-Britt Vejlgaard, Sustainability Engineer, Computational Designer at GXN
We express appreciation to Ann-Britt Vejlgaard, whose contributions have been funda-
mental to establishing the groundwork of this thesis. Ann-Britt facilitated four interviews
aimed at elucidating the objectives of the Design for Disassembly (DfD) and Business
as Usual (BaU) approaches within the CIRCuIT project. Additionally, she provided a
framework for assessing End-of-Life scenarios and BIM models of the two cases.
Alina Galimshina, Postdoctoral researcher, ETH Zürich
Special thanks to Alina Galimshina for her invaluable knowledge and guidance, particu-
larly in the project’s early stages. Alina provided recommendations for utilizing online
tools to manipulate weather files according to IPCC predictions. Furthermore, she sup-
plied essential standard deviation data used in the study of service life durations.
Henrik Sørensen, Civil Engineer and MBA, henrik-innovation
An esteemed acknowledgment is extended to Henrik, whose extensive expertise in the
engineering field provided valuable insights from an industry perspective on currently
challenges for Design in Disassembly. Furthermore, appreciation is extended to Henrik for
providing oﬀice space for us during these five months.
Alexander Hollberg, Associate Professor, Chalmers University of Technology
Thanks to Alexander Hollberg, who participated in an interview to share insights on recent
findings in academia related to Design for Disassembly.
Mirko Farnetasi, Associate Driving Global Embodied Carbon and Circular Economy,
SOM
Thanks to Mirko for sharing his field-specific knowledge during our visit to London.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theoretical Framework
4
2.1
Design for Disassembly and Related Risk Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Design for Disassembly in Life Cycle Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Dynamic Life Cycle Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Operational Impact Assessment with Dynamic Dependencies
. . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Estimated Service Life of Materials with Static and Dynamic Dependencies
15
2.6
Testing Uncertainties Related to DfD in LCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.7
Summary of Theoretical Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Methodology
22
3.1
Initial Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Data Sourcing and Collaboration with GXN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Primary Modeling Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Supplementary Modeling Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Presentation of the Modified LCA Method
26
5
Case Study
28
5.1
Materials and Assemblies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Estimated Service Life of Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Future Climate for Denmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4
Dynamic Occupancy Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Results and Result Analysis
44
6.1
Method Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.2
Sensitivity Analysis of Material Service Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.3
Sensitivity of Variables Implemented in the Modified LCA Method . . . . .
70
6.4
Summary of Results and Result Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7
Discussion
76
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
vi
==PAGE:8==
7.1
Limitations and Assumptions in the Methodology and Suggestions on Fur-
ther Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
7.2
Discussion of the Modified LCA Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7.3
Summary of Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
8
Conclusion
84
Bibliography
86
A Appendix
91
A.1 Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
A.2 Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
A.3 Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
A.4 Results - Method Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
A.5 Results - Sensitivity analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
A.6 MATERIAL CATALOGUE - Service Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
B Appendix - attachments
128
B.1
MATERIAL CATALOGUE - Environmental Impacts - Business as Usual.pdf128
B.2
MATERIAL CATALOGUE - Environmental Impacts - Design for Disas-
sembly.pdf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
B.3
Demo DfD Assessment Tool.xlsx
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
B.4 WORKSHEET.xlsx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
B.5
Results-GWP-Development-BaU.xlsx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
B.6
Results-GWP-Development-DfD.xlsx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
B.7
Operational Script.gh
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
B.8
MAIN (folder)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
vii
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
In today’s building industry, reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions while improving a
building’s adaptability to future changes in climate and social use is paramount. Accord-
ing to research conducted by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), a
reduction in emissions of roughly 50% by 2030 is required to stay way below 2oC global
warming which is critical to avoid irreversible changes to the climate [1]. To reach this
goal, the European Green Deal was approved in 2020 and sets a legally binding target to
transition the economy to be climate-neutral by 2050 [2].
This puts high pressure on the building industry since this particular sector is related
to 40% of global GHG emissions [3]. Different types of sustainability strategies and the
related potential GHG savings have been assessed, e.g., by the European Environmental
Agency, grouping the initiatives into three categories: Increase life spans, Reduce mate-
rial consumption, and Use new generation materials. In terms of renovation actions, the
increase in life spans is predicted to result in the most considerable GHG savings [4]. Con-
sequently, there is an increasing focus on adaptability and flexibility strategies attempting
to ensure that buildings will not become obsolescent prematurely, including Design for
Disassembly (DfD).
The EU Taxonomy, a European financial framework promoting sustainable investments,
has proposed six environmental goals for the building industry: (1) climate change mit-
igation, (2) climate change adaptation, (3) sustainable use and protection of water and
marine resources, (4) transition to a circular economy, (5) pollution prevention and con-
trol, and (6) protection and restoration of biodiversity and ecosystems [5]. This report
focuses on goals 1, 2, and 4, given that climate change poses a considerable risk to the
building industry, with an increase in nature-related damages and thus further shortening
the life span of materials. Furthermore, newer buildings are predicted to have a shorter life
span than those built in the past, according to the research of Negendahl and Andersen
[6]. A shorter life span of buildings and building elements will increase resource use and
environmental impacts if the materials are not designed to be integrated into a circular
economy.
Today, Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is the most commonly used methodology to as-
sess the environmental impacts of buildings, and LCA reporting is mandatory for all new
buildings according to the Danish Building Regulation [7]. However, this method cannot
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
1
==PAGE:10==
fully capture the benefits of adaptable and flexible design, nor Design for Disassembly
[8]. Therefore, this study seeks to test models for incorporating the future uncertainties
of DfD into LCA with a focus on the service life and potential reuse/recycling potential
of building materials. Future uncertainties in LCA are one of the main obstacles to jus-
tifying the benefits of DfD strategies. Due to the potentially long life cycle of a building,
it requires predictions of events and dynamic impacts happening many years from now.
Current LCA methodologies in Denmark consider a building’s environmental footprint
over 50 years, after which the building is assumed to be demolished. Such assumptions
are applied to all buildings with no differentiation to their adaptability or other influential
factors that could suggest a longer life span. Generally, this is due to the lack of data on
the cause-effect of social, economic, and environmental agents and the building’s life span
[9].
Additionally, the concept of a building’s life span is a very abstract term.
Is the life
span determined by the structure? Is it a certain percentage of the original materials
remaining, retention of aesthetic trades, or something else entirely? For those interested
in Greek mythology, these considerations draw clear parallels to the Paradox of Theseus’s
ship - a thought experiment centered around a ship traveling back and forth from Athens
to Delos undergoing several hundreds of years of renovation. Later on, this ship became
an example for philosophers, who wondered if it could be defined as the same ship if each
piece of it was replaced [10]. This question can also be asked when trying to determine
the life span of a building, especially as this time period determines the boundaries for
measuring its environmental footprint. This conflict is deeply related to DfD since it re-
quires a prolonged time frame and expansion of the analysis scope from building scale
to, e.g., city scale to truly capture the benefits in an LCA. Furthermore, there is the risk
of a material’s ability to enter the circular economy not being realized all those years
after its construction. Frameworks to determine the potential and risks related to DfD
are increasing in demand, and several influential institutions, such as the Sustainability
scheme, DGNB, and the EU taxonomy, are now looking into methods to implement these
considerations with a dynamic perspective in LCA.
Other barriers make designers hesitant to implement DfD as a strategy, e.g.
the fact
that studies suggest that DfD requires additional up-front GHG emissions and that DfD
is equivalent to oversized structures [11] [12], which is argued to be misconceptions by
other scholars [13]. Thus, more research is required for DfD to become a viable practice,
in addition to adjustments in current LCA methods to capture the benefits/disadvantages.
1.2
Goal
This experimental study aims to contribute to the debate on whether DfD is the most
appropriate sustainability strategy, given the urgency of climate change mitigation. The
study hopes to provide insight into which aspects of LCA should be prioritized for further
research to improve the assessment of DfD regarding method and data availability with a
focus on service life estimation, reuse/recycling potential, and dynamic impacts over time.
Furthermore, the project aims to assist policymakers in decision-making, highlighting chal-
lenges and opportunities related to a modification of current LCA methods to incentivize
DfD strategies.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
2
==PAGE:11==
1.3
Research Questions
Research questions:
1. What are the advantages and disadvantages of the state-of-the-art methods to model
the consequences of Design for Disassembly in LCA?
2. How can we test the consequences of Design for Disassembly regarding Global Warm-
ing Potential?
3. What are the most important parameters affecting the Global Warming Potential of
Design for Disassembly? In particular, those regarding the service life and reuse/re-
cycling potential of materials, given future scenarios.
4. Should we Design for Disassembly theoretically?
Project Overview
To answer these research questions, this project will first conduct a literature review of
state-of-the-art methods seeking to capture the environmental consequences of DfD in
building design today.
This study only focuses on GHG emissions, also called Global
Warming Potential (GWP). The literature review will further attempt to source statisti-
cal data on uncertainties related to DfD.
Secondly, this study sets out to create a method for assessing the consequences of DfD
in LCA. This method will be called ”Modified LCA” and aims to implement some of the
main findings from the literature review.
Thirdly, the study attempts to test and critically review the Modified LCA method on
two case studies and compare the results with those of a traditional LCA, called ”Baseline
LCA”. The Danish architecture company GXN provided two case studies: one designed
with Business as Usual (BaU) materials and construction methods and one with DfD
strategies. Two sensitivity analyses will be conducted to identify the key parameters ben-
efiting DfD strategies. The first will examine how the two LCA methods (Baseline vs
Modified) respond to uncertainties in service life estimation. Subsequently, a sensitivity
analysis will be conducted on the parameters differentiating the Modified from the Base-
line LCA to determine their impacts.
Finally, this project will discuss whether the Modified LCA method provides an incen-
tive to design for disassembly and the main limitations and uncertainties related to the
approach. The study will also discuss the broader implications of implementing the various
aspects of the Modified LCA method in the building industry.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
3
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Theoretical Framework
2.1
Design for Disassembly and Related Risk Factors
Design for Disassembly (DfD) is a design strategy that integrates the ability to decon-
struct, reuse, and replace building components safely. The approach aims to extend the
overall lifespan of the building, as well as the individual material. Adaptable and dry-
assembly building parts are intentionally designed to accommodate future modifications
without comprehensive deconstruction of entire elements. The strategy plays a crucial
role in resource preserving and waste prevention [14][15].
DfD is defined in ISO2020887:2020 as: ”An approach to the design of a product or con-
structed asset that facilitates disassembly at the end of its useful life, in such a way that
enables components and parts to be reused, recycled, recovered for energy or in some other
way, diverted from the waste stream”[16]
For decades, the building industry has focused on researching and developing energy-
eﬀicient buildings and cheap building materials. At the beginning of the 90s, the DfD
began to gain attraction, following the principle of Design for Assembly (DfA) introduced
in the 70s.
Initially, the motivation was economically driven [17].
However, with the
awareness of circular economy and recourse limitations, DfD has become widely debated
and increasingly important in the building industry globally.
Historically, DfD has been a prevalent construction method for various reasons. One rea-
son was the necessity due to the absence of mounting products. This was seen during the
Middle Ages in Europe, where timber constructions were designed to be disassembled and
reused due to the joint technique and hierarchy of structure. [18] This concept persists
in Japan, known as ”Japanese wooden architecture,” where wood’s strengths and physi-
cal properties are maximized to achieve flexibility. [18] Another historical driver for DfD
was the importance and shortage of materials and building elements. An example is the
Colosseum in Rome, constructed using facade material from Farnese Palace, demonstrat-
ing early reuse practice. Furthermore, before static housing, nomad lifestyles necessitated
easy deconstruction of shelter [18].
While many historical methods for creating DfD principles are no longer in use, the princi-
ple remains relevant, as Philip Crowther points out: ”This often forgotten technology has
remarkable potential in an era where concern over reuse and recycling is becoming increas-
ingly important.” [18]. A general challenge in design processes is the lack of knowledge and
limited availability of DfD joints in the toolbox of engineers and architects [19]. This lack
of know-how may be attributed to current construction methods being more time-eﬀicient
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
4
==PAGE:13==
and economically beneficial since the historical aspect outlines that DfD would be the
most natural way to build.
In literature, several experts discuss the challenges and opportunities of incorporating
disassembly into the design to facilitate the reuse and recycling of a larger percentage of
building materials. A US study from 2015 highlights these aspects to raise awareness of
focus points for future stakeholders [20]. This study highlights the major challenges the
industry is facing. A crucial aspect regarding the reuse of materials is the low demand,
which leads to higher costs and makes it time-consuming to build with reused material.
To encourage designers to use reusable or reused materials in the future, the demand must
increase, potentially driven by ambitious building regulations. The increase in demand
would foster a new industry with disassembly elements, enhancing the economy and eﬀi-
ciency of the material.
Another significant challenge is the uncertainty related to the customer’s preferences and
behavior that the designers can not predict. The occupancy of the building impacts not
only the operational impacts but also the service life of the materials. From study of
challenges and opportunities by Da Yan et Al [20], it can be concluded that designing for
disassembly and creating the perfect circular system is very complex, and there is a high
risk of well-indented design choices not being realized in the future, leading to unintended
consequences.
The Danish Technological Institute, a non-profit research institution, has published Design
for Disassembly manual [15] presents the 27 guidelines from the study ”Developing an in-
clusive model for design for deconstruction” by Dr. Crowther [21], and breaks this down to
11 essential keywords to guide the designers: recycled materials; simplify; avoid toxic and
dangerous substances; use the same material; identify and retain information; collections
must be reusable; avoid special designs; use modular design and standards; allow parallel
separation; easy access to collections; handle components. The overall aim is to narrow
down the potential threats to activating the DfD potential. The Design for Disassembly
manual [15] presents a qualitative study was conducted in the UK by interviewing people
in the building industry and making them identify the potential risks that can lead to
DfD potentially not being activated, and how to adress these risks. These focus points are
presented below:
1. Better training of professionals in the design of the building’s dismantling (or DfD)
2. Give more points for accountability in the assessment of sustainability
3. Legislation which makes it a requirement to have a plan for dismantling the building,
in connection with granting permission to the construction
4. Public legislation must set targets for material recovery and recycling
5. Early involvement of professional demolishers in connection with the design of the
building
The second point is particularly important to this study, as it outlines the importance
of ”accountability in DfD in sustainability assessment”, which is the primary objective of
this thesis. The fourth point emphasizes the significance of ”public legislation targets for
the reuse and recycling of materials”, which advocates for an expanded scope for currently
used sustainability assessment, LCA.
The importance of reducing resource use in the building industry is widely known, but
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
5
==PAGE:14==
how can it be assessed whether this has been achieved when designing a building? Many
are addressing this problem in the literature, amongst others, Claudio Favi and Michele
Germani [22], who created Disassembly indices to measure the feasibility of different EoL
scenarios for DfD. The study proposes six new indexes: a reuse index, recycle index, re-
manufacturing index, landfill index, incineration index, and different treatment indexes
to determine the End-of-Life for the material. The index aims to help designers in the
early design stage evaluate the EoL of products and support EU policy for waste treat-
ment. However, this methodology is extensive and requires consistent data before using
the equations.
The architectural company 3XN/GXN has created a simple framework for evaluating a
materials EoL, which was developed during the CIRCuIT project. The CIRCuiT project
was part of the European Commission’s Horizon 2020 program, promoting sustainable and
circular construction practices [23]. The framework was not used in the CIRCuIT project
since it was unfinished when the project ended. However, the concept of the unfinished
framework is to assessed the EoL based on the following risk types:
• Inaccessibility: If the material cannot be accessed without demolishing other ele-
ments or materials.
• Inadabtability: If the material is not adaptable to fit into a new system or context.
• Independency: If the material is mounted to another material by glue or other wet
connections.
• Toxins: If the material has dangerous chemicals to humans.
This simple framework does not account for several paramount risk factors, such as eco-
nomic incentives and available logistics to facilitate reuse/recycling (See Appendix B.3)
2.2
Design for Disassembly in Life Cycle Assessment
Life cycle assessment (LCA) is the standardized method used to assess the potential envi-
ronmental impacts of a building design over its life span. It is commonly used to quantify
sustainability in terms of emissions and resource depletion. ISO 14040 describes the ”prin-
ciples and framework for LCA”, while ISO 14044 “specifies requirements and provides
guidelines” [24], [25]. These standards define the main concepts, including the four steps
in an LCA: 1) Goal and Scope, 2) Inventory Analysis, 3) Impact Assessment, 4) Interpre-
tation, and the environmental impact categories to be assessed.
There are two key European adaptations of the ISO standards for the construction in-
dustry. The first standard, EN15978 ”Sustainability of construction works - Assessment
of environmental performance of buildings - Calculation method”, specifies how the envi-
ronmental impacts are assessed according to specific life cycle stages for a building [26].
The second standard, EN 15804+A1/+A2 ”Sustainability of construction works – En-
vironmental product declarations – Core rules for the product category of construction
products”, specifies how environmental data for products is declared in Environmental
Product Declarations (EPD’s) [27].
The benefits and disadvantages of a given sustainability strategy, such as DfD, will strongly
depend on the method chosen for measuring and reporting environmental impacts. This
section will cover the main calculation rules affecting DfD, among other sustainability
strategies, in the LCA. For example, modules chosen to include the study period and
the allocation of emissions between multiple life cycles will be covered. The chosen LCA
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
6
==PAGE:15==
methods and target values set nationally and internationally can influence the market by
incentivizing more holistic sustainability strategies. The main calculation rules for LCA
in Denmark can be seen in table 2.1 and the limit values for GHG emissions in Denmark
can be seen in Appendix A.1 table A.1 .
Life Cycle Assessment calculation rules, BR18
Study period
50 years
Modules to be included
A1, A2, A3, B4, B6, C3, C4 (D outside system)
Product specific material input data
EPD’s according to EN15804+A1 or A2
Generic material input data
BUILD’s database (Ökobaudat, EPD Danmark) [28]
Area inventory
Brutto area, adjusted according to §455
Life span
According to BUILD life span table [29]
Energy emission factors
Prediction according to Artelia [30]
Allocation for reuse in 1st life cycle
0% of emissions
Allocation for reuse in 2nd life cycle
100% of emissions
Calculation rule for bio-based materials
-1/1
Table 2.1: LCA calculation rules according to the Danish Building Regulations [7], [28]
2.2.1
LCA Modules representing DfD
The five main LCA stages are the product stage, construction process stage, use stage,
and End-of-Life stage, and finally, the benefits and loads beyond the system boundaries
(See figure 2.1) where stages far into the future are subject to higher uncertainties. These
stages are subdivided into modules classified by a letter and a number, e.g., A1 (Extraction
of raw materials). However, many of the LCA modules defined in the European standards
are excluded from reporting environmental impacts in Denmark. Here, only A1-A3, B4,
B6, C3-C4 must be declared [7], (see the modules marked with blue in figure 2.1), due to
the lack of consistent and accurate data [31]. The D stage is furthermore declared outside
of system boundaries and therefore not used to calculate if the building complies with the
given limit values for GHG in Denmark, see Appendix A.1 table A.1.
The GWP of bio-based materials is accounted for 1:1, meaning that the carbon which
is sequestered as the plant grows is counted as a negative impact in the raw material
extraction module, and the same amount is released at the EoL stage given that the
bio-based material is incinerated.[7]
Some of the currently excluded modules are assumed to be key in representing the po-
tential benefits/disadvantages of DfD strategies.
This includes, among others, the B2
(Maintenance), B3 (Repair), B5 (Refurbishment), C1 (De-construction and demolition),
and well as the D stage. Balouktsi et Al. investigate the implications and the feasibility
of making more modules mandatory in Denmark [31]. The modules in question are the
A4, A5, B1, B2, C1, and C2, where the B2 (Maintenance) and C1 (Deconstruction/Demo-
lition) modules are particularly relevant to DfD. The study found the B2 (maintenance)
module to have a very low direct influence on the GWP. However, the paper argues that
the indirect impact on GWP can be significant due to the potential extension of the ser-
vice life of materials. The relation between GWP and the service life of building materials
is elaborated in section 2.5. As the C1 (De-construction/Demolition) module is highly
uncertain, being far into the future, the study suggests that it should be reported using
standard values, thus not benefiting DfD [31]. The implications and barriers for imple-
menting the D stages in LCA have been investigated by Joensuu et Al., concluding that
the uncertainties are too significant and the possible errors in assumptions make it too
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.1: LCA stages according to EN 15978 with modules according to EN15643 for
Greenhouse gas emissions specifically [31]. The modules marked with blue are included in
the current LCA reporting according to the Danish Building Regulations [7]
complex for non-specialists in LCA to correctly implement this stage [32]. The C2 and C3
modules can represent different EoL scenarios (landfill, incineration, recycling, or reuse)
and determine the type of data in the D stage (reuse, recovery, recycling, or exported
utility potential). This means that if the EoL scenario is incineration, then the D stage
represents the exported utilities related to the incineration. The EoL data is however often
the result of a complex calculation where e.g. a percentage of the material is assumed to
be incinerated and another percentage is recycled. The D stage is therefore a challenge
to implement due to great uncertainty and lack of transparency regarding assumptions
made when calculating the avoided production of new materials, energy, or something in
between. In addition to that aspect, EPD is generally considered inconsistent since the
declarations have different content and formats depending on the publisher [33].
Furthermore, updates of the current LCA methodology on a European level are on its
way and these updates hold potential changes of which some can influence the assessment
of DfD. The scope for GHG emission reporting is being revised for a new version of the
EN 15978 and the draft, prEN 15978:2023, published in 2023 suggests among others the
following changes [31]:
1. Combining B2 (Maintenance) and B3 (Repair) into one module. This could poten-
tially play a role in the assessment of DfD.
2. Include packaging in the waste management. This could also potentially be relevant
in a more accurate assessment of DfD benefits.
3. Distinction between regulated and unregulated energy use of building systems as
well as other energy use related to the user’s activities. This is not directly affecting
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
8
==PAGE:17==
DfD, but could be important for other sustainability strategies such as flexibility.
Studies on the emission distribution between the LCA modules for structural components
suggest that DfD tends to have higher GWP in the product stage compared to business
as usual, but only if no reuse occurs. If reuse occurs the DfD is overall environmentally
profitable in the second life cycle given the studies methods to account for GHG emissions
over multiple life cycles [11] [12].
2.2.2
Study Period and Allocation Methods between Multiple Life Cy-
cles
Current LCA methodologies assess the impacts related to the construction industry using
a single building’s life cycle as the scope with all material impacts depending on the fixed
study period, thus the circular material flow facilitated by DfD is not taken into account.
As discussed, DfD aims to prolong the life span of buildings and the service life of the
elements although not necessarily prolong the use within the same building.
Buildings constructed with reused materials have already been the subject to an adjust-
ment in LCA calculation rules on a national level in Denmark as it has been decided to
account for these materials as 0 through all LCA modules [7], see table 2.1. However,
current legislation lacks an incentive through the LCA methods and subsequently, the
politically determined limit values to ensure that materials can be reused after the EoL/in
the second life cycle. This is criticized by many scholars, where the introduction of multiple
life cycles in LCA is being discussed. Among others, Troussier et Al. suggest incorporating
an estimate of the number of usage cycles (loops) that the building component can support
and the probability of EoL scenarios such as reuse, recycle, incineration, and landfill [34].
The concept of multiple life cycles will directly reflect the advantages of DfD, but as of
now, there is no consensus on how the impacts should be allocated between the initial and
following life cycles. This is due to the complexity and uncertainties related to the long
life span of buildings and building materials, as well as the fact that a representative allo-
cation of emissions across life cycles must reflect the timing of the emissions. Finally, such
a method must consider the risks of the reuse/recycling potential not being activated [35].
As for now, the European standard, EN15798, requires an allocation approach assigning
all emissions to the first life cycle [8].
The entire building’s life span is set to be 50 years in Denmark (see table 2.1) and typically
set to 50-60 years in Europe due to economic projection timelines and norms in the insur-
ance industry, and to enable comparison across projects [36]. The study period is known
to have a great influence on the LCA results, as the research by Goulouti et Al. found the
study period to have a significant impact on the sensitivity of the most influential building
elements in the assessment [37]. The study period will also determine if the benefits of DfD
and the use of long-lasting materials lie beyond the scope of the assessment, see section 2.5.
2.3
Dynamic Life Cycle Assessment
Another discussed revision to the current LCA methodologies concerns the static nature
of the LCA methods currently used in the industry. A study by Shu el Al. [38] argues that
traditional LCA methods have two major limitations in theory and practice as they do not
consider 1) Time-variance over the long life cycle of a building and 2) Occupancy behavior.
These two uncertainties in LCA could potentially be of high impact when assessing DfD
since DfD allows for adaptability without necessarily adding obsolescent materials to the
waste stream.
Shu el Al.
[38] suggests a Dynamic LCA (DLCA) with properties as
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
9
==PAGE:18==
presented in figure 2.2. Here, technological progress covers the development of technology
and machine eﬀiciency. The variation in occupancy behavior accommodates occupancy
behavior differences based on, e.g., age, income, and awareness of energy saving, as well
as the change over time in behavior tendencies. Dynamic characteristic factors cover the
importance of rewarding emissions emitted in the future compared to present emissions,
accounting for the fact that the timing of the emissions affects the abatement of global
warming. Dynamic weighting factors are influenced by time-sensitive political adjustments
such as green taxes, and fees.
Figure 2.2: Identification of dynamic properties in DLCA from [38], considering technolog-
ical development, occupancy behaviour, the urgency of reduction as characteristic factors
and a political factor
A literature review of ”Defining Temporally Dynamic Life Cycle Assessment”[39] criticizes
the assumption of a static world in LCA today, and points out the inconsistency of the
use of DLCA, and suggests a Partially Dynamic Life Cycle Assessment (PDLCA).
A degree of dynamic aspects in LCA is gaining more impact in the industry, reflected
in DGNB’s pilot proposal for the 2025 manual, which may possibly be adopted by the
EU taxonomy [40]. However, accurate and consistent data and frameworks for dynamic
characterization factors are not yet mature; thus, DGNB’s Dynamic Effect method is sup-
posed to be an addition to the traditional LCA method referenced in the Danish Building
Regulation [40].
The following equations 2.1 and 2.2 are based on the study of Resch et Al. [41] and used
to predict the emissions impact on climate change based on time, the dynamic characteri-
zation factor, Tau (τ(y)), and technological optimization factor, Omega (ω(y)) for a given
material type, here simplified to be 1% for all materials and industries. [40].
The function for estimating the embodied GWP of a building is given by summarizing
the impact of all elements. The total GWP is given by the sum of all embodied and
operational emissions, see Equation 2.3 with Dynamic Factors.
τ(y) = 2 −e
ln(2)
T
·y
(2.1)
ω(y) = e−z·y
(2.2)
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
10
==PAGE:19==
GWPDyn(y) =
elements
∑
n=i
(τ(y)·(ω(y)·GWPEmbodied(y))+(FElec(y)·EElec+FHeat(y)·EHeat))
(2.3)
Where;
y = Time [years]
τ(y) = Dynamic characterization factor [−]
ω(y) = Technological optimization factor [−]
T = Time frame, 100 years[years]
z = Yearly technological optimization of the material, 1% [%]
GWPDyn(y) = Global Warming Potential with Dynamic Effects [kgCO2e/m2/yr]
GWPEmbodied(y) = Global Warming Potential of materials [kgCO2e/m2/yr] )
FElec(y) = Emission factors of electricity [kgCO2e/kWh]
FHeat(y) = Emission factors of district heating [kgCO2e/kWh] )
EElec = Electricity demand [kWh/m2/yr]
EHeat = Heating demand [kWh/m2/yr]
The tendencies of the two dynamic factors, Tau, and Omega, are presented in figure
2.3, visualized over time.
They are calculated based on equation 2.1 and 2.2 over T
= 100 years and with an assumed technological optimization of 1%.
However, this is
not representative of the reality, where e.g. solar panel production is estimated to have
a technological optimization of 3.7% emission reduction per year, but an estimation of
the general development across technologies. Resch et Al. estimated the possible yearly
optimization related to a building’s life cycle emissions to be 0.5 −4% based on a global
sensitivity analysis [41].
0
20
40
60
80
100
Year
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Factor [-]
Omega and Tau over Years
Omega
Tau
Figure 2.3: Dynamic factor for technological optimization (ω) and dynamic characteriza-
tion factor (τ) [40] visualized for a 100 year period
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
11
==PAGE:20==
2.4
Operational Impact Assessment with Dynamic Depen-
dencies
When assessing the life cycle of the building, the yearly energy use is a significant com-
ponent in the total global warming impact, categorized as the B6 stage ”Energy use for
operation”. The limit of energy use in a building is specified in the Danish building regu-
lation as[42]:
ETotal = 30 +
1000
Aheated
(2.4)
Where;
ETotal = Total energy use [kWh/m2/y]
Aheated = Heated area in the building [m2]
The total energy use is calculated according to the Energy Frame, determining the primary
energy demand to meet the building’s requirements for thermal comfort, hot water, and
lighting per area according to the Danish Building Regulations [43]. The Danish Building
Regulation requirement for the indoor thermal climate and U-values for the envelope can
be seen in Appendix A.1 table A.2 [44] [45].
2.4.1
Dynamic Energy Factors
The equations used to determine the global warming potential of heat and electricity
are the nationally determined energy factors, see equation 2.5 and 2.6. The heating and
electricity demand is calculated according to the Energy Frame. The factor forecasting
from the Danish Energy Agency, presented by Artelia [30] is intended to predict the
future emission levels from the energy mix, since this is expected to move towards a more
renewable direction. The emission factors are based on the ”Analysisforcast for energy
mix 2022” presented by the Danish Energy Agency [46], which are based on the political
goals of reducing greenhouse gasses with 70% in 2030 compared to 1990.
GWPheat = EHeat · 0.85 · FHeat(y)
(2.5)
Where:
GWPheat = Global Warming Potential of heating [kgCO2e/m2/yr]
EHeat = Heating demand [kWh/m2/yr]
0.85 = Energy factor translating primary energy to secondary energy for district heating
[43]
FHeat(y) = Emission factors of district heating [kgCO2e/kWh] [30]
y = Time [years]
GWPElec = EElec · 1.9 · FHeat(y)
(2.6)
Where;
GWPheat = Global Warming Potential of electricity [kgCO2e/m2/yr]
EElec = Electricity demand [kWh/m2/yr]
1.9 = Energy factor translating primary energy to secondary energy for electricity [43]
FElec(y) = Emission factors of electricity [kgCO2e/kWh] [30]
y = Time [years]
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
12
==PAGE:21==
The electricity system can not be considered territorial bound since Denmark exchanges
electricity with neighboring countries.
The emissions factors (see figure 2.4) are tak-
ing the predicted import into account with representative emission factors based on the
TYNDP2022 scenario report [47] and data from ”LCA for experts” datasets. The emis-
sion factor for imported electricity is generally higher in countries like Germany, UK, and
Netherlands, meanwhile, countries such as Norway and Sweden produce a more renewable
energy mix than Denmark.
The forecast shows a decrease in emission factors for energy until 2050 after which it be-
comes static due to the many assumptions and uncertainties. The emission factors per
kWh if it is heating or electricity are visualized below, see figure 2.4.
2025
2035
2045
2055
2065
2075
2085
2095
2105
2115
2125
Years
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
GWP [kg CO2 e/m2/yr]
Dynamic and static GWP for heat and electricity for baseline scenario
Heat Dynamic [kg CO2 e/kWh]
Electricity Dynamic [kg CO2 e/kWh]
Figure 2.4: Development of energy factor from 2025 and 100 years forward. From Artelia’s
publication based on the Danish energy agency [30]
2.4.2
Future Weather Scenarios
Current LCA methods do not consider dynamic weather scenarios in the assessment of
the operational or embodied impacts. Changes to the climate are extremely important to
consider as it will increase the need for climate adaptation to protect our buildings from
the increasing risk of more extreme weather such as flooding or storms and a change in
the overall temperature, humidity, solar radiation to mention some of the natural agents
affecting the degradation rate of the materials. In Denmark, online tools like DinGeo
are commonly used to assess the weather-related risks for a given building site, and this
tool is also implemented in the DGNB scheme [48], [49]. Methodologies attempting to esti-
mate the impact of weather on the service life of materials will be elaborated in section 2.5.
In Denmark, the energy and thermal simulations used to calculate the operational im-
pact are conducted using an epw weather file representing a Danish Design Reference
Year (DRY), which is based on data collected from 2001 to 2010 on temperature, relative
humidity, wind speed, and direction, atmospheric pressure, global radiation, cloud cover,
and sea and soil temperature [50]. Although weather predictions are subject to high uncer-
tainties and depend on the actions taken by society, we will certainly see a rapid change
in the climate in the coming years, making the use of static weather files a source of error.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
13
==PAGE:22==
The IPCC has predicted a range of possible weather scenarios reflecting the future global
warming as a result of GHG emissions [51]. In the Paris Agreement, the joined countries
set out to follow the migration pathway compatible with global warming of 1.5oC above
pre-industrial levels and pledges to stay way below 2oC [1]. The current warming rate will
lead to 1.5oC global warming in 2040, according to IPCC, given an immediate reduction
in GHG emissions and that we successfully reach a GHG-neutral society in 2055 [52].
This has led to a variety of techniques attempting to create weather files for the changing
weather, and the most common technique is called Morphing, presented by Belcher et
Al. [53]. This method uses a baseline climate file with observed weather data and cli-
mate models to create a new climate file representing the future weather. The morphing
method is highly uncertain, due to the unpredictable nature of climate change and related
to the down-scaling in spatial and temporal resolution simplifying the model for energy
and thermal building simulations [53]. Different tools are seeking to match the morphing
method with the predictions made by the IPCC, such as the CCWorldWeatherGen [54]
and the epwshiftr [55].
2.4.3
Future Occupancy Scenarios
Occupancy behaviors are known to play a great role in the actual energy consumption
[56]. A study from 2015 [57] outlines the state-of-art research, current obstacles, and fu-
ture needs and states that the importance of the “human factor” in building performance
simulation is evident. Today, the static Energy Frame calculation does not reflect the
actual consumption or variation due to occupancy groups based on age, number of people
pr m2, profession, culture, etc. [43].
Since the future is unknown, predicting a building’s functional requirements is highly
uncertain and very diﬀicult.
The occupancy type can be predicted to depend on ect.
changes in demographics and lifestyle trends, which play a significant role in the changes
in supply and demand regarding different building typologies. Massive uncertainties in
the population growth in a certain area are related to a multitude of factors, including
fertility, immigration, economy, death rate, and urbanization [58]. The CIRCuIT project
has done research on the topic of future demands for residential housing in Copenhagen
based on data from Statistics Denmark. The results are shown in figure 2.5 pairing dif-
ferent occupancy and residential typologies visualizing the likelihood (as a percentage)
of a specific occupancy group moving into specific types of housing based on Statistics
Denmark’s data from 2021 on ”How different family constellations choose to live” [58]. As
an example, 67.4% of young people in co-living situations live in apartments larger than
74 m2, whereas only 1.3% lives in houses in Copenhagen see figure 2.5. To keep up with
the change in housing demand, CIRCuIT also points out that future family constructions
most likely will differ much from what is previously defined as a family.
The two curves are unrelated to the occupancy groups and show the relative difference
between in age groups in 2022 compared to 2045, see the x-axis on figure 2.5. These curves
show that the number of people who are 24-34 years old in Copenhagen will decrease from
2022 to 2045, whereas the number of people over 75 years will increase.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
14
==PAGE:23==
CIRCuIT
Transformative Housing
62.2%
62.7%
Single Middleage
Single Youth
Single Retired
Co-Living Middleage
Co-Living Youth
Co-Living Retired
Young Families
Older Families
67.4%
14.3%
42.3%
38.3%
45.5%
49.4%
66.0%
63.7%
17.2%
31.8%
1.8%
4.1%
32.3%
2.1%
3.1%
5.9%
13.5%
28.7%
1.3%
2.6%
2.7%
2.3%
43.3%
45.2%
8.1%
3.5%
2.5%
24.9%
9.1%
2.3%
Other
Apartment < 74sqm
House
Apartment > 74sqm
0yr
6yr
12yr
18yr
24yr
30yr
36yr
42yr
48yr
54yr
60yr
66yr
72yr
78yr
84yr
90yr
96yr
100yr
2045
2022
Figure 2.5: Representation from GXN on ”How different family constellations choose to
live” and ”People in different age groups now and in 2045” - Danmarks Statistik 2021 [58]
2.5
Estimated Service Life of Materials with Static and Dy-
namic Dependencies
Service life estimation is an essential part of LCA when assessing the embodied impacts.
Research is being conducted on building element level as well as building level e.g. based
on typology and construction period. Here, multifamily residencies are predicted to have
a life span of 168 years if built between 1990-2010 [6], which is higher than the predic-
tion stated in the Danish Building Regulations of 120 years for all residential buildings
[36]. Methods to prolong and estimate the service life theoretically and in practice are
closely related to DfD. Different types of strategies are attempting to ensure buildings,
in general, will not become obsolescent prematurely, including climate change adaptation,
DfD, high-quality material choices, open floor plans, and high ceiling height [6].
The
focus of this paper is primarily the link between DfD and the service life of building el-
ements. Although DfD is a strategy the designers can control here and now, its actual
dependency on service life is influenced by many risks and uncertain conditions, some
static and others dynamic over time. The series of ISO standards concerning service life
estimation is the ISO 15686 ”Buildings and constructed assets – Service-life planning” [24].
Service Life is defined in ISO 15686 as the period from installation until the component
meets or exceeds the performance requirements and Design Service Life is defined as the
service life intended by the designer when the prescribed maintenance is followed [24].
There is a lack of consistent and adequate data and methodologies implementing the most
common agents and their respective cause-effects on the service life [59], [60]. Several sug-
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
15
==PAGE:24==
gestions have been made as to how the agents should be categorized, Iselin et Al. propose
to distinguish between endogenous and exogenous agents [61], while other proposes phys-
ical and behavioral agents or a combination of the before mentioned in a four-quadrant
conceptual model of the cause-effect for obsolescence [60], [59]. It is stated that there is
a general lack of data collected over a long period to access the high uncertainties related
to the longitude of the predictions [59]. Furthermore, data and models account for factors
taking spatial differentiation into account [36]. Studies further suggest that social agents
play the biggest role in the premature obsolescence of building materials which are subject
to high uncertainty and thus diﬀicult to implement accurately [9]. Interactions between
agents add another layer of complexity and the propagation of uncertainties makes ser-
vice life estimation an extremely diﬀicult part of LCA modeling [9]. It is agreed that a
more detailed collection of data mapping service life dependencies on various agents can
provide valuable knowledge for prioritizing sustainable design strategies such as design for
disassembly [62], [63].
2.5.1
Modelling Service Life Dependencies in LCA
Generally, there are 3 types of models to estimate the service life of building materials in
LCA [29]. From a modeling point of view, the dependencies between an agent and the
service life are described as factors:
• Deterministic models predict one absolute service life value, often based on analysis
of the degradation factors affecting the service life of the element. The advantages of
this model include simplicity, and easy implementation, also with many unknowns in
the model. The disadvantages include a lack of precision and the inability to model
future uncertainties related to physical and behavioral agents [9].
• Stochastic models use probability functions to understand uncertainties and estimate
a degradation curve, often shown as an s-curve and called the replacement rate [6].
Advantages include the method’s ability to capture more nuances. Disadvantages
cover the complexity of the mathematical expressions and extensive data require-
ments, preferably collected over a long period, limiting the application possibilities
[9].
• Engineering models, also called heuristic models, are a mix between the determinis-
tic and stochastic models. The Factor Method proposed in ISO15686 is, for instance,
a heuristic model [29]. The advantages include the simplicity and easy implemen-
tation of the deterministic methods with a manageable level of complexity when
probabilistic data is available [9].
2.5.2
Factor Method - ISO 15686
The most commonly used method to implement service life dependencies is the Factor
Method proposed by ISO 15686 [24], which adjusts for a selected number of physical
and behavioral dependencies.
According to the Factor Method, service life depending
on technical properties/material composition and quality is called Reference Service Life
(RSL). It is possible to adjust RSL with more project-specific dependencies, after which the
estimate will be called Estimated Service Life (ESL) [24]. The Factor Method is described
below according to ISO15686 [24], see equation 2.7:
ESL = RSL · a · b · c · d · e · f · g · h
(2.7)
ESL = Estimated Service Life
RSL = Reference Service Life
a = Inherent Performance Level
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
16
==PAGE:25==
b = Design Level
c = Work Execution Level
d = Indoor Environment
e = Outdoor Environment
f = Usage Conditions
g = Maintenance Level
Here, factors Inherent Performance Level (a), Design Level (b), and Work Execution Level
(c) are initial, static agents but still their final impact on the service life is uncertain until
far into the future. The other factors can be described as future, dynamic as they can
vary over time and their impacts are too. The ISO 15686 proposes a method to account
for the uncertainties of both the factors and the RSL using an uncertainty range instead
of deterministic values for final ESL, see equation A.1 and A.2 in Appendix A.1 [24].
One tool using the Factor Method is Levetider.dk, based on Danish data and building
costumes. Levetider.dk does not cover all elements - only the most sensitive elements
commonly deviating from the generic ESL. This includes; roofs, facades, windows, and
wet rooms. Furthermore, only the following factors are included; Design (b), Quality (c),
Indoor environment (d), and Outdoor environment (e). The factors are proposed to be
between 0.8 and 1.2 by ISO 15686, but Levetider.dk has chosen to only apply factors < 1.
A fixed uncertainty range is determined to be 30% at levetider.dk which is a simplification
compared to the suggested method proposed by the ISO15686 [64].
2.5.3
BUILD
BUILD is an institute providing research and guidelines for the public and the Danish
state on sustainable construction practices [65]. This institute has published generic ser-
vice life values and calculation rules recommended by the Danish Building Regulations
for LCA. BUILD’s method to predict these generic service life values, called the ”actual
mean life span” is based on the interactions between four statistically independent mean
life spans; technical, functional, economic, and aesthetic [36].
The generic life span of BUILD is estimated based on the engineering model combin-
ing deterministic and stochastic models. The service life estimations are based on expert
knowledge when empirical data is unavailable. BUILD either assumes a normal distribu-
tion for service life or estimates the service life using the MTTF model, a commonly used
method to estimate the mean time between failures for a physical system [36]. Levetider.dk
assumes the weibull or normal distribution based on empirical data and expert knowl-
edge[64]. Other literature shows that the service of building elements can be described as
log-normally distributed, among others seen in the study of a dataset holding descriptive
statistics of 100 construction products, primarily Swiss [37]. The many assumptions, es-
pecially regarding distribution types and interactions, show the high uncertainties related
to service life estimation, and BUILD emphasizes that it is not possible to predict service
lives with one single statistical distribution being applied to all materials and all cases [36].
The generic service life values reported by BUILD depend on material type and posi-
tion to enable the use of service life values with different levels of detail. The values are
rounded up or down to one of the following steps (10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80,
100 or 120). Further methods to implement service life dependencies according to Danish
Building Regulations [36], [64] include parallel life spans according to the mounting type,
which is highly relevant for DfD. BUILD has furthermore proposed that elements of the
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
17
==PAGE:26==
same construction with less than 20% variation in life span must follow the lowest life
span (20% rule) suggesting that renovation often will be planned to include elements that
are close to their EoL for economic and practical reasons. Finally, BUILD states that if
the time left of the entire building’s study period is less than a third of a given building
element’s life span, then it will not be economically viable to replace the element (also
known as the 33% rule) [36].
2.6
Testing Uncertainties Related to DfD in LCA
Research studies often couple uncertainty analysis with a sensitivity analysis to understand
the effect on the LCA output when varying the input variables according to their probabil-
ity. A Global Sensitivity Analysis (GSA) simultaneously varies the inputs, capturing the
interaction effects as well [66]. This approach is applied and recommended to investigate
the complexities in LCA regarding dynamic factors and service life uncertainties, which
are relevant for DfD [37], [41] [67].
The strengths of GSA include the ability to capture model input interactions and iden-
tify influential and non-influential variables [66]. The main limitations of current GSA
methods concern the treatment of dependent and correlated variables and the number of
simulations required if there are a significant number of variables [66], [68].
Different approaches can be found in research for measuring the importance of variables
in GSA, including regression, statistical tests, and functional decomposition of ex the vari-
ance [69]. The variance-based GSA is recommended for LCA [41] as it provides a clear
overview of the influential variables by calculating the share of the total variance, that
can be attributed to each variable, also called Sobol indices [66]. First-order indices of
the variance-based GSA are calculated as follows (see equation 2.8) and Total indices, see
2.9. The first-order indices represent the variance caused by a single input (varying alone).
Second-order indices take the interactions between two inputs into account, and finally,
the total indices are the sum of all calculated indices [70], [69].
Si =
Vi
V ar(Y )
(2.8)
Where Si is the contribution from the input Xi to the output variance averaged by the
variation caused by all inputs V ar(Y ). The sum of all Si = 1
Si,Total = 1 −V ar[E(Y |Xi)]
V ar(Y )
(2.9)
Where E(Y |Xi) is the expected value of Y, when Xi is fixed averaged by the variation
caused by all inputs V ar(Y ). The sum of all Si,Total >= 1
Methods of sampling inputs are linked to the study’s purpose and the type of analysis.
Here Monte Carlo sampling or quasi-Monte Carlo sampling, e.g. Saltelli, are commonly
used with global sensitivity analysis, as seen in [41] and [37]. The samples are random
and independent based on the probability distribution and bounds for the inputs, making
the empirical data a key requirement for providing representative results. Quasi-Monte
Carlo is often used as it has increased eﬀiciency and accuracy with fewer random values
compared to regular Monte Carlo but this method does not work well with model patterns,
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
18
==PAGE:27==
where variables tend to cancel each other out or with discontinuity [71]. Quasi-random
sampling methods can, however, consider grouping if certain variables should be fixed to-
gether when the sample variations are generated [72]. This is useful if e.g. certain building
materials are mounted together.
Equations 2.10 and 2.11 can be used to estimate the number of GSA model evaluations
required to calculate reliable results based on the number of input samples and dominates
how computationally heavy the model is [73]. If second-order indices are excluded the
number of model evaluations can be calculated using equation 2.10.
N = n · (M + 2)
(2.10)
If second-order indices are included, the equation for calculating the model evaluations is
as follows, see equation 2.11.
N = n · (2M + 2)
(2.11)
Where;
N = number of model evaluations
n = number of samples, as a rule of thumb n=1000 [73]
M = Number of variables
The level of knowledge, mathematical modeling abilities, computational power, and data
availability are important considerations to make when modeling LCA uncertainties. This
is necessary to determine which parts of the system can be modeled explicitly and which
parts should be represented by existing models on the causal relationship of sub-processes
within the LCA model [74]. A scenario analysis, for instance, is appropriate to use when
testing the effect of possible future scenarios or pathways such as weather scenarios from
the IPCC, occupancy or EoL scenarios for building materials and DfD [74], [75].
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
19
==PAGE:28==
2.7
Summary of Theoretical Framework
This section addressed research question 1: ”What are the advantages and disadvantages
of the state-of-the-art methods to model the consequences of Design for Disassembly in
LCA?”. Finally, we summarize the advantages and disadvantages of the key perspectives
identified in the literature.
Advantages of state-of-the-art LCA methods:
• The D stage is already declared in EPDs, making it possible to evaluate the reuse/re-
cycling potential of the material outside of the system boundaries. This insight can
suggest the potential benefits of DfD strategies for a given material
• The Factor Method from ISO15686 attempts to account for service life dependen-
cies on a selected number of physical and behavioral agents for a material. This
initiative makes the estimated service life more case-specific and comprehensive, en-
abling designers to target DfD strategies based on the consequences of service life
dependencies in LCA
• The traditional LCA method (from BR18) is easy to apply in practice, and the
results can be used as a benchmark and in decision-making processes
Disadvantages of state-of-the-art LCA methods:
• The traditional method (from BR18) only accounts for a single life cycle period for
materials defined by the system boundaries of a building’s lifespan. Additionally,
the study period of 50 years results in a method currently unable to assess the
benefits of a circular economy and longevity materials. The exclusion of multiple
life cycle periods leaves less incentive to facilitate DfD since the benefits of reusable
and recyclable materials are not attributed to the assessed building
• The exclusion of the D stage in the final LCA result used to benchmark the building
against Danish target values for GWP is a disadvantage for DfD. Implementing the
D stage is debatable, as Joensuu et Al. conclude, since it would result in significant
uncertainty [32]
• The traditional method (from BR18) assumes the same properties and tendencies
throughout the lifespan of the building.
This is a neglect of both technological
and political development, such as the implementation of new-generation materials
and future changes in regulations. The assumed implications of a transition to a
carbon-neutral society are, therefore, not benefiting DfD in LCA. In addition to
this, current LCA methods do not consider future uncertainties related to climate
change and occupancy behavior
• No standardized, comprehensive framework exists to determine EoL. The existing
methods are often too time and data-consuming or do not consider all influential
risks. Thus, LCA assumes a 100% probability of a specific EoL scenario. However,
developments in waste management and regulations result in several possible EoL
outcomes for a material.
The static tendency, not accounting for probability in
the parameters driving the LCA, is generally seen throughout the whole method.
Accounting for probability in the declared LCA results would be more accurate,
although more complex for decision-making
• A significant disadvantage of the LCA method is the lack of transparency and re-
liability in the environmental input data, affecting the overall uncertainty of LCA
results, in particular regarding EoL data on reuse/recycling
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
20
==PAGE:29==
• Not all LCA modules are reported, introducing the risk of hidden emissions, which
could benefit/penalize DfD
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
21
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 3
Methodology
The following section outlines and elaborates on the methodologies used to investigate the
hypothesis and answer the research questions for this study. The study is experimental,
and the overall workflow can be seen in figure 3.1. The primary modeling framework, an
LCA, was supplemented with frameworks aiming to consider the benefits of DfD. This led
to constructing a new LCA method named ”Modified” LCA. Python was used to model
the LCA function with all dependencies and variables.
SUPPLEMENTARY 
MODELING FRAMEWORK
DATA 
SOURCING
DATA 
ANALYSIS
PRIMARY MODELING 
FRAMEWORK
Primary data
Semi-​structured interviews
Secondary data
Databases and previous research
LCA
End of Life Framework
 Factor Method (ISO15686)
DLCA (DGNB)
Sobol Sensitivity Analysis
Confidence evaluation
Method Comparison
INITIAL 
RESEARCH
Literature 
review
Energy simulation
Figure 3.1: Workflow showing the main frameworks used in this project to answer the
research questions
3.1
Initial Research
This project commenced with a literature review on state-of-the-art methods seeking to
quantify the causal relations benefiting Design for Disassembly and current methodologies’
related data gaps and limitations.
3.2
Data Sourcing and Collaboration with GXN
Case study data was sourced from BIM models with information on geometry, materi-
als, and construction details. Two Rhino models were used in this case, one representing
a Design for Disassembly (DfD) case study and one Business as Usual (BaU) case study
from the architecture company, 3XN/GXN. The quantities were extracted from Rhino and
paired with environmental data for all materials, primarily based on the BUILD database
[28], and partly from EPD’s sourced online, see Appendix B.1 and B.2. Additional data
on the case studies and design intentions was sourced through semi-structured interviews
with 3XN/GXN.
Mean service life values for position and material dependencies were from BUILD [29],
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
22
==PAGE:31==
and empirical data on standard deviation values were based on the study by Goulouti et
Al. for a given position [37]. Data from levetider.dk was used to set the exact value for
all static, project-specific factors according to the ISO15686 Factor Method [24]. It was
impossible to source consistent data on the cause-effect between dynamic agents (weather
and occupants) and the service life of materials. Thus, it was decided to base these on
assumptions, although within the range recommended by the ISO15686 Factor Method
[24].
Three weather files (.epw files) were used as input to perform an energy simulation in
EnergyPlus using Grasshopper to Rhino. The .epw files were provided by the supervisor,
Kristoffer Negendahl, and represented weather data for Fredericia in 2005 and predictions
for 2050 and 2080.The data for occupancy groups were assumptions from the author’s side
rooted in the research by CURCUiT, ”Transformative Housing” [76]. Data on the two dy-
namic factors, Omega and Tau, were calculated based on the assumptions and equations
provided by the new DGNB 2025 pilot manual [40]. Energy factors were based on the
Danish Energy Agency’s projection of the Danish electricity mix and its corresponding
global warming impact per energy unit [30].
3.3
Primary Modeling Framework
After collecting the necessary data, an LCA was conducted for the two case studies, BaU
and DfD, according to DS/EN15978:2012. This method was selected due to its widespread
utilization in practice.
Relevant literature revealed various life span estimations of a
residential apartment building going beyond the 50 years set by the Danish Building
Regulations. Furthermore, the included prognosis of a dynamic characterization factor
for GWP, Tau, was based on 100 years. The main assumptions included that both case
studies have a life span of 100 years, functional equivalence between the two cases and
that each replacement of materials was done using the same environmental background
data.
3.4
Supplementary Modeling Framework
3.4.1
End-of-Life framework
The LCA methodology lacks a framework for determining the most likely End-of-Life sce-
nario for a given case. Therefore, it was decided to attempt to implement this aspect into
LCA with a supplementary framework. After evaluating various methods for assessing the
risks of materials not being reused/recycled, this study adopted the qualitative approach
from GXN/3XN. The framework was an unfinished and unpublished tool but can be found
in the Appendix B.3. This project adjusted the original tool, adding a risk factor related
to data unavailability. A second adjustment was implemented, linking the outcome of the
EoL assessment to LCA modules with rules to either include or exclude certain modules.
The rationale for employing this method lies in its simplicity and requirement of quali-
tative project knowledge instead of extensive empirical data. The End-of-Life framework
used in this thesis can be seen in Appendix A.2 figure A.1
3.4.2
Factor Method
The ISO15686 Factor Method was implemented to complement the LCA methodology
since Design for Disassembly aims to prolong the service life of materials. The Factor
Method does not consider weather and occupancy conditions dynamic over time. This
led the study to adjust the Factor Method, attempting to establish a causal relationship
between changing weather and occupancy conditions and service life. Other factors were
assumed to have a static effect on the service life see Appendix A.2 table A.3.
The weather conditions from the energy simulation were modeled as decisive for the service
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
23
==PAGE:32==
life of external building parts. The study aimed to account for changing temperature and
humidity, solar radiation, and other risks and vulnerabilities related to climate change. The
dynamic energy scenarios for occupancy were modeled as decisive of the level of tear and
wear on internal surfaces. The dynamic factors for service life and the respective energy
scenario were modeled as constant over the entire study period of 100 years. Appendix A.2
figure A.2 provides the complete overview of the agents accounted for implicitly through
secondary data. The agents chosen to model explicitly using the Factor Method can be
seen in Appendix A.2 table A.4.
3.4.3
Energy Simulation
The operational impact of changing weather and occupant scenarios is estimated with an
energy simulation in Grasshopper using Energy Plus, see attached Appendix B.7. The
simulations of energy consumption are executed, in both cases, as 1-year simulations for
all scenarios, see specification in the case presentation, section 5.4 and 5.3. The follow-
ing settings and conditions are used when simulating the energy in this assessment see
Appendix A.2 table A.5.
3.4.4
Dynamic Life Cycle Assessment
While investigating the dependencies of service life, it became clear that certain factors
would need to be dynamic over time to assess the influence over the life cycle effectively.
The study extended the analysis scope by incorporating various perspectives on future dy-
namic events using the equation presented in the DGNB 2025 Pilot manual, see equation
2.3. This decision was motivated by a commitment to investigate the political sustain-
ability agenda within the building industry, recognizing that this approach represents the
future of calculation methods.
3.5
Data Analysis
3.5.1
Method Comparison
A new LCA method called ”Modified” was defined based on previous frameworks. The goal
was to compare the Modified LCA’s abilities to capture DfD benefits to a traditional LCA
”Baseline.” The two LCA methods were applied to the case studies aiming to evaluate the
different case responses. The method overview is shown in table 3.1. The construction of
service life dependencies can be seen in figure 4.1 for the Baseline and Modified methods.
LCA modules
Service life de-
pendency
Weather
scenario
Occupant
scenario
Dynamic
Factors for
GWP
Baseline
A1-A3, B4, B6,
C3-C4
Mounting
Current
weather
Single
Youth
None
Modified
A1-A3, B4, B6,
C3-C4, D
Static
factors
and
extreme-
case
of
the
dynamic factors
2.1
degC
increase
Family
of
4
Tau, τ,
and
Omega, ω
Table 3.1: Overview of the fixed settings used to compare the two LCA methods, ”Baseline”
and ”Modified”. Further details in service life dependencies can be seen in figure 4.1
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
24
==PAGE:33==
Position
dependency
BUILD.dk
Material
dependency
BUILD.dk
Mounting
dependency
Material from GXN
Static factors:
Location and design
ISO15686/Levetider.dk
Baseline service life
according to BR18 Method
ISO15686/assumptions
Dynamic factors:
Weather and occupants
Modified service life
according to Factor Method
Figure 3.2: The build-up of service life based on various dependencies proposed by the
Danish Building Regulation [29] and additional modifications according to the ISO15686
Factor Method [24]
3.5.2
Sobol Sensitivity Analysis
The Sobol sensitivity analysis was used to determine the scale of the variation in GWP
due to each variable. This sensitivity method was chosen due to the explainability of
the results and the method’s ability to capture parameter interactions. The GSA was
performed using the SALib library for Python [77]. 1000 samples were drawn using the
Saltelli method to estimate the input distribution. The service life dependencies used in
the analysis can be seen in Appendix A.2 figure A.3.
Firstly, a sensitivity analysis was performed for the Baseline and the Modified LCA re-
sults, see table 3.1. The service life values were assumed to be positive, absolute, random
variables with a lognormal distribution. The materials mounted together were grouped
to ensure they always took identical service life in the analysis. The mounted material’s
standard deviations were adjusted to represent the lowest value. The goal was to evalu-
ate the most sensitive materials before and after implementing the Modified LCA method.
Furthermore, it examined whether the DfD strategies targeted the correct material groups
for the given case study. Secondly, a sensitivity analysis was performed to test the impact
of all the variables differentiating the Baseline and the Modified LCA method. Certain
parameters were modeled to be included or excluded in the LCA method, while others
varied between multiple scenarios, see Appendix A.2 table A.6. The weather files, occu-
pancy groups, and dynamic service life factors were treated as dependent, deterministic
scenarios with a uniform probability distribution. The goal was to provide insight on the
variables of highest importance for DfD compared to BaU.
3.5.3
Evaluation of Confidence
The results were evaluated, and the 95% confidence intervals were computed assuming a
normal distribution for the model output. Furthermore, the study aimed to validate the
results by comparing the tendencies of the initial method comparison with the sensitivity
results.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
25
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4
Presentation of the Modified LCA
Method
This chapter presents the Modified LCA method, which aims to test the GWP benefits of
DfD in LCA addressing research question 2: ”How can we test the consequences of Design
for Disassembly regarding Global Warming Potential?”.
The main features of the method include:
• Consideration of future agents affecting the GWP of DfD, focusing on service life
dependencies
• Implementation of End-of-Life framework to determine likely scenarios and the re-
lated EoL modules based on risk factors
• Expansion of the model boundaries from a single building to a system by including
the D stage in the LCA scope
• Extension of the study period from 50 years to 100 years
The Modified LCA seeks to implement future unknown agents, focusing on GWP depen-
dencies on service life, including weather, occupants, technological optimization of material
production, and dynamic characterization factors for GWP. The causal relationship be-
tween service life and the dynamic agents, occupancy, and weather is also implemented to
account for the effect on operational impacts. By including probabilistic input data, the
goal is to transition from an assessment of absolute GWP to a range of probable GWP
results. This adjustment’s advantages include emphasizing here-and-now emissions while
addressing the uncertainties related to future predictions. The expected disadvantages
include increased complexity, which can challenge the decision-making processes.
A qualitative EoL framework is implemented to assess the probability of EoL scenarios.
The chosen scenario will determine which EoL modules should be included in the LCA.
The main complications related to this feature concern the current procedure for declaring
a material’s environmental impacts since it is common to declare a fixed scenario with
fractions of the material having different EoL. This can lead to an incomplete assessment
of a material’s environmental impacts. The advantages of the EoL framework include the
simplicity with which it enables the LCA practitioner to consider certain risk factors.
The LCA scope is expanded beyond the traditional system boundaries, thus allowing
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
26
==PAGE:35==
the environmental benefits of a potential reuse/recycling to be attributed to the building
design that facilitates disassembly. This is expected to increase the incentive for designers
and clients to design for disassembly. Still, since the GWP savings are highly uncertain
and will happen in the future, it could be feared that including the D stage allows for
increased here-and-now emissions if current target values are not adjusted accordingly
within the building industry.
The study period is extended to 100 years, which is expected to benefit longevity ma-
terials but results in higher uncertainty in GWP estimation.
Figure 4.1 illustrates the mapping of the New Modified LCA Method:
Embodied
GWP
Operational
GWP
Product stage
A1-​A3
Tau
Omega
Energy 
factor
heat
Energy 
factor
electricity
Replacements
B4
End of Life
C3-​C4
Number of 
replacements
33 % rule
Occupancy
D stage
GWP
Factors modeled as dynamic over time
Standard Deviation
Weather
Study Period
Variables added in the Modified LCA
Mean Service life
Dynamic factors
Occupancy groups
Weather
Service Life Dependencies
End-​of-​Life 
Framework
Figure 4.1: The new Modified LCA method used to test the global warming potential
dependencies on service life in Design for Disassembly
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
27
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 5
Case Study
This section will introduce the two GXN case studies that represent two-bedroom apart-
ments in Denmark. General information on the case studies will be presented, including
detail drawings, materials, assemblies, and estimated service life. This section will further-
more present the different types of occupants assumed to live in the apartment and, finally,
the location-specific climate. The two case studies are proposed as part of the Circular
Construction in Regenerative Cities (CIRCuIT) project. The architects of GXN have fo-
cused on three main approaches to achieve a transformative design, which is used as the
DfD case study in this study. The three concepts are multifunctionality, reconfiguration,
and de/remountability, see figure 5.1.
Extendibility
Partitioning
Multi-funcitonality
Functional 
Mutation
Accessibility
Replaceability
Reconfiguring
Seperation
Reconfiguration
De/Remountability
Multifunctionality
Figure 5.1: Figure elaborating on the three main transformative design approaches imple-
mented in the DfD case study proposed by GXN [58]
5.1
Materials and Assemblies
The following will provide an overview of the apartment layouts, the materials, and their
respective assembly methods, sections, and detail drawings.
The complete overview of material quantities, thermal conductivity, densities, and mate-
rial ID numbers from BUILD’s database [7] on environmental data/links and ID numbers
for EPDs can be seen in Appendix B.4.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
28
==PAGE:37==
The two cases do not represent the entire residential building, only a single apartment,
excluding the roof and foundation in the energy simulation and embodied emissions. The
installations (electricity and plumbing), skirting along the walls, screws, and nails are not
included in the LCA.
General data for the two case studies can be seen in table 5.1 showing that the DfD
apartment is bigger than the BaU enabling higher flexibility.
However, the DfD still
weighs less than BaU, 121 tons compared to 89 tons. The Window Wall Ratio (WWR%)
of the BaU and DfD is quite similar and very high, around 70%. It is important to mention
that only North and South-facing walls are facades facing the exterior, while the East and
West-facing walls are assumed to be interior separations walls towards the neighboring
apartment. This contributes to the high WWR%, but the windows are simply very large,
as seen in figure 5.3 and 5.7. The only relevant U-values are those of with outdoor bound-
ary conditions which is the external walls and windows. It can be seen that the external
wall for BaU has better-insulating properties than DfD. However, as before mentioned the
windows take up the majority of the envelope and this is identical for BaU and DfD.
BaU
DfD
Brutto area (incl 25% of balcony area and
hallway for LCA) [m2]
128
118
Energy area (excl. hallway) [m2]
98
92
Floor to ceiling height [m]
2.7
2.7
WWR [%]
71
72
Material weight [tons]
121
89
Slab: U-value [W/m2K]
0.43
0.25 / 0.94
Slab: Boundary condition
Adiabatic
Adiabatic
External walls: U-value [W/m2K]
0.092
0.12
External walls: Boundary condition
Outdoors
Outdoors
Windows: U-value [W/m2K]
1.49
1.49
Windows: Boundary condition
Outdoors
Outdoors
Table 5.1: General data for case studies, BaU and DfD concerning areas and operational
properties
Figure 5.2 shows the floor plan of the two case studies with marking of the sections,
which can be seen in figure 5.4, 5.5, 5.8, and 5.9. The different assemblies and mounting
methods for BaU and DfD are based on the detail drawing, see figure 5.6 and 5.10[58].
The assembly methods affect the EoL scenario, corresponding D stage scenarios, and the
estimated service life see figure 5.6 and 5.10.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
29
==PAGE:38==
N
N
Figure 5.2: Top view with sections for Business as Usual (left) and Design for Disassembly
(right) from the BIM models
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
30
==PAGE:39==
5.1.1
Business as Usual
N
Figure 5.3: Perspective visualization of the
Business as Usual model
The Business as Usual (BaU) case was cre-
ated to represent today’s conventional con-
struction methods. The CIRCuIT project
investigated the structure of 36 apartments
in Copenhagen, which showed that 100%
had a structure of ”precast concrete pan-
els for the floors and prefabricated concrete
sandwich panels for the walls” [76].
The
BaU model, (see figure 5.3), comprises pre-
cast concrete elements, sandwich elements,
wet connections, and several nailed assem-
blies. Demounting the elements is inconve-
nient because the assembly sequence makes
it diﬀicult and uncommon to reuse or recy-
cle the materials in the construction type
[76]. The benefits of conventional construc-
tion methods are mainly economic, as it is time eﬀicient and has low material waste on
the construction site [76].
Figure 5.4 and 5.5 show sections with materials for the exterior wall, slabs, and inte-
rior constructions. The exterior walls are made of bricks, mineral wool, and cast concrete,
and the interior walls are made of concrete.. The slab consists of layers of concrete screed
with floor heating and a hollow-core slab.
For BaU, it is assumed that the slab has several materials that are unlikely to be disassem-
bled and replaced separately due to risks, see Appendix A.2 figure A.1. This includes the
floor heating system cast into the concrete screed and the acoustic membrane underneath.
These tree materials will be treated as one in terms of service life and End-of-Life scenarios,
see figure 5.6. The same applies to the slab in the bathroom, which is similar except for the
tiles used as a floor covering instead of wooden planks. The tiles, floor heating, concrete
screed, and acoustic membrane are treated as one. It is further assumed that the window
glass and frame can not be disassembled as they are nailed together. The plasterboards
are attached to concrete or mineral wool according to the drawing and data provided by
GXN, which is not doable or uncommon in reality. It is further assumed that none of the
concrete and rebar will be disassembled. The final group of materials mounted together
in a fashion disabling disassembly is the balcony railings made of steel, glass, and wood.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
31
==PAGE:40==
Nailed plasterboard 26 mm
Mineral wool insulation 53 mm
Cast concrete 150 mm
Mineral wool insulation 300 mm
Bricks 108 mm
Concrete beam w. rebar
Wooden planks 20 mm
Concrete 10 mm
Steel
Glass
Wood
Hollowcore slab 185 mm
Concrete screed 100 mm
Acoustic membrane 2 mm
Concrete screed w. floor heating 84 mm
Wooden floor 20 mm
Paint 1 mm
Wood cupboards 12 mm
Precast concrete 200 mm
Nailed window 
frames, plastic
Triple pane glass
Figure 5.4: Long section with materials for Business as Usual [78]
Nailed plasterboard 26 mm
Steel studs
Mineral wool insulation 70 mm
Precast concrete 63 mm
Tiles 10 mm
Hollowcore slab 185 mm
Concrete screed 100 mm
Acoustic membrane 2 mm
Concrete screed w. floor heating 84 mm
Tiles 10 mm
Elevator shaft
Precast concrete 200 mm
(C25/30)
Figure 5.5: Short section with materials of Business as Usual [78]
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
32
==PAGE:41==
Cast concrete as fastener 
between elements
Precast concrete facade 
with cast in brick
Precast concrete slab
Precast Conrete Wall
Underfloor heating
Cast concrete as 
fastener between 
elements
Glued skirting along wall
Cast concrete as thermal 
mass and acoustic 
barrier
Nailed window frames
Cast in drainage
Nailed Plasterboard Wall
Elecricity chords inside 
walls
Figure 5.6: Mounting methods and materials chosen for Business as Usual based on GXN’s
CIRCuIT project [58]
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
33
==PAGE:42==
5.1.2
Design for Disassembly
N
Figure 5.7: Perspective visualization of the
Design for Disassembly model
The Design for Disassembly (DfD) case can
be seen in figure 5.7. The strategies men-
tioned in CURCuIT enable disassembly to
reuse or recycle the materials [76]. To avoid
the non-adaptable structures of BaU, one
of the main strategies is to separate the
load-bearing system in the exterior wall
from the elements that provide the ther-
mal envelope [78].
The materials are as-
sembled using dry connections and screws
for mounting.
The DfD case has multi-
functional layers and a flexible floor plan
aiming to meet changing needs over time.
The apartment can be divided into smaller
apartments or expanded by combining two
or more neighboring apartments. This is
done by designing a larger core, so more
entrances to the apartment are possible. Furthermore, by making part of the living room
slab identical to the bathroom slab, so it is more convenient if an extra bathroom is needed,
which can be seen in figure 5.8. The DfD case study has implemented several other sus-
tainability strategies, such as using bio-based materials, which is expected to impact the
GWP significantly.
The two sections 5.8 and 5.9, provide an overview of the materials of DfD. Here, the
exterior walls are composed of wood cladding attached to a mounting system of wood
with wood fiber insulation, and CLT. The interior walls are made with steel studs and
wood fiber insulation. There are two types of slabs in the DfD model; the first covers most
of the living room made of wood fibreboards with floor heating, sand, and wooden studs,
and finally, CLT. The second type of slab can be seen in section 5.8 for the bathroom and
parts of the neighboring room. This slab has a layer of concrete screed with floor heating,
followed by EPS concrete and a traditional hollow-core slab.
DfD has fewer assemblies that can not be disassembled compared to BaU, yet some per-
sist, see figure 5.10. This includes the rebar in concrete columns and tiles attached to a
plasterboard wall in the bathroom. The bathroom slab has two assemblies that can not
be disassembled: the floor heating cast into concrete and the EPS concrete on both sides
of an acoustic membrane.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
34
==PAGE:43==
Screwed plasterboard 26 mm
CLT 150 mm
Wood fiber insulation 250 mm
Mounting systen, wood
Shiplap facade cladding, wood  15 mm
Steel
Glass
Wood
Screwed window 
frames, plastic
Triple pane glass
Tiles 10 mm
Screwed plasterboard 26 mm
Steel studs
Wood fiber insulation 70 mm
Screwed plasterboard, 26 mm
Tiles 10 mm
Concrete columns
CLT 185 mm
Sand and wooden studs 150 mm
Wood fibreboard w. floor heating 28 mm
Acoustic membrane 2 mm
Bamboo 20 mm
Acoustic membrane 2 mm
EPS concrete 65 mm
Concrete screed w. floor heating 84 mm
Acoustic membrane 2 mm
Bamboo 20 mm
EPS concrete 45 mm
Hollowcore slab 185 mm
Figure 5.8: Long section with materials for Design for Disassembly [78]
Screwed plasterboard 26 mm
Steel studs
Mineral wool insulation 70 mm
Screwed plasterboard 26 mm
CLT 185 mm
Sand and wooden studs 150 mm
Wood fibreboard w. floor heating 28 mm
Acoustic membrane 2 mm
Bamboo 14 mm
Elevator shaft
Precast concrete 200 mm
(C25/30)
Steel beam
Triple pane glass
Screwed window frames, plastic
Figure 5.9: Short section with materials of Design for Disassembly [78]
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
35
==PAGE:44==
Acoustic rubber band
Cross Laminated Timber 
(CLT) Slab
Composite Steel Beam
Screwed Plasterboard 
CLT walls between 
columns
Lime mortar which can 
be washed away
Bolted connections
Woodfibre board with 
underfloor heating
Sand for thermal mass 
and 
Precast Concrete Column
Shiplap facade on timber 
frame
Steel frame partition wall
Reused Bamboo Flooring
External Electrical Access
Woodfibre insulation
Figure 5.10: Mounting methods and materials chosen for Design for Disassembly based
on GXN’s CIRCuIT project [58]
5.2
Estimated Service Life of Materials
The static factors implemented to represent the project-specific dependencies, design, in-
door, and location can be seen in table 5.2 and table 5.3 specifying the affected materials,
the factor value, and the assumptions. It can be seen that the static factor representing
the indoor environment does not have any effect on the wet room in BaU and DfD, and
this factor will not be investigated further.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
36
==PAGE:45==
Material
Assumption
Design
Indoor
Location
Tiles in wet
room
slab
and wall
Surface tiles placed on con-
crete floor and walls, hid-
den steel pipes, over 3.25
m2, vertical drain pipes,
floor heating
-
1
-
Bricks
on
exterior
facade
No
coding,
good
water
drainage, 2-3 floors, main
orientation is north and
west, coastal location, less
than 0,2 m overhang
0.8
-
0.85
Window
glass
Plastic, hidden and new
joints, inserted 4-5 cm in
the walls, coastal location
-
-
0.9
Window
frame, plas-
tic
Plastic, hidden and new
joints, inserted 4-5 cm in
the walls, coastal location
-
-
0.9
Table 5.2: Static factors applied to BaU [64]
Material
Assumption
Design
Indoor
Location
Tiles in wet
room
slab
and wall
Surface tiles placed on con-
crete floor and walls, hidden
steel pipes, over 3.25 m2, ver-
tical drain pipes, floor heating
-
1
-
Wooden
shiplap
on
exterior
facade
Pinewood, ventilated due to
mounting system, good water
drainage, 2-3 floors, orienta-
tion mainly north and east,
coastal location, less overhang
than 0.2 m
0.8
-
0.95
Window
glass
Plastic, hidden and new joints,
inserted 4-5 cm in the walls,
coastal location
-
-
0.9
Window
frame, plas-
tic
Plastic, hidden and new joints,
inserted 4-5 cm in the walls,
coastal location
-
-
0.9
Table 5.3: Static factors applied to DfD
The following two graphs, 5.11 and 5.12, show the development of the service life due to
the various dependencies: position, material type, mounting, static, and dynamic factors.
The graphs can be seen in full size in the Appendix A.3, figure A.4 and A.5.
The red circles covering multiple markings visualize the mounting dependency. See, e.g.,
the red circle around the floor heating, the concrete screed, and the acoustic membrane,
meaning these materials have parallel service lives, all adjusted to match the material with
the lowest service life, see figure 5.11.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
37
==PAGE:46==
Appendix A.3, figure A.6 and A.7 show the overall change in service life.
Here, the
average change in service for all materials in BaU is 20.7 years and 14.1 years for DfD.
Service life for BaU
Figure 5.11: Visualization of the change in service life per material for DfD due to depen-
dencies on position, material, mounting, static factors and extreme-case dynamic factors
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
38
==PAGE:47==
ESL
Service life for DfD
Figure 5.12: Visualization of the change in service life per material for DfD due to depen-
dencies on position, material, mounting, static factors, and extreme-case dynamic factors
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
39
==PAGE:48==
5.3
Future Climate for Denmark
A coastal location in Denmark has been chosen for this study, but no fixed location is set
as the cases are conceptual. The weather files used to represent current and future climate
are based on data from Fredericia, a coastal city in central Denmark. The temperature,
relative humidity, wind speed, and global radiation are shown for each month of the
year in figure 5.13, 5.14, 5.15, and 5.16. These weather files represent the scenario of
staying beneath the pledge of the Paris Agreement with global warming of 1.3oC and
another scenario is just above the Paris Agreement pledge with a temperature rise of
2.1oC compared to the current climate, see figure 5.13. It can furthermore be seen that
the current temperature in Fredericia is 8.6oC on average. The graph shows that the
scenario with 1.3oC global warming follows a similar pattern as the current weather over
the four seasons, but the file representing 2.1oC global warming has more fluctuations.
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Month of the year
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Temperature [degC]
Radiation for all weather 3 scenarios
Current weather, mean = 8.60 [degC]
1.3 [degC] Global Warming, mean = 9.91 [degC]
2.1 [degC] Global Warming, mean = 10.71 [degC]
Figure 5.13: Temperature development over a year for the 3 weather scenarios in Denmark,
current weather, 1.3 °C global warming and 2.1 °C global warming
Figure 5.14 shows the relative humidity, which is predicted to increase a little over time
from 82% today to around 84% and 85% on average. Together with the increasing temper-
ature, this will result in a change in water content in the air that might influence specific
building materials. In general, there is an increase in the wind speed following the rising
temperature. Figure 5.15 shows the wind speed with very similar tendencies for all scenar-
ios with the strongest wind in the winter compared to summer. The graph shows quite the
increase from current states, with an average wind speed for Fredericia of 4.0 m/s which
is predicted to increase to nearly 5.3 m/s. Finally, figure 5.16 shows the monthly global
radiation which is not predicted to change much over time, except for a slight drop due
to increased cloud cover in January and February and an increasing amount of radiation
in September.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
40
==PAGE:49==
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Month of the year
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Relative humidity [%]
Relative humidity for all 3 weather scenarios
Current weather, mean = 82.17 [%]
1.3 [degC] Global Warming, mean = 84.57 [%]
2.1 [degC] Global Warming, mean = 84.45 [%]
Figure 5.14: Mean monthly relative humidity over a year for the 3 weather scenarios in
Denmark, current weather, 1.3 °C global warming and 2.1 °C global warming
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Month of the year
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Wind speed [m/s]
Wind speed for all 3 weather scenarios
Current weather, mean = 4.03 m/s
1.3 [degC] Global Warming, mean = 5.27 m/s
2.1 [degC] Global Warming, mean = 5.28 m/s
Figure 5.15: Mean monthly wind speed over a year for the 3 weather scenarios in Denmark,
current weather, 1.3 °C global warming and 2.1 °C global warming
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
41
==PAGE:50==
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Month of the year
0
50
100
150
200
Radiation (direct and diffuse) [Wh/m2]
Radiation for all 3 weather scenarios
Year
Current weather, mean = 111.56 Wh/m2
1.3 [degC] Global Warming, mean = 111.08 Wh/m2
2.1 [degC] Global Warming, mean = 111.48 Wh/m2
Figure 5.16: Mean monthly global radiation over a year for the 3 weather scenarios in
Denmark, current weather, 1.3 °C global warming and 2.1 °C global warming
5.4
Dynamic Occupancy Scenarios
For this given case study, five likely occupancy groups have been selected based on research
by GXN [76]. The assumptions made regarding the residents are presented in figure 5.17
defined by an occupancy schedule and the number of people varying between 1 person,
2 people, and finally, a family of 4. The behavior is modeled as hours spent at home,
differentiating between being awake or asleep, see figure 5.18. As a result of the schedules,
the young and middle age people are home for a total of 13 hours, being asleep for 9 hours
when the lighting and equipment are off, see figure 5.18. Retired people are assumed to
spend a total of 20 hours at home, sleeping for 8 hours and the family of 4 is noted to
spend 15 hours at home, also sleeping for 8 hours.
Number of people
Schedule type
1
1 
2
2
4
Retired
Young/middle age
Retired
Family
Young/middle age
Figure 5.17: Visualization of the occupancy groups used in this study from ”Transforma-
tive housing” [76]
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
42
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.18: Schedules representing the assumed behavior of the various occupancy groups
(0 = not home, 0.5 = home and sleeping, 1 = home and awake) used in the energy
simulation
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
43
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 6
Results and Result Analysis
This section evaluates the impact of the various parameters related to DfD on the GWP
of the residential buildings from the case study.
Initially, this section presents GWP
results for the two case studies focusing on the EoL and D stages. This is followed by an
analysis of each service’s life dependency on GWP. The relationship between service life
and energy is presented as part of these results, covering the operational impact of weather
and occupancy scenarios. Following this, the section will review the findings of adding
the D stage and the factors of dynamic LCA, Tau, and Omega. This leads to the final
comparison of the Baseline method and the proposed Modified LCA method, followed by
a short additional study on the importance of the 33% rule, adding to the main findings.
Finally, this section will analyze the data of each sensitivity analysis, one for the material
service life and one for the variables differentiating the Baseline and Modified LCA method.
6.1
Method Comparison
6.1.1
Life Cycle Stages
The main GWP results, see figure 6.1, are divided into Life Cycle stages for BaU and
DfD and calculated using the Baseline LCA method.
The total GWP for BaU is 5.5
kgCO2e/m2/yr and 4.1 kgCO2e/m2/yr for DfD without the D stage. It is worth noticing
that the D stage is significantly larger for DfD than BaU, -1.8 kgCO2e/m2/yr compared
to -0.19 kgCO2e/m2/yr. The distribution of GWP between the LCA stages clearly shows
the significant impact of bio-based materials for DfD, resulting in a negative impact in the
Manufacturing stage of -0.24 kgCO2e/m2/yr and a very substantial impact contribution
in the EoL stage with 2.09 kgCO2e/m2/yr. This is due to the carbon sequestration and
the method proposed by the Danish Building Regulations to account for these as negative
impacts. BaU has a higher up-front contribution from the mineral-based materials, mainly
concrete, with 2.43 kgCO2e/m2/yr see figure 6.1. The operational impacts (B6) are fairly
similar, but the impact from replacements (B4) is slightly higher for BaU.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
44
==PAGE:53==
A
B4
B6
C
D
Total
Total + D
Stages
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
GWP [kg CO2 e/m2/yr]
2.43
2.01
0.67
0.38
-0.19
5.50
5.31
-0.24
1.57
0.71
2.09
-1.80
4.13
2.33
Comparison of BaU and DfD across stages
BaU
DfD
Figure 6.1: GWP total impact and distribution between Life Cycle stages for BaU and
DfD using the LCA method from BR18, see table 2.1 (except the study period being 100
years)
6.1.2
End-of-Life and D stage
This section will provide the outcomes derived from the End-of-Life framework proposed
by GXN, and modified by the authors to incorporate an additional risk factor of data
unavailability (see Appendix A.2, figure A.1). The framework aims to identify the most
likely EoL scenario based on criteria including accessibility, independence, adaptability,
toxic content, and data availability. Detailed EoL for each material and corresponding
GWP throughout LCA stages can be accessed in the attached Material Catalogue ”MATE-
RIAL CATALOGUE - Environmental Impacts - Business as Usual.pdf” and ”MATERIAL
CATALOGUE - Environmental Impacts - Design for Disassembly.pdf”.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.2: Presentation of the weight distribution in percentage on the left primary axis
and corresponding EoL type for Bau and DfD. The right-hand primary axis presents the
percentage of the C stage and D stage that corresponds to the given EoL. All impacts in
the D stages are negative, and all the C stage impacts are positive GWP values [kg CO2
e/m2/yr] A.4, figure A.8)
While evaluating the results in figure 6.2, it is worth keeping in mind that the BaU has a
total weight of 121 tons, and DfD has a total weight of 89 tons. This means the percentage
of materials per weight ending in various EoL scenarios for BaU represents ∼1/3 more
material than for DfD. The same inequity applies to the GWP in the C stage (also called
EoL) and D stage where previous results 6.1 reveal that DfD has a 5.5 times higher impact
in C stage and 9 times higher impact in the D stage. BaU consists of mostly recyclable
materials and a small fraction of landfill and incineration. There is almost no reuse. The
largest GWP contribution from the C stage lies in the incineration, which was expected.
There is a relatively low C stage impact in the recycling compared to how much the ma-
terials with this EoL contribute per weight. The D stage, which reflects the benefit, is
highest in the recycling and incineration EoL. For the DfD, a similar tendency is seen for
recycling, but a larger fraction is seen for reused material than BaU.
The BaU case study shows a weight contribution for the EoL landfill category on ∼12%,
which is a contribution from 14 different materials. Here, the concrete Screed in the living
room slab is the largest contributor with 18000kg. The GWP for the C stage reveals that
the landfill is responsible for ∼25% of the GWP, also due to concrete screed. To explain
the EoL outcomes, see risk factor fractions in charts in figure 6.3. The main risk factors
causing the materials to end up in landfills are found to be ”Independence” and ”Poor
data availability”. The concrete screed is assumed to be inadaptable triggering a large
fraction of the 52%. ”Poor data availability” for insulation is causing this material to be
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
46
==PAGE:55==
assumed to go to landfill.
For the DfD case study, the landfill constitutes ∼7% of the total EoL weight, which
is practically solely the concrete Screed from the slabs in the wet room which ends up
as landfill because of the embedded floor heating system. The GWP [%] of the C stage
caused by landfilled materials is ∼2%, which is also primary from the concrete screed.
This example outlines the great impact of embedded floors and why this should be avoided.
The most significant reason for the materials EoL in landfills is due to the independence,
likely stemming from the embedded floor heating system. Materials assumed to be land-
filled do not generate any benefits in the D stage.
When examining the materials assumed to be incinerated for BaU, a similar contribu-
tion can be seen as for landfill per weight. However, there is a significantly higher GWP
for both the C and D stages from incineration compared to landfill. This is mainly caused
by the incineration of wood. A similar tendency is found in the DfD case, where bio-based
materials are a large contributor to GWP. Assessed from figure 6.3, both cases present
a fairly large share of incineration caused by inadaptability, meaning that the materials
were assumed not to be able to adapt to a new context, such as the wooden floor in both
case studies. The materials assumed to be incinerated due to the dependencies in the
construction are mainly the window and window frame, which are indivisible for BaU. For
DfD, the largest risk factors is the data availability, causing wood fibre insulation and
bamboo to be incinerated instead of recycled for DfD.
Although both scenarios primarily consist of recyclable materials, DfD appears to derive
greater benefits in the D stage while simultaneously incurring the highest penalties, as
seen from the GWP contribution, see figure 6.1. The high mass contribution comes from
the CLT, which is highly represented in the DfD case study and has a great impact on
both the C and D stages. For both BaU and DfD, the high mass contribution for recycling
was driven by concrete. This gave a large mass contribution but almost no contribution
in the C and D stage GWP. In both cases, the recycled materials are found to be inadapt-
able, which is, among others, especially concrete elements. It has been assessed that the
concrete will not be able to fit directly into a new context if not intended beforehand, but
the concrete can be crushed and recycled in e.g. roads.
There is a difference in the reuse potential, being almost 20% for DfD and only around 1%
for the BaU. The graph illustrates a larger D stage impact for the reuse in BaU, caused by
a lower total D stage value, making the impact look larger, see figure 6.1. The calculated
result values reveal that the D stage from reuse in BaU is -0.01 [kg CO2 e/m2/yr] and
-0.04 [kg CO2 e/m2/yr] for the DfD. In BaU, only steel is considered directly reusable
because it is a standard product. In the DfD case study, all the steel and the sand used
for thermal mass in the slab living room floor are also considered reusable. The sand has
the greatest impact on the disposal result in terms of weight. It can be seen in the Material
Catalogue that the benefits of steel result in great benefits in the D stage, but sand has
barely any benefits. Additionally, DfD contains more steel since it has steel studs in the
internal walls and steel beams in the slab. The steel combined with the sand results in a
higher percentage of reusable materials in DfD compared to BaU.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
47
==PAGE:56==
Business as Usual
Design for Disassembly
Inacessability
Inadaptability
Independency
Poor data 
avaliability
62.4%
94.1%
31.3%
83.8%
Figure 6.3: Risk type of the disposal types: The first row of circle diagrams shows how
the risk types are distributed, based on weight, for the three disposal types, landfill, incin-
eration, and recyclable, for BaU. The second row of circle diagrams shows the same for
the DfD case.
6.1.3
GWP with Static and Dynamic Service Life Dependencies
This section will show the effect of each service life dependency: position, material type,
mounting, static factors (representing design and location-specific dependencies), and dy-
namic factors (representing assumed weather and occupancy dependencies).
The essential materials to include in the Design for Disassembly strategies are expected
to be found based on their relationship between the number of replacements and relative
GWP contribution. A decrease in service life does not necessarily increase GWP if no ad-
ditional replacements occur. The contribution scale is another important factor since one
extra replacement for a high-impact material will significantly impact the overall GWP,
but two to three extra replacements for a material with a small impact might be negligible.
The figures, see 6.4 and 6.5, show the number of replacements given the different ser-
vice life dependencies and the corresponding GWP for both case studies. The number of
replacements is calculated considering the 33% rule from BR18. The materials without
any change in replacements are excluded from the figures but can be seen in attached Ap-
pendix B.5 and B.6. The materials are ranked according to the material with the highest
contribution to the overall change in GWP relative to the Baseline. The tables also show
the overall change in the number of replacements from the lowest to the highest measured
number.
The tables break down what happens to each material between the steps of adding more
service life dependencies compared to the previous step. The numbers highlighted in red
show an increase in replacements, and green highlights show a decrease. It is also essential
to mention that energy is included in the tables, as the dynamic factors and energy sce-
narios are correlated. The dynamic factors are applied to all interior and exterior surfaces
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
48
==PAGE:57==
for the extreme weather (2.1 °C global warming) and occupancy (Family of 4) scenarios,
which the energy scenario also represents. The other scenarios have the baseline energy
scenario for weather (Current weather) and occupancy (Single Young/middle age).
The various dependencies do not affect the DfD and BaU similarly as expected. BaU
is significantly affected by the modeling choices of parallel service life due to mounting de-
pendencies with an 18% increase in GWP, see figure 6.4 compared to DfD only increasing
with 3% in this step, see figure 6.5. The assembly method is exceptionally crucial when
making a material with high impact and long service life such as concrete depending on
a system like floor heating with a short service life, as seen for the living room slab of
BaU. Here, the assembly choices increase the replacements from 0 to 2 contributing with
13% of the total change of 18% in GWP. The material dependency on static and dynamic
factors does not change the number of replacements for the living room slab. This shows
the consequences of not implementing design for disassembly strategies for the slab in
BaU in terms of the chosen calculation rules. The GWP of each material before and after
implementing mounting dependencies, can be seen in Appendix A.4, figure A.9 and A.10.
From the lowest level of detail in service life estimation (which only considers the position)
to the second (considering both position and material type), the overall GWP improves
for BaU with -7%, see figure 6.4. This step does however not improve the GWP for DfD,
as it increases with 6%, see figure 6.5. This suggests that certain materials have been used
in DfD with lower durability than the assumed average of that respective position. For
DfD, the assembly of the living room slab with a wood fibreboard with a floor heating
system are the two main contributors to worsening the GWP.
The number of replacements required for paint changes most of all materials due to mate-
rial type dependencies, but the impact is small, thus not of the highest importance.
Both BaU and DfD respond to the addition of static and dynamic factors with an in-
creased amount of replacements as expected. Here, DfD increases with 13% and it can be
seen that the three main contributions come from the window panes, the bamboo floor
covering, and the increase in energy demand. Window panes are affected by the weather
and the floor covering by the occupants. The window panes are furthermore affected by
static factors determined by the assumed coastal location making this the most sensitive
material in terms of service life dependencies for DfD.
The figures can be found in full size in Appendix A.4, figure A.11 and A.12.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
49
==PAGE:58==
Increase
Decrease
Figure 6.4: Table showing the replacements and GWP of BaU materials. The materials
with 0 change in replacements throughout the change of dependencies are not presented
in the table
Increase
Decrease
Figure 6.5: Table showing the replacements and GWP of DfD materials. The materials
with 0 change in replacements throughout the change of dependencies are not presented
in the table
The following figures 6.6 and 6.7 are visual representations of GWP due to adding more
service life dependencies. They show the cumulative total GWP over 100 years for BaU
and DfD, for the three types of service life dependencies required by the Danish Building
Regulation, and the static and dynamic factors. The results are calculated using the en-
ergy scenario ”Current weather”, Single Young/middle age. The impact from the dynamic
factors, weather, and occupants are shown individually, whereas the impact from location
and design factors are combined, see figure 6.7.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
50
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.6 for BaU clearly shows the main event causing the increase in GWP for BaU
due to mounting dependency after 40 years (see baseline curve). This event is known to
be the reduction of the service life for concrete from 80 to 40 years due to the assembly
methods casting floor heating into the concrete.
Figure 6.7 shows the cumulative curves with applied service life-dependent factors which
result in an increased amount of notches representing more spread-out replacements as
expected. Unexpectedly, an increase in occupants (more wear and tear on interior surfaces)
has a higher impact on the GWP for DfD compared to the impact of the weather on
exterior surfaces. This can be seen in figure 6.6b, where the GWP increases with 9% with
the extreme occupancy scenario and only 2% due to extreme weather. It is unexpected
because one of the most influential materials in DfD is the impact of weather on the
window pane. This is because the occupancy scenarios have a much higher impact on the
GWP compared to the weather scenarios, see figure 6.8 and 6.9. Here the extreme case
weather scenarios, (2.1 degC global warming), lower the GWP compared to the baseline,
(1.3 degC global warming) because of a lower heating demand for both case studies. On
the other hand, the occupancy scenarios raise the GWP going from the baseline (Single
Young/middle age) to the extreme case (Family of 4).
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Years
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
Service life dependencies
Position (5.0 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
Position and material (4.7 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
BASELINE - Position, material, and mounting (5.5 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
(a) BaU
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Years
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
Service life dependencies
Position (3.8 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
Position and material (4.0 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
BASELINE - Position, material, and mounting (4.1 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
(b) DfD
Figure 6.6: Cumulative GWP plot showing the effect of service life dependencies according
to BR18 requirements (with energy scenario: current weather and Single young/middle
age occupancy)
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
51
==PAGE:60==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Years
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
Service life dependencies
Incl. factors for location, design, occupants, and weather (6.5 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
Incl. factors for location, design, and occupants (6.1 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
Incl. factors for location and design (5.9 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
BASELINE - Position, material, and mounting (5.5 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
(a) BaU
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Years
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
Service life dependencies
Incl. factors for location, design, occupants, and weather (4.8 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
Incl. factors for location, design, and occupants (4.7 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
Incl. factors for location and design (4.3 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
BASELINE - Position, material, and mounting (4.1 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
(b) DfD
Figure 6.7: Cumulative GWP plot showing the effect of service life factors: static for
location and design (with energy scenario: Current weather and Single young/middle-age
occupancy) and dynamic for weather and occupants fixed at the extreme-case scenarios,
factor 0.8 (with energy scenario: 2.1 deg C global warming and Family of 4 occupancy)
6.1.4
Operational Impact with Dynamic Weather and Occupants
This section presents the results of GWP of operational energy. Figure 6.8 and 6.9 show
that the hours spent at home have a greater influence on the electricity impacts than the
number of people. The reason for this is the electricity use which depends on the hours
spent at home. However, the heat demand decreases a little when more people are present
due to a higher internal load of heat. The family of 4 is using less heat, also because
of internal loads, and a lower electricity consumption due to fewer hours spent at home
than the retired people’s schedule. The young/middle-aged people, who are determined
to spend the lowest amount of hours at home, have a higher heat demand because of
lower internal loads from the electricity/equipment and people, and a fairly low electricity
demand due to fewer hours spent at home. More detailed figures for occupancy results can
be seen in Appendix A.4, figure A.13 and A.14. Across cases, the same tendencies can be
found, as they are almost identical even though the energy consumption in DfD is a little
higher, the area is a little larger as well. DfD also has a higher U-value in the external wall,
for which it is expected to see a higher heat demand, this is very negligible though. The
high electricity use contra heating use is also influenced by the COP at electricity = 1.9
and heat = 0.85, meaning that the contribution does not reflect the actual demand. It was
expected to see a decrease in the heat demand when the outdoor temperature increases,
and no increase in electricity use, considering that the case studies have no cooling systems
applied. This tendency is seen in the results where a slight decrease in heat is observed,
but a similar electricity use, for both cases, see figure 6.8 and 6.9.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
52
==PAGE:61==
 Single Retired
 Co-living Retired
 Young family of 4
 Single Young/middelage
 Co-living Young/middelage
 Single Retired
 Co-living Retired
 Young family of 4
 Single Young/middelage
 Co-living Young/middelage
 Single Retired
 Co-living Retired
 Young family of 4
 Single Young/middelage
 Co-living Young/middelage
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
GWP [kg CO2 e /m2/yr]
Current
1.3 degC increase
2.1 degC increase
Stacked Bar Plot of heat and electricity for all scenarios for business as usual case
Heat
Electricity
Figure 6.8: Operational GWP contribution for the Business as Usual case. The energy
use is divided into heat and electricity. All combinations of weather scenarios (current,
1.3 °C global warming, 2.1 1.3 °C global warming) and occupancy groups are shown.
 Single Retired
 Co-living Retired
 Young family of 4
 Single Young/middelage
 Co-living Young/middelage
 Single Retired
 Co-living Retired
 Young family of 4
 Single Young/middelage
 Co-living Young/middelage
 Single Retired
 Co-living Retired
 Young family of 4
 Single Young/middelage
 Co-living Young/middelage
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
GWP [kg CO2 e/m2/yr]
Current
1.3 degC increase
2.1 degC increase
Stacked Bar Plot of heat and electricity for all scenarios for Design for disassembly case
Heat
Electricity
Figure 6.9: Operational GWP contribution for the Design for Disassembly case.
The
energy use is divided into heat and electricity.
All combinations of weather scenarios
(current, 1.3 °C global warming, 2.1 1.3 °C global warming) and occupancy groups are
shown.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
53
==PAGE:62==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Years
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
kg CO2/m2/year
GWP [kg CO2/m2/yr] Over 100 (showed for 40 years) for baseline scenario
BaU, current weather
Bau, 1.3 degC increase
BaU, 2.1 degC increase
DfD, current weather
DfD, 1.3 degC increase
DfD, 2.1 degC increase
Figure 6.10: GWP contribution from energy use over time in kg CO2 e/m2/yr for the
Baseline scenario occupancy (Single Young/middel age changing the weather scenarios)
Figure 6.10 represents the GWP per area contribution for the energy throughout the years.
The energy consumption is set as a static value, but the factor for kg CO2 e/kWh decreases
the expected future impact on energy use. In the first 5 years, energy use has a steeply
decreasing pattern followed by a more static development. In figure 6.11 it is clear that
DfD has a slightly higher contribution compared to the business as usual, and that they
follow the same tendency as seen before where the demand gets smaller and smaller when
using future weather scenarios.
Current weather
BAU, 1.3°C increase
BAU, 2.1°C increase
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
GWP [kg CO2 e/m2/yr]
Sum of Values for BAU and DfD for the 3 weather scenarios
BAU
DfD
Figure 6.11: Comparison of GWP for the two cases; Business as Usual and Design for
Disassembly in the 3 weather scenarios for the baseline occupancy scenario
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
54
==PAGE:63==
6.1.5
GWP with Dynamic LCA Factors, Tau and Omega, and the D
stage
The following section presents the results for the impact of adding the D stage and the two
dynamic factors, Omega (the technological optimization factor) and Tau (the reduction
urgency factor). The baseline is used as a reference, adding one variable at a time. All
the plots are shown using the energy scenario (Current weather, Single young/middle age).
The individual impact of each variable can be seen in Appendix A.4 figure A.15.
Figure 6.12 and 6.13 show the change in GWP compared to the previous step.
The
materials that do not change due to the added D stage and dynamic factors are not in-
cluded in the two tables, but the entire material overview can be seen in Appendix B.5
and B.6. Figure 6.12 shows that BaU decreases by only 6% when adding the D stage
compared to DfD, (See figure 6.13), where the decrease is a total of 57%. Relative to the
previous step, Omega decreases the DfD with a total of 28% and only 18% for BaU due to
the large EoL impact, visualized in figure 6.15. Tau has the highest impact, as expected,
as it affects materials as well as energy and has the steepest decline over time, see figure
2.3. BaU is reduced by 20% and DfD by 60%. Here, it can be seen that energy contributes
25% of the overall GWP reduction when adding Tau in the DfD case study.
The figures can be found in full size in Appendix A.4, figure A.16 and A.17. Here fig-
ure visualizing the GWP of all material with and without the D stage can be found as
well, see Appendix A.4, figure A.21 and A.22.
Increase
Decrease
Figure 6.12: Table showing the D stage, dynamic factors, and GWP of BaU materials.
The materials with 0 change in replacements throughout the change of dependencies are
not presented in the table
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
55
==PAGE:64==
Increase
Decrease
Figure 6.13: Table showing the D stage, dynamic factors, and GWP of DfD materials.
The materials with 0 change in replacements throughout the change of dependencies are
not presented in the table
The ”Material Catalogue” (See Appendix B.1 and B.2) is of particular relevance for ana-
lyzing the results in terms of the type of materials that decrease or increase when adding
a certain factor. It depends on whether their main contribution lies in the Manufacturing
stage or EoL stage as well as the scale of the D stage. The D stage reflects the environmen-
tal data and framework used to determine the EoL scenario. It can further be seen that
the D stage has a massive impact on the DfD case study since there is a larger potential
for reuse compared to BaU, see figure 6.2. This suggests that the D stage is one of the
most influential variables in this study.
The impact of including the D stage for CLT in the DfD is very important. The frame-
work used to decide the EoL stage categorized the CLT elements as recyclable since they
are assumed to be accessible and independent. The environmental input data for CLT is
from EPD Denmark and has the following footprint, (see figure 6.14), where the poten-
tial for recycling is accounted for as avoided production of new wood for fibreboards. It
can be discussed if the environmental data seems accurate since the potential to avoid
the production of new wood (D stage) is larger than the production of the material itself
(Embodied), see figure 6.14.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
56
==PAGE:65==
Implementing the D stage for BaU has no notable impacts except for the wooden floor
in the living room slab and the elevator. This is because the wooden floor is being incin-
erated releasing the stored carbon, but the D stage gives credits for avoided GWP when
district heating is produced from the waste. The elevator consists of metals, that are being
recycled, which also gives significant credits in the D stage.
Figure 6.14: Environmental input data for CLT from EPD denmark, [79]. See Appendix
B.2
Figure 6.15 shows the two cumulative GWP paths over 100 years with the D stage, Omega,
and Tau. Here, it is clear how the inclusion of the D stage shortens the peak at the EoL
for DfD. Tau and Omega will diminish the positive EoL emissions as well as the negative
D stage contribution significantly. However, it is important to keep in mind that the D
stage also influences the impact of every replacement.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Years
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
GWP dependencies
BASELINE - Position, material, and mounting (5.5 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
Incl. D stage (5.1 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
Incl. D stage and Omega (4.2 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
Incl. D stage, Omega, and Tau (3.2 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
(a) BaU
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Years
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
GWP dependencies
BASELINE - Position, material, and mounting (4.1 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
Incl. D stage (1.8 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
Incl. D stage and Omega (1.2 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
Incl. D stage, Omega, and Tau (0.5 kg CO2 e/m2/yr)
(b) DfD
Figure 6.15: Cumulative GWP plot showing the effect of the D stage and the dynamic
factors for technological optimization, Omega, and reduction urgency, Tau (with energy
scenario: (Current weather, Single young/middle age. See Appendix B.2)
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
57
==PAGE:66==
6.1.6
Baseline vs Modified LCA method
This section will provide the initial results of a comparison of the Modified LCA method
with the Baseline LCA for BaU and DfD. The exact setting used for the two scenarios can
be seen in the Method chapter, table 3.1 and the LCA calculation rules according to the
Danish Building Regulations can be seen in table 2.1.
The resulting GWP paths in the four cases can be seen in figure 6.16 calculated over
100 years. The final GWP results over 50 years can be seen in Appendix A.4, figure A.18.
33%
83%
Figure 6.16: Cumulative GWP for BaU and DfD over 100 years calculated according to
the Baseline vs the Modified LCA method with all dependencies
The Baseline GWP for Business as Usual is 5.5 kgCO2e/m2/yr compared to 3.7 kgCO2e/m2,
when using the Modified LCA method. For DfD the Baseline scenario has a total GWP of
4.1 kgCO2e/m2/yr and only 0.7 kgCO2e/m2/yr for the modified scenario. This means an
overall reduction in GWP of 33% for BaU and 83% for DfD, see figure 6.16. The GWP for
DfD when using the Modified LCA method is extremely low. It is yet to be discovered if
the significant reduction in GWP for DfD is because the new LCA method benefits Design
for Disassembly strategies or due to other aspects in the DfD case study such as the use of
bio-based materials. Figure 6.16 shows that the DfD Baseline has significant GHG emis-
sions at the EoL stage, which is completely canceled out when the Modified LCA method
is applied due to the dynamic factors, Tau and Omega, as discussed in section 6.1.5.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
58
==PAGE:67==
The following results compare the GWP of all materials when using the Baseline vs Mod-
ified LCA method see figure 6.17 and 6.18. The results will clarify how each material
responds to applying the new LCA method and which materials have the highest relative
impacts. This shows the combined effect of all the previously analyzed variables (service
life dependencies, D stage, Omega, and Tau). The operational impact is included to vi-
sualize its contribution compared to the embodied. It can be seen that the new Modified
LCA method affects more materials in DfD than in BaU. Furthermore, some materials in
DfD have a significant negative contribution when using the Modified LCA.
The figure can be found in full size in Appendix A.4, figure A.19.
Slab living room - Concrete screed A
Energy
Windows - Glass
Elevator - Elevator
Slab living room - Floor heating
Slab living room - Hollowcore slab
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
External Walls - Cast concrete
External Walls - Mineral wool insulation B
External Walls - Bricks
Slab living room - Concrete screed B
Windows - Nailed window frames, plastic
Internal walls apartment - Precast concrete wall
Slab wet room - Concrete screed A
Slab living room - Acoustic membrane
Slab living room - Wooden floor
Doors - Front door
Ceiling - Nailed plasterboard wall
Elevator - Elevator shaft
Internal walls wet room - Precast concrete wall
Doors - Doors
Internal walls wet room - Mineral wool insulation
Beams - Concrete beam
External Walls - Mineral wool insulation A
Slab wet room - Floor heating
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Stairs - Stairs
Balcony - Glass
External Walls - Nailed plasterboard wall
Beams - Rebar
Slab wet room - Concrete screed B
Internal walls wet room - Nailed plasterboard wall
Stairs - Platform
Internal walls wet room - Tiles
Slab wet room - Tiles
Kitchen - Cupboards
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Internal walls apartment - Paint
Balcony - Concrete
Balcony - Steel
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Balcony - Wood
Balcony - Wood planks
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
BaU: GWP impacts of materials and energy - Baseline vs Modified
Baseline
Modified
Figure 6.17: BaU: GWP contributions from materials and energy calculated using the
Baseline vs Modified LCA method and a study period of 100 years.
The operational
impacts are based on the current weather scenario and single young/middleage occupancy
group
Figure 6.17 show that the top layer of concrete screed (concrete screed A) in the living
room slab has the largest contribution of all materials with 0.91 kgCO2e/m2/yr when
looking at the red Baseline scenario for BaU. The contribution from the concrete screed is
reduced by 52% compared to the original Baseline when using the Modified method, which
is a notable reduction. The GWP impact of the concrete screed is reduced by 52% be-
cause it has 2 replacements within the study period of 100 years for both the Baseline and
the Modified scenario, see figure 5.11. When applying the two dynamic factors, Omega
and Tau, the GWP from the first and second replacements is diminished significantly, as
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
59
==PAGE:68==
seen in the previous figure 6.12. In the Material Catalogue, attached Appendix B.1 and
B.2, it can be seen that the majority of GHG emissions from concrete take place in the
Manufacturing stage, influencing how much the impacts will be reduced with Tau and
Omega. It can furthermore be seen in the Material Catalogue and visualized in figure 6.19
that the concrete screed is assumed to go to landfill, thus having no benefits in the D stage.
Other elements with short service life have the same tendencies as the concrete screed,
such as the elevator and floor heating system the living room slab, see figure 6.17. It
can furthermore be seen that the Modified LCA method barely changes the impact of
some other GWP-intensive, structural concrete elements, such as the hollow-core slab in
the living room and the internal, precast concrete walls in the hallway. These elements
have a service life of 120 years, and the EoL scenario is recycling due to inadaptability
see Appendix B.4. The impact of waste processing and the potential benefits of recycling
mineral-based materials such as concrete is quite low relative to the impacts of the Manu-
facturing stage. This could explain why these concrete elements remain unaffected by the
Modified LCA method when the concrete screed is so sensitive.
The calculated GWP impacts from bricks increase when using the new Modified LCA
method. This is due to the static and dynamic factors applied in the Modified scenario
decreasing the service life of the bricks from 80 years to 43 years in extreme case weather
scenarios, see figure 5.11. The 33% rule will ensure no replacements for bricks at 80 years
in the Baseline. In the Modified scenario the second replacement at 86 years will also be
removed, resulting in 1 replacement, see figure 6.4. The visualization in figure 6.19 shows
that since the static factors are applied first in the LCA modeling, this dependency causes
the increase in GWP. The impacts from producing bricks are furthermore happening in
the Manufacturing stage, thus not affected substantially by Omega and Tau, at least for
the first set of bricks used, when constructing the building. It can be seen on figure 6.19
that the increase from Omega and Tau do not outweight the added impacts from an ad-
ditional replacement. The EoL scenario for bricks is recycling, (See Appendix B.4) and
the Material Catalogue in Appendix B.1 and B.2. The bricks are recycled due to their in-
adaptability. This assumption will be elaborated in the discussion but the environmental
data show a very little GWP saving from D stage.
The wooden floor in the living room slab has a positive GWP impact when looking at
the Baseline results but a significant negative impact when using the Modified method.
This can be seen in figure 6.17 and 6.19. This is because the wood sequesters carbon in its
Manufacturing stage, which is counted as a negative impact. The same amount of carbon
is released if the wood is incinerated at the EoL stage, which it is in this case due to its
inadaptability, see Appendix B.4. The impact of the wooden floor then becomes negative
overall when the benefits from the D stage is included. The impact becomes increasingly
negative when Omega and Tau is added.
This can be explained by the fact that the
EoL and D stage combined has a positive impact. The wooden floor has 1 replacement
meaning the positive impacts will be reduced more than the negative impacts from the
Manufacturing stage resulting in an overall decrease. Tau and Omega will then reduce the
positive impacts from incineration more than they will reduce the negative impacts from
production.
The figure can be found in full size in Appendix A.4, figure A.20.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
60
==PAGE:69==
Energy
Windows - Glass
Elevator - Elevator
Slab living room - Wood fibreboard
Slab living room - Floor heating A
Slab wet room - Concrete screed
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
Beams - Steel beam
Slab living room - Bamboo
External Walls - Wood fibre insulation
Windows - Screwed window frames, plastic
Internal walls apartment - Wood fibre insulation
Slab living room - CLT
Ceiling - Screwed plasterboard wall
External Walls - Concrete, 4 columns pr apartment
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Slab wet room - Floor heating
Doors - Front door
Doors - Doors
Slab living room - Sand for thermal mass
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall B
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Stairs - Platform
Elevator - Elevator shaft
External Walls - Rebar
External Walls - CLT
Internal walls wet room - Tiles A
External Walls - Shiplap façade cladding, wood
Internal walls wet room - Wood fibre insulation
Slab wet room - Bamboo
Slab wet room - EPS concrete A
Stairs - Stairs
Slab wet room - EPS concrete B
Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall B
Kitchen - Cupboards
Balcony - Concrete
External Walls - Screwed plasterboard wall
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Balcony - Glass
Balcony - Wood planks
Slab wet room - Tiles
Slab living room - Wooden studs
Slab living room - Acoustic membrane
Balcony - Steel
External Walls - Mounting system wood
Balcony - Wood
Internal walls apartment - Steel studs - A
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane B
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane A
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
DfD: GWP impacts of materials and energy - Baseline vs Modified
Baseline
Modified
Figure 6.18: DfD: GWP contributions from materials and energy calculated using the
Baseline vs Modified LCA method and a study period of 100 years.
The operational
impacts are based on the current weather scenario and single young/middleage occupancy
group
Figure 6.18 show all the material and energy impacts for DfD. Here, the biggest contributor
to the overall GWP is the energy consumption for the Baseline with 0.71 kgCO2e/m2/yr.
The window glass has the second largest contribution when looking at the Baseline. The
glass and window frame can be disassembled in the DfD case study due to the use of
screws instead of nails. The service life of glass is 25 years in the Baseline and only 18
years in the Modified scenario, which is shorter than the service life of the plastic window
frames (50 years and 36 years). The impact of a shorter service life is attributed to the
static factors going from 3 to 4 replacements, see figure 6.19. The glass has a much higher
impact compared to the frame, but the impact of the frames is not negligible. This means
that the design for disassembly initiative only mainly benefits in the rare occasions where
the plastic frame becomes obsolescent before the window panes.
The biggest contributor to the Modified scenario is however a negative contribution from
the structural CLT in the living room slab with -0.68 kgCO2e/m2/yr. The CLT slab is
positive when using the traditional LCA method and it has a service life of 100 years, see
figure 5.12, meaning no replacements are happening both in the Baseline and Modified
scenario. The slab is one of the main focuses in terms of design for disassembly and it
is highly benefited in the Modified LCA method. This is due to the calculation rules
for bio-based materials combined with the D stage. It can be seen on figure 6.19 that
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
61
==PAGE:70==
the implementation of Tau and Omega does not make the GWP for the CLT slab fur-
ther negative. Compared to other bio-based materials, is the D stage for the CLT slab
so significant that the D stage and the EoL impacts combined results in a negative impact.
The CLT in the external wall becomes very influential in the Modified scenario com-
pared to its contribution in the Baseline. The bamboo floor covering is assumed to be
incinerated due to data unavailability, see the Material Catalogue in Appendix B.1 and
B.2. However, it can be seen that bamboo has a different impact distribution compared
to other bio-based materials with positive impacts in the Manufacturing stage. This is be-
cause the EPD mixes data from China in the Manufacturing stage with Chinese electricity
mix and Danish data in the EoL and D stage. The D stage is still substantial resulting
in an overall negative contribution when using the Modified LCA, see figure 6.18. The
elevator has a significant contribution as well as due to its short service life and benefits
from recycling of metals in the D stage.
Position
Material
Mounting
Static
Dynamic
D-phase
Omega
Tau
Dependencies
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
GWP [kg CO2 e/m2/yr]
Development of GWP for service life dependencies, d-phase and factors
BaU_Bricks
BaU_Concrete_A
BaU_Wooden_floor_slab
DfD_Window_glass
DfD_CLT_slab_livingroom
DfD_Fiberboard_slab_livingroom
Baseline
Modified
Figure 6.19: GWP for selected materials in BaU (Bricks, Concrete screed, and wooden
floor) and DfD (Window glass, CLT slab, and Wood fibreboard) for all service life depen-
dencies, the D stage, Tau, and Omega
Figure 6.19 gives an idea of the variation in GWP happening for each step in between
the Baseline LCA and the Modified LCA. The graph also shows the development from
position, material and mounting dependencies. It can be seen that Omega and Tau have
a great impact on materials with high up-front emissions, such as glass and concrete, and
the D stage influences the bio-based material, in particular the recycled CLT slab.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
62
==PAGE:71==
Additional Study on the Importance of the 33% Rule
The 33% rule is set by the Danish Building Regulation and addresses the unlikely event
of materials being replaced if 33% of their service life exceeds the time left until assumed
demolition. Subsequently, bricks with a service life of 80 years will not be replaced given
a study period of 100 years because it is not economically viable to add new bricks with
only 20 years left of the building’s life span. This rule was initially not assumed to have
a great impact. However, given that many carbon-intensive materials are set to have a
service life between 80-100 years, the impact of this rule will be analyzed in the following
section.
Table 6.1 shows the GWP for both BaU and DfD for the Baseline and the Modified
method. It can be seen that the 33% have the biggest effect on the Baseline scenarios,
which was expected given the dynamic factors, Tau, and Omega.
Furthermore, a big
variation persists in the impact for these two case studies, making this rule potentially
of high importance as its influence on the GWP seems to be rather inconsistent, varying
from 8.5% to 1.7% for BaU but only from 5.9% to 5.6% for DfD.
BaU:
Baseline
BaU:
Modified
DfD:
Baseline
DfD:
Modified
GWP
[kgCO2/m2/yr]
without 33% rule
6.01
3.47
4.36
0.54
GWP
[kgCO2/m2/yr]
with 33% rule
5.50
3.41
4.10
0.51
Decrease in GWP due to
the 33% rule [%]
8.5%
1.7%
5.9%
5.6%
Table 6.1: Change in GWP due to the 33% rule for the Baseline and Modified LCA results
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
63
==PAGE:72==
6.2
Sensitivity Analysis of Material Service Life
The sensitivity analysis results will be presented for all materials considering their uncer-
tainty, see figure 6.21 and 6.22. First, an example of the replacement rate will be visualized
to show how the inputs are generated, see figure 6.20. Finally, this section will present
the resulting GWP as a range instead of an absolute value for DfD and BaU using both
the Baseline and the Modified LCA method.
43
54
60
80
30
38
50
60
Q1
Q3
Q1
Q3
Replacement rate for external wall in Business as Usual - Bricks
Replacement rate for external wall in Design for Disassembly - Wood cladding
Figure 6.20: The replacement rate for service life based on a lognormal distribution for
the external layer of each building (BaU = brick, DfD = wood cladding) for the mean
service life according to position, material, static, dynamic dependencies
Figure 6.20 visualizes the cumulative probability, also called the replacement rate, for ex-
ternal wall cladding. The exterior cladding is bricks for BaU and wood cladding for DfD.
It can be seen that the changing mean service life shifts the entire S-curve, thus changing
the range of service life values, which lies within the 50% quantile. This influences the
comparison of the material’s sensitivity when using the Baseline vs Modified LCA method
since each method considers different service life dependencies. However, given the study
period of 100 years, this analysis does not always account for the entire solution space
of a materials service life. It can be seen in figure 6.20 that bricks have the potential to
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
64
==PAGE:73==
last more than 200 years, providing a statistical incentive to assume a high probability for
reuse, although the data represent service life within the same building. The replacement
rate of all materials can be seen in Appendix A.6, figure A.35, and A.36.
The figures can be found in full size in Appendix A.5,
External Walls - Nailed plasterboard wall
External Walls - Mineral wool insulation A
External Walls - Cast concrete
External Walls - Mineral wool insulation B
External Walls - Bricks
Slab living room - Wooden floor
Group: Slab living room - Concrete screed w. floor heating and acoustic membrane
Slab living room - Concrete screed B
Slab living room - Hollowcore slab
Group: Slab wet room - Tiles, concrete screed w. floor heating and acoustic membrane
Slab wet room - Concrete screed B
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Group: Beams - Concrete beam w. rebar
Internal walls apartment - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls apartment - Paint
Internal walls wet room - Nailed plasterboard wall
Internal walls wet room - Mineral wool insulation
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Internal walls wet room - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls wet room - Tiles
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Group: Windows - Nailed window frames, plastic and glass
Doors - Front door
Doors - Doors
Kitchen - Cupboards
Group: Stairs - Stairs and Platform
Ceiling - Nailed plasterboard wall
Elevator - Elevator shaft
Elevator - Elevator
Balcony - Wood planks
Balcony - Concrete
Group: Balcony - Steel, Glass and Wood railing
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Variation [%]
Total Sensitivity Indices for BaU
BASELINE
MODIFIED
Figure 6.21: BaU: Total variation in GWP attributed to each material when varying the
service life. The data represent the 95% confidence interval calculated with the Baseline
and the Modified LCA method.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
65
==PAGE:74==
External Walls - Screwed plasterboard wall
External Walls - CLT
External Walls - Wood fibre insulation
External Walls - Mounting system wood
External Walls - Shiplap façade cladding, wood
Group: External Walls - Concrete columns w. rebar
Slab living room - Bamboo
Slab living room - Acoustic membrane
Slab living room - Wood fibreboard
Slab living room - Floor heating A
Slab living room - Sand for thermal mass
Slab living room - Wooden studs
Slab living room - CLT
Slab wet room - Bamboo
Slab wet room - Tiles
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane A
Group: Slab wet room - Concrete screed w. floor heating
Group: Slab wet room - EPS concrete and acoustic membrane
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Beams - Steel beam
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls apartment - Steel studs - A
Internal walls apartment - Wood fibre insulation
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall B
Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Internal walls wet room - Wood fibre insulation
Group: Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall and tiles
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Windows - Screwed window frames, plastic
Windows - Glass
Doors - Front door
Doors - Doors
Kitchen - Cupboards
Group: Stairs - Stairs and Platform
Ceiling - Screwed plasterboard wall
Elevator - Elevator shaft
Elevator - Elevator
Balcony - Wood planks
Balcony - Concrete
Balcony - Steel
Balcony - Glass
Balcony - Wood
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Variation [%]
Total Sensitivity Indices for DfD
BASELINE
MODIFIED
Figure 6.22: DfD: Total variation in GWP attributed to each material when varying the
service life. The data represent the 95% confidence interval calculated with the Baseline
and the Modified LCA method.
Figure 6.21 and 6.22 show the total Sobol indices for the materials of BaU and DfD. The
Sobol indices represent the total variation in GWP attributed to each responsible variable,
with interactions considered. The material groups seen on the x-axis represent the mate-
rial with parallel service life. The plots do not say anything about the uncertainty of the
total GWP. The tendencies in materials’ relative sensitivity do not change much for BaU
when applying the two LCA methods compared to DfD. This is caused by the bio-based
materials in DfD. It can be seen on the two graphs that many of the materials which were
found to be sensitive in the previous analysis, see section 6.1.3 and 6.1.5, also show high
sensitivity in this analysis.
For BaU, see figure 6.21, this includes the material group of concrete screed, floor heating,
and acoustic membrane in the living room slab of BaU, which drives the uncertainty due
to the high impact and low service life. This material group is responsible for around 6%
of the GWP variation for both the Baseline and Modified results. The windows and the
elevation are equally sensitive when using the Baseline LCA, but they get a very different
contribution to the overall variation in GWP when using the Modified LCA method. Here
the window is more sensitive compared to elevator. Both elements contribute greatly to
the overall GWP, and their entire solution space of possible service life falls within the
study period of 100 years (See Appendix A.6 figure A.35). This shift in importance from
one LCA calculation method to the other is due to the interactions between the D stage,
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
66
==PAGE:75==
Omega, and Tau over time. The hollowcore slab and external wall concrete are known to
have some of the highest contributions to the total GWP, see figure 6.17, but this analysis
shows that none of the elements are very sensitive. This can be explained by the fact that
it is very unlikely for these elements to have a reduced service life, which results in the
need for a replacement within 100 years, given the 33% rule, seen in Appendix A.6, figure
A.35. It is important to remember that figure A.35 show the replacement rate without
static and dynamic factors taken into account, but non of the above mentioned materials
are affected by these factors.
For DfD, see figure 6.22, the total Sobol indices show that the window glass is highly
sensitive, especially when using the Modified LCA which was expected. Here, it is respon-
sible for more than 10% of the total GWP variation. The window glass and window frame
are modeled separately as they can be disassembled, resulting in different replacement
rates, (See Appendix A.6, figure A.36). Here, it can be seen that the replacement rate
for window glass is very steep, meaning the majority is replaced around the same time.
The replacement time for the window frame is more uncertain, but the contribution is so
low that the influence on GWP is negligible. This confirms again that a focus on DfD for
window parts is less important.
When using the Modified LCA, the CLT slab was expected to have a much higher in-
fluence on the total variation in GWP, see figure 6.22. This is due to its position as a
structural element with a long service life. The replacement rate reveals that there is less
than a 25% chance that the CLT’s service life results in an additional replacement. How-
ever, as it has been discovered, will a replacement of CLT only benefit the overall GWP.
However, the sensitivity analysis confirms the tendencies seen before for bio-based mate-
rials since CLT has a higher relative sensitivity in the Modified vs Baseline, as expected.
This tendency is also applied to other structural bio-based materials.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
67
==PAGE:76==
0
2
4
6
8
10
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Frequency density [%]
DfD MODIFIED: mu = 0.83,  std = 0.23
BaU MODIFIED: mu = 3.98,  std = 0.28
DfD BASELINE: mu = 4.64,  std = 0.47
BaU BASELINE: mu = 6.22,  std = 0.69
DfD MODIFIED
BaU MODIFIED
DfD BASELINE
BaU BASELINE
Figure 6.23: Distribution of GWP results for BaU and DfD using the Baseline and Modified
LCA method. The data is fitted to a normal distribution, and the frequency density can
be seen on the y-axis and the GWP on the x-axis
Figure 6.23 shows the total solutions space as a result of the service life uncertainty for
all materials in BaU and DfD. The results are calculated using the two LCA methods and
fitted to a normal distribution. The mean and standard deviation can be seen at the top
of the figure.
The mean GWP for BaU is computed with a 95% confidence to be 6.2 kgCO2e/m2/yr
using Baseline LCA and reduced to 4 kgCO2e/m2/yr with the Modified LCA. For DfD
these numbers or 4.6 kgCO2e/m2/yr with the Baseline and 0.8 kgCO2e/m2/yr with the
Modified LCA. All the calculated mean GWP values are higher compared to the absolute
values calculated without service life uncertainties.
The results calculated with the Baseline method have a higher uncertainty range than
those of the Modified LCA. The Modified LCA method was expected to make the GWP
less sensitive to service life variation since the effects of Tau and Omega have been seen on
the cumulative plot to completely cancel out the emissions from replacements over time,
especially if combined with the D stage, see figure 6.15. However, the effects of Tau and
Omega can be highly unpredictable for the individual materials. As seen in the previous
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
68
==PAGE:77==
results for bricks and windows glass, see figure 6.19, can these factors both increase or
decrease the GWP due to one extra replacement.
Another interesting conclusion that can be drawn from the results is the fact that it
can not be concluded with certainty if BaU has a higher GWP than DfD when using the
Baseline LCA method. However, when using the Modified LCA, BaU will always have
a higher GWP than DfD, see figure 6.23. BaU generally has a broader range of possi-
ble outputs, which can be explained by a combination of the replacement rates and the
individual material contributions to the total GWP. The large solution space highlights
the issues related to the current LCA reporting of an absolute GWP value instead of an
uncertainty range.
Furthermore, the plot shows that there is a very small chance that the final GWP of
BaU could be similar when using either the Baseline or Modified LCA. Therefore, it can
not be concluded if the Modified LCA decreases the GWP of BaU compared to the Baseline
when service life uncertainties are included. However, it can be concluded that the Mod-
ifed LCA method always results in a decrease in GWP for the DfD case study compared
to the Baseline results.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
69
==PAGE:78==
6.3
Sensitivity of Variables Implemented in the Modified
LCA Method
The following section investigates the sensitivity of GWP for each of the implemented vari-
ables in the Modified LCA method; D stage, dynamic factors, all service life dependencies,
and the study period. The results are calculated with the Sobol GSA estimating the vari-
ation in GWP attributed to each variable when accounting for interactions, see figure 6.24.
The D stage and the dynamic factors, Omega and Tau are varied by being either in-
cluded or excluded. The energy is varied running through all 15 combinations of weather
and occupancy scenarios. The dynamic factors for service life are varied between 1, 0.9,
and 0.8 and the study period varies between 50 and 100 years. Finally, the mean service
life values vary based on the three dependencies: position, material, and mounting. The
overview of input variables can be found in Appendix A.2 figure A.6. The impacts of
weather and occupants on operational and embodied emissions are modeled as indepen-
dent for this analysis, given the limitations of the Sobol GSA, which will be elaborated
further in the discussion. Generally, there are issues with method used to generate these
results, making them highly unreliable and impossible to draw any conclusions from them.
BaU and DfD are visualized in the same plot (See figure 6.24), but the results values
can not be compared across case studies since the results represent the relative contribu-
tion to the overall GWP variation [%]. The total variation in GWP for the case studies
can be seen on figure 6.25 and 6.26. Here, the mean GWP for BaU is estimated to be
5.42 kgCO2e/m2/yr and 1.9 kgCO2e/m2/yr for DfD when fitted to a lognormal distribu-
tion. Figure 6.26 for DfD show two clusters of results with higher frequency, one spanning
from around 1-2 kgCO2e/m2/yr and a second, less likely group of results around 4.5-5.5
kgCO2e/m2/yr. This resembles the tendencies of a Weibull distribution and could be
explained by the great influence of the Study Period for DfD, see figure 6.24. The results
show that the Study Period has the biggest contribution of more than 6% for DfD. This
is followed by the technological optimization factor, Omega, contributing to around 4%
of the total GWP variation. The Omega is estimated to cause more variation in GWP
compared to the D stage, which is not as expected based on the previous results due to
the use of bio-based materials. However, tt is possible since this global sensitivity analysis
captures the influence given all combinations of the variables.
The D stage is measured as highly sensitive and responsible for around 4% of the GWP
variation when looking at the total sensitivity indices for BaU, see figure 6.24. Omega and
the Study Period also show high sensitivity which seems realistic given the insight from
previous analysis.
Additionally, it can be seen that changing weather and occupancy cause much higher
variation due to service life dependencies compared to the operational energy for BaU.
Here, the variation caused by service life dependencies and dynamic service life factors
highlights the need for empirical data to understand the influence of actual causal rela-
tionships between service life and various agents.
The dynamic factor, Tau, is measured to not impact the results for neither the BaU
nor DfD case study. Tau was expected to be one of the most influential variables, but this
result could be caused by the Sobol analysis as it struggles to deal with patterns where
variables cancel the effect of other variables.
Part of the assumed influence of Tau is
canceled out since the Omega factor is applied first in the mathematical model for GWP.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
70
==PAGE:79==
Service life dependencies for DfD is not measured to have any influence on the GWP,
which is also know to be an error according to previous results supporting the unreliable
nature of these results.
Energy
D stage
Study Period
Omega
Tau
Occupants (interior surfaces)
Weather (exterior surfaces)
Service Life dependencies 
 (position, material or mounting)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Variation in GWP [%]
Total Sensitivity Indices for Modified LCA Method
DfD
BaU
Figure 6.24: BaU and DfD: Variation in GWP [%] attributed to each variable implemented
in the Modified LCA method calculated with the Sobol GSA. The visualized results rep-
resent the 95% confidence interval
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
71
==PAGE:80==
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Frequency density [%]
BaU: Sensitivity of variables in the Modified LCA Method: std = 0.19, mu = 5.42
Figure 6.25: BaU: Distribution of GWP results when varying the parameters of the Modi-
fied LCA method. The data is fitted to a lognormal distribution, and the frequency density
can be seen on the y-axis and the GWP on the x-axis
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
72
==PAGE:81==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Frequency density [%]
DfD: Sensitivity of variables in the Modified LCA Method: std = 0.66, mu = 1.90
Figure 6.26: DfD: Distribution of GWP results when varying the parameters of the Modi-
fied LCA method. The data is fitted to a lognormal distribution, and the frequency density
can be seen on the y-axis and the GWP on the x-axis
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
73
==PAGE:82==
6.4
Summary of Results and Result Analysis
This summary will present the main conclusions from the result analysis to answer research
question 3: ”What are the most important parameters affecting the Global Warming Po-
tential of Design for Disassembly?
In particular, those regarding the service life and
reuse/recycling potential of materials, given future scenarios”.
The Modified LCA method reduces the GWP of the DfD case study by 83% and only
33% for the BaU case study compared to traditional LCA results.
The initial results suggest that the driving parameters implemented to benefit DfD were
Omega, Tau, and the reuse/recycling potential of the D stage. The D stage mainly impacts
bio-based materials, making it diﬀicult to address its exact benefits for DfD. The service
life dependencies on mounting methods and material type are also influential parameters
directly affecting DfD. The sensitivity analysis of the individual parameters in the Modi-
fied LCA method contradicted the initial results, showing that Tau does not influence the
GWP. This is known to be an error due to a mismatch between the model and the chosen
analysis method, which will be elaborated in the discussion.
Six main takeaways seem to characterize the outcome of applying the Modified LCA
method to assess DfD strategies:
1. End-of-Life framework and D stage: Poor data availability is an important risk factor
affecting the GWP of DfD in LCA. 66% of all materials assumed to be incinerated for
DfD is due to poor data availability, as these materials were assumed to be recyclable
in the first place. The recyclable materials made the biggest contribution by weight
in both cases, which was mainly impacted by the CLT for DfD and concrete elements
for BaU. 48% of all materials assumed to go to landfill are also due to poor data
availability for BaU. The results show that inadaptability is the leading risk factor
causing materials to be recycled instead of reused, with 94% for BaU and 83% for
DfD. Here, concrete is the main contributor to BaU’s recycled materials by weight
2. Omega and Tau: The influence of the driving parameters, Omega and Tau, is de-
termined by the timing of the emissions (replacement time) and the environmental
impact distribution between the Manufacturing, EoL, and D stages. Combined with
the added D stage, these factors can result in increasingly negative GWP impacts of
bio-based materials if they are assumed to be reusable/recyclable/incinerated. As an
indicator of the potential effect of Omega and Tau, this study measured a reduction
of 60% in GWP for the DfD case study after the implementation of the D stage
3. Mounting dependencies: The results suggest that DfD strategies must be aimed at
high-impact, long-service life materials if mounted with short-service life materials.
In this study, the mounting dependencies of the concrete slab and floor heating
system contributed to 13% increase in GWP out of the total 18% GWP increase of
BaU when considering this dependency in service life estimation
4. Service life dependencies on material type: The result analysis of this dependency can
provide intel on the appropriateness of the implemented DfD strategies concerning
material durability and position. This dependency resulted in an increase in GWP
for DfD with 6%, whereas the BaU case study had a decrease of 7% due to more
durable material choices
5. GWP dependencies on future weather: Changing scenarios for the weather was neg-
ligible for operational impacts but suggested significance for the embodied emissions
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
74
==PAGE:83==
of external material layers, in particular, if combined with the static factors of the
Factor Method. This shows the relevance of investigating these causal relationships
further to optimize DfD strategies
6. Future uncertainties: The uncertainties related to service life estimation show that
it is impossible to draw any conclusions regarding the benefits given by the Modified
LCA method for BaU. Conclusions can be made for the DfD case study, where the
GWP is reduced from an average of 4.6 kgCO2e/m2/yr to 0.8 kgCO2e/m2/yr when
using the Modified LCA and assuming a normal distribution
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
75
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 7
Discussion
This section will discuss how the objectives of this study have been met and evaluate the
central limitations of the methodology. Secondly, this thesis discusses whether we should
Design for Disassembly in theory based on the Modified LCA method. Additionally, this
section will address the potential implications of implementing the method in reality. This
will lead to a discussion of the main dilemmas and risks surrounding the political aspects
of LCA when attempting to adjust the science-based method to incentivize DfD and
sustainability strategies in general. Throughout this section, the discussion will provide
suggestions for further research.
7.1
Limitations and Assumptions in the Methodology and
Suggestions on Further Research
The Modified LCA’s sparse testing and method limitations mean no conclusions can be
drawn on the consequences of DfD in LCA. However, the results suggest tendencies in the
method’s treatment of certain material types based on service life, environmental impact
distribution, and assembly methods. This study selects the key focus areas addressing
the benefits of DfD based on a literature review, and no screening methods are applied
to discover whether other variables are of higher importance for DfD in LCA. Further
limitations include the biases from the author’s point of view in terms of the variables
chosen to examine, leading to unknown unknowns. The method should have covered other
environmental impacts, such as resource depletion, to adequately assess if a DfD strategy
is favorable. Conclusions from this study can not be generalized as the Modified LCA
method should be tested on several case studies with different sustainability strategies,
material use, location, and other variances to examine its robustness. Finally, it can be
debated if the scope of this experimental thesis was set too wide, preventing the project
from deeply elaborating on each implementation of future uncertainties.
The method
validation test is conducted on a whole apartment, making the case more comprehensive.
A narrower scope is recommended for further research to investigate future uncertainties
and building parts.
7.1.1
Environmental Data and End-of-Life Framework
The project raised awareness of the lack of a standardized framework for determining the
most likely EoL scenario for a material. The EoL assumptions made for the materials
were based on the framework provided by GXN, which determined the EoL and, thereby,
which EPD to use in the analysis. The EoL framework is thereby influencing the data
foundation of the analysis. The exclusion of certain LCA modules according to the EoL
scenario is a highly questionable approach due to the structure of environmental data for
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
76
==PAGE:85==
products. This has indeed led to an incomplete LCA. The assumed advantage of the EoL
framework concerning its simplicity is, in fact, a limitation, as the qualitative assumptions
made by the user can be affected by the lack of technical knowledge. This results in a high
degree of subjectivity in the EoL assessments. The EoL framework, developed by GXN,
could be suspected of facilitating a positive outcome of the DfD case study. Furthermore,
it can concluded that the EoL framework is incomplete and misses many important risk
factors, such as economic and logistic considerations. This emphasizes the need for further
research on the topic and a standardized, comprehensive framework/guidelines enabling
LCA practitioners to select the most likely EoL scenario or a range of probable scenarios.
This LCA did not assess all life cycle modules and impact categories.
Only the LCA
modules mandatory according to the Danish Building Regulations are assessed, including
an added D stage and the manipulation of the declared EoL modules. This results in
inconsistency and the risk of unreported emissions.
Additionally, EPDs generally lack
transparency and reliability.
A further investigation of EPDs could be conducted, as
it seems to introduce high uncertainties on the results.
Based on these findings, it is
recommended that stricter requirements be introduced to the declaration rules for EPDs
to ensure consistency.
7.1.2
Service Life Dependencies
The literature review reveals that the service life of materials has a crucial impact on the
GWP and high uncertainties, making it a key objective of this study. Here, the Factor
Method is the main framework, aiming to increase the context-specific service life predic-
tions due to various pre- and post-designing dependencies. This study did not consider the
factors; Work Execution Level (c) and Maintenance Level (g). Although the factor repre-
senting Maintenance Level (g) is highly relevant for DfD, no consistent data was found to
implement the effects of maintenance on service life. This study proposes further research
on implementing the Maintenance Level (g) dependencies on, e.g., tenure type. Further-
more, whether the assumptions leading to a given factor value are correct can be debated.
Certain factors are implicitly implemented in BUILD’s generic data, such as the Inherent
Performance Level (a) [36]. The impact of these dependencies is a black box since the
relevant background data is publicly unavailable. Generally, the transparency of BUILD’s
method of estimating generic service life values can be discussed. The service lives are cal-
culated from four individual service life values (technical, functional, economic, aesthetic)
using different methods, as mentioned in the literature review. The exact method used
for a given material is not public either.
The study aims to investigate the dynamic factors that influence service life, particularly
those related to changing weather and occupancy. However, it is important to note that
this aspect is not fully addressed in the study. The so-called ’Dynamic factors’ are not
modeled as dynamic over time but rather as a factor dependent on 15 different conditions.
These dependencies are modeled as a fixed chain of events, meaning that, for example,
one weather scenario always applies the same factor to exterior surfaces. This approach
is purely based on assumptions, and a more comprehensive solutions space that accounts
for the many possible responses to an event should have been considered to evaluate the
method properly. It is decided that the number of people determined the level of wear
and tear on the interior surface.
In addition, the analysis should have considered the
hours spent at home as a parameter influencing service life. The results show that mount-
ing dependencies greatly impact BaU’s GWP. The materials modeled as disassemblable
are decided based on a qualitative assessment by the authors. The methodology could
have introduced more specific guidelines on approaching this problem, especially due to
the importance of the results for DfD. It is very diﬀicult to estimate parallel service lives
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
77
==PAGE:86==
for materials. Currently, parallel service lives are assigned based on mounting methods,
not considering the inconvenience due to accessibility. E.g., it can be discussed whether
a membrane with a short service life would be replaced if it requires disassembling the
entire element, even if technically possible.
The study excludes the 20% rule for service life, a method that accounts for the logis-
tic and economic perspective of renovation. The rule states that two adjacent materials
should be replaced simultaneously if the difference in their service lives is less than 20%.
Implementing this dependency will decrease the service life of the target materials. For
further research, this rule should be accounted for in the service life dependencies since it
is required by the Danish Building Regulations.
This study recommends more focus on the rules for service life dependencies in LCA.
Modeling service life dependencies is highly complex since various rules are found to in-
teract, and additional dynamic considerations require reliable, empirical data to avoid
misleading results.
7.1.3
Operational Impact Assessment
An energy simulation is performed to assess the building’s total GWP impact given various
scenarios. The methodology suggests weather files representing different reference years
and a specific location. The initial plan of the investigation was to use the morphing
method and thereby extract data on the weather for every year during the 100 years, but
this was not obtained due to a lack of coding skills. Thus, implementing the morphing
method would comply better with the aim of dynamic future predictions. Secondly, the
occupancy groups were made from a qualitative estimation, and no empirical data supports
the occupancy schedules. The occupancy behavior relies on the standard values from BR18,
and no aspect of, e.g., historical trends, culture, income levels, or education is accounted
for. Thus, this static and generic perspective is chosen due to the model’s complexity.
Furthermore, it is decided that a comprehensive analysis of the operational impacts would
deviate too much from the initial scope. This methodology suggests implementing primary
energy factors, which in a Danish context are 1.9 for electricity and 0.85 for district heating.
However, these currently used numbers may not fully capture the improvements in the
electricity grid or district heating infrastructure. The study chose to present the scope
of the indoor climate for the two case buildings to make them more comparable.
An
indoor operational temperature calculation was conducted, but since it was seen that both
buildings almost met the requirements of hours above the detected degrees, it was chosen
not to elaborate more on the result to stay more focused on the objectives. As a result,
there are no clear guidelines in the method on how to elaborate on whether your building
complies with the comparative requirements.
Exploring the target unit of operational
and embodied global warming potential for further research will be valuable. Calculating
the GWP in [kg CO2 e/pers/yr] instead of [kg CO2 e/m2/yr] would create an incentive
for living closer and building smaller, potentially benefiting across social, economic, and
environmental sustainability aspects. A more comprehensive quantitative study should be
executed for further research to accommodate the occupancy forecast.
7.1.4
LCA and DLCA
The study investigates the effect of introducing dynamic factors, Omega and Tau, accord-
ing to the DGNB 2025 Pilot manual [40]. The results of this study show that Tau and
Omega motivate the use of bio-based materials since the EoL emissions become almost
negligible. In combination with the negative impacts in the Manufacturing stage, this
results in a total negative GWP. Furthermore, this will lead to an incentive to replace
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
78
==PAGE:87==
bio-based materials more often as it will decrease the GWP. At the same time, the results
suggest that Tau and Omega may reduce the incentives for reusing metals since this mate-
rial group typically has significant benefits in the D stage, which becomes negligible when
the factors are added. Tau is an exponential function with the total study period as a
static value and the current year (y) as a variable. When T = y, the result becomes 0 no
matter what, whereas the GWP becomes 0. It can be discussed if this is the best approach
to the DLCA, since no matter the study period, the impact becomes 0 in the last year.
This phenomenon is very clear to see in the cumulative results of this assignment.
7.1.5
Method Comparison
The Modified LCA is compared to a Baseline LCA method over 100 years. It can be
discussed whether a comparison using 50 years for the Baseline (to represent an actual LCA
according to the Danish Building Regulations) would be more accurate. Consequently, the
consequences of extending the study period are not suﬀiciently addressed. The case studies
used in this thesis target not only DfD strategies but also transformability and flexibility.
The other two strategies are not investigated in the Modified LCA method, and it is
diﬀicult to address whether the multi-strategic design has unknown indirect effects on the
results, both positive and negative. In the DfD case study, the living room and kitchen
floor have slab construction similar to the bathroom, with the aim of increasing flexibility
in the design. These benefits were not accounted for using the Modified LCA method.
As discussed, the results of this study are influenced by the material choices of the two
case studies. While BaU primarily consists of concrete, bricks, and other mineral-based
materials, the DfD primarily consists of bio-based materials. This greatly influences the
results and ability to analyze DfD strategies. Although the case studies is designed to
be comparable, they differ in material choices and functionalities, and properties. Thus,
another main assumption is functional equivalence between the case studies. The method
comparison will be able to provide more details on DfD if certain construction parts are
analyzed separately. Furthermore, the cases do not represent an entire building, leaving
large construction parts, such as the roof and foundation, unaddressed. This influences the
results of both embodied and operational. Additionally, the case studies are conceptual,
and due to technical properties, few construction details are found to be uncommon in
reality. Still, it is decided to keep all build-ups and materials as provided by GXN. A
source of error in the method comparison is rooted in the frame or reference. Here, each
variable is added to the Baseline Method in the chronological order of the GWP function;
see figure 4.1. It can be debated whether the method comparison lacks insight into the
effects of the individual variables instead of the cumulative effects, e.g., the impact of Tau
without Omega. A more detailed analysis of the EoL and D stage contributions for each
material will provide a deeper understanding of which materials to target in terms of DfD.
7.1.6
Sensitivity Analysis
The Sobol sensitivity analysis is chosen based on various scholars recommending this
variance-based GSA for LCA due to its ability to manage time-series data among other
features [41], [69]. The first sensitivity analysis of material service life is subject to certain
errors and critical assumptions. The replacement rates used in the sensitivity analysis are
based on background data on standard deviations, primarily representing Swiss buildings.
The data is further categorized according to the position, not accounting for the material
type or mounting methods [37]. However, the Swiss data is paired with the mean service
life data sourced according to the Danish Building Regulations, and these spatial differ-
ences cause errors in the results. Other approaches could have been used to estimate an
uncertainty range for the service life, such as the ISO 15686-8 annex C (See Equation
A.1 and A.2 in appendix A.1) [24]. Here, an engineering model estimates an uncertainty
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
79
==PAGE:88==
range for both service life factors and the mean service life. However, no empirical data is
found on the service life factors, only general assumptions. Thus, it is chosen to apply the
probabilistic data, which is accessible. Another source of error is rooted in the method-
ology since the uncertainty is applied to the service life — not the upstream service life
factors. Instead, all factors were treated as deterministic, discrete values, and all service
life values were treated as stochastic variables. This is problematic since several scholars
state that the probability distribution must be applied to the upstream factors if mod-
eled explicitly instead of the resulting service life [9] [80]. The literature review reveals
an inconsistency in the chosen distribution types used to model service life uncertainties.
Additionally, it is argued that one distribution type can not be used for all materials and
cases [36]. Thus, this was a source of error. The sensitivity results reveal the importance
of reporting a probability range for GWP results instead of an absolute value. However,
the results also support the argument that increased complexity makes LCA less useful in
decision-making processes. Additionally, the study emphasizes the need for spatial data
on service life probabilities categorized according to known, influential casual relationships
such as mounting, material type, and building type.
A goodness-of-fit analysis must be applied for further research to validate the assump-
tions of normally distributed model outputs. Additionally, statistical data describing the
distribution, such as the quantiles, must be collected.
The second sensitivity analysis aims to estimate the scale of impact of each variable,
differentiating the Baseline LCA from the Modified LCA method. Based on the result
analysis, it can be concluded that the Sobol GSA was not an appropriate choice given the
model setup. In the mathematical model used to calculate the final GWP, the value of
the dynamic service life factors (weather and occupancy) depended on the energy output
produced by the energy simulation. This is an issue since the main limitation of the cho-
sen variance-based GSA is the treatment of depending variables. An additional constraint
is rooted in the chosen sampling method, quasi-Monte Carlo, arising from the canceling
effects between variables [66] [71]. The limitation regarding the modeling of dependent
variables is an issue as causal relationships often occur in real life and in the way one
typically constructs the mathematical model. As of now, there are no methods commonly
agreed upon for managing these dependencies in GSA [66], [68]. This leads to an adjust-
ment in this project’s GWP function, modeling the operational impacts and effects on
service life as independent variables in the sensitivity analysis. The goal is to produce
more reliable results. This is a limitation as the study sets out to uncover methods to
account for the causal relationship between these variables. This study does not adjust
the model to avoid patterns of cancellation effects caused by variable interactions, which
causes highly unreliable results. It can be discussed if a different approach to measure
variable importance is more appropriate, such as linear regression models and statistical
tests, e.g., ANOVA, instead of the functional decomposition method of the Sobol [69]. Ad-
ditionally, this study does not use empirical data to model the uncertainty distribution for
the Modified LCA variables, and all are assumed to have a uniform distribution. Only one
EoL scenario and complementing D stage is chosen. Still, it will provide valuable insight to
assess a space of possible inputs to understand the importance of considering multiple pos-
sible EoL and D stage scenarios, as these assumptions are assumed to be highly uncertain
in LCA. Due to the limitations, the results of this analysis are considered invalid, and no
conclusions can be drawn. Therefore, it was decided not to provide statistical data on the
model output or validate the assumed normal distributions with a goodness-of-fit analysis.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
80
==PAGE:89==
Finally, the 95% confidence interval is used to filter out noisy data. This is done with
an embedded function in the SALib package. However, documentation of the exact meth-
ods used to calculate the confidence intervals is sparse, making it challenging to validate
the results [77].
7.2
Discussion of the Modified LCA Method
The newly developed Modified LCA method gives rise to a discussion of the implications
of adjusting science-based LCA for political purposes. The method is developed aiming to
incentivize DfD using four main principles: 1) Consideration of future agents affecting the
GWP benefits of DfD, 2) Implementation of End-of-Life framework to determine likely
scenarios and the related EoL modules based on risk factors 3) Expansion of the model
boundaries from a single building to a system by including the D stage in the LCA scope
4) Extension of the study period from 50 years to 100 years.
1) Consideration of future agents affecting the GWP benefits of DfD: The importance
of considering service life dependencies will only increase due to climate change and the
political agenda focusing on climate adaptations. Presenting a factor that embraces future
weather conditions could potentially, with the correct implementation and factor values,
help the designer choose materials that are more adaptable to the future. The results show
that this insight can be provided when evaluating the impact of service life dependencies
on position and material type. However, this method’s implementation of dynamic factors
representing the impacts of changing weather does not enable this advantage. Here, the
dynamic weather factor does not consider the material’s durability and degree of climatic
adaptability. This is, e.g., seen in the external facade layer where the life span of bricks in
BaU decreases by 10.8 years, and the wood cladding for DfD only decreases by 7.6 years
when applying the ”2.1 °C global warming” scenario. This highlights the inappropriate
side effect, which is that the penalty from future climate change impacts long-lasting ma-
terials the most. Based on these considerations, future research on factors that would
impact the life span of the material, based on its properties, is worth investigating.
Levetider.dk is used to set the values for the static factors.
However, this tool only
proposes factors lower than 1, contradicting the ISO15686 proposal of factors greater than
1. The findings of this thesis suggest an implementation of factors greater than 1, in com-
bination with considerations of material properties, as this adjustment has the potential
to benefit DfD strategies by prolonging the service life in LCA.
The Modified LCA method succeeded in implementing considerations for technological
development, although it did not succeed in addressing the related uncertainties. Assum-
ing all materials have one fixed technological development path is critical. This also applies
to the dynamic characterization factor, as climate change predictions are subject to high
uncertainties and depend on the actions taken by society. The dynamic characterization
factor, Tau, is politically determined to be within the range of 0-1, which only decreases
the overall GWP when applied. It is based on today’s current situation and does not
consider that the urgency of global warming reduction might increase over time if soci-
ety fails to achieve its political goals. Based on the findings of the study, adjusting the
range is recommended to include factor values larger than 1, thus penalizing here-and-now
emissions. The critical aspects of implementing Tau and Omega must be considered as
the assessed GWP no longer represents reality. The results show, as expected, that the
inclusion of Tau and Omega will allow for an increase in actual emissions if current GWP
target values remain the same.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
81
==PAGE:90==
2) Implementation of End-of-Life framework to determine likely scenarios and the related
EoL modules based on risk factors: The implementation of a framework for choosing the
End-of-Life for building material is recommended to provide a consistent method for ad-
dressing the current problem of choosing an appropriate EoL. Such a framework would
benefit the validation of the LCA. However, the framework proposed in the Modified LCA
method does not account for the future environmental, social, and economic risk factors
resulting in the potential of DfD not being activated. The assessment does not address
that a specific material could be in resource shortage at the time of demolition, thereby
getting e.g. reused/recycled instead of the intended incineration/landfill. At the time of
demolition, the material could also be in huge demand due to social effects and thereby be
reused/recycled. The EoL framework covers some essential risk factors, but it would be
worth looking into more logistic risks, e.g. considering the design process as a risk factor,
aiming to encourage the designers to plan for disassembly. The chosen scenario will deter-
mine which EoL modules should be included in the LCA. The main complications related
to this feature concern the current procedure for declaring a material’s environmental im-
pacts since it is common to declare a fixed scenario with fractions of the material having
different EoL. Therefore, the Modified LCA method can lead to an incomplete assessment
of a material’s environmental impacts.
3) Expansion of the model boundaries from a single building to a system by including
the D stage in the LCA scope: The implementation of the D stage aims to facilitate the
benefits of a circular economy in LCA. The discussion concerning the attributing of loads
and benefits of the D stage is political, and the chosen method will have significant con-
sequences for the environment and the incentive for various sustainability strategies. The
results show, as expected that including the D stage will allow for an increase in emis-
sions if the target values are not lowered accordingly. The consequences of attributing all
benefits of avoided emissions to the building facilitating DfD must be further investigated.
If implementing the D stage, certain allocation rules between multiple life cycles should
be considered to abate the risk of underestimating GWP. This would be a comprehensive
and long-term process to develop such new objectives. Based on the results, the main
side effect of the Modified LCA is assumed to be the assessment of bio-based materials
according to the -1/1 rule when expanding the system boundaries to include the D stage.
Findings from the study suggest a general problem when incorporating the D stage in
LCA, as it encourages clients to build with more bio-based materials, and thereby live
in carbon-captured buildings. For further research, a case with semi-identical building
elements could have been conducted with these two methods to target the effect of the
DfD rather than the materials.
4) Extension of the study period from 50 years to 100 years: The study period is ex-
tended to 100 years, but this project did not assess the increase in uncertainty over time.
However, the data collected on position-dependent replacement rates show that the poten-
tial of certain longevity materials lies way beyond 100 years. This insight is not considered
when assessing the probability of reuse for the individual material, as no data could be
sourced on standard deviations with both material and position dependencies. Based on
the literature review a tendency for Tau during a 50-year study period is not comparable
to the tendency when the study period is 100-year. This aspect should be taken into
consideration when both expanding the study period and adding Tau as a future dynamic
factor. If the study period is prolonged in the assessment, the corresponding political
target values would have to be adjusted accordingly.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
82
==PAGE:91==
7.3
Summary of Discussion
The discussion aims to contribute to the current debate on whether we should design
for disassembly with a theoretical focus. This summary highlights the main conclusions
and recommendations drawn from attempting to test the benefits of DfD with the Mod-
ified LCA method and address research question 4: ”Should we Design for Disassembly
theoretically?”.
• The Modified LCA method must be applied to more case studies to be able to provide
general conclusions on its ability to benefit DfD strategies and uncover unknown and
unintended side effects
• Based on the results, the main side effect of the Modified LCA is assumed to be the
assessment of bio-based materials when expanding the system boundaries to include
the D stage. This study emphasizes that the attribution of loads and benefits to the
first life cycle must be considered carefully as this can lead to certain materials e.g.
bio-based having a negative contribution to the overall GWP result. It is furthermore
debatable how the benefits of future, uncertain GWP savings due to DfD should be
accounted for
• The dynamic factors for GWP (Omega and Tau) are spanning between 0-1, thus
only decreasing the GWP when applied. It is recommended to adjust this range to
include factor values larger than 1, thus penalizing here-and-now emissions to avoid
significantly underestimating the GWP. The results of this study support the DGNB
2025 Pilot Manual’s proposal to implement the DLCA approach as a supplement to
traditional LCA, not a replacement
• The project results emphasize the importance of a standardized framework to deter-
mine the EoL scenarios and implement these as uncertainties in LCA
• The sensitivity results revealed the importance of reporting a probability range for
GWP instead of an absolute value. In particular, spatial data on service life proba-
bilities and End-of-Life scenarios are important to assess the benefits of Design for
Disassembly. However, the results also support the argument that an increase in
complexity makes LCA less useful in decision-making processes
• One of the main limitations for testing the dynamic factors for weather and occupants
is rooted in this project’s approach using a fixed chain of events to model the causal
relationships. Here, an input scenario would lead to a predetermined model response.
A probabilistic approach is suggested for further research
• The study period was extended to 100 years, but this project did not assess the in-
crease in uncertainty over time. It could, however, be seen from the data collected on
position-dependent replacement rates that the potential of certain longevity materi-
als lies way beyond 100 years. This insight is not taken into account when assessing
the probability of reuse for the individual material but is recommended for further
research
• Finally, the method should have covered other environmental impacts, such as re-
source depletion, to assess if Design for Disassembly is favorable in theory properly
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
83
==PAGE:92==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
This study sought to investigate the benefits and disadvantages of Design for Disassembly
(DfD) in Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) by developing a new method called the Modified
LCA. The Modified LCA method aimed to address the limitations of traditional LCA
in capturing the benefits of DfD by incorporating future uncertainties related to service
life, reuse/recycling potential, and dynamic impacts over time. The study hypothesized
that the Modified LCA method would incentivize DfD strategies by providing a more
comprehensive assessment of their environmental impacts. The Modified LCA method
was tested on two case studies of two-bedroom apartments in Denmark, one designed with
Business as Usual (BaU) materials and construction methods and one with DfD strate-
gies. The results showed that the Modified LCA method significantly reduced the Global
Warming Potential (GWP) of the DfD case study by 83% compared to the traditional
LCA results. However, the reduction for the BaU case study was only 33%. This suggests
that the Modified LCA method captures the benefits of DfD strategies more effectively
than traditional LCA. However, it is important to note that these results are highly de-
pendent on the assumptions and limitations of the Modified LCA method and may not
be generalizable to other case studies. The study identified several driving parameters
that benefit DfD in terms of service life and reuse/recycling potential of materials, given
their future uncertainties. These parameters include the technological optimization factor
(Omega), the dynamic characterization factor for GWP (Tau), and the reuse/recycling
potential of the D stage (the benefits and loads beyond the system boundary).
The
study found that the service life dependencies on mounting methods and material type
are influential parameters directly affecting DfD. However, the sensitivity analysis of the
individual parameters in the Modified LCA method revealed that Tau does not influence
the GWP, contradicting the initial results. This discrepancy is attributed to the limita-
tions of the Sobol Global Sensitivity Analysis (GSA) method in handling patterns where
variables cancel each other’s effects. The results are furthermore highly influenced by the
chosen method to account for the reuse/recycling potential of bio-based materials, which
is found to potentially underestimate the GWP. This is because the carbon sequestered
in bio-based materials is accounted for as a negative impact, while the same amount of
carbon is released at the End-of-Life stage. This underestimation could be mitigated by
adjusting the characterization factor for bio-based materials or by implementing a more
comprehensive assessment of these materials’ reuse/recycling potential. The politically
defined characterization factor, Tau, aiming to incentivize immediate emission reductions,
is also found to potentially underestimate the GWP. This could be mitigated by allowing
Tau to take values above the range of 0 to 1. In conclusion, this study has demonstrated
the potential of the Modified LCA method to capture the benefits of DfD strategies in
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
84
==PAGE:93==
LCA. The study’s findings suggest that DfD can significantly reduce the environmental
impacts of buildings, particularly when considering future uncertainties related to service
life, reuse/recycling potential, and dynamic impacts. However, further research is needed
to refine the Modified LCA method and address its limitations, such as handling depen-
dent variables in the sensitivity analysis and incorporating empirical data on the causal
relationships between service life and various agents.
By addressing these limitations,
the Modified LCA method can become a valuable tool for assessing the environmental
impacts of DfD strategies and promoting sustainable building design. It is important to
emphasize that due to the uncertainties and assumptions made in this study, the Modified
LCA should be used as a supplement to traditional LCA rather than a replacement. The
GWP values obtained from the Modified LCA, which account for future savings based on
uncertainties, are not directly comparable to those from traditional LCA, which focus on
current emissions. The results of this study can provide valuable insight into the political
debate of LCA method adjustments by highlighting possible side effects of implementing
future scenarios.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
85
==PAGE:94==
Bibliography
[1]
The Paris Agreement United Nations. https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/paris-
agreement. (Accessed on 06/24/2024).
[2]
2050 long-term strategy - European Commission. https://climate.ec.europa.eu/
eu-action/climate-strategies-targets/2050-long-term-strategy_en. (Accessed on
05/20/2024).
[3]
UNEP IEA. “Global status report for buildings and construction 2019”. In: UN
Enviroment programme 224 (2019).
[4]
Building renovation: where circular economy and climate meet — European Envi-
ronment Agency. https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/building-renovation-
where-circular-economy. (Accessed on 05/20/2024).
[5]
Taksonomivejledning - Opførelse af nye bygninger | Rådet for Bæredygtigt Byggeri.
https://rfbb.dk/publikation/taksonomivejledning--- opf%C3%B8relse- af- nye-
bygninger-1. (Accessed on 07/01/2024).
[6]
Rune Andersen and Kristoffer Negendahl. “Lifespan prediction of existing building
typologies”. eng. In: Journal of Building Engineering 65 (2023), p. 105696. issn:
23527102. doi: 10.1016/j.jobe.2022.105696.
[7]
BR18. https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-bestemmelser/11/BRV/Version-
2-Bygningers-klimap%C3%A5virkning/Kap-1_2. (Accessed on 05/09/2024).
[8]
Matthew Roberts et al. “Understanding the global warming potential of circular
design strategies: Life cycle assessment of a design-for-disassembly building”. eng.
In: Sustainable Production and Consumption 37 (2023), pp. 331–343. issn: 23525509.
doi: 10.1016/j.spc.2023.03.001.
[9]
Silva. Methodologies for Service Life Prediction of Buildings, Green Energy and Tech-
nology. eng. Springer International Publishing, 2016. isbn: 3319332880, 3319332902,
9783319332888, 9783319332901.
[10]
Ship of Theseus – Philosophical Thought. https : / / open . library . okstate . edu /
introphilosophy/chapter/ship-of-theseus/. (Accessed on 07/01/2024).
[11]
Ingrid Bertin et al. “Environmental impacts of Design for Reuse practices in the
building sector”. eng. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 349 (2022), p. 131228. issn:
18791786, 09596526. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.131228.
[12]
Matthew J. Eckelman et al. “Life cycle energy and environmental benefits of novel
design-for-deconstruction structural systems in steel buildings”. eng. In: Building
and Environment 143 (2018), pp. 421–430. issn: 1873684x, 03601323. doi: 10.1016/
j.buildenv.2018.07.017.
[13]
Anbefalinger_til_implementering_af_fleksibelt_byggeri.pdf. chrome - extension : / /
efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/
portal/337588768/Anbefalinger_til_implementering_af_fleksibelt_byggeri.pdf.
(Accessed on 05/20/2024).
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
86
==PAGE:95==
[14]
Design for Disassembly (DfD) - Construction Recycling - King County Solid Waste
Division. https://kingcounty.gov/en/legacy/depts/dnrp/solid-waste/programs/
green-building/construction-demolition/-/media/depts/dnrp/solid-waste/green-
building/documents/Design_for_Disassembly-guide.ashx?la=en&hash=765B65C76D7EFD7B811F
(Accessed on 06/10/2024).
[15]
Design for Disassembly — Håndbog om affaldsforebyggelse i byggeriet by Byggeri &
Anlæg på Teknologisk Institut - Issuu. https://issuu.com/teknologiskinst/docs/dfd_
haandbog_teknologisk_institut_0. (Accessed on 06/10/2024).
[16]
Standard. https://sd.ds.dk/Viewer/Standard?ProjectNr=M329731&Status=60.
60&VariantID=41&Page=0. (Accessed on 07/05/2024).
[17]
Katarzyna Ostapska et al. “Design for Disassembly: A systematic scoping review
and analysis of built structures Designed for Disassembly”. eng. In: Sustainable Pro-
duction and Consumption 48 (2024), pp. 377–395. issn: 23525509. doi: 10.1016/j.
spc.2024.05.014.
[18]
Microsoft Word - Crowther-acsa-1.doc. https : / / eprints . qut . edu . au / 2837 / 1 /
Crowther-ACSA1999.PDF. (Accessed on 06/24/2024).
[19]
Titelsid.p65. https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=
23239714ea03f78b515f9023b96b02fbb121d4ee. (Accessed on 06/24/2024).
[20]
Design for Disassembly and Deconstruction - Challenges and Opportunities - Sci-
enceDirect. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877705815021402.
(Accessed on 07/05/2024).
[21]
Microsoft Word - Crowther-TG39-Wellington-2001.doc. https://core.ac.uk/download/
pdf/10874642.pdf. (Accessed on 06/10/2024).
[22]
Claudio Favi and Michele Germani. “A Design for Disassembly Approach to Analyze
and Manage End-of-Life Options for Industrial Products in the Early Design Phase”.
eng. In: Technology and Manufacturing Process Selection (2014), pp. 297–322. doi:
10.1007/978-1-4471-5544-7_15.
[23]
About CIRCuIT | Circuit. https://www.circuit-project.eu/about-circuit. (Accessed
on 03/28/2024).
[24]
Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and framework.
eng. 2008.
[25]
Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Requirements and guidelines
– Amendment 2 (ISO 14044:2006/Amd 2:2020). eng. 2020.
[26]
Sustainability of construction works – Assessment of environmental performance of
buildings – Calculation method. eng. 2012.
[27]
Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product declarations – Core
rules for the product category of construction products. eng. 2019.
[28]
BR18. https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Bilag/B2/Bilag_2/Tabel_7#787e83a6-
b7d9-4a83-a4be-37574156daef. (Accessed on 05/09/2024).
[29]
Kim Haugbølle et al. BUILD levetidstabel: Version 2021. dan. 2021.
[30]
Emissionsfaktorer for el fjernvarme og ledningsgas for 2025-2075.pdf. https://www.
sbst.dk/Media/638282171394687135/Emissionsfaktorer%20for%20el%20fjernvarme%
20og%20ledningsgas%20for%202025-2075.pdf. (Accessed on 06/10/2024).
[31]
Maria Balouktsi and Harpa Birgisdottir. Analysis of new modules in connection with
calculation of the climate impact of buildings. eng. 2023.
[32]
Tuomo Joensuu et al. “Developing Buildings’ Life Cycle Assessment in Circular
Economy-Comparing methods for assessing carbon footprint of reusable compo-
nents”. eng. In: Sustainable Cities and Society 77 (2022), p. 103499. issn: 22106715,
22106707. doi: 10.1016/j.scs.2021.103499.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
87
==PAGE:96==
[33]
The communication of environmental impacts through environmental product decla-
rations. https://ntnuopen.ntnu.no/ntnu-xmlui/bitstream/handle/11250/234552/
473599_FULLTEXT01.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y. (Accessed on 07/03/2024).
[34]
Methodology for multiple life cycles product ecodesign / The Design Society. https:
//www.designsociety.org/publication/39511/Methodology+for+multiple+life+
cycles+product+ecodesign. (Accessed on 07/05/2024).
[35]
Leonora Charlotte Malabi Eberhardt et al. “Development of a life cycle assess-
ment allocation approach for circular economy in the built environment”. eng. In:
Sustainability (switzerland) 12.22 (2020), pp. 1–16. issn: 20711050. doi: 10.3390/
su12229579.
[36]
Niels-Jørgen Aagaard et al. Levetider af bygningsdele ved vurdering af bæredygtighed
og totaløkonomi. dan. SBI forlag, 2013. isbn: 8756315864, 9788756315869.
[37]
Kyriaki Goulouti et al. “Uncertainty of building elements’ service lives in build-
ing LCA
LCC: What matters?” eng. In: Building and Environment 183 (2020),
p. 106904. issn: 1873684x, 03601323. doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2020.106904.
[38]
Shu Su et al. “Dynamic LCA framework for environmental impact assessment of
buildings”. eng. In: Energy and Buildings 149 (2017), pp. 310–320. issn: 03787788,
18726178. doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2017.05.042.
[39]
Defining Temporally Dynamic Life Cycle Assessment: A Literature Review. https:
//backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/201356290/Sohn_et_al_2019_
Integrated _ Environmental _ Assessment _ and _ Management . pdf. (Accessed on
06/11/2024).
[40]
DGNB Renovering og nybyggeri 2025 (pilot) | Rådet for Bæredygtigt Byggeri. https:
//rfbb.dk/publikation/dgnb- renovering- og- nybyggeri- 2025- pilot. (Accessed on
05/09/2024).
[41]
Eirik Resch et al. “Estimating dynamic climate change effects of material use in
buildings—Timing, uncertainty, and emission sources”. eng. In: Building and Envi-
ronment 187 (2021), p. 107399. issn: 1873684x, 03601323. doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.
2020.107399.
[42]
BR18. https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-bestemmelser/11/Krav. (Accessed
on 06/10/2024).
[43]
BR18. https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-bestemmelser/11/BRV/Energiforbrug-
2. (Accessed on 06/10/2024).
[44]
BR18. https : / / bygningsreglementet . dk / Historisk / BR18 _ Version7 / Tekniske -
bestemmelser/19/Vejledninger/Termisk- indeklima/Kap- 1_0#:~:text=For%
20boliger%2C%20hvor%20der%20er,rumtemperaturen%20overskrider%2028%20%
C2%B0C.. (Accessed on 05/09/2024).
[45]
BR18. https : / / bygningsreglementet . dk / Historisk / BR18 _ Version3 / Tekniske -
bestemmelser/11/Krav/259. (Accessed on 05/09/2024).
[46]
Microsoft Word - AF23 - Sammenfatningsnotat.docx. https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/
files/Statistik/af23_-_sammenfatningsnotat.pdf. (Accessed on 06/11/2024).
[47]
TYNDP 2022 Scenario Report | Version. April 2022. https://2022.entsos-tyndp-
scenarios.eu/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/TYNDP2022_Joint_Scenario_Full-
Report-April-2022.pdf. (Accessed on 06/11/2024).
[48]
DinGeo - Geodata på alle adresser i hele Danmark. https : / / www . dingeo . dk/.
(Accessed on 06/24/2024).
[49]
DGNB manual for nye bygninger og omfattende renoveringer 2023 | Rådet for
Bæredygtigt Byggeri. https://rfbb.dk/publikation/dgnb-manual-for-nye-bygninger-
og-omfattende-renoveringer-2023. (Accessed on 06/24/2024).
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
88
==PAGE:97==
[50]
DMI_report_18-20.pdf. chrome - extension : / / efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj /
https://www.dmi.dk/fileadmin/Rapporter/2018/DMI_report_18-20.pdf. (Ac-
cessed on 06/24/2024).
[51]
Documentation — IPCC. https://www.ipcc.ch/documentation/. (Accessed on
06/24/2024).
[52]
FAQ Chapter 1 — Global Warming of 1.5. https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/faq/faq-
chapter-1/#\protect\protect\leavevmode@ifvmode\kern+.2222em\relax~\protect\
protect\leavevmode@ifvmode\kern+.2222em\relaxtext=At%20the%20present%
20rate % 2C % 20global \ protect \ protect \ leavevmode @ ifvmode \ kern + .1667em \
relaxemissions%20reaching%20zero%20by%202055.. (Accessed on 06/24/2024).
[53]
S. E. Belcher, J. N. Hacker, and D. S. Powell. “Constructing design weather data
for future climates”. eng. In: Building Services Engineering Research and Technology
26.1 (2005), pp. 49–61. issn: 14770849, 01436244. doi: 10.1191/0143624405bt112oa.
[54]
Climate Change World Weather File Generator for World-Wide Weather Data -
CCWorldWeatherGen - University of Southampton Blogs. https://energy.soton.ac.
uk/climate-change-world-weather-file-generator-for-world-wide-weather-data-
ccworldweathergen/. (Accessed on 06/24/2024).
[55]
Hongyuan Jia, Adrian Chong, and Baisong Ning. “Epwshiftr: Incorporating Open
Data of Climate Change Prediction into Building Performance Simulation for Fu-
ture Adaptation and Mitigation”. In: Proceedings of Building Simulation 2023: 18th
Conference of IBPSA. Vol. 18. Building Simulation. Shanghai, China: IBPSA, 2023,
pp. 3201–3207. doi: 10.26868/25222708.2023.1612.
[56]
Kailai Sun, Qianchuan Zhao, and Jianhong Zou. “A review of building occupancy
measurement systems”. eng. In: Energy and Buildings 216 (2020), p. 109965. issn:
18726178, 03787788. doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2020.109965.
[57]
Da Yan et al. “Occupant behavior modeling for building performance simulation:
Current state and future challenges”. eng. In: Energy and Buildings 107 (2015),
pp. 264–278. issn: 18726178, 03787788. doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2015.08.032.
[58]
GXN Innovation. https://gxn.3xn.com/project/circuit. (Accessed on 03/28/2024).
[59]
Andre Thomsen. “Obsolescence – understanding the underlying processes”. English.
In: Reviewed papers of the 24th Annual Conference of the European Real Estate Soci-
ety (ERES 2017). ERES 2017: 24th Annual Conference of the European Real Estate
Society , ERES17 ; Conference date: 28-06-2017 Through 01-07-2017. Netherlands:
Delft University of Technology, 2017. url: http://2017.eres.tudelft.nl/index.html.
[60]
Ana Silva et al. “Causal Effects between Criteria That Establish the End of Ser-
vice Life of Buildings and Components”. eng. In: Buildings 12.2 (2022), p. 88. issn:
20755309. doi: 10.3390/buildings12020088.
[61]
Donald G. Iselin and Andrew C. Lemer. “The fourth dimension in building : strate-
gies for minimizing obsolescence”. In: 1993. url: https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:107084847.
[62]
Mohammad Pourebrahimi, Seyed Rahman Eghbali, and Ana Pereira Roders. “Iden-
tifying building obsolescence: towards increasing buildings’ service life”. eng. In: In-
ternational Journal of Building Pathology and Adaptation 38.5 (2020), pp. 635–652.
issn: 23984716, 23984708. doi: 10.1108/IJBPA-08-2019-0068.
[63]
bamb2020.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/BAMB_MaterialsPassports_BestPractice.pdf.
https://www.bamb2020.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/BAMB_MaterialsPassports_
BestPractice.pdf. (Accessed on 05/19/2024).
[64]
levetider.dk. https://www.levetider.dk/. (Accessed on 04/03/2024).
[65]
Om BUILD - Institut for Byggeri, By og Miljø - Aalborg Universitet. https://www.
build.aau.dk/om-build. (Accessed on 07/02/2024).
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
89
==PAGE:98==
[66]
Philippe Wiederkehr. Global Sensitivity Analysis with Dependent Inputs. 2018.
[67]
Probabilistic LCA and LCC to identify robust and reliable renovation strategies -
IOPscience. https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1755-1315/323/1/012058/
meta. (Accessed on 07/05/2024).
[68]
Erin DeCarlo, Sankaran Mahadevan, and Benjamin Smarslok. “Eﬀicient global sen-
sitivity analysis with correlated variables”. In: Structural and Multidisciplinary Op-
timization 58 (Dec. 2018). doi: 10.1007/s00158-018-2077-1.
[69]
Sobol Indices to Measure Feature Importance | by Valentin Catherine | Towards
Data Science. https://towardsdatascience.com/sobol-indices-to-measure-feature-
importance-54cedc3281bc#\protect\protect\leavevmode@ifvmode\kern+.2222em\
relax~:text=1st%2Dorder%20Sobol%20Indices,(order%20%3E%201)%20is.. (Ac-
cessed on 05/20/2024).
[70]
Variance-based sensitivity analysis - Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Variance-based_sensitivity_analysis. (Accessed on 05/20/2024).
[71]
url: https://www.linkedin.com/advice/0/what-advantages-disadvantages-quasi-
monte-carlo-methods.
[72]
Basics — SALib’s documentation. https://salib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user_
guide/basics.html. (Accessed on 05/13/2024).
[73]
Determining the appropriate number of samples for a sensitivity analysis – Water
Programming: A Collaborative Research Blog. https://waterprogramming.wordpress.
com/2020/03/23/determining-the-appropriate-number-of-samples-for-a-sensitivity-
analysis/. (Accessed on 05/13/2024).
[74]
H. R. Maier et al. “Uncertainty, sensitivity and scenario analysis: how do they fit
together?” eng. In: Proceedings of the International Congress on Modelling and
Simulation, Modsim (2021), pp. 554–560. issn: 29818001.
[75]
Waldo Galle, Niels de Temmerman, and Ronald De Meyer. “Integrating scenarios
into life cycle assessment: Understanding the value and financial feasibility of a
demountable building”. eng. In: Buildings 7.3 (2017), p. 64. issn: 20755309. doi:
10.3390/buildings7030064.
[76]
CPH Demo 1: Adaptable Housing | Circuit. https://www.circuit-project.eu/cph-
demo1. (Accessed on 06/27/2024).
[77]
SALib - Sensitivity Analysis Library in Python — SALib’s documentation. https:
//salib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/. (Accessed on 06/13/2024).
[78]
6a48a4_54bd6ee0362a4ea6b596589c5fe19c1b.pdf. https://0d79eb7a-7805-4201-b0c2-
38bce7592e36.filesusr.com/ugd/6a48a4_54bd6ee0362a4ea6b596589c5fe19c1b.pdf.
(Accessed on 05/20/2024).
[79]
md-20007-en_rev1_trædk.pdf. https://www.epddanmark.dk/media/tmwhxyym/
md-20007-en_rev1_tr%C3%A6dk.pdf. (Accessed on 06/28/2024).
[80]
Niels-Jørgen Aagaard, Eva B. Møller, and Ernst Jan de Place Hansen. Levetider
for bygningsdele omfattet af ejerskifteforsikring og huseftersynsordningen. dan. SBI
forlag, 2012. isbn: 8792739024, 9788792739025.
[81]
Roberta Di Bari et al. “Probabilistic life-cycle assessment of service life extension
on renovated buildings under seismic hazard”. eng. In: Buildings 10.3 (2020), p. 48.
issn: 20755309. doi: 10.3390/buildings10030048.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
90
==PAGE:99==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Theory
A.1.1
Target values for GWP in Denmark
Life Cycle Assessment requirements, BR18
2023
12 kg CO2e/m2/year (only for new constructions above 1000 m2)
2025
10.5 kg CO2e/m2/year
2027
9 kg CO2e/m2/year
2029
7.5 kg CO2e/m2/year
Table A.1: Limit values to comply with according to the Danish Building Regulation, all
but the 2025 threshold are still proposals
A.1.2
Thermal envelope requirements
The Danish Building Regulation requirement for the indoor thermal climate in a residential
building is as follows:
• Above 28C◦<= 25 hours over a year
• Above 27C◦<= 100 hours over a year
Thermal envelope and energy requirements, BR18
U-value - External wall
0.3 W/mK
U-value - Internal walls w. temp diff. > 5C
0.4 W/mK
U-value - Internal slabs w. floor heating
0.5 W/mK
U-value - Windows
-17 kWh/m2/y compared to ref.
Table A.2: Thermal specifications and energy requirements according to the Danish Build-
ing Regulations
A.1.3
Service life uncertainty according to ISO15686
The ESL and uncertainty range calculation method according to the ISO 15686-8 annex
C, see equation A.1 and A.2, [24].
tESL = tRSL · ϕA · ϕB · ϕC · ϕD · ϕE · ϕF · ϕG
(A.1)
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
91
==PAGE:100==
∆tESL = tESL ·
√
(∆tRSL
tRSL
)2 + (∆ΦA
ΦA
)2 + (∆ΦB
ΦB
)2 + ... + (∆ΦG
ΦG
)2
(A.2)
A.2
Method
A.2.1
End of Life Framework
Framework from 3XN/GXN used to determine the End of Life scenarios for the case study
materials
Acessible?
Independent?
No
Yes
Adaptable?
Free of 
toxins?
Repariable or refurbishable or 
Remanufacturable or extractable?
Extractable 
toxins?
Reusable
(A1-​A3 + B4 + D)
Recycle
(A1-​A3 + B4 + C3 + D)
Combustible 
waste?
Landfill
(A1-​A3 + B4 + C3 + C4)
Incineration
(A1-​A3 + B4 + C3 + D)
Data available for 
recycling process?
End of Life scenario
(LCA modules included)
Figure A.1: End of Life framework based on the EoL excell tool from 3XN/GXN
A.2.2
Literature review of agent and methods accounting for service life
dependencies
The following figure A.2 attempts to map selected agents influencing the service life of
building elements based on the literature review. The agents are grouped into 4 clusters,
making the distinction between agents one can influence here and now through the design
and future agents, grouped into social, economic, and natural agents as well as the combi-
nations placed in the overlaps of the circles. If a method/methods are available to adjust
accordingly for a more precise estimate of service life in LCA, they are listed underneath
the agent. The impacts are organized mainly based on literature from the Danish BUILD
[36], ISO15686 [24], BAMB [63], Pourebrahimi et Al. [62], Andersen and Negendahl [6],
Silva et Al. [9], and levetider.dk [64]. The sources tend to use different names to describe
similar impacts, thus the figure attempts to group the terms used referring to the same
impact type. The green check marks show the agents taken into account in this study and
through which method.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
92
==PAGE:101==
Design
Protection by design [3] / 
Design Level (2)
impl. in Factor method [2]
Mounting type [1]
impl. as Parallel life spans [1]
Quality of planning [3]
Building typology [5]
Information / BIM / 
Material passport [3]
Social
agents
User Intensity [3] / 
Usage conditions [2] 
impl. in Factor method [2]
Economic
agents
Natural
agents
Exposure [3] / Outdoor environment [2] 
impl. in Factor method [2]
Exposure [3] / Indoor 
environment [2]
impl. in Factor method [2]
Tenure type [4]
Neighbourhood development [4] / 
Functional life span [1] 
impl. in "Actual Life span" [1]
Maintenance [3]
impl. in Factor method [2]
Energy 
renovation [6]
Planning of renovation [1]
impl. in 20% and 33% rule [1]
Price development [6] / 
Economic life span [1]
impl. in "Actual Life span" [1]
Innovation/ technological 
optimisation / Functional life span [1]
impl. in "Actual Life span" [1]
Change in user needs / 
Functional life span [1] 
impl. in "Actual Life span" [1]
Frequency of 
user change [4]
Resource 
scarcity [3]
Toxicity [3]
Legal 
requirements [4]
Natural disasters [8]
impl. in Probabilistic models 
ex PSHA [8]
Aesthetic life span [1] 
impl. in "Actual Life span" [1]
Profit  [4] / Economic life span [1]
impl. in "Actual Life span" [1]
Work execution level [2] / 
Quality of execution [3] 
impl. in Factor method [2]
Technical life span [1] / Inherent Performance Level [2] / 
Material composition and quality [3]
impl. in "Actual Life span" [1] and Factor method [2] 
War
Initial design choices influencing 
the life span of materials
Future agents influencing 
the life span of materials
The influence on life span 
is taken into account in this study: 
Method to implement the 
respective influence on life span: Kursiv
Figure A.2: Initial design choices and future social, environmental, and economic agents
affecting the life span of building elements. The green check marks indicate the influences
taken into account in this study.
Sources include 1: BUILD[36] 2: ISO 15686[24] 3:
BAMB[63] 4: Pourebrahimi et Al.[62] 5: Andersen and Negendahl[6] 6: Silva et Al[9] 7:
levetider.dk [64] 8: Di Bari el Al.[81]
Some dependencies can be controlled/investigated while other agents are an integrated
part of an estimated service life where the assumptions and exact calculation methods
has been diﬀicult to access (black-box). This means that some agents are accounted for
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
93
==PAGE:102==
implicitly through ex. the methods for generic service life estimate used by BUILD where
aesthetics are accounted for in the service life called ”Actual life span” which is then
published with the only non black-box dependency being ”Position”.
A.2.3
Factors modeled explicitly in this thesis based on the ISO15686
Factor names according
to ISO15686 [24]
Explanation
Naming
used in this
report
Static
b (Design level)
Protection of materials by de-
sign choices
Design
Static
d (Indoor environment)
Construction of the wet rooms
Indoor
Static
e (Outdoor environment)
Focus
on
location
(coastal,
city, suburb or countryside)
Location
Dynamic
e (Outdoor environment)
Focus on the weather
Weather
Dynamic
f (Usage conditions)
Focus on wear and tear from
occupants
Occupants
Table A.3: Static factors implemented from levetider.dk and dynamic factors based on
assumptions
A.2.4
Dynamic service life factors (causal relationship with weather and
occupant scenario)
Weather scenarios
Factor applied to the service life of exterior surfaces
Current weather
1
1.3 °C
0.9
2.1 °C
0.8
Number of occupants
Factor applied to the service life of interior surfaces
1
1
2
0.9
4
0.8
Table A.4: Dynamic factors applied to the service life of all interior and exterior surfaces
for DfD and BaU
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
94
==PAGE:103==
A.2.5
Setting for energy simulation
Conditions
Values
Schedule
Lighting
1.5 W
m2
When home = 1,
when home asleeep = 0,
when not home = 0
Equipment
3.5 W
m2
When home = 1,
when home asleeep = 0,
when not home = 0
Domestic hot water
None
None
Infiltration
0.0001m3
s pr m2 facade
Always on
Heating set point
28C◦
at 20 C◦when not home,
at 21 C◦when home and asleep,
at 22 C◦when home and awake
Cooling set point
None
Always off
Window opening
20%
at TIn25C◦if Tout > 5C◦
Table A.5: Energy settings used in the energy simulation to simulate dynamic future
scenarios
A.2.6
Replacement rate estimation for sensitivity analysis
Visualization of the method used to construct the replacement rates for the materials and
the data sources
Position
dependency
BUILD.dk
Material
dependency
BUILD.dk
Mounting
dependency
Material from GXN
Static factors:
Location and design
ISO15686/Levetider.dk
Baseline service life
according to BR18 Method
ISO15686/assumptions
Dynamic factors:
Weather and occupants
Mean 
Service 
Life
SD for 
Service 
Life
Position
dependency
Kyriaki Goulouti et al.
Service 
Life
Mean
Cumulative 
probability
Resulting replacement rate
Modified service life
according to Factor Method
Figure A.3: Service Life development for the Baseline and Modified method used for
Sensitivity Analysis
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
95
==PAGE:104==
Variable
Input values and range
Distribution
Service life depen-
dencies
[Position, Material, Mounting,
Static factors]
Discrete
Weather factor
[1, 0.9, 0.8]
Discrete
Occupancy factor
[1, 0.9, 0.8]
Discrete
Weather file
[Current, 1.3 deg C, 2.1 deg C]
Discrete
Occupancy
groups
[Single Young/middle age, Co-
living Young/middle age, Sin-
gle Retired age, Co-living Re-
tired age, Family of 4]
Discrete
Number
of
re-
placements
Service life
Stochastic
D stage
[Included/excluded]
Discrete
Omega
[Included/excluded]
Discrete
Tau
[Included/excluded]
Discrete
Study Period
[50, 100]
Discrete
Table A.6: Table presenting the input data in the sensitivity analysis
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
96
==PAGE:105==
A.2.7
Input variables for sensitivity analysis
A.3
Case
A.3.1
Change in Service Life
Service life for BaU
Figure A.4: Visualization of the change in service life per material for DfD due to depen-
dencies on position, material, mounting, static factors and extreme-case dynamic factors
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
97
==PAGE:106==
ESL
Service life for DfD
Figure A.5: Visualization of the change in service life per material for DfD due to depen-
dencies on position, material, mounting, static factors, and extreme-case dynamic factors
A.3.2
Mean change in Service Life
Figure A.6 and A.7 show the mean change in service life. 20.7 years on average for BaU
and 14.1 years for DfD.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
98
==PAGE:107==
External Walls - Nailed plasterboard wall
External Walls - Mineral wool insulation
External Walls - Cast concrete
External Walls - Bricks
Slab living room - Wooden floor
Slab living room - Concrete screed A
Slab living room - Floor heating
Slab living room - Acoustic membrane
Slab living room - Concrete screed B
Slab living room - Hollowcore slab
Slab wet room - Tiles
Slab wet room - Concrete screed A
Slab wet room - Floor heating
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane
Slab wet room - Concrete screed B
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Beams - Concrete beam
Beams - Rebar
Internal walls apartment - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls apartment - Paint
Internal walls wet room - Nailed plasterboard wall
Internal walls wet room - Mineral wool insulation
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Internal walls wet room - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls wet room - Tiles
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Windows - Nailed window frames, plastic
Windows - Glass
Doors - Front door
Doors - Doors
Kitchen - Cupboards
Stairs - Stairs
Stairs - Platform
Ceiling - Nailed plasterboard wall
Elevator - Elevator shaft
Elevator - Elevator
Balcony - Wood planks
Balcony - Concrete
Balcony - Steel
Balcony - Glass
Balcony - Wood
Materials
0
20
40
60
80
Change in ESL (years)
Change in mean ESL for BaU (mean of all elements = 20.7 years)
Change in ESL (years)
Figure A.6: Visualization of the change in ESL per material and the overall mean = 20.7
years due to ESL dependencies
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
99
==PAGE:108==
External Walls - Screwed plasterboard wall
External Walls - CLT
External Walls - Wood fibre insulation
External Walls - Mounting system wood
External Walls - Shiplap façade cladding, wood
External Walls - Concrete, 4 columns pr apartment
External Walls - Rebar
Slab living room - Bamboo
Slab living room - Acoustic membrane
Slab living room - Wood fibreboard
Slab living room - Floor heating A
Slab living room - Sand for thermal mass
Slab living room - Wooden studs
Slab living room - CLT
Slab wet room - Bamboo
Slab wet room - Tiles
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane A
Slab wet room - Concrete screed
Slab wet room - Floor heating
Slab wet room - EPS concrete A
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane B
Slab wet room - EPS concrete B
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Beams - Steel beam
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls apartment - Steel studs
Internal walls apartment - Wood fibre insulation
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall B
Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Internal walls wet room - Wood fibre insulation
Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall B
Internal walls wet room - Tiles A
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Windows - Screwed window frames, plastic
Windows - Glass
Doors - Front door
Doors - Doors
Kitchen - Cupboards
Stairs - Stairs
Stairs - Platform
Ceiling - Screwed plasterboard wall
Elevator - Elevator shaft
Elevator - Elevator
Balcony - Wood planks
Balcony - Concrete
Balcony - Steel
Balcony - Glass
Balcony - Wood
Materials
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Change in ESL (years)
Change in mean ESL for DfD (mean of all elements = 14.1 years)
Change in ESL (years)
Figure A.7: Visualization of the change in ESL per material and the overall mean = 14.1
years due to ESL dependencies
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
100
==PAGE:109==
A.4
Results - Method Comparison
A.4.1
GWP of End-of-Life Framework
Figure A.8: EoL distribution types and corresponding GWP for BaU and DfD
A.4.2
GWP from Mounting Dependency
To get a final look at the impact of assembly methods for each material, the following two
graphs provide an overview of the exact materials that are impacted, see figure A.9 and
A.10.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
101
==PAGE:110==
Slab living room - Concrete screed A
Energy
Windows - Glass
Elevator - Elevator
Slab living room - Floor heating
Slab living room - Hollowcore slab
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
External Walls - Cast concrete
External Walls - Mineral wool insulation B
External Walls - Bricks
Slab living room - Concrete screed B
Windows - Nailed window frames, plastic
Internal walls apartment - Precast concrete wall
Slab wet room - Concrete screed A
Slab living room - Acoustic membrane
Slab living room - Wooden floor
Doors - Front door
Ceiling - Nailed plasterboard wall
Elevator - Elevator shaft
Internal walls wet room - Precast concrete wall
Doors - Doors
Internal walls wet room - Mineral wool insulation
Beams - Concrete beam
External Walls - Mineral wool insulation A
Slab wet room - Floor heating
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Stairs - Stairs
Balcony - Glass
External Walls - Nailed plasterboard wall
Beams - Rebar
Slab wet room - Concrete screed B
Internal walls wet room - Nailed plasterboard wall
Stairs - Platform
Internal walls wet room - Tiles
Slab wet room - Tiles
Kitchen - Cupboards
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Internal walls apartment - Paint
Balcony - Concrete
Balcony - Steel
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Balcony - Wood
Balcony - Wood planks
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
BaU: GWP impacts of materials and energy - with and without mounting dependencies
BASELINE - Position, material, 33 pct. rule and mounting
Position, material, and 33 pct. rule
Figure A.9: BaU: GWP contribution for materials for mounting vs no mounting depen-
dencies
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
102
==PAGE:111==
Energy
Windows - Glass
Elevator - Elevator
Slab living room - Wood fibreboard
Slab living room - Floor heating A
Slab wet room - Concrete screed
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
Beams - Steel beam
Slab living room - Bamboo
External Walls - Wood fibre insulation
Windows - Screwed window frames, plastic
Internal walls apartment - Wood fibre insulation
Slab living room - CLT
Ceiling - Screwed plasterboard wall
External Walls - Concrete, 4 columns pr apartment
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Slab wet room - Floor heating
Doors - Front door
Doors - Doors
Slab living room - Sand for thermal mass
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall B
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Stairs - Platform
Elevator - Elevator shaft
External Walls - Rebar
External Walls - CLT
Internal walls wet room - Tiles A
External Walls - Shiplap façade cladding, wood
Internal walls wet room - Wood fibre insulation
Slab wet room - Bamboo
Slab wet room - EPS concrete A
Stairs - Stairs
Slab wet room - EPS concrete B
Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall B
Kitchen - Cupboards
Balcony - Concrete
External Walls - Screwed plasterboard wall
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Balcony - Glass
Balcony - Wood planks
Slab wet room - Tiles
Slab living room - Wooden studs
Slab living room - Acoustic membrane
Balcony - Steel
External Walls - Mounting system wood
Balcony - Wood
Internal walls apartment - Steel studs - A
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane B
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane A
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
DfD: GWP impacts of materials and energy - with and without mounting dependencies
BASELINE - Position, material, 33 pct. rule and mounting
Position, material, and 33 pct. rule
Figure A.10: DfD: GWP contribution for materials for mounting vs no mounting depen-
dencies
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
103
==PAGE:112==
A.4.3
The GWP impact of service life dependencies, dynamic factors,
and D stage
Increase
Decrease
Figure A.11: Table showing the replacements and GWP of BaU materials. The materials
with 0 change in replacements throughout the change of dependencies are not presented
in the table
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
104
==PAGE:113==
Increase
Decrease
Figure A.12: Table showing the replacements and GWP of DfD materials. The materials
with 0 change in replacements throughout the change of dependencies are not presented
in the table
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
105
==PAGE:114==
A.4.4
Energy consumption by occupancy group
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
kWh/m2/yr
Single young
Single retired
Co-living young
Co-living retired
Family
Occupancy category
Energy Consumption by occupancy group
2010
2050
2080
Figure A.13: Energy use for the Business as Usual case by occupancy group and weather
condition. (single = 1, Co-living = 2, family = 4), sum of home hours (young/middel age
= 8.5[h], retired = 16[h], Family = 11[h])
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
kWh/m2/yr
Single young
Single retired
Co-living young
Co-living retired
Family
Occupancy category
Energy Consumption by occupancy group
2010
2050
2080
Figure A.14: Energy use for the Design for Disassembly case by occupancy group and
weather condition. (single = 1, Co-living = 2, family = 4), sum of home hours (young/mid-
del age = 8.5[h], retired = 16[h], Family = 11[h])
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
106
==PAGE:115==
A.4.5
Cummulative plot showing the effect of D stage, Omega and Tau
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Years
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
GWP dependencies
BASELINE - Position, material, 33 pct. rule, and mounting
Incl. D stage
Incl. Omega
Incl. Tau
(a) BaU
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Years
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
GWP dependencies
BASELINE - Position, material, and mounting
Incl. D stage
Incl. Omega
Incl. Tau
(b) DfD
Figure A.15: Cumulative GWP plot showing the effect of the D stage and the dynamic
factors for technological optimization (Omega) and reduction urgency (Tau) individually
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
107
==PAGE:116==
A.4.6
Contribution to total change in GWP compared to previous de-
pendency
Increase
Decrease
Figure A.16: Table showing the D stage, dynamic factors, and GWP of BaU materials.
The materials with 0 change in replacements throughout the change of dependencies are
not presented in the table
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
108
==PAGE:117==
Increase
Decrease
Figure A.17: Table showing the D stage, dynamic factors, and GWP of DfD materials.
The materials with 0 change in replacements throughout the change of dependencies are
not presented in the table
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
109
==PAGE:118==
A.4.7
Cummulative plots of 50 and 100 years study period
36%
83%
83%
13%
Cummulative sum of GWP when study period = 50 years
Cummulative sum of GWP when study period = 100 years
Figure A.18: Cummulative plot showing the GWP for DfD and BaU based on the baseline
and modified method. The GWP are shown when Study Period is 50 years
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
110
==PAGE:119==
A.4.8
GWP contribution from materials
Slab living room - Concrete screed A
Energy
Windows - Glass
Elevator - Elevator
Slab living room - Floor heating
Slab living room - Hollowcore slab
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
External Walls - Cast concrete
External Walls - Mineral wool insulation B
External Walls - Bricks
Slab living room - Concrete screed B
Windows - Nailed window frames, plastic
Internal walls apartment - Precast concrete wall
Slab wet room - Concrete screed A
Slab living room - Acoustic membrane
Slab living room - Wooden floor
Doors - Front door
Ceiling - Nailed plasterboard wall
Elevator - Elevator shaft
Internal walls wet room - Precast concrete wall
Doors - Doors
Internal walls wet room - Mineral wool insulation
Beams - Concrete beam
External Walls - Mineral wool insulation A
Slab wet room - Floor heating
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Stairs - Stairs
Balcony - Glass
External Walls - Nailed plasterboard wall
Beams - Rebar
Slab wet room - Concrete screed B
Internal walls wet room - Nailed plasterboard wall
Stairs - Platform
Internal walls wet room - Tiles
Slab wet room - Tiles
Kitchen - Cupboards
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Internal walls apartment - Paint
Balcony - Concrete
Balcony - Steel
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Balcony - Wood
Balcony - Wood planks
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
BaU: GWP impacts of materials and energy - Baseline vs Modified
Baseline
Modified
Figure A.19: BaU: GWP contribution for materials for baseline vs modified (with energy
scenario: current weather, single young/middle age)
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
111
==PAGE:120==
Energy
Windows - Glass
Elevator - Elevator
Slab living room - Wood fibreboard
Slab living room - Floor heating A
Slab wet room - Concrete screed
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
Beams - Steel beam
Slab living room - Bamboo
External Walls - Wood fibre insulation
Windows - Screwed window frames, plastic
Internal walls apartment - Wood fibre insulation
Slab living room - CLT
Ceiling - Screwed plasterboard wall
External Walls - Concrete, 4 columns pr apartment
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Slab wet room - Floor heating
Doors - Front door
Doors - Doors
Slab living room - Sand for thermal mass
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall B
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Stairs - Platform
Elevator - Elevator shaft
External Walls - Rebar
External Walls - CLT
Internal walls wet room - Tiles A
External Walls - Shiplap façade cladding, wood
Internal walls wet room - Wood fibre insulation
Slab wet room - Bamboo
Slab wet room - EPS concrete A
Stairs - Stairs
Slab wet room - EPS concrete B
Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall B
Kitchen - Cupboards
Balcony - Concrete
External Walls - Screwed plasterboard wall
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Balcony - Glass
Balcony - Wood planks
Slab wet room - Tiles
Slab living room - Wooden studs
Slab living room - Acoustic membrane
Balcony - Steel
External Walls - Mounting system wood
Balcony - Wood
Internal walls apartment - Steel studs - A
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane B
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane A
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
DfD: GWP impacts of materials and energy - Baseline vs Modified
Baseline
Modified
Figure A.20: DfD: GWP contribution for materials for baseline vs modified
A.4.9
GWP from D stage impact
The impact of the D stage is furthrmore visualized on the material level as a bar chart,
see figure A.21 and A.22.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
112
==PAGE:121==
Slab living room - Concrete screed A
Energy
Windows - Glass
Elevator - Elevator
Slab living room - Floor heating
Slab living room - Hollowcore slab
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
External Walls - Cast concrete
External Walls - Mineral wool insulation B
External Walls - Bricks
Slab living room - Concrete screed B
Windows - Nailed window frames, plastic
Internal walls apartment - Precast concrete wall
Slab wet room - Concrete screed A
Slab living room - Acoustic membrane
Slab living room - Wooden floor
Doors - Front door
Ceiling - Nailed plasterboard wall
Elevator - Elevator shaft
Internal walls wet room - Precast concrete wall
Doors - Doors
Internal walls wet room - Mineral wool insulation
Beams - Concrete beam
External Walls - Mineral wool insulation A
Slab wet room - Floor heating
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Stairs - Stairs
Balcony - Glass
External Walls - Nailed plasterboard wall
Beams - Rebar
Slab wet room - Concrete screed B
Internal walls wet room - Nailed plasterboard wall
Stairs - Platform
Internal walls wet room - Tiles
Slab wet room - Tiles
Kitchen - Cupboards
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Internal walls apartment - Paint
Balcony - Concrete
Balcony - Steel
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Balcony - Wood
Balcony - Wood planks
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
BaU: GWP impacts of materials and energy - Baseline vs Baseline with D stage
Baseline
Baseline with D stage
Figure A.21: BaU: GWP contribution for materials for baseline vs baseline with the D
stage
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
113
==PAGE:122==
Energy
Windows - Glass
Elevator - Elevator
Slab living room - Wood fibreboard
Slab living room - Floor heating A
Slab wet room - Concrete screed
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
Beams - Steel beam
Slab living room - Bamboo
External Walls - Wood fibre insulation
Windows - Screwed window frames, plastic
Internal walls apartment - Wood fibre insulation
Slab living room - CLT
Ceiling - Screwed plasterboard wall
External Walls - Concrete, 4 columns pr apartment
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Slab wet room - Floor heating
Doors - Front door
Doors - Doors
Slab living room - Sand for thermal mass
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall B
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Stairs - Platform
Elevator - Elevator shaft
External Walls - Rebar
External Walls - CLT
Internal walls wet room - Tiles A
External Walls - Shiplap façade cladding, wood
Internal walls wet room - Wood fibre insulation
Slab wet room - Bamboo
Slab wet room - EPS concrete A
Stairs - Stairs
Slab wet room - EPS concrete B
Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall B
Kitchen - Cupboards
Balcony - Concrete
External Walls - Screwed plasterboard wall
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Balcony - Glass
Balcony - Wood planks
Slab wet room - Tiles
Slab living room - Wooden studs
Slab living room - Acoustic membrane
Balcony - Steel
External Walls - Mounting system wood
Balcony - Wood
Internal walls apartment - Steel studs - A
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane B
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane A
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
kg CO2 e/m2/yr
DfD: GWP impacts of materials and energy - Baseline vs Baseline with D stage
Baseline
Baseline with D stage
Figure A.22: DfD: GWP contribution for materials for baseline vs baseline with the D
stage
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
114
==PAGE:123==
A.5
Results - Sensitivity analysis
A.5.1
Sensetivity analysis - materials
External Walls - Nailed plasterboard wall
External Walls - Mineral wool insulation A
External Walls - Cast concrete
External Walls - Mineral wool insulation B
External Walls - Bricks
Slab living room - Wooden floor
Group: Slab living room - Concrete screed w. floor heating and acoustic membrane
Slab living room - Concrete screed B
Slab living room - Hollowcore slab
Group: Slab wet room - Tiles, concrete screed w. floor heating and acoustic membrane
Slab wet room - Concrete screed B
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Group: Beams - Concrete beam w. rebar
Internal walls apartment - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls apartment - Paint
Internal walls wet room - Nailed plasterboard wall
Internal walls wet room - Mineral wool insulation
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Internal walls wet room - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls wet room - Tiles
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Group: Windows - Nailed window frames, plastic and glass
Doors - Front door
Doors - Doors
Kitchen - Cupboards
Group: Stairs - Stairs and Platform
Ceiling - Nailed plasterboard wall
Elevator - Elevator shaft
Elevator - Elevator
Balcony - Wood planks
Balcony - Concrete
Group: Balcony - Steel, Glass and Wood railing
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Variation [%]
Total Sensitivity Indices for BaU
BASELINE
MODIFIED
Figure A.23: BaU: Total variation in GWP attributed to each material when varying the
service life. The data represent the 95% confidence interval calculated with the baseline
and the modified LCA method.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
115
==PAGE:124==
External Walls - Screwed plasterboard wall
External Walls - CLT
External Walls - Wood fibre insulation
External Walls - Mounting system wood
External Walls - Shiplap façade cladding, wood
Group: External Walls - Concrete columns w. rebar
Slab living room - Bamboo
Slab living room - Acoustic membrane
Slab living room - Wood fibreboard
Slab living room - Floor heating A
Slab living room - Sand for thermal mass
Slab living room - Wooden studs
Slab living room - CLT
Slab wet room - Bamboo
Slab wet room - Tiles
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane A
Group: Slab wet room - Concrete screed w. floor heating
Group: Slab wet room - EPS concrete and acoustic membrane
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Beams - Steel beam
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls apartment - Steel studs - A
Internal walls apartment - Wood fibre insulation
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall B
Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Internal walls wet room - Wood fibre insulation
Group: Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall and tiles
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Windows - Screwed window frames, plastic
Windows - Glass
Doors - Front door
Doors - Doors
Kitchen - Cupboards
Group: Stairs - Stairs and Platform
Ceiling - Screwed plasterboard wall
Elevator - Elevator shaft
Elevator - Elevator
Balcony - Wood planks
Balcony - Concrete
Balcony - Steel
Balcony - Glass
Balcony - Wood
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Variation [%]
Total Sensitivity Indices for DfD
BASELINE
MODIFIED
Figure A.24: DfD: Total variation in GWP attributed to each material when varying the
service life. The data represent the 95% confidence interval calculated with the baseline
and the modified LCA method.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
116
==PAGE:125==
A.5.2
Sensitivity analysis - indices
External Walls - Nailed plasterboard wall
External Walls - Mineral wool insulation A
External Walls - Cast concrete
External Walls - Mineral wool insulation B
External Walls - Bricks
Slab living room - Wooden floor
Group: Slab living room - Concrete screed w. floor heating and acoustic membrane
Slab living room - Concrete screed B
Slab living room - Hollowcore slab
Group: Slab wet room - Tiles, concrete screed w. floor heating and acoustic membrane
Slab wet room - Concrete screed B
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Group: Beams - Concrete beam w. rebar
Internal walls apartment - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls apartment - Paint
Internal walls wet room - Nailed plasterboard wall
Internal walls wet room - Mineral wool insulation
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Internal walls wet room - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls wet room - Tiles
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Group: Windows - Nailed window frames, plastic and glass
Doors - Front door
Doors - Doors
Kitchen - Cupboards
Group: Stairs - Stairs and Platform
Ceiling - Nailed plasterboard wall
Elevator - Elevator shaft
Elevator - Elevator
Balcony - Wood planks
Balcony - Concrete
Group: Balcony - Steel, Glass and Wood railing
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Variation [%]
First Sensitivity Indices for BaU
BASELINE
MODIFIED
Figure A.25: BaU: First indices results from the Sobol sensitivity analysis on the impacts
from material service life on GWP. The data represent the 95% confidence interval.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
117
==PAGE:126==
External Walls_Nailed plasterboard wall
External Walls_Mineral wool insulation A
External Walls_Cast concrete
External Walls_Mineral wool insulation B
External Walls_Bricks
Slab living room_Wooden floor
Group: Slab living room - Concrete screed w. floor heating and acoustic membrane
Slab living room_Concrete screed B
Slab living room_Hollowcore slab
Group: Slab wet room - Tiles, concrete screed w. floor heating and acoustic membrane
Slab wet room_Concrete screed B
Slab wet room_Hollowcore slab
Group: Beams - Concrete beam w. rebar
Internal walls apartment_Precast concrete wall
Internal walls apartment_Paint
Internal walls wet room_Nailed plasterboard wall
Internal walls wet room_Mineral wool insulation
Internal walls wet room_Steel studs
Internal walls wet room_Precast concrete wall
Internal walls wet room_Tiles
Internal walls hallway_Precast concrete wall
Internal walls hallway_Paint
Group: Windows - Nailed window frames, plastic and glass
Doors_Front door
Doors_Doors
Kitchen_Cupboards
Group: Stairs - Stairs and Platform
Ceiling_Nailed plasterboard wall
Elevator_Elevator shaft
Elevator_Elevator
Balcony_Wood planks
Balcony_Concrete
Group: Balcony - Steel, Glass and Wood railing
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Variation [%]
First Sensitivity Indices for BaU MODIFIED
S1
S1_conf
Figure A.26: BaU: First indices results from the Sobol sensitivity analysis on the impacts
from material service life on GWP after the application of all factors and D-phase. 95%
confidence interval and with noisy data
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
118
==PAGE:127==
External Walls_Nailed plasterboard wall
External Walls_Mineral wool insulation A
External Walls_Cast concrete
External Walls_Mineral wool insulation B
External Walls_Bricks
Slab living room_Wooden floor
Group: Slab living room - Concrete screed w. floor heating and acoustic membrane
Slab living room_Concrete screed B
Slab living room_Hollowcore slab
Group: Slab wet room - Tiles, concrete screed w. floor heating and acoustic membrane
Slab wet room_Concrete screed B
Slab wet room_Hollowcore slab
Group: Beams - Concrete beam w. rebar
Internal walls apartment_Precast concrete wall
Internal walls apartment_Paint
Internal walls wet room_Nailed plasterboard wall
Internal walls wet room_Mineral wool insulation
Internal walls wet room_Steel studs
Internal walls wet room_Precast concrete wall
Internal walls wet room_Tiles
Internal walls hallway_Precast concrete wall
Internal walls hallway_Paint
Group: Windows - Nailed window frames, plastic and glass
Doors_Front door
Doors_Doors
Kitchen_Cupboards
Group: Stairs - Stairs and Platform
Ceiling_Nailed plasterboard wall
Elevator_Elevator shaft
Elevator_Elevator
Balcony_Wood planks
Balcony_Concrete
Group: Balcony - Steel, Glass and Wood railing
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Variation [%]
Total Sensitivity Indices for BaU MODIFIED
ST
ST_conf
Figure A.27: BaU: Total indices results from the Sobol sensitivity analysis on the impacts
from material service life on GWP after the application of all factors and D-phase. 95%
confidence interval and with noisy data
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
119
==PAGE:128==
External Walls_Nailed plasterboard wall
External Walls_Mineral wool insulation A
External Walls_Cast concrete
External Walls_Mineral wool insulation B
External Walls_Bricks
Slab living room_Wooden floor
Group: Slab living room - Concrete screed w. floor heating and acoustic membrane
Slab living room_Concrete screed B
Slab living room_Hollowcore slab
Group: Slab wet room - Tiles, concrete screed w. floor heating and acoustic membrane
Slab wet room_Concrete screed B
Slab wet room_Hollowcore slab
Group: Beams - Concrete beam w. rebar
Internal walls apartment_Precast concrete wall
Internal walls apartment_Paint
Internal walls wet room_Nailed plasterboard wall
Internal walls wet room_Mineral wool insulation
Internal walls wet room_Steel studs
Internal walls wet room_Precast concrete wall
Internal walls wet room_Tiles
Internal walls hallway_Precast concrete wall
Internal walls hallway_Paint
Group: Windows - Nailed window frames, plastic and glass
Doors_Front door
Doors_Doors
Kitchen_Cupboards
Group: Stairs - Stairs and Platform
Ceiling_Nailed plasterboard wall
Elevator_Elevator shaft
Elevator_Elevator
Balcony_Wood planks
Balcony_Concrete
Group: Balcony - Steel, Glass and Wood railing
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Variation [%]
First Sensitivity Indices for BaU BASELINE
S1
S1_conf
Figure A.28: BaU: First indices results from the Sobol sensitivity analysis on the impacts
from material service life on GWP. 95% confidence interval and with noisy data
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
120
==PAGE:129==
External Walls_Nailed plasterboard wall
External Walls_Mineral wool insulation A
External Walls_Cast concrete
External Walls_Mineral wool insulation B
External Walls_Bricks
Slab living room_Wooden floor
Group: Slab living room - Concrete screed w. floor heating and acoustic membrane
Slab living room_Concrete screed B
Slab living room_Hollowcore slab
Group: Slab wet room - Tiles, concrete screed w. floor heating and acoustic membrane
Slab wet room_Concrete screed B
Slab wet room_Hollowcore slab
Group: Beams - Concrete beam w. rebar
Internal walls apartment_Precast concrete wall
Internal walls apartment_Paint
Internal walls wet room_Nailed plasterboard wall
Internal walls wet room_Mineral wool insulation
Internal walls wet room_Steel studs
Internal walls wet room_Precast concrete wall
Internal walls wet room_Tiles
Internal walls hallway_Precast concrete wall
Internal walls hallway_Paint
Group: Windows - Nailed window frames, plastic and glass
Doors_Front door
Doors_Doors
Kitchen_Cupboards
Group: Stairs - Stairs and Platform
Ceiling_Nailed plasterboard wall
Elevator_Elevator shaft
Elevator_Elevator
Balcony_Wood planks
Balcony_Concrete
Group: Balcony - Steel, Glass and Wood railing
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Variation [%]
Total Sensitivity Indices for BaU BASELINE
ST
ST_conf
Figure A.29: BaU: Total indices results from the Sobol sensitivity analysis on the impacts
from material service life on GWP. 95% confidence interval and with noisy data
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
121
==PAGE:130==
External Walls - Screwed plasterboard wall
External Walls - CLT
External Walls - Wood fibre insulation
External Walls - Mounting system wood
External Walls - Shiplap façade cladding, wood
Group: External Walls - Concrete columns w. rebar
Slab living room - Bamboo
Slab living room - Acoustic membrane
Slab living room - Wood fibreboard
Slab living room - Floor heating A
Slab living room - Sand for thermal mass
Slab living room - Wooden studs
Slab living room - CLT
Slab wet room - Bamboo
Slab wet room - Tiles
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane A
Group: Slab wet room - Concrete screed w. floor heating
Group: Slab wet room - EPS concrete and acoustic membrane
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Beams - Steel beam
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls apartment - Steel studs - A
Internal walls apartment - Wood fibre insulation
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall B
Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Internal walls wet room - Wood fibre insulation
Group: Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall and tiles
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Windows - Screwed window frames, plastic
Windows - Glass
Doors - Front door
Doors - Doors
Kitchen - Cupboards
Group: Stairs - Stairs and Platform
Ceiling - Screwed plasterboard wall
Elevator - Elevator shaft
Elevator - Elevator
Balcony - Wood planks
Balcony - Concrete
Balcony - Steel
Balcony - Glass
Balcony - Wood
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Variation [%]
First Sensitivity Indices for DfD
BASELINE
MODIFIED
Figure A.30: DfD: First indices results from the Sobol sensitivity analysis on the impacts
from material service life on GWP. The data represent the 95% confidence interval.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
122
==PAGE:131==
External Walls - Screwed plasterboard wall
External Walls - CLT
External Walls - Wood fibre insulation
External Walls - Mounting system wood
External Walls - Shiplap façade cladding, wood
Group: External Walls - Concrete columns w. rebar
Slab living room - Bamboo
Slab living room - Acoustic membrane
Slab living room - Wood fibreboard
Slab living room - Floor heating A
Slab living room - Sand for thermal mass
Slab living room - Wooden studs
Slab living room - CLT
Slab wet room - Bamboo
Slab wet room - Tiles
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane A
Group: Slab wet room - Concrete screed w. floor heating
Group: Slab wet room - EPS concrete and acoustic membrane
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Beams - Steel beam
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls apartment - Steel studs - A
Internal walls apartment - Wood fibre insulation
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall B
Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Internal walls wet room - Wood fibre insulation
Group: Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall and tiles
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Windows - Screwed window frames, plastic
Windows - Glass
Doors - Front door
Doors - Doors
Kitchen - Cupboards
Group: Stairs - Stairs and Platform
Ceiling - Screwed plasterboard wall
Elevator - Elevator shaft
Elevator - Elevator
Balcony - Wood planks
Balcony - Concrete
Balcony - Steel
Balcony - Glass
Balcony - Wood
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Variation [%]
First Sensitivity Indices for DfD MODIFIED
S1
S1_conf
Figure A.31: DfD: first indices results from the Sobol sensitivity analysis on the impacts
from material service life on GWP after the application of all factors and D-phase. 95%
confidence interval and with noisy data
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
123
==PAGE:132==
External Walls - Screwed plasterboard wall
External Walls - CLT
External Walls - Wood fibre insulation
External Walls - Mounting system wood
External Walls - Shiplap façade cladding, wood
Group: External Walls - Concrete columns w. rebar
Slab living room - Bamboo
Slab living room - Acoustic membrane
Slab living room - Wood fibreboard
Slab living room - Floor heating A
Slab living room - Sand for thermal mass
Slab living room - Wooden studs
Slab living room - CLT
Slab wet room - Bamboo
Slab wet room - Tiles
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane A
Group: Slab wet room - Concrete screed w. floor heating
Group: Slab wet room - EPS concrete and acoustic membrane
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Beams - Steel beam
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls apartment - Steel studs - A
Internal walls apartment - Wood fibre insulation
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall B
Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Internal walls wet room - Wood fibre insulation
Group: Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall and tiles
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Windows - Screwed window frames, plastic
Windows - Glass
Doors - Front door
Doors - Doors
Kitchen - Cupboards
Group: Stairs - Stairs and Platform
Ceiling - Screwed plasterboard wall
Elevator - Elevator shaft
Elevator - Elevator
Balcony - Wood planks
Balcony - Concrete
Balcony - Steel
Balcony - Glass
Balcony - Wood
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Variation [%]
Total Sensitivity Indices for DfD MODIFIED
ST
ST_conf
Figure A.32: DfD: Total indices results from the Sobol sensitivity analysis on the impacts
from material service life on GWP after the application of all factors and D-phase. 95%
confidence interval and with noisy data
External Walls - Screwed plasterboard wall
External Walls - CLT
External Walls - Wood fibre insulation
External Walls - Mounting system wood
External Walls - Shiplap façade cladding, wood
Group: External Walls - Concrete columns w. rebar
Slab living room - Bamboo
Slab living room - Acoustic membrane
Slab living room - Wood fibreboard
Slab living room - Floor heating A
Slab living room - Sand for thermal mass
Slab living room - Wooden studs
Slab living room - CLT
Slab wet room - Bamboo
Slab wet room - Tiles
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane A
Group: Slab wet room - Concrete screed w. floor heating
Group: Slab wet room - EPS concrete and acoustic membrane
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Beams - Steel beam
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls apartment - Steel studs - A
Internal walls apartment - Wood fibre insulation
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall B
Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Internal walls wet room - Wood fibre insulation
Group: Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall and tiles
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Windows - Screwed window frames, plastic
Windows - Glass
Doors - Front door
Doors - Doors
Kitchen - Cupboards
Group: Stairs - Stairs and Platform
Ceiling - Screwed plasterboard wall
Elevator - Elevator shaft
Elevator - Elevator
Balcony - Wood planks
Balcony - Concrete
Balcony - Steel
Balcony - Glass
Balcony - Wood
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Variation [%]
First Sensitivity Indices for DfD BASELINE
S1
S1_conf
Figure A.33: DfD: First indices results from the Sobol sensitivity analysis on the impacts
from material service life on GWP. 95% confidence interval and with noisy data
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
124
==PAGE:133==
External Walls - Screwed plasterboard wall
External Walls - CLT
External Walls - Wood fibre insulation
External Walls - Mounting system wood
External Walls - Shiplap façade cladding, wood
Group: External Walls - Concrete columns w. rebar
Slab living room - Bamboo
Slab living room - Acoustic membrane
Slab living room - Wood fibreboard
Slab living room - Floor heating A
Slab living room - Sand for thermal mass
Slab living room - Wooden studs
Slab living room - CLT
Slab wet room - Bamboo
Slab wet room - Tiles
Slab wet room - Acoustic membrane A
Group: Slab wet room - Concrete screed w. floor heating
Group: Slab wet room - EPS concrete and acoustic membrane
Slab wet room - Hollowcore slab
Beams - Steel beam
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls apartment - Steel studs - A
Internal walls apartment - Wood fibre insulation
Internal walls apartment - Screwed plasterboard wall B
Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall A
Internal walls wet room - Steel studs
Internal walls wet room - Wood fibre insulation
Group: Internal walls wet room - Screwed plasterboard wall and tiles
Internal walls hallway - Precast concrete wall
Internal walls hallway - Paint
Windows - Screwed window frames, plastic
Windows - Glass
Doors - Front door
Doors - Doors
Kitchen - Cupboards
Group: Stairs - Stairs and Platform
Ceiling - Screwed plasterboard wall
Elevator - Elevator shaft
Elevator - Elevator
Balcony - Wood planks
Balcony - Concrete
Balcony - Steel
Balcony - Glass
Balcony - Wood
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Variation [%]
Total Sensitivity Indices for DfD BASELINE
ST
ST_conf
Figure A.34: DfD: Total indices results from the Sobol sensitivity analysis on the impacts
from material service life on GWP. 95% confidence interval and with noisy data
A.6
MATERIAL CATALOGUE - Service Life
ESL log-normal distributed input values for each element in the case study Business as
Usual and Design for Disassembly- here visualized for all ESL dependent on position,
material type and mounting, see figure A.35 and A.36.
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
125
==PAGE:134==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
External Walls
Nailed plasterboard wall
Cast concrete
Mineral wool insulation
Bricks
20
40
60
80
100
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Windows
Nailed window frames, plastic and glass
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Internal walls living room
Precast concrete wall
Paint
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Internal walls wet room
Nailed plasterboard wall
Mineral wool insulation
Steel studs
Precast concrete wall
Tiles
0
100
200
300
400
500
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Internal walls hallway
Precast concrete wall
Paint
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Slab Living Room
Wooden floor
Concrete screed w. floor heating 
 and acoustic membrane
Concrete screed
Hollowcore slab
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Slab wet room
Tiles
Concrete screed w. floor heating 
 and acoustic membrane
Concrete screed
Hollowcore slab
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Doors, kitchen and ceiling
Front door
Doors
Cupboards
Nailed plasterboard wall
0
100
200
300
400
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Stairs, elevator, beams
Concrete beam w. rebar
Stairs
Elevator shaft
Elevator
0
50
100
150
200
250
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Balcony
Wood planks
Concrete
Steel, glass and wood railing
BaU: Cumulative Probability Distribution for baseline ESL 
 according to BR18
Figure A.35: Replacement rate for material in BaU according to the Baseline. Generate
with Saltelli sampling with a log-normal distribution using Python. The mean based on
BUILD Levetidstabel and standard deviation based on [37]
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
126
==PAGE:135==
0
100
200
300
400
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
External Walls
Screwed plasterboard wall
CLT
Wood fibre insulation
Mounting system wood
Shiplap façade cladding, wood
Concrete columns w. rebar
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Windows
Screwed window frames, plastic
Glass
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Internal walls living room
Screwed plasterboard wall
Steel studs
Wood fibre insulation
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Internal walls wet room
Screwed plasterboard wall
Steel studs
Wood fibre insulation
Tiles and screwed plasterboard wall
0
50
100
150
200
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Internal walls hallway
Precast concrete wall
Paint
0
100
200
300
400
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Slab Living Room
Bamboo
Acoustic membrane
Wood fibreboard
Floor heating
Sand for thermal mass
Wooden studs
CLT
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Slab wet room
Bamboo
Tiles
Acoustic membrane
Concrete screed w. floor heating
EPS concrete and acoustic membrane
Hollowcore slab
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Doors, kitchen and ceiling
Front door
Doors
Cupboards
Screwed plasterboard wall
0
100
200
300
400
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Stairs, elevator, beams
Steel beam
Stairs
Elevator shaft
Elevator
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Years
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
Balcony
Wood planks
Concrete
Steel
Glass
Wood
DfD: Cumulative Probability Distribution for baseline ESL 
 according to BR18
Figure A.36: Replacement rate for material in DfD according to the Baseline. Generate
with Saltelli sampling with a log-normal distribution using Python. The mean based on
BUILD Levetidstabel and standard deviation based on [37]
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
127
==PAGE:136==
Appendix B
Appendix - attachments
B.1
MATERIAL CATALOGUE - Environmental Impacts -
Business as Usual.pdf
B.2
MATERIAL CATALOGUE - Environmental Impacts -
Design for Disassembly.pdf
B.3
Demo DfD Assessment Tool.xlsx
B.4
WORKSHEET.xlsx
B.5
Results-GWP-Development-BaU.xlsx
B.6
Results-GWP-Development-DfD.xlsx
B.7
Operational Script.gh
B.8
MAIN (folder)
Assessing Design for Disassembly with
Future Scenarios
128
