==PAGE:1==
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for
Video Object Segmentation
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
Master Thesis
July 20, 2024
By
Ioannis Manganas
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/english/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Visual Computing, De-
partment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree MSc in Human-Centered Artificial Intel-
ligence.
Ioannis Manganas - s220493
Signature
July 20, 2024
Date
ii
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Video Object Segmentation models require large datasets to be trained. However, an-
notating video datasets is an expensive and time consuming task. The majority of the
existing datasets are either smaller in size and well annotated or vice versa. In cases
where datasets are small, to avoid overfitting, data augmentation provides a solution. In
the image segmentation domain, Simple Copy-Paste has proven to be a simple and com-
putationally cheap way of increasing the prediction capability of the models. In the Video
Object Segmentation field, research effort has been mostly applied to refining models,
but data augmentation has not been equally investigated. The existing methods have
proven successful, but are either very simple or very computationally expensive and very
domain-driven. In this thesis, we propose a simple, computationally cheap video data
augmentation method, inspired by Simple Copy-Paste, that preserves the temporal con-
sistency of the pasted objects. Moreover, we propose a way to increase the pasted object
diversity by generating of pseudo-videos from image datasets or via a pipeline that lever-
ages generative and segmentation models. The static image datasets are either widely
available, or are used for pre-training the benchmark model. A series of experiments on a
benchmark model show a consistent increase of the quality of the predicted masks, com-
pared to the model trained without the proposed augmentation process. The performance
is measured via Intersection over Union and depending on the experiment, is in the area
around 2%. These results reinforce the initial hypothesis about the method we propose
and motivate further investigation in refinements and extensions.
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my thesis supervisor
Associate Professor Dimitrios Papadopoulos, for giving me the opportunity to collaborate
with him. His feedback, proposals and guidance were instrumental to the completion of
this thesis. I would also like to specially thank PhD candidate Athanasios Delatolas for
his patience, comments, feedback and continuous support and assistance.
Last but not least, I would like to thank Vicky, whose company, emotional support and
patience have helped me overcome any challenge that arose, and succeed.
iv
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background and related work
3
2.1
Video segmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Data augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Other models used in the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Datasets and performance measures
12
3.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
Performance metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Method
15
4.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Augmentation using video data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.3
Pseudo-videos from static image data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.4
Synthetically generated data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.5
Comparison with other methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5
Experiments
21
5.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
Initial evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3
Hyperparameters selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.4
Quantitative results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.5
Qualitative results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6
Conclusion
41
7
Future work
42
Bibliography
43
A Appendix
47
A.1 Static datasets resizing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
A.2 Textual Inversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Videos have become the most popular form of shared media contents [1]. The abundance
of cameras across various devices, including smartphones, computers, automobiles, and
drones, has significantly contributed to the extensive production of video data [2]. This
abundance of video data has, in turn, spurred research into methodologies that effectively
utilize this vast resource.
Video segmentation aims to identify and isolate the key objects across all frames of a given
video. This task has a wide range of potential uses, such as in robotics and automated
driving, automated surveillance, augmented reality, social media, movie production, video
conferencing and video editing [3]. Video Object Segmentation (VOS) is the task of iso-
lating specific objects from the background, for each frame of a given video. It aims to
solve the problem of maintaining accurate object boundaries throughout the frames, de-
spite variations in lighting, occlusions, and complex motion patterns. VOS is an active re-
search area with a variety of challenges. These include handling occlusions where objects
are partially or completely hidden, dealing with object movements that cause motion blur,
and managing scenes with multiple interacting objects. These problems are approached
through innovations in algorithm design, refining neural network models architectures and
leveraging larger and more diverse datasets.
Deep learning models have been developed in order to approach the video segmenta-
tion task. As the models become more complex, larger amounts of data are needed to
increase their generalising capabilities and avoid overfitting. Annotating video datasets is
an expensive and time consuming task. As a result, video datasets that are densely an-
notated and include the challenges of the VOS task are difficult to create and thus remain
limited in size.
Data augmentation is a crucial technique in enhancing the performance of machine learn-
ing models and is utilised to decrease overfitting [4], [2]. By artificially increasing the size
and diversity of training datasets, data augmentation helps improve model generalisation
and robustness. In the image segmentation domain, various ways have been used to
generate new data from existing datasets during training, such as geometrical transfor-
mations and appearance variations. More complex methods, such as Simple Copy-Paste
[5], augment the dataset by combining data from the existing dataset, in the form of pasted
objects onto the training image.
Taking inspiration from Simple Copy-Paste, as a starting point, we develop and test a
simple approach to video data augmentation . For each frame of a video, one or more
objects, from another randomly selected video of the training dataset are pasted in a
random position after some basic transformations. The original objects of the target video
can either remain in the foreground, or be occluded as the pasted object moves throughout
the frames. To test this approach, we trained a state of the art model [6] and evaluated it on
a common Supervised VOS benchmark dataset, eg. DAVIS-2017, without augmentation.
We compare the segmentation performance to the same model being trained using the
proposed augmentation scheme on the same dataset using metrics widely employed in
benchmarks in the literature.
Since the number of annotated image datasets is considerably larger, these datasets can
also be used for augmentation. We present an extension to the augmentation scheme,
where pseudo-videos are generated from static images using videos from the training
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
1
==PAGE:10==
dataset. This increases the diversity of the pasted objects and also the size of the ex-
tended dataset. As a final step, instead of using existing image datasets, a pipeline that
leverages generative models for image generation and segmentation is proposed, to fur-
ther increase the diversity of the image data used for pseudo-videos.
Numerous experiments are conducted, comparing the segmentation performance of the
models trained under various combinations of the augmentation process. The results
show a definite increase in the performance of the model, especially when starting the
training from scratch, without pre-training. Further work and possible refinements are
also discussed.
1.1
Thesis outline
The thesis is structured in the following way:
In chapter 1, we introduce the task and challenges of Video Object Segmentation.
In chapter 2, we present a literature review, alongside the most important models and ex-
isting relevant augmentation techniques. Specifically, in section 2.1 we present a general
overview of the video segmentation field and its subcategories. In subsection 2.1.1, we
introduce the Video Object Segmentation problem and its subcategories. The models that
have been the benchmark on the Video Object Segmentation tasks and the state-of-the-
art models are based upon are presented in section 2.2. We present the most important
models, the STM and STCN in subsection 2.2.1 and subsection 2.2.2 respectively. We
present the topic of data augmentation in the image segmentation field and corresponding
literature in section 2.3. For the case of video data, we discuss augmentation techniques
from the literature in subsection 2.3.1.
In chapter 3, we provide an overview of the most important datasets that have been used
in the field of Video Object Segmentation. Two of them are used in the experiments
of the thesis. Furthermore, we introduce the performance metrics that are used in the
literature for benchmarking Video Object Segmentation models and are used in the thesis
in section 3.2.
In chapter 4, we present the proposed data augmentation method. Firstly, we provide
a general overview in section 4.1, with the augmentation process utilizing video data is
presented in section 4.2. We present the method of generating pseudo-videos from im-
age datasets to use in the augmentation process in section 4.3. Finally, we discuss the
pipeline that is used to generate images in section 4.4. A comparison of the process to
two methods from the literature is discussed in section 4.5.
In chapter 5, we present the experimental results. In particular, we show the initial eval-
uation based on the offline augmented dataset in section 5.2 and the hyper-parameters
selection ablation study is shown in section 5.3. We present the experimental results
based on augmentation using DAVIS and pseudo-video from image datasets in subsec-
tion 5.4.1 and subsection 5.4.2 respectively. Finally, we show results from the generative
pipeline for images and qualitative results in subsection 5.4.5 and section 5.5 respectively.
In chapter 6, concluding remarks are made based on the experiments of chapter 5.
Finally, in chapter 7, we suggest some proposals for refining and improving on the method.
2
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:11==
2
Background and related work
2.1
Video segmentation
Video segmentation is defined as the task of identification of key objects with specific prop-
erties or semantics in the frames of a video [3]. Video segmentation can be categorized
in three classes, based on the type of the model output. In Video Object Segmentation
(VOS) the task is to produce a binary mask that segments objects in the video. It is a seg-
mentation between background and foreground. For Video Semantic Segmentation, the
goal is to extract objects within a set of categories from a given video. Finally, for Video
Instance Segmentation [7] the task is to detect, segment and track instances in videos.
An instance refers to an individual occurrence of an object category.
In this thesis, the task of Semi-Supervised Video Object Segmentation is considered.
The main challenges of the task are occlusions, fast object motion, camera motion, back-
ground clutter, appearance changes or deformations [3].
2.1.1
Video object segmentation
As stated, VOS is the task of segmenting and tracking objects of interest throughout a
video, establishing correspondence across frames. This task is an essential task for video
understanding [8] and plays an essential role in applications such as video editing, video
synthesis and decomposition, as well as in data annotation [9]. Video editing tasks, such
as object removal, virtual background creation for video-conferencing and content based
video coding [3] are applications where VOS is essential and are of increased interest,
since video is the most shared type of media content [1].
VOS methods can be grouped into the following types: semi-supervised, unsupervised,
interactive and referring [10]. This distinction is based on the supervision required at
inference time, not during training. In other words, the user provided information during
segmentation of an input video. Semi-Supervised VOS (SVOS) methods aim to segment
an object throughout the frames of a video, given an the object mask of the first frame [8].
Unsupervised VOS perform segmentation of the most salient objects without any extra
input from the user or prior information. Interactive VOS methods use user interaction as
input and guidance, eg. scribbles and clicks [11], [3]. Finally, Referring VOS methods use
user provided language expressions in order to identify and segment an object [12], [13].
This thesis considers SVOS methods.
2.2
Models
As stated, the objective of the semis-supervised VOS task is: given the first frame of a
video sequence and its segmentation mask, the algorithm must predict the mask for each
subsequent frame in the sequence. Previous, pixel-level matching methods used either
the first or the previous frame to learn the cues. Using the first frame for features extrac-
tion and propagation can deal with occlusions but is sensitive to appearance changes.
Using the previous frame increases robustness against appearance changes, while be-
ing sensitive to occlusions and error drifts. A combination of the first and previous frame
were used in [14] which achieved state of the art accuracy and motivated the following
models. One of the most popular approaches to utilize more frames and yield higher
quality segmentation masks is space-time networks, described in the following sections.
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
3
==PAGE:12==
2.2.1
STM
The Space-Time Memory (STM) network is motivated by the idea that information about
more previous frames in the video sequence can achieve better segmentation prediction
of the current, query frame. The STM network consists of the memory and the query
frames. The memory frames are past frames with their respective predicted masks, or
provided mask for the case of the first frame. The query frame processes is the current
frame, whose segmentation map needs to be predicted.
Query and memory:
Each object in the memory frames passes through the memory
encoder once. The output of the encoder is a key and a value mapping. If a second
or more objects are present, the same procedure is followed for these objects as well.
The query frame is passed to the query encoder to generate a key mapping. This tensor
is matched with every object in the memory and the corresponding affinity matrix, one
per object instance, is generated. As the final step, the memory encoder values are
transferred to the query frame and object masks are decoded.
Both the memory and query frames are passed through encoders, that output key and
value maps. The encoders are however different, in that the input of the query frame is
only an image, while the input of the memory encoder is an image concatenated with its
segmentation map. The Query encoder uses only the current frame to be segmented
as input.
The key and value maps are the outputs of two parallel convolutional lay-
ers attached after the backbone network, that acts as a bottleneck. For the backbone,
ResNet50 is used and the dimensions of the key and value maps are kQ ∈RH×W×C/8
and vQ ∈RH×W×C/2 respectively. H, W are the input image height and width dimen-
sions and C is the number of feature dimension of the backbone network. The Memory
encoder has the same structure However, the inputs are not only the previous frames, but
also their masks that are concatenated to their respective frame. Thus, the first convolu-
tion layer of the backbone network is modified to accommodate for the additional channel.
Each mask is represented as a single channel probability map between0 and 1, using the
softmax function. The dimensions of the key and value mappings are kQ ∈RT×H×W×C/8
and vQ ∈RT×H×W×C/2 respectively, where T is the number of the memory frames.
The output key map of the encoders is used for addressing. A similarity measure calcu-
lated between the query key and all the keys from the memory frames dictates when and
where the relevant memory values are retrieved. The values from the memory and query
frame have different meaning:
• Memory frames: Values encode visual semantics and information regarding whether
each feature belongs to the foreground object or not.
• Query frame: Values are learned to store appearance information to be used in the
decoder for the mask prediction.
Space-time memory read:
After passing the memory and query frames through the
corresponding encoders, the space-time memory read operation takes place. This oper-
ation starts with a dot product operation between the key mappings of the query and all
the memory frames. The result is passed through a softmax function. The result of this
operation is that similarities between all the pixels of the query and memory key maps are
measured. The similarity matching happens in a non-local fashion. After passing through
the softmax function, the similarities are used for a weighed summation of the memory
values. Finally, this result is concatenated with the query values and sent to the decoder.
4
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:13==
For every object in the video, the affinity matrix for every memory frame with the query
frame needs to be calculated.Figure 2.1 illustrates the STM memory architecture.
Figure 2.1: STM architecture. The query and memory pass through their respective
encoders. The keys are used to calculate similarities which will in turn be used to calculate
the affinity matrix. The decoder uses the query frame encoder value and the affinity matrix
to infer a probability maps via a UNet. Figure from [1]
Decoder:
The read output is initially compressed to have 256 channels using a convo-
lutional layer and residual block. Then the resulting tensor is gradually upscaled. Feature
maps are also used via skip connections from the query encoder block. Every convolu-
tional layer has a 256 channels output apart from the last one, that outputs 2 channels.
The mask is estimated at 1/4 scale of the input image.
Training:
The network is initially pre-trained on static image data, that have been trans-
formed multiple times to emulate video sequences. Each synthetic clip consists of 3
frames and is generated by applying random affine transformations to an image. After
this stage, it is fine tuned with real video data. During this stage, 3 temporally ordered
frames are sampled from a video. During sampling, a number of in-between sampled
frames is skipped. This number is scheduled to be gradually increased from 0 to 25.
Training on real videos uses either DAVIS-2017 [15] or Youtube-VOS [16], depending on
the evaluation metric. During training, the output of the previous segmentation step is
used to populate the memory for the next frame.
Inference:
In order to minimize the GPU memory requirements, not every frame is
added to the memory frames after segmentation. The first frame, with the user provided
segmentation mask, is always added in the memory. The same is true for the last seg-
mented query frame, from the last segmentation step. The number of intermediate frames
is a tunable parameter.
2.2.2
STCN
Since the STM has proven to be an popular strategy for SVOS [10], STCN [6] opts to
redesign the memory operation and make it more efficient. The fact that for each object
the affinity matrix needs to be computed for each frame in the memory is the starting point
for the STCN optimization redesign.
Memory management improvements:
In STCN, initially the query and memory frames
are encoded. For the memory frames, only the RGB images are used. This also allows for
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
5
==PAGE:14==
caching the key mappings that are output by the encoders, since the memory segmenta-
tion masks are not used in this encoding process. Then, the affinity matrix is constructed
using these two key tensors. Light encoders are used to produce the value maps for each
object mask in memory. Moreover, the last frame is not needed to always be included
as a temporary memory frame. This is due to the fact that the last frame would be too
similar to the query frame, considering that the transition of the image context change
between two consecutive frames is smooth. As a result from not including this last frame,
the writers of [6] found that drifting was reduced. The differences in memory management
between STM and STCN are illustrated in Figure 2.2
Figure 2.2: Differences in STCN and STM memory management between STM (left)
and STCN (right). Figure from [6].
Affinity matrix computation:
STM uses the dot product to calculate the affinity matrix.
In STCN, an efficient implementation of the L2 distance metric is used for similarity cal-
culation between the key mappings. Specifically, the negative square Euclidean distance
between the query and memory keys:
SL2
ij = −

kM
i
−kQ
j


2
2
(2.1)
The dot product function works similar to weighted voting. The memory nodes collectively
vote for the outcome of the query node.However, a few nodes can have dominating votes
over large regions. As a result, many memory nodes will not have significant contributions
regardless of the query. With the proposed negative squared L2 distance, every point in
memory can contribute significantly to a query, if the query feature matches that of the
memory. Moreover, decreasing the key space dimensions can increase the performance
of the network.
2.3
Data augmentation
Deep learning models for computer vision have many parameters. In order to effectively
train these models, large amount of data are needed. However, having this amount of data
is not always feasible. One reason for this, is that labeling or annotating images, in the
case of computer vision, is a time consuming and expensive task [8]. Training a model on
fewer data can lead to poor generalisation, due to overfitting on the training dataset. Data
augmentation is a technique employed that can alleviate this problem. Data augmentation
on image data is effective, since the transformations applied do not fundamentally change
6
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:15==
the properties of the object in the image. The trade-off to an increase in generalisation
capabilities is the added computation during training.
One way to use augmentation in image datasets, is to apply transformations in the image
before the forward pass of the model. These transformations can be affine transforma-
tions, horizontal or vertical flip, the addition of noise, blurring, cropping, zooming or even
masking regions of the image. An example is Cutout [17], where random sections of an
image are masked out. In GridMask [18], an area of pixels is removed from the image.
However, the pixels that are removed do not belong in the same set, ie. the total removed
area is make up of disjoint smaller areas, forming a grid. Moreover, color distortion can
also be applied, eg. brightness or hue variations.
Another way is to combine information from two or more images in the training dataset.
One example is mixup [19], where a weighted combination of two images is created dur-
ing training and passed through the network. The labels of the images are also com-
bined using the same interpolation. In CutMix [20], random patches from one image are
removed and replaced by a patch from another image. The image labels are also com-
bined proportionally to the number of pixels from each image. In AugMix [21], a series of
augmentations is performed in parallel, with starting point the original image. Then, these
transformed images are interpolated. AugMix is similar to mixup, but mixes augmented
versions of the same image.
For the task of instance segmentation, Simple Copy-Paste [5] has been proven to be an
effective augmentation. The goal of the instance segmentation task is similar to object
detection, however instead for predicting a bounding box for every detected object, a
mask is returned that has the shape of the object. In Simple Copy-Paste, two images
are selected during training. After applying random scale jittering and flipping, a random
subset of the objects of one image are pasted onto the other image. The relevant masks
and bounding boxes of the final image is adjusted accordingly. Assuming I1 is the pasted
image and I2 the main image, the images are blended by using the pasted objects mask
α as:
I2 ←α × I1 + (1 −α) × I2
(2.2)
Applying Gaussian filtering to blend the mask edges of the pasted objects did not alter
the performance of the trained model. Moreover, random scale jittering from 0.1 to 2 of
the original image size, denoted as Large Scale Jittering, led to increased performance
compared with Standard Scale Jittering, with resize range from 0.85 to 1.25 of the original
image size.
Simple Copy-Paste was extended in X-Paste [22], where a zero-shot model, CLIP, and
text to image models were used. The zero-shot recognition model was used to filter for a
large selection of categories through web retrieved images. After some further process-
ing, the selected images are segmented and categorized. These images and their masks
can then be pasted on template backgrounds. The text2image model can be used instead
of the web crawling method, to generate image instances from a category of CLIP. This
increases the diversity of the training and augmentation dataset. The pipeline is illustrated
in Figure 2.3.
2.3.1
Data augmentation in Video Object Segmentation
As stated, one way to avoid overfitting, apart from data augmentation, is to obtain more
training data. One method to this end relies on synthetic datasets. An example of this
approach is described in [11], with the BL30K dataset. This approach has also been
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: Overview of the X-Paste pipeline. X-Paste first obtains filtered real images
from CLIP and generated images from Stable Diffusion. Then Instance Mask Generation
module gets the pseudo mask for all images. After that, the Instance Filtering module
removes these samples with inaccurate mask segmentation. Finally, these resulting in-
stances are pasted into a background image for training. Figure from [22].
followed in the pre-training phase of some reference VOS models, like STM and STCN,
and has been shown to enhance their performance. BL30K is a synthetic dataset rendered
using Blender [23] with data from ShapeNet [24]. ShapeNet is a richly annotated dataset
of shapes generated by 3d CAD models of various objects. BL30K is divided into six
segments, each with approximately 5000 videos. The videos are organized in the fashion
of DAVIS [15] and YouTubeVOS [16], so that it is easy to reuse code for training using the
aforementioned datasets. Each video is 160 frames long, and each frame has a resolution
of 768 × 512. There are 3 to 5 objects per video, and each object has a random smooth
trajectory, with occlusions still possible.
Another example is presented in SAIL-VOS [25], [26], where perfectly annotated frames
are extracted from the video game Grand Theft Auto V, featuring many challenges for the
VOS task, such as partial occlusion of the objects in the frame.
The results of data augmentation techniques that have been used for image segmentation
have motivated a number of methods to be applied in video data and the VOS task. In
continuous copy-paste (CCP) [27], random instances from a database are pasted on a se-
quence of frames, after the application of specific transformations. The method is based
upon an existing or generated instance dataset. This dataset consists of sequences of
images as frames, that only contain the values of foreground pixels of a specific object.
Several objects are used. This database looks like a collection of frame sequences, with
each one containing an object whose position and scale varies per frame, with the rest of
the frame being blank. The first step involves preparing templates, that act as background
for the instances to be pasted on. Templates are generated from single images or they
are random frames drawn from an existing video sequence. If the template is generated
from a single image, rescaling and resolution adjustment of this image is performed. As
a second step, a number of distinct objects are selected and for each one, a number of
frames from the instances database is drawn. This number is equal to the number of tem-
plate frames. The last step is that the instances are pasted on the respective template
frame. Before pasting, a series of transformations is applied to each instance block: ran-
dom sequence flip, random boundary shift to the left or right of the template to mimic the
object leaving or entering the scene. Finally, random bottom shearing acts as occlusion.
In VideoMix [28], three ways are tested in order to achieve video based data augmenta-
tion, for the task of video action classification. VideoMix creates augmented data through
the combination of two training samples. Similar to Copy-Paste and CutMix, the final train-
8
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:17==
ing sample is created by generating a mask, which is used to combine the two videos.
However, this mask also has a temporal dimension. The labels are combined proportion-
ally, by the volume of each video that is combined. Three ways of combination are tested:
spatial, temporal and spatio-temporal. During the spatial combination, a volume of one
video is cropped and inserted into another video. This method is similar to performing
CutMix for each frame of a video, with the patches coming from the second video. In the
temporal way, a frame sequence of one video is inserted between the frames of a second
video to produce a training video sample that starts with the first video, is intercepted by
the frames of a second video and finally the sample sequence finishes with frames from
the first video. The spatio-temporal method is a combination of the two aforementioned
methods. These methods are summarized in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: VideoMix augmentation method variants: Spatial (S-), Temporal (T-) and
Spatio-Temporal (ST-) methods. The channel dimension is omitted for each image frame.
Figure from [28].
It is found that the Spatial method, of sampling the dimensions of a crop and pasting the
crop of all the frames and ground truth masks on the target video, works the best. This
approach is similar to Copy-Paste only in the pasting part, while due to the randomness
of the sampling, a cohesive object might not be pasted.
An approach that yields better performance in action recognition is described in ObjectMix
[29]. Inspired by Copy-Paste, object regions from two video are copied and pasted into
each other’s frames. Compared to VideoMix, the temporal and spatial continuity of the
objects is taken into account. ObjectMix requires a trained instance segmentation model
(Detectron2) in order to extract segmentation masks for each object in the two videos that
are used to produce the augmented video. If more objects are detected, their masks are
aggregated into a single channel mask using a logical OR operation between them. After
this step, two new videos are generated by pasting the objects delineated by the masks
into each other video frames and the corresponding masks are also updated. Another
version of ObjectMix is also proposed that before pasting, applies the logical OR operator
to the segmented masks also in the frame number, or time, axis. The results show an
improvement in the performance when ObjectMix is used when the training data are bal-
anced between no augmentation and using the proposed method. Moreover, it is shown
that the additional OR operation in the time dimensions axis provides stronger regular-
isation, however the performance on the validation set are lower compared the original
ObjectMix.
In [30], the authors propose Augmentation by Mimicking Motion Change (AMMC) as aug-
mentation method. Considering that the object position and appearance has not varied a
lot between consecutive frames, they create pseudo-videos from static images. For each
image, the object is decoupled from the background. Background image is in-painted,
while the target image is transformed wit a sequence of operations that reflect changes
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
9
==PAGE:18==
due to motion. The set of target images are pasted on the background to create a set of
frames, that are further transformed using translation, scale and flip transformations.
The authors of S3Aug [31] approach data augmentation for the action recognition task with
a more complicated method. The generation of new data frames is based on three steps:
segmentation, category sampling and feature shift. In the segmentation step, the frames
of the video are segmented using a pre-trained panoptic segmentation network. Each
pixel is assigned to a class. Moreover, a unique id value is attached to every instance.
In the second step, a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) is used to generate a new
frame. To add variation, the label of the selected segmented areas is replaced by another
category. Finally, the last step is used to add temporal coherence and avoid flickering
between consecutive generated frames. The feature shift is performed via modules that
are used in the network between the convolution layers or transformer layers and they
swap features between consecutive frames. An example is to select an object of a person
in a video and generate new frames that contain the person while the background is
produced by the generative network.
Finally, the work in [32] proposes two methods, reversing the frames order, which is al-
ready a part of the STCN training loop, and also replacing the background of a video for
each target frame with another video, keeping the object of the ground truth intact. The
results show a performance increase for a state of the art model trained on YoutubeVOS.
2.4
Other models used in the thesis
In section 4.4, we propose a generative pipeline to extend the diversity of the available
image datasets, that we utilize in out augmentation method. This pipeline utilizes pre-
trained models for a series of tasks. These models are presented in the following section.
2.4.1
Diffusion models
Diffusion models [33] are generative models. In this thesis, they are used to generate im-
ages in chapter 4. Diffusion models generate data by reversing a gradual noising process.
The basic idea is to start with a piece of data (like an image), add noise to it step-by-step
until it becomes pure noise, and then learn how to reverse this process to recover the orig-
inal data. In the forward diffusion process, noise is gradually added to the image over a
series of steps. The amount of noise added at each step is predetermined by a schedule.
The reverse diffusion process, involves learning to gradually remove the noise, step-by-
step, to recover the original image. This is done by training a neural network to predict
the noise added at each step, allowing the model to denoise the image incrementally.
In the thesis, Stable Diffusion [34] is used in chapter 5. Stable Diffusion improves denois-
ing diffusion models by utilising the latent space, instead of pixel space. During training,
this is achieved by using an encoder to initially encode the image into a low dimensional
latent representation. The diffusion processes are then applied to the latent space rep-
resentation. Moreover, conditioning of additional inputs is also incorporated, through the
use of attention layers. This way, text input can be used for guidance of the image gen-
eration process, by modifying the latent space.
We also utilize the Stable Diffusion XL-turbo model in a greater extent, which is based
on Adversarial Diffusion Distillation [35]. This model achieves single (or few) step image
generation, comparable to GANs [36]. This is few steps generation process results to
images of high quality, and it the reason why we prefer it over Stable Diffusion models.
Training is achieved via two losses: an adversarial loss and a distillation loss. The ad-
versarial loss forces the model to generate realistically looking images. The distillation
10
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:19==
loss uses a trained and fixed diffusion model as a teacher in order to teach the model
to produce results that have the same high quality as the teacher model, preserving its
composition.
2.4.2
Object detection
Object detection models are used in computer vision in order to identify and localize ob-
jects in an image. We use object detection in section 4.4 in order to detect the desired
object in an image and acquire the location of it in the form of bounding box.
In this thesis, we used the model Grounding Dino [37], that can also be conditioned using
as text input the class name we want to detect. Grounding Dino is an extension of the
transformer based object detection model DINO [38]. It performs vision-language modality
fusion at multiple phases, so that open-set detection is improved. Open-set detection aims
at detecting arbitrary classes with the help of text understanding from user input.
The architecture of the Grounding Dino model consists of two encoders, one for each
modality and one decoder. Initially, features are from the image and text input pair using
relevant backbone networks. Then, the feature enhancer block performs feature fusion
of these modalities by the use of cross attention blocks, one for each modality. Multiple
feature enhancer blocks are used. From the enhanced features, queries are selected
via the language-guided query selection module, which are then passed to the decoder.
Each query vector contains two parts; a positional part for the bounding box prediction,
and a content part which is learnable. The decoder uses both self attention for the cross-
modality input query, as well as cross-attention blocks for each modality.
For training, the losses are selected to be the L1 and Generalized Intersection over Union
(GIOU) [39] losses for the bounding box prediction. Contrastive loss between predicted
objects and language tokens. Losses are added after each decoder layer and after the
encoder inputs.
2.4.3
Segment Anything Model
Segment Anything Model (SAM) [40] is as segmentation model. We use it in section 4.4
to provide a segmentation mask for the generated images. SAM can be prompted in
various ways, such as masks, points, bounding boxes or text. The bounding box from the
object detection model in subsection 2.4.2 is used in SAM for prompting. We used SAM
for segmentation due its zero-shot capabilities.
SAM consists of three major parts: the image encoder, the prompt encoder and the mask
decoder. The image encoder is an adapted Vision Transformer [41] that runs once per
image and prior to the user prompt inputs. The prompt encoder can handle two different
input prompt: dense (masks) or sparse, that are points, bounding boxes or text. Sparse
prompts are positionally encoded and combined with embeddings from CLIP [42]. Mask
prompts are embedded using convolutional layers and are summed element-wise with the
embeddings of the image encoder. The decoder uses different block types: self-attention
for the prompt, prompt-image cross-attention and vice versa. Afterwards, a dynamic mask
prediction head maps the mask token to a linear classifier for mask prediction. More than
one masks are predicted and ranked based on their IoU scores.
Training SAM consists of three stages. A manual, a semi-automatic and a fully automatic
stage. The two first stages feature annotators and aim to initially train the model and in-
crease the diversity of the objects to predict masks for. The last part consists of prompting
SAM with grid of points and selecting the most confident and stable of the output masks
of the decoder.
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
11
==PAGE:20==
3
Datasets and performance measures
3.1
Datasets
In this section, we present the datasets that have been most widely been utilised for
VOS models training and benchmarking. Some of these datasets are initially intended
for related video segmentation tasks, however are included here since the availability of
diverse, high quality and densely annotated video data is scarce. The meaning of quality
is not isolated to represent high resolution, but also refers to representing the current
challenges of the video medium. In other words, video datasets need to follow the trend
of the intended tasks in the frame rate, context and challenges of the videos that are
targeted by the model and specifically the VOS task. As stated in [11], there exists a trade-
off between the quality of the videos and annotations and the number of available videos
per dataset, the latter allowing the model to have greater generalisation capabilities.
3.1.1
FBMS-59 (Freiburg-Berkeley Motion Segmentation)
The FBMS-59 dataset is described in [43] and can be accessed in [44]. It consists of 59
sequences. Some sequences have every 20th frame is annotated, while others provide
annotations for every 16th frame. A total of 720 frames are annotated.
3.1.2
SegTrack-v2
The SegTrack-v2 dataset was introduced in [45] and can be accessed through [46]. It
consists of 14 sequences with 24 objects and has 947 annotated frames. Each sequence
is fully annotated. The sequences have properties like motion blur, shape deformation,
appearance change, slow motion, occlusion and interactions between objects.
3.1.3
DAVIS
DAVIS 2016
DAVIS [47], consists of 50 HD quality videos sequences (30 for training set and 20 for
validation), per frame annotated. It includes common challenges such as occlusions,
motion blur, fast motion, non-linear deformation. Its motivation is to create a dataset with
high resolution, similar to the one of contemporary devices, as well as to contain a larger
quantity of data to avoid overfitting. Even though the sequences have duration of 2s to
4s, they include many challenges. DAVIS segments one object from its background. It is
available for download at [48].
DAVIS 2017
The DAVIS17 dataset [15] extends the original DAVIS dataset to segment multiple objects,
by using instance-level annotation masks. Moreover, more challenges are included with
increased video complexity, smaller objects and fine structures and occlusions. It amounts
to 150 sequences (60 train, 30 val, 30 test−dev, 30 test−challenge) , with 10459 frames
and 376 objects. The quality of the new sequences, over the original 50 of DAVIS includes
4K, HD and also some 720p videos.
DAVIS 2018
The DAVIS18 [49] dataset is similar to the DAVIS17 dataset, with scribble annotation to
support IVOS.
DAVIS 2019
For VOS, the DAVIS19 dataset [50] remains the same as DAVIS17. The only sequences
that are introduced regard the unsupervised, AVOS challenge.
12
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:21==
3.1.4
Youtube-VOS
YouTube-VOS [51], [16] is a large scale dataset, comprised of 4519 videos in total, in
its 2019 version. Compared to the 150 videos of DAVIS17, the size of data is largely in-
creased. The duration ranges between 3-6s and each video has a framerate of 30fps.
The selection of objects includes animals, vehicles, accessories, common objects and
humans in various activities, with the latter category annotated by the activity category.
As a result, it has been created to be as broad as possible and include everyday sce-
narios. By sourcing videos from YouTube, YouTube-VOS has three advantages. First,
the videos are diverse and feature objects with diverse appearance, while at the same
time including real-world challenges, such as occlusions and deformations. Second, the
videos have been created by using contemporary equipment, such as phones and cam-
eras, and have high resolution. Finally, the videos have been created by both amateurs
and professionals, offering broad coverage of similar objects. A main disadvantage is the
lower, 6fps rate of segmentation.
3.1.5
OVIS
OVIS [52] is a dataset created for the VIS task. Its main focus was providing a dataset
with many occlusions. The categories are mostly animals, however some other everyday
objects, such as vehicles, are included. There are 901 videos with duration ranging from
5 to 60 seconds, having a mean duration of 12.77 seconds. The videos are annotated per
fifth frame.
3.1.6
MOSE
MOSE [53] is a newer dataset for VOS that is aimed to tracking and segmentation of
objects in complex environments. It is comprised of 2149 clips, with 5200 objects from
36 categories and 431725 masks. It was motivated by the fact that isolated and salient
objects rarely occur in real-world environments. On the contrary, complex scenes and
heavily occluded objects are more frequent.
The generation of MOSE comes from two parts. Some videos come from OVIS [52] and
are processed to comply with the SVOS format. The second part comes from newly
captured videos with the following characteristics: They feature multiple objects, possibly
crowded and of similar appearance. Occlusion is present, as well as disappearance and
re-appearance of objects. Different scales of the objects are present and the objects
are moving. These videos have HD resolution and their duration ranges from 5-60s. A
disadvantage is that not all videos are annotated for every frame. Some videos are, while
some others are annotated every fifth frame.
3.1.7
VOST
The VOST dataset [54] is another dataset that is created to impose more challenge and
take into consideration possible real-world scenarios. In this case, the emphasis is on the
effects of changes in the texture and appearance due to complex transformation of the
same object during a video. The dataset contains 713 clips, with 155 object categories
with average duration of 21.3 seconds. The labels are annotated with a rate of 5 fps.
3.1.8
BL30K
The BL30K dataset [11] was generated to be used for pre-training using synthetic data. It
includes high quality, dense annotations, as well as a large number of sequences. Each
video has resolution 768 × 512 and has 160 frames. It includes 29989 videos, rendered
using Blender[23]. Each video features 3-5 videos.
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
13
==PAGE:22==
3.2
Performance metrics
In the supervised scenario, the model outputs a mask prediction M. Given the ground
truth mask, G, different metrics are utilized. The metrics used for evaluating the quality of
the predictions, as defined from DAVIS [47] are:
• Region Similarity J : Also Intersection over Union (IoU). Measures the region-based
segmentation similarity by counting the number of mislabeled pixels from the predic-
tion mask M. The IoU is calculated as the intersection over union of the predicted
mask over the ground truth mask:
J = |M ∩G|
|M ∪G|
(3.1)
The background pixels are not included in the calculation of J .
• Contour Accuracy F: A mask, such as M, can be interpreted as a set of contours
c(M), that delimits the spatial extent of the mask [47]. The contour based precision,
Pc, and recall, Rc, are computed and a reused to calculate F as:
F = 2PcRc
Pc + Rc
(3.2)
As in the describing paper, morphology operations are used.
• Performance metric J &F: It is the average of the J and F scores:
J &F = J + F
2
(3.3)
The most important metric that is used in the thesis is the region similarity or IoU metric,
J . It is reported as the mean of J for each segmented frame of a video sequence.
14
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:23==
4
Method
In this chapter, we introduce our data augmentation method. As a first step, generating
new video frames from existing training videos is discussed in section 4.2. Afterwards,
we present a method for generating videos using datasets of static images combined with
the existing video dataset as a way to increase the pasted object diversity subsubsec-
tion 4.3. Finally, a pipeline to increase the image data diversity using generative methods
is presented in section 4.4.
4.1
Overview
The general idea of the augmentation method we describe in the sections of this chapter is
illustrated in Figure 4.1. More formally, we sample a video from the training dataset, Vi =
{f1, f2, . . . fN} of N frames and its corresponding ground-truth masks Mi = {m1, m2, . . . mN}
from a VOS dataset. Another video, Vj is used to augment Vi. Vj can be a video or a
pseudo-video generated from the method we present in subsubsection 4.3. The resulting
video frames belong to the sequence ˜Vi. If multiple augmentation happen, the place of
˜Vi takes the place of Vi and the process is repeated.
Video
Image
Pseudo-video 
creation
Transformations
Frames 
Combination
Training video 
frames
Augmentation 
video frames
1
2
N
1
2
N
Augmented video 
frames
1
2
N
j
~
V
i
V
i
V
Figure 4.1: Copy-Paste inspired video augmentation method. The database can con-
tain video and image data. N frames are sampled from a training video Vi, the original
video before augmentation. An augmentation video Vj is sampled or created from a static
image. Afterwards, the N augmentation frames are uniformly transformed. The frames
of the transformed augmentation video are combined with the training video Vi frame by
frame, to produce the augmented video ˜Vi.
4.2
Augmentation using video data
N frames are sampled from a training video Vi from a VOS dataset. Then, N frames
are sampled from an augmentation video Vj. Each frame of Vj passes through a series
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
15
==PAGE:24==
(a) Original and augmentation frames and
masks before combination.
(b) Resulting final frame and mask with differ-
ent combination methods.
Figure 4.2: Different cases of combining the augmentation data. From top to bottom
of Figure 4.2a: Original training video Vi frame and mask. Augmentation video Vj frame
and mask. Augmentation frame and mask after transformations. In Figure 4.2b different
possible combination methods are shown to produce a frame and mask of ˜Vi. From top
to bottom: New selected object in foreground and its mask is included in the augmented
mask. New selected object without mask inclusion. All objects are pasted in foreground
without including their masks. In the last row, All frames are pasted in the background.
The mask object colors are for illustration purpose.
of transformations that include random horizontal flip, scaling and translation. The latter
transformation is used to randomize the paste location of an object from Vj onto the frames
of Vi. The same transformation parameters apply to all the frames of Vj. Afterwards,
a number of objects Vj are selected and are pasted onto the respective frames of Vi.
An example of selecting an object from the augmentation frames is shown in row 3 of
Figure 4.2b, compared to row 2 where all the objects are pasted. The pasted object’s
masks may or may not be included in the mask of the combined video ˜Vi. Including the
mask in the augmented frame is shown in row 1 of Figure 4.2b. The new objects can be
pasted in the foreground, creating occlusions, or in the background, by random. In row 3
of Figure 4.2b, the objects are pasted in the foreground and the original object, the bear,
is occluded. The same objects are pasted in the background in row 4 of Figure 4.2b.
The number of sampled frames from each video, N, depends on the model. For the case
of STCN, 3 consecutive frames are selected, with spacing between them that also varies
between epochs. In Figure 4.2, the procedure is illustrated with the transformations in
Figure 4.2a and various combinations of the final frame and mask in Figure 4.2b. These
combinations can be object selection from the augmentation mask, background or fore-
ground pasting on the original frame and inclusion of the selected augmentation mask
in the final ground truth mask. In Figure 4.3, another example augmentation round is
illustrated in one of the three frames chosen for training.
16
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.3: Copy-Paste inspired augmentation, applied in one frame. First row: Orig-
inal video Vi frame and ground truth mask used for training. Middle row: Augmentation
video Vj frame and corresponding mask. No scaling and position transformations have
yet been applied. Third row: After scaling and a small position change, the augmentation
object is added in the background of the original frame, to produce a frame of ˜Vi. The
mask colors are only for demonstration and do not change the mask representation.
No additional disk space is required for this augmentation method, since the augmenta-
tions happen during training, in the dataloader and the same videos that are already exist
on the drive are used. Moreover, the computational overhead is minimal, since all the
operations are based on popular libraries that offer vectorized operations.
In conclusion, the video augmentation method receives the original frames and their cor-
responding masks in the two arrays, alongside two other arrays of augmentation frames
and masks. The two augmentation arrays pass through a series of transformations similar
to those for image data augmentation and finally, the two arrays are combined to produce
the final frames and masks. If more augmentation rounds happen, this process repeats
with a new randomly selected augmentation video and the place of the original video is
taken by the final video frames and masks that was the result of the last augmentation
round.
4.3
Pseudo-videos from static image data
In section 4.2 the augmentation data come from the same dataset that is used for train-
ing. Due to the number of different parameters, a large amount of combinations can be
observed in the augmented videos. However, the number of distinct objects is limited.
In order to increase the variation of the new objects that are pasted on the augmented
video frames, image datasets can be used. This is due to the fact that image datasets
have been widely used for training image segmentation models and are diverse, come
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
17
==PAGE:26==
with good quality annotations and feature images from diverse classes. Moreover, VOS
models like STCN feature a pre-training stage on static data. As a result, the same image
datasets can be also used for video data augmentation with the disadvantage that extra
storage space is required.
The procedure in the section 4.2 could be repeated in this case, if a video can be gen-
erated from static images. In the pre-training stage of STCN this has been attempted
by simple image transformations, applied repeatedly to an image. However, real world
videos feature objects with smooth motion between frames. Moreover, even with trans-
formations, only simple motion patterns can be simulated. As a result, data augmentation
cannot generate more challenging data for the model. We solve this by using the existing
video dataset for motion sampling.
Motion generation
The idea is to sample the motion of one object from one of the videos of the training set to
create a realistically smooth motion of the image object. This can be done by making the
image object’s position change through the frames as the object in a selected video. To
give the impression of the camera zooming in or out, or the object coming into or leaving
the frame, the scale of the video object can also be sampled and applied to the image
object. We illustrate the procedure in Figure 4.4.
Rescale
Motion
generation
1
2
3
N
Pseudo-video
(0, 0)
(x2, y2)
(x3, y3)
(xN, yN)
s1=1
s2
s3
sN
^V j
f 1
V j
V k
Figure 4.4: Method to generate pseudo-videos from one image, by sampling the
motion of a video. Firstly, we select an image and its ground-truth annotation from the
database. If the image needs to be rescaled to fit the distribution of the objects in DAVIS ,
as described in subsection 5.4.3, a random video Vk is selected and one object from its first
frame fk
0 provides the relative rescale ratio to the frame dimensions. Afterwards, another
video Vj = {f1, f2, . . . fN} with N frames is selected. For every frame fi, i ∈1 . . . N, the
position of the bounding box center is tracked, alongside the scale in respect to the image
area. A series of N frames is created, where in each one the image-mask pair object has
been translated by the motion of the frames of video Vj. The tuple x, y represents relative
position of the bounding box center. s represents relative scale of the bounding box height
and width. The reference is the bounding box of the first frame, which has scale s = 1
and position (x, y) = (0, 0).
Care has to be taken with image datasets, because their relative scale, or the area the
object occupies in the frame might not be similar to the object area distribution in the
videos that are used for training and are considered relevant for the VOS task in real world
scenarios. Thus, the image data might need rescaling before the starting the process
of pseudo-video creation. This is examined in chapter 5, but the case of rescaling is
described in the overall procedure.
18
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:27==
During training, we sample a video Vi = {f1, f2, . . . fN} with N frames. An image is
randomly selected from the augmentation dataset. If it is required to rescale the image, a
video Vk is selected, an object from its first frame fk
0 is randomly selected and its relative
size with regard to the frame size is calculated. This is the rescale ratio to apply to the
selected image. After that, we sample another another video Vj with N frames from
the same training dataset. If the image contains multiple labels, one is selected based
on the objects’ areas and their proximity to the image borders, to avoid having small or
incomplete masks. From Vj, one object from the first frame is also selected. The selected
object of Vj is tracked through the N frames, and the position of its bounding box center
and relative areas are used to translate and rescale the image to produce a new frame
sequence, ˆVj. This process is shown in the area delineated by dashed line in Figure 4.4.
Now ˆVj can be used in place of Vj of the process described in section 4.2.
4.4
Synthetically generated data
In section 4.3, we generate pseudo-videos using images from an image dataset stored
on disk. It is possible to increase the diversity of the image objects, and thus the diversity
of the pasted objects in the augmented videos, by using generative methods and create
new images. Text to image models would be good candidates, since it is easy to pass an
image class description to the model and generate a new image, that can be also different
between two generation rounds with the same prompt. The drawback of this method is
that we either create the new images before training the model and store them on the
disk, or we create the images online during training, requiring more GPU memory. This
was also the drawback mentioned in [29]. We utilize diffusion models for the generation of
images, due to the high quality results and the abundance of pre-trained models available.
The most important condition however, is to acquire high quality masks for the objects of
the generated images. A similar argument with the existence of high quality annotated
data for video datasets can be made here. In order to segment the generated images
as well as possible, pre-trained models are also used, further accentuating the need for
GPU memory during online training.
After the image is generated, we pass it through an object detection model to acquire
the the object’s bounding box. This is used as prompt for the segmentation model. As a
result, in the end of the pipeline, we get an image-mask pair. As segmentation model, we
use SAM [40] and for object detection, Grounding Dino [37]. We illustrate the process of
generating an image-mask pair in Figure 4.5.
This process for image generation can increase the diversity of the image objects that can
be pasted in the training video frames for augmentation. However, more GPU memory
needs to be used during training or the image dataset needs to be created beforehand
and stored on the disk. Depending on the way the prompt is created, a total of three or
four models are needed to create new image-mask pairs.
4.5
Comparison with other methods
Compared to VideoMix [28], this method keeps the temporal continuity of both the pasted
object, as well as for the objects in the original frame as long as they are not fully occluded.
Since the new object is inserted using its corresponding mask, no irrelevant context from
the new video is added that can remove from the original background or create occlusions
that are not usually observed.
Compared to ObjectMix [29], our method, without considering the generate image data,
is computationally cheaper and faster, so that it can easily be incorporated to the training
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
19
==PAGE:28==
bus
text2img
model
object
detection  
segmentation
model
prompt
Figure 4.5: Process of generating an image-mask pair using a class name. The
coloured fill of a box means that we utilize a pre-trained model. The prompt can be either
hard-coded or the output of a model.
phase. Depending on the type of generative model, the image generation can also be
relatively fast, at the cost of GPU memory. Moreover, this method allows for more diversity
in the creation of the augmented images. The pasted objects need not always occlude
the objects of the original video frame. There is also the possibility of not using these new
masks as targets, acting merely as occlusions or part of the background.
20
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:29==
5
Experiments
In this chapter, we present the experimental evaluation of our Copy-Paste method de-
scribed in chapter 4.
5.1
Datasets
The datasets that we use in the experiments for training the STCN model are discussed
in this section.
5.1.1
Video datasets
For video datasets, we utilize DAVIS-2017 [15], denoted as DAVIS and Youtube-VOS
[16], denoted as YouTubeVOS. DAVIS is always used to train the STCN model, while
both datasets can be used in the augmentation scheme individually or together.
5.1.2
Static images datasets
Apart from video datasets, in this chapter static image data are also involved in the aug-
mentation method. We opt-for these datasets as they are the standard in the pre-training
stage in the VOS field [1], [6], [11], [55]m [56], [57]. These datasets are: FSS-1000 [58]
that contains images from 1000 classes, with 10 annotated images for each class. EC-
SSD [59] with 1000 images. HRSOD [60] with 2010 images. BIG [61], which contains 200
images. DUTS [62], with 15572 images. These datasets are also denoted collectively as
static.
Apart from the static dataset, we leverage COCO [63] due to the 118000 annotated images
it includes from 36 classes. When COCO and static datasets are used alongside for
augmentation, they are collectively denoted as the all image dataset.
5.1.3
Performance metrics
In order to avoid confusion, there are two ways of presenting evaluation data with similar
nomenclature. On one hand, validation IoU, or J , is calculated with two ways. During
training, it is calculated on the validation set, but for the three frames that the model has
selected. It is not an inference result. These results are logged and shown on graphs.
On the other hand, lacking a test set, the overall performance of the trained model is
evaluated by passing all the validation set videos through the model. For every video, all
the frames are segmented in order. This procedure also results in an average value of the
same IoU measure. This metric is not logged in general and it is presented in the results
of the tables. This measure is the real world metric the model is judged on, while the one
based on the three frames logged during training, is more indicative. For all the results in
the chapter, we use the last checkpoint of the trained model.
5.2
Initial evaluation
To investigate the potential performance increase of our augmentation method, a proof-
of-concept experiment is conducted. The STCN is trained on DAVIS and an extended
dataset. This dataset is created by applying the augmentation method to all the videos in
DAVIS and then storing the resulting videos locally. The result is a dataset that consists
of 120 videos, having twice the number of videos than DAVIS. The probability of using
an augmented video in training is thus 50%. We denote this extended dataset as DAVIS-
Augm. The model was trained for 20000 epochs and the results are shown in Table 5.1.
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
21
==PAGE:30==
Table 5.1: Preliminary experiment.
Training STCN from scratch on DAVIS without
and with augmentation from an augmented version stored on disk (offline). An increase
of 1.5% is observed after training for 20000 epochs. The augmented dataset includes
DAVIS, plus 60 augmented videos.
Dataset
J &F
J
DAVIS
69.7
66.8
DAVIS-Augm
71.1
68.3
There is an increase in the mean IoU metric of around 2.2%. This increase prompts for
further investigation in the method. Furthermore, it is not optimal to create the augmented
dataset and store it on disk for the following reasons: First, additional disk space is used
and having access to the augmented data is not essential. Secondly, creating data online
allows for the easier selection of the augmentation probability. Finally, the large number
of possible combinations between the frame objects is not utilised. Once an augmented
video is created, it is going to be passed exactly the same through the model every epoch.
In other words, if the augmentation is performed online, every epoch different augmenta-
tion will be applied to a selected video and the objects pasted on it will differ.
5.3
Hyperparameters selection
In order to further investigate the effects of the hyper-parameters that are used in the
augmentation, an ablation study is performed. These hyper-parameters are the augmen-
tation probability, paugm, the limits of random scaling and translation, the selection of the
objects from the augmentation video to be pasted, and the inclusion or not of the pasted
objects’ masks in the augmented data point. Finally, it is also investigated whether adding
an additional augmentation video increases the performance.
The initial hyper-parameters are: paugm = 0.5, random scale ratio: s = 0.5 −2, random
translation: t = (−dim/8) −dim/8, where dim corresponds is the width or height of
the frame. Selecting specific objects is not active, meaning that all the objects from the
augmentation frame are pasted on the original frame. Finally, the new masks are not
included in the final frame.
Augmentation probability
The augmentation probability for this experiment takes the values: paugm = [0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75].
The STCN model is trained for 2500 epochs using the default augmentation hyper-parameters
for the augmentation. The evaluation results are presented on Table 5.2 and the logged
values of the training and validation Iou during training are illustrated in Figure 5.1.
Table 5.2: Augmentation probability selection. Training STCN from scratch for 2500
epochs, on DAVIS and varying the values of augmentation probability. DAVIS is used as
augmentation dataset.
paugm
J &F
J
0
70.2
67.5
0.25
70.3
67.7
0.5
70.1
67.2
0.75
70.6
68
The regularising effect of the augmentations can be seen in Figure 5.1. However, from
validation IoU alone it cannot be decided that this is the best value to pick. The test result
22
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:31==
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Epoch
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
IoU
Training IoU
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Epoch
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
Validation IoU
paugm = 0
paugm = 0.75
paugm = 0.5
paugm = 0.25
Figure 5.1: Training and validation IoU of 3 frames, with varying the probability of aug-
mentation, paugm.
run on all the validation videos shows that for paugm = 0.75 the performance of the model
is better, thus this is the selected value for the augmentation probability.
Scale ratio
The scale ratio for the augmentation object is randomly selected within the following limits:
0.5-2, 0.5-5, 0.5-10 and 0.1-10. The IoU results during training are shown in Figure 5.2 and
the evaluation results in Table 5.3.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Epoch
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
IoU
Training IoU
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Epoch
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
IoU
Validation IoU
s = 0.5-2
s = 0.5-5
s = 0.5-10
s = 0.1-10
Figure 5.2: Training and validation IoU of 3 frames with varying the limits of the random
scale ratio.
From Figure 5.2 it is not easy to select which limits help the model perform the best. This is
also the case for the evaluation in Table 5.3. It would be expected that the larger scaling
ratios would lead to larger pasted objects creating more occlusions or even hiding the
original objects.
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
23
==PAGE:32==
Table 5.3: Experiment results for varying values of scale ratio limits. The STCN is
trained from scratch on DAVIS, with DAVIS as the augmentation dataset.
Scale ratio limits
J &F
J
0.5 - 2
69.0
66.8
0.5 - 5
66.8
64.2
0.5 - 10
60.0
57.7
0.1 - 10
63.9
61.9
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Epoch
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
IoU
Training IoU
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Epoch
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
IoU
Validation IoU
t = 0
t = 0.125
t = 0.25
t = 0.5
Figure 5.3: Training and validation IoU of 3 frames with varying the limits of the random
translation of the augmentation frame.
Translation limits
The translation transformation moves the object from its original position in the augmen-
tation frame to a new position, so that the paste position changes in the new frame. Two
different position offset values are selected, one for the x and one for the y axis. The STCN
model was trained from scratch for 1000 epochs using the DAVIS dataset, with translation
values selected between the following limits: 0 (no translation), dims/8, dims/4, dims/2.
The results are illustrated in Figure 5.3 and Table 5.4.
Table 5.4: Experimental results for varying the paste location limits. The STCN is
trained from scratch on DAVIS using DAVIS as augmentation dataset. The translation
limits are randomly selected for the height and width between the values −t to t.
Translation limits
J &F
J
0
68.5
66.4
dims/8
69.0
66.8
dims/4
67.9
65.6
dims/2
66.6
64.7
The results during training are not very conclusive compared to the evaluation on the
whole validation dataset of the training model. The worst results are expected, since it
is possible for the object to leave the frame after translation, which results in an empty
augmentation frame. It is also seen that adding the randomness of the pasting location
increases the performance of the model.
24
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:33==
Foreground or background pasting of augmentation objects
The objects in the augmentation frames can be pasted on the original frame in the fore-
ground, occluding the original objects in the case of overlap, or as part of the background.
To test whether the added potential occlusions result in helping train a better performing,
model, the STCN model was trained for 1000 epochs with three probability values for the
new object being in the foreground: 0 (always in the background), 0.5, 1.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Epoch
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
IoU
Training IoU
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Epoch
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
IoU
Validation IoU
p = 0
p = 0.5
p = 1
Figure 5.4: Training and validation IoU of 3 frames with varying the foreground proba-
bility p for the pasted object(s).
Table 5.5: Experimental results for varying foreground pasting probability.
The
STCN is trained from scratch on DAVIS using DAVIS as augmentation dataset. The prob-
ability to paste the augmentation object in the foreground is denoted as p.
Foreground probability
J &F
J
0
69.4
66.9
0.5
69.1
66.6
1
69.0
66.8
From the results of either Figure 5.4 and from the final evaluation of Table 5.5, pasting
the object in the foreground, creating occlusions, does not show major increase the per-
formance of the model.
5.4
Quantitative results
In order to test the augmentation scheme, a series of experiments were conducted. The
hyper-parameters used are shown in Table 5.6.
We opted for multiple augmentation rounds, each one as an independent event in the
case the previous augmentation has occurred. This way, more combinations are possible
from the limited number of the DAVIS training dataset.
5.4.1
Using DAVIS
The experiment consists of training the STCN model from scratch and with the augmenta-
tion scheme for multiple times, to also gather statistics on the evaluation results for each
case. The number of epochs is set to 7000. The results are shown in Table 5.7.
The augmentation lead to an increase of around 2%, similar to the initial investigation.
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
25
==PAGE:34==
Table 5.6: Selected Hyper-parameters.
Hyper-parameter
Value
paugm
[0.75, 0.5, 0.25]
scale ratio s limits
0.5-2
translation limits t
dims/8
select instances
1
include instances
True
augmentation rounds
1
foreground probability
0.5
Table 5.7: Evaluation results for multiple experiments, with and without augmenta-
tion. The STCN is trained with and without augmentation for 7000 epochs.
Augmentation
# trials
Mean J &F
Std J &F
Mean J
Std J
No
3
69.4
0.3
66.9
0.2
Yes
4
71.2
0.8
68.2
0.9
Examination of results
Looking into the evaluation results of applying the augmentation scheme for each video
might can help identify cases where augmentation assists.
One property of the videos is the number of objects. The videos are classified in groups
with one or more objects in the first frame. The evaluation results are calculated for each
video individually, based on the model trained for 7000 epochs. Furthermore, the videos
are also classified based on the specific number of objects their fist frame contains. The
results are illustrated in Figure 5.5 and Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.5: J evaluated for all frames of validation videos. The videos are scored
individually and classified in groups with one or more distinct objects in their first frame.
It can be seen that the augmentation scheme helps the model attain better IoU results
26
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.6: J evaluated for all frames of validation videos. The videos are scored
individually and classified in groups with based on the number of objects in their first
frame.
when the number of objects is higher. Specifically, from Figure 5.6, when three or more
objects are in the frame the difference is substantial. For the case of the two objects in the
first frame, the results seem to be slightly worse for the model trained with augmentation
data. This might be due to the nature of the videos. Possibly some of these videos might
be showing people with smooth motion. In this case, adding occlusions might worsen the
performance if the majority of the videos feature people, since some of these examples
might be occluded by the pasted objects.
Looking at the object size and its correlation to the IoU. On one hand, there are many
objects and frames. On the other hand, the effect of time is not readily observed. The
lower the frame number, closer to the beginning of the video where the user has provided
the input mask, the IoU value is normally higher. Plots of IoU versus relative object area
are shown in Figure 5.7.
Assuming that many occlusions and motion have occurred until frame 30, the frames are
relatively away from the user provided annotation. In Figure 5.7a, the individual IoU of
the objects of the videos are again plotted versus their relative size after frame 30. These
show that for objects that are in general large throughout the video, the IoU should also
be increased. Spearman correlation coefficient, denoted as s, and Kendall’s tau k −t
measures have also been calculated. Both are positive and not close to 0. These corre-
lation measures also increase when using augmentation. InFigure 5.7b, only objects with
area up to 10% of the image area are plotted, again after frame 30. Under the assumption
that the frame number is irrelevant, it seems from the fitted line that the augmentation
performs better for larger objects.
5.4.2
Using static images
In order to follow the procedure described in section 4.3, image datasets were used.
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
27
==PAGE:36==
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Object relative size
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Object IoU
davis k-t: 0.33, s: 0.48
augmented k-t: 0.37, s: 0.53
(a) All objects after frame 30.
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Object relative size
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Object IoU
davis
augmented
(b) All objects after frame 30, with area to to 10%
of the image area.
Figure 5.7: Individual object IoU versus relative object size in all frames of the DAVIS
validation dataset. In Figure 5.7a, a positive correlation is shown with size and IoU,
increased when using augmentation. s: Spearman correlation coefficient, k −t: Kendall’s
tau.
Before using these datasets for pseudo-video creation, their object size relative to the
image area is investigated. This is done so that the objects that are created are not
extremely large and do not always occlude the original object. Moreover, since the video
datasets used for training are taken from real world videos, they represent scenarios which
should be emulated. For COCO, the relative object size to the image area is compared
with DAVIS in Figure 5.8. For both DAVIS and COCO, the calculations treat each object
in one frame independently. The distribution of the relative object area is similar for both
datasets. As a result, no rescaling is performed when using COCO for pseudo-videos
generation. This is not the case however for the other image datasets. As an example,
the relative object area of BIG and its rescaled version are shown in Figure 5.9. Due to
the random transformations and the video object selection, it is difficult to assess how
the image object evolves through the generated video. As a result, only the first frame of
DAVIS is considered when comparing relative object sizes from now on. The relative size
distributions for all the static datasets, before and after rescaling, are shown in Figure A.1,
in section A.1.
In Figure 5.10, we show the relative area statistics for the augmented video ˜Vi using
the different datasets used in this chapter for augmentation. In Figure 5.10a only the
objects in the first frame of an augmented video are used for the statistics calculation.
In Figure 5.10b, for each object in a video, the relative areas through the frames are
averaged.
5.4.3
Augmentation with video and static image data experiments
In order to compare the efficacy method using different sources of augmentation data, a
series of experiments is conducted. The STCN model is used for benchmarking and the
DAVIS dataset is used for training. The hyper-parameters for the augmentations are the
same as in Table 5.6, however, the number of possible augmentations per data point is
three, with probabilities paugm = [0.75, 0.5, 0.25]. For all of the experiments in the chapter,
the last model is kept after training and no model is kept based on a specific metric. The
evaluation metric of the experiments is the IoU, J , as well as J &F calculated over each
28
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:37==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
DAVIS frames average
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
DAVIS first frame
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Object relative area
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
COCO
Figure 5.8: Relative object area distribution for COCO and DAVIS datasets. Top:
Relative object area in COCO. Middle: Average object area for all frames in DAVIS. Last:
Object area of in the first frame of DAVIS. In DAVIS, many objects change size through
the frames. Many leave the frame completely. For those, the average size is decreased
and the distribution shifts towards the left, closer to 0.
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
29
==PAGE:38==
0.0
0.2
0.4
BIG
0.0
0.2
0.4
BIG rescaled
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Object relative area
0.0
0.2
0.4
DAVIS first frame
Figure 5.9: Relative object size distribution for BIG and DAVIS datasets. Top: Rel-
ative object area in BIG. Middle: Average object area of BIG after rescaling based on
random object samples from DAVIS. Last: Object area of in the first frame of DAVIS.
30
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:39==
Sd2 20
Mistral nltk
Mistral
Sdxl 4
Sdxl 1
COCO
DAVIS
Static
YouTubeVos
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(a) Objects in the first frame.
Sd2 20
Mistral nltk
Mistral
Sdxl 4
Sdxl 1
COCO
DAVIS
Static
YouTubeVos
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(b) Average of objects through the frames.
Figure 5.10: Mean relative object sizes of the first frame ˜f1 of augmented video ˜Vi
used for training. The x axis denotes the datasets the augmentation videos or pseud-
videos Vj are sampled from. Some dataset names are introduced later in the chapter.
COCO and YouTubeVos are not rescaled.
frame of the DAVIS validation videos. The results of the model at the end of training is
denoted as Last. Moreover, every 100 epochs the model is saved. From these models
the last ten are evaluated also to examine the mean value and standard deviation of J .
The static dataset contains all the image datasets that STCN uses for pre-training. All
image dataset contains the images in static and COCO dataset. The dataset used for
augmentation is uniformly sampled when a training video is selected in the dataloader.
Training from scratch, 3000 epochs
Table 5.8: Training STCN from scratch on DAVIS for 3000 epochs, using various
augmentation datasets. All pseudo-video data provide substantial increase in mean J
when the template video relative scale is not tracked. The best results are proved by
using DAVIS for augmentation, most probably due to the object type and size distribution.
Augmentation dataset
Last J &F
Last J
Mean J
Std J
-
68.3
65.7
65.5
0.7
DAVIS
74.4
71.6
72.0
0.4
YouTubeVos
68.7
66.1
64.6
1.0
COCO
71.6
69.3
69.5
0.5
COCO+scale track
66.5
63.9
65.1
1.1
Static
72.4
70.0
69.0
0.9
Static+scale track
70.6
68.6
66.0
2.0
All image
72.9
70.7
70.1
0.3
All datasets
73.2
70.8
70.4
0.4
From the video data, using DAVIS videos for augmentation shows an increase in J of
approximately 5.9% over using no augmentation. YouTubeVos shows much weaker re-
sults. This might be due to the lower frequency of annotations that reduces temporal
cohesion even in the case of many skipped frames between the training frames triplet of
STCN. Another factor could be the relative size of the objects in YouTubeVos, creating
large occlusions. Finally, the reason could be simply that the model needs to be trained
more. However, since YouTubeVos is used for training without any further changes in the
original STCN, no resizing is performed.
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
31
==PAGE:40==
Regarding the pseudo-video augmentation data, it can be seen in Table 5.8 that they
increase the performance under a specific condition. When generating the pseudo-video
from a given image, a video is selected in random from the DAVIS training set. An object
is selected from the first frame of that video that acts as a template, to track its motion.
Apart from the position offset, the relative scale ratio can be tracked along the frames,
as stated in section 4.3. When the scale is tracked, the performance drops significantly
in these experiments. This might be due to the template video becoming smaller in the
template frame and thus the image object not adding occlusions or background noise.
This rescaling is added on top of the random rescaling of the generated pseudo-video
frames, so the object can increase or decrease a lot in some extreme cases.
Training from scratch for 7000 epochs
In order to validate the performance results of the best models, they are repeated for 7000
epochs. The results are shown in Table 5.9.
Table 5.9: Training STCN from scratch on DAVIS for 7000 epochs, using selected
datasets for augmentation from Table 5.8. Notice the high standard deviation for the
model trained using all the image datasets for pseudo-videos augmentation.
Augmentation dataset
Last J &F
Last J
Mean J
Std J
-
70.5
68.1
67.0
1.2
DAVIS
73.3
70.3
70.1
0.8
Static
73.6
71.1
69.4
1.3
All image
73.9
71.5
68.8
5.3
Judging from the last model, using the static images dataset, results in the best perfor-
mance, an increase of 3% from the model trained without augmentation. Using DAVIS
resulting the best mean value of the IoU the last ten models, with also the lowest stan-
dard deviation. Finally, from the last case where all the image datasets are used, keeping
the last model does not always result in the best performance.
Weighted augmentations
Since using DAVIS has increased the performance substantially, it is tested whether com-
bining it with the pseudo-videos from the image datasets can further increase the perfor-
mance. In order to weigh more the use of DAVIS, it is assigned a probability of 50%. This
is also repeated by including COCO with a probability of 25%. The results after training
for 7000 epochs are presented in Table 5.10.
Table 5.10: Training STCN from scratch on DAVIS for 7000 epochs, for varying aug-
mentation dataset probabilities. In the column Dataset probabilities the datasets that
are individually weighted are shown.
Dataset probabili-
ties
Augmentation
dataset
Last J &F
Last J
Mean
J
Std J
-
-
70.5
68.1
67.0
1.2
DAVIS 50%
DAVIS+Static
73.7
71.8
70.2
1.1
DAVIS
50%,
COCO 25%
DAVIS+All image
72.6
70.1
69.9
0.8
Including DAVIS in the augmentation datasets with high probability increases the IoU
value for both the last saved model, as well as for the mean value of the last ten mod-
els. The performance drop when including COCO shows that the augmentation dataset
probabilities could be better tuned.
32
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:41==
Training from pre-trained model for 3000 epochs
Training STCN from a pre-trained model shows an increase of approximately 4% in both
J and J &F in [6]. A similar experiment is performed here. The STCN is trained on
image data from the static dataset and then trained on the datasets in Table 5.11 for 3000
epochs. The pre-trained model is provided in [64].
Table 5.11: Training STCN from scratch on DAVIS for 3000 epochs from a pre-trained
model. The pre-trained model has been trained on the image data from the static dataset
for 36 hours, denoted as stage 0.
Augmentation dataset
Last J &F
Last J
Mean J
Std J
-
78.8
75.7
75.5
0.2
DAVIS
80.1
77.3
76.8
0.3
YouTubeVos
80.3
77.3
76.7
0.7
COCO
79.7
77.0
76.7
0.7
Static
80.1
77.0
77.0
0.5
All image
79.2
76.2
76.5
0.4
All datasets
79.9
77.1
76.6
0.7
All the models are close in terms of J , however the gap from the model that was trained
without augmentations has closed. Using YouTubeVos as augmentation dataset has also
yielded good performance, compared to the results shown in Table 5.8.
5.4.4
Synthetic image data
Using synthetic data can increase the diversity from the static datasets. It is examined
whether this approach results in increased J .
As stated in section 4.4, the image generation pipeline consists of three elements: the
prompt, the text to image model and the segmentation model. The segmentation model
that is used is SAM and in order to segment the generated image, a bounding box from
an object detection model is utilised. Depending on the way the prompt is acquired, there
is a total of three or four models that are used in the generation pipeline.
Prompt generation
The input to the prompt generation is an class name for the generated image. These class
names come from the classes of COCO, and specifically those that belong to 19 classes,
in the broad categories of animals and vehicles.
Hard-coded prompt
In this case, the prompt is generated by replacing the class place-
holder in the following sentence: ”An image of a <class>.”
Use of language model for diversity in the prompts
In order to increase the diversity
of the generated images, the prompts are generated from a Large Language Model (LLM).
In this case, Mistral 7B [65] is used. In order to get an expanded prompt from an input
object class, an example needs to be set. In all of the following experiments, unless stated
otherwise, the example question and answer given to Mistral are the following:
• Example question: ”For the object class car make a single diverse caption that
describes a special case of the object.”
• Example answer: ”An image of a vintage convertible cruising down a scenic coastal
highway on a sunny day.”
During image generation the word car in the example question is replaced with the object
class name.
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
33
==PAGE:42==
Increase the input class diversity
An even more diverse set of prompts can be gener-
ated by keeping the same procedure for Mistral, but instead of using an object class, use
hyponyms from a super-class this object belongs to. To this end, a hyponyms dictionary
was used from Wordnet [66] using the library nltk [67]. The super-classes are set to:
person, vehicle and animal. A super-class is randomly selected during training and then
one of its hyponyms is also randomly selected to be used for the prompt generation.
Description of image
In order to avoid having the same view of an object in the gener-
ated image, a small description of the color, pose and visibility of the object are used as
input prompt to the LLM. During training, these variables are chosen alongside an object
class, from the 19 selected classes of COCO. Then, they are input in the LLM, whose
examples have changed to:
• Example question: ”black car, top view, partially visible. Setting is free of choice for
you.”
• Example answer: ”An image featuring a black car, partially visible from a top-down
perspective, parked on a sunlit cobblestone street surrounded by lush green trees.”
Different text to image model
The text to image models used for the experiments are Sdxl-turbo [35], denoted Sdxl from
now on, and Stable diffusion 2 [68]. The advantage of Sdxl is that it can generate images
using a few steps, rendering the model more suited for the case of online generation
during training. In the experiments, four steps are used for Sdxl, apart from once when
one step was tested.
Object detection model and Segment Anything
For segmentation, the bounding box is decided to act as prompt to SAM. This bounding
box is estimated using the model Grounding Dino [37]. Grounding Dino also requires the
class of the object to detect. The output is the bounding box used in SAM alongside the
generate image.
Calculating similarity with the objects in DAVIS
In order to quantify how suitable the generated images are, especially when dealing with
the added randomness of the language model for the prompt generation, metric is re-
quired. Using Clip embeddings and Maximum Mean Discrepancy (CMMD) [69] as a met-
ric has been shown to be a robust way to estimate distances between images in two
distributions. The first, reference distribution are the objects of DAVIS and the second
distributions are the generated images.
To calculate the CMMD metric, the images from each dataset are passed through CLIP
[42] and the embedding vector for the reference and compared datasets are generated.
These embedding vectors are compared using the method from [70] and the distance
between the image distributions are calculated.
The strength of using CMMD as metric comes from the fact that it utilizes CLIP which
has been trained on 400 million images. Moreover, CMMD can be used to estimate dis-
tances between datasets without assumptions about their distributions and can be used
to calculate the metric for smaller samples of the datasets. In this case, 30 images were
generated for the calculation of each generation method and were compared with the 67
objects from the training DAVIS dataset.
The process of comparing the reference DAVIS objects dataset with a generated sample
of images is the following. In each video in DAVIS, each object of the first frame is isolated
using its annotation, to avoid also comparing the background. The same happens to the
34
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:43==
object of every generated image, using the segmentation provided by SAM. An example
image from DAVIS that is used as reference is shown in Figure 5.11.
(a) First frame of reference video.
(b) Isolated object.
(c) Generated image.
(d) Isolated object.
Figure 5.11: Sample images used for the calculation of CMMD. Top row: frame and
isolated object from reference dataset, DAVIS. Bottom row: Generated image and isolated
object from generative pipeline. Figure 5.11a has been resized for illustrative purposes.
Resulting images
Using combinations of prompt generation methods and text to image models, with various
steps, image data are generated for the selected classes of COCO. The resulting images
for class ”person” are illustrated in Figure 5.12.
For the pipeline that uses a fixed prompt and sdxl-turbo in Figure 5.12a and Figure 5.12b,
denoted as Sdxl, one and four diffusion steps are used. The difference this has on the
result is better color and slightly increased pose variance. When the prompt is generated
using as input a randomly selected class from COCO, denoted as Sdxl Mistral, the gen-
erated images are very improved in terms of color and background context. This diversity
provided by Mistral acts like added descriptors and add linguistic categories, which are
shown to influence the image generation process [71]. When hyponyms from Wordnet
are randomly selected from one of the super-classes of COCO, in the pipeline denoted as
Sdxl Mistral Nltk the diversity of the generated images improves, which is observed from
the example images in Table 5.12. However, this diversity can lead to unpredictable and
rare object classes, that do not necessarily match the distribution of the objects in DAVIS.
When the desired color, pose and visibility are passed as input to Mistral, the generated
images show increased diversity. Finally, using more steps when using Stable Diffusion
2 as a text to image model with the same prompt does not show any visible changes in
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
35
==PAGE:44==
the generated image qualities.
The diversity of the generated images from the different pipelines can also be investigated.
This is performed by observing multiple images from each pipeline that has been created
for the same object class. This is illustrated in Table 5.12.
Sdxl 1 step
Sdxl 4 steps
Sdxl Mistral
Sdxl Mistral Nltk
Sdxl Mistral pose col
Sd2 20
Sd2 50
Table 5.12: Generated images using the same object class for the different genera-
tion pipelines. The last three rows use the same prompts for each image. Increasing the
number of steps does not lead to perceivable increase in image quality for Sd2. For the
fourth row, Sdxl Mistral hypo, the images have been handpicked for illustrative purpose.
In reality, the hyponym for the super-class vehicle can lead to images of ships, boats,
trains etc.
36
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:45==
(a) Sdxl 1 step
(b) Sdxl 4 steps
(c) Sdxl Mistral
(d) Sdxl Mistral Nltk
(e) Sdxl Mistral pose color
(f) Sd2 20 steps
(g) Sd2 50 steps
Figure 5.12: Generated images using various prompt methods and text to image
models, for the object class person. Figure 5.12a-Figure 5.12b: ”An image of a per-
son.”. Figure 5.12c: ”An image of a brilliant elderly woman with piercing blue eyes, sur-
rounded by stacks of books and a steaming cup of tea, deeply engrossed in a thoughtful
expression while sitting in her cozy home library.”. Figure 5.12d: ”A lumberjack sitting atop
a snowy mountain, clad in insulating layers and wearing a traditional checkered flannel
shirt, taking a break to enjoy a hot cup of cocoa and a hearty sandwich, while reflecting
on the beauty of the winter forest around him.”. The hyponym ”lumberman” has been
randomly selected for the class person. Figure 5.12e, Figure 5.12f and Figure 5.12g: ”A
person of color, dressed in a vibrant traditional outfit, sitting at a table in a sunlit cafe, with
a steaming cup of coffee and a book partially obscuring their face, inviting intrigue and
conversation.”. The same prompt is used in these images, but the text to image model is
different, as well as the number of steps for Sd2.
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
37
==PAGE:46==
5.4.5
Experimental results using synthetic data
The STCN model is initially trained from scratch on DAVIS and utilizing datasets of 1500
generated images, using the methods described in subsection 5.4.4. The results are
shown in Table 5.13.
Table 5.13: Training STCN on DAVIS from scratch for 3000 epochs, using generated
image data for pseudo-videos generation.
Augmentation
dataset
Last J &F
Last J
Mean
J
Std J
CMMD
-
68.3
65.7
65.5
0.7
0
Sdxl 1
67.2
64.9
65.0
1.1
1.07
Sdxl 4
69.0
66.6
65.5
0.9
1.13
Sdxl Mistral
68.0
65.5
65.1
1.6
1.03
Sdxl Mistral hypo
70.0
67.5
66.2
1.5
1.01
Sdxl Mistral pose col
70.8
68.4
64.5
3.0
0.99
Sd2 50 pose col
66.9
65.0
65.5
1.1
1.15
Sd2 20 pose col
68.0
65.5
64.8
1.0
1.25
At first glance, the CMMD metric varies only slightly between the different generation
pipelines. However, the best performing models in their category also have the lowest
distance metrics. Another note is that not all models provide an increase at the perfor-
mance compared to training without augmentation.
The two datasets that led to the best performance in the last model and mean J are
trained from scratch for 7000 epochs. Moreover, in order to validate whether having larger
variety of images in the dataset increases the performance by adding diversity in the
augmentations, the dataset with the best last model’s J is extended to 20000 images.
The results are shown in Table 5.14.
Table 5.14: Training STCN on DAVIS from scratch for 7000 epochs, using generated
image data for pseudo-videos generation. The best performing pipelines are used
from Table 5.13
Augmentation dataset
Last J &F
Last J
Mean J
Std J
-
70.5
68.1
67.0
1.2
Sdxl Mistral hypo
72.7
70.3
69.3
1.6
Sdxl Mistral pose col
73.7
71.5
69.1
1.5
Sdxl Mistral pose col 20k
72.2
69.5
69.0
1.3
It is noted that increasing the dataset size by 12 times does not lead to better performance.
It would be expected that the larger number of images would lead to more diversity in the
pasted objects. This is assumed to happen due to the limited number of class names from
COCO. However the language model provides diversity even for the same input class and
color-pose-visibility combination.
5.5
Qualitative results
In this section, some qualitative results that compare segmentation acquired using the
augmentation method of the chapter are presented.
To produce these, the STCN is
trained from scratch for 7000 epochs. When augmentation is used during training, DAVIS
was used as augmentation dataset. For inference, the default parameters used in [64]
are applied here.
38
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:47==
For the video car-roundabout of the DAVIS validation set, the segmentation results for a
sample of are illustrated in Figure 5.13.
Figure 5.13: Comparison of segmentation results after training without and with
data augmentation, with one object per frame. Row (a) shows the ground truth mask
on six frames of a video for one annotated object (red). Rows (b) and (c) show the pre-
dicted masks of STCN, after training on DAVIS without (b) and with (c) augmentation
from the DAVIS dataset. For this case, it is observed that when augmentation is used, the
segmentation performance increases consistently throughout the frames. The similar ob-
jects in the background are mistakenly segmented in a lower rate. For the not augmented
dataset, J = 82.4 and for the augmented dataset of row 3, J = 89.2.
From Figure 5.13, it can be seen that adding augmentation increases the segmentation
performance of the model. This is more prominent when similar objects to the ground
truth are shown in the background.
Another example that includes more objects is illustrated in Figure 5.14. In this case,
challenges like occlusion, objects partially leaving the frame and motion alongside the
depth axis, are present.
This video showcases occlusion, fast motion and also similar but distinct objects. Both
the augmented and not-augmented datasets models fail to segment the single dog that
is shown with the red mask. This is more prominent in the later frames of the videos.
However, the red mask annotated dog is better annotated in the case of the augmented
dataset. We attribute this to the occlusions that are introduced after augmentation.
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.14: Comparison of segmentation results after training without and with
data augmentation with multiple objects per frame. Row (a) shows the ground truth
mask on six frames of a video for 3 annotated object (green, blue, red). Rows (b) and (c)
show the predicted masks of STCN, after training on DAVIS without (second row) and with
(third row) augmentation from the DAVIS dataset. The green and red objects are distinct,
but belong to the same class, both being dogs. It is seen however that using augmentation
assisted the model in discerning between the examples. The added occlusions via the
augmentation could explain why the red object is correctly segmented while the green
object had occluded it in previous frames. For the not augmented dataset in row 2, J =
53.4 and for the augmented dataset of row 3, J = 55.6.
40
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:49==
6
Conclusion
The topic of this thesis was to investigate the performance of a Copy-paste inspired aug-
mentation scheme, applied to video data. Initial experimentation using an offline extended
version of the DAVIS dataset yielded promising results, which led to further investigation.
After running an ablation study to select hyper-parameters for the method, more rigor-
ous experiments show that using the augmentation on the video data used for training
increased the IoU of the model, with minimal computational cost. These results are at-
tributed to the fact that the added occlusions help the model learn to track the model better
through the frames, when other objects hide it for some of the frames. Also, in the case
of the videos with relatively static background, adding noise to it through moving objects
could increase the inference performance.
Using static image data to generate pseudo-videos was the next step. The idea was that
image datasets have larger diversity than that of the objects found in the much smaller
video datasets in comparison. A computationally simple pipeline was designed to gener-
ate the pseudo-videos. Experiments showed that this method yielded an increase over
the model trained without augmentation, comparable to using video data. This is possi-
bly due to the fact that the new objects, either pasted in the background or foreground,
increase the possible objects that the model is trained upon and can better make the
distinction between the target and background objects.
As a final step, in order to further increase the diversity of the new objects, synthetic
images and their segmentation are produced via a pipeline. Different modules were con-
sidered for some parts of this pipeline. The results again show the performance increase
from using these images in the augmentation process. The reasons are similar to the
case of images from existing datasets. However, in this case, more computational power
and/or storage space are required.
The result of this thesis shows that with minimal computational overhead, a simple process
can increase the segmentation performance of the STCN, when it is added to the code
during training. In the simplest case, no extra data are needed.
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
41
==PAGE:50==
7
Future work
The initial experiments using the augmentation method of chapter 4 shows promising
results, even with its current simple implementation. Various refinements or further im-
provements could further enhance the performance gains when training the STCN or other
SVOS models.
Apart from trying the method on other models, some more time could be spent on fine-
tuning the hyper-parameters of the augmentation method, or some refining on corner
cases that might appear. For example, more time could be spent on selecting the optimal
number of augmentation rounds per training video, as well as the respective probabilities
of each round. An important case is when creating pseudo-videos. If the sampled object
from the training video dataset that is used to track motion from leaves the frame, then
the same happens for the pseudo-video object. This leads to having no augmentation for
that round.
Regarding the use of synthetic data. Since it was shown that the added context from the
prompt of the language model adds diversity to the image, the next step would be to filter
the images that are generated from the diffusion model based on some criteria. One of
these criteria could be the shape of the segmented image. Since the model performs
well using DAVIS as augmentation dataset, the shape properties of the masks could yield
some insight into whether the shape actually affects the performance. If this is the case,
an algorithm to filter the generated images based on their segmentation mask could be
designed.
On a related note, another extension involves generating images similar to the objects
in DAVIS. One way to achieve this is through textual inversion [72]. Some generated
examples using textual inversion are presented in section A.2.
Another area of interest is generating synthetic videos for augmentation instead of creating
pseudo-videos from image data. This can be done by using pre-trained text-to-video
models to generate videos. Each frame of these videos can be segmented using either a
VOS model or a segmentation model for each frame, similar to how pseudo-videos were
segmented.
Additionally, the current method can be compared to the pre-training stage of STCN. In-
stead of generating triplets of transformed images using simple transformations, exploring
the motion sampling of the same image datasets using existing video dataset objects as
templates could be beneficial.
42
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Seoung Wug Oh et al. “Video Object Segmentation Using Space-Time Memory
Networks”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV). Oct. 2019.
[2]
Nino Cauli and Diego Reforgiato Recupero. “Survey on Videos Data Augmentation
for Deep Learning Models”. In: Future Internet 14.3 (2022). ISSN: 1999-5903. DOI:
10.3390/fi14030093. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/14/3/93.
[3]
Tianfei Zhou et al. A Survey on Deep Learning Technique for Video Segmentation.
2022. arXiv: 2107.01153 [cs.CV].
[4]
Charu C. Aggarwal. Neural Networks and Deep Learning - A Textbook. Springer,
2018. ISBN: 978-3-319-94462-3. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-94463-0. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-94463-0.
[5]
Golnaz Ghiasi et al. Simple Copy-Paste is a Strong Data Augmentation Method for
Instance Segmentation. 2021. arXiv: 2012.07177 [cs.CV].
[6]
Ho Kei Cheng, Yu-Wing Tai, and Chi-Keung Tang. Rethinking Space-Time Networks
with Improved Memory Coverage for Efficient Video Object Segmentation. 2021.
arXiv: 2106.05210 [cs.CV].
[7]
Chenhao Xu et al. Deep Learning Techniques for Video Instance Segmentation: A
Survey. 2023. arXiv: 2310.12393 [cs.CV].
[8]
Thanos Delatolas, Vicky Kalogeiton, and Dim P. Papadopoulos. “Learning the What
and How of Annotation in Video Object Segmentation”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV). 2024.
[9]
Ho Kei Cheng et al. Putting the Object Back into Video Object Segmentation. 2023.
arXiv: 2310.12982 [cs.CV].
[10]
Mingqi Gao et al. “Deep learning for video object segmentation: a review”. In: Ar-
tificial Intelligence Review 56.1 (Jan. 2023), pp. 457–531. ISSN: 1573-7462. DOI:
10.1007/s10462-022-10176-7. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-022-10176-7.
[11]
Ho Kei Cheng, Yu-Wing Tai, and Chi-Keung Tang. “Modular Interactive Video Object
Segmentation: Interaction-to-Mask, Propagation and Difference-Aware Fusion”. In:
CVPR. 2021.
[12]
Seonguk Seo, Joon-Young Lee, and Bohyung Han. “URVOS: Unified Referring
Video Object Segmentation Network with a Large-Scale Benchmark”. In: Computer
Vision – ECCV 2020. Ed. by Andrea Vedaldi et al. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2020, pp. 208–223. ISBN: 978-3-030-58555-6.
[13]
Ning Xu and Linjie Yang and Yuchen Fan and Jianchao Yang and Dingcheng Yue
and Yuchen Liang and Brian Price and Scott Cohen and Thomas Huang. YouTube-
VOS A Large-Scale Benchmark for Video Object Segmentation. https://youtube-
vos.org/. [Online; accessed July 20, 2024]. 2018.
[14]
Seoung Wug Oh et al. “Fast Video Object Segmentation by Reference-Guided Mask
Propagation”. In: The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion (CVPR). 2018.
[15]
Jordi Pont-Tuset et al. “The 2017 DAVIS Challenge on Video Object Segmentation”.
In: arXiv:1704.00675 (2017).
[16]
Ning Xu et al. YouTube-VOS: A Large-Scale Video Object Segmentation Bench-
mark. 2018. arXiv: 1809.03327 [cs.CV].
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
43
==PAGE:52==
[17]
Terrance DeVries and Graham W. Taylor. Improved Regularization of Convolutional
Neural Networks with Cutout. 2017. arXiv: 1708.04552 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1708.04552.
[18]
Pengguang Chen et al. GridMask Data Augmentation. 2024. arXiv: 2001 . 04086
[cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.04086.
[19]
Hongyi Zhang et al. mixup: Beyond Empirical Risk Minimization. 2018. arXiv: 1710.
09412 [cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.09412.
[20]
Sangdoo Yun et al. CutMix: Regularization Strategy to Train Strong Classifiers with
Localizable Features. 2019. arXiv: 1905.04899 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1905.04899.
[21]
Dan Hendrycks et al. AugMix: A Simple Data Processing Method to Improve Ro-
bustness and Uncertainty. 2020. arXiv: 1912.02781 [stat.ML]. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1912.02781.
[22]
Hanqing Zhao et al. X-Paste: Revisiting Scalable Copy-Paste for Instance Segmen-
tation using CLIP and StableDiffusion. 2023. arXiv: 2212.03863 [cs.CV].
[23]
Blender Online Community. Blender - a 3D modelling and rendering package. Blender
Foundation. Stichting Blender Foundation, Amsterdam, 2018. URL: http://www.
blender.org.
[24]
Angel X. Chang et al. ShapeNet: An Information-Rich 3D Model Repository. 2015.
arXiv: 1512.03012 [cs.GR]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03012.
[25]
Y.-T. Hu et al. “SAIL-VOS: Semantic Amodal Instance Level Video Object Segmen-
tation – A Synthetic Dataset and Baselines”. In: Proc. CVPR. 2019.
[26]
Y.-T. Hu and H.-S. Chen and K. Hui and J.-B. Huang and A. G. Schwing. SAIL-VOS.
https://sailvos.web.illinois.edu. [Online; accessed July 20, 2024]. 2019.
[27]
Zhenbo Xu et al. “Continuous Copy-Paste for One-stage Multi-object Tracking and
Segmentation”. In: 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV). 2021, pp. 15303–15312. DOI: 10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.01504.
[28]
Sangdoo Yun et al. VideoMix: Rethinking Data Augmentation for Video Classifica-
tion. 2020. arXiv: 2012.03457 [cs.CV].
[29]
Jun Kimata, Tomoya Nitta, and Toru Tamaki. “ObjectMix: Data Augmentation by
Copy-Pasting Objects in Videos for Action Recognition”. In: Proceedings of the 4th
ACM International Conference on Multimedia in Asia. MMAsia ’22. ACM, Dec. 2022.
DOI: 10.1145/3551626.3564941. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3551626.3564941.
[30]
Lei Hu et al. “Do We Really Need Frame-by-Frame Annotation Datasets for Ob-
ject Tracking?” In: Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Multi-
media. MM ’21. Virtual Event, China: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021,
pp. 4949–4957. ISBN: 9781450386517. DOI: 10.1145/3474085.3475365. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3474085.3475365.
[31]
Taiki Sugiura and Toru Tamaki. S3Aug: Segmentation, Sampling, and Shift for Ac-
tion Recognition. 2023. arXiv: 2310.14556 [cs.CV].
[32]
KimHojin et al. “Data Augmentation Scheme for Semi-Supervised Video Object
Segmentation”. In: Journal of Broadcast Engineering 27.1 (Jan. 2022), pp. 13–19.
[33]
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Mod-
els. 2020. arXiv: 2006.11239 [cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11239.
[34]
Robin Rombach et al. High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Mod-
els. 2021. arXiv: 2112.10752 [cs.CV].
[35]
Axel Sauer et al. Adversarial Diffusion Distillation. 2023. arXiv: 2311.17042 [cs.CV].
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.17042.
[36]
Ian J. Goodfellow et al. Generative Adversarial Networks. 2014. arXiv: 1406.2661
[stat.ML]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.2661.
44
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:53==
[37]
Shilong Liu et al. Grounding DINO: Marrying DINO with Grounded Pre-Training for
Open-Set Object Detection. 2023. arXiv: 2303.05499 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2303.05499.
[38]
Hao Zhang et al. DINO: DETR with Improved DeNoising Anchor Boxes for End-to-
End Object Detection. 2022. arXiv: 2203.03605 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2203.03605.
[39]
Hamid Rezatofighi et al. Generalized Intersection over Union: A Metric and A Loss
for Bounding Box Regression. 2019. arXiv: 1902.09630 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1902.09630.
[40]
Alexander Kirillov et al. Segment Anything. 2023. arXiv: 2304.02643 [cs.CV]. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.02643.
[41]
Alexey Dosovitskiy et al. An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image
Recognition at Scale. 2021. arXiv: 2010.11929 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2010.11929.
[42]
Alec Radford et al. Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language
Supervision. 2021. arXiv: 2103.00020 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.
00020.
[43]
P. Ochs, J. Malik, and T. Brox. “Segmentation of moving objects by long term video
analysis”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 36.6
(June 2014). Preprint, pp. 1187–1200. URL: http://lmb.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/
Publications/2014/OB14b.
[44]
P. Ochs and J. Malik and T. Brox. Freiburg-Berkeley Motion Segmentation Dataset
(FBMS-59). https://lmb.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/resources/datasets/moseg.en.html.
[Online; accessed July 20, 2024]. 2014.
[45]
Fuxin Li et al. “Video Segmentation by Tracking Many Figure-Ground Segments”.
In: 2013 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision. 2013, pp. 2192–2199.
DOI: 10.1109/ICCV.2013.273.
[46]
Li, Fuxin and Kim, Taeyoung and Humayun, Ahmad and Tsai, David and Rehg,
James M. SegTrack v2 Dataset. https://web.engr.oregonstate.edu/~lif/SegTrack2/
dataset.html. [Online; accessed July 20, 2024]. 2013.
[47]
F. Perazzi et al. “A Benchmark Dataset and Evaluation Methodology for Video Ob-
ject Segmentation”. In: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2016.
[48]
F. Perazzi and J. Pont-Tuset and B. McWilliams and L. Van Gool and M. Gross
and A. Sorkine-Hornung. DAVIS challenge. https://davischallenge.org/index.html.
[Online; accessed July 20, 2024]. 2016.
[49]
Sergi Caelles et al. “The 2018 DAVIS Challenge on Video Object Segmentation”.
In: arXiv:1803.00557 (2018).
[50]
Sergi Caelles et al. “The 2019 DAVIS Challenge on VOS: Unsupervised Multi-Object
Segmentation”. In: arXiv:1905.00737 (2019).
[51]
Ning Xu et al. YouTube-VOS: Sequence-to-Sequence Video Object Segmentation.
2018. arXiv: 1809.00461 [cs.CV].
[52]
Jiyang Qi et al. “Occluded Video Instance Segmentation: A Benchmark”. In: Inter-
national Journal of Computer Vision (2022).
[53]
Henghui Ding et al. “MOSE: A New Dataset for Video Object Segmentation in Com-
plex Scenes”. In: ICCV. 2023.
[54]
Pavel Tokmakov, Jie Li, and Adrien Gaidon. “Breaking the “Object” in Video Object
Segmentation”. In: CVPR. 2023.
[55]
Ho Kei Cheng and Alexander G. Schwing. XMem: Long-Term Video Object Seg-
mentation with an Atkinson-Shiffrin Memory Model. 2022. arXiv: 2207.07115 [cs.CV].
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.07115.
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
45
==PAGE:54==
[56]
Maksym Bekuzarov et al. XMem++: Production-level Video Segmentation From
Few Annotated Frames. 2023. arXiv: 2307.15958 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2307.15958.
[57]
Ho Kei Cheng et al. Putting the Object Back into Video Object Segmentation. 2024.
arXiv: 2310.12982 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.12982.
[58]
Xiang Li et al. “FSS-1000: A 1000-Class Dataset for Few-Shot Segmentation”. In:
CVPR (2020).
[59]
Jianping Shi et al. Hierarchical Saliency Detection on Extended CSSD. 2015. arXiv:
1408.5418 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1408.5418.
[60]
Yi Zeng et al. “Towards High-Resolution Salient Object Detection”. In: The IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). Oct. 2019.
[61]
Ho Kei Cheng et al. “CascadePSP: Toward Class-Agnostic and Very High-Resolution
Segmentation via Global and Local Refinement”. In: CVPR. 2020.
[62]
Lijun Wang et al. “Learning to Detect Salient Objects with Image-level Supervision”.
In: CVPR. 2017.
[63]
Tsung-Yi Lin et al. “Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context”. In: ECCV. Eu-
ropean Conference on Computer Vision, Sept. 2014. URL: https://www.microsoft.
com/en-us/research/publication/microsoft-coco-common-objects-in-context/.
[64]
Ho Kei Cheng and Yu-Wing Tai and Chi-Keung Tang. Rethinking Space-Time Net-
works with Improved Memory Coverage for Efficient Video Object Segmentation,
Github repository. https://github.com/hkchengrex/STCN?tab=readme- ov- file#
reproducing-the-results. [Online; accessed July 20, 2024]. 2021.
[65]
Albert Q. Jiang et al. Mistral 7B. 2023. arXiv: 2310 . 06825 [cs.CL]. URL: https :
//arxiv.org/abs/2310.06825.
[66]
Antoine Bordes et al. “Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data”.
In: Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems - Volume 2. NIPS’13. Lake Tahoe, Nevada: Curran Associates
Inc., 2013, pp. 2787–2795.
[67]
Edward Loper and Steven Bird. NLTK: The Natural Language Toolkit. 2002. arXiv:
cs/0205028 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0205028.
[68]
Robin Rombach et al. High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Mod-
els. 2021. arXiv: 2112.10752 [cs.CV].
[69]
Sadeep Jayasumana et al. Rethinking FID: Towards a Better Evaluation Metric for
Image Generation. 2024. arXiv: 2401.09603 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2401.09603.
[70]
George Wynne and Andrew B. Duncan. A Kernel Two-Sample Test for Functional
Data. 2020. arXiv: 2008.11095 [math.ST]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.11095.
[71]
Sam Witteveen and Martin Andrews. Investigating Prompt Engineering in Diffusion
Models. 2022. arXiv: 2211.15462 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.15462.
[72]
Rinon Gal et al. An Image is Worth One Word: Personalizing Text-to-Image Gener-
ation using Textual Inversion. 2022. arXiv: 2208.01618 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2208.01618.
46
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:55==
A
Appendix
A.1
Static datasets resizing
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Object relative area
0.0
0.2
DAVIS first frame
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.00
0.05
BIG
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.5
BIG_rescaled
0.0
0.5
1.0
0.00
0.05
DUTS-TR
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.0
0.5
DUTS-TR_rescaled
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
0.000
0.025
HRSOD
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.0
0.5
HRSOD_rescaled
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
0.00
0.05
ecssd
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.0
0.5
ecssd_rescaled
0.0
0.5
1.0
0.00
0.05
fss
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.0
0.5
fss_rescaled
Figure A.1: Relative object area distribution of all datasets. DAVIS is on the top. On
the right column, the static dataset distributions after rescaling based on random objects
from DAVIS are shown.
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
47
==PAGE:56==
A.2
Textual Inversion
Textual Inversion [72] is a technique that allows learning a small set of user provided
image samples and mapping it on the embedding space of a text model. In other words,
we are trying to map the provided images to a token, that can later be used in prompts
to a text to image model. We can use this method to produce images that come from the
same distribution as the objects from the desired augmentation dataset, eg. DAVIS.
To this end, we try some experiments to verify the feasibility of this method for our case.
Textual inversion needs a small set of images. These come from sampling a video from
DAVIS. For a video Vt, we select 5 frames that include the desired object and are spaced
equally between them. We tested training textual inversion using three cases of the sam-
pled frames: Use the whole frames, isolate the object using its mask from the rest of
each frame, or isolate the object using its bounding box. These case are illustrated in
Figure A.2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.2: Example of the three ways the textual inversion model is trained. Row
(a) is the full frame sampled from the dataset. Row (b) is the isolated object using its
mask. Row (c) is the object isolated using its bounding box.
Some results from training on each of the datasets in Figure A.2 are shown in Figure A.3.
The prompt used to generate these results is: ’An image of a < S >’, where < S > is the
token that has learnt to represent the set of the images.
When some further description is added to the prompt, for example: ’An image of a < S >.
Street race.’, a sample of the generated images is shown in Figure A.4.
Qualitatively, looking at the results of Figure A.3 and Figure A.4, using the full frames to
train the textual inversion model results in capturing a lot of the background. However,
when adding descriptors to the prompt, the generated objects are close to the desired
result. Using the mask-isolated object resulted in more diverse images, especially re-
garding the background. Finally, the results from using the object isolated by its bounding
box resulted in the least diverse results and are almost variations of the training samples.
48
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
==PAGE:57==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.3: Examples of generated images using textual inversion and the three
different datasets of Figure A.2. Row (a) is the full frame sampled from the dataset.
Row (b) is the isolated object using its mask. Row (c) is the object isolated using its
bounding box. The prompt is: ’An image of a < S >.’, where < S > is the learnt token.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.4: Examples of generated images using textual inversion and the three
different datasets of Figure A.2. Row (a) is the full frame sampled from the dataset.
Row (b) is the isolated object using its mask. Row (c) is the object isolated using its
bounding box. The prompt is: ’An image of a < S >. Street race.’, where < S > is the
learnt token.
Copy-Paste Data Augmentation for Video Object Segmentation
49
==PAGE:58==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/english/
