==PAGE:1==
Hardware acceleration for AI-based
noise removal in audio signals
Michela Variale
Kongens Lyngby 2024
IMM-M.Sc.-2024
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3351
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk IMM-M.Sc.-2024
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The objective of this thesis was to design and implement neural network’s archi-
tectures optimized for efficient deployment on hardware platforms, with a spe-
cific focus on neural networks for audio denoising applications. For the hardware
implementation FPGA (Field-Programmable Gate Array) were used.
In pursuit of the goal to develop a fully operational denoising neural network,
this thesis concentrated on successfully implementing a small-scale Convolu-
tional Neural Network (CNN).
The project began with the creation of a basic neural network model to establish
an understanding of fundamental principles. Building on this foundation, the
study progressed to the development of a CNN, tailored to meet the demands
of noise removal techniques. This implementation demonstrated the feasibility
of deploying CNNs on hardware platforms and provided valuable insights into
performance and efficiency.
The findings highlight the potential of hardware acceleration to enhance the
processing capabilities of neural networks. This work contributes to the ongoing
advancement of efficient neural network acceleration using FPGAs, laying a
robust groundwork for future research and development in this field.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter science of the Technical University of Denmark during my international
internship, supported by the study abroad thesis funding provided by Politecnico
di Bari, in fulfillment for the requirements of a MsC in Automation Engineering
at ’Politecnico di Bari’ in Bari, Italy. The thesis was carried out from 01-03-
24 to 31-07-24 under the supervision of Associate Professor Luca Pezzarossa,
Riccardo Miccini, Alessandro Cerioli and co-supervision of Assistant Professor
Martino De Carlo (Politecnico di Bari).
Kongens Lyngby, 31-July-2024
Michela Variale
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgments
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors, Luca Pezzarossa,
Riccardo Miccini, and Martino De Carlo, for their invaluable advice and unwa-
vering presence throughout this journey. Their guidance and support has been
crucial to the completion of this thesis.
I am also immensely grateful to the friends I have made during these few months
here. Your companionship and support have made this experience unforgettable,
and I truly hope that our friendships will endure long after this chapter of our
lives has ended.
A special thank you goes to Marco for his emotional support, even from afar.
Your encouragement has been a constant source of strength for me.
Lastly, I would like to thank my family for enabling me to embark on this
incredible journey and for always encouraging me to do my best.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgments
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Advancements in Audio Denoising Techniques . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Artificial Neuron . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.3
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.4
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Hardware Acceleration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1
FPGAs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.2
Architectural details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Related works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.1
Conv-TasNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.2
FPGA-based neural network inference accelerator . . . . .
18
2.3.3
Efficient Speech Quality Prediction with Binary Activa-
tion Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.4
Conclusion of Related Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
3
Design
21
3.1
Design Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.1
Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.2
Input Loader . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.3
Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.4
Process Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.5
Serial Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.6
Other Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Implementation
31
4.1
Neuron . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.1
First implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.1.1
Simulation and Analysis of Neuron Behavior . .
33
4.1.2
Second Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.2.1
Simulation and Analysis of Neuron Behavior . .
37
4.2
Small MLP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3
Mnist
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3.1
Generation of the VHDL configuration file using Python.
45
4.4
Convolutional Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.4.1
Generation of the VHDL configuration file using Python.
54
5
Testing and Evaluation
59
5.1
Simulation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.1.1
Small MLP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.1.2
MNIST
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.1.3
Convolutional Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.2
Performance and Resource Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.2.1
MNIST 8x8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.2.2
CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.3
Results with the FPGA Board
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6
Conclusion
73
6.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
Bibliography
77
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This chapter provides an introduction to the thesis, giving an overview of the
field to which is related, the motivation behind choosing this project, and a
summary of the thesis structure.
This thesis presents a comprehensive study on designing and implementing neu-
ral network architectures optimized for efficient deployment on hardware plat-
forms, specifically targeting audio denoising applications using Field-Programmable
Gate Arrays (FPGAs). The research begins with foundational neural network
models and advances to the development of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) tailored for noise removal. Through this work, the feasibility and ben-
efits of deploying CNNs on hardware platforms are demonstrated, showcasing
significant potential for enhancing processing capabilities via hardware accel-
eration.
The findings contribute to the field by providing insights into the
performance and efficiency of neural networks on FPGAs, establishing a robust
foundation for future advancements in neural network acceleration.
1.1
Advancements in Audio Denoising Techniques
The domain of audio de-noising has seen significant advancements, driven by the
need to enhance the quality of audio signals in various applications. Its impor-
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
tance allowed to develop numerous techniques to solve this problem. Traditional
audio denoising techniques, such as spectral subtraction and linear filtering, rely
on researchers’ understanding and modeling of noise patterns. this makes them
not adaptable to different kind of noise and enviornment changes. In contrast,
deep learning approaches like the ones depicted in [1] [2] [3] outperforms classical
techinques in known environment but require more computational complexity,
requiring more computational resources and time. This can pose limitations
in real-time applications or resource constrained devices. The development of
AI-based speech denoising technology has been rapidly advancing, and the per-
formance of everyday hardware is also improving. With progress in algorithms
and hardware, the handling of non-stationary noise in unknown environments
is expected to become more reliable. This advancement will greatly improve
the quality of human voice in scenarios such as voice calls and online streaming,
leading to a significant improvement in overall voice quality. [4]
To address the computational demands of advanced AI-based denoising meth-
ods while ensuring real-time performance, the use of FPGAs has emerged as
a promising solution. Known for their reconfigurability and parallel processing
capabilities, FPGAs provide an attractive alternative to traditional CPUs and
GPUs, especially in scenarios where power efficiency and real-time processing are
critical. The integration of neural networks with FPGA technology represents a
cutting-edge intersection of software and hardware engineering, with the aim of
harnessing the strengths of both domains to deliver efficient high-performance
solutions.
1.2
Motivation
Voice recognition systems are widely used in mobile devices, smart home en-
vironments, industrial settings, healthcare, and education, enhancing opera-
tional efficiency and enabling hands-free control. However, their performance
is often compromised by high background noise, particularly in noisy environ-
ments.
Deep learning approaches have been shown to improve audio signal
quality through effective noise filtering.
The intrisic parallelism nature of neural networks is suitable for the flexibility
and parallel processing capabilities of Field Programmable Gate Array (FP-
GAs). However, their deployment on FPGAs presents challenges due to high
computational demands and limited amount of resources.
This thesis focuses on designing and implementing Neural Network architectures
optimized for efficient FPGA deployment, specifically for noise removal in audio
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Outline
3
signal, to enhance signal clarity and reliability in practical applications.
1.3
Outline
This thesis is divided into six chapters, with each chapter focusing on specific
elements of the research and development of the proposed solution.
• Chapter 1:
Introduction introduces the field of noise removal from
audio signal, highlights the motivation behind the research, and outlines
the structure of the thesis.
• Chapter 2: Background provides a comprehensive overview of neu-
ral network fundamentals, hardware acceleration technologies, specifically
FPGAs, and a review of related works.
• Chapter 3: Design details the design framework for implementing neu-
ral network components and system specification.
• Chapter 4:
Implementation discusses the practical implementation
of neural networks, beginning with a single neuron and progressing to
convolutional neural networks.
• Chapter 5: Testing and Evaluation analyzes the performance and
resource utilization of the implemented systems through simulations and
FPGA testing.
• Chapter 6: Conclusion summarizes the key findings and contributions
of the research, and suggests directions for future work.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter offers a comprehensive overview of neural network architectures,
focusing on multi-layer perceptrons and convolutional neural networks, along
with the hardware accelerators that boost their performance. It highlights the
role of Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) as a flexible and efficient so-
lution for implementing neural network inference accelerators. Additionally, the
chapter examines related works, such as the Conv-TasNet system and resource-
efficient methods for predicting speech quality.
2.1
Neural Network
An artificial neural network (ANN), often simply referred to as a neural
network (NN), is a mathematical/computational model based on biological
neural networks. It is inspired by the simplified structure of biological neural
networks: the brain consists of a large number of highly connected elements
called neurons that contain three main components that are relevant to our
purposes:
• the dendrites that are tree-like receptive networks of nerve fibers that
carry electrical signals into the cell body;
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
• the cell body that effectively sums and thresholds these incoming signals.
• the axon which is a single long fiber that carries the signal from the cell
body out to other neurons.
The point of contact between an axon of one cell and a dendrite of another cell
is called a synapse. It is the arrangement of neurons and the strengths of the
individual synapses, determined by a complex chemical process, that establishes
the function of the neural network. [5]
2.1.1
Artificial Neuron
A perceptron, which is another name for an artificial neuron, is a MISO
(Multiple-Input-Single-Output) system. The inputs to the neuron ⟨p1, p2, . . . , pn⟩
are each weighted by {w1, w2, . . . , wn}.The core of the neuron hosts a basic
mathematical function that processes the weighted inputs, resulting in an out-
put a. This output is calculated as the weighted sum of the inputs. Additionally,
each neuron’s output includes a constant weight b (an offset), commonly referred
to as the bias.
Figure 2.1: Single-input
Figure 2.2: Multi-input
For a single-input neuron, the input variable to the function f is a variable
obtained according to the following relation:
n = w · p + b
(2.1)
Where b represents the bias, p is the actual input and w is the synaptic weight
associated with the input. The output a is given by:
a = f(n) = f(w · p + b)
(2.2)
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Neural Network
7
In the more general case of a multi-input system, there exists a vector of input
variables (and thus associated synaptic weights). The input to the function (f)
is calculated as a linear combination of the inputs plus the bias:
n =
 R
X
i=1
pi · w1i
!
+ b
(2.3)
The scaled output is given by:
a = f(n) = f(Wp + b)
(2.4)
In this case: W is a weight matrix, p is the vector of inputs, b is the bias. The
function that implements the neuron is called the activation function and is
chosen based on the application for which the neural network is intended. For
example:
• For classification or pattern recognition applications, it is advisable to
use discontinuous activation functions whose outputs belong to a discrete,
countable domain.
• For approximating continuous functions, continuous activation functions
are preferred, typically of class (C∞) (i.e., continuously differentiable).
In this thesis project, where the ultimate goal is to implement a neural net-
work for audio denoising, we employed the Heaviside function as the activation
function.
H(x) =
(
0
for x ≤0
1
for x > 0
(2.5)
An ANN is a system consisting of the interconnection of multiple artificial neu-
rons according to a well-defined topology, which defines the structure and ar-
rangement of the network. Different topologies can lead to varying capabilities
and behaviors of the network. In the following paragraphs, we will delve only
into the topologies that were actually implemented on the FPGA.
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
2.1.2
Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP)
The most common topology is known as the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP),
which consists of layers. Each layer is defined as a set of neurons that share the
same inputs this means that each layer is fully connected to the next.
Figure 2.3: Three Layer Network
In figure 2.3 there is :
• an input layer through which input data is fed into the network.
• an output layer that contains as many neurons as there are system out-
puts.
• one or more hidden layers, each potentially containing any number of
neurons.
Each layer has its own weight matrix W, its own bias vector b , a net input
vector and an output vector a.
The MLP topology is a classic feed-forward architecture, where information
flows “forward” along the network: the outputs of one layer serve as inputs
exclusively for the next layer.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Neural Network
9
2.1.3
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
A Neural Network that as at least one convolutional layer is called a Convo-
lutional Neural Network, or CNNs. They are a particular class of neural
network designed to process input using a predefined grid-like structure. Time-
series data, which is a 1-D grid with samples taken at regular intervals, and
image data, which is a 2-D grid of pixels, are two examples. The name “con-
volutional neural network” indicates that the network employs a mathematical
operation called convolution. This kind of operation in its most general form,
it is defined as the integral of the product of the two functions after one function
has been inverted across the y-axis and then shifted. By evaluating the integral
across all possible shifts, we obtain the convolution function
Figure 2.4: Example of Continous-time Convolution
s(t) =
Z
x(a)w(t −a)da
(2.6)
In general, s(t) is the result of the convolution operation, where x(a) represents
the input signal or function, and w(t −a) is the weight function or filter. This
operation is defined for any functions for which the integral in (2.6) is defined.
In convolutional network terminology, the first argument (in this example, the
function x) to the convolution is often referred to as the input, and the argument
(in this example, the function w) as the kernel.
The output is sometimes
referred to as the feature map.
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
Usually, when we work with data on a computer,time will be discretized, and
new data is provided at regular intervals. In this case, we can define the discrete
convolution:
s(t) = (x ∗w)(t) =
∞
X
a=−∞
x(a)w(t −a)
(2.7)
In machine learning applications, the input is usually a multidimensional ar-
ray of data, and the kernel is usually a multidimensional array of parameters
that are adapted by the learning algorithm. We will refer to these multidimen-
sional arrays as tensors. Because each element of the input and kernel must
be explicitly stored separately, we usually assume that these functions are zero
everywhere but in the finite set of points for which we store the values. This
means that in practice, we can implement the infinite summation as a summa-
tion over a finite number of array elements.Finally, we often use convolutions
over more than one axis at a time. For example, if we use a two-dimensional
image I as our input, we probably also want to use a two-dimensional kernel K
[6]:
S(i, j) = (I ∗K)(i, j) =
X
m
X
n
I(m, n)K(i −m, j −n)
(2.8)
Figure 2.5: Example of 2-D Convolution
Therefore, what happens in a convolutional layer is that a filter or kernel slides
all over the input, and as it moves, it performs element-wise multiplication with
the part of the image it is currently on, summing up the results into a single
output pixel in the feature map.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Neural Network
11
This process is repeated across the entire input matrix, resulting in a feature
map that highlights certain features from the input.
There are four hyperparameters that increase the complexity of a convolutional
layer:
• the depth corresponds to the number of filters we would like to use, each
learning to look for something different in the input. We will refer to a set
of neurons that are all looking at the same region of the input as a depth
column .
• the dilation involves spacing out the kernel elements, enabling the net-
work to have a wider field of view and capture more contextual information
without increasing the number of parameters.
• the stride with which we slide the filter. When the stride is 1 then we
move the filters one pixel at a time. When the stride is 2 (or uncommonly
3 or more, though this is rare in practice) then the filters jump 2 pixels at
a time as we slide them around. This will produce smaller output volumes
spatially.
• sometimes it is also convenient to pad the input volume with zeros around
the border. The size of this zero-padding is a hyperparameter. It will
allow us to control the spatial size of the output volumes, often it is used
to preserve the spatial size of the input volume.
In constructing a CNN, the architecture extends beyond the Convolutional
Layer to include several other types of layers. The Pooling Layer, for
instance, which often employs max pooling, serves to reduce the spatial
dimensions of the data, thereby lessening the computational demands.
Activation functions, such as the ReLU or sigmoid, are crucial for in-
troducing non-linearity into the network, enabling it to capture and learn
more complex patterns. These elements, along with the layers, can be
meticulously adjusted to refine the CNN’s efficacy for particular tasks.
Lastly, the Fully-Connected Layer acts as the network’s interpreter,
converting the features it has discerned into the final outcomes or classi-
fications.
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
Figure 2.6: Example of a CNN
In traditional neural network layers, each input unit is linked to each output
unit through a matrix of parameters, with individual parameters defining the
interactions. This results in every output unit being connected to every input
unit. On the other hand, convolutional networks are designed with sparse in-
teractions—achieved by using a kernel that is smaller than the input size. For
instance, in image processing, while the input image may consist of thousands or
millions of pixels, small yet significant features like edges can be identified using
kernels that cover just tens or hundreds of pixels. This approach significantly
reduces the number of parameters needed, cutting down on memory usage and
enhancing the model’s statistical efficiency. It also simplifies the computation
process, requiring fewer operations to produce the output. The efficiency gains
from this method are often substantial. For example, if there are m inputs and
n outputs, matrix multiplication would necessitate m × n parameters and the
practical algorithms would run in O(m × n) time for each example. By con-
straining the number of connections for each output to k, a sparsely connected
model needs only k × n parameters and operates in O(k × n) time.
2.1.4
Training
Training a neural network involves feeding it large amounts of data so that it
can learn to recognize patterns and make decisions. This process is iterative and
involves adjusting the weights of the network’s connections based on the accu-
racy of its predictions, a method known as backpropagation. This algorithm
uses gradient descent to enable supervised learning of artificial neural networks.
The method determines the gradient of the error function with regard to the
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Hardware Acceleration
13
weights of the artificial neural network given an error function.
The ”back-
wards” in the name refers to the fact that the gradient is calculated backwards
through the network, with the gradient of the last layer of weights calculated
first and the gradient of the first layer of weights calculated last. The gradient
for the layer before it is computed using some of the partial computations of
the gradient from that layer. However, the intricacies of training neural net-
works, which include choosing the right architecture, activation functions, and
optimization algorithms, are beyond the scope of this project. Our focus lies
elsewhere, and while understanding the training process is beneficial, it is not
our primary aim. Therefore, we will not delve into the detailed mechanics of
neural network training in this context.
2.2
Hardware Acceleration
Hardware accelerators are specialized components designed to execute tasks
using custom hardware, providing a more efficient alternative to software-based
execution. These accelerators improve power efficiency and reduce completion
time for complex operations. Integrated into modern computing systems, they
complement the main processor by taking on intricate tasks, freeing up the
central processing unit to manage other processes concurrently. This synergy
enhances the swift execution of applications, significantly improving system per-
formance.
Figure 2.7: Hardware Accelerator
The advent of AI and machine learning has particularly underscored the value
of hardware accelerators, as they provide the necessary computational power
to support complex algorithms and large-scale data processing. This has led
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
to their widespread adoption across diverse domains, from consumer electronics
to data centers and autonomous vehicles. As technology continues to evolve,
the role of hardware accelerators is expected to grow, driving innovation and
enabling new capabilities in the realm of computing.
In the context of this thesis, a Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA)
was employed to expedite the processing tasks, specifically for the implemen-
tation and execution of neural networks.
This approach was chosen due to
the FPGA’s ability to provide high-speed computation and its reconfigurabil-
ity, which is particularly advantageous for the iterative and parallel processing
demands of neural networks.
2.2.1
FPGAs
Field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) are digital integrated circuits
(ICs) that contain configurable (programmable) logic blocks along with con-
figurable interconnects between them[7].
They were designed to fill the gap
between:
• Programmable Logic Devices (PLDs) that offer a basic yet repro-
grammable solution for digital circuit design, featuring logic gates and
fixed registers, with the advantage of being cost-effective and straightfor-
ward to design despite their limited complexity of thousands of gates;
• Application Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs) that are specialized
chips that maximize various features with millions of gates customized
for high speed, low power, and radiation hardness, but they come with
cons such as a very expensive and lengthy design phase, long development
cycles, and furthermore they are notoriously difficult to design with very
limited programmability.
FPGAs have bridged the gap by offering a cost-effective, easily designable and
reprogrammable solution for complex functions. At the heart of FPGAs lies the
capability to program an integrated circuit in the field after manufacturing.
2.2.2
Architectural details
The fundamental architecture of FPGAs and Programmable Logic Devices (PLDs)
is comparable, consisting of an array of programmable logic blocks intercon-
nected by a programmable grid. These devices vary in complexity from 10,000
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Hardware Acceleration
15
to 10 million gates. It is common to categorize FPGAs’ architectures based on
their granularity since their main feature is that their underlying fabric con-
sists of large numbers of simple blocks called Configurable Logic Blocks (CLB)
embedded in a network of programmable interconnect:
• Fine-Grained: Each logic block can implement very simple functions,
such as a 3-input logic gate or a storage element. They are efficient for
systolic algorithms and traditional logic synthesis but requires many con-
nections, leading to higher interconnect delays.
• Coarse-Grained: Logic blocks contain more complex elements, like mul-
tiple 4-input LUTs, multiplexers, and flip-flops. This reduces the number
of connections needed, lowering interconnect delays and improving perfor-
mance.
Figure 2.8: Underlying fabric
The speed of an FPGA is influenced by the extensive interconnections, which
introduce delays that are challenging to predict. When discussing programming
mechanisms, we can primarily distinguish between two types of devices:
• SRAM-Based: These devices are widely used due to their reconfigura-
bility, allowing for multiple programming cycles. However, they need to be
==PAGE:26==
16
Background
reconfigured each time the system is powered up. This reconfiguration can
be achieved either through a special external memory device, which adds
cost and takes up board space, or by using an on-board microprocessor.
• Antifuse-Based: These are one-time programmable and non-volatile,
meaning they retain their configuration without power.
They are rad-
hard, making them suitable for military and aerospace applications.
The CLB can be made up of several logical elements and can primarily be
based on two distinct types in FPGAs: MUX (multiplexer) based logic blocks
and LUT (lookup table) based logic blocks.
• MUX-based logic blocks primarily use multiplexers to implement com-
binational logic, consisting of a set of MUXes that can route signals from
various inputs to a single output.
These MUXes allow for efficient se-
lection of different input signals based on control signals, making them
well-suited for tasks involving data routing, such as connecting different
inputs to a common output.
• On the other hand, LUT-based logic blocks use lookup tables to im-
plement combinational logic functions by storing precomputed truth table
values for specific logic functions (e.g., AND, OR, XOR). The LUT input
lines select the appropriate output value based on the input combination,
making LUTs versatile and capable of representing a wide range of logic
functions.
(a) MUX-based CLB
(b) LUT-based CLB
Figure 2.9: Comparison of MUX-based and LUT-based CLBs
Depending on the manufacturer, the CLB might be called a logic block (LB)
by Altera, a logic element (LE) or a logic cell (LC) by Xilinx. The number and
arrangement of components within the CLB can vary depending on the specific
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Related works
17
device.
Most modern FPGA Configurable Logic Blocks combine LUTs with
additional MUXes and Flip Flops to build more complex functions.
Figure 2.10: Higly simplified Xilinx Logic Cell (LC)
2.3
Related works
In this section, we will explore the significant advancements in speech separation
using fully convolutional neural networks, the potential of FPGA-based neural
network inference accelerators, and strategies for resource-efficient optimization.
2.3.1
Conv-TasNet
Automatic speech separation is crucial in real-world acoustic environments.
While numerous methods have been proposed to address this challenge, sev-
eral issues persist, including accuracy, latency, and computational cost. Exist-
ing approaches often rely on time–frequency representations of mixed signals,
which suffer from drawbacks such as phase-magnitude decoupling and subopti-
mal performance. In [1], Conv-TasNet—a fully convolutional time-domain audio
separation network—was introduced.
Figure 2.11: Conv-TasNet Block Diagram
==PAGE:28==
18
Background
(a) Conv-TasNet Flowchart
(b) 1-D
Convolu-
tional
Block
Design
Figure 2.12
As we can see in 2.12a we have a 1-D convolutional autoencoder that models
the waveforms and a temporal convolutional network (TCN) separation mod-
ule that estimates the masks based on the encoder output. Different colors in
the 1-D convolutional blocks in TCN denote different dilation factors. Each 1-D
Convolutional Block is designed as in 2.12b: it consists of a 1 × 1-conv operation
followed by a depthwise convolution (D- conv) operation, with nonlinear activa-
tion function and normalization added between each two convolution operations.
Two linear 1 × 1-conv blocks serve as the residual path and the skip-connection
path, respectively.
The results shown in [1] are remarkable: Conv-TasNet significantly outper-
forms previous time–frequency masking methods in separating two- and three-
speaker mixtures. It also surpasses ideal time–frequency magnitude masks in
two-speaker speech separation. Furthermore, Conv-TasNet’s smaller model size
and shorter minimum latency make it suitable for both offline and real-time
speech separation applications.
Therefore this study represents a significant
step toward practical speech separation systems for real-world speech process-
ing technologies.
2.3.2
FPGA-based neural network inference accelerator
The high computation and storage complexity of neural networks inference poses
great difficulty on its application. CPU platforms are hard to offer enough com-
putation capacity. Today GPU platforms are the first choice for neural network
process because of its high computation capacity and easy to use development
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Related works
19
frameworks. Besides CPUs and GPUs, FPGAs are becoming a platform can-
didate to achieve energy efficient neural network processing.
With a neural
network oriented hardware design, FPGAs can implement high parallelism and
make use of the properties of neural network computation to remove additional
logic. We also have to take into account that:
• Current FPGAs usually support working frequency at 100-300MHz, which
is much less than CPU and GPU. The FPGA’s logic overhead for reconfig-
urability also reduces the overall system performance. A straightforward
design on FPGA is hard to achieve high performance and high energy
efficiency.
• Implementation of neural networks on FPGAs is much harder than that
on CPUs or GPUs since there are no development framework for FPGAs.
In [8] different state-of-the-art neural network accelerator designs are compared
to evaluate the techniques introduced and estimate the achievable performance
of FPGA-based accelerator design. The evaluation result in section 6, shows
how FPGA can achieve more than 10× better speed and energy efficiency than
state-of-the-art GPU. Although progress has been made in designing neural
networks, there are still challenges. Specifically:
• Quantization: Reducing the bit-width for efficient computation is limited
by maintaining model accuracy, requiring additional algorithm research.
• Integration: Combining various techniques (both software and hardware)
for optimal performance requires further investigation.
This demonstrates that FPGA is a promising candidate for neural network ac-
celeration and is therefore worth further investigation.
2.3.3
Efficient Speech Quality Prediction with Binary Ac-
tivation Maps
As demonstrated in [1], deep learning methods can provide high-quality esti-
mates for both objective and subjective speech quality metrics. However, their
substantial computational demands often make them unsuitable for resource-
constrained devices.
To tackle this challenge, [9] explored the use of binary
activation maps (BAMs) for speech quality prediction within a convolutional
architecture based on DNSMOS (a fully convolutional neural network usually
==PAGE:30==
20
Background
used to evaluate denoising systems). The results of this research indicate that
the binary activation model, when combined with quantization-aware training,
matches the predictive performance of the baseline model. Additionally, by in-
corporating 8-bit weight quantization, this approach achieves a 25-fold reduction
in memory usage during inference, while replacing nearly all dot products with
summations making it a promising solution for resource-efficient speech quality
prediction.
2.3.4
Conclusion of Related Works
In summary, the reviewed works offer a thorough exploration of advancements
in neural network applications and their implementations. The Conv-TasNet
paper showcases notable improvements in audio separation using convolutional
time-domain techniques. The FPGA-based Neural Network Inference Acceler-
ator study highlights the significance of hardware efficiency and resource man-
agement in speeding up neural network inference. Additionally, the Resource-
efficient Speech Quality Prediction research gives us valid resource-efficient meth-
ods that ensures high-quality speech predictions.
Collectively, these studies
underscore the importance of further investigation into hardware-accelerated
neural networks, particularly in the realm of noise removal in audio signals.
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Design
In this chapter, we delve into the design of our system, focusing on its various
components and their interconnections. Our goal is to develop a robust sys-
tem that efficiently processes input data through a neural network implemented
on an FPGA board. We aim to achieve high-performance computation with
minimal latency and a streamlined data flow from input to output.
3.1
Design Overview
The system is designed to facilitate efficient data processing and computation
using an FPGA-based neural network. The key objectives of our design include:
• Efficient Data Transfer: Ensuring that input data is quickly and accu-
rately transferred from the PC to the FPGA memory.
• High-Speed Computation: Leveraging the FPGA’s parallel processing
capabilities to accelerate neural network computations.
• Clear Process Indication: Providing clear visual feedback through the
board’s LED to signal the completion of the computation and readiness
of the output.
==PAGE:32==
22
Design
• Ease of Interaction: Simplifying user interaction through an interface
that allows the user to easly interact with the board.
Figure 3.1: Architecture of the system
The Figure 3.1 illustrates the architecture of the entire system. Here is a brief
explanation of the process:
1. Data Transfer: Initially, the input data is downloaded from the PC onto
the FPGA memory. This step prepares the data for processing by the
neural network.
2. Initiation of Processing: The processing begins when the start button on
the board is pressed, sending the input data to the neural network via the
input loader register.
3. Computation and Readiness: After all data has been transmitted, the
data ready signal is activated, indicating that the neural network can
start its computation.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Components
23
4. Completion Indication: Following the required number of clock cycles,
the output data will be ready. At this point, an LED on the board will
illuminate, signaling that the computation is complete and the results are
available for upload to the PC.
By adhering to these design principles and steps, we aim to create a system that
meets our performance and usability specifications effectively.
3.2
Components
In this section, we provide a detailed description of each component that makes
up the system. These components work in tandem to ensure efficient data pro-
cessing, high-speed computation, and user-friendly interaction. The key compo-
nents include the Neural Network, Input Loader, Memory, Process Controller,
Serial Communication, and other essential supporting elements. Each compo-
nent is designed to fulfill specific roles.
3.2.1
Neural Network
Figure 3.2: Neural Network component
The neural network is structured with neurons categorized into two distinct
types. The first type includes neurons equipped with a Heaviside activation
function, which produce a binary output. This means they activate (output
1) or remain inactive (output 0) based on a predefined threshold. These neu-
rons are typically integrated into the hidden layers of the network. The second
type comprises neurons that operate without an activation function, yielding an
integer output, and are usually positioned in the network’s final layer.
==PAGE:34==
24
Design
Depending on how these neurons are connected, two different types of network
have been implemented: the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) and the Convo-
lutional Neural Network (CNN). In an MLP, the neurons are fully connected,
with each neuron in one layer linked to every neuron in the subsequent layer.
Conversely, in a CNN, neurons connect only to a specific region of the input,
determined by the kernel’s dimensions.
The process of the network is initiated when the data ready signal is set to 1, al-
lowing the input data to traverse through the first layer of neurons. The network
then commences its processing phase. The duration until the output is ready is
contingent on the input’s size, which will be elaborated upon subsequently.
3.2.2
Input Loader
Figure 3.3: Input Loader component
The input loader interfaces with the process controller to sequentially access
and thus receive inputs stored into the memory. Upon the successful aggregation
of all necessary inputs, it updates the data ready flag to a high state, indicating
readiness, and proceeds to dispatch the collected data to the network for further
processing. This streamlined process ensures that the network receives inputs
in a timely and organized manner, ready for the next stage of operations.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Components
25
3.2.3
Memory
Figure 3.4: Input Loader component
The memory in use is a Dual-Port Block RAM, featuring two write ports with
a word-size of 32 bits. The total memory capacity is determined by 2 raised to
the power of ADDR SIZE, which in our case is set to 16. The process is triggered
on the rising edge of the clock signal (clk) and manages the read and write
operations for both ports.
When the enable signal (ena) is high, the RAM
allows data to be read from the address specified by addra . Concurrently, if
the write enable signal (wea) is high, data is written to the same address. Port
B has the same behaviour.
To have a better understanding of how the finite state machines described in
the following section works, it is worth to examine the method by which inputs
and outputs are stored in memory. Beginning at the zero address, the inputs
are placed; given that each input possesses a bitwidth of 8, four such inputs are
placed on each row. Conversely, the outputs are positioned at a specified offset,
and due to their larger bitwidth of 32, a single output occupies each row.
==PAGE:36==
26
Design
Figure 3.5: How data is stored in memory
3.2.4
Process Controller
Figure 3.6: Input Loader component
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Components
27
This component is a finite state machine (FSM) that regulates the whole process:
• START: when the start db condition equals ’1’, indicating that the board
button has been pressed, the addr count next will be reset to its minimum
value of zero, and the system will proceed to the UPLOAD WAIT state. If this
condition is not fulfilled, the system will maintain its current state (START)
.
• UPLOAD WAIT: set the enable of the Port A of the memory to ’1’ and then
proceeds to the UPLOAD B0 state.
• UPLOAD B0,UPLOAD B1,UPLOAD B2,UPLOAD B3: these states manage loading
data from memory (doa mem) into the register (data in reg) while incre-
menting the address count. The memory and register are enabled during
this process. Upon reaching the UPLOAD B3 state, the FSM transitions to
the UPLOAD CHECK state.
• UPLOAD CHECK: when the address count (addr count) matches the last ad-
dress allocated to the input, the system performs two actions. Firstly, it
deactivates both the memory (ena memory) and the register (en register).
Following this, it shifts into the WAIT FOR OUTPUT state. Conversely, if the
address count does not correspond to the last assigned address it activates
the memory (ena memory) while maintaining the register (en register) in
a disabled state. Subsequently, the system transitions into the UPLOAD B0
state.
• WAIT FOR OUTPUT: waits for a certain number of clock cycles, depending
on the size of the neural network, and afterwords sets the add count to
the first address designated for the output and sets the following state to
WRITE OUTPUT.
• WRITE OUTPUT: checks whether the output has reached its final address. If
so, it transitions to the PROCESS COMPLETED state. If not, it activates the
memory and write enable signals, allowing the neural network’s output
to be stored in memory. Simultaneously, it updates both the output and
address counters, while preserving the current state.
• PROCESS COMPLETED: deactivates the memory and write enable signals and,
concurrently, it elevates the finish signal to a high state, indicating the
completion of the process.
==PAGE:38==
28
Design
3.2.5
Serial Communication
Figure 3.7: Serial Communication between the PC and the FPGA board
The components that will be briefly described in this section and the following
are designed by Luca Pezzarossa. The Controller is a finite state machine that
is designed to menage memory access from the UART (Universal Asynchronous
Receiver-Transmitter). It plays a crucial role in coordinating the read and write
operations that occur between the UART and the system’s memory. Addition-
ally an interface (serial interface) is used to download the input data from
the PC to the FPGA board and, after the process is completed, to upload the
outputs of the neural networks. In this regard, some modifications have been
made to the script because the application for which this interface was originally
used was different: it took an image in PGM format as input and provided a
PGM image as output. Since different networks with various types of input
and output data have been implemented, the decision was made to adapt the
interface. Now, it accepts a .txt file containing all the input data and, once the
output is generated, saves the results in another .txt file formatted according to
the specific application.
3.2.6
Other Components
In addition to the primary components, several supporting elements are crucial
for the overall functionality and performance of the system. These components
include the clock divider and the debounce circuit, which ensure accurate timing
and reliable input handling. Below are descriptions of these essential supporting
components:
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Components
29
(a) Clock divider compo-
nent
(b) Debounce
compo-
nent
• Clock Divider: Divides the 100MHz on-board clock and delivers as de-
fault a 50 MHz clock for use in the design.
• Debounce Since the push-buttons on the board are not debounced, this
digital circuit is needed to debounce the start signal.
==PAGE:40==
30
Design
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
Implementation
This section describes the implementation specifics of our project, beginning
with the cornerstone of neural networks: the neuron. Then, we will introduce
different level of complexity; starting with a rudimentary neural network with
the sole purpose of understanding how to interconnect neurons , progressing
to two MNIST MLP networks of varying sizes using different input size, and
culminating with a small convolutional neural network.
4.1
Neuron
Prior to delving into the specifics of its implementation, it is essential to revisit
the fundamental operations that occur within a neuron. Initially, it performs
a weighted summation, which involves multiplying each input by its respective
weight and then add them up. Following this, the cumulative sum is processed
through an activation function. In this case, due to the reasons explained in
chapter 2, a threshold activation function is used. This choice results in both
the neuron’s inputs and outputs being binary. Furthermore, the binary nature
of the inputs simplifies the process, eliminating the need for multiplications
between inputs and weights, which are signed. Instead, the presence of an input
value of 1 prompts the addition of its corresponding weight to the sum, while
an input of 0 leads to the exclusion of the weight.
==PAGE:42==
32
Implementation
4.1.1
First implementation
The most straightforward way to implement this kind of operation was to use
a for - generate loop that iterates from 0 to data width, that is the number of
input of the neuron, and generate instances of the component full mux adder.
GEN_WEIS: for i in 0 to data_width-1 generate
fa_inst: full_mux_adder
Port map (
rst => rst,
clk=>clk,
input=>inputs(i),
A=> weightsIn(i),
B =>vect_s(i),
SUM => vect_s (i+1)
);
end generate;
To map the sum through each iteration is used the signal vect s, initialized to
all zeros:
type constIntArray is ARRAY (natural range <>) of signed(5 downto 0);
signal vect_s: constIntarray (data_width downto 0):=(others
=>(others=>'0'));
,→
This component first select the weight and then adds it to the cumulative sum
that has been calculated by the preceding component in the sequence:
-- mux
if (input='1') then
Aw<=A;
elsif (input='0') then
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Neuron
33
Aw<=(others=>'0');
end if;
--adder
SUM <= Aw+B;
Then, the activation function is implemented by a simple if-statement in the
top-level entity. These statement assess whether the cumulative sum exceeds a
predefined threshold, which is zero in this instance. If the sum is greater, the
output is assigned a value of 1; otherwise, it defaults to 0.
if (vect_s(data_width)>to_signed(0,31)) then
output<='1';
else
output<='0';
end if;
4.1.1.1
Simulation and Analysis of Neuron Behavior
To evaluate the efficiency of this neuron, a series of simulations were conducted.
Initially, these simulations aimed to verify the accuracy of the neuron’s com-
puted output. Considering that we used the following weights and inputs:
• weightsIn=(-4,-4,4,15,4)
• input="11111"
We should expect a weighted sum that is the sum of all the weights (−4 −4 +
4 + 15 + 4 = 15 ) and therefore an output that is 1.
==PAGE:44==
34
Implementation
Figure 4.1: Simulation result
As we can see from the simulation result even if the sum result and the output are
correct we can observe how the vect sum signal evolves in an unpredictible way.
Subsequently, the focus shifted to observing the neuron’s response to varying
inputs from ”11111” to ”10000” after one clock period.
Figure 4.2: Simulation result
While the output may appear correct, the weighted sum calculation is actually
flawed. This discrepancy arises because not all input elements are accounted for
immediately upon input change. To ensure accuracy, it is necessary to wait for
a number of clock cycles equivalent to the number of inputs. In larger neural
networks, this delay could span hundreds of clock cycles, which is impractical.
Consequently, this particular neuron implementation is unsuitable for neural
networks due to the extensive delay in processing inputs.
4.1.2
Second Implementation
To address the aforementioned issues, a reduction tree was employed for sum-
ming operations. This method offers several advantages: it enables the parallel
processing of data, which is inherently more efficient. Specifically, it requires a
number of steps that increase logarithmically with the inputs—log2(n) for n ele-
ments—compared to the less efficient method of linearly processing each element
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Neuron
35
one by one. Consequently, this approach significantly diminishes the computa-
tional complexity involved in the task. To implement this kind of structure first
we initialize a matrix whose row are the stages of the tree and the column are
the inputs of the neuron:
signal stages: matrix (0 to natural(ceil(log2(real(data_width)))) ,0 to
data_width-1);
The initial phase of the reduction tree is initialized by assigning either the
corresponding weight value or a zero to each element, depending on the input
values. This is achieved through a loop that iterates over the entire data width.
for i in 0 to data_width-1 loop
if inputs(i)='1' then
stages(0,i)<=weights(i);
else
stages(0,i)<=(others=>'0');
end if;
end loop;
Subsequently, the reduction addition is performed with two nested loops: the
outer loop runs through the stages, while the inner loop processes the input
data for each stage.
for i in 1 to integer(ceil(log2(real(data_width)))) loop
for j in 0 to data_width-1 loop
if j mod 2**(i)=0 then
if j + 2**(i-1) <= data_width-1 then
stages(i,j) <= stages(i-1,j)+ stages(i-1,j + 2**(i-1));
else
stages(i,j) <= stages(i-1,j);
end if;
==PAGE:46==
36
Implementation
else
stages(i,j)<=(others =>'0');
end if;
end loop;
end loop;
Additionally the if-statements inside the loops first check whether j is a multiple
of 2i:
• If j is divisible by 2i, it means that j is at a position where reduction ad-
dition occurs. At this point the second if-statements check if the adjacent
element exceeds the matrix bounds:
– if the element is within bounds it computes the sum of two adjacent
elements from the previous stage
– however, if it is outside it assigns the value from the previous stage.
• Otherwise, it sets the value of stages(i,j) to zero.
The weighted sum is the fist element of the last stage of the tree:
sum <= stages(integer(ceil(log2(real(data_width)))) ,0);
At last, the binary activation function is applied to the sum and, therefore, the
output is computed:
if sum>to_signed(0,bitwidth) then
output<='1';
else
output<='0';
end if;
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Neuron
37
4.1.2.1
Simulation and Analysis of Neuron Behavior
The simulation demonstrates the neuron’s response to an initial input of ”10101”.
Following a single clock cycle, the input changes to ”11001”, showcasing the
neuron’s behavior under varying conditions.
Figure 4.3: Simulation result
As we can see in 4.3 the number of clock cycle needed to compute the output is
5:
1. the first one to assign the selected weights to the first stage of the tree;
2. the following three (= ceil(log2(data width))) to compute the weighted
sum
3. the last one to compute the output;
Furthermore, it is evident that altering the input following a single clock cycle
does not disrupt the output computation. This is attributed to the propagation
of the first input commencing prior to the switch to the second input, ensuring
that any subsequent changes do not impact the ongoing computation process.
Due to the outlined reasons, this particular neuron model was selected as the
foundation for the subsequent neural network architecture. Its robustness and
adaptability make it an ideal candidate for comprehensive neural network im-
plementation, ensuring consistency and efficiency across the entire system.
==PAGE:48==
38
Implementation
4.2
Small MLP
Now that we have the fundamental building block of neural networks, we can
proceed to connect them together to create a neural network. Our initial step
was to construct a modestly-sized, fully connected neural network characterized
by a binary input size of ten.
This foundational network is structured with a hidden layer comprising five
neurons, followed by an output layer with three neurons. The strategic approach
involves crafting a configuration file, named ’config.vhd’, which encapsulates
all pertinent details of the network, including its weights. This configuration
file serves as a template, enabling the generation of diverse neural networks
through simple modifications. Initially, the process of configuring was performed
manually. However, to streamline and automate this process, a Python script
will be subsequently employed to autonomously extract all essential data from
the network’s ONNX model.
In the initial section of the configuration file, we establish essential data types:
• an array of signed to store the weights;
• an integer array designated for holding the neuron count as well as the
input width across each layer.
This foundational setup is crucial for structuring the neural network’s architec-
ture and ensuring the correct processing of data throughout the system.
-- int Arrays with Constants
type constIntArray is ARRAY (natural range <>) of signed(5 downto 0);
type structure is ARRAY (natural range <>) of integer;
--data_width of input
for each layer
constant DATA_WIDTHS: structure (2 downto 0) := (3,5,10);
--number of neurons for each layer
constant networkStructure : structure (1 downto 0) := (3,5);
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Small MLP
39
Figure 4.4: MLP conections
As we can see in 4.4 the total number of connection is equal to the sum of
all the elements of the data widths array. Specifically, the input connection are
numbered from 0 to data widths(0)−1, the sequence that represents the output
connections for the first layer and subsequently serves as the input for the second
layer spans from data widths(0) to (data widths(0) + data widths(1)) −1 and
finally the connection related to the output of the whole neural network ranges
from data widths(0) + data widths(1) to (data widths(0) + data widths(1)) +
data widths(2)−1) . To manage these connections efficiently, an array is defined
to track and index them accordingly:
--this array is used to make the connection in the nn
constant connnectionRange : structure (3 downto 0)
:=(data_widths(0)+data_widths(1)+data_widths(2),
data_widths(0)+data_widths(1), data_widths(0), 0);
,→
,→
Subsequently, the weight array is established and systematically arranged to
==PAGE:50==
40
Implementation
ensure proper sequencing: weights associated with the first neuron in the first
layer are allocated positions ranging from 0 up to data widths(0)-1. Subse-
quently, weights for the second neuron in the first layer occupy the subsequent
range, starting from data widths(0) up to data widths(0)×2, and this pattern
continues accordingly. To efficiently navigate this array, a matrix is employed
where each entry denotes the index of the initial weight for each neuron. This
matrix is organized such that columns represent individual layers, while rows
correspond to the respective neurons within those layers.
type COORDINATES is array (0 to networkStructure(0), 0 to
network_structure'length-1) of natural;
,→
constant positions: COORDINATES:(
(0,data_widths(0)*5),
(data_widths(0),data_widths(0)*5+data_widths(1)),
(data_widths(0)*2,data_widths(0)*5+data_widths(1)*2),
(data_widths(0)*3,0),
(data_widths(0)*4,0)
);
The gathered information is utilized to construct the neural network through two
nested for - generate loop: the first, or outer, loop systematically creates each
layer of the network. Subsequently, the second, or inner, loop is responsible
for generating the individual neurons within each of these layers. The signal
connection links each neuron whithin the network. it is important to recall that
a binary activation function is used inside the neurons resulting in having both
binary inputs, this is why the signal connection is a std logic vector.
signal connection : std_logic_vector (connectionRange(3)-1 downto 0);
gen : FOR i IN 0 TO networkStructure'length - 1 GENERATE --layers
gen2: FOR j IN 0 TO networkStructure(i) - 1 GENERATE --neurons within
the Layers
,→
neuron_inst: neuron
generic map (
DATA_WIDTH => DATA_WIDTHS(i),
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Small MLP
41
startindex => positions(j,i)
)
port map (
clk
=> clk,
rst => rst,
inputs => connection(connnectionRange(i+1)-1
downto connnectionRange(i)),
output
=> connection(connnectionRange(i+1)+j)
);
END GENERATE;
END GENERATE;
For example for i=0, j=0 the first neuron of the second layer is created and we
will have:
• data width=data widths(0)=10;
• position(j,i)=position(0,0)=0;
• connection(connnectionRange(i+1)-1 downto connnectionRange(i))=
connection(connnectionRange(1)-1 downto connnectionRange(0))=
connection(data widths(0)-1 downto 0)=
connection(9 downto 0), which are the input of the first layer and, there-
fore, of the whole neural network, in fact they change with the i index;
• connection(i+1)+j=connection(1)+0=10.
Additionally for i=1, j=2 the third neuron of the second layer is created and
we will have:
• data width=data widths(1)=5;
• connection(connnectionRange(i+1)-1 downto connnectionRange(i))=
connection(connnectionRange(1)-1 downto connnectionRange(0))=
connection(data widths(0)-1 downto 0)=
connection(9 downto 0), which are the input of the second layer and,
therefore, the output of the first one;
• connection(i+1)+j=connection(2)+2=17
Upon reviewing the diagram depicting the neural network and its connections in
4.4, it becomes evident that the established connections have been meticulously
crafted.
==PAGE:52==
42
Implementation
Finally, within the process, the network’s inputs are entrusted to the designated
connections, and the same is done for the outputs.
PROCESS(clk,rst)
BEGIN
connection(connectionRange(1)-1 downto connectionRange(0) <=
inputs;
,→
if (rst = '1') then
outputs <= (others => '0');
connection(connectionRange(1)-1
downto connectionRange(0)) <= (others => '0');
elsif(rising_edge(clk)) THEN
outputs <= connection(connectionRange(3)-1 downto
connectionRange(2);
,→
end if;
END PROCESS;
4.3
Mnist
To ensure the integrity and operational efficacy of the neural network’s con-
nections for a designated task, we opted to employ an MLP tasked with digit
recognition, utilizing the MNIST dataset as a benchmark for performance eval-
uation. This approach allows us to rigorously assess the network’s architecture
and functionality in a controlled, task-specific environment.The MNIST dataset
is a renowned benchmark in the field of machine learning, comprising 60,000
small, square images rendered in grayscale, each depicting a handwritten digit
between 0 and 9. To improve upon the existing framework, we implemented
specific alterations designed to boost the neural network’s classification accu-
racy. These adjustments include transitioning from binary to grayscale input
values, incorporating biases to the neurons and altering the output to represent
the probability of an image corresponding to a particular digit, rather than a
binary outcome.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Mnist
43
The following discussion will detail how these adjustments were applied. To the
configuration file were added two types - one dedicated to the input and one for
the output:
type output is ARRAY (natural range <>) of signed(15 downto 0);
type input is ARRAY (natural range <>) of unsigned(7 downto 0);
In the top-level entity, the input undergoes binarization to transform it into a
binary format. Given that the input range spans from 0 to 255, a threshold
value is determined to be approximately 128, which is half of the maximum
value. This conversion is executed using a for loop, ensuring that the input is
suitably prepared before being introduced to the network. The rationale behind
this preprocessing step is to accommodate the network’s neurons, which are
designed to receive binary inputs.
for i in 0 to data_widths(0)-1 loop
if inputs(i)> to_unsigned (128,8) then
binary_inputs(i) <= '1';
else
binary_inputs(i) <='0';
end if;
end loop;
The biases are preserved in the configuration file, as the weights, and an array
is used to keep track of their position. Subsequently, these biases are integrated
into the neurons’ processing unit, specifically they are directly added to the final
stage of the tree in the weighted sum signal.
sum <= stages(integer(ceil(log2(real(data_width)))) ,0)+
resize(biases(biasindex+current_neuron),16);
To enable non-binary outputs, a new class of neuron, designated as neuron int,
has been developed. This neuron is distinguished by its absence of an activation
==PAGE:54==
44
Implementation
function, allowing its output to be the direct weighted sum of its inputs. Inte-
gration into the network is achieved through the use of a conditional ’generate’
statement within two nested loops. This statement ensures that if the current
layer is a hidden layer, neurons producing binary outputs are instantiated. Con-
versely, if the layer is not a hidden layer, neurons yielding non-binary outputs
are created.
bam_layer: IF i=0
GENERATE
neuron_inst: neuron
generic map (
DATA_WIDTH => DATA_WIDTHS(i),
current_neuron => j,
biasindex=>bias_index(i),
startindex => positions(j,i)
)
port map ( clk
=> clk,
rst => rst,
inputs => connection(connnectionRange(i+1)-1
downto connnectionRange(i)),
output
=> connection(connnectionRange(i+1)+j)
);
ELSIF i = 1 GENERATE
neuron_inst2: neuron_int
generic map (
DATA_WIDTH => DATA_WIDTHS(i),
current_neuron => j,
biasindex=>bias_index(i),
startindex => positions(j,i)
)
port map ( clk
=> clk,
rst => rst,
inputs => connection(connnectionRange(i+1)-1
downto connnectionRange(i)),
output
=> sum_output(j)
);
END GENERATE;
To assess the design’s scalability, two neural networks were configured with dis-
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Mnist
45
tinct input dimensions by simply altering the configuration file. The initial net-
work was set up with an 8x8 input size, while the subsequent one was expanded
to a 14x14 input size. Despite the difference in input scale, both networks main-
tained a consistent architecture, featuring 24 neurons in the hidden layer and 10
neurons in the output layer. Additionally, each network utilized 8-bit weights
and biases. Performance evaluation revealed that the smaller network achieved
a 77.1% accuracy rate, whereas the larger network demonstrated an improved
accuracy of 87.98%.
4.3.1
Generation of the VHDL configuration file using
Python.
In this section, we will explore the Python script designed to create the config-
uration file. The process begins with loading the ONNX model, followed by the
initialization of necessary variables.
# Load the ONNX model
model = onnx.load('dense_bam_8x8_trained.onnx')
# Initialize the variable
n_input=0
n_output=0
weights = {}
biases = {}
num_neur = {}
These variables are extracted from the model, including the dimensions of the
first input and output.
# Infer shapes
inferred_model = shape_inference.infer_shapes(model)
# To obtain input and output dimension
for input in inferred_model.graph.input:
==PAGE:56==
46
Implementation
print(f"The size of the input {input.name}:")
for dim in input.type.tensor_type.shape.dim:
if dim.HasField("dim_value"):
n_input=dim.dim_value
print(n_input, end=", ")
elif dim.HasField("dim_param"):
print(dim.dim_param, end=", ")
else:
print("?", end=", ")
print()
for output in inferred_model.graph.output:
print(f"The size of the output {output.name}:")
for dim in output.type.tensor_type.shape.dim:
if dim.HasField("dim_value"):
n_output=dim.dim_value
print(n_output, end=", ")
elif dim.HasField("dim_param"):
print(dim.dim_param, end=", ")
else:
print("?", end=", ")
print()
Subsequently, we separate the weights and biases, specifically the weights are
categorized into first and second layers. This stratification ensures that they
are documented in the configuration file in the proper sequence, enhancing the
clarity and maintainability of the code.
# Initialize vectors for the weights of the first and second layer
first_layer_weights = None
second_layer_weights = None
# Count the layers
layer_count = 0
for initializer in model.graph.initializer:
numpy_array = numpy_helper.to_array(initializer)
# Check if it is a weight based on the tensor size
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Convolutional Neural Network
47
if numpy_array.ndim == 2:
# weights are generally of size 2 (input x
neur_numb)
,→
layer_count += 1
if layer_count == 1:
first_layer_weights = numpy_array
elif layer_count == 2:
second_layer_weights = numpy_array
break
# break the loop after finding the weights of the
second layer
,→
elif numpy_array.ndim==1:
biases[initializer.name] = numpy_array
num_neur[initializer.name] = len(numpy_array)
# Store the number
of neurons for each layer
,→
Finally, the code opens a file named ”config.vhdl” and writes VHDL code into
it. This code delineates a package, designated as CONFIG, which encapsulates
a set of constants formatted as we have seen in the previous sections. These
constants serve as pivotal parameters that guide the neural network’s structure
and behaviour.
4.4
Convolutional Neural Network
Due to time constraint, we have decided to utilize the established architecture
of a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) as the foundation for our convolutional neu-
ral network (CNN) implementation. This decision allows us to accelerate the
development phase by building upon the MLP framework, thereby enabling us
to concentrate our efforts on modifying particular elements to support convo-
lutional functions effectively. To accomplish this objective, we initially conduct
a search for analogies within the two neural networks by employing a compact
convolutional neural network. This network is structured with three layers, each
featuring a kernel size of three. The output channels for these layers are config-
ured as 16, 8, and 4, respectively. Initially, they may appear entirely distinct,
particularly considering that the inputs have transitioned to a two-dimensional
format. Moreover, instead of having a matrix for each layer, we now utilize a
tensor characterized by the dimensions Cin × K × Cout.
To ensure the availability of at least one set of output channels or feature maps
==PAGE:58==
48
Implementation
(Lout3 = 1), it is necessary to input a specific number of channels. This number
is determined by the following criteria:
Figure 4.5: Computation of Lin
In our case we need 7 time-step to produce a single set of ouput channels.
To catch the similarities let’s deconstruct the processes occurring within the
first layer of the CNN. To compute the first set of feature maps we consider
the first input window (highlighted in green in 4.6). Upon the application of
various kernels to this window, a series of distinct feature maps is produced,
each representing different aspects of the input data.
Figure 4.6: First set of feature maps
To have a single ”column” of output in the following layer, we need at least three
sets of feature maps, where three correspond to the kernel size. Moreover to
have at least one set of output at the end of all the neural network we need five of
them, as shown in 4.5. By sliding the kernel across the input and systematically
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Convolutional Neural Network
49
applying the same operation, we generate the necessary feature maps required
for the subsequent layers of the network.
Figure 4.7: Second set of feature maps
Figure 4.8: Feature maps of the first layer
When we talk about a single input window and a single kernel, the convolution
operation involves element-wise multiplication of the input window’s values with
the kernel’s values, followed by summing the results. This process is similar to
how a neuron in an MLP weighs its input signals and then sums them. The
main distinction is that the inputs and weights for a single neuron in a CNN
are arranged in arrays rather than in a matrix form. To align a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) with an MLP’s structure,the first action is to restructure
the CNN’s multidimensional matrices into a one-dimensional array through a
process called flattening. Consequently, during the convolution operation, the
sliding window advances by an increment equal to the number of input channels,
rather than moving it by one unit.
For instance, with an input having 16
channels, the window shifts 16 units at a time.
==PAGE:60==
50
Implementation
Figure 4.9: Flattening
In an MLP, each neuron is fully connected to all inputs. Conversely, in a CNN,
a neuron is connected only to a specific region of the input, allowing for local-
ized feature detection. This distinction is further emphasized by the fact that
while neurons in the same layer of an MLP share the same input, whereas in a
CNN, the input to a layer operates as a sliding window that traverses the data,
capturing diverse features along the way.
To address this differences some modification were made both in the configura-
tion file and in the top-level entity.
In the configuration file new constants were introduced to describe the network
structure:
constant Ker: integer:=3;
constant C: structure (3 downto 0) := ( 16,4,8,16);
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Convolutional Neural Network
51
constant L: structure (3 downto 0) := ( 1, 3, 5, 7);
constant total_Nin: struttura (2 downto 0) := (
C(2)*L(2),
C(1)*L(1),
C(0)*L(0));
constant data_widths: structure (2 downto 0) := ( C(2)*ker,
C(1)*ker,
C(0)*ker);
constant connnectionRange : structure (3 downto 0) := (
total_Nin(2)+total_Nin(1)+total_Nin(0),
total_Nin(1)+total_Nin(0),
total_Nin(0),
0);
Where:
• ker is the size of the kernel;
• C is the number of channels for each layer, specifically the zero element is
the number of channels of the input
• L is the number of time-steps for each layer
• data widths is the quantity of data inputs that each neuron receives for
each layer.
• total Nin total number of input/output channels for each layer
In an enhanced storage format, the weights are organized within a matrix whose
dimensions are totalCout×maxDim. Here, totalCout represents the cumulative
sum of all the Cout values, and maxDim denotes the count of elements in the
largest kernel. This matrix structure allows each row to correspond to a distinct
kernel. To efficiently manage the association of kernels with their respective
neurons across different layers, an auxiliary array is utilized to maintain this
mapping.
constant startindex: struttura(2 downto 0):=(C(1)+C(2),C(1),0);
In the top-level architecture, a third nested loop has been introduced to imple-
ment the traversal of the input window through the dataset. This loop iterates
==PAGE:62==
52
Implementation
from 0 to (L(i −1) −2) −1, which represents the total number of shifts the
window undergoes for each layer. Additionally, a subtle modification has been
made to the connection methodology.
While connections remain within the
designated range, the input is advanced by an increment equal to the product
of the number of channels and the iteration index, expressed as C(i −1) × j
(where C(i −1) denotes the channel count of the input). A similar approach is
employed for the output, using C(i) to indicate the channel count of the output.
gen : FOR i IN 1 TO C'length - 1 GENERATE --layers
gen2: FOR j IN 0 TO (L(i-1)-2) - 1 GENERATE --moves the input window
gen3: FOR k IN 0 TO C(i) - 1 GENERATE --changes the kernel
bam_layer: IF i< 3 GENERATE
neuron_inst: entity work.neuron
generic map (
DATA_WIDTH => DATA_WIDTHS(i-1),
current_kernel => k,
biasindex=>
biasindex(i-1),
startindex => startindex(i-1)
)
port map (
clk
=> clk,
rst => rst,
inputs => connection(connnectionRange(i-1)
+data_widths(i-1)+C(i-1)*j-1 downto
connnectionRange(i-1)+C(i-1)*j),
,→
output
=> connection(connnectionRange(i)
+C(i)*j+k)
);
ELSIF i = 3 GENERATE
neuron_inst2: entity work.neuron_int
generic map (
DATA_WIDTH => DATA_WIDTHS(i-1),
current_kernel => k,
biasindex=>biasindex(i-1),
startindex => startindex(i-1)
)
port map (
clk
=> clk,
rst => rst,
inputs => connection(connnectionRange(i-1)
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Convolutional Neural Network
53
+data_widths(i-1)+C(i-1)*j-1 downto
connnectionRange(i-1)+C(i-1)*j),
,→
output
=> sum_output(k)
);
END GENERATE;
END GENERATE;
END GENERATE;
END GENERATE;
The final aim of this thesis project was to implement a denoising neural net-
work, where biases are added to the input layer to adjust the threshold. This
is why, in this smaller implementation, biases are also added—to ensure that
the structure of this small network mimics the final one through the generation
of the configuration package. Accordingly, we will integrate this process into
our smaller convolutional neural network. The addition of biases will be exe-
cuted through a dual for-loop structure, ensuring that each column receives the
necessary adjustments.
-- add the bias to the input + applies trhreshold
for j in 0 to L(0)-1 loop
for i in 0 to C(0)-1 loop
biased_input(C(0)*j+i)<=RESIZE(inputs(C(0)*j+i),16)+
RESIZE(biases(C(0)-1-i),16);
if biased_input(C(0)*j+i)>to_signed(0,16) then
binary_input(C(0)*j+i)<='1';
else
binary_input(C(0)*j+i)<='0';
end if;
end loop;
end loop;
==PAGE:64==
54
Implementation
4.4.1
Generation of the VHDL configuration file using
Python.
Due to the modifications in the network’s architecture, the variables derived
from the ONNX model have also undergone changes. Consequently, the specific
variables that are now required include:
# Load the ONNX model
model = onnx.load('conv1d_16_8_4.onnx')
# Initialize variables to store outputs count for each Conv layer
Cout1, Cout2, Cout3 = 0, 0, 0
# Initialize variable to store input size
Cin = 0
bias_array=[]
weights_list=[]
Afterward the script iterates through the computational graph of a model. It
commences by enumerating each node within the model’s graph structure, ap-
plying conditional logic to identify nodes of type ’Add’ that correspond to the
first layer of the network. Upon locating such a node, the script retrieves the
associated bias tensor, assuming it is the second input to the ’Add’ operation.
The biases are then converted from their tensor representation into a numerical
array and appended to a list for subsequent use, with the count of biases being
recorded, since it is equal to the numbers of input channels(Cin).
# Iterate over each node in the graph
for i, node in enumerate(model.graph.node):
if node.op_type == 'Add' and node.name ==
'/first_layer/first_layer.0/Add':
,→
# Get the bias tensor (assuming it is the second input of Add)
bias_tensor_name = node.input[1]
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Convolutional Neural Network
55
bias_tensor = next((tensor for tensor in model.graph.initializer
if tensor.name == bias_tensor_name), None)
,→
if bias_tensor:
biases = numpy_helper.to_array(bias_tensor)
print(f"Biases for Add layer: {biases}")
bias_array.append(biases)
Cin=len(biases)
The script further distinguishes nodes of type ’Conv’, indicative of convolutional
layers, to extract weight tensors, again assuming these are the second input to
the ’Conv’ operation. The weights are similarly converted and printed, with
the additional step of determining the output channel size (Cout) based on the
layer’s position within the network hierarchy. The script also accounts for the
potential presence of a bias tensor as the third input to the ’Conv’ operation,
processing it in the same manner as described for the ’Add’ nodes.
elif node.op_type == 'Conv':
# Get the weight tensor
weight_tensor_name = node.input[1]
# Assuming weights are the
second input of Conv
,→
weight_tensor = next((tensor for tensor in model.graph.initializer
if tensor.name == weight_tensor_name), None)
,→
if weight_tensor:
weights = numpy_helper.to_array(weight_tensor)
print(f"Weights for Conv layer {node.name}: {weights}")
# Get Cout from the weights shape
if '/layers/layers.0/Conv' in node.name:
Cout1 = weights.shape[0]
elif '/layers/layers.2/Conv' in node.name:
Cout2 = weights.shape[0]
elif '/layers/layers.4/Conv' in node.name:
Cout3 = weights.shape[0]
# Get bias tensor if it exists (assuming it is the third input of
Conv)
,→
if len(node.input) > 2:
==PAGE:66==
56
Implementation
bias_tensor_name = node.input[2]
bias_tensor = next((tensor for tensor in
model.graph.initializer if tensor.name ==
bias_tensor_name), None)
,→
,→
if bias_tensor:
biases = numpy_helper.to_array(bias_tensor)
print(f"Biases for Conv layer {node.name}: {biases}")
bias_array.append(biases)
Since in the configuration file the weights are in a matrix of size totalCout ×
maxCout with each row representing a kernel, we begin by computing these key
dimensions as follows.
# Determine the maximum number of outputs (Cout) among all layers
maxCout = max(len(weights_list[i]) for i in range(len(weights_list)))
print(maxCout)
# Calculate total number of outputs from all layers
total_Cout = Cout1+Cout2+Cout3
print(total_Cout)
Subsequently, we generate a matrix initialized to zero and methodically populate
it with the kernels.
# Create a matrix with zeros
weight_matrix = np.zeros((total_Cout, maxCout))
# Fill the matrix with weights
for i, kernel_weights in enumerate(weights_list):
weight_matrix[i, :len(kernel_weights)] = kernel_weights
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Convolutional Neural Network
57
Finally, the configuration package is created incorporating all the variables de-
rived from the ONNX model.
==PAGE:68==
58
Implementation
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5
Testing and Evaluation
This chapter presents the outcomes of the neural network implementations de-
tailed in Chapter 4. It is structured into three main sections: the first section
analyzes the simulation outcomes; the second section examines hardware uti-
lization and the maximum clock frequency; and the third section discusses the
results achieved by the FPGA board.
5.1
Simulation Results
5.1.1
Small MLP
In the initial implementation of our neural network, we lacked a dataset to
validate the simulation results. However, due to the network’s minimal size, we
were able to calculate the outputs directly through matrix multiplication across
various input combinations. This approach allowed us to bypass the need for a
large dataset and still obtain the necessary computational outcomes to proceed
with our analysis. In the initial layer of the neural network, the input vector:
==PAGE:70==
60
Testing and Evaluation
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
is multiplied by the weight matrix:


−6
−4
−10
0
7
7
−12
0
7
2
−5
−9
0
12
8
−13
−5
−9
0
13
2
4
16
9
−3
−10
−3
−14
−18
2
10
1
−6
2
−7
7
29
6
22
2
1
−11
−6
2
0
−23
−16
−15
10
−3


resulting in the output vector:
−4
1
−23
25
20
After applying a binary activation function, the output is transformed into:
0
1
0
1
1
This output vector is then used as the input for the next layer, where it is mul-
tiplied by another weight matrix to compute the neural network’s final output.
The calculation proceeds as follows:
0
1
0
1
1


6
22
−4
17
−13
−4
−6
−7
4
3
1
15
10
0
4


=
30
−12
15
The final output vector, after applying the binary activation function, is:
1
0
1
Similarly, when the input vector:

1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
1

is processed through the same network layers, the resulting output is:
1
1
1
==PAGE:71==
5.1 Simulation Results
61
The inputs used are identical to those in the testbench simulations, allowing for a
direct comparison of the neural network’s performance during testing. Initially,
only the first input vector is applied, followed by a sequential application of the
second input vector to evaluate the network’s dynamic behavior in response to
changing inputs.
Figure 5.1: Simulation results of the small MLP
In the provided figure, we can observe that the output is computed correctly.
The computational time is 12 clock cycles, calculated as follows:
2 + ⌈log2(data widths[0])⌉+ 2 + ⌈log2(data widths[1])⌉+ 1
(5.1)
The first two terms account for the propagation of the input inside the neuron,
as the neurons in a layer operate in parallel. The final term represents the time
taken for the output to propagate from the signal connection to the output of
the neural network.
We then conducted another simulation where the input was changed after one
clock cycle:
Figure 5.2: Simulation result of the small MLP when the input changes after
one clock cycle
In Figure 5.2, we can observe that, under these circumstances, the computation
==PAGE:72==
62
Testing and Evaluation
of the outputs for both inputs remains intact. Furthermore, the new output is
generated and available after just one additional clock cycle, demonstrating the
network’s capability to quickly adapt and provide updated outputs efficiently.
5.1.2
MNIST
For our simulation, we downscaled the original 28x28 pixel images first to an 8x8
pixel format and then to a 14x14 pixel format, reducing the input size to make
it more manageable for FPGA implementation. The following images showcase
the samples used in the simulation, where each digit is annotated with its true
label and the corresponding prediction made by the software-compiled neural
network.
Figure 5.3: Samples for the 8x8 MNIST
Figure 5.4: Samples for the 14x14 MNIST
For this simulation, the first sample from 5.3 was utilized. Consequently, we
anticipate that the largest output will correspond to the seventh output, in line
with our expectations.
Figure 5.5: Simulation results for the MNIST 8x8
==PAGE:73==
5.1 Simulation Results
63
Additionally, the number of clock cycles aligns with the value shown in 5.1. The
only variation is that an extra clock cycle is required due to the need to binarize
the input.
For the MNIST 14x14 simulation, we use the fifth sample from those depicted
in 5.4. Accordingly, we expect the fourth output to be the largest.
Figure 5.6: Simulation results for the MNIST 14x14
These results validate our expectations and demonstrate that the analytical ap-
proach applied to the MNIST 8x8 dataset is equally applicable to the MNIST
14x14 dataset. The primary difference lies in the input width, yet the consis-
tency of the outcomes across different resolutions underscores the robustness
and adaptability of our methodology.
5.1.3
Convolutional Neural Network
The simulation results of the convolutional neural network (CNN) served as a
foundational exercise to understand the implementation mechanics rather than
deriving meaningful insights from a real dataset. Since the focus was on grasping
the CNN framework, no actual dataset was employed. Instead, the outcomes
were juxtaposed with the software compilation of the neural network, which
processed random inputs. This approach allowed for an examination of the net-
work’s behavior and functionality in a controlled, albeit artificial, environment.
By comparing the simulation results to the expected behavior from the ran-
dom inputs, it was possible to validate the correct implementation of the CNN
without the need for genuine data.
The ”sample” chosen for the simulation in software produced the following out-
put:
==PAGE:74==
64
Testing and Evaluation


7
218
247
−298
101
141
−292
160
−99
−415
−83
−65
223
−247
125
−48


From the simulation result in Figure 5.7, we can observe that the output is cor-
rectly computed. Additionally, the computational time adheres to the formula
5.1, with an added layer resulting in a total of 21 clock cycles. Notably, all
neurons within the same layer are computed in parallel, similar to how it occurs
in MLP networks.
Figure 5.7: Simulation results for the CNN
This demonstrates that the implementation of the convolutional neural network
was successfull by validating its behavior against expected outcomes from ran-
dom inputs. This foundational understanding sets the stage for future experi-
ments with real datasets specifically those aimed at audio denoising, once scaling
up is complete. The groundwork laid by this exercise ensures that subsequent
work with real data will build on a robust and thoroughly tested implementa-
tion.
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Performance and Resource Analysis
65
5.2
Performance and Resource Analysis
Before delving into the synthesis and implementation analysis using Vivado, it is
important to note that the neural networks were integrated into the architecture
described in Chapter 3. Given the constraints of our hardware platform, only
the smaller neural networks—specifically the MNIST 8x8 and the CNN—were
actually deployed onto the board. We utilized the Nexys 7 development board,
a versatile FPGA platform featuring the Xilinx Artix-7 FPGA.
The Nexys 7 board is equipped with the Xilinx Artix-7 XC7A35T-1CPG236C
FPGA, which offers a balance of performance and resource availability suit-
able for educational purposes and small to medium-scale FPGA projects. Key
hardware specifications of the Nexys 7 board include [10]:
• FPGA Device: Xilinx Artix-7 XC7A35T-1CPG236C
– Logic Cells: 33,280
– Look-Up Tables (LUTs): 8,320
– Flip-Flops: 66,560
– Block RAM (BRAM): 1.8 Mb
– DSP Slices: 80
• I/O Options: The board includes various I/O interfaces such as:
– VGA Output: For video display applications
– Audio Codec: For audio input and output
– USB-UART Bridge: For serial communication
– Push Buttons, Switches, and LEDs
• Memory:
– External DDR3 SDRAM: 128 MB
– On-board SRAM: 256 KB
• Clock Resources:
– On-board Oscillators: Typically provides a 100 MHz clock signal
– Clock Management: Includes PLLs and MMCMs for clock generation
and management
==PAGE:76==
66
Testing and Evaluation
Figure 5.8: Nexys A7 FPGA board
Given these specifications, the Nexys 7 board is well suited for deploying smaller
neural network models like MNIST 8x8 and CNN. The resource limitations of
the board made it necessary to select these smaller models to ensure efficient
deployment and evaluation.
In the following sections, we will discuss the maximum clock frequency achieved
and the hardware utilization metrics for these neural networks. This analysis
will provide insights into the efficiency and performance of our FPGA imple-
mentation.
==PAGE:77==
5.2 Performance and Resource Analysis
67
5.2.1
MNIST 8x8
The resource utilization and timing report generated by Vivado after running
Synthesis and Implementation provides insights into how the design utilizes the
FPGA’s resources and meets timing constraints. These reports are essential for
optimizing the design to ensure it fits within the device’s resource limits and
operates correctly at the desired clock rates.
The utilization report reveals how the design effectively utilizes the FPGA re-
sources to implement the operations of the neural network, handle input data
from memory, and manage data transfer from a PC via a serial port.
Figure 5.9: Utilization Report for the MNIST 8x8
The Vivado timing report does not explicitly state the maximum frequency
at which the design can operate. However, this can be easily calculated.First
we need to identify the Worst Negative Slack (WNS) from the report, which
represents the amount of time by which the slowest path in the design fails to
meet the required timing. In our case it is WNS = 6.005ns and the clock period
is T = 10ns, the maximum frequency is given by:
fmax[MHz] =
1000
T −WNS =
1000
10 −6.005 ≈250.31MHz
Moreover, the Total Negative Slack (TNS) is the sum of the worst negative slack
values across all timing paths. It is a critical metric in design timing analysis,
as it indicates the severity of timing violations. A negative TNS value signifies
that there are timing violations within the design, whereas a TNS of zero implies
that the design meets all timing constraints. In this instance TNS = 0 meaning
==PAGE:78==
68
Testing and Evaluation
that the design is free of timing violations, ensuring that it operates within the
specified timing requirements.
5.2.2
CNN
The implementation of the new neural network design on the Nexys A7 board
exhibits proficient use of FPGA resources. The low I/O resource consumption
underscores the design’s efficient data transfer methodology via a serial port
from a PC.
Figure 5.10: Utilization Report for the CNN
The timing evaluation indicates that the design can function at a maximum
frequency of around ≈198.81 MHz, calculated from a Worst Negative Slack
(WNS) of 4.970 ns and a clock period of 10 ns. Additionally, the Total Negative
Slack (TNS) of zero signifies that the design adheres to all timing requirements,
ensuring dependable performance within the set parameters.
These findings
ensure that our design operates within the device’s resource constraints while
meeting the desired performance metrics.
==PAGE:79==
5.3 Results with the FPGA Board
69
5.3
Results with the FPGA Board
Having confirmed that our design is appropriately sized for the board and satis-
fies the timing constraints, we are now ready to proceed with uploading it onto
the FPGA board. This step marks a significant milestone in our project, as it
transitions from the design phase to actual implementation.
The samples utilized for testing the two networks onboard are identical to those
used in simulations. This ensures consistency in the evaluation process, allowing
for accurate comparisons between live data and simulated predictions.
The procedure for operating both neural networks is identical. Initially, text
files are generated from the samples, which are referred to as ”input.txt”. Sub-
sequently, these files are transferred onto the board via the serial interface.
Figure 5.11: Serial interface for communication with the FPGA Board
After the completion of the download phase, the next step is to initiate the net-
work computation by pressing the designated start button. Upon the conclusion
of this computation, a LED will illuminate instantly to signal that the output
is ready. The final step involves uploading the output to the PC, where it can
be displayed.
==PAGE:80==
70
Testing and Evaluation
Figure 5.12: Output for the MNIST 8x8
Figure 5.13: Output for the CNN
Upon comparing Figure 5.12 with Figure 5.5, and Figure 5.13 with Figure 5.7,
it becomes evident that the outcomes from the FPGA board are consistent
with those from the simulations in both instances. This consistency between
simulation and real-world results not only validates our design but also highlights
the reliability and precision of our approach.
Our experiments with MNIST networks have convincingly demonstrated the
scalability and robustness of our approach. The successful application of our
methods in these initial trials provides strong evidence that the underlying prin-
ciples are sound and effective. Encouraged by these results, we extended our
approach by implementing a small convolutional neural network using the same
==PAGE:81==
5.3 Results with the FPGA Board
71
structure as the MNIST networks. This successful implementation further con-
firms the scalability of our techniques and sets the stage for their application
to more complex convolutional neural networks. This progress not only vali-
dates the direction of our project but also lays a solid foundation for developing
an effective denoising neural network. Our work paves the way for real-world
implementations, ensuring that our research can have practical and impactful
applications.
==PAGE:82==
72
Testing and Evaluation
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This chapter concludes the thesis with a summary of the steps we followed
during the project development and the results we obtained, highlighting the
key findings, implications, and future directions for our work.
6.1
Summary
While aiming to develop a fully operational denoising neural network, this thesis
primarily focused on the successful implementation of a small-scale Convolu-
tional Neural Network. Nevertheless, this thesis has successfully demonstrated
the design, implementation, and evaluation of neural networks on FPGA hard-
ware. Through detailed simulations, performance analysis, and real-world test-
ing, we have validated the robustness, scalability, and practical applicability of
our approach. The consistent results across different network types and input
resolutions underscore the reliability of our methodology, providing a strong
foundation for future enhancements and real-world implementations.
As we
move forward, the insights gained from this work will guide the development
of more complex neural networks and their application to a wide range of real-
world problems, ultimately contributing to the advancement of efficient and
practical neural network solutions on FPGA platforms.
==PAGE:84==
74
Conclusion
The step that we followed during the thesis project development and the results
that we obtained are:
1. We have gained an understanding of neural network operations, FPGA
architecture, AI-based denoising methods, and model compression tech-
niques.
2. We designed an architecture that enables efficient data processing through
FPGA-based neural networks.
3. We first implemented a single neuron to determine the most efficient im-
plementation method, followed by a small MLP to understand neuron
connections, scaling up to two MLP for the MNIST dataset with different
input size to assess design scalability, and finally, a small convolutional
neural network incorporating some of the characteristics of a denoising
neural network.
4. We run simulation on vivado to test the networks we implemented on a
logical-functional level
5. Using Vivado’s synthesis and implementation tools, we analyzed the hard-
ware utilization and maximum clock frequencies of our neural networks to
see that both neural networks (MNIST 8x8 and the small CNN) utilized
the Nexys A7 resources proficently and met all the timing constraint.
6. Finally, by deploying the MNIST 8x8 and CNN networks onto the FPGA
board, we validated the practical implementation of our designs.
6.2
Future work
The foundational work laid by this thesis provides a solid platform for future en-
hancements, particularly in extending our methodology to more complex neural
networks and real-world applications such as audio denoising.
• AI-based noise removal
The consistent results obtained across different input resolutions and net-
work types affirm the scalability of our approach. It can be build upon this
foundation to develop denoising neural networks, leveraging the FPGA’s
parallel processing capabilities for efficient computation.
• Real-time computation
Applications requiring audio denoising, such as speech enhancement and
==PAGE:85==
6.2 Future work
75
environmental noise reduction, often demand real-time computation. There-
fore, optimizing FPGA-based neural networks for real-time performance
is crucial.
• Advanced Neural Network Architectures
Implementing additional layers, such as zero-padding and max pooling,
can broaden the range of applications for FPGA-based neural networks.
These enhancements will enable more complex and capable neural network
architectures.
• Optimization Techniques
Investigating various optimization techniques to further reduce resource
utilization and increase the efficiency of FPGA implementations. Tech-
niques like quantization, pruning, and hardware-aware neural architecture
search can significantly enhance performance.
• Cross-Platforms comparison with other
Comparing the performance of FPGA-based neural networks with other
hardware platforms, such as GPUs, to identify the strengths and weak-
nesses of each approach. This comparison will provide insights into the
most suitable platforms for specific applications and performance require-
ments.
==PAGE:86==
76
Conclusion
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1] Yi Luo and Nima Mesgarani. Conv-tasnet: Surpassing ideal time–frequency
magnitude masking for speech separation. IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 27(8):1256–1266, 2019.
[2] Andreas Jansson, Eric Humphrey, Nicola Montecchio, Rachel Bittner,
Aparna Kumar, and Tillman Weyde. Singing voice separation with deep
u-net convolutional networks. 2017.
[3] Yusuf Isik, Jonathan Le Roux, Zhuo Chen, Shinji Watanabe, and John R.
Hershey.
Single-channel multi-speaker separation using deep clustering,
2016.
[4] Ke Tang. Comparative analysis of voice denoising using machine learning
and traditional denoising. Applied and Computational Engineering, 30:118–
124, 01 2024.
[5] M.T. Hagan, H.B. Demuth, M.H. Beale, and O. De Jes´us. Neural Network
Design. Martin Hagan, 2014.
[6] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT
Press, 2016. http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[7] Clive &ldMax&rd Maxfield.
Chapter 1 - introduction.
In Clive &ld-
Max&rd Maxfield, editor, The Design Warrior’s Guide to FPGAs, pages
1–8. Newnes, Burlington, 2004.
[8] Kaiyuan Guo, Shulin Zeng, Jincheng Yu, Yu Wang, and Huazhong Yang. A
survey of FPGA based neural network accelerator. CoRR, abs/1712.08934,
2017.
==PAGE:88==
78
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] Mattias Nilsson, Riccardo Miccini, Cl´ement Laroche, Tobias Piechowiak,
and Friedemann Zenke.
Resource-efficient speech quality prediction
through quantization aware training and binary activation maps, 2024.
[10] Digilent Inc. Nexys a7 reference guide. https://digilent.com/reference/
programmable-logic/nexys-a7/start, 2024. Accessed: 2024-07-25.
