==PAGE:1==
REST API Security Testing within the IEC
62443-4-1 Standard
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
Master Thesis
August, 2024
By
Alina Kostetska
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
REST APIs are widely used by web applications and industrial automation and control
systems (IACS), but their exposure to the internet makes them prime targets for attackers.
Security testing is crucial to ensure the safety of REST APIs, and Practice 5 of the IEC
62443-4-1 standard provides guidelines for the security testing of products.
This thesis addresses the challenge of designing and implementing a test framework fo-
cused on the security testing of REST APIs while providing evidence of compliance with
the standard. It includes a mechanism for mapping test cases to IEC 62443-4-1 require-
ments, facilitating compliance with Practice 5, as well as an extensive list of REST API
security properties defined and categorized based on REST principles.
The thesis advances the automation of REST API security testing in industrial settings and
establishes a robust foundation for integrating additional tools and refining test cases.
ii
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I am deeply grateful to my Aalto supervisor, Dr. Lachlan J. Gunn, for his invaluable guid-
ance and constructive feedback throughout this thesis. I am also grateful to my DTU
supervisor, Prof. Nicola Dragoni, for advising me on the content and requirements spe-
cific to DTU.
I also want to thank my advisor from Vaisala, Jari Rasinen, for guiding my thesis and
connecting it to the industry. I appreciate Vaisala for giving me this opportunity. Special
thanks to Harri Susi, Ngoc Tiep Nhu Nguyen, and other colleagues for their support and
encouragement.
I want to thank the SECCLO consortium for providing me with this opportunity, which has
allowed me to advance my professional career and build lifelong connections.
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Symbols and abbreviations
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
REST APIs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Software security testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
REST API security testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Industrial automation and control systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.1
Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.2
IEC 62443 series of standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Problem statement
11
3.1
Adversary model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.2
Test framework objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.3
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Design
13
4.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Step 0: Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2.1
Defining standard requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2.2
Defining security requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2.3
Defining a threat model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Step 1: Configuration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.4
Step 2: Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.5
Step 3: Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5
Implementation
21
5.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
Configuration file . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3
Test cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.3.1
Schemathesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.3.2
Zed Attack Proxy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.3.3
RESTler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.4
IEC 62443-4-1 coverage analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6
Evaluation
29
6.1
Target for evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.2
Traceability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.3
Usability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.4
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.5
Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.5.1
Current IEC 62443-4-1 coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.5.2
Vulnerability coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
7
Discussion
33
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
v
==PAGE:8==
8
Related work
35
8.1
REST API security properties and automation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
8.2
Mapping of requirements to test cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
9
Conclusion
39
Bibliography
41
A JSON dictionary of IEC 62443-4-1 requirements
45
B Python script to map test results to requirements
48
C HTML template for mapping
51
D Contents of conftest.py for registering requirement markers for testcases
53
vi
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:9==
Symbols and abbreviations
General Abbreviations
ACM
Association for Computing Machinery. 35
API
Application Programming Interface. 1–4, 6–9, 11–18, 21, 23–30, 32, 33,
35, 36, 39
CORS
Cross-Origin Resource Sharing. 16
CRUD
Create, Read, Update, and Delete. 3
CSRF
Cross-Site Request Forgery. 16, 21
DAST
Dynamic Application Security Testing. 5, 7, 8, 11
DoS
Denial of Service. 32
GraphQL
Graph Query Language. 3
HMI
Human-Machine Interfaces. 8
HTML
HyperText Markup Language. 3, 28
HTTP
Hypertext Transfer Protocol. 3, 7, 14, 17, 23, 32
IACS
Industrial Automation and Control Systems. 1, 8
IAST
Interactive Application Security Testing. 5, 8
IEEE
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. 35
IP
Internet Protocol. 18, 21
JSON
JavaScript Object Notation. 3, 4, 21, 27–29
JWT
JSON Web Token. 32
REST
Representational State Transfer. 1–4, 8, 11–17, 24, 25, 27, 28, 33, 35, 36,
39
RPC
Remote Procedure Call. 3
SAST
Static Application Security Testing. 5, 8
SDLC
Software Development Life Cycle. 4, 6
SOAP
Simple Object Access Protocol. 3
SQL
Structured Query Language. 12, 15, 24, 30, 35
SSH
Secure Shell. 17
SUT
System Under Test. 11, 17, 21, 25, 26, 39
TLS
Transport Layer Security. 9, 21
URI
Uniform Resource Identifier. 3
URL
Uniform Resource Locator. 4, 16
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
vii
==PAGE:10==
XML
Extensible Markup Language. 27, 28
XSS
Cross-Site Scripting. 12, 24, 30, 35
YAML
YAML Ain’t Markup Language. 4, 21
ZAP
Zed Attack Proxy. 23–25, 30, 33, 39
IEC 62443-4-1 Specific Abbreviations
PT
Penetration testing in the context of IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5. 9, 10, 15
SRT
Security requirements testing in the context of IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5. 9,
15, 27
SRT-a
Subtype of SRT, involving functional testing of security requirements. 9, 14,
15, 24–27
SRT-b
Subtype of SRT, involving performance and scalability testing. 9, 15
SRT-c
Subtype of SRT, involving boundary/edge/unexpected input testing. 9, 15,
24, 26, 30
TMT
Threat mitigation testing in the context of IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5. 9, 15,
17
TMT-a
Subtype of TMT, involving ensuring mitigation exists and works as de-
signed. 9, 15
TMT-b
Subtype of TMT, involving tests attempting to thwart the mitigation. 9, 15
VT
Vulnerability testing in the context of IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5. 9, 15
VT-a
Subtype of VT, involving abuse case or malformed or unexpected input test-
ing that focuses on uncovering security issues. 9, 14, 15, 19, 24, 26
VT-b
Subtype of VT, involving attack surface analysis. 9, 14, 15, 19, 25
VT-c
Subtype of VT, involving black-box scanning to detect known vulnerabilities.
10, 14, 15, 19, 25, 30
VT-d
Subtype of VT, involving software composition analysis. 10, 14
VT-d1
Subtype of VT, involving identifying known vulnerabilities in the product soft-
ware components. 10, 15
VT-d2
Subtype of VT, involving identifying links to vulnerable libraries. 10, 15
VT-d3
Subtype of VT, involving detecting security rule violations. 10, 15
VT-d4
Subtype of VT, involving checking compiler settings that can lead to vulner-
abilities. 10, 15
VT-e
Subtype of VT, involving dynamic runtime resource management to identify
resource exhaustion flaws. 10, 14, 15
viii
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Nowadays, web application programming interfaces (APIs) are ubiquitous. They extend
beyond traditional web applications to provide control, configuration, and data collec-
tion for embedded devices. In the context of Industrial Automation and Control Systems
(IACS), APIs have become integral for communication and data visualization, enabling
operators to monitor and control industrial processes remotely [1].
In the IACS context, APIs can quickly become the first and easiest attack target, as they
are typically exposed to the internet or network.
Patnaik et al. [2] discuss the importance of secure APIs and review how the topic has been
addressed in research since 1975. They categorize various papers that provide advice
on making APIs more secure and identify seven key ways the literature addresses. These
include clearer documentation, higher code quality, and quality assurance.
Security testing is an integral part of quality assurance and is a type of testing that focuses
on assessing the security of a system. It can include ensuring the system is meeting its
security goals, and identifying and addressing any security vulnerabilities to ensure the
system cannot be exploited by malicious attackers [3].
Security testing is a broad and somewhat ambiguous term that suggests various activities
but does not provide clear actions. Due to the diverse nature of software, each requiring
its own security testing, this project narrows its scope to systems utilizing REST APIs.
The representational state transfer (REST) architecture is the most common approach
for building web APIs. This project aims to define a framework specifically designed to
automate REST API testing to minimize the possibility of it becoming an access point to
a system attack.
Security testing is crucial, but to ensure and demonstrate its effectiveness, we adhere
to industry standards. This approach allows us to methodically address security testing.
One of the key series of standards regulating IACS security is IEC 62443 [4]. Since IACS
security relies on REST APIs as integral components, we use this standard to guide our
security activities. Although these practices are tailored for IACS, they are also applicable
to any REST APIs, including those used in everyday web applications.
The IEC 62443 series of standards focuses on security for Industrial Automation and
Control Systems (IACS) [4]. IEC 62443-4-1 [5] is a part that describes requirements for
secure product development lifecycles. The most relevant part to this thesis is Section
9, called Practice 5 - Security verification and validation testing [5]. Practice 5 describes
different types of security testing and provides examples and use cases.
In order to demonstrate compliance with the standard, it is important to create a map-
ping between security testing and the standard’s expectations. The main objective of this
thesis is to develop an extendable and configurable framework for performing automated
security tests on REST APIs, using IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5 [5] as the baseline. This
test framework must enable the mapping of existing test cases to standard requirements.
Our main contributions are as follows:
1. A design for a security testing framework for REST APIs that can be extended to
other types of testing and provides a way to create a mapping from test cases to
requirements defined in IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5 [5] (Avsnitt 4).
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
1
==PAGE:12==
2. A working implementation of the test framework based on three open-source secu-
rity tools (Avsnitt 5).
3. A systematisation of REST API security properties according to REST principles
(Avsnitt 4.2.2).
2
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
2.1
REST APIs
An Application programming interface (API) is a software interface that specifies how
other programs can communicate with it. Despite being intended for use by other pro-
grams, an API must be easily understandable by the humans writing those programs.
Web APIs facilitate interoperability with web services [6]. They enable a clear separation
of responsibilities between those who gather data and those who use and display it. This
division reduces the workload on the latter group, allowing them to focus on their core
competencies. For instance, an application wanting to show the user’s current location
can integrate this functionality using the Google Maps API instead of developing its own
mapping service.
Web APIs can be built using various paradigms. The most popular standards today are
REST, RPC, GraphQL, WebHooks, and WebSockets. These can be divided into two
categories [7]:
• Request-response APIs – these APIs expose an interface to a web application via
HTTP. The API is defined by a set of endpoints to which a client can send HTTP
requests and receive responses. Examples include REST [8], and SOAP [9].
• Event-driven APIs – these APIs use polling techniques, where the API endpoints
are queried at predetermined intervals to get updated data, preventing data from
becoming stale. Examples include WebHooks [10], and WebSockets [11].
This thesis focuses on request-response APIs, particularly those built according to Rep-
resentational State Transfer (REST) principles.
REST was first defined by Roy Fielding in [8]. RESTful APIs operate on resources, iden-
tifiable entities that can be named, addressed, and manipulated on the web. Uniform
Resource Identifiers (URIs) are used to identify and interact with these resources. Typ-
ically, REST APIs use HTTP as the transfer protocol, enabling operations on resources
using standard Create, Read, Update, and Delete (CRUD) operations. REST matches
well with HTTP features and is overall understandable, so it remains one of the most
popular approaches to API design [12].
RESTful APIs are usually built to conform to six principles, also referred to as the Web
Architectural Style [8, 13]:
1. Client-server decoupling ensures the separation of concerns between the client
and server, allowing them to be developed independently using any language or
technology.
2. A Uniform interface ensures consistent interactions between a client and a server
by providing a standardized way to identify and manipulate resources. A URI iden-
tifies a resource, which can be represented in multiple ways, but the information
returned is the same.
For example, if we query an online shopping website page to learn about our order,
we can receive the order information from the server as JSON, or HTML, but the
information returned is the same.
3. Statelessness means that the server does not retain client information between
requests. Each request from a client must contain all necessary information. This
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
3
==PAGE:14==
simplifies server design and enhances scalability and load balancing as any server
can handle any request without relying on previous interactions.
4. Cacheability requires servers to include constraints on caching responses, reduc-
ing latency and increasing application availability.
5. A layered system allows the system to be composed of layers, each with distinct
responsibilities. A client may interact with a layer without knowing whether it is
communicating directly with the server. A proxy, a load balancer, or a gateway can
be a layer.
6. Code-on-demand (optional) allows servers to transfer executable code to clients,
such as JavaScript for execution. This principle promotes coupling between client
and server, hence its optional nature.
REST also plays a major role in embedded web system development. It reduces the
coupling between the backend and frontend by abstracting system data into REST re-
sources, improves the expansibility of the system by providing flexibility of RESTful archi-
tecture, and provides ease of use [14].
Maintaining up-to-date API documentation is crucial, as it must reflect every change made
to the API, ensuring continued usability for clients [15].
The OpenAPI specification [16] is a standard, language-agnostic way to describe a
RESTful API, formerly known as the Swagger Specification. It consists of a JSON or
YAML file that describes the entire API, including endpoints, methods, inputs, outputs,
security headers, authentication information.
Figur 1 shows a sample of an OpenAPI specification. Every specification must include an
OpenAPI version (here 3.0.0) and an info field that provides metadata about the API, such
as the title, description, and version. The specification must also include a paths field that
lists all available endpoints and the methods we can use. In this case, the endpoint /users
can be accessed with a GET request, returning a list of all users.
The specification can also include a servers field listing URLs to access the API, which
can include multiple servers for testing or load balancing. The YAML example provided in-
cludes both a production server (http://api.example.com/v1) and a staging server (http://staging-
api.example.com) for internal testing.
2.2
Software security testing
Software security has the goal of engineering software so that it continues to function
correctly under malicious attacks. It is employed throughout the Software Development
Life Cycle (SDLC) and may require multidisciplinary effort. Figur 2 shows the main touch-
points (a set of best practices) in software security. The early stages involve defining
security requirements, abuse cases, and preliminary risk analysis. Later stages, such as
pre-release, include penetration testing and other security operations. While the picture
shows a linear set of steps, companies nowadays use iterative approaches to product re-
lease. In such cases, the best practices will be iterated through as a product evolves [17].
Risk-based security tests in Figur 2 involve two main approaches: testing the functionality
of implemented security mechanisms and conducting risk-based testing simulating an
attacker’s perspective [17]. Risk-based security tests are what normally will be addressed
as security testing throughout the thesis.
4
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:15==
1
openapi: 3.0.0
2
info:
3
title: Sample API
4
description: Optional multiline or single-line description in
[CommonMark](http://commonmark.org/help/) or HTML.
,→
5
version: 0.1.9
6
servers:
7
- url: http://api.example.com/v1
8
description: Optional server description, e.g. Main (production)
server
,→
9
- url: http://staging-api.example.com
10
description: Optional server description, e.g. Internal staging
server for testing
,→
11
paths:
12
/users:
13
get:
14
summary: Returns a list of users.
15
description: Optional extended description in CommonMark or HTML.
16
responses:
17
'200':
# status code
18
description: A JSON array of user names
19
content:
20
application/json:
21
schema:
22
type: array
23
items:
24
type: string
Figure 1: Sample OpenAPI specification written in YAML taken from ”Basic Structure”
(taken from [16]).
In software development, software security testing evaluates the security of a system and
to identify potential vulnerabilities and weaknesses. It can be both manual and auto-
mated. Manual testing can be useful in some cases, leveraging testers’ expertise without
overhead from setting up tools or writing code. Automated testing reduces the human
overhead of repetitive work, it can be more beneficial long-term, allowing the reuse of test
cases and working with larger sets for test data.
Automated security testing can be divided into three categories [18]:
• Static Application Security Testing (SAST) – this white-box technique involves scan-
ning the source code of an application. While it can yield better results, SAST tools
are not always available for all technologies [19].
• Dynamic Application Security Testing (DAST) – this black-box technique conducts
large-scale scans of an application from an attacker’s perspective without requiring
source code, though it may be less precise in reporting vulnerabilities [20].
• Interactive Application Security Testing (IAST) – this approach combines SAST and
DAST by performing black-box scanning followed by white-box analysis to identify
the root cause of discovered vulnerabilities. It is more complex but can produce
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
5
==PAGE:16==
defining
requirements
designing
creating 
test plans
coding
testing
gathering
feedback
abuse
cases
security
requirements
risk
analysis
risk-based
security tests
code
review
penetration
testing
security
operations
Figure 2: Best practices in software security applied throughout software development
process (adapted from [17]).
better results than just black-box scanning [21].
There are several challenges in incorporating security into the SDLC. Security is often ne-
glected during the design stage, and there is a lack of structured threat modeling. Many
developers lack security knowledge, leading to framework misuse or overreliance without
proper checks. Responsibilities are often unclear, with security tasks assigned to specific
individuals rather than being a collective responsibility. Although security should be con-
sidered at every step, it is frequently addressed only during post-development testing due
to external audits or regulatory requirements rather than proactive efforts. This unplanned
approach, limited resources, and lack of management support result in inconsistent secu-
rity practices across teams and development stages, leading to ad-hoc approaches [22].
2.3
REST API security testing
Security testing can be ambiguous, particularly when dealing with complex systems com-
prising multiple components. The ambiguity arises from the difficulty in determining how
to approach the testing process, which components to test, which techniques to use, and
where the boundaries of the testing should lie. To address security testing in a more
structured manner and avoid ad-hoc methods, it is beneficial to extract distinct architec-
tural patterns and concepts. By defining security requirements for each component sep-
arately, a more systematic and comprehensive testing strategy can be developed [23].
APIs are one such component, that can be targeted separately in security testing from
the rest of the system.
API security lies at the intersection of three security areas (Figur 3) [6]:
• Information security – concerned with the protection of data that is created, stored,
and transmitted.
• Network security – focuses on protecting data on the network and the network
itself.
• Application security – ensures the protection of software systems.
Each field has its challenges and protection techniques, making it difficult to define specific
protection mechanisms for API security. However, evaluating all three areas is crucial
6
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:17==
Network
security
Application
security
Information
security
API
security
Figure 3: API security is at the intersection of three security domains: information security,
network security, and application security (adapted from [6]).
when creating requirements or tests for API security.
API testing is crucial to ensure functionality, reliability, security, and delivery of business
logic. Manual API testing is time-consuming and impractical for APIs with numerous end-
points or configurations, making automated API testing preferable [24]. This also applies
to API security testing.
Various tools target API security.They can be categorized according to the tasks they
perform [25]:
1. API Security Posture – tools for monitoring, documentation, and quick updates.
2. API Runtime Security – tools for monitoring HTTP interactions and detecting mali-
cious traffic to API endpoints.
3. API Security Testing – tools for dynamic assessment of APIs, DAST tools.
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
7
==PAGE:18==
API security testing, a form of dynamic application security testing (DAST), evaluates the
security of applications through their APIs. Unlike SAST and IAST, which can require
access to the codebase or other internal information, DAST focuses on interacting with
the application via its APIs.
Tools for API security testing can be categorized based on the knowledge they utilize:
• Black-box: operate without prior knowledge of the system, interacting only with API
requests and responses,
• White-box: leverage internal knowledge of the system’s workings,
• Grey-box: combine aspects of black-box and white-box testing, using some system
knowledge.
These tools perform various types of testing, including known vulnerability scanning [26],
schema validation [27], and fuzz testing [27, 28].
2.4
Industrial automation and control systems
2.4.1
Definition
Industrial Automation and Control Systems (IACSs) refer to hardware and software sys-
tems designed to control and automate industrial processes. These systems are critical
for ensuring the efficient, safe, and reliable operation of industrial facilities.
Control functions in an IACSs are typically implemented using embedded devices, which
can be controlled via Human-Machine Interfaces (HMIs). HMIs are often targeted by
attackers as they are used by operators to monitor and control industrial processes [1].
HMIs have evolved from basic buttons and lights on machinery to desktop visualizations
and touch panels. Internet connectivity and web services have further advanced HMIs
with web and mobile applications, often using REST APIs for underlying communica-
tion [29].
2.4.2
IEC 62443 series of standards
The IEC 62443 series of standards [4], titled ”Security for Industrial Automation and Con-
trol Systems,” is a crucial security framework for IACS. It defines requirements and pro-
cesses for implementing and maintaining secure IACS.
The series addresses IACS security on four levels:
• General – IEC 62443-1-X standards cover general security concepts, terms, metrics
for evaluation, and use cases.
• Policies and procedures – IEC 62443-2-X standards address organizing and man-
aging a security program in a company.
• System – IEC 62443-3-X standards cover system-level security for IACS, including
system design, risk assessment, security requirements, and levels.
• Component – IEC 62443-4-X standards specify technical requirements for IACS
components and secure product development.
IEC 62443-4-1 [5] is a standard that specifies process requirements for the secure devel-
opment of products intended for use in the IACS environment. It provides a framework
for achieving secure-by-design and defense-in-depth products in IACS. The standard out-
lines eight practices covering security management, security requirements definition, se-
8
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:19==
curity by design, secure development and testing, update management, and other security
guidelines.
Practice 5 - Security verification and validation testing [5] concerns the security test-
ing required to ensure all security requirements are met and the product implements a
defense-in-depth strategy.
The standard defines security verification and validation testing as:
Security verification and validation testing – testing performed to assess the overall
security of a component, product, or system when used in its intended product secu-
rity context and to determine if a component, product, or system satisfies the product
security requirements and satisfies its designed security purpose. [5, Section 3.1.33]
Practice 5 [5] defines four types of security testing. Each is assigned a short code for
easier reference later:
1. SRT: Security requirements testing,
2. TMT: Threat mitigation testing,
3. VT: Vulnerability testing,
4. PT: Penetration testing.
Security requirements testing focuses on testing functional security requirements [30]
and handling bad scenarios. According to Practice 5 [5], it includes:
a. SRT-a: functional testing of security requirements,
b. SRT-b: performance and scalability testing,
c. SRT-c: boundary/edge/unexpected input testing.
This process requires defined security requirements for the product and verifies through
testing that the product meets these requirements. Security requirements may include
functionality requirements, component-specific requirements (e.g., APIs), and require-
ments for secrets storage and cryptographic algorithms if applicable.
Threat mitigation testing focuses on testing defined threat mitigations. According to
Practice 5 [5], testing must include:
a. TMT-a: ensuring mitigation exists and works as designed, and
b. TMT-b: tests attempting to thwart the mitigation.
This process requires a defined threat model for the product and verifies the effectiveness
of threat mitigations.
For example, if the threat model specifies using TLS/1.3 as mitigation, we need to attempt
using TLS/1.3 (TMT-a) and then try using a lower version and assert failure (TMT-b).
Vulnerability testing identifies potential security vulnerabilities. A list of vulnerabilities
must be defined from a recent industry-recognized source. According to Practice 5 [5],
the testing must include a number of different techniques, such as:
a. VT-a: abuse case or malformed or unexpected input testing that focuses on uncovering
security issues.
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
9
==PAGE:20==
b. VT-b: attack surface analysis, such as port scanning or searching for undocumented
endpoints.
c. VT-c: black-box scanning to detect known vulnerabilities.
d. VT-d: for compiled software, software composition analysis to identify:
1. VT-d1: known vulnerabilities in the product software components.
2. VT-d2: links to vulnerable libraries.
3. VT-d3: security rule violations.
4. VT-d4: compiler settings that can lead to vulnerabilities.
e. VT-e: dynamic runtime resource management to identify resource exhaustion flaws of
the product.
Penetration testing (PT) is similar to vulnerability testing. According to Practice 5 [5],
it focuses on identifying vulnerabilities that can compromise the confidentiality, integrity,
or availability of the product. It simulates an attacker’s perspective, often performed as
a black-box test, and attempts to bypass multiple layers of defense. Penetration testing
can be manual, automated, or a combination of both.
Security requirements and threat mitigation testing are normally conducted by an indepen-
dent department, while vulnerability testing can be performed by an independent person
from the same department. Penetration testing is best conducted by an external entity to
provide a fresh perspective on product interfaces and potential vulnerabilities.
10
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:21==
3
Problem statement
The main objective of this thesis is to develop a test framework for security testing of
REST APIs, using IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5 [5] as a baseline, with a focus on Dynamic
Application Security Testing (DAST) tools. A key function of this framework is to map the
testing results back to the IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5 testing types [5], identifying potential
gaps and providing an overall security testing picture of testing for compliance purposes.
The test framework is intended for testers who need to assess the security of products, en-
hanced by their in-depth, white-box knowledge of the products’ functionality, components,
and operational environments. While many security testing tools operate as black-box
tools, this framework also provides recommendations on how to incorporate white-box
knowledge into their results by capturing system logs.
The use case involves a tester who wants to run security tests either once per release or
on demand, allowing comprehensive and continuous security assessment.
3.1
Adversary model
To understand the types of attacks we are targeting by performing security testing and
the context we assume attacker to operate in, it is useful to define the following assump-
tions [31]:
• Location – The adversary model assumes an external adversary operating from a
network separate from the internal (testing) network. This adversary does not have
write access to the System Under Test (SUT) services, meaning they cannot modify
or delete important logs or change the configurations of the SUT.
• Abilities – The adversary is assumed to interact with the system’s endpoints in
a manner similar to a legitimate user. Depending on the system’s functionality,
the adversary may be able to create new user or admin accounts and modify their
information.
3.2
Test framework objectives
The proposed test framework is designed to have the following properties:
Traceability: The framework must design and enforce a mechanism to evaluate the
coverage of IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5 [5].
Usability: The testing process must aim to minimize setup and analysis efforts, re-
ducing the overall workload for users. The overall effort of setting up the testing
should be less than setting up the underlying testing tools.
Performance: The testing process must be efficient enough to be conducted once
per product release, ideally within a time frame of a few hours to a few days.
Coverage:
• High IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5 [5] coverage: the framework must address the
four types of security testing described in Practice 5 of the IEC 62443-4-1 stan-
dard [5]. This minimizes possible gaps in security testing and ensures compli-
ance with the standard.
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
11
==PAGE:22==
• High vulnerability coverage: the framework must address various types of vul-
nerabilities, including those caused by improper input validation, known black-
box vulnerabilities, improper configuration, and more.
3.3
Research Questions
In pursuit of these goals, the thesis will explore two research questions.
Research question 1: Which aspects of REST API design, when ignored or incorrectly
implemented, pose security threats, and how can these aspects be efficiently tested
using automated tools?
This question focuses on identifying specific security aspects of REST APIs. It is crucial
to adopt a comprehensive approach that addresses all security aspects of a REST API,
rather than just a few like endpoint authentication or resource management. General web
service attacks, such as XSS or SQL injection, are not necessarily included, as they can
occur independently of REST APIs.
The second part of the question addresses methods for automating the verification of
these properties during the product testing phase. Since tools often target only specific
aspects of API security, a comprehensive testing approach may require combining multi-
ple tools.
Research question 2: How to map existing security tests to IEC 62443-4-1 [5] to
ensure compliance?
This question focuses on enabling the traceability of existing test cases and their mapping
to standard requirements. This is crucial for compliance and audit purposes, providing
proof that a product is undergoing the necessary testing.
12
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:23==
4
Design
This chapter proposes a framework for testing and mapping tests to the IEC 62443-4-1
requirements [5]. It also suggests general security requirements for REST APIs and a
way to incorporate white-box knowledge into testing.
4.1
Overview
We propose a framework for security testing with four distinct steps, as depicted in Figur 4:
• Step 0: definitions – this step is conducted once per system under test. It involves
defining the general information about the target and the relevant standard require-
ments. This foundational step ensures a clear understanding of the target’s context
and the specific security requirements it must meet.
• Step 1: configuration – this step is conducted once per test run, it involves con-
figuring and improving the test cases. It ensures that all necessary test cases are
properly set up and aligned with the defined requirements from Step 0.
• Step 2: testing – this step is conducted once per test run, this step involves the
execution of the configured test cases. The tests are run to evaluate the target’s
security posture against the defined requirements.
• Step 3: analysis – this step is conducted once per test run. Following the testing
phase, it involves generating reports and analyzing the results. The analysis helps
identify areas for improvement and provides insights to refine the test cases and
configuration in future test runs.
After completing the initial iteration of Steps 0-3, testers receive a report detailing the test
results and their alignment with IEC 62443-4-1 [5]. For the next iterations, the Definitions
step is skipped. The testers review the test configuration, and if no changes are required,
the tests can be rerun and analyzed with minimal manual effort.
The tests can run on a per-release basis, in response to significant changes, or on de-
mand for evaluating the product’s security and providing a report on IEC 62443-4-1 [5]
compliance.
0: definitions
1: configuration
2: testing
3: analysis
Figure 4: Four steps of the test framework. Step 0, Definitions, is conducted once per
System Under Test (SUT). Afterward, the process is cyclical and can be iteratively re-
peated to evaluate the security of the SUT.
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
13
==PAGE:24==
4.2
Step 0: Definitions
Step 0, definitions, is conducted once per target and is a manual process. This step
involves several critical tasks:
• Defining standard requirements – this task involves reviewing the IEC 62443-4-
1 standard [5] to identify the relevant requirements. These requirements are then
compiled into a single document for easy reference throughout the testing process.
• Defining security requirements – according to IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5 [5], the
product must have defined security requirements. These requirements will be used
as the basis for security tests.
• Defining threat model – according to IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5 [5], the product
must have defined threat model. It must state potential threats and their mitigations.
These tasks in Step 0 ensure we get a clear understanding of the target’s security needs,
which is crucial for the next steps in the testing process.
4.2.1
Defining standard requirements
In Avsnitt 2.4.2 we reviewed the types of testing IEC 62443-4-1 standard [5] requires. In
this section, we will explain how these testing types change when applied to REST APIs.
Security requirements testing can be fully applied to REST API testing. We consider
HTTP request parameters (including body payloads) as inputs and create tests for mal-
formed inputs. Functional testing of security requirements and performance testing re-
main the same.
Threat mitigation testing does not differ; it is simply scoped specifically to REST APIs.
Vulnerability testing changes slightly. We can still test inputs (VT-a), analyze the at-
tack surface, such as open endpoints (VT-b), and conduct black-box scanning (VT-c).
However, software composition analysis (VT-d) is not possible because we are target-
ing a system facing the internet with open endpoints, not a compiled piece of software.
Dynamic runtime resource management testing (VT-e) can be considered, but few tools
exist for this purpose.
Penetration testing remains out of scope.
Tabell 1 lists all the testing types required by the standard, along with their descriptions,
as presented in Avsnitt 2.4.2. The second column indicates whether these testing types
are applicable to REST API security testing.
4.2.2
Defining security requirements
The SRT-a testing type assumes that a system has defined security requirements, and
here we will define security requirements specific to REST APIs. These requirements
cover areas such as authentication, authorization, configuration, input validation, and rate
limiting. Additionally, it is essential to implement security measures tailored to the specific
functions of the API. For instance, if the API sends commands to devices, modifies website
configurations, or initiates services, these security measures must be clearly defined and
monitored to ensure the API’s security.
While many security requirements for REST APIs will be specific to their functionalities,
there are also common features common to any API. We will define the requirements
based on the REST principles they pertain to. The requirements are taken from various
sources such as [32, 33, 28, 34]. This list is not exhaustive, as it primarily focuses on
security aspects directly related to REST APIs. Other security risks may still exist. For
14
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:25==
Table 1: Applicability of testing types defined in IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5 [5] to REST
API testing (✓indicates applicability, indicates non-applicability)
Type
Applicable
to
REST
APIs
Description
SRT
SRT-a
✓
Functional testing of security requirements
SRT-b
✓
Performance and scalability testing
SRT-c
✓
Boundary/edge/unexpected input testing
TMT
TMT-a
✓
Ensuring mitigation exists and works as de-
signed
TMT-b
✓
Tests to try to thwart it
VT
VT-a
✓
Abuse case or malformed or unexpected input
testing that focuses on uncovering security is-
sues
VT-b
✓
Attack surface analysis
VT-c
✓
Black-box scanning
VT-d1

Known vulnerabilities in the product software
components
VT-d2

Linking to vulnerable libraries
VT-d3

Security rule violations
VT-d4

Compiler settings that can lead to vulnerabilities
VT-e
✓
Dynamic runtime resource management
PT
PT

Penetration testing
example, one of the endpoints may accept input that causes SQL injection, but this is a
generic risk that has nothing to do with it being an API endpoint.
Since REST has six principles for building a web application, REST API security require-
ments can be divided into six categories:
• Uniform Interface – this category is concerned about resources and their manage-
ment:
– Use-after-free – resources must not be available after deletion [32]
– Resource-leak – if a resource has not been created, it must not be accessible
and ”leak” any side-effects in the backend service [32]
– Resource-hierarchy – a child resource of a parent must not be accessible from
another parent [32]
– User-namespace – a resource created by one user must not be accessible by
another user [32]
– Invalid-dynamic-object – a system must not accept and process invalid ob-
jects [28] [33, API1:2023]
– No-overwrite – users must not be able to overwrite other users’ resources [33,
API1:2023]
– Restricted-resource-consumption – API must limit client interaction and re-
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
15
==PAGE:26==
source consumption [33, API4:2023]
• Client-Server – this category of requirements focuses on the inputs and outputs of
REST APIs, specifically the requests, responses, and their components:
– Payload-body – invalid body parameters must not be accepted [28]
– OpenAPI-specification-conformance – the OpenAPI specification [16] must not
be bypassed; input checks and defined security mechanisms must be en-
forced [33, API10:2023]
– Server-side-request-forgery – user-supplied URLs must be checked to avoid
server-side request forgery vulnerabilities [33, API7:2023]
– Error-messages – returned error messages must not reveal system inner work-
ings [34] [33, API8:2023]
– CORS-policy – a Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS) policy must be en-
forced to control access from different origins [33, API8:2023]
– Security-headers – enforce usage of other security headers (if applicable) [33,
API8:2023]
– Improper-inventory-management – documentation must not have any blindspots,
and be up to date. [33, API9:2023]
• Stateless – since the server does not store any session-related information for
clients, we can define requirements related to session management to ensure that
clients can only access authorized resources despite the lack of server-side session
storage:
– HEAD-Authentication-bypass – resources must not be available with HEAD if
they are not available with GET
– CSRF-token-reuse – CSRF tokens must not work for another user/session
– Session-cookies – session cookies must change every session for the same
user [34]
– Logout – logout must kill session cookie [34]
– Broken-authentication – ensure proper authentication mechanisms are in place [33,
API2:2023]
– Object-property-level-authorization – ensure object property level authoriza-
tion [33, API3:2023]
– Function-level-authorization – ensure function level authorization [33, API5:2023]
• Cacheable – this category concerns caching mechanisms in REST APIs and their
exploitation:
– Cache-poisoning – cache poisoning is not possible
• Layered System – this category outlines the requirements for systems implemented
in a layered architecture:
– Race-condition – responses containing multiple properties of the same object
must always match the same state of the single object
16
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:27==
– Business-logic – vulnerable points of business model must be defined, ensur-
ing that potential bottlenecks are addressed and mitigated [33, API6:2023] [33,
API10:2023]
• Code on Demand – this category pertains to an optional REST principle where the
server provides executable code to the client on demand. No requirements have
been gathered for this category.
4.2.3
Defining a threat model
The TMT (Threat Mitigation Testing) type requires a system to have a threat model with
defined threats and mitigations. This threat model focuses on identifying system-specific
threats and the potential paths to exploit them. While it shares some common concerns
with security requirements, it is more tailored to the particular assets and vulnerabilities of
the system. Since creating a comprehensive threat model based solely on REST APIs is
difficult, if not impossible, to automate, so we do not consider this testing type in our test
framework.
4.3
Step 1: Configuration
Configuration is conducted once per test run and is primarily a manual process. This step
involves several critical tasks:
• Updating OpenAPI specification file – we rely on the specification file to learn basic
information about endpoints such as which methods they accept and which input
they expect. Therefore, it must be up to date before each test run.
• Updating configuration files – making sure the setup is up to date. Ensure each test
case is tagged with the requirement it fulfills.
• Populating test cases – adding more test cases as needed.
Completing these tasks ensures the testing environment is properly prepared for thorough
and effective security testing.
4.4
Step 2: Testing
Figur 5 illustrates the architecture of a testing environment, where a testing client inter-
acts with a system under test (SUT). The System Under Test is a system with exposed
endpoints that are to be tested. It can be a completely separate device running a web
server, or it just can be a web server running on the same machine as the testing client.
The testing client is the system that is running multiple test cases. It can access API
endpoints by HTTP interactions. It sends requests and receives responses from SUT.
API security testing is often black-box because the testing relies on HTTP responses
which don’t reveal the internal workings of the system. To improve on this approach, the
design assumes that the testing client can establish a more direct form of communication
with the system under test via serial, SSH, or telnet connection. Through this connection,
the testing client can execute specific commands on the system, such as retrieving logs
or other internal data. This method provides a deeper insight into the system’s internal
state during the test runs, incorporating elements of white-box testing.
For example, if a client sends a request to a server and receives a generic “500 Internal
Server Error“ response, it is difficult to determine the cause of the issue. By accessing
the system’s logs, the testing client can identify the specific reason for the error, such as
invalid data causing an infinite loop or a constraint violation that was not properly handled.
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
17
==PAGE:28==
endpoint_1
endpoint_n
...
SUT logs
system under test
testing client
GET/POST/...
request
Figure 5: Testing setup: he testing client runs test cases by sending HTTP requests to the
System Under Test (SUT), which has exposed endpoints and a mechanism for retrieving
internal logs.
This detailed information helps identify the exact problem, providing clarity that the generic
error message does not offer.
The testing client is designed as shown in Figur 6. The testing client accepts a formal
description of standard requirements, with tags attached to each distinct requirement. It
also accepts an API specification file. The main configuration file defines target-specific
information such as IP addresses, credentials, and methods for retrieving logs.
Within the client, there are numerous test cases, each tagged with the specific standard
requirement(s) it targets. A single test case may address one or more requirements. The
testing client also includes libraries that facilitate setting up connections or running test
cases.
As outputs, the testing client provides test results (pass/fail) and a report on standard
coverage.
config.
file
libs
testcases
Security requirements
1
Requirement 1 description
2
Requirement 2 description
3
Requirement 3 description
Security testing types
1
Type 1
2
Type 2
3
Type 3
derived from IEC 62443 and
company policy
API specification
file
IEC 62443
coverage
report
test results
testing client
Figure 6: Testing client design: the testing client takes an API specification file and se-
curity requirements as inputs, and outputs an IEC 62443 coverage report and test case
results. The client includes a configuration file, external libraries, and test cases, each
tagged with the security requirements they cover.
18
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:29==
The testing client is extendable and configurable, allowing additional test cases to be
added with minimal effort.
4.5
Step 3: Analysis
The testing client is also responsible for the analysis of coverage of the standard, as
illustrated in Figur 6.
The analysis step involves reorganizing the test results from the test run and structuring
them according to the standard. This process provides a clear overview of each standard
requirement and the test cases that targeted it. It is important to note that targeting a
requirement does not necessarily mean it is fully covered.
Figure 7: Example of IEC 62443-4-1 coverage report for Vulnerability Testing (VT) type,
showing one test case under each subtype, all of which passed.
Figur 7 provides an example of how IEC 62443-4-1 [5] coverage report looks like. Each
vulnerability testing category (VT-a, VT-b, VT-c in this case) includes a description of the
type and the specific test case that was executed, along with its result.
In this example, we suppose that the test cases test_RESTler_fuzzlean and
test_OWASP_ZAP_scan were executed and both passed.
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
19
==PAGE:30==
20
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:31==
5
Implementation
Avsnitt 4 explained the design we proposed for a test framework that allows easy mapping
from IEC 62443-4-1 requirements [5] to existing tests, ensuring coverage. The design is
configurable and extendable, providing flexibility in the testing process. This section will
focus on the practical implementation of the suggested design.
5.1
Overview
The testing client, as shown in Figur 6, is structured as a directory with the following
components, each serving a distinct function:
• IEC62443_cov/ – this folder includes scripts to map test results to the requirements
and generate an IEC 62443-4-1 [5] coverage report,
• libs/ – this folder contains any libraries the test cases require,
• tests/ – this folder contains all the test cases. Each test case is tagged with a
specific requirement(s) it targets,
• config.py – the configuration file with SUT-specific information for testing, including
a path to a requirements file and OpenAPI specification file.
5.2
Configuration file
When preparing an environment for security testing, especially with automated testing
tools, it is important to create a detailed configuration. It can include various elements
such as network settings and authentication credentials, which are critical for ensuring
the effectiveness and accuracy of the testing process.
Currently, the setup includes only the information required by the test cases. Since test
cases are tools, the specifics depend on the needs of those tools. Generally, the neces-
sary information can include:
• OpenAPI schema – it is mandatory to provide a path to a file with an API specifi-
cation for efficient testing. The schema should be in JSON and YAML format and
include available for testing API endpoints, their expected inputs and outputs, any
headers, and security mechanisms required for more comprehensive testing,
• Network settings – includes the IP address and port of the target, and information
on TLS certificates if needed,
• Log connection – the configuration file includes the means (usually a function) to
establish a connection with the target to retrieve logs,
• Authentication information – if the target requires authentication, the configuration
file can include credentials for one or more users and the means to establish a
session,
• Request headers – if the target requires specific headers or enables security mech-
anisms such as CSRF tokens, the configuration file can include those headers or
the means to obtain them,
• Other tools settings – different tools require specific values or files to be sent as
input parameters. It is important to set them (or provide paths to them) to keep them
centralized and ensure ease of use.
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
21
==PAGE:32==
In the current implementation, the configuration file is a Python file located in the root test-
ing folder. Each of the test cases in the tests/ directory can import necessary information
from it.
5.3
Test cases
The test cases are written using the pytest framework [35]. Each test case is standalone
and located in a separate file. For better logs and visualization, we use the Allure reporting
tool [36]. With the allure.attach function, we can attach any necessary details during
the test run.
Each test must be tagged with one or more requirements it targets. This tagging process
is typically conducted during step 2, Configuration, of the framework when new tests are
implemented. A tag indicates that the test at least partially covers the requirement. How-
ever, it does not allow us to determine whether the requirement has been fully covered
without manual evaluation.
The requirements associated with a test are chosen manually. A tester must review all the
requirements dictated by the standard and determine whether they match the functionality
of the test case.
1
import allure
2
import pytest
3
4
@allure.suite("Example Testcase")
5
class TestExample:
6
7
@pytest.fixture
8
def prepare(self):
9
# setup()
10
yield
11
# teardown()
12
13
@pytest.mark.reqcov("Req1")
14
@pytest.mark.reqcov("Req2")
15
def test_example(self, prepare) -> None:
16
# run()
17
Figure 8: Sample structure of a test case written in pytest. The test test_example is within
the TestExample class, which also includes the prepare fixture responsible for the setup
and teardown of the test case. test_example takes the prepare fixture as an argument
and is marked with two requirements using the @pytest.mark decorator.
The simplest test file can look like Figur 8. We always need to import the allure and pytest
modules. The test is wrapped in a Python class that has a meaningful name. In this case,
we have TestExample. Using the allure.suite decorator, we can differentiate our test
cases from others in the report.
For simplicity, our test case called test_example accepts the prepare fixture as an ar-
gument. This means that the fixture will run before the test case, then on the yield line,
the actual test will run. After test_example finishes, we return to the fixture to perform
22
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:33==
teardown. This way, we can handle all the pre- and post-processing in the fixture and
only define the actual test case steps in the test_example function.
We assume each of the commented functions can, for example, contain the following
functionality:
• setup(): preparing the environment for the test, starting a docker container with a
tool, setting up any inputs/files the tool needs.
• run(): actual test steps, running the tool, validating the results, asserting necessary
conditions.
• teardown(): reverting environment changes, stopping docker containers, deleting
test data, logging the results.
We use pytest.mark.reqcov("Requirement code") to set the requirements the test
case targets. The code should be taken from a file that defines all the requirements
(explained below).
The pytest.mark decorator works only if the markers are registered. To register all mark-
ers mentioned in the test cases, a tester needs to add a conftest.py script to the root of
the folder with contents as shown in Tillegg D.
The current implementation has three test cases that each run one of the tools: Schemath-
esis, ZAP, and RESTler.
Our test framework makes use of these tools to maintain a general approach rather than
being system-specific. System-specific security requirements are typically checked sep-
arately, while these tools offer a broader testing scope.
5.3.1
Schemathesis
The first test runs fuzzing with Schemathesis [27]. Schemathesis is a tool for API testing
that automatically generates test cases based on an API specification file. It tests the
API with a variety of randomized inputs to check whether any of them cause server errors
or other types of failures. While it is not specifically targeted at security testing, it is an
excellent tool for verifying input-output correspondence to the specification and identifying
bugs. Schemathesis can detect minor bugs caused by improper input validation as well
as more serious critical vulnerabilities.
Schemathesis takes an API specification as input and automatically generates inputs for
testing. It includes various checks that mark HTTP interactions as failed, such as when the
server returns a 500 error or accepts invalid data according to the schema. Additionally,
it allows the tester to replay those interactions to verify whether the issue has been fixed
or to gather logs for further analysis.
The tool is highly customizable, allowing users to write their own checks and introduce
hooks for interactions, such as modifying the request body.
Function. The test case named text_fuzz has the following contents for the commented
functions in Figur 8:
• setup(): run initial fuzzing to get a list of inputs that are marked as failures by the
tool.
• run(): rerun the failed inputs one by one and gather system logs after each run.
• teardown(): save fuzzing results to a file.
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
23
==PAGE:34==
Markers. Tabell 2 contains all requirements that this setup of the Schemathesis tool tar-
gets. Schemathesis fuzzes REST APIs by sending requests that contain malformed data
in the request body, including sending requests for invalid resources. This means the
testing targets Invalid-dynamic-object and Payload-body security requirements.
Schemathesis is first of all a testing tool that tests whether an API specification is cor-
rectly defined. If security headers are included in the specification, it will check whether
those are enforced by the server. If the documentation is not up to date or contains in-
consistencies, they will be reported. This means the test targets OpenAPI-specification-
conformance, Security-headers, and Improper-inventory-management security require-
ments.
Finally, SRT-c and VT-a are both testing types from IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5 [5] that are
defined as malformed input testing, so Schemathesis applies to this requirement as well.
Table 2: IEC 62443-4-1 requirements [5] targeted by the test_fuzz test case, which runs
the Schemathesis tool.
Code
Description
SRT-a
Invalid-dynamic-
object
A system should not accept and process invalid
objects
Payload-body
Invalid body parameters should not be accepted
OpenAPI-
specification-
conformance
The OpenAPI specification cannot be bypassed;
input checks and defined security mechanisms
should be enforced
Security-headers
Enforce usage of other security headers
Improper-
inventory-
management
Documentation should not have any blind spots
and should be up to date
SRT-c
Boundary/edge/unexpected input testing
VT-a
Abuse case or malformed or unexpected input
testing that focuses on uncovering security issues
5.3.2
Zed Attack Proxy
The second test runs a scan with Zed Attack Proxy (ZAP) [26]. It is a web application
scanner with several modes of operation. It can be used as a proxy for manual testing, al-
lowing the interception and inspection of interactions. Additionally, it supports automated
scans, including both passive and active scanning. ZAP scans for a wide range of se-
curity vulnerabilities, including but not limited to SQL injection, cross-site scripting (XSS),
security misconfigurations, and missing security headers.
• Passive scanning - inspects traffic that goes through the proxy without modifying
it. It detects issues such as information leakage, missing security headers, and
insecure cookie settings. We do not use this mode in the current implementation.
• Active scanning - actively sends new requests to the service to identify vulnerabil-
ities. It performs tests for SQL injection, XSS, file inclusion, and other security flaws
by manipulating inputs and observing responses.
Function. The test case named text_scan has the following contents for the commented
functions in Figur 8:
24
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:35==
• setup(): start Docker container with ZAP, create a new ZAP session and load Ope-
nAPI schema into ZAP session.
• run(): run active scanning with an add-on [37] that allows ZAP to obtain necessary
data from an API specification file. This enables ZAP to have more detailed infor-
mation about the endpoints, resulting in a more efficient and thorough scan of the
application.
• teardown(): stop the container, save scanning results to a file.
An additional step can be added to rerun requests to endpoints with found alerts and
gather logs from the system for further analysis.
Markers. Tabell 3 contains all requirements that this setup of the ZAP tool targets. ZAP
can identify whether an endpoint is leaking some unnecessary information that should not
be included in the response, so it targets the Error-messages security requirements.
ZAP is capable of finding problems with the usage of security headers as it searches for
the most common misconfigurations, so it targets the Security-headers security require-
ment.
ZAP is a black-box security tool that searches for common vulnerabilities and analyzes
input/output traffic from the SUT. So the test that runs ZAP also targets VT-b and VT-c
testing types.
Table 3: IEC 62443-4-1 requirements [5] targeted by the test_scan test case, which runs
the ZAP tool.
Code
Description
SRT-a
Error-messages
Returned error messages should not reveal sys-
tem inner workings
Security-headers
Enforce usage of other security headers
VT-b
Attack surface analysis
VT-c
Black-box scanning
5.3.3
RESTler
The third test runs stateful fuzzing with RESTler [28]. RESTler is a stateful REST API
fuzzing tool designed to find security vulnerabilities. RESTler keeps track of the API state
across multiple requests, which allows it to test complex sequences of operations. Given
a specification, the tool generates test cases targeting specific classes of bugs and dy-
namically learns from responses. It can create test cases to check whether a resource
is still available after deletion, whether an unauthorized user can access a resource, and
whether a request fails after replacing a valid resource with an invalid one, among other
scenarios.
RESTler has four execution modes:
• Compile – this mode takes the OpenAPI specification and generates a tool-specific
grammar for fuzzing, it is the first and mandatory phase,
• Test – quickly executes tests on all the endpoints to see general coverage and
report any low-hanging errors in the setup,
• Fuzz-Lean – executes tests with chosen checks on every endpoint once to find any
quick bugs,
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
25
==PAGE:36==
• Fuzz – same as Fuzz-Lean, but runs tests multiple times per endpoint. This is a
longer and more exhaustive process targeting more complicated bugs.
Function. The test case named text_fuzzlean has the following contents for the com-
mented functions in Figur 8:
• setup(): start Docker container with RESTler, generate RESTler grammar from
OpenAPI specification using Compile mode.
• run(): run RESTler in fuzz-lean mode.
• teardown(): stop the container, save fuzzing results to a file.
Fuzz-lean mode in the run() phase can be replaced by fuzz depending on the purpose.
If a quick scan is needed, fuzz-lean can be sufficient. RESTler also allows rerunning
failed test cases, then the structure of the test case will change to become similar to
Schemathesis, meaning we fuzz in setup() and rerun each failed test case in run().
Markers. Tabell 4 contains all requirements that this setup of the RESTler tool targets.
RESTler can analyze the API specification and create test cases for creating and deleting
resources, to check whether they are still available after deletion. This targets the Use-
after-free security requirement.
RESTler targets resource management and can validate whether a resource creation
leaks any side-effect to the SUT (Resource-leak), and whether resource hierarchy is kept
(Resource-hierarchy).
RESTler is also basically a fuzzer, so it sends invalid data to the SUT and checks for the
Invalid-dynamic-object security requirement.
Since RESTler is a stateful fuzzer, it potentially targets any Business-logic issues that
may come up when the requests are called in an unusual order or multiple times in a row.
Finally, RESTler targets SRT-c and VT-a testing types because it performs malformed
input testing.
Table 4: IEC 62443-4-1 requirements [5] targeted by the text_fuzzlean test case, which
runs the RESTler tool.
Code
Description
SRT-a
Use-after-free
Resources should not be available after deletion
Resource-leak
If a resource has not been created, it should not be
accessible and ’leak’ any side-effects in the back-
end service
Resource-
hierarchy
A child resource of a parent must not be accessible
from another parent
Invalid-dynamic-
object
A system should not accept and process invalid
objects
Business-logic
Vulnerable points of the business model should
be defined, ensuring that potential bottlenecks are
addressed and mitigated
SRT-c
Boundary/edge/unexpected input testing
VT-a
Abuse case or malformed or unexpected input
testing that focuses on uncovering security issues
26
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:37==
5.4
IEC 62443-4-1 coverage analysis
All the requirements from IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5 [5] are saved to a JSON formatted
file. Those include four testing types, their subtypes, and REST API-related security re-
quirements defined in Avsnitt 4.2.2.
1
{
2
"name": "Testing type 1",
3
"description": "Description of testing type 1",
4
"items": [
5
{
6
"name": "Subtype 1",
7
"description": "Description of subtype 1",
8
"items": []
9
},
10
{
11
"name": "Subtype 2",
12
"description": "Description of subtype 1",
13
"items": []
14
}
15
]
16
}
Figure 9: Basic JSON structure for a file containing IEC 62443-4-1 requirements [5]. Each
item has three fields: the name of the testing type, its description, and items—an array
that recursively contains other items, or subtypes.
Figur 9 shows the basic JSON structure of the file. Each of the elements can have mul-
tiple children (in the items array field) that can also have other children. This allows the
extension of the structure to as many layers as needed.
The whole file can be found in Tillegg A. The first layer is titled IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5,
and the second layer contains the four testing types defined by it: security requirements
testing, threat mitigation testing, vulnerability testing, and penetration testing. The next
layer contains their subtypes, and the final (for now) layer contains individual security
requirements we define.
For example, the security requirement Use-after-free would be under the SRT-a sub-
type of the SRT – Security requirements testing type under the whole IEC 62443-4-1 Prac-
tice 5 [5], and the structure that leads to it would look like Figur 10.
This JSON structure can be easily parsed in the next steps of the solution, centralizing
this information in a single location.
To calculate coverage of IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5 [5] by existing test cases, we need to:
1. Run the test cases. A tester runs pytest on the test directory and produces an XML-
formatted report containing the execution of test cases that were run, including their timing,
results, and markers which indicate which requirement(s) they target. However, it displays
the results simply in the order they are executed, without any proper structure.
2. Run Python script for analysis. To identify gaps between the standard requirements
and the existing tests, we generate a report structured similarly to the JSON format defined
earlier. To generate this report, we run a Python script that takes two arguments: the path
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
27
==PAGE:38==
1
{
2
"name": "IEC62443-4-1 Practice 5",
3
"description": "Security verification and validation testing",
4
"items": [
5
{
6
"name": "SRT: Security requirements testing",
7
"description": "Testing requirements and edge cases",
8
"items": [
9
{
10
"name": "SRT-a",
11
"description": "Functional testing of security requirements",
12
"items": [
13
{
14
"name": "Use-after-free",
15
"description": "Resources should not be available after
deletion",
,→
16
"items": []
17
}
18
]
19
}
20
]
21
}
22
]
23
}
Figure 10: JSON structure defining IEC 62443-4-1 Practice 5 testing types. It begins at
the highest level by defining and describing the practice, then each item represents one of
the four testing types, such as security requirements testing. Each testing type includes its
subtypes. This example shows the full path for the Use-after-free security requirement.
to the XML file containing the test results, and the path to the JSON file containing the
standard types and requirements.
The full script can be found in Tillegg B and does the following:
1. Parses the report.xml file and extracts the names of tests that were run and their
results (pass/fail).
2. Reads the JSON structure with the testing types and REST API security require-
ments from IEC62443_cov/IEC62443-4-1-Practice5.json.
3. Populates the JSON structure with test names and results by creating a new field
called tests.
4. Creates an HTML report using a templating engine. The template can be found in
Tillegg C. An example of such a report is shown in Figur 11.
The tests and report generation process can be run on demand using the specified com-
mand. It is possible to integrate these processes into the continuous integration pipeline
or to run them once per release or major change, but these process considerations are
application-specific and outside the scope of this thesis.
28
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:39==
6
Evaluation
6.1
Target for evaluation
As stated in Avsnitt 3, the proposed test framework will be evaluated based on four key
properties. To achieve this, we use the open-source project “completely ridiculous API“
(crAPI) [38]. crAPI is a modern web application built on a microservice architecture de-
signed to educate users about API security risks. It focuses on vulnerabilities listed in the
OWASP API Security Top 10 [33]. The project includes 15 published challenges and 2
secret challenges, each illustrating a different security vulnerability.
6.2
Traceability
We propose a mechanism for manually mapping test cases to the requirements of IEC 62443-
4-1[5], with automated report generation for gap identification. The process is outlined in
avsnitt 4.5 and the implementation details are described in Avsnitt 5.4.
This approach ensures the traceability of results and facilitates the creation of artifacts
necessary for confirming compliance with IEC 62443-4-1 [5].
6.3
Usability
The test framework focuses on the usability of testing through four steps: Definitions, Con-
figuration, Testing, and Analysis. These steps facilitate the setup, execution, and analysis
of tests. While the initial setup requires manual effort to define security requirements and
the threat model, this is essential for any project. The framework consolidates these defi-
nitions into a single JSON file and includes code for log collection, allowing multiple tools
to run without needing tool-specific configurations for each application.
From the second iteration onward, the manual effort is minimized, requiring testers only
to keep the configurations up to date.
For the evaluation, we used the framework to test the open-source crAPI project [38].
We utilized default values for the Definitions step (including security requirements) and
made minimal configurations for the Configuration step by updating the JSON file with
the API specification and log collection information. The specification is available from
the project page, and log collection can be performed using the “docker logs“ command
for each running service. We created one admin user, with Schemathesis and RESTler
configured to authenticate as this user. The configuration file was used to set up three
tools, reducing the setup effort.
The resulting report in Tabell 5 is clear and easy to understand, facilitating the identification
of gaps in IEC 62443-4-1 [5] coverage and providing a quick overview of security testing
results.
The experiment supported the framework’s usability claim. Its iterative nature reduces
manual effort, and centralized configuration decreases setup time.
6.4
Performance
The duration of the testing strongly depends on the choice of test cases. Using only the
suggested tools without additional test cases, the execution times for the testing tools
running on the crAPI [38] configuration are as follows:
• RESTler: 1 hour and 40 minutes to run compile and fuzz in the fuzz-lean configu-
ration.
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
29
==PAGE:40==
• Schemathesis: 52 minutes to fuzz with the maximum number of examples set to
100.
• ZAP: 35 minutes to run an active scan on all endpoints.
It was run on a system with the following specifications:
• 32 GB RAM
• 10-core Intel Core i7-13800H processor
We can therefore conclude that security testing with the proposed framework can be in-
cluded in the pipeline to be run once per release or on demand, but not necessarily for
every commit.
6.5
Coverage
6.5.1
Current IEC 62443-4-1 coverage
Currently, tools cover specific areas of security requirements testing, including some
resource management checks and error handling, primarily targeted by RESTler. Mal-
formed input (SRT-c and VT-c) is addressed by both RESTler and Schemathesis. ZAP
focuses mainly on black-box testing and known vulnerability scanning but also covers
some security requirements.
Figur 11 contains the report for the crAPI project with three tests for each tool discussed.
If a test is listed under a security requirement or testing type, it does not necessarily mean
it fully covers it. Manual evaluation is needed to ensure complete coverage. We can only
confirm that the test performs actions related to the requirement, but it may not fully satisfy
all its aspects.
6.5.2
Vulnerability coverage
The sample project has 15 published vulnerabilities that can be targeted by an outside
attacker [38]; these are listed in Tabell 5. The developers of crAPI refer to them as chal-
lenges.
The current framework setup found 4 vulnerabilities identified by challenges 8, 9, 12, and
13. Many unsolved challenges target design issues, which are either difficult to automate
or require specialized tools.
For example, challenges 1, 2, 4, and 7 focus on whether one user can access or modify
the resources of another user, which is challenging to check in an automated way. Chal-
lenges 5, 10, 11, and 14 require a deep understanding of which properties are considered
hidden, confidential, or important. Challenges 3, 6, and 15 require specific functionality
that current tools do not provide. These gaps highlight areas for future improvement and
indicate the types of tools that may be needed.
Other issues not specifically defined as challenges, such as server errors caused by bugs,
incorrect API specifications, improper input validation, and information disclosure in er-
rors, can still significantly impact security. These issues can lead to similar challenges in
a more indirect manner, and the current test framework addresses them.
RESTler reported 12 bugs across 11 endpoints, while Schemathesis reported 326 bugs
across 31 endpoints. Both RESTler and Schemathesis identify issues that lead a server
to undefined behavior and return 500 errors. Issues with insufficient input validation may
lead to a lot of other vulnerabilities like SQL injection or XSS. ZAP, on the other hand,
focuses on well-known vulnerabilities in web applications. It reported 2 high alerts, 3
30
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:41==
Figure 11: Full test report showing coverage of IEC 62443-4-1 requirements by tests
from the test framework for the crAPI project [38]. A red background indicates a failed
test, while a blue background indicates a passed test.
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
31
==PAGE:42==
medium alerts, 2 low alerts, and 3 informational alerts. The results from Schemathesis
were replayed and logging data was gathered to provide additional information for manual
verification.
Table 5: List of crAPI Challenges provided by developers [38] and whether they were
found by testing with the current implementation of the framework.
Challenge
Found by
testing
Challenge 1: Access details of another user’s vehicle
No
Challenge 2: Access mechanic reports of other users
No
Challenge 3: Reset the password of a different user
No
Challenge 4: Find an API endpoint that leaks sensitive
information of other users
No
Challenge 5: Find an API endpoint that leaks an internal
property of a video
No
Challenge 6: Perform a layer 7 DoS using ‘contact
mechanic’ feature
No
Challenge 7: Delete a video of another user
No
Challenge 8: Get an item for free
Yes
Challenge 9: Increase your balance by $1,000 or more
Yes
Challenge 10: Update internal video properties
No
Challenge 11: Make crAPI send an HTTP call to
https://www.google.com and return the HTTP response
No
Challenge 12: Find a way to get free coupons without
knowing the coupon code
Yes
Challenge 13: Find a way to redeem a coupon that you
have already claimed by modifying the database
Yes
Challenge 14: Find an endpoint that does not perform
authentication checks for a user
No
Challenge 15: Find a way to forge valid JWT Tokens
No
The results show that the current setup did not manage to find all published vulnerabili-
ties in crAPI [38]. It did manage to identify 4 out of 15, along with more indirect issues
that require further investigation. This indicates the need for additional tools to target
other issues. However, the lack of specialized tools for certain purposes limits current
possibilities.
32
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:43==
7
Discussion
The framework designed in this thesis automates the security testing of REST APIs. The
Definitions step of the framework addresses Research question 1 by establishing some
general properties of REST APIs based on REST principles and converting them into
testing requirements. These properties are general and do not include any specialized
checks on endpoints with specific functionalities, such as authentication. Depending on
the specific functionalities of an API, there may be a need to extend the list of properties.
The test framework suggests three open-source tools: Schemathesis [27], ZAP [26], and
RESTler [28]. These tools are chosen for their general applicability and ability to test any
REST API, given its specification. They primarily operate as black-box tools, so we sug-
gested log gathering as an additional step to facilitate the analysis of tool results. This
covers Research question 1 on how to efficiently automate REST API security testing.
Additionally, the tools are highly configurable, allowing customization to meet specific
needs. For example, Schemathesis supports additional hooks and checks, RESTler al-
lows custom checks, and different user setups can be configured to test using authenti-
cated and unauthenticated users. Those functionalities can be used to further improve
tools’ usage.
As shown in Figur 11, the used tools cover part of the general security requirements for
REST APIs. While testing business logic or race conditions can be challenging, other
tools like rfswarm [39] can be used for performance testing, and Akto [40] can enhance
known vulnerability scanning. For this thesis, three tools were chosen to employ the test
framework with basic functionality. However, the framework allows for expansion and the
integration of additional tools.
It would be also beneficial to develop separate test cases targeting other testing types,
such as checking whether session cookies change between sessions or whether certain
pages are inaccessible to unauthenticated users. The framework allows for the easy
addition of new test cases to the testing client.
The final step of the test framework, Analysis, addresses Research question 2. It maps
existing test cases to IEC 62443-4-1 requirements [5]. Currently, it shows requirements
and corresponding test cases but does not include specific information on coverage per-
centage or metadata about the test run. Including such information would be beneficial.
Additionally, at present, it is unclear whether a requirement has been fully or partially
covered, as this requires manual evaluation. Marking requirements as partially or fully
covered would be advantageous, but would require a more sophisticated tagging mech-
anism.
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
33
==PAGE:44==
34
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:45==
8
Related work
Avsnitt 3.3 defines two main research questions. To find relevant papers for each ques-
tion, we created two distinct queries. We used DTU FindIt [41] to search for relevant pa-
pers due to its flexible search capabilities and its integration of data from over 70 providers,
including ACM, IEEE, and Elsevier. We utilized flexible matching (e.g., a search for ”test”
also returns ”tests” and ”testing”) and limited the results to papers available online in En-
glish, categorized as Journal Articles or Conference Papers.
8.1
REST API security properties and automation
The first query aims to find papers relevant to the first research question: which aspects
of REST API design, when ignored or incorrectly implemented, pose security threats, and
how can these aspects be efficiently tested using automated tools:
Query: ’title:(test OR automation OR automatic OR tool OR check) AND security
AND title:(REST OR Web) AND title:API’
The first part of the query focuses on the action we want to perform: testing, automating,
checking, or creating a tool in a security context. The second part focuses on the object
of the action: REST APIs. We also search for web APIs because some tools or properties
may still apply.
Table 6: List of papers discussing REST API security and its automation, including the
security properties targeted by the automation, the type of contribution provided, and the
testing type they operate on (black-box, white-box, or grey-box).
Papers
Targeted security properties
Contribution
type
Testing type
[42]
XSS attack, cryptographic failures,
token problems etc.
Tool
Black-box
[43]
Input
validation,
authorization,
state management,
concurrency,
resource, and error handling
Tool
Black-box
[32]
Resource creation,
deletion,
ac-
cess
Tool extension
Black-box
[44]
Mass assignment
Tool extension
Black-box
[45]
SQL, XSS, malicious domains, and
security check violations
Test framework
Black-box
[46]
Authorization and endpoint expo-
sure
Method
Black-box
[47]
Authorization and authentication
Approach
Grey-box
[48]
Authorization, authentication, and
error handling
Approach
Grey-box
[49]
OpenAPI specification validation
Tool
Black-box
[50]
Software bugs
Tool
Black-box
[51]
Software bugs, OpenAPI specifica-
tion validation
Tool extension
Black-box
[52]
Schema validation, invalid headers,
non-idempotent modifications etc.
Literature review
-
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
35
==PAGE:46==
This query resulted in 25 papers. We discarded 12 papers for not being relevant and 1
paper for being a duplicate. Tabell 6 contains the remaining 12 papers.
Several papers target automated testing of REST API security. Some papers describe
tools and approaches for general REST API security areas, such as authorization and
authentication [47, 48, 46, 43, 52]. These aim for completeness in specific areas, which
can be challenging. One approach to general testing is using fuzzer-like tools [49, 50, 51],
which ideally cover the entire codebase and check for bugs leading to security issues. In
practice, fuzzers are not always effective.
Other papers focus on specific vulnerabilities in REST APIs [44, 45, 42, 32]. This ap-
proach specifies properties and ways to check them, improving the soundness of the
search. For example, [32] specifies the Use-after-free property, which ensures that deleted
resources are no longer accessible. This can be checked by deleting a resource and at-
tempting to access it. While this method is good, it lacks an overall perspective.
None of the papers provide a comprehensive list of REST API properties to target. They
either focus on specific security areas like authorization or on particular vulnerabilities/prop-
erties.
This thesis, however, proposes a comprehensive list of security requirements for REST
APIs, thoroughly categorized based on REST principles and combining multiple sources.
This allows for combining all the approaches mentioned in the papers. Most papers con-
tribute by implementing tools and tool extensions [42, 43, 32, 44, 49, 50, 51] which can
be integrated into the test framework. Moreover, since the tools work as black-box ap-
proaches, we can validate their results by using a log capturing mechanism.
8.2
Mapping of requirements to test cases
The second query aims to find papers relevant to the second research question: how to
map existing security tests to IEC 62443-4-1 [5] to ensure compliance:
Query: ’map AND title:test AND title:(requirement OR specification) AND
(traceability OR trace)’
The first part of the query specifies the focus on mapping. The second part focuses on
the object: tests and requirements. Specification is used synonymously with requirement.
Finally, we include the traceability keyword to specify that mapping is done for traceability
purposes.
This query resulted in 11 papers. We discarded 6 papers for not being relevant, leaving
5 papers, including one literature review. The papers are shown in Tabell 7.
36
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:47==
Table 7: List of papers discussing the mapping of software requirements to automated
test cases for traceability and compliance, including the level of automation, the type of
requirements targeted, and the technology used for mapping.
Paper
Automation
level
Require-
ment type
Technology/method used
[53]
Automated
Functional
and
non-
functional
Natural Language Processing and Ma-
chine Learning
[54]
Automated
Functional
Karnaugh-Veitch maps
[55]
Automated
Functional
Test scenario modeling diagrams
[56]
Automated
Functional
Dynamic slicing technology
[57]
Automated,
semi-
automated,
manual
Functional
and
non-
functional
Model-based
testing,
goal-oriented
development, traceability, formal ap-
proaches,
code-centric
approaches
(literature review)
Most solutions in the papers are automated, while [57] is a literature review referencing
various solutions, not just automated ones. Most papers [54, 55, 56] target functional
requirements because they can be more easily described by text, model, or pseudocode,
allowing for automated generation of test cases. Technologies used for mapping in those
papers – Karnaugh-Veitch maps, test scenario modeling diagram and dynamic slicing
technology – do not easily work with non-functional requirements, including security re-
quirements. [53] theoretically can target security requirements if they are specific and can
be connected to test cases using Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning.
However, this is not always feasible, as it may be challenging to connect a fuzzing tool like
Schemathesis to a requirement that validates the OpenAPI schema. Another approach
mentioned in [57] is formal methods. They are much more complex and require deep
knowledge of the topic.
This thesis acknowledges the difficulty of mapping security requirements to test cases
and thus approaches it from a manual perspective, relying on the tester’s judgment for
mapping decisions. The automation provided in the thesis is in generating reports to ease
gap and coverage evaluation.
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
37
==PAGE:48==
38
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:49==
9
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to design and implement a framework for REST API security testing,
incorporating mechanisms for analyzing coverage of Practice 5 of the IEC 62443-4-1 stan-
dard [5], which defines the necessary security testing types for compliance. The goal was
achieved through a four-step iterative test framework: Definitions, Configuration, Testing,
and Analysis. Additionally, the thesis addressed two research questions.
The first research question explored specific REST API design features that could pose
security threats if ignored or incorrectly implemented. Avsnitt 4.2.2 addressed this by cre-
ating a comprehensive list of security requirements for REST APIs, categorized based on
REST API principles and integrating multiple resources. The second part of the question
focused on how to effectively test these requirements using automated tools. In order to
achieve this, we designed a test framework in Avsnitt 4 with an extendable and config-
urable design primarily targeted at security testing of REST APIs but capable of extension
to other testing types. The framework consists of four steps – Definitions, Configuration,
Testing, and Analysis – that can be iteratively repeated every time tests are run to ensure
they remain up-to-date and efficient. The test framework operates under a black-box
assumption, but it incorporates logs capturing for improving the results.
The second research question examined the mapping of existing security tests to IEC 62443-
4-1 requirements [5] to ensure compliance. Avsnitt 4.5 discusses how tests can be man-
ually mapped to the requirements, and how to automatically generate a coverage report
for IEC 62443-4-1 [5]. Avsnitt 5.4 details the practical implementation of this mechanism.
While primarily manual, the process includes some automation for report generation, be-
cause for security requirements it is not easy to automate the mapping between the tests
and requirements. The resulting report (Figur 11) is easily readable, maintains the struc-
ture of IEC 62443-4-1 [5], and helps identify gaps in REST API security testing.
Avsnitt 5 explains the implementation of the test framework using pytest and the Allure
reporting tool. The test framework was implemented with three tools: Schemathesis [27],
ZAP [26], and RESTler [28], for running general REST API tests such as fuzzing and
black-box scanning. Tool results can be further validated by capturing system logs, as
demonstrated with Schemathesis [27].
After the implementation, the test framework was evaluated on the open-source vulnera-
ble project crAPI [38]. It demonstrated the implemented traceability mechanism by map-
ping security requirements to test cases and improvement of the usability of security tools.
Users only need to fill in one configuration file with information about the system under
test (SUT), rather than setting up each tool separately.
The evaluation showed that the current capabilities of the test framework do not fully cover
the standard and find a few of vulnerabilities. The tools target many defined security
requirements, but manual evaluation is needed to determine if they fully cover them. For
vulnerability coverage of the chosen sample project crAPI [38], the tools identified 4 out
of 15 vulnerabilities. Additionally, RESTler [28] and Schemathesis [27] reported multiple
other bugs likely connected to improper input sanitization. To improve coverage, we can
employ other tools for the implementation as the test framework can be easily expanded.
Limitations may arise due to the lack of specialized tools that target specific API security
aspects.
The performance test indicated that the current implementation can be run regularly to
evaluate the security of an API and generate artifacts for IEC 62443-4-1 compliance.
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
39
==PAGE:50==
However, it may not be suitable to run on every commit.
40
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Marco Ehrlich et al. “Towards Automated Security Evaluation within the Industrial
Reference Architecture”. In: Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE 25th International Con-
ference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation. Vol. 1. 2020, pp. 1644–
1651. DOI: 10.1109/ETFA46521.2020.9211883.
[2]
Nikhil Patnaik et al. “SLR: From Saltzer and Schroeder to 2021…47 Years of Re-
search on the Development and Validation of Security API Recommendations”.
In: ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 32.3 (Apr. 2023). ISSN: 1049-331X. DOI:
10.1145/3561383.
[3]
Mohammed Ali Kunda and Izzat Alsmadi. “Practical web security testing: Evolution
of web application modules and open source testing tools”. In: Proceedings of the
2022 International Conference on Intelligent Data Science Technologies and Appli-
cations. 2022, pp. 152–155. DOI: 10.1109/IDSTA55301.2022.9923130.
[4]
ISA/IEC 62443 Series of Standards - ISA — isa.org. https://www.isa.org/standards-
and-publications/isa-standards/isa-iec-62443-series-of-standards. [Accessed 22-03-
2024].
[5]
Security for industrial automation and control systems. Part 4-1: Secure product
development lifecycle requirements (IEC 62443-4-1:2018). Standard. International
Electrotechnical Commission, Mar. 2018.
[6]
N. Madden. API Security in Action. Manning Publications, 2020. ISBN: 9781617296024.
[7]
B. Jin, S. Sahni, and A. Shevat. Designing Web APIs: Building APIs that Developers
Love. O’Reilly Media, 2018. ISBN: 9781492026921.
[8]
Roy Thomas Fielding. “Architectural styles and the design of network-based soft-
ware architectures”. Publication. University of California, Irvine, 2000.
[9]
SOAP Specifications — w3.org. https://www.w3.org/TR/soap/. [Accessed 31-07-
2024].
[10]
About webhooks - GitHub Docs — docs.github.com. https://docs.github.com/en/
webhooks/about-webhooks. [Accessed 31-07-2024].
[11]
Ian Fette. RFC 6455: The WebSocket Protocol — datatracker.ietf.org. https : / /
datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6455. [Accessed 31-07-2024].
[12]
Gerald Schermann, Jürgen Cito, and Philipp Leitner. “All the Services Large and
Micro: Revisiting Industrial Practice in Services Computing”. In: Proceedings of the
2015 International Conference on Service-Oriented Computing Workshops. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2016, pp. 36–47. ISBN: 978-3-662-50539-7.
[13]
M. Masse. REST API Design Rulebook: Designing Consistent RESTful Web Ser-
vice Interfaces. O’Reilly Media, 2011. ISBN: 9781449319908.
[14]
Yunwei Zhao and Xin Wan. “The Design of Embedded Web System based on REST
Architecture”. In: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE 4th Advanced Information Technol-
ogy, Electronic and Automation Control Conference. Vol. 1. 2019, pp. 99–103. DOI:
10.1109/IAEAC47372.2019.8997929.
[15]
S.M. Sohan, Craig Anslow, and Frank Maurer. “A Case Study of Web API Evolu-
tion”. In: Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE World Congress on Services. 2015, pp. 245–
252. DOI: 10.1109/SERVICES.2015.43.
[16]
About Swagger Specification | Documentation | Swagger — swagger.io. https://
swagger.io/docs/specification/about/. [Accessed 25-07-2024].
[17]
Gary McGraw. “Software Security: Building Security In”. In: Proceedings of the 2006
17th International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering. 2006, pp. 6–6.
DOI: 10.1109/ISSRE.2006.43.
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
41
==PAGE:52==
[18]
Dinis Barroqueiro Cruz, João Rafael Almeida, and José Luís Oliveira. “Open Source
Solutions for Vulnerability Assessment: A Comparative Analysis”. In: IEEE Access
11 (2023), pp. 100234–100255. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3315595.
[19]
Jinqiu Yang et al. “Towards Better Utilizing Static Application Security Testing”. In:
Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software En-
gineering: Software Engineering in Practice. 2019, pp. 51–60. DOI: 10.1109/ICSE-
SEIP.2019.00014.
[20]
Francesc Mateo Tudela et al. “On Combining Static, Dynamic and Interactive Anal-
ysis Security Testing Tools to Improve OWASP Top Ten Security Vulnerability De-
tection in Web Applications”. In: Applied Sciences 10.24 (2020). ISSN: 2076-3417.
DOI: 10.3390/app10249119.
[21]
Yuanyuan Pan. “Interactive Application Security Testing”. In: Proceedings of the
2019 International Conference on Smart Grid and Electrical Automation. 2019, pp. 558–
561. DOI: 10.1109/ICSGEA.2019.00131.
[22]
Hala Assal and Sonia Chiasson. “Security in the Software Development Lifecycle”.
In: Proceedings of the 2018 Symposium On Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS)
at the USENIX Security Symposium. 2018.
[23]
Ralph Ankele et al. “Requirements and Recommendations for IoT/IIoT Models to au-
tomate Security Assurance through Threat Modelling, Security Analysis and Pene-
tration Testing”. In: Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Availability,
Reliability and Security. ARES ’19. Canterbury, CA, United Kingdom: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2019. ISBN: 9781450371643. DOI: 10.1145/3339252.
3341482.
[24]
Isha, Abhinav Sharma, and M. Revathi. “Automated API Testing”. In: Proceedings
of the 2018 3rd International Conference on Inventive Computation Technologies.
2018, pp. 788–791. DOI: 10.1109/ICICT43934.2018.9034254.
[25]
API Security Tools | OWASP Foundation — owasp.org. https://owasp.org/www-
community/api_security_tools. [Accessed 24-07-2024].
[26]
The ZAP Homepage — zaproxy.org. https://www.zaproxy.org/. [Accessed 10-07-
2024].
[27]
Schemathesis 3.31.1 documentation. https : / / schemathesis . readthedocs . io / en /
stable/. [Accessed 10-07-2024].
[28]
Vaggelis Atlidakis, Patrice Godefroid, and Marina Polishchuk. “RESTler: Stateful
REST API Fuzzing”. In: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Con-
ference on Software Engineering. 2019, pp. 748–758. DOI: 10.1109/ICSE.2019.
00083.
[29]
Peter Papcun, Erik Kajáti, and Jiří Koziorek. “Human Machine Interface in Concept
of Industry 4.0”. In: Proceedings of the 2018 World Symposium on Digital Intelli-
gence for Systems and Machines. 2018, pp. 289–296. DOI: 10.1109/DISA.2018.
8490603.
[30]
OWASP Top Ten Proactive Controls 2018 | C1: Define Security Requirements |
OWASP Foundation — owasp.org. https : / / owasp . org / www - project - proactive -
controls/v3/en/c1-security-requirements. [Accessed 21-03-2024].
[31]
Quang Do, Ben Martini, and Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo. “The role of the adversary
model in applied security research”. In: Computers & Security 81 (2019), pp. 156–
181. ISSN: 0167-4048. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2018.12.002.
[32]
Vaggelis Atlidakis, Patrice Godefroid, and Marina Polishchuk. “Checking Security
Properties of Cloud Service REST APIs”. In: Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE 13th
International Conference on Software Testing, Validation and Verification. 2020,
pp. 387–397. DOI: 10.1109/ICST46399.2020.00046.
42
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:53==
[33]
OWASP API Security Project team. OWASP API Security Top 10 — owasp.org.
https://owasp.org/API-Security/editions/2023/en/0x00-header/. [Accessed 28-03-
2024].
[34]
WSTG - v4.2 | OWASP Foundation — owasp.org. https://owasp.org/www-project-
web-security-testing-guide/v42/4-Web_Application_Security_Testing/00-Introduction_
and_Objectives/README. [Accessed 02-04-2024].
[35]
pytest documentation — docs.pytest.org. https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/. [Ac-
cessed 28-07-2024].
[36]
Allure Report — allurereport.org. https://allurereport.org/. [Accessed 28-07-2024].
[37]
ZAP; OpenAPI Support — zaproxy.org. https://www.zaproxy.org/docs/desktop/
addons/openapi-support/. [Accessed 26-07-2024].
[38]
GitHub - OWASP/crAPI: completely ridiculous API (crAPI) — github.com. https :
//github.com/OWASP/crAPI. [Accessed 16-07-2024].
[39]
GitHub - damies13/rfswarm: Robot Framework Swarm — github.com. https : / /
github.com/damies13/rfswarm. [Accessed 16-07-2024].
[40]
GitHub - akto-api-security/akto: Proactive, Open source API security →API discov-
ery, Testing in CI/CD, Test Library with 150+ Tests, Add custom tests, Sensitive
data exposure — github.com. https://github.com/akto-api-security/akto. [Accessed
16-07-2024].
[41]
DTU Findit - the digital library — bibliotek.dtu.dk. https://www.bibliotek.dtu.dk/en/
find-information/dtu-findit. [Accessed 30-07-2024].
[42]
Sébastien Salva and Jarod Sue. “Security Testing of RESTful APIs with Test Case
Mutation”. eng. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Evaluation of
Novel Approaches to Software Engineering (2024), pp. 582–589. ISSN: 21844895.
DOI: 10.5220/0012698600003687.
[43]
Vaggelis Atlidakis, Patrice Godefroid, and Marina Polishchuk. “REST-ler: Automatic
Intelligent REST API Fuzzing [arXiv]”. eng. In: Arxiv (2018), 14 pp.
[44]
Davide Corradini, Michele Pasqua, and Mariano Ceccato. “Automated Black-Box
Testing of Mass Assignment Vulnerabilities in RESTful APIs”. eng. In: Proceedings
of the International Conference on Software Engineering (2023), pp. 2553–2564.
ISSN: 15581225. DOI: 10.1109/ICSE48619.2023.00213.
[45]
Md Shohel Khan, Rubaiyat Sha Fardin Siam, and Muhammad Abdullah Adnan. “A
framework for checking and mitigating the security vulnerabilities of cloud service
RESTful APIs”. eng. In: Service Oriented Computing and Applications (2024), pp. 1–
22. ISSN: 18632394, 18632386. DOI: 10.1007/s11761-024-00404-z.
[46]
Yuki Ishida et al. “Automated Vulnerability Assessment Approach for Web API that
Considers Requests and Responses”. eng. In: Proceedings of the International
Conference on Advanced Communication Technology (2024), pp. 1521–1533. ISSN:
17389445. DOI: 10.23919/ICACT60172.2024.10471939.
[47]
Hsiao Jung Chen, Shang Pin Ma, and Hsueh Cheng Lu. “Collaborative Security
Annotation and Online Testing for Web APIs”. eng. In: Proceedings of the 2021
IEEE International Conference on E-business Engineering (2021), pp. 9–15. DOI:
10.1109/ICEBE52470.2021.00009.
[48]
Tobias Fertig and Peter Braun. “Model-driven testing of RESTful APIs”. eng. In:
Proceedings of the 2015 Companion of the 24th International Conference on World
Wide Web (2015), pp. 1497–1502. DOI: 10.1145/2740908.2743045.
[49]
Duarte Felicio, Jose Simao, and Nuno Datia. “Rapitest: Continuous black-box test-
ing of restful web apis”. eng. In: Procedia Computer Science 219 (2023), pp. 537–
545. ISSN: 18770509. DOI: 10.1016/j.procs.2023.01.322.
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
43
==PAGE:54==
[50]
Chung Hsuan Tsai, Shi Chun Tsai, and Shih Kun Huang. “REST API Fuzzing by
Coverage Level Guided Blackbox Testing”. eng. In: Proceedings of the IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and Security 2021- (2021),
pp. 291–300. ISSN: 26939177. DOI: 10.1109/QRS54544.2021.00040.
[51]
Chien Hung Liu, Shu Ling Chen, and Hong Kai Huang. “Automated Test Input Gen-
eration for Testing Representational State Transfer (REST) Application Program-
ming Interface (API) using Parameter Fuzzing”. eng. In: Proceedings of the 2023
IEEE 6th International Conference on Knowledge Innovation and Invention (2023),
pp. 249–253. ISSN: 27704785. DOI: 10.1109/ICKII58656.2023.10332662.
[52]
Man Zhang and Andrea Arcuri. “Open Problems in Fuzzing RESTful APIs: A Com-
parison of Tools”. eng. In: Acm Transactions on Software Engineering and Method-
ology 32.6 (2023), p. 144. ISSN: 15577392, 1049331x. DOI: 10.1145/3597205.
[53]
Kae Sawada et al. “Intelligent requirement-to-test-case traceability system via Natu-
ral Language Processing and Machine Learning”. In: Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE
9th International Conference on Space Mission Challenges for Information Technol-
ogy. 2023, pp. 78–83. DOI: 10.1109/SMC-IT56444.2023.00017.
[54]
Nils Henning Müllner. “Karnaugh-Veitch Maps as Minimal Formal Contract between
Textual Requirements and Tests: A Use-Case Based Technical Analysis”. eng. In:
Electronics 11.15 (2022), p. 2430. ISSN: 20799292. DOI: 10.3390/electronics11152430.
[55]
Robin Tommy et al. “Test scenario modeling: Modeling test scenarios diagrammati-
cally using specification based testing techniques”. eng. In: Proceedings of the 2015
3rd International Conference on Computer, Communication, Control and Informa-
tion Technology (2015), p. 7060198. DOI: 10.1109/C3IT.2015.7060198.
[56]
J.J. Li and J.R. Horgan. “A tool suite for diagnosis and testing of software design
specifications”. In: Proceedings of the 2000 International Conference on Depend-
able Systems and Networks. 2000, pp. 295–304. DOI: 10.1109/ICDSN.2000.857553.
[57]
Zeinab Alizadeh Barmi, Amir Hossein Ebrahimi, and Robert Feldt. “Alignment of
requirements specification and testing: A systematic mapping study”. eng. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 2011 4th IEEE International Conference on Software Testing, Ver-
ification, and Validation Workshops (2011), pp. 476–485. DOI: 10.1109/ICSTW.
2011.58.
44
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:55==
A
JSON dictionary of IEC 62443-4-1
requirements
1
{
2
"name": "IEC62443-4-1 Practice 5",
3
"description": "Detailed description of IEC62443-4-1 Practice 5 requirements and testing
procedures",
,→
4
"items": [
5
{
6
"name": "SVV-1: Security requirements testing",
7
"description": "testing functional security requirements",
8
"items": [
9
{
10
"name": "SRT-a",
11
"description": "Functional testing of security requirements",
12
"items": [
13
{"name": "Use-after-free", "description": "Resources should not be available
after deletion", "items": []},
,→
14
{"name": "Resource-leak", "description": "If a resource has not been created,
it should not be accessible and 'leak' any side-effects in the backend
service", "items": []},
,→
,→
15
{"name": "Resource-hierarchy", "description": "A child resource of a parent
must not be accessible from another parent", "items": []},
,→
16
{"name": "User-namespace", "description": "A resource created by one user
should not be accessible by another user", "items": []},
,→
17
{"name": "Invalid-dynamic-object", "description": "A system should not accept
and process invalid objects", "items": []},
,→
18
{"name": "No-overwrite", "description": "Users should not be able to overwrite
other users' resources", "items": []},
,→
19
{"name": "Restricted-resource-consumption", "description": "API should limit
client interaction and resource consumption", "items": []},
,→
20
{"name": "Payload-body", "description": "Invalid body parameters should not be
accepted", "items": []},
,→
21
{"name": "OpenAPI-specification-conformance", "description": "The OpenAPI
specification cannot be bypassed; input checks and defined security
mechanisms should be enforced", "items": []},
,→
,→
22
{"name": "Server-side-request-forgery", "description": "User-supplied URL must
be checked to avoid server-side request forgery flaws", "items": []},
,→
23
{"name": "Error-messages", "description": "Returned error messages should not
reveal system inner workings", "items": []},
,→
24
{"name": "CORS-policy", "description": "A Cross-Origin Resource Sharing policy
should be enforced to control access from different origins", "items":
[]},
,→
,→
25
{"name": "Security-headers", "description": "Enforce usage of other security
headers (if applicable)", "items": []},
,→
26
{"name": "Improper-inventory-management", "description": "Documentation should
not have any blindspots, and be up to date", "items": []},
,→
27
{"name": "HEAD-Authentication-bypass", "description": "Resources should not be
available with HEAD if they are not available with GET", "items": []},
,→
28
{"name": "CSRF-token-reuse", "description": "CSRF tokens should not work for
another user/session", "items": []},
,→
29
{"name": "Session-cookies", "description": "Session cookies should change
every session for the same user", "items": []},
,→
30
{"name": "Logout", "description": "Logout should kill session cookie",
"items": []},
,→
31
{"name": "Broken-authentication", "description": "Ensure proper authentication
mechanisms are in place", "items": []},
,→
32
{"name": "Object-property-level-authorization", "description": "Ensure object
property level authorization", "items": []},
,→
33
{"name": "Function-level-authorization", "description": "Ensure function level
authorization", "items": []},
,→
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
45
==PAGE:56==
34
{"name": "Cache-poisoning", "description": "Cache poisoning is not possible",
"items": []},
,→
35
{"name": "Race-condition", "description": "Responses containing multiple
properties of the same object should always match the same state of the
single object", "items": []},
,→
,→
36
{"name": "Business-logic", "description": "Vulnerable points of business model
should be defined, ensuring that potential bottlenecks are addressed and
mitigated", "items": []}
,→
,→
37
]
38
},
39
{
40
"name": "SRT-b",
41
"description": "Performance and scalability testing",
42
"items": []
43
},
44
{
45
"name": "SRT-c",
46
"description": "Boundary/edge/unexpected input testing",
47
"items": []
48
}
49
]
50
},
51
{
52
"name": "SVV-2: Threat mitigation testing",
53
"description": "",
54
"items": [
55
{
56
"name": "TMT-a",
57
"description": "Making sure mitigation exists and works as designed",
58
"items": []
59
},
60
{
61
"name": "TMT-b",
62
"description": "Tests to try to thwart it",
63
"items": []
64
}
65
]
66
},
67
{
68
"name": "SVV-3: Vulnerability testing",
69
"description": "",
70
"items": [
71
{
72
"name": "VT-a",
73
"description": "Abuse case or malformed or unexpected input testing that focuses
on uncovering security issues",
,→
74
"items": []
75
},
76
{
77
"name": "VT-b",
78
"description": "Attack surface analysis",
79
"items": []
80
},
81
{
82
"name": "VT-c",
83
"description": "Black box scanning",
84
"items": []
85
},
86
{
87
"name": "VT-d",
88
"description": "",
89
"items": [
46
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:57==
90
{
91
"name": "VT-d1",
92
"description": "Known vulnerabilities in the product software components",
93
"items": []
94
},
95
{
96
"name": "VT-d2",
97
"description": "Linking to vulnerable libraries",
98
"items": []
99
},
100
{
101
"name": "VT-d3",
102
"description": "Security rule violations",
103
"items": []
104
},
105
{
106
"name": "VT-d4",
107
"description": "Compiler settings that can lead to vulnerabilities",
108
"items": []
109
}
110
]
111
},
112
{
113
"name": "VT-e",
114
"description": "Dynamic runtime resource management",
115
"items": []
116
}
117
]
118
},
119
{
120
"name": "SVV-4: Penetration testing",
121
"description": "Out of scope",
122
"items": []
123
}
124
]
125
}
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
47
==PAGE:58==
B
Python script to map test results to
requirements
1
import json
2
import sys
3
import xml.etree.ElementTree as ET
4
from collections import defaultdict
5
6
from jinja2 import Environment
7
from jinja2 import FileSystemLoader
8
9
10
def parse_xml_report(file_path):
11
"""
12
Parses an XML report file and extracts test results.
13
14
Args:
15
file_path (str): The path to the XML report file.
16
17
Returns:
18
dict: A nested dictionary containing the test results. The keys of the outer
dictionary are the requirement values,
,→
19
and the values are dictionaries. The keys of the inner dictionaries are the
test names, and the values are
,→
20
lists of outcomes (either "pass" or "fail").
21
"""
22
tree = ET.parse(file_path)
23
root = tree.getroot()
24
test_results = defaultdict(lambda: defaultdict(list))
25
26
for testcase in root.findall(".//testcase"):
27
test_name = (
28
testcase.attrib["classname"] + "::" + testcase.attrib["name"]
29
)
30
outcome = "pass" if testcase.find(".//failure") == None else "fail"
31
properties = testcase.find(".//properties")
32
33
if properties:
34
for prop in properties:
35
if prop.attrib["name"] == "reqcov":
36
req_value = prop.attrib["value"]
37
test_results[req_value][test_name].append(outcome)
38
39
return test_results
40
41
42
def read_json_structure(file_path):
43
"""
44
Reads and returns the JSON structure from the given file path.
45
46
Args:
47
file_path (str): The path to the JSON file.
48
49
Returns:
50
dict: The JSON structure loaded from the file.
51
"""
52
with open(file_path, "r") as file:
53
return json.load(file)
54
55
48
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:59==
56
def merge_test_results(data, test_results):
57
"""
58
Merge the test results into the given data structure.
59
60
Args:
61
data (dict): The data structure containing the test items.
62
test_results (dict): The test results to be merged.
63
64
Returns:
65
None
66
"""
67
for item in data["items"]:
68
if item["name"] in test_results:
69
item["tests"] = [
70
{"name": test_name, "status": status}
71
for test_name, statuses in test_results[item["name"]].items()
72
for status in statuses
73
]
74
else:
75
item["tests"] = []
76
77
if "items" in item:
78
merge_test_results({"items": item["items"]}, test_results)
79
80
81
def create_html_report(json_structure):
82
"""
83
Creates an HTML report based on the provided JSON structure.
84
85
Args:
86
json_structure (dict): The JSON structure containing the data for the report.
87
88
Returns:
89
None
90
"""
91
env = Environment(loader=FileSystemLoader("."))
92
template = env.get_template("IEC62443_cov/template.html")
93
html_content = template.render(items=json_structure["items"])
94
with open("standard_coverage_report.html", "w") as file:
95
file.write(html_content)
96
97
98
def main():
99
"""
100
Entry point of the script.
101
102
Usage: python script.py <path_to_xml_report> <path_to_json_structure>
103
104
This function takes two command line arguments: the path to an XML report file and the
path to a JSON structure file.
,→
105
It parses the XML report, reads the JSON structure, merges the test results with the
JSON structure, and creates an HTML report.
,→
106
"""
107
if len(sys.argv) != 3:
108
print(
109
"Usage: python script.py <path_to_xml_report> <path_to_json_structure>"
110
)
111
sys.exit(1)
112
113
xml_file_path = sys.argv[1]
114
json_file_path = sys.argv[2]
115
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
49
==PAGE:60==
116
test_results = parse_xml_report(xml_file_path)
117
118
json_structure = read_json_structure(json_file_path)
119
120
merge_test_results(json_structure, test_results)
121
122
create_html_report(json_structure)
123
124
125
if __name__ == "__main__":
126
main()
50
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:61==
C
HTML template for mapping
1
<!DOCTYPE html>
2
<html>
3
<head>
4
<title>IEC62443 Coverage Report</title>
5
<style>
6
ul, li {
7
list-style-type: none;
8
padding-left: 20px;
9
}
10
li {
11
margin: 5px 0;
12
font-size: 16px; /* Text size */
13
border-bottom: 2px solid #ddd; /* Subtle line under each item for better
separation */
,→
14
}
15
strong {
16
font-size: 18px; /* Larger text for dictionary keys */
17
position: relative;
18
}
19
.has-items {
20
cursor: pointer; /* Cursor changes to pointer when hovering over strong
elements with items */
,→
21
}
22
.has-items::before {
23
content: " "; /* Right arrow */
24
position: absolute;
25
left: -20px; /* Adjust this value to position the arrow */
26
top: 0;
27
font-size: 16px;
28
transition: transform 0.3s;
29
}
30
.active::before {
31
transform: rotate(90deg); /* Rotate the arrow when active */
32
}
33
.nested {
34
display: none; /* Hide nested lists by default */
35
}
36
.active {
37
display: block; /* Show nested lists when active */
38
}
39
</style>
40
</head>
41
<body>
42
<h1 style="font-size: 24px;">IEC62443 Coverage Report</h1>
43
<ul>
44
{% for item in items %}
45
<li>
46
<strong onclick="toggleNested(this)" {% if item["items"]
%}class="has-items"{% endif %}>{{ item["name"] }}</strong> {% if
item["description"] %} : {{ item["description"] }} {% endif %}
,→
,→
47
48
{% if item["items"] %}
49
<ul class="nested">
50
{% for subitem in item["items"] recursive %}
51
<li style="background-color: white;">
52
<strong onclick="toggleNested(this)" {% if subitem["items"]
%}class="has-items"{% endif %}>{{ subitem["name"]
}}</strong> {% if subitem["description"] %}
: {{
subitem["description"] }} {% endif %}
,→
,→
,→
53
{% if subitem["items"] %}
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
51
==PAGE:62==
54
<ul class="nested">
55
{{ loop(subitem["items"]) }}
56
</ul>
57
{% endif %}
58
<ul>
59
{% for test in subitem["tests"] %}
60
<li style="background-color: {{ 'lightblue' if
test.status == 'pass' else '#ffcccc' }};">
,→
61
{{ test.name }} - {{ test.status }}
62
</li>
63
{% endfor %}
64
</ul>
65
</li>
66
{% endfor %}
67
</ul>
68
{% endif %}
69
</li>
70
{% endfor %}
71
</ul>
72
73
<script>
74
function toggleNested(element) {
75
if (!element.classList.contains('has-items')) {
76
return; // Do nothing if the element does not have sub-items
77
}
78
let nextUl = element.nextElementSibling;
79
while (nextUl && nextUl.tagName !== 'UL') {
80
nextUl = nextUl.nextElementSibling;
81
}
82
if (nextUl) {
83
nextUl.classList.toggle('active');
84
element.classList.toggle('active');
85
}
86
}
87
</script>
88
</body>
89
</html>
52
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
==PAGE:63==
D
Contents of conftest.py for registering
requirement markers for testcases
1
import pytest
2
3
def pytest_addoption(parser):
4
parser.addoption(
5
"-E",
6
action="store",
7
metavar="NAME",
8
help="only run tests matching the environment NAME.",
9
)
10
11
def pytest_configure(config):
12
# register an additional marker
13
config.addinivalue_line(
14
"markers", "reqcov(name): mark test to run only on named environment"
15
)
16
17
def pytest_collection_modifyitems(session, config, items):
18
for item in items:
19
for marker in item.iter_markers(name="reqcov"):
20
test_id = marker.args[0]
21
item.user_properties.append(("reqcov", test_id))
REST API Security Testing within the IEC 62443-4-1 Standard
53
==PAGE:64==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
