==PAGE:1==
A Comparative Study of Context-Aware
Recommender Models: Effectiveness,
Preprocessing & Context Representation
Alex Abades Grimes (s212784)
Master of Science in Engineering
2024
==PAGE:2==
b
.
==PAGE:3==
A Comparative Study of Context-Aware
Recommender Models: Effectiveness,
Preprocessing & Context Representation
Report written by:
Alex Abades Grimes (s212784)
Advisor(s):
Maria Maistro, Tenure-track Assistant Professor at the Department of Computer Science at KU
Jess Frellsen, Associate Professor at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sci-
ence at DTU
DTU Compute
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
compute@compute.dtu.dk
Project period:
27 January 2024- 27 June 2024
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©, 2024
==PAGE:4==
d
==PAGE:5==
a
==PAGE:6==
DTU Compute
Department Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 30 31
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Since the emergence of Context-Aware Recommendation Systems (CARS) at the ACM
RecSys conference in 2008, extensive research has assessed the impact of context on rec-
ommendations and the ways in which Matrix Factorization can be adapted to include
contextual information. This study explores the integration of context in recommenda-
tion systems by comparing traditional models like General Matrix Factorization (GMF)
and Neural Collaborative Filtering (NCF) with context-aware variants (CNCF) across
two public datasets, Frappe and Yelp. The study evaluates various feature encoding
techniques, including One-Hot Encoding and autoencoder-based and how different con-
textual representations affect the model’s performance. Offline evaluation demonstrates
that context enhances recommendations in large, complex datasets. The Context-Aware
Neural Collaborative Filtering (CNCF) model outstand on the Yelp dataset through
effective contextual integration. Additionally, the study reveals that data filtering tech-
niques (2-Core and 5-Core) minimally impact performance, whereas the choice of feature
encoding significantly influences results on large datasets.
==PAGE:8==
ii
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I want to thank Maria, for all her support and the guidance she has provided
throughout my master’s thesis. When I doubted I would finish my master’s, she agreed
to supervise the thesis in a field that I had been trying to propose to my professors for
the previous four months. I also want to thank Jes, who despite having limited time,
agreed to co-supervise the thesis and assist with academic management at the university.
Secondly, I would like to thank my family for all the support received; without them,
I would not have had the opportunity to study abroad. My close friends from Spain and
here in Denmark, Pau, Roger, and Mario, for taking the time to listen to me complaining
about problems I have faced on this journey. I also thank my startup co-founder and
friend Ferran, for understanding my situation and supporting me with the workload and
my sometimes bad mood.
Finally, and the most important, I would like to thank my partner Laura for all her
support, for letting me see the light when I thought I was in a well, for listening all
my complains about my master, my startup and my work and taking me out to have a
dinner or a walk and forget about everything I was going through.
==PAGE:10==
iv
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Introduction to Recommended Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Content-Based Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Collaborative Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Memory Based
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Model Based
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Hybrid methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Context Aware Recommended systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5.1
Representation of context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5.2
Contextual pre-filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5.3
Contextual post-filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5.4
Contextual modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Related Work
13
3.1
Context Aware Matrix Factorization (CAMF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Tensor Factorization (TF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Markov Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Bandit Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Methodology
19
4.1
Aim of the study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Recommender Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.1
Top Pop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.2
General Matrix Factorization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.3
Neural Collaborative Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.4
Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:12==
vi
Contents
4.3
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.1
Data Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.2
Data Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
Design of the experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Experimental setup
45
5.1
Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Implementation Detail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2.1
Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2.2
Packages and Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3
Model Complexity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.4
Hyper-parameters tunning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Experiments
57
6.1
Setting up Baseline Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.1.1
Performance Comparison on Baseline Models . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.1.2
Performance on different number of factors . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.1.3
Effect of filtering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.2
Neural Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.2.1
Reproducibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.2.2
Performance Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.2.3
Influence of Filtering on the Neural Component . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.2.4
Performance on Different Number of Factors . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.2.5
Influence of the pool of items on the Neural Component
. . . . .
72
6.2.6
Influence of Different Encoding Strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.2.7
Analysis of the Autoencoder Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7
Conclusions
77
Appendix A Data
79
A.1 Frappe Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.2 Yelp Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
Appendix B Code setup examples
87
List of Figures
I
List of Tables
III
Bibliography
V
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The field of recommendation systems is broad, employing various techniques.
One
branch that captures the intricate preferences of individuals is Context-Aware Recom-
mendation Systems (CARS), introduced in 2008 at the ACM RecSys conference [1]. User
preferences change throughout the day, and context plays a crucial role in determining
what content a user would like to consume. Context significantly influences user prefer-
ences; for instance, a person’s reception of a movie can vary depending on factors such
as location, mood, and company.
In CARS, various techniques have been employed to improve the precision and rel-
evance of the recommended content. Some of these techniques extend the traditional
Matrix Factorization [2] to include context, such as Context-Aware Matrix Factoriza-
tion [3] and Tensor Factorization (TF) [4]. Other techniques rely on existing algorithms,
such as Bandit algorithms, which address the uncertainty of items by exploring and
exploiting content [5], or Markov processes in Markov Chain Recommendation Systems
(MCRS), which use past user interactions and their context to predict future interactions
by modeling the transition probabilities between items [6], usually employed in sequen-
tial recommendation systems. Recent studies leverage the use of attention mechanisms
for feature selection, such as Attentional Factorization Machines (AFM), which use at-
tention networks to learn the importance of feature interactions [7] or AutoInt, which
employs self-attentive neural networks to automatically learn feature interactions [8].
This study will compare different models that either include or do not include context,
specifically popular items (TopPop), General Matrix Factorization (GMF) [9], Neural
Collaborative Filtering (NCF) [10], Contextual Neural Collaborative (CNCF) with One-
Hot-Encoding (OHE) and with an autoencoder (AE) [11]. CNCF is an extensions of
NCF that can include context. The objective is to investigate the influence of context on
different models, specifically exploring how different contextual representations can help
improve the accuracy of recommendation systems (RS). Additionally, the influence of the
minimum number of interactions of users and items on the models will be investigated.
For this reason, two public datasets have been selected: Frappe and Yelp. These
datasets have been chosen because of their size and contextual information.
While
Frappe is a relatively small dataset that can simulate a small database in an ongoing
application, Yelp has many users, items, and interactions, and will reveal how these
models perform when the dataset scales. Moreover, Yelp’s contextual features can be
transformed to match those of Frappe, allowing for a comparative analysis of how con-
textual features influence recommendation systems across datasets of different scales
and natures.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
This thesis contributes to:
• Comparison of Context-Aware Recommendation Systems (CARS) models, includ-
ing TopPop, General Matrix Factorization (GMF), Neural Collaborative Filtering
(NCF), Context Neural Collaborative Filtering with OHE and AE, using two pub-
lic datasets, Frappe and Yelp.
• Analysis of the effect of data pre-processing and filtering on the models accuracy,
specifically investigating the impact of 2-core and 5-core filtering techniques, which
involve using users or items with two or more and five or more interactions, re-
spectively.
• Evaluation of the impact of different contextual feature representation strategies on
context-aware models, focusing on compact encoding methods that reduce sparsity
due and compared to traditional one-hot encoding techniques.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This chapter will briefly describe the necessary knowledge to understand how different
Recommendation Systems (RS) work.
It will begin with a brief introduction, detailing the two major types of recommenda-
tion models. Subsequently, it will explain how both models can be used to compensate
for their weaknesses and then, what are the most common problems in RS. Finally, it
will explain what Context-Aware Recommendation Systems (CARS) are and the ways
in which context can be used within these systems conceptually.
2.1
Introduction to Recommended Systems
Recommendation systems (RS) are a set of algorithms whose main objective is to assist
users in searching for relevant information [12].
These systems have evolved signifi-
cantly since their first appearance in the 1990s, with the first attempts to implement
collaborative recommended systems [13]. Since then, recommendation algorithms have
been applied in a wide range of fields, including electronic commerce (e-commerce), elec-
tronic learning (e-learning), electronic government (e-government), electronic libraries
(e-library), and information services, online business (e-business). Its coverage extends
to a wide variety of applications such as music, movies, websites, tourism, books, docu-
ments, research articles, food and other general products.
Some of the most successful companies that use these systems include Amazon [14],
Netflix [15], and Spotify [16], among others. These companies have demonstrated how
recommended systems can significantly improve user experience and contribute to busi-
ness success.
The main idea behind these algorithms, is to discover similarities between what a
user liked and what the user might like. Basically, recommending products that have
a high probability of being to your liking, given their characteristics or the interactions
with other users or products. Below, in Figure 2.1, a basic explanation on how recom-
mendation system works can be observed.
==PAGE:16==
4
2 Background
Figure 2.1. Basic understanding of a recommendation [17]
To date, various types of recommendation algorithms have been used, which differ
greatly in the nature of their recommendations.
As can be seen in Figure 2.1, the
recommendation can be based on different approaches. The first approach, a) on Figure
2.1, is based solely on the suggestions of other users, alike to the classic ”word of mouth”
when choosing a service or product. This implies that you might lean toward an option
because of the positive experiences friends or family have had with it. On the other
hand, the second recommendation, b) on Figure 2.1, is based on your previous purchases,
suggesting that a related product might interest you. If you have been buying cameras,
probably you are a photography fan, and therefore, you may buy more accessories for
your camera.
The diagram in Figure 2.2, separates model-based, collaborative filtering, and hybrid
methods, which will be described in the next section.
Figure 2.2. Taxonomy of recommended system model types [18]
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Content-Based Systems
5
2.2
Content-Based Systems
Content-based recommendation models operate mainly by examining user interactions
with various items. These interactions can be direct, like ratings, reviews, and prefer-
ences, or indirect, such as time spent and interaction history [19]. This models mainly
takes into account the features extracted from the item itself [20], and based on the
interaction that a user has had with the items, it creates a profile that assigns certain
scores to the different characteristics. These scores are used to recommend items in the
future.
Let’s look at a practical example: if a user frequently interacts with items that are
not expensive and belong to the painting section, more specifically, accessories such
as brushes. The model will create a profile for that specific user with high scores on
the characteristics: Not expensive, Painting, Brushes. Consequently, items that do not
match this specifications will not be recommended to the user. For example, expensive
computers accessories like monitors will not be recommended, as they will not match
user interests.
A more illustrative representation of this concept can be found below, in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3. Basic recommendation model [19]
One of the main challenges of these types of algorithms is their tendency to rec-
ommend items that strictly fit the preferences already established in the user’s profile,
making it diﬀicult to recommend items that could potentially fit the user’s interest but
fall outside their usual preferences. This can limit the diversity of products the user can
find and, consequently, restrict the exploration of new categories or interests.
The representation of the items can take various forms, whether structured or un-
structured [12]. A structured representation could be given by defining pre-established
characteristics, where predefined attributes with different possible options are specified
i,e,. Price, Category, Size, Weight, etc. In contrast, an unstructured representation of
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Background
the items is more commonly observed in these models, given that most of the charac-
teristics are extracted from texts, such as the description of a product [12].Due to the
complexity of understanding unstructured text, semantic analysis techniques are often
employed. These techniques represent text using methods like term frequency (TF, IDF,
etc.) [19] or word embeddings (Word2Vec, GloVe, etc.).
Content-based approaches have been applied in various recommendation systems.
Examples include a book recommendation system using text categorization [21], a recom-
mendation system employing a graph indexing approach [22], and a movie recommender
system based on temporal user preferences [23].
2.3
Collaborative Filtering
Unlike many content-based approaches which utilize the attributes of users and items,
Collaborative Filtering (CF) approaches make predictions by using only the user-item
interaction information [24].
The main idea behind this strategy is to group users into subgroups, based on the
principle that, just like in real life, people with similar tastes tend to prefer the same
items. In this way, items that have been well-received by a subgroup can be recom-
mended to other users who fit the description of that group [25].
For example, if a group of people are passionate about motorcycles and frequently
purchase products from the brand Dainese, when a new member joins the group, it is
likely that others will be recommending buying a Dainese jacket, based on their positive
experiences with the brand.
This approach simulates the process of word-of-mouth
recommendations but applied systematically through algorithms to predict and suggest
items that are likely to be liked by the user. Within CF we can find two main methods,
model-based and memory-based methods, first described by Breese et al. [26] and model
based methods, both described in the following sections.
2.3.1
Memory Based
Memory based recommendation models, as their name indicate, are solely based on
past interaction between user and items, this are simpler models as they do not have
a latent models [19].
These systems, by relying on the similarity between users or
items, make extensive use of algorithms such as K-nearest neighbors (KNN) to predict
the clustering among the entities of items or users. The core of these methods is the
calculation of similarity between the vectors representing the users or items. Some of the
most used similarity methods include methods such as Pearson Correlation Coeﬀicient
(PCC), Cosine similarity (COS), Mean Squared Difference (MSD), Proximity Impact
Popularity (PIP), Jaccard Similarity, and Proximity Significance Singularity (PSS) [27].
Within memory based methods, we can find user-based ad item-based methods, de-
scribed below.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Collaborative Filtering
7
User-based
User-based methods recommend items based on the similarity between users. It basi-
cally compares with similarity measures, such as cosine similarity, the ratings that two
different users have given to a set of items. If the ratings are similar, that will indicate
that both users are alike in preferences, and therefore, items that each user has given
a high score will be recommended to the other user if he/she has not interacted with
them yet. Usually this procedure it is not done only comparing one user, in contrast
a set of users are used to calculate a ”group” similarity and then compare a new user
rating against it. Once there is a subgroup of users, items that are liked by the users in
the subgroup will be recommended to the ”new” user.
This method assumes that users with similar tastes will tend to have similar prefer-
ences. Therefore, if a group of users shows interest in certain types of items, it is likely
that a new user, whose preferences match those of the group, will also find those items
attractive. Below, in Figure 2.4 a representation of user based can be observed.
Figure 2.4. User-based Collaborative Faltering [28]
Item-based
Item-based methods work as user-based.
Nevertheless, instead of grouping users, it
groups items. Instead of comparing users ratings it compares item ratings. Therefore,
given the best item for a user, the one that the user has given a higher rating, we can
find items similar to that one with cosine similarity and recommend items which are
very similar to the user preferred item. Figure 2.5 shows an illustration which represent
the logic described above.
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Background
Figure 2.5. Item-based Collaborative Filtering [28]
Collaborative Filtering (CF) methods are popular in Recommendation Systems (RS)
because they do not require item or user information. However, CF methods have some
limitations, such as the well-known cold start problem. This issue arises from a lack of
data on new users or items, leading to sparsity in the interaction matrix and making it
diﬀicult to recommend meaningful items [27]. Additionally, scalability problems must
be considered as more users and items are added to the recommendation model.
2.3.2
Model Based
Model-based approaches operate under the hypothesis that there is an underlying model
capable of explaining the interactions among users and items. In recent years, there has
been a growing interest in model-based collaborative filtering (CF) [27]. This interest
is largely due to the crucial role neural networks (NNs) play in modeling the latent
factors where methods such as Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM), Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), and AutoEncoder are widley used
in recent studies. [27] [29] [30] [31].
These models typically use the user-item interaction matrix, which is formed with
users as the rows and items as the columns. At the intersection between user X and
item Y , the information about the interaction between them is stored. This could be
a binary value (1 if there has been an interaction, 0 if there has not) or a rating value
(e.g., 1-10). Table 2.1 shows the interaction matrix.
item1
item2
item3
user1
0
1
1
user2
1
1
0
user3
1
0
1
Table 2.1. User-Item Matrix
These matrices are often very large and sparse. Additionally, diﬀicult to handle, as
the complexity increases with the number of users and items due to the computational
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Hybrid methods
9
cost and the number of zeros they contain. These matrices have dimensions RM×N,
where M represents the number of users and N the number of items. Therefore, many
methods decompose this matrix into lower-dimensional (k) latent spaces. These lower-
dimensional spaces aim to represent items and users with latent features that the model
considers most important.
For example, in a movie recommendation, these features
could be genre, year, actors, etc.
One of the most commonly used models, General Matrix Factorization (GMF), uses
latent matrices to decompose the interaction matrix. These latent matrices employ a
lower-dimensional space to represent the information in the interaction matrix. This
method is described in greater detail in Sections 4.2.2 and 3.1.
2.4
Hybrid methods
As explained, each method has certain strengths and weaknesses. A widely used ap-
proach to mitigate the cold start problem, is to use model based and collaborative
filtering approaches to recommend items to users. Specifically, a content-based model is
used for new users or users with very few interactions, as preferences can be asked when
they create a profile on the platform and these can be used to recommend related items.
Once the user has interacted with certain items, collaborative models can be used to
recommend items the user might like [32].
It has been observed that using these methods improves overall accuracy [32]. For
example, using collaborative models to capture user preferences while content-based
models are used to capture item similarities [28].
This can help mitigate scalability
issues, as collaborative models can be affected when the number of users and items is
very large and training these models can be very costly.
2.5
Context Aware Recommended systems
So far, the methods we have reviewed are based on the characteristics of the items, the
interactions between users and items, or a combination of both approaches. All recom-
mendation systems that have been described have one thing in common, they assume
that the user preferences remain constant no matter what changes around the user: what
the user likes in the morning while commuting, will be the same that the user likes at
midday while eating, regardless of their location, the people they are surrounded by, or
the task they are performing. This type of additional information, which is not taken into
account in classical recommendation systems, is known as contextual information. This
concept first appeared in the literature in 2008, at the annual Recommended Systems
conference (ACM RecSys) [1] and is known today as Context-Aware Recommended Sys-
tems (CARS). Over the last few decades [33], CARS have been implemented in various
industries, such as e-learning [34], music [35], movies [36], etc.
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Background
We can think of the use of context as a help to better understand user preferences
when recommending information. The following example describes conceptually how
the use of context can benefit RS.
During their workday, from 08 to 17, they are much more interested in content that
could be useful for their work. However, upon arriving home, their interest might lean
towards recipes for dinner or possible movies to watch afterward.
2.5.1
Representation of context
The conceptualization of context in recommendation systems is really wide, as context
can be represented in may different ways depending on the field of application. Despite
the breadth of interpretations, from now on, we will focus on a definition of context
specifically applied to recommendation systems.
Context can be understood as the set of data collected about a user that provides
additional information, allowing for a more accurate understanding of their preferences
at a given moment. Factors such as the user’s geographical location, the day of the
week, the time of day, and the company they work for are examples of how circum-
stances can influence the user’s interest in certain products or services. A distinctive
feature of context is its complexity, mainly because of its diversity, the multiple ways
it can be collected, and its level of detail. This complexity makes structuring context
a challenge, but at the same time, a crucial element for its effective implementation in
recommendation systems.
Some of the most researched structures include the hierarchical structure:
The hierarchical structure allows both the context and its grouping to be organized by
levels of detail or specification, similar to a tree, where the small branches join together
until they become part of the trunk. For example, temporal context can be structured
in sequences, from more generic (which includes more information) to more specific, like
the time example: Y ear →Month →Week →Day →Hour →Minute...
In addition to having a hierarchy, context can also have groupings of categories within
that level of the hierarchy. For example, at the ”Day” level, the following options could
be obtained: [Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday]. How-
ever, what might indicate a preference between two types of items for a user is not the
specific day, but rather the category that day belongs to. Here, the days could be catego-
rized as follows: Weekday = {Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday} and
Weekend = {Saturday, Sunday}. Therefore, the day would not be split into 7 days,
but into two categories: Day = {Weekday, Weekend}.
On the other hand, when handling different types of context, such as Time and
Company, we can have sequences of contexts that can also be hierarchically organized.
Given the following contexts and its categories:
• Time : Day →Weekday, Weekend
• Relational : Company →Alone, Accompanied
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Context Aware Recommended systems
11
Once we have a combination of contexts we could recommend items only based on
the first level of personalization, as we have seen in the above example, where we re-
omend a item based on Weekday or Weekend. Nevertheless, if we want to refine even
more the personalization we could obtain a combination of contexts such as:
{Weekday, Alone}, {Weekday, NotAlone}, {Weekend, Alone}, {Weekend, NotAlone}
This way of representing context is defined by Equation 2.1, where each context
dimension K is defined by a set of attributes q [37]:
K = (K1, K2, ..., Kq)
(2.1)
Higher values of q define a much more detailed context, while smaller values represent
a higher level in the hierarchy. Reusing the previous example, a context representation
with q equal to one would be K1 = {Weekday} or K1 = {Weekend}, while if q is equal
to two, K2 = {Weekday, NotAlone}.
Beyond the chosen representation of context, it can be used in three different ways:
contextual pre-filtering, post-filtering, and contextual modeling, which will be discussed
below.
2.5.2
Contextual pre-filtering
Contextual pre-filtering uses context as a filter before making a recommendation by
the model, this method reduces the problem of multidimensional recommendations to
the standard 2D User x Item space [33]. This can be seen as a query to the database
to select only the data that is truly important for the recommendation, ending with
a ”pool” of items that might be relevant for the user.
Based on the filtered items,
we predict the ratings and make the recommendation.
This method is very useful,
as it allows creating the interaction matrix in two-dimensions, being the dimensions
(userxitem), thus facilitating the use of traditional recommendation models, such as
matrix factorization.
A conceptual example can be seen below: If a user wants to watch a movie on
Saturday, we would perform a query to the database to look for movies that have been
rated on Saturdays. With this set, based on the user-item interaction, we predict a
rating on the available movies and recommend the highest one.
One of the problems with methods that use pre-filtering is lack of data, since filtering
by a specific context reduces the number of data and, consequently, the number of
interactions between user and item, making it more likely to face problems such as data
sparsity.
Additionally, as we filter by the context, we may end up not considering a really
good fit for the user if the item has not been interacted under certain circumstances.
Furthermore, models that use pre-filtering end up generating local models linked to
specific contexts , so they do not generalize to a global rating model [33]. There is no
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Background
way to know if the local model performs better than the global without creating and
comparing the performance of both local models.
2.5.3
Contextual post-filtering
An alternative to integrate context, without modifying the traditional recommendation
paradigm and maintaining the use of the interaction matrix (UserxItem), consists of
applying context to filter the results produced by the recommendation model.
This
process is called post-filtering, where, analogously to pre-filtering, context is used to
refine the data; in this case, the recommendations issued by the model.
Post-filtering can be implemented in two different ways: it can filter the information
or adjust the information. In the first scenario, the query restricts the items only to
those that explicitly meet the contextual conditions. For example, if on a Monday at
work I read a news story, the recommendation model will suggests a batch of news
stories, but as during the week I am only interested in reading about the stock market,
post-filtering methods under work days will only allow access to news of that match this
subject. In contrast, adjusting models will not only let items that explicitly match the
context criteria, but rather it will allow access to all news but assigning a higher score
to those that meet the specific requirements, in this case, stock market news.
Within post-filtering, we identify two main approaches: heuristic and model-based
[33]. Both strategies can be applied to both filtering and adjusting the information.
The heuristic approach focuses exclusively on the item’s attributes, for example, in the
case mentioned above, features such as the news subject, is considered. This method
can include from one to several attributes. Whereas the model based relies on machine
learning to predict user preferences.
2.5.4
Contextual modelling
Here is the translation in an impersonal form:
Methods that inherently use context as part of the model, unlike pre-filter and post-
filter methods, do not use context as a query to filter content. Context attributes, such
as time, day, hour, etc., are used in the model to predict item ratings [33]. Therefore,
the rating is no longer solely a function of the user and the item, but also of the context
as shown in Equation 2.2.
Ratings = R(user, Item) →Ratings = R : (User, Item, Context)
(2.2)
The main difference is that traditional recommendation systems cannot be used, as
the representation of the interaction matrix shifts from being two-dimensional to multi-
dimensional, depending of the context. Therefore, specific models have been developed
over the past decades. Sections 3.1 and 3.2 detail how some of these models incorporate
context.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Related Work
This chapter will introduce notation and briefly discuss some of the most widely used
methods in Context-Aware Recommender Systems (CARS).
The main objective of recommendation systems is to predict the rating that a user
ui will give to an item ij, given M users u1, u2, . . . , uM and N items i1, i2, . . . , iN. The
prediction is based on the users’ and items’ previous interactions, thus the interaction
matrix R has dimensions RM×N.
In a context-aware recommendation system (CARS), the interaction matrix R ex-
tends to include contexts, having dimensions RM×N×C. Here, M represents the number
of users, N represents the number of items, and C accounts for the contexts c1, c2, . . . , cC.
This extension allows the system to predict ratings or interactions while considering ad-
ditional contextual information.
Next, it will be explained how Matrix Factorization (MF) can be adapted to include
context, followed by a method that extends the context to multiple dimensions using
tensors and their decomposition for recommendation, Tensor Factorization (TF). Once
these methods are described, Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) will be reviewed, which
can serve as a complement for filtering content or directly used in the model relying
on the probabilistic distribution of items over users. Finally, it will be explained how
the stochastic model Markov Process has been adapted to the field of recommendation
systems and how the statistical model Bandit algorithm can be adapted for use in CARS.
3.1
Context Aware Matrix Factorization
(CAMF)
Matrix factorization is a widely used method in the field of recommendation systems,
specifically well-known for the Netflix Challenge [9], which revolutionized movie recom-
mendations.
This method can be adapted to incorporate context. Next, we will discuss Context-
Aware Matrix Factorization (CAMF). CAMF can be written as in the following equation:
ri,j = pi · qT
j + µ + bi + bj
(3.1)
Where ri,j is the rating of a user i for an item j, pi and qj are the representations
in the latent matrices of the item and the user, µ is the mean of the ratings, and bi
and bj are the bias terms for the user and item, respectively [38]. The idea of CAMF is
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Related Work
that the model learns a different bias terms depending on the context for each user and
that, depending on the context in which an item is consumed, this provides additional
information to the model. The formula can be rewritten as shown in the following, where
depending on the context, the predicted rating will increase or decrease [39].
ri,j,c1,...ck = pi · qT
j + µ + bi +
k
∑
m=1
Bijcm
(3.2)
To better understand the concept, let’s assume we only consider the day of the week,
day ∈[Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday] .
With
CAMF, the model would be trained in such a way that we have a bias term for each day
of the week, Bi,j,Monday, Bi,j,Tuesday, ..., Bi,j,Sunday.
Extending this concept, if another category is added to capture the importance of the
time of day, daytime ∈[Morning, Midday, Afternoon, Evening] , to predict the rating
of a user i for a movie j on a Friday afternoon, the following formula would be applied:
ri,j,Friday,Afternoon = pi · qT
j + µ + bi + Bi,j,Friday + Bi,j,Afternoon
(3.3)
3.2
Tensor Factorization (TF)
The idea behind tensor factorization is simple: instead of decomposing the user-item
interaction matrix (described in Section 2.3.2), the tensor where the context information
is also stored Y ∈Rm×n×k is decomposed.
One of the most commonly used methods is Candecomp/Parafac (CP) decomposition
[40] [4] [41], which extends matrix factorization to tensors. Just as a rank-1 matrix can
be decomposed into an outer product of two vectors, as in the following equation:
A = p ⊗qT
(3.4)
A rank-1 tensor with three modes can also be decomposed into an outer product, in this
case of three vectors, as shown in the following:
X = p ⊗q ⊗c
(3.5)
Where p is the user embedding, q is the item embedding and c the context embedding.
Therefore, a specific rating for a user ui, an item ij and a context k, the rating would
be described as the following:
Xi,j,k = pi ⊗qj ⊗ck
(3.6)
Since tensors in complex datasets do not usually have rank 1, the CANDECOMP/-
PARAFAC (CP) decomposition method can be extended to higher ranks. Specifically,
the model uses a number of latent factors or components, which can be interpreted sim-
ilarly to rank in matrices. Therefore, a tensor with three modes, —which correspond to
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Tensor Factorization (TF)
15
the dimensions of the tensor— and potentially higher rank can be decomposed as shown
in the following equation:
X =
R
∑
r=1
ar ⊗br ⊗cr
(3.7)
The tensor mode can also be greater than 3 since context, by providing different in-
formation, is treated as a new dimension. Following the example of matrix factorization,
if we had 2 different contexts: day and time, the dimensions of the tensor would be
XM×N×D×H, where the dimensions would be users, items, days, and hours, respectively.
Therefore, the equation can be generalized as shown in the following:
X =
R
∑
r=1
ar ⊗br ⊗cr1 ⊗... ⊗cr2
(3.8)
A more general method is Tucker decomposition [40], [42], which is an extension of
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) and uses Higher Order Singular Value Decomposi-
tion (HOSVD). Similar to SVD, it attempts to decompose the tensor into a core tensor
(S) and a set of factorized matrices (U, M, C) for the user, item, and context. In this
case, the core tensor S can be compared to Σ, as it is responsible for quantifying the
strength with which the different modes (dimensions of the tensor) interact. A larger
absolute value in S would imply a stronger interaction of the corresponding components
between modes. The factorized matrices play a similar role to the orthogonal matrices
(U, V ) in SVD, where each matrix attempts to capture one mode of the original ten-
sor and each mode represents a representation of user, item or context. The Tucker
decomposition is shown in in the following:
X ≈S ×U U ×M M ×C C
(3.9)
Where × represents the product between the core tensor and the corresponding factor-
ized matrix: U for the user, M for the item, and C for the context.
Similar to CP decomposition, when there are multiple contexts, such as day and
time, each context is considered a mode of the tensor, resulting in XM×N×D×H. The
Tucker decomposition with multiple contexts is shown next:
X ≈S ×U U ×M M ×CD CDay ×CH CHour
(3.10)
Due to the complexity of tensors, HOSVD must be carried out through iterative pro-
cesses such as Alternating Least Squares (ALS), which are computationally expensive.
Additionally, as the dimension of the matrices increases, the computational cost to de-
compose the interaction matrices also increases.
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Related Work
3.3
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
LDA is a probabilistic model that uses the frequency with which a word appears in a
text to define a topic. Subsequently, once K topics have been found, these topics are
used to represent documents [40], [43]. For example, a document in which the words
football, basketball, handball, water polo, swimming, and others frequently appear could
be represented by the topics: sports, ball sports, and water sports.
There are several ways to use these topics in recommendation systems, all revolving
around text processing, such as possible user reviews, product definitions, etc. Once the
topics of the items or interactions have been extracted, they can be used in contextual
pre-filtering or post-filtering [40], [44]. This means that these topics can be used as a
kind of filter when creating a pool of items to recommend, or, once obtained through the
RS, filter those that best match the user’s preferences according to the topic representing
them.
Additionally, LDA can be used to directly as a Recommendation Systems (RS) model
[45], where in an item-based Collaborative Filtering an item could be represented as as a
compound of users preferences, just as document could be represented by a set of topics.
Each item has a probability distribution over user groups, and each user group has a
probability distribution over users.
In order to use it the topic information of each item and used directly in the models,
once the topic vector is calculated, it can be concatenated with the item’s vector and
the user, item and topic vectors can be factorized. Additionally, the topic vector can be
used as additional context information or to improve the user or item profile. It can also
be used to compare similarities between items or users in models that can use systems
similar to k-nearest neighbors, where the similarity between two vectors is compared with
cosine or Jaccard similarity. Finally, the vector can be used as a weight to influence the
rating or interaction of the user with a specific item, increasing the likelihood that items
similar to those the user typically engages with have a higher rating.
3.4
Markov Process
Models that use a Markov process are established by the Markov chain Equation 3.11,
which are based on the following Markov property: ”Memorylessness.” This concept aims
to replicate behavior under certain circumstances. When seeking a type of content in a
specific situation, it is likely that the user will engage more with the application if they
have enjoyed the content they have seen under those circumstances, not because of what
they may have seen five days ago.
Using Instagram as an example, a user may have a predisposition towards astronomy
topics. Nevertheless, if they use the application while commuting in the morning, it is
unlikely they will be in the mood to consume astronomy content due to its complexity
and the attention it demands. Therefore, during commuting, the content consumed on
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Bandit Algorithms
17
Instagram is more likely to reflect what is most accessible or engaging at that moment,
rather than their specific interest in astronomy. This highlights how context influences
content interaction.
This concept makes Markov Process particularly well-suited for session-based recom-
mendation models [46] [47], as the amount of collected interactions is smaller and no
prior information is required. The transition probability from state i to state j is defined
as follows:
pi,j = P(Xn+1 = j|Xn = i)
(3.11)
Where X is the state in the Markov process, which represents the user current interaction
with the items he has seen so far and pi,j is the transition probability from one state
to another. The probability matrix for a user, P, represents the probability that a user
switches from one item to another, where the rows and columns represent the set of
possible states, being [Item1, Item2, Item3] defined as follows:
P =


0, 3
0, 4
0, 4
0, 2
0, 2
0, 6
0, 15
0, 45
0, 40


(3.12)
Therefore, the probability that the user switches from Item2 to Item1 is 0.2, consider-
ing that the columns are [Item1, Item2, Item3] and the rows are [Item1, Item2, Item3]T.
Markov processes can be used directly to recommend items, but they present scala-
bility issues due to sparsity problems and have been used with other techniques [48] [49]
Finally, the states can capture more than just the items and also incorporate the
context in which the interaction occurs. This method poses a scalability problem, as
the transition matrix grows with the number of users and items. Additionally, many of
the transitions from one item to another may have never occurred, and therefore, a lot
of missing values will be part of the transition matrix leading to sparse data problems.
3.5
Bandit Algorithms
Bandit algorithms are primarily used in Reinforcement Learning, where the model is
trained through rewards. The idea is to balance exploration and exploitation. Explo-
ration represents discovering new paths, in recommendation systems, new items; ex-
ploitation is utilizing the discovered paths, in recommendation systems, recommending
items the system is already familiar with.
Among Bandit algorithms are Multi-Armed Bandits (MAB), which, instead of having
only one available action, have a repertoire of actions, each with different rewards. Some
of the most commonly used are ϵ-greedy, LinUCB, Bernoulli, and Thompson Sampling
[40], [50].
In recommendation systems, MAB can be integrated where each ”arm” can rep-
resent different items or even topics previously established or generated. One of the
advantages over traditional recommendation models is that MAB can be updated in
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Related Work
real-time, without the need to continuously train the model with the collected data, as
Matrix Factorization might require.
Specifically, the balance of these algorithms lies in how much new content should
be explored, new items to recommend, versus recommending the items that are already
known. Context can play a crucial role, as changes in location, time of day, device being
used, etc., can be indicators that new items should be explored. It is not necessarily
about exploring items; it can also be used to discover new topics and subsequently select
X items to recommend.
Some of the problems these algorithms present are:
• Scalability: since if the system’s options are based on items, it can become over-
whelmed due to the number of possibilities.
• Bias: because the system may have an imbalanced adjustment between exploring
and exploiting, causing it to always recommend the items it already knows.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Methodology
4.1
Aim of the study
The main objective of the study is to investigate the impact of context on the perfor-
mance of recommendation models. Models that integrate context, such as the Contex-
tual Neural Collaborative Filtering (CNCF) with One-Hot-Encoding (OHE) and autoe-
coder (AE) [11], will be compared with traditional models that do not integrate context,
such as General Matrix Factorization (GMF) and Neural Collaborative Filtering (NCF).
CNCF with OHE and AE was chosen because both models have a neural component
derived from the NCF model. Additionally, the CNCF with AE is intended to verify
if it can improve the accuracy of the models without the need to invest much effort in
the careful selection of context, which is a critical factor for models that incorporate
context.
To verify if models that use context have better accuracy than those that do not,
two public datasets, Frappe and Yelp, have been used. These datasets were selected due
to the number of contextual features, the number of users, the number of items, and
the number of interactions they have. The aim is to compare how the models adapt to
datasets of different sizes. Additionally, it is intended to select, as much as possible, the
same contextual features for both datasets to verify if the same contextual representation
can work in two datasets with different characteristics and if using an autoencoder can
help learn which features are most relevant according to the data.
The study aims to investigate how the representation of context influences the models
that use it and if more compact contextual representations that do not contain as many
zeros due to different types of encoding can help mitigate model problems, such as being
unable to capture relationships.
Finally, the study seeks to validate how important the minimum number of interac-
tions in the datasets are and if users or items with few interactions can negatively impact
the model. Additionally, since two datasets of different sizes have been selected, it will
be verified if the quantity (in absolute terms) of users or items with few interactions can
cause the model to lose accuracy.
==PAGE:32==
20
4 Methodology
4.2
Recommender Models
In this section the recommended models used will be described. The aim of all models is
to predict probability of interaction with a Top-K recommendation, focusing on selecting
and ranking the top K items based on their interaction probabilities from all potential
recommendations. Starting for Top Pop and General Matrix Factorization which are the
base line models as described above. After the baseline models, the models that have
a neural component will be discussed and finally, the details of the models that have
neural component and use context will be introduced.
4.2.1
Top Pop
One of the models used is Top Pop, which has been utilized to compare the results
obtained from previous experiments. The aim of this model is to show the most popular
items to all users without any personalization. This model is obtained in the following
way:
• The number of interactions for each item is counted, either by rating or review.
• The list of items is sorted in descending order.
• The top K most relevant items, in this case, 10, are selected.
• For each user in the test set, the 10 most popular items are recommended, and it
is verified if the item chosen as ground truth is among the recommended list, the
10 most relevant items.
• The average HR, RR, and NDCG for all users are calculated.
4.2.2
General Matrix Factorization
Matrix factorization (MF) is one of the fundamental methods in recommendation sys-
tems, standing out since the beginning of this discipline. A pioneering study particularly
used the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) method to reduce the dimensionality of
the user-item interaction matrix, demonstrating its utility under certain conditions [2].
However, it was not until Simon Funk presented his own version of matrix factorization
during the Netflix competition in 2006 that this technique gained popularity and began
to be widely used in recommendation systems [51] [9]. Additionally, General Matrix
Factorization (GMF) will be first described to obtain ratings and next, how can be
transformed to predict probability of interaction. The interaction matrix is described as
follows:
R ∈RN×M
(4.1)
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Recommender Models
21
Where N represents the users and M the items. R in this case can store binary infor-
mation, with 1 if the user has interacted with the item and 0 otherwise, or it can store
the review value, if considered. This matrix can be decomposed into a product of two
smaller latent matrices. Specifically, one matrix for the users, which we will denote as
U, and one matrix for the items, which we will denote as I. The latent matrices for user
and items are shown in the following equations:
User = U N×k
(4.2)
Item = IM×k
(4.3)
In this case, a latent space dimension, denoted as k, must be selected, which is smaller
than N and M ( k ≪n, m). In this way, by multiplying the two latent matrices, R can
be reconstructed as follows:
ˆR = U × IT
(4.4)
Therefore, the rating of a user for a specific item can be predicted as follows. Let ui
be the i-th user in matrix U and ij be the j-th item in matrix I. The latent vectors
are multiplied using a dot product to determine the rating, as shown in the following
equation:
ˆrij = ui × iT
j
(4.5)
The latent spaces for the items capture intrinsic characteristics of the items, while for the
users, the latent space represents how much they might like those intrinsic characteristics
of the items. In this case, since the model’s objective is to determine whether the user
has interacted with the item or not, the sigmoid function should be used to transform the
rating that the model assigns into a probability of interaction, as shown in the following
equation:
σ(x) =
1
1 + ex
(4.6)
Therefore, the probability of interaction can be defined as shown in the following equa-
tion:
ˆrij = σ(ˆrij) =
1
1 + eˆrij
(4.7)
To train the model, since the goal is to determine whether the user has interacted with
the item or not, Binary Cross Entropy is used, defined in the following equation:
Loss = −
∑
(i,j)∈R
[rijlog(ˆrij) + (1 −rij)log(1 −ˆrij)]
(4.8)
This aims to minimize the difference between the predicted interaction and the actual
interaction. The loss function, Binary Cross Entropy, has been used in order to train all
the models.
==PAGE:34==
22
4 Methodology
4.2.3
Neural Collaborative Filtering
This model leverages the General Matrix Factorization component, with some modifica-
tions, to also utilize a neural component. The idea is that the General Matrix Factor-
ization part learns the linear relationships of the interactions between users and items,
while the neural component learns the non-linear relationships of the interactions. The
architecture of the model is visualized below in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1. Neural Collaborative Filtering architecture [10]
Starting with the Matrix Factorization component, the idea is the same: decompose
the interaction matrix into two latent matrices. Therefore, it can be explained using the
Equations 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4, where U N×k was the latent user matrix and IM×k the
latent item matrix. The difference lies in the prediction step. Where a dot product was
previously used, now a Hadamard product, also known as element-wise product, is used,
as shown in the following equation:
ϕGMF
i,j
= ui ⊙ij
(4.9)
Subsequently, this result is concatenated with the output of the neural network compo-
nent. In this case, instead of being a scalar value, the result is a vector that will be used
later for rating prediction.
For the neural part, two latent matrices are similarly created to represent the interac-
tion matrix. The user matrix can be denoted as U N×γ
nn
and, similarly, the item matrix is
denoted as IM×γ
nn
, where γ is the embedding size for the neural component. Here, instead
of directly reconstructing the interaction matrix, the two latent vectors are concatenated
and passed through a neural component, with both latent vectors serving as inputs to
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Recommender Models
23
the neural network. The behavior of the first layer of the neural network is explained in
the following equations:
zl = Wl[unn
i , inn
j ]T + bl
(4.10)
al = f(zl)
(4.11)
ReLU(x) = max(0, x)
(4.12)
Where zl represents the input of the activation function, the [ui, ij] represents the con-
catenation of user and item vectors and b represents the bias term. Following, the output
goes through an activation function, as defined in equation 4.11. For this model, the
ReLU activation function has been used, as described in Equation 4.12. Furthermore,
the equations can be generalized as described in the following equation:
ϕMLP = a((W T
L (aL −1(...W T
2 [unn
i , inn
j ]T + b2)...)) + BL)
(4.13)
Once the vectors from the neural network (MLP) and General Matrix Factorization
(GMF) are obtained, they are used to predict the rating. These vectors are concatenated
and passed through a final layer as shown in the top layer in Figure 4.1, in the following
equation:
z = W[ϕGMF, ϕMLP] + b
(4.14)
It should be noted that the embedding size is proportional to the number of factors so
that both vectors, ϕMLP and ϕGMF, have a balanced representation and neither vector
overshadows the other, as shown in the following equation:
embeddingsize = k × nlayers
2
(4.15)
Finally, similar to GMF, since the goal is to predict the probability of interaction, the
sigmoid function is used, as defined the following equation:
ˆrij =
1
1 + e−z
(4.16)
4.2.4
Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering
In this section two models will be described, first the model that uses One-Hot-Encoding
for the context representation, followed by the model that uses an Autoencoder to trans-
form into latent space the contextual representation.
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Methodology
One-Hot-Encoding
For the Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering model that uses One-Hot Encoding,
the architecture is very similar to the one explained in the previous section. The only
difference is that the context is concatenated to the user and item embedding before being
processed by the neural component. Below, in Figure 4.2, a graphical representation of
the NCF extended with contextual information can be observed.
Figure 4.2. Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering architecture [11]
Let CN×M×p be the context matrix, where N is the number of users, M is the number
of items, and p is the dimension of the context. The matrix CN×M×p stores the context
information at the moment of interaction. The context can be used to enrich the model,
and thus, Equation 4.10 can be updated to include the context as shown in the following
equation:
zl = Wl[unn
i , inn
j , ci,j]T + bl
(4.17)
Where ci,j is a vector that represents the information collected at the moment when the
ith user interacted with the jth item. The generalization of equation 4.13 is described
in the following equation:
ϕMLP = a((W T
L (aL −1(...W T
2 [unn
i , inn
j , ci,j]T + b2)...)) + BL)
(4.18)
Once the output of the neural network is obtained, it is still concatenated to the vector
obtained from GMF, as described in equations 4.14 and 4.16.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Recommender Models
25
Autoencoder
The last model used is the one that transforms the context into a latent space λ.
The objective of the autoencoder is to reduce the dimensionality of the context.
Given the context CN×M×p, where p is the dimension of the context, the aim is to select
a latent space λ, where λ ≪p, resulting in CN×M×λ. A simple autoencoder with an
hourglass structure has been used, where the architecture followed a structure with 3
layers. The first one, was the input layer, where the number of neurons was equal to the
number of contextual features. The second layer, was the ”bottle neck”. The last layer,
was the output layer, where the number of neurons was equal to the contextual features.
The encoder attempts to represent ci,j ∈Rp in a lower-dimensional representation Rλ,
with W1 ∈Rλ and b1 ∈Rλ. The encoder equation is shown in the following equation:
ab = f(W T
1 ci,j + b1)
(4.19)
Where the activation function is the hyperbolic tangent, as the context encoding consists
of values from -1 to 1.
tanh(x) = sinh(x)
cosh(x) = ex −e−x
ex + e−x
(4.20)
Once the data has passed through the bottleneck, the decoder maps the data back to
the original dimensions, i.e., from ci,j ∈Rλ to ci,j ∈Rp. Where W2 ∈Rp and b2 ∈Rp,
as described in the following equation:
ˆ
ci,j = f(W T
2 ab + bb)
(4.21)
To train the autoencoder, as we try to reconstruct the input, the loss function used was
Mean Absolute Error (MAE), as described in the following equation:
Loss = ||c,i,j −ˆ
ci,j||2
(4.22)
Once the autoencoder has been trained, Equations 4.10, 4.14, and 4.16 can be used, with
the context now being Cm×n×λ and for the user-item interaction, ci,j ∈Rλ. Similarly,
the structure can be seen in Figure 4.2, where the context is ci,j ∈Rλ.
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Methodology
4.3
Data
In this section, the statistics of two publicly available datasets, Frappe and Yelp will be
described. First, the data will be investigated without pre-processing in Section 4.3.1,
and subsequently, the preprocessing performed on the data in Section 4.3.2.
4.3.1
Data Statistics
In order to compare the influence of context in Context-Aware Recomended Systems
(CARS) two publicly dataset have been selected, both widely used in the context aware
recommended systems field [11]. The first selected dataset is FRAPPE: Mobile app
usage [52]. The second publicly dataset is YELP: Businesses, reviews, and user data [53].
Below, in Table 4.1, a summary of both datasets is shown.
Name
K-Core
N◦Users
N◦Items
N◦Interactions
N◦Context
Frappe
Raw
957
4,082
96,203
24
Yelp
Raw
1.987.897
150.346
6.990.247
22
Table 4.1. Frappe and Yelp data summary
Frappe
The Frappe dataset [52] contains the interactions of a group of users with a set of mobile
applications. Within the dataset, it is possible to find a wide range of features; however,
some of these are not currently available due to privacy reasons. The dataset includes
a total of 957 users and 4.082 mobile applications with a total of 96.203 reviews. The
data is divided into two main parts: user data along with the interaction context, and
the interaction metadata including details about the application. The features found in
each file are briefly described below:
• Dataset Features: user, item, cnt (number of times a user has open the app),
daytime, weekday, isweekend, homework, cost, weather, country and city.
• Metadata features: item, package, category, downloads, developer, icon, lan-
guage, description, name, price, rating and short description.
In Appendix A, an extensive definition of Frappe files and its categories can be found.
It includes data, feature types, and definitions present in the files.
Collaborative recommendation algorithms use user interactions to recommend con-
tent to similar users. Therefore, the dataset was analyzed to determine the number
of interactions per user and the frequency of interactions with each item. In order to
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Data
27
achieve these results, a count of interaction per user sorted in descending order has been
made. In Figure 4.3, the distribution of interactions per user can be observed.
Figure 4.3. Frappe dataset: distribution of user interactions
The distribution of interactions per user can be clearly observed and follows a long-
tail distribution. Approximately 50% of the users, equivalent to 487 individuals, register
20 interactions or less.
To obtain an overall view of the dataset, the process has been repeated by analyzing
the number of interaction with items. In Figure 4.4, the distribution of the number of
times an item has been interacted with is presented.
Figure 4.4. Frappe dataset: distribution of item interactions
The distribution of item interactions is similar to the distribution observed for users
in Figure 4.3, although in this case, the rightward skew is even more pronounced, with
==PAGE:40==
28
4 Methodology
a median of 3 interactions per item. This indicates that 2.360 items, a 57,81%, in the
dataset register fewer than 3 interactions.
To better understand the distribution of interactions between users and items, a
histogram has been created by segmenting the dataset into categories based on the
number of interactions. This histogram allows us to observe how many users fall into
each interaction category, ranging from 1 to more than 30 interactions. In Figure 4.5
can be found a categorical distribution of the amount of users by number of interactions.
Figure 4.5. Frappe Dataset: Categorical Distribution per user interactions
From Figure 4.5, it can be clearly seen that a high number of users have at least 10
interactions or more, specifically 585 users, whereas 262 have at maximum 5 interactions.
Similarly, a categorical distribution of the amount of interactions per item has been made.
It can be seen in Figure 4.6.
In Figure 4.6, it is observed that the majority of items have a maximum of 2 inter-
actions, while a small proportion exceeds 10 interactions. This trend contrasts with the
distribution of interactions among users. This phenomenon is quite common, especially
considering the nature of the mobile app dataset. Currently, Google Play has approx-
imately 3.3 million applications [54], many of which are downloaded a limited number
of times. Moreover, it is important to note that a download does not necessarily imply
regular use of the application. Consequently, users tend to have, on average, more in-
teractions than individual items. This is because if a user does not like an item, they
can interact with other items, i.e., use other applications.
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Data
29
Figure 4.6. Frappe dataset: categorical distribution per item interactions
Yelp
The Yelp [53] dataset consists of information about local businesses. Yelp is a platform
that facilitates the connection between people and small local businesses 1 . In this
application, users interact with businesses through reviews or ratings. Additionally, the
platform has a social component that allows users to invite friends to see their favorite
businesses. For example, if a user is undecided about where to eat or which tailor to
visit for clothing alterations, they can consult the recommendations and experiences of
other users on Yelp.
The dataset comprises 1.987.897 users, 150.346 businesses, and 6.990.280 reviews [53].
It is organized into six files stored as MongoDB documents. The business file contains
data related to each local business, including its location and type.
The review file
features details on the user-business interactions, such as ratings, text reviews, and the
number of people who voted on each review, among other elements. The user file includes
data on the social aspects of the application, such as the number of friends and reviews
associated with each user. The check-in file provides a list of the days on which users
checked into a business. The tip file offers condensed information about a text review
and its usefulness. Lastly, the photo file contains visual content related to the businesses,
including photos of dishes and their categories. Since the experiments primarily focus
on the first three files of the dataset - business, user, and review - the characteristics of
these are described in more detail in Appendix A, including the data type and a brief
definition of each.
1Yelp website: https://www.yelp.dk
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Methodology
In the same way that the Frappe dataset was analyzed, the same procedure has been
applied to the Yelp dataset, revealing a quite similar distribution. Nevertheless, due to
the large number of users and the significant variability in the number of interactions
among them, a logarithmic scale has been applied to analyze the data. In Figure 4.7,
the distribution of interactions per user is shown.
Figure 4.7. Yelp Dataset: Logarithmic distribution of Users Interactions
In Figure 4.7, the distribution of interactions per user can be clearly observed and
it follows, as does the Frappe, a long tail distribution. Nevertheless, in contrast to the
Frappe dataset, this data reveals a much longer tail, which indicates that the vast ma-
jority of users have interacted just a few times with different businesses. Approximately
50% of the users have just 1 interaction whereas only a few hundred, specifically 346
users, have over a thousand interactions with different business. This might suppose a
problem as it is hard to recommend items for these users.
To obtain an overall view of the dataset, the process has been repeated by analyzing
the number of items. Below, in Figure 4.8, the distribution of the number of times with
which an item has been interacted by a user is presented, also in a logarithmic scale.
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Data
31
Figure 4.8. Yelp dataset logarithmic distribution of items interactions
In Figure 4.8, it can be clearly seen that the items also exhibit a right-skewed distri-
bution, where 50%, 77.584 items, have at least 15 interactions. This ensures that at least
half of the items will have enough interactions to be used in the training process. To
further deepen the understanding of the data, a histogram has been made by segmenting
the data into categories. Figure 4.9 shows the number of interactions per user and in
the number of times with which an item has been interacted in the categories [1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10-20, 20-30, >30].
Figure 4.9. Yelp dataset: categorical distribution of users interactions
The above graph, Figure 4.9, shows that many users have interacted only once with
an item, specifically 1.135.977 users, while only 117.370 users have at least 10 interactions.
Upon further investigation, it is found that a total of 1.759.702 users have recorded a
maximum of 5 interactions. As with the Frappe dataset, it is important to be cautious
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Methodology
with these users, as having so few interactions may not provide suﬀicient information to
a collaborative recommendation model.
Similarly, in Figure 4.10, a categorical distribution of the amount of interactions per
item can be seen.
Figure 4.10. Yelp dataset: categorical distribution of items interactions
The above graph, Figure 4.10, shows that no item has fewer than 5 interactions, and
the majority of items have at least 20 interactions, specifically 101.269 items, which is
particularly good as the model will have a large number of items from which to learn.
These results will require review once the data is transformed. This is necessary because
the number of items could be reduced significantly due to a large number of users with
minimal interactions (between 1 and 5 interactions per user).
4.3.2
Data Preprocessing
As previously discussed in Section 2.3, collaborative recommendation models learn and
recommend based on interactions between the user-item pairs, regardless of whether the
context is considered or not. To be able to use the data described in Section 4.3, we
must ensure some consistency, including guaranteeing a minimum number of interactions
per user and per item. Additionally, the most relevant features must be selected to be
used as context in the model. These features must be transformed so that the models
can learn from them. Specifically, categorical or textual variables must be transformed
into an appropriate format, numerical values must be normalized, and other categories
must be encoded to maximize their potential. — Two preprocessing strategies have
been conducted to generate two subsets of data with different k-Core.
K-Core is a
filtering strategy that applies a threshold for the minimum number of interactions. This
ensures that each item and each user has at least a specified number of interactions,
improving the quality of the dataset. Although the goal is to ensure a minimum number
of interactions, there is also a desire to avoid a drastic reduction in the number of users
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Data
33
and items and for this reason 2-Core (k=2) and 5-Core (k=5), which ensure a minimum
of 2 and 5 interactions respectively has been selected.
This subset has been generated through an iterative process. Initially, users who do
not meet the minimum required interactions are removed. Next, items that do not meet
the same condition are also removed. This process can cause users who initially met the
minimum interaction threshold (2 or 5 interactions, depending on the filtering criteria)
to fall below the required threshold after item removal. For example, if an item that a
user with exactly five interactions engaged with is removed, that user may then have
fewer than the required interactions. The same issue can occur with items after users
are removed. Therefore, this process is repeated iteratively until all users and items in
the dataset meet the minimum interaction requirements, achieving stability.
Frappe
Below, two tables can be found. The first table, Table 4.2, shows the number of users,
the number of items, the number of interactions and the number of contexts per each
subset of the data. The second table, Table 4.3, shows the percentage of the reduction
in users, items and interactions compared to the raw dataset.
Name
K-Core
N◦Users
N◦Items
N◦Interactions
N◦Context
Frappe
Raw
957
4,082
96,203
24
Frappe
≥2
785
1.837
87.566
24
Frappe
≥5
651
1.127
84.373
23
Table 4.2. Frappe dataset and subsets overview
Name
K-Core
% Red. Users
% Red. Items
% Red. Inter
Frappe
≥2
17,97%
55,00%
8,98%
Frappe
≥5
31,97%
72,39%
12,30%
Table 4.3. Reduction overview in frappe dataset and subsets
In Table 4.3, it can be observed that the reduction of items in the Frappe dataset
is quite significant, both in the 2-core and 5-core subsets, with reductions of 55% and
72.4%, respectively. According to the long-tail distribution shown in Figure 4.4 and
Figure 4.6, these reduction was expected. However, it poses a challenge for training, due
to the decrease in the number of items available.
In contrast, the number of users does not reduce as drastically as the items in both
prefiltering processes (2 and 5 Core); in the 2-Core it decreases by 18%, slightly above
the 15% threshold, while in the 5-Core, 32% of the users are removed. Although these
numbers represent a considerable reduction in both users and items, they do not pose
a serious problem for the dataset, as the reduction in the number of interactions is just
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Methodology
over 10% in the worst case, i.e., in the 5-core. This indicates that for the users who
remain in the dataset, there is suﬀicient information to satisfactorily train a model.
Yelp
Table 4.4, shows the number of users, the number of items, the number of interactions
and the number of contexts per each subset of the data. Table 4.5 shows the percentage
of reduction of users, items and interactions compared to the raw dataset.
Name
K-Core
N◦Users
N◦Items
N◦Interactions
N◦Context
Yelp
Raw
1.987.897
150.346
6.990.247
22
Yelp
≥2
528.685
143.711
5.197.755
22
Yelp
≥5
215.366
95.895
3.862.980
22
Table 4.4. Yelp dataset and subsets overview
Name
K-Core
% Red. Users
% Red. Items
% Red. Inter
Yelp
≥2
73,40%
4,41%
25,64%
Yelp
≥5
89,17%
36,22%
44,74%
Table 4.5. Reduction overview in Yelp dataset and subsets
In the Yelp dataset, a more significant reduction of users is observed compared to the
Frappe dataset. By removing only users with one interaction (i.e., K=2), the number
of users is reduced by 73,4%. However, the difference between the 2-Core and 5-Core
subsets is not as significant, with an additional 15,77% reduction in the number of users
in the 5-core. It is noteworthy that almost 90% of the users in the Yelp dataset have
fewer than five interactions.
In the case of items, they generally have a higher average interaction, which is at-
tributed to the fact that there are significantly more users than items. This makes it
more likely that items have had more than one interaction. In the 2-Core subset, only
4.41% of items are removed, while in the 5-Core, the reduction is more notable, reaching
36,22%.
Looking at the number of interactions, approximately a quarter of these are elimi-
nated in the 2-Core, while in the 5-Core, about half are removed. This reduction could
lead to insuﬀicient data, potentially compromising the model’s ability to learn about
interactions. However, considering that the total dataset has approximately 7 million
interactions, it can be assumed that there is suﬀicient data to train and make recom-
mendations effectively, even for the subset of 215.366 users obtained in the 5-Core with
a 50% reduction.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Data
35
Train Test Split
Following the work implemented in Neural Collaborative Filtering [10], a ”leave-one-out”
strategy has been adopted for testing and evaluating the model [12] [33] [55] [56]. This
strategy involves including all the interactions of a user in the training set, except for
one, which is added to the test set and subsequently used to evaluate the model.
This well-known strategy may present several fundamental problems, including the
potential lack of representation of items in the test set and the limited representativeness
of users being tested based on a single selected interaction. The selected item might be
popular and therefore easier to recommend, which can skew the evaluation results.
The issue of the lack of representation in the test set is easily understood in a dataset
like Frappe, which has more items than users, approximately 4.26 times more.
By
following a ”leave-one-out” strategy, it is evident that some items will not be represented
in the test set, as the test set would only include 957 users, and, therefore, 957 items.
Consequently, 3.125 items would not be represented in the test.
However, this problem is significant because, despite the considerably higher number
of items compared to users in a dataset, it cannot be guaranteed that all items will be
present at least once in the test set. This is due to the way items are selected from each
user to be included in the test and training sets.
This methodology results in only a fraction of the items being represented in the test
set.Table 4.6 illustrates the percentage of items that could not be represented in the test
set for each subset.
Datset
K-core
N Users
Total Items
Missing Items
% Not rep. Items
MovieLens
N/A
6.040
3.706
1.785
48%
Frappe
2
785
1.837
1.538
84%
Frappe
5
651
1.127
869
77%
Yelp
2
528.685
143.711
27.817
19%
Yelp
5
215.366
95.895
35.830
37%
Table 4.6. Item representation in tests datasets
Encoding
In this section the different encoding will be explained. First, all the different types and
how are these calculated. Afterwards, the transformations on the different datasets will
be explained.
One-hot Encoding
To transform the categorical features, whether nominal or ordinal, of the datasets, the
”one-hot” encoding process has been used. This is a necessary transformation because
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Methodology
most machine learning algorithms require numerical input. This method involves creat-
ing as many columns as there are categories for a feature. Table 4.7 shows an example
of this transformation.
User
Season
0
Spring
1
Summer
2
Autumn
3
Winter
Table 4.7. Example season dataset
As can be seen in Table 4.7, the data are very compact. Nevertheless, the data cannot
be directly used to train a recommendation model or any other artificial intelligence
model, as these models require numerical data. Following the one-hot encoding method,
the data is transformed so that each category becomes a separate column.
User
Season_Spring
Season_Summer
Season_Autum
Season_Winter
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
2
0
0
1
0
3
0
0
0
1
Table 4.8. Example season dataset One-Hot-Encoding
This approach can create data sparsity issues, especially if a feature contains many
categories. Applying one-hot encoding to such features may result in a high-dimensional
dataset dominated by zeros [57] [58] [59]. This would significantly complicate the training
process, as machine learning models may struggle to learn from sparse and predominantly
null data.
Binary Encoding
Another type of encoding that has been used is binary encoding, which is very similar
to one-hot encoding, with the difference that one of the categories is not explicitly
represented. This encoding method has been used exclusively with features that have
only two categories to ensure that there is no loss of information. In these situations, two
distinct values can be encoded using just a 0 and a 1. Table 4.9 provides an example of
how the information about the weekend versus workday is represented with categorical
data.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Data
37
User
IsWeekend
0
weekend
1
workday
2
weekend
3
workday
Table 4.9. Example isweeked
As can be seen in Table 4.9, the ”IsWeekend” feature consists of only two categories.
In this case, it is not necessary to create two new columns, as would be done with One-
Hot-Encoding, to represent this feature. Instead, by binarizing the category, the same
result can be achieved; that is, the absence of a value can implicitly imply the presence
of the other, thereby reducing the dimensionality of the dataset. Table 4.10 shows an
example of how this encoding is applied:
User
IsWeekend
0
0
1
1
2
0
3
1
Table 4.10. Example isweeked binarized
Transformations
This section explains the types of transformations performed on the data. Subsequently,
the features to which these transformations have been applied will be specified.
Logarithmic
A base-10 logarithmic transformation has been applied to correct the skewness of some
features [60], particularly since these data span multiple scales, which could increase the
model’s susceptibility to larger values [61] [62]. To prevent issues with values close to or
equal to zero, a constant was added before proceeding with the transformation as shown
in the following equation:
x = log(x + 1)
(4.23)
Cyclical
Due to the significant data sparsity often resulting from the use of One-Hot-Encoding in
datasets for recommendation models, cyclical encoding has been explored to numerically
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Methodology
capture nominal features [63]. An example of the sparsity due to one-hot encoding can be
seen in Table 4.7. This method allow the capture of the cyclical nature of the features
without increasing data sparsity and in a format that is comprehensible to machine
learning models. Below, in Equations 4.24 and 4.25, are defined the cosine and sine
equations that have been used in this process.
yi = sin(max(feature)
2πfeatuerei
)
(4.24)
zi = cos(max(feature)
2πfeatuerei
)
(4.25)
Normalization
In order to have all the features in the same scale and prevent the model from learning
more from features with larger scales, a normalization method has been applied to some
of the features in the datasets. Below are the equations that have been used in this
process.
yi =
featurei ∗minfeature
maxfeature −minfeature
(4.26)
Where feature represents a general feature or attribute from the dataset, featurei de-
notes a specific instance or value of the feature for the i-th data point and minfeature and
maxfeature are the minimum and maximum values of the specific feature, respectively.
Applied Transformations - Frappe
For the Frappe dataset, logarithmic and cyclical transformations have been applied.
Additionally, One-Hot-Encoding has been used to transform nominal features.
The selection of features for this subset is based on the paper [11], where some of
the features are selected. Table 4.11 a detailed explanation of the features, as listed in
the Appendix A, are described:
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Data
39
Feature ID
Description
User
Indicating unique user IDs.
Item
Indicating unique item IDs.
Rating
Rating of the item by the user.
Cnt
Number of times the app has been used by the user.
Daytime
Daytime split into 7 categories: sunrise, morning, noon, afternoon,
evening, sunset, night.
Weather
Type of weather at the moment of the app usage: sunny, cloudy,
foggy, rainy, stormy, drizzle, snowy, sleet, unknown.
IsWeekend
Whether it is a weekday or a weekend.
HomeWork
Whether the user was at home, at work or unknown.
Table 4.11. Feature ID and description Frappe dataset
A logarithmic transformation and One-Hot-Encoding was performed on Frappe dataset,
resulting in 23 to 24 contextual features, depending on the K-Core used. For instance, in
the 5-Core subset, interactions that occurred in rainy weather were removed, eliminating
that category from the ”Weather” attribute.
Initially, a logarithmic transformation was applied to the highly skewed ”cnt” feature,
which ranged from 1 to 28,752. Figure 4.11, illustrates the skewness before and after
this transformation.
Figure 4.11. Frappe cnt feature distribution
Finally, nominal features, such as ”Daytime”, ”Weather”, ”IsWeekend”, and ”Home-
work”, have been transformed using One-Hot-Encoding. This resulted in 22 contextual
features in the 2-Core subset and 21 contextual features in the 5-Core subset.
The second transformation applied seeks to reduce the data sparsity that results from
using One-Hot-Encoding on contextual features. For example, the ”Daytime” attribute
is represented by 7 columns; ”Weather”, by 9 columns (8 in the 5-Core); whether it is
the weekend or not, by 2 columns; and location, by 3 columns. In each group of columns,
only one shows a value of 1, indicating the presence of that specific feature. Therefore,
21 or 22 columns are used to describe only 4 contextual features.
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Methodology
As part of the transformations applied, the first has been to convert the ”Daytime”
category from nominal to numerical, in this case to interval, to represent the time at
which each interaction between user and item took place. Table 4.12 shows how each
daytime category has been mapped to a specific time interval.
daytime
hour
sunrise
6
morning
9
noon
12
afternoon
15
evening
18
sunset
18
night
21
Table 4.12. Frappe day time to hour
Once the specific times of the interactions were obtained, cyclic encoding was applied
to capture the nature of the hours during the day. This method allows the reduction of
the seven columns originally used to define the time of day to just two columns, both
with values ranging between -1 and 1.
Further investigation of the data has revealed that the ”Homework” category records
a total of 75,670 interactions, which represents 78.75% of the interactions at an unknown
location. Due to this considerable lack of specific information, it has been decided to
dispense with this feature.
Additionally, binary encoding has been applied to the ”IsWeekend” feature, as it
only has two options. These are mutually exclusive: if it is not the weekend, it must be
a weekday. This allows the reduction of two columns to a single one to define the week
category. Finally, logarithmic encoding has been applied to the ”cnt” feature as in the
previous dataset sample.
All numerical features except the features created through cyclical encoding have
been normalized for numerical stability.
Applied Transformations - Yelp
In the Yelp dataset, some additional transformations have been performed to preprocess
the data. First, a date variable was created with the day of the interaction, in this case,
a review. With this variable, a categorical variable was extracted indicating whether the
day of the interaction was a weekday or a weekend: ”Isweekend”.
Additionally, the hours during which the interaction occurred were extracted and 7
categories were created. Below, Table 4.13 shows the range of hours per category:
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Data
41
daytime
hour range
sunrise
[05, 07)
morning
[07, 12)
noon
[12, 14)
afternoon
[14, 17)
evening
[17, 20)
night
[20, 05)
Table 4.13. Yelp hour to daytime
Following some ideas presented in [11], the week number in which the interaction
took place and whether the day in question was a holiday were extracted. Additionally,
the ”number of friends” list was used to determine how many friends the specific user
has and the number of years that user has been an elite user.
These two variables could indicate how active a user is on the platform and how much
they use it. The greater the number of friends, the more places they can share and the
more likely they are to visit restaurants with friends. The longer someone is an elite
member, the more relevant the application is to the user. Moreover, the season in which
the interaction took place was extracted, allowing the suggestion of winter restaurants
that serve dishes such as ramen, or summer restaurants that offer salads, depending on
the user’s relevance. Table 4.14 shows the range of the seasons can be observed.
season
date range
spring
[Mar 20, Jun 21)
summer
[Jun 21, Sep 22)
fall
[Sep 22, Dec 21)
winter
[Dec 21, Mar 20)
Table 4.14. Date ranges for each season
Finally, the number of years the user has used the application, i.e., the user’s seniority,
was utilized. This can help suggest more popular and frequently visited restaurants to
a user with few years of seniority, while someone who has already used the application
for some time might not want to visit the same ”usual” places.
To ensure all this data can be used later in the different models, the unique identifier
uuid4 of both users and businesses was mapped to an integer. After this preprocessing
step for the recommendation models, the following encodings were performed. A subset
with a minimum of 2 interactions (2-core) and another with a minimum of 5 interactions
(5-core) was created, as was done with the Frappe dataset. Table 4.15 shows a detailed
explanation of the features used in the transformations, as listed in the Appendix A.
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Methodology
Feature ID
Description
UserId
Indicating unique user IDs.
BusinessId
Indicating unique item IDs.
Stars
Rating of the item by the user.
IsWeekend
Whether it’s a weekday or a weekend.
Season
Indicating in which season the rating was made.
IsHoliday
Whether it’s a holiday or not.
Daytime
Daytime split into 7 categories: sunrise, morning, noon, afternoon,
evening, sunset, night.
Latitude
Latitude where the business is located.
Longitude
Longitude where the business is located.
Num_friends
The number of friends a user has.
Num_elite
The number of years a user has been an elite user.
Seniority
The number of years a user has been using the application.
Week_number
The week number at the moment of the interaction.
Table 4.15. Feature ID and description Yelp dataset
Of the features described in Table 4.15, One-Hot-Encoding was applied to the nomi-
nal variables, namely ”IsWeekend”, ”Season”, ”IsHoliday”, and ”Daytime”. The numer-
ical variables, namely ”Latitude”, ”Longitude”, ”Num_friends”, ”Num_elite”, and ”Se-
niority”, were normalized, and finally, a cyclic encoding was performed on the ”Week_number”.
Special attention should be paid to the ”Longitude” and ”Latitude” features, as
standard normalization, such as the one applied in Equation 4.26, could result in loss of
information since negative values would be scaled to positive. By inspecting the data in
depth, it is observed that, as it pertains to only two regions (the U.S. and Canada), the
range of both features is limited to only positive values for latitude and only negative
values for longitude; the range can be found in Table 4.16. For this reason, and given
that the models with a neural network component are the only ones using context and
employ activation functions with ReLU, it was decided to normalize these two features
to a range of [0,1].
feature
min value
max value
latitude
27.55
53.68
longitude
-120.10
-73.20
Table 4.16. Minimum and maximum values on features
A second transformation was carried out, aiming to reduce data sparsity, as has been
done with the Frappe dataset. Due to One-Hot-Encoding, 6 columns were obtained to
specify the time of day, 4 columns to specify the season, 2 columns to verify if it is
a weekday or not, and 2 columns to verify if it is a holiday or not. In each group of
columns, only one shows a value of 1, indicating the presence of that specific feature.
Therefore, 22 columns are used to describe only 4 contextual features.
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Design of the experiments
43
To address this, several modifications were made to the data. The only nominal
feature, ”Season,” retained its 4 categories. The feature describing the time of day was
modified; instead of categorizing it as previously described, the hour of interaction was
directly obtained and subsequently encoded cyclically, similar to the ”Week_number”
feature. The 4 columns representing whether it was a weekend or holiday were reduced to
2 using binary encoding. Additionally, the numerical features ”Latitude,” ”Longitude,”
and ”Seniority” were normalized. However, the ”Num_friends” feature and the total
years the application was used were not included for this subset.
This results in a
total of 13 contextual features: ”UserId”, ”BusinessId”, ”Stars”, ”Season”, ”Latitude”,
”Longitude”, ”Seniority”, ”IsWeekend”, and ”IsHoliday”.
4.4
Design of the experiments
The experiments aim to evaluate the accuracy of various recommendation models, focus-
ing on the information that context can provide to the models and comparing whether
models that incorporate context can improve the performance. The experiments are
divided into two sections: baseline models and neural models. The first section focuses
on evaluating baseline models such as TopPop and GMF to compare the results of mod-
els that use a neural component.
In the second section, models that have a neural
component and can use context to improve model accuracy are investigated.
In the first part of the experiments, the baseline models were established. The first
experiment conducted was a comparison of the performance of the GMF and TopPop
models with a 5-Core data filter, followed by a more detailed investigation of how the
latent space factors affect the accuracy of the GMF model. After completing this first
part of the study, the influence of data filtering on the accuracy of the models was
investigated, using a 2-Core data filter, which trained the model with users and items
that had a minimum of two interactions. Finally, it was investigated whether the number
of latent space factors had the same influence on the dataset with a 2-Core data filter.
After the initial experiments with the baseline models, models that used a neural com-
ponent and those that used context were investigated. An experiment on reproducibility
was conducted first to verify that the NCF model was correctly implemented. Subse-
quently, models that used a neural component (NCF) and those that included context
(CNCF) were compared. The influence of the factors, and therefore the structure of the
neural component in the NCF, CNCF models, was further investigated to verify whether
the latent space of GMF and the embeddings for the neural component impacted the
model’s performance. Once the number of factors was examined, the influence of the
pool of items on the models evaluation was tested to determine if models evaluated with
a subset of items would achieve higher accuracy. The experiments continued with an
investigation of how different contextual representations influenced the performance of
the CNCF models. Finally, the influence of different contextual representations on the
autoencoder used by the CNCF with AE model was investigated.
==PAGE:56==
44
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5
Experimental setup
In this chapter, the evaluation metrics will first be defined in Section5.1, followed by a
detailed implementation to replicate the results in Section 5.2, and concluding with a
description of the models complexity in Section 5.3 .
5.1
Evaluation Metrics
In this subsection the evaluation metrics used to calculate the models performance are
described. In total 3 different metrics were used. First, Hit Ratio (HR), next Mean
Reciprocal Rang (MRR) and last, Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG).
Hit Ratio
The Hit Ratio (HR) calculates the ratio of users to whom at least one relevant item from
the list of recommended items has been recommended.
For each user in the test set, check if the recommended items, (based on the most
popular items), include items the user has interacted with. The hit ratio is the number
of hits, (true positives), divided by the total number of users in the test set.
HR@K = 1
N
Nu
∑
i=1
1(yi ∈ˆ
topK)
(5.1)
Where N is the total number of users,
ˆ
topK is the set of top-K items recommended
to a user and yi is the actual item interacted with or rated by user i. Where yi ∈{0, 1}.
The 1(·) is an indicator function that returns 1 if the condition is true (i.e., the item
yi the user interacted with is within the top-K recommendations for that user) and 0
otherwise. Below, in Figure 5.1, a visual definition can be found.
==PAGE:58==
46
5 Experimental setup
Figure 5.1. Graphical Representation of HR with an evaluation list of length 3 items [64]
Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain
Unlike the Hit Ratio, the Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG), seeks to
capture and score the position in which the recommended items are placed to the user,
since a relevant item in the first position should carry more weight than a relevant item
in the last position.
It starts from the principle that each item has a different relevance (rel) for the user,
and, naturally, it is desired to order the recommended items by their degree of rele-
vance. To calculate this, it is crucial to understand Gain, Cumulative Gain, Discounted
Cumulative Gain, and how to normalize the latter.
The relevance of an item can be binary (i.e., 1 if the product is relevant and 0
otherwise) or non-binary (i.e., a score from 0 to 10, depending on how much the user
likes it). This is also defined as the gain of an item. Therefore, the cumulative Gain for
a set of K items is defined as the sum of the relevance score in the list, being the item
relevant (rel > 0) or not (rel = 0) as shown in the following equation:
CG@K =
K
∑
k=1
reli
(5.2)
Where reli is the relevance at the i-th position. The disadvantage of this measurement is
that it does not consider the order of the items in the list of recommendations. Therefore,
the relevance contributes to the cumulative gain regardless of the item’s position within
the list. To make the relevance of an item inversely proportional to its position on the list,
various methods can be used. One of the most utilized is dividing the item’s relevance
by the logarithm base 2 of its position, below discounted cumulative gain (DCG):
DCG@K =
K
∑
k=1
reli
log2(i + 1)
(5.3)
Specifically, we apply the log base 2 to discount the relevance, as it is popular in
the field of document retrieval for various reasons. One reason is that the difference
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Evaluation Metrics
47
in relevance between the first two items should be significantly greater than between,
for instance, the eighth and the ninth. Additionally, it aligns with the psychological
concept that the perception of relevance decreases by half with every doubling of the
item’s position.
Finally, it is necessary to normalize the DCG@K to account for the variable number
of instances in the top-K list and to consider the relevance of items that might not
be shown. To normalize, the DCG@K is divided by the ideal DCG@K (IDCG@K),
which is the maximum value that the DCG could reach for the set of relevant items.
The NDCG@K is calculated as follows:
NDCG@K = DCG@K
IDCG@K
(5.4)
It should be noted that in binary cases, the ideal NDCG will always be 1 as long as
there is only one relevant item. This is because the best-case scenario is achieved when
the single relevant item is recommended and ranked first. Finally, it is important to
mention that in cases where the recommendation is not purely binary and items have
varying levels of relevance, there are other methods to emphasize the importance of
higher relevance scores in the overall DCG calculation.
Reciprocal Rank
The Reciprocal Rank (RR) attempts to capture not only if the first item is within the
list of suggested items but also the position of this item within the list, as it is important
for relevant items to be at the beginning of the suggested list. As the name suggests, it
is simply calculated by taking 1 divided by the position of the relevant item in the list.
The idea is to give more importance to the item’s position, aiming to improve the first
predictions of recommendation systems.
The Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) it’s just the average of the RR across all users.
Therefore, for a specific user u, ranki is the position of the first relevant item in the
list [65]. MRR is described as shown in the following equation:
MRR = 1
U
U
∑
u=1
1
ranki
(5.5)
Pool of Items
The evaluation of recommendation models is carried out by selecting X negative instances
(items that the user has not interacted with) for each positive instance (items that the
user has interacted with). This set of items used to evaluate the model is known as the
item pool, and it is from this set of instances that the model makes recommendations.
Subsequently, the top-k recommendation list is created and evaluated using the HR,
MRR, and NDCG metrics described in Sections 5.1, 5.1, and 5.1, respectively.
==PAGE:60==
48
5 Experimental setup
5.2
Implementation Detail
In this section, the hardware used in the experiments will first be detailed, followed by
a specification of the language, frameworks, and libraries that were used.
5.2.1
Infrastructure
The experiments have been carried out on the High Performance Computer (HPC) [66]
from the Denmark’s Technical University (DTU). The hardware used in the HPC con-
sists of 2x Intel Xeon Gold 6226R processors with 16 cores and 32 threads at 2.90GHz.
Additionally, a Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) was used to accelerate the training
process, specifically the NVIDIA Tesla A100 PCIe with 80 GB, which has 6912 CUDA
cores and 432 Tensor cores [67]. Below, are the technical specifications of the CPU:
• 11 x 384GB memory (12 x 32GB DDR4-2933)
• 17 x 768 GB memory (12 x 64GB DDR4-2933)
• 10 GBit-Ethernet
• 480 GB SSD
5.2.2
Packages and Technologies
The ”recsys” repository has been programmed using Python and has been isolated using
virtual environments. Specifically, Python 3.10.12 was used. The required packages
are: ”NumPy”, ”pandas”, ”SciPy”, ”Scikit-learn”, ”matplotlib”, ”PyTorch”, ”easydict”,
”PyYAML”. Below a detailed list with the versions of each package can be found.
• numpy==1.26.3
• pandas==2.2.1
• scipy==1.12.0
• scikit-learn==1.4.1.post1
• matplotlib==3.8.3
• torch==2.2.1+cu118
• PyYAML==6.0.1
• easydict==easydict 1.13
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Model Complexity
49
5.3
Model Complexity
In this section a analysis of the complexity of the models Top Pop, General Matrix
Factorization (GMF), Neural Collaborative Filtering (NCF), Contextual Neural Collab-
orative Filtering (CNCF) with One-Hot-Encoding (OHE) and autoencoder (AE) .
Top Pop
The TopPop does not have parameters to optimize, it only needs to take into account
the number of interactions and the number of items in the test set. Therefore, for this
model the complexity will be evaluated as time complexity.
• Counting Interactions: Being Itrain all the interactions in the training dataset,
it is needed O(Itrain)to count occurrences for each item.
• Sorting Items: Once the counts are done, sorting has a complexity of O(m ·
log(m)), where m is the number of items.
• Selecting Top N Items: Selecting a portion of the list, the top 10 items, has a
constant complexity O(c).
Therefore, the complexity of TopPop from training to evaluation is O(Itrain + O(m ·
log(m)).
Matrix Factorization
For General Matrix Factorization, the number of parameters to be optimized varies
according to the number of factors. Since the interaction matrix RN×N is decomposed
into two latent matrices of dimensions k, U N×k and IM×k, the number of parameters
to optimize will be proportional to the latent dimension, the number of users, and the
number of items. The calculation of the parameters for the latent user matrix, the latent
item matrix, and the total parameters to be used is shown in the following equations:
parametersuser = m × k
(5.6)
parametersitem = n × k
(5.7)
parameters = (m × k) + (n × k)
(5.8)
parameters = (k × (m + n))
(5.9)
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Experimental setup
Neural Collaborative Filtering
For the model that uses a neural component, equations 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, and 5.9 are used
to calculate the number of parameters in the Matrix Factorization component. To this,
the neural component and the final prediction layer must be added.
For the embedding part, we have a latent matrix for users and another for items,
U m×γ
nn
and In×γ
nn . Following the equations described in the previous section, the number
of parameters to be optimized is described in the following equation:
parametersnn = (γ × (n + m))
(5.10)
Additionally, for the neural network, the number of parameters can be calculated as
follows: for the first layer, it can be calculated by multiplying the number of neurons in
the first layer, n(l)
w , by the number of neurons in the second layer, n(l+1)
w
, plus the number
of bias terms, one bias term for each neuron in the second layer, n(l+1)
b
= n(l+1)
w
. The
number of parameters to optimize for the neural component is shown in the following
equations:
Parametersl+1 = (nl × nl+1) + nl+1
(5.11)
Parametersl+1 = nl+1 × (nl + 1)
(5.12)
Parameterstotal =
L−1
∑
l=1
nl+1 × (nl + 1)
(5.13)
Where L it’s the last layer of the neural component, which has has as many neurons as
the latent factor from matrix factorization. Finally, since the last layer of the neural
network will always be equal to the number of factors, a final layer with a number
of parameters proportional to the number of factors must be added. The number of
parameters to optimize for NCF is shown in the following equation:
Parametersprdict = (k ∗2 × 1) + 1 = 2k + 1
(5.14)
The total number of parameters to optimize in NCF is described as:
Parameters = (k ×(n+m))+(γ ×(n+m))+(
L−1
∑
l=1
nl+1 ×(nl +1))+((k ∗2+1) (5.15)
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Model Complexity
51
Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering
One-Hot-Encoding
The number of parameters to optimize for the model using context with One-Hot En-
coding is calculated in the same way as the parameters in Neural Collaborative Filtering
5.15. The only difference in this model is that the input to the neural network will be
proportional to the latent dimensions of the user matrices, Unn, and item matrices, Inn,
plus the context. As seen in the previous section, the input will be [unn
i , inn
j , ci,j], where
ci,j ∈Cm×n×p. Therefore, the total number of parameters to optimize is given by the
Equation 5.15.
Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering Autoencoder
To be able to make recommendations using the context representation in a latent space,
an autoencoder had to be trained. Therefore, the parameters of the autoencoder must
also be considered.
In this case, the number of parameters to optimize can be calculated following the
generalized equation in NCF, equation 5.15.
To differentiate both components, and
because the autoencoder used is a simple autoencoder with only an encoder-decoder
with a hidden layer acting as a bottleneck, the equations can be represented based on
the dimensions of the context p and the selected latent space λ. The encoder has weights
to optimize which are λ × p plus a bias term equal to λ. The decoder has weights to
optimize which are equal to p × λ plus a bias term equal to p, as shown in the following
equations:
Parametersencoder = λ × (1 + p)
(5.16)
Parametersdecoder = p × (1 + λ)
(5.17)
Parametersautoencoder = 2λp + λ + p
(5.18)
Therefore, the total number of paramenters of CNCF with an autoencoder can be cal-
culated by adding Equation 5.18 to Equation 5.15, resulting in:
Parameters = (k×(n+m))+(γ×(n+m))+(
L−1
∑
l=1
nl+1×(nl+1))+((k∗2+1)+(2λp+λ+p)
(5.19)
==PAGE:64==
52
5 Experimental setup
5.4
Hyper-parameters tunning
For the experiments with the recommendation models, a grid search was conducted with
the combination of the following parameters:
• learning rate: 0,01 - 0,001 - 0,0001
• Batch size: 128 - 256 - 512
On the other hand, General Matrix Factorization and Neural Collaborative Filtering
have been trained with latent spaces of 8, 16, 32, and 64 using the Frappe dataset.
Additionally, all training processes have been conducted with 100 epoch. Nevertheless,
due to time constrains in the High Performance Computer (HPC) some of the conducted
experiments were unable to achieve 100 epochs as explained in Table 6.10. Finally, for
all training processes, the ADAM optimizer was used, and Binary Cross Entropy was
used as the loss function or criterion for GMF, NCF, CNCF with One-Hot-Encoding
and CNCF with autoencoder models that predict interaction whereas the Mean Squared
Error (MSE) was used for the autoencoder.
Optimization of Autoencoder Parameters via Grid
Search
The data for the autoencoder was split following a standard approach, with 80% used for
the training set and the remaining 20% for the test set. An alternative approach could
have been to use the same train-test split as in the recommender model, employing a
leave-one-out strategy for the test set. However, while this approach ensures that each
user is included in the test set, it results in a relatively small test set with only 651
instances compared to 88,542 in the training set. This disparity could likely cause the
evaluation to fail due to the low diversity of data in the test set. Furthermore, having
only 651 instances in the test set makes the evaluation more susceptible to high variance
depending on the selected samples.
As explained in section 4.2.4, an Autoencoder with an hourglass structure was used.
Initially, with a ReLU activation function, as all the data had been transformed and
encoded to have values between 0 and 1.
All experiments with the Autoencoder were conducted using the ADAM optimizer
and the mean squared error (MSE) loss function. Additionally, they were evaluated with
two metrics: mean absolute error (MAE) and root mean squared error (RMSE).
In table 5.1 the results obtained with the autoencoder using the Frappe 5-Core
filtering can be found. Additionally, the weights on this experiment were initialized with
a normal distribution as mentioned in [11] [68].
==PAGE:65==
5.4 Hyper-parameters tunning
53
Data
Model
Filtering
Batch Size
lr
Layers
RSME
MAE
Loss
Frappe
AE
5-Core
128
0,01
[21, 9]
0,484
0,587
0,233
Frappe
AE
5-Core
128
0,001
[21, 9]
0,471
0,446
0,221
Frappe
AE
5-Core
128
0,0001
[21, 9]
0,469
0,444
0,220
Frappe
AE
5-Core
256
0,01
[21, 9]
0,481
0,456
0,232
Frappe
AE
5-Core
256
0,001
[21, 9]
0,462
0,431
0,214
Frappe
AE
5-Core
256
0,0001
[21, 9]
0,465
0,437
0,216
Frappe
AE
5-Core
512
0,01
[21, 9]
0,491
0,474
0,241
Frappe
AE
5-Core
512
0,001
[21, 9]
0,479
0,462
0,229
Frappe
AE
5-Core
512
0,0001
[21, 9]
0,470
0,446
0,221
Table 5.1. Performance metrics AutoEncoder Frappe 5-Core Normal distribution.
As can be clearly observed, the autoencoder, regardless of the learning rate or batch
size used, does not seem to significantly improve its reconstruction accuracy. This sug-
gests that the autoencoder may not be learning correctly. Since [11] does not discuss the
results obtained with the autoencoder, it cannot be concluded whether the autoencoder
is actually learning.
For this reason, alternatives were sought to evaluate if the autoencoder’s accuracy
was adequate. The first experiment conducted was to modify the weight initialization
and, instead of following what was explained in [11] [68], a default initialization was
used. The equations for the weight initialization is shown in:
W ∼U
(
−
√
1
in_features,
√
1
in_features
)
(5.20)
Table 5.2 shows the results obtained with the autoencoder and the default initialization,
using a ReLU activation function.
Data
Model
Filtering
Batch Size
lr
Layers
RSME
MAE
Loss
Frappe
AE
5-Core
128
0,01
[21, 9]
0,483
0,458
0,233
Frappe
AE
5-Core
128
0,001
[21, 9]
0,471
0,446
0,221
Frappe
AE
5-Core
128
0,0001
[21, 9]
0,465
0,436
0,217
Frappe
AE
5-Core
256
0,01
[21, 9]
0,488
0,469
0,238
Frappe
AE
5-Core
256
0,001
[21, 9]
0,462
0,430
0,213
Frappe
AE
5-Core
256
0,0001
[21, 9]
0,476
0,457
0,226
Frappe
AE
5-Core
512
0,01
[21, 9]
0,496
0,484
0,246
Frappe
AE
5-Core
512
0,001
[21, 9]
0,484
0,472
0,234
Frappe
AE
5-Core
512
0,0001
[21, 9]
0,463
0,434
0,214
Table 5.2. Performance metrics AutoEncoder Frappe 5-Core default initialization
==PAGE:66==
54
5 Experimental setup
As can be observed, the results obtained are not significantly different from those
obtained with Gaussian distribution initialization of the weights. This problem may
suggest several things, such as robustness, overfitting, underfitting, among others.
Therefore, since it was unclear to what extent the autoencoder was learning, if at all,
the loss function was investigated in more detail to see if it converged. The test loss of
the experiment conducted with a learning rate of 0.001 and a batch size of 256, using
the Frappe 5-Core subset, is shown in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2. Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering Frappe 5-Core test loss
As can be clearly observed, the autoencoder seemed to find a minimum in the second
iteration. This could be a global minimum or a local minimum. Based on the data
obtained, the following hypothesis was considered: ”The autoencoder is learning and is
robust enough to reach a global minimum regardless of weight initialization.” Once the
hypothesis was established, a stress test was designed to verify if the autoencoder was
indeed learning.
To do this, the autoencoder was trained with randomly generated data with the same
degree of sparsity. Out of 21 contextual features, only 4 had a non zero value. Therefore,
a dataset of the same dimensions as the original training set was created, filled with zeros
except for 4 random values per row. The model was evaluated at each epoch with the
original test set.
Below, in table 5.3 the results for different learning rates and different batch sizes
can be observed. The weight initialization follows a normal distribution with mean 0
and standard deviation equal to 0,01.
==PAGE:67==
5.4 Hyper-parameters tunning
55
Data
Model
Filtering
Batch Size
lr
Layers
RSME
MAE
Loss
Random
AE
5-Core
128
0,01
[21, 9]
0,477
0,451
0,186
Random
AE
5-Core
128
0,001
[21, 9]
0,483
0,457
0,192
Random
AE
5-Core
128
0,0001
[21, 9]
0,514
0,498
0,206
Random
AE
5-Core
256
0,01
[21, 9]
0,477
0,451
0,186
Random
AE
5-Core
256
0,001
[21, 9]
0,467
0,441
0,176
Random
AE
5-Core
256
0,0001
[21, 9]
0,492
0,476
0,184
Random
AE
5-Core
512
0,01
[21, 9]
0,488
0,460
0,176
Random
AE
5-Core
512
0,001
[21, 9]
0,478
0,460
0,176
Random
AE
5-Core
512
0,0001
[21, 9]
0,480
0,458
0,186
Table 5.3. Performance metrics AutoEncoder Frappe 5-Core Random Data
The results, which were basically the same as those obtained in the previous two
experiments, indicated that the model was not learning valuable information during
training. Therefore, the hypothesis that the model was robust and found a global mini-
mum was not plausible.
The following conclusion was reached: ”The data used in the autoencoder had too
much sparsity, meaning too many zeros”. Once this hypothesis was established, it was
decided to test it.
In this experiment, a dataset of the same size as the Frappe 5-Core dataset was
created. In this case, the cnt feature was also used, as it is a value between 0 and 1 and
all data points have it. Unlike the previous experiment, all data, except for cnt, had a
value equal to 1, and only two zeros were randomly added, one per feature. This ensured
that, although it did not reflect a realistic data structure, the dataset was not sparse.
Below, in table 5.4 the results from the autoencoder with a normal distribution
initialization and with no sparse random data can be observed.
Data
Model
Filtering
Batch Size
lr
Layers
RSME
MAE
Loss
Random
AE
5-Core
128
0,01
[21, 9]
0,281
0,153
0,086
Random
AE
5-Core
128
0,001
[21, 9]
0,278
0,152
0,085
Random
AE
5-Core
128
0,0001
[21, 9]
0,284
0,155
0,087
Random
AE
5-Core
256
0,01
[21, 9]
0,277
0,151
0,085
Random
AE
5-Core
256
0,001
[21, 9]
0,276
0,148
0,081
Random
AE
5-Core
256
0,0001
[21, 9]
0,277
0,151
0,085
Random
AE
5-Core
512
0,01
[21, 9]
0,284
0,155
0,087
Random
AE
5-Core
512
0,001
[21, 9]
0,285
0,156
0,087
Random
AE
5-Core
512
0,0001
[21, 9]
0,285
0,156
0,087
Table 5.4. Performance metrics AutoEncoder no sparse random data.
==PAGE:68==
56
5 Experimental setup
As can be observed, the results of the experiments are quite notable. The autoencoder
has a lower error in both RMSE and MSE, specifically 0.196 less for RMSE and 0.301
for MAE. This confirms the hypothesis that the data are too sparse.
For this reason, a more compact version of the data was used for both the Frappe
and Yelp datasets. Both versions are described in the Data section 4.3.2 and 4.3.2. Addi-
tionally, due to the changes in the data, specifically in the cyclic encoding, a hyperbolic
tangent (tanh) activation function was used. Defined in Equation 4.20. Unlike ReLU,
this function allows learning from negative numbers (it does not map negative numbers
to 0). This activation function was chosen because the cyclic encoding for the hour in
the compact version had values ranging from -1 to 1. In total 12 contextual features
where used in the following experiment.
Table 5.5 shows the results for the Frappe 5-Core compact version can be found. The
weight initialization follows a normal distribution.
Data
Model
Filtering
Batch Size
lr
Layers
RSME
MAE
Loss
Frappe12
AE
5-Core
128
0,01
[12, 9]
0,168
0,056
0,013
Frappe12
AE
5-Core
128
0,001
[12, 9]
0,161
0,055
0,012
Frappe12
AE
5-Core
128
0,0001
[12, 9]
0,181
0,058
0,013
Frappe12
AE
5-Core
256
0,01
[12, 9]
0,130
0,051
0,012
Frappe12
AE
5-Core
256
0,001
[12, 9]
0,105
0,049
0,011
Frappe12
AE
5-Core
256
0,0001
[12, 9]
0,126
0,053
0,012
Frappe12
AE
5-Core
512
0,01
[12, 9]
0,189
0,060
0,012
Frappe12
AE
5-Core
512
0,001
[12, 9]
0,184
0,059
0,014
Frappe12
AE
5-Core
512
0,0001
[12, 9]
0,203
0,064
0,015
Table 5.5. Performance metrics AutoEncoder Frappe5 compact hyperbolic tangent
As can be observed, the results obtained are better than those obtained with the
dataset containing 21 contextual features.
This corroborates that a more compact
dataset can indeed be reconstructed by an autoencoder with less error.
Comparing
the best-performing results, both trained with a learning rate of 0.001 and a batch size
of 256, the autoencoder trained with the compact version of the data improves the model
by 77.26% in RMSE and 88.67% in MAE.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 6
Experiments
In this chapter, the experiments will be described. Initially, the focus will be on baseline
models (Top Pop and GMF), comparing performance, examining the influence of vari-
ous factors, and evaluating the effects of filtering. Subsequent experiments will involve
models with a neural component (NCF) and compare them to models that incorporate
context (CNCF). These models’ performance will be assessed based on the number of
factors and the impact of K-Core filtering. Additionally, the effects of selecting differ-
ent numbers of instances for evaluation will be investigated. Finally, various context
representations and encoding strategies will be examined to determine their effects on
model performance and how the different representation affect on the performance of
the autoencoder, and consequently, on recommendation performance.
6.1
Setting up Baseline Models
The first experiments conducted were with Top Pop and General Matrix Factorization
(GMF). The objective of the experiment was to have baseline models to later compare
with the models that include a neural network component and context.
6.1.1
Performance Comparison on Baseline Models
As explained in Section 4.3, data filtering was used to keep only items and users with
five or more interactions (5-Core). This filtering was chosen because it is widely used in
the field of recommendation systems [69]. Additionally, five is a reasonable low number,
ensuring that the dataset does not reduce drastically while ensuring consistency for the
training. For both datasets, the same train-test split was performed using the leave-
one-out method. The results obtained with Top Pop and General Matrix Factorization
(GMF) are presented in Table 6.1. The results obtained with GMF used a number of
factors equal to eight, a learning rate of 0.001, and a batch size of 256.
As can be observed in Table 6.1, the recommendation using Top Pop has much
lower accuracy than GMF, which is indeed expected.
It can be concluded that the
results obtained for the Frappe dataset in Top Pop are significantly better. Thus can be
associated to the fact that in smaller datasets like Frappe, user interactions are likely to
be more concentrated on a limited set of items. Therefore, popular items have a higher
chance to be recommended and be more relevant for more users.
==PAGE:70==
58
6 Experiments
Dataset
Filtering
Model
HR@10
MRR@10
NCDG@10
Frappe
5-Core
Top Pop
0,365
0,193
0,139
Frappe
5-Core
GMF
0,934
0,870
0,885
Yelp
5-Core
Top Pop
0,009
0,004
0,003
Yelp
5-Core
GMF
0,764
0,510
0,579
Table 6.1. Performance metrics for Top Pop and GMF on Frappe and Yelp datasets
Finally, it can be observed that GMF has an accuracy of 93,4% in recommending
liked items in the Frappe dataset, while in the Yelp dataset it is 76,4% (HR). Despite a
significant improvement, it can be seen that the recommendations for the Yelp dataset
are not always at the top of the recommended list. We can see that the recommended
items in Yelp tend to have position 2, while in Frappe they are closer to the first position
(based on MRR).
6.1.2
Performance on different number of factors
Based on the results obtained and the difference in evaluation metrics (HR, MRR, and
NDCG), it was decided to investigate how the number of factors could influence the
results in both the Frappe 5-Core and Yelp 5-Core datasets.
The objective was to
investigate whether different numbers of factors could improve HR, MRR, and NDCG
for both Frappe and Yelp.
The results obtained with different numbers of factors for Frappe and Yelp are shown
in Table 6.2. In both experiments, the best results were obtained using a learning rate
of 0.001 and a batch size of 256. Additionally, they were evaluated using a pool of items
with 99 negative instances. The best results are highlighted in bold.
Dataset
Filtering
Model
Nf
HR@10
MRR@10
NCDG@10
Frappe
5-Core
GMF
8
0,908
0,686
0,740
Frappe
5-Core
GMF
16
0,914
0,780
0,813
Frappe
5-Core
GMF
32
0,922
0,859
0,874
Frappe
5-Core
GMF
64
0,934
0,870
0,885
Yelp
5-Core
GMF
8
0,743
0,421
0,498
Yelp
5-Core
GMF
16
0,748
0,472
0,542
Yelp
5-Core
GMF
32
0,754
0,506
0,574
Yelp
5-Core
GMF
64
0,764
0,510
0,579
Table 6.2. Performance metrics for different numbers of factors on Frappe and Yelp 5-Core
subset (Nf corresponds to Number of factors)
==PAGE:71==
6.1 Setting up Baseline Models
59
It can be observed that both in Frappe and Yelp Dastets datset, the HR is not
susceptible to the number of factors, while MRR and NDCG are. This indicates that,
regardless of the number of factors in the model, the item preferred by users is recom-
mended most of the time; however, the number of factors influentiate the position the
item has on the list. Additionally, it can be concluded that increasing the number of
factors improves the precision of MRR and NDCG, but beyond 32 factors, there is no
significant improvement. The best results obtained in both datasets are with a factor
equal to 64.
Figure 6.1. General Matrix Factorization with Frappe 5-Core subset
Figure 6.2. General Matrix Factorization with Yelp 5-Core subset
==PAGE:72==
60
6 Experiments
Comparing the models with 8 and 64 factors on the Frappe dataset, the accuracy
improves in a 2,86%, 26,88%, and 19,61% for HR, MRR, and NDCG, respectively from
eight to 64 factors. Similarly, the number of factors influences the Yelp dataset in the
same way, where accuracy improves by 2,78%, 21,19%, and 16,39% for HR, MRR, and
NDCG, respectively when comparing the model with eight factors versus 64 factors. The
influence of the factors in Frappe 5-Core is shown in Figure 6.1. Similarly, the results
obtained with different numbers of factors for the Yelp 5-Core dataset are shown in
Figure 6.2.
6.1.3
Effect of filtering
Once it was concluded that the best number of factors for GMF was 64, it was decided
to investigate whether data filtering could influence the results obtained in both models,
Top Pop and GMF. For this reason, it was decided to replicate the experiments with the
2-Core subset of both datasets. Table 6.3 shows a comparison of the results obtained
with the 2-Core and 5-Core subsets.
Dataset
Filtering
Model
HR@10
MRR@10
NCDG@10
Frappe
5-Core
Top Pop
0,365
0,193
0,139
Frappe
5-Core
GMF
0,934
0,870
0,885
Frappe
2-Core
Top Pop
0,311
0,167
0,117
Frappe
2-Core
GMF
0,926
0,847
0,869
Yelp
5-Core
Top Pop
0,009
0,004
0,003
Yelp
5-Core
GMF
0,764
0,510
0,579
Yelp
2-Core
Top Pop
0,008
0,003
0,003
Yelp
2-Core
GMF
0,757
0,496
0,568
Table 6.3. Performance metrics for Top Pop and GMF on Frappe and Yelp datasets 5-Core
and 2-Core
It can be observed that the model’s accuracy is diminished when the 2-Core subset
is used. This is because more users have interacted with fewer items, and these are
probably not the most popular items. Specifically, the recommendation of the model
Top Pop for the Frappe 2-Core subset is 14.95% worse in HR, 13.31% worse in MRR,
and 16.25% worse in NDCG compared to the 5-Core. Similarly, in the Yelp dataset, the
2-Core subset also has lower accuracy. Specifically, the model using the 2-Core subset
is 10.76% worse in HR, 10.11% worse in MRR, and 12.91% worse in NDCG compared
to Yelp 5-Core.
According to the results obtained, it can be concluded that in the Top Pop model, the
users and the items which have between 2 and 4 interactions affect the model lowering
the accuracy. This occurs for two reasons: firstly, since the users have interacted with few
==PAGE:73==
6.1 Setting up Baseline Models
61
items, the model is not able to learn significant information about them; secondly, the
items with which these users have interacted are likely to be items with few interactions.
The combination of these two conditions means that the model has less information
about both the users and the items with which they have interacted. If the results
obtained with GMF are compared, it can also be observed that the model’s accuracy is
slightly lower for the experiments conducted with 2-Core filtering. Specifically, the model
using the Frappe 2-Core subset has an HR that is 0,86% lower, an MRR that is 2,65%
lower, and an NDCG that is 1,81% lower compared to the Frappe 5-Core. Similarly, for
the model using the Yelp 2-Core subset, the accuracy decreases by 0,92% in HR, 2,75%
in MRR, and 1,90% in NDCG compared to the Yelp 5-Core subset. Therefore, for the
Yelp dataset with a factor equal to 64, it cannot be concluded that users and items with
a number of interactions between 2 and 4 provide significant value to the model; rather,
it seems that they make the model less accurate.
Influence of factors in 2-Core Subset
In order to investigate if the number of factors affect the model performance in the same
way as in the 5-Core subset, the experiments conducted in Section 6.1.2 were conducted
with 2-Core subsets. Table 6.4, shows a summary of the results obtained with different
umber of factors for the 2-Core subsets can be found. Both experiments use a learning
rate of 0,001 and a batch size of 256. Furthermore, the evaluation was also conducted
with a pool of 99 negative instances per positive.
Dataset
Filtering
Model
Nf
HR@10
MRR@10
NCDG@10
Frappe
2-Core
GMF
8
0,920
0,699
0,753
Frappe
2-Core
GMF
16
0,926
0,783
0,820
Frappe
2-Core
GMF
32
0,934
0,856
0,878
Frappe
2-Core
GMF
64
0,926
0,847
0,869
Yelp
2-Core
GMF
8
0,752
0,429
0,506
Yelp
2-Core
GMF
16
0,757
0,474
0,547
Yelp
2-Core
GMF
32
0,764
0,504
0,576
Yelp
2-Core
GMF
64
0,757
0,496
0,568
Table 6.4. Performance metrics for different numbers of factors on Frappe and Yelp 2-Core
subset (Nf corresponds to Number of factors)
As can be observed in Table 6.4, unlike the experiments with the 5-Core subsets
shown in Table 6.2, the best results were obtained with a factor equal to 32. Figure 6.3,
shows that the number of factors does not significantly affect HR accuracy, whereas it
does affect the accuracy of MRR and NDCG, which slightly decrease after a number
of factors equal to 32. Similarly, in Figure 6.4, it can be observed that the number of
factors is not determinant for HR accuracy in the Yelp 2-Core subset, whereas MRR
and NDCG do improve with the increase in factors.
==PAGE:74==
62
6 Experiments
Figure 6.3. General Matrix Factorization with Frappe 2-Core subset
Figure 6.4. General Matrix Factorization with Yelp 2-Core subset
It can be concluded that although the factors do influence the accuracy of MRR and
NDCG, users and items with between 2 and 4 interactions do not provide significant
value to the models, regardless of the number of factors used.
==PAGE:75==
6.2 Neural Models
63
6.2
Neural Models
Once the baseline models were established, it was first decided to check if the models
with a neural network component could add value to the recommendation model. Subse-
quently, it was investigated whether the models that used interaction context provided
more information to improve the recommendations.
6.2.1
Reproducibility
The first experiment conducted in Neural Collaborative Filtering aimed to determine
whether the Neural Collaborative Filtering model had been correctly coded. The original
model was implemented in ”Keras TensorFlow”, while the implemented one was in
”PyTorch”. To compare scores with the original experiment, the MovieLens 1M [70]
was used, as referenced in the Neural Collaborative Filtering paper [10].
The architecture described in the paper [10] was used, where it is proposed that
the multi-layer perceptron (MLP) part be proportional to the number of factors. This
means that, for a number of factors equal to 8, 3 hidden layers with dimensions [32,
16, 8] respectively were used. This indicates that the embeddings used in the MLP
part have a dimension of 16. Furthermore, the data has not been preprocessed as it is
explained in Appendix A. The model evaluation was conducted using a pool of items
with 99 negative instances and one positive instance. Table 6.5 shows the results of NCF
with the MovieLens 1M [70].
Dataset
Filtering
Model
Nf
HR@10
NCDG@10
MovieLens 1M
None
NCF
8
0,682
0,409
MovieLens 1M
None
NCF
16
0,689
0,415
MovieLens 1M
None
NCF
32
0,703
0,425
MovieLens 1M
None
NCF
64
0,693
0,415
Table 6.5. Performance metrics for different numbers of factors MovieLens 1M Dataset (Nf
corresponds to Number of factors)
In figure 6.5, the results obtained with the MovieLens 1 Million dataset can be ob-
served. The evaluation metrics hit ratio and NDCG were used with a top-k recommended
items list, where K is equal to 10. Lastly, the best results were obtained with a learning
rate was set to 0,001 and a batch size of 256.
The results obtained indicated that the model implemented in PyTorch worked cor-
rectly.
However, unlike the results obtained in [10], the number of factors did not
significantly improve accuracy. The best result obtained was using a factor of 32 for
matrix factorization, compared to the result obtained using a factor of eight the accuracy
increase was 3.08%.
==PAGE:76==
64
6 Experiments
Figure 6.5. Neural Collaborative Filtering MovieLens 1M
6.2.2
Performance Comparison
The experiments were conducted with the 5-Core subset for both datasets. The objective
of the experiments is to evaluate the influence of the neural component and context on
different types of datasets to improve the recommendation model’s predictions. Table
6.6, presents a summary of the experiments conducted with the different models. All
models were trained with a learning rate of 0,001, a batch size of 256, and evaluated
with a pool of 99 negative instances per positive instance.
Dataset
Filtering
Model
Encoding
Context
HR@10
MRR@10
NCDG@10
Frappe
5-Core
Top Pop
None
0
0,365
0,193
0,139
Frappe
5-Core
GMF
None
0
0,934
0,870
0,885
Frappe
5-Core
NCF
None
0
0,942
0,892
0,904
Frappe
5-Core
CNCF
OHE
21
0,940
0,873
0,889
Frappe
5-Core
CNCF
OHE
12
0,925
0,757
0,798
Frappe
5-Core
CNCF
AE
21
0,934
0,885
0,897
Yelp
5-Core
Top Pop
None
0
0,009
0,004
0,003
Yelp
5-Core
GMF
None
0
0,743
0,421
0,498
Yelp
5-Core
NCF
None
0
0,518
0,282
0,349
Yelp
5-Core
CNCF
OHE
21
0,678
0,378
0,450
Yelp
5-Core
CNCF
OHE
13
0,759
0,409
0,492
Yelp
5-Core
CNCF
AE
21
0,740
0,386
0,470
Table 6.6. Performance metrics for Top Pop and GMF on Frappe and Yelp datasets
As can be observed from the dataset, the results obtained with GMF, NCF, and
CNCF models for the Frappe dataset under various configurations are quite similar.
This similarity in performance is likely due to the dataset’s small size, which may not
==PAGE:77==
6.2 Neural Models
65
contain complex relationships that different modeling approaches could exploit more
effectively. While the best results were obtained using Neural Collaborative Filtering
(NCF), the improvements in metrics such as HR@10, MRR@10, and NCDG@10 do
not guarantee that NCF is robust enough to consistently outperform all other models.
Finally, it can be concluded that, although all models using context have good results,
the use of context does not improve the model’s accuracy.
In contrast, for Yelp dataset, the model with the highest accuracy is the one that
uses a compact representation of the context, CNCF with One-Hot-Encoding with 13
contextual features. Although this model is better in terms of HR, being 2,15% better
than the one using GMF, it is 2,85% worse in MRR and 1,20% worse in NDCG compared
to GMF. Additionally, it is noteworthy that the model that uses a neural component
without context (NCF) has significantly lower accuracy than GMF. Specifically, NCF
for Yelp is 32.21% less accurate in HR, 44.79% less in MRR, and 39.71% less in NDCG
then the results obtained with GMF for Yelp.
For the Yelp dataset, the models using an autoencoder have better accuracy than that
obtained with the context representation in 21 features using OHE, without reaching the
high accuracies achieved with CNCF and the compact version of the data or GMF. With
the results obtained, it is diﬀicult to conclude that the neural component truly improves
the model. The influence of the resulting vector from the neural component and MF
should be investigated to verify if both are equally useful for making the final prediction
or if the model always focuses on the vector resulting from matrix factorization.
6.2.3
Influence of Filtering on the Neural Component
As seen in the previous section, data filtering did not have a significant influence on
the Top Pop and GMF models. For this reason, it was decided to validate whether the
neural component of the model could extract more information from users and items
with few interactions. The NCF and CNCF models with One-Hot Encoding (OHE) were
used for this experiment. Table 6.7, shows a summary of the results obtained with the
Frappe dataset, comparing the two types of filtering: 2-Core versus 5-Core.
Dataset
Filtering
Model
Encoding
Context
HR@10
MRR@10
NCDG@10
Frappe
2-Core
Top Pop
None
0
0,311
0,167
0,117
Frappe
2-Core
GMF
None
0
0,934
0,856
0,878
Frappe
2-Core
NCF
None
0
0,927
0,877
0,889
Frappe
2-Core
CNC
OHE
21
0,932
0,865
0,881
Frappe
5-Core
Top Pop
None
0
0,365
0,193
0,139
Frappe
5-Core
GMF
None
0
0,934
0,870
0,885
Frappe
5-Core
NCF
None
0
0,942
0,892
0,904
Frappe
5-Core
CNCF
OHE
21
0,940
0,873
0,889
Table 6.7. Performance metrics for different models on 2-Core vs 5-Core on Frappe dataset
==PAGE:78==
66
6 Experiments
As can be observed in Table 6.7, the results with the 2-Core filtering are quite similar
and comparable to those obtained with the 5-Core filtering. In this case, the best model
is the one that only uses General Matrix Factorization. Additionally, this again indicates
that users and items with between 2 and 4 interactions do not provide significant value
and may slightly reduce the model’s accuracy, except for the Top Pop model, where, as
has been explained in Section 6.1.3 the users and items with fewer interactions have a
significant role. Figure 6.8 shows the results of the experiment with 2-Core and 5-Core
filtering.
Dataset
Filtering
Model
Encoding
Context
HR@10
MRR@10
NCDG@10
Yelp
2-Core
Top Pop
None
0
0,008
0,004
0,003
Yelp
2-Core
GMF
None
0
0,757
0,496
0,568
Yelp
2-Core
NCF
None
0
0,503
0,265
0,182
Yelp
2-Core
CNC
OHE
21
0,644
0,344
0,416
Yelp
5-Core
Top Pop
None
0
0,009
0,004
0,003
Yelp
5-Core
GMF
None
0
0,764
0,510
0,579
Yelp
5-Core
NCF
None
0
0,518
0,282
0,349
Yelp
5-Core
CNCF
OHE
21
0,678
0,378
0,450
Table 6.8. Performance metrics for different models on 2-Core vs 5-Core on Yelp dataset
Table 6.8 shows that the results obtained with the 2-Core filtering on Yelp dataset
are almost the same to those obtained with the 5-Core filtering, which is aligned to
the results obtained with Frappe dataset shown in Table 6.7. It is noteworthy that the
best model in Yelp dataset with 2-Core filtering is the GMF. Nevertheless, the accuracy
obtained with GMF and 2-Core filtering is slightly lower than the accuracy obtained
with GMF and the 5-Core filtering.
For both datasets, it can be concluded that the neural component, whether it includes
context or not, fails to capture significant information from users and items that have
between 2 and 4 interactions. Therefore, the following experiments were conducted only
with the 5-Core filtering.
6.2.4
Performance on Different Number of Factors
To verify if the number of factors was significant in improving the precision of the neural
network, it was decided to investigate more deeply the effect of the factors in NCF and
CNCF, the latter with One-Hot Encoding. Both models were chosen to validate if more
complex architectures could capture non-linear relationships and also to compare if using
context in these networks could be useful.
Table 6.9 shows a summary of the results obtained from the two datasets using Neural
Collaborative Filtering (NCF) and Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering (CNCF)
with 5-Core data filtering. All experiments were conducted with a learning rate of 0.001,
a batch size of 256, and a pool of 99 negative items.
==PAGE:79==
6.2 Neural Models
67
Dataset
Model
Encoding
Context
Nf
HR@10
MRR@10
NCDG@10
Frappe
NCF
None
0
8
0,919
0,794
0,801
Frappe
NCF
None
0
16
0,931
0,857
0,875
Frappe
NCF
None
0
32
0,936
0,879
0,892
Frappe
NCF
None
0
64
0,942
0,892
0,904
Frappe
CNCF
OHE
21
8
0,919
0,740
0,783
Frappe
CNCF
OHE
21
16
0,928
0,842
0,862
Frappe
CNCF
OHE
21
32
0,930
0,840
0.862
Frappe
CNCF
OHE
21
64
0,940
0,873
0,889
Yelp
NCF
None
0
8
0,505
0,252
0,312
Yelp
NCF
None
0
16
0,512
0,271
0,338
Yelp
NCF
None
0
32
0,515
0,277
0.345
Yelp
NCF
None
0
64
0,518
0,282
0.349
Yelp
CNCF
OHE
21
8
0,678
0,378
0,450
Yelp
CNCF
OHE
21
16
0,410
0,209
0,256
Yelp
CNCF
OHE
21
32
0,370
0,188
0,230
Yelp
CNCF
OHE
21
64
0,453
0,219
0,274
Table 6.9. Performance metrics for different number of factors NCF and CNCF for Frappe
and Yelp (Nf corresponds to Number of factors)
Figure 6.6. Neural Collaborative Filtering Frappe 5 - Core
As can be observed in Table 6.9, the results obtained for the Frappe dataset are quite
similar in HR accuracy, regardless of the number of factors and whether context is used.
It is noteworthy that, although not a significant improvement, the best accuracy in the
Frappe dataset was obtained with the NCF model, which does not use context.
In contrast, for the Yelp dataset, it can be observed that the best accuracy is obtained
by using context and a factor equal to eight. For the NCF model, which does not use
==PAGE:80==
68
6 Experiments
context, the number of factors is not relevant. Figure 6.6 shows the results obtained
with a learning rate of 0,001, a batch size of 256, and a pool of 99 negative instances for
the experiment using the Neural Collaborative Filtering (NCF) and the Frappe datasets
with 5-Core filtering.
In Figure 6.6 it can be observed that, although the neural network becomes more
complex and thus capable of learning more complex relationships, there is no significant
improvement in HR when the number of factors is increased. However, there is a sig-
nificant improvement on NCF when comparing models with a factor of eight versus a
factor of 64 in MRR and NDCG. Specifically, while HR improves by only 2,50%, MRR
improves by 12,34% and NDCG by 12,86% from the model using 64 factors over eight.
Figure 6.1 shows that the accuracy of MRR and NDCF with the model CNCF and
OHE on the Frappe dataset, improves when increasing the number of factors, which is
consistent with the results obtained in GMF detailed in Table 6.2. Figure 6.7 shows the
results obtained with the NCF model using the Yelp dataset. This model was trained
with a learning rate of 0.001, a batch size of 256, and a pool of 99 negative instances.
Figure 6.7. Neural Collaborative Filtering Yelp 5 - Core
In Figure 6.7 it can be observed that the results obtained with Yelp dataset are not
as good as those obtained from the experiment of NCF with Frappe dataset shown in 6.6.
These results were expected due to the large number of users and items in the dataset.
Nevertheless, as demonstrated in the previous experiments detailed in 6.9, the number
of factors does not significantly contribute to the accuracy of the model.
In contrast with the results obtained with Frappe 6.6, we can see that with Yelp
dataset, the number of factors does not significantly affect HR, MRR, or NDCG. Com-
paring a number of factors equal to eight with a number of factors equal to 64 for the
NCF with Yelp dataset, the HR has a relative improvement similar to the Frappe model,
where HR improves by 2,57%, MRR by 11,90%, and NDCG by 11,86%. However, the
improvement in absolute terms is not as significant. The accuracy in the NCF experi-
ment with Yelp dataset improves the HR by 0,005, the MRR by 0,011 and the NDCG by
==PAGE:81==
6.2 Neural Models
69
0,013 points, whereas in the NCF experiment with the Frappe dataset, the HR improves
by 0,023, the MRR by 0,098 and the NDCG by 0,103 points. This indicates that while
the number of factors can generally improve the recommendations on models that has
a neural component, the magnitude of the improvement is data-dependent.
In order to decide if more time was needed to achieve better results, the loss func-
tion was investigated for all experiments. Figure 6.8, shows the loss function for the
experiment with the Yelp data and the NCF model with a number of factors equal to
eight. The learning rate was set to 0,001, the batch size to 256, and a pool of 99 negative
instances was used for the evaluation.
Figure 6.8. Neural Collaborative Filtering Yelp 5 - core test loss
As can be observed in Figure 6.8 the loss function converges. This convergence was
observed in the loss functions for the experiments conducted with NCF and number
of factors 8, 16, 32 and 64. After epoch 20, the improvement is not very significant,
and although it could still improve, it is unlikely that HR, MRR, and NDCG would
improve significantly even if the model is trained up to 100 epochs. Undoubtedly, this
is something worth investigating in the future. After investigating the results obtained
with both datasets in a model with a neural component without the use of context, it
was decided to investigate more deeply the influence of the factors on the accuracy of
the model that did use the context of the interactions.
Figure 6.9 shows the influence of the number of factors in the Contextual Neural
Collaborative Filtering model with One-Hot Encoding for the Frappe dataset.
The
model was trained with a learning rate of 0.001, a batch size of 256, and a pool of
negative instances of 99 elements.
==PAGE:82==
70
6 Experiments
Figure 6.9. Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering Frappe 5 - Core
As shown in Figure 6.9, the number of factors does not significantly impact the Hit
Ratio’s accuracy. Furthermore, the Hit Ratio (HR) accuracy achieved with the CNCF
model does not surpass that obtained in the experiments using Neural Collaborative
Filtering (NCF), regardless of the number of factors involved.
When analyzing the accuracy of MRR and NDCG, it can be observed that the
number of factors does help improve accuracy as indicated the results with NCF in 6.6.
Specifically, the model CNCF when using 16 factors outperforms the model CNCF that
uses 8 factors by 13,78% and 10,06% in MRR and NDCG, respectively. There is also
an increase of 3,93% and 3,19% in the accuracy of MRR and NDCG, respectively, when
comparing the model CNCF using 64 factors versus the model CNCF using 32 factors.
Overall, the model CNCF that uses 64 factors is 2,33% better in HR, 18,04% better in
MRR, and 13,49% better in NDCG compared to the model CNCF that uses 8 factors.
Therefore, can be concluded that the factors help the neural component to improve the
recommendations. Nonetheless, using the context does not improve the model (CNCF)
performance.
To investigate if the number of factors also had little impact when using a bigger
dataset.
A more detailed investigation on the Yelp results was carried.
It is worth
remembering that Yelp’s dataset has 30 times more users and items, and approximately
40 times more interactions. Figure 6.10 shows the results obtained in the experiment
conducted on CNCF and the Yelp 5-Core filtering, using a learning rate of 0.001, a batch
size of 256, and a pool of items with 99 negative instances.
==PAGE:83==
6.2 Neural Models
71
Figure 6.10. Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering Yelp 5 - Core
Figure 6.11.
Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering Yelp 5 - Core loss function per
number of factor
As shown in Figure 6.10, increasing the number of factors does not enhance the
model’s performance; instead, it worsens it. The model performs best with 8 factors
(CNCF f=8), improving 83.20% the Hit Ratio (HR), 101.70% the Mean Reciprocal Rank
(MRR), and 95.40% the Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG) compared
to the model with 32 factors (CNCF f=32).
The degradation in performance could
stem from several issues. Firstly, model overfitting, which is unlikely since the more
complex model with 64 factors (f=64) outperforms the medium complexity models with
16 and 32 factors. Secondly, issues related to training time and convergence, which are
==PAGE:84==
72
6 Experiments
also unlikely, as evidenced by the loss curves in 6.11 showing convergence for models
with 16, 32, and 64 factors. Lastly, it is plausible that the models are reaching a local
minimum, as they are initialized using the default method described in the next section
(5.20). Further investigation is necessary to confirm if finding a local minimum impacts
performance.
Figure 6.11 shows the loss curves of the CNCF model trained with the Yelp datset
with the 5-Core filtering. The results shown were obtained with a learning rate of 0.001,
a batch size of 256, and a pool of items with 99 negative instances per positive instance.
As can be observed in Figure 6.11 the loss curves for all models, except the smallest
one (f=8), despite being trained for a limited time converge.
Additionally, the loss
function of each model is quite similar, converging to values between 0.02 and 0.05. The
number of epochs is different for each model due to varying training times. Table 6.10
shows the average training and evaluation time per epoch for each model.
Num Factors
Total Time (min)
Train time (min)
Test time (min)
8
135,01
126,55
8,46
16
180,46
170,65
9,81
32
203,40
193,54
9,86
64
282,62
272,75
9,87
Table 6.10. Training & evaluation time CNCF Frappe subset 5-Core
6.2.5
Influence of the pool of items on the Neural
Component
The next experiment aid to asses if the selected items used to evaluate the model had
a significant impact on the models performance. It is easier to recommend the positive
item to the user if only a subset of items with which the user has not interacted is
selected, rather than using all available items with which the user has not interacted.
It was decided to test with the Frappe dataset due to its size, as it has 1127 items.
Given that the Yelp with the 5-Core filtering needed 10 minutes to evaluate the model
with 100 items, the time required to evaluate with all the negative instances (a maximum
of 95,890) for each user would consume all the available computation time.
Additionally, since the models trained with CNCF on the Frappe dataset have shown
significant improvement only when changing from 8 factors to 64, it was decided to
conduct the experiments with only these two factors for both models, CNCF and NCF,
due to the time consumption in evaluation. Table 6.11, shows the results obtained with
a learning rate of 0.001, a batch size of 256, and two different factors, 8 and 64, both
evaluated with all the items the user has not interacted compared to the results obtained
with a pool of items with 99 negative instances, can be compared.
==PAGE:85==
6.2 Neural Models
73
Dataset
Model
Encoding
Context
Nf
Ni
HR@10
MRR@10
NCDG@10
Frappe
NCF
None
0
8
99
0,919
0,794
0,801
Frappe
NCF
None
0
8
N/A
0,905
0,789
0,793
Frappe
NCF
None
0
64
99
0,942
0,892
0,904
Frappe
NCF
None
0
64
N/A
0,930
0,884
0,887
Frappe
CNCF
OHE
21
8
99
0,919
0,740
0,783
Frappe
CNCF
OHE
21
8
N/A
0,899
0,775
0,805
Frappe
CNCF
OHE
21
64
99
0,940
0,873
0,889
Frappe
CNCF
OHE
21
64
N/A
0,920
0,838
0,868
Table 6.11. Performance metrics CNCF Frappe subset 5-Core with pool and without pool of
items (Nf corresponds to Number of factors and Ni corresponds to Number of items)
As shown in Table 6.11, with the Frappe 5-Core filtering, using a pool of items with
99 negative instances does not result in a significant improvement in the accuracy of
the models, neither when using 8 factors nor when using 64 factors. In the NCF model,
none of the evaluation metrics showed improvement while using all available items, which
aligns with expectations. This occurs because using more items for evaluation increases
the likelihood that the model perceives one of the uninteracted items as similar to the
user’s preferred items. Consequently, this similar item is ranked higher, pushing the
evaluated item lower on the recommendation list.
Similarly, CNCF has a lower accuracy in terms of HR in all number of factors. How-
ever, contrary to expectations due to the increased number of items in the evaluation,
MRR and NDCG show a small, non-significant improvement when using a number of
factor equal to eight. When using 64 factors, the model’s accuracy decreases in all eval-
uation metrics, though also in a non-significant manner. From this results, it can be
concluded that a pool of items in a small dataset may not be that relevant to the models
performance. Showing no significant decrease in the model accuracy.
6.2.6
Influence of Different Encoding Strategies
The following experiment aimed to determine if the representation of context could
influence the accuracy of the models, specifically the CNCF model that uses One-Hot
Encoding. The motivation for the experiment was to improve the performance of models
with a neural component, especially those that used context. This is because, despite
having more information available, the models using context (CNCF) did not result in
better item recommendations; in fact, in some cases, the performance of CNCF models
was drastically reduced. One of the reasons the model might be failing is that the data
were very sparse, not due to a lack of data, but because of the encoding technique used,
One-Hot Encoding. As a result, as explained in the Data section 4.3, both the Frappe
and Yelp datasets ended up having only 4 numerical values per user compared to 17
zeros.
==PAGE:86==
74
6 Experiments
To verify this hypothesis, experiments were conducted with the CNCF model using
One-Hot Encoding with a more compact representation of the data. Specifically, Frappe
was reduced to 12 columns, while Yelp was reduced to 13. Furthermore, due to the
insights from the influence of the number of factors on the model performance, it was
decided that in this experiment only 2 different factors would be used, eight and 64.
Table 6.12, shows a comparison of the results obtained with the CNCF model using
One-Hot Encoding and two different representations of context. The results were ob-
tained with a learning rate of 0.001, a batch size of 256, and were evaluated with a pool
of 99 negative items.
Dataset
Model
Encoding
Context
Nf
HR@10
MRR@10
NCDG@10
Frappe
CNCF
OHE
12
8
0,925
0,757
0,798
Frappe
CNCF
OHE
21
8
0,919
0,740
0,783
Frappe
CNCF
OHE
12
64
0,910
0,836
0,854
Frappe
CNCF
OHE
21
64
0,940
0,873
0,889
Yelp
CNCF
OHE
13
8
0,759
0,409
0,492
Yelp
CNCF
OHE
21
8
0,678
0,378
0,450
Yelp
CNCF
OHE
13
64
0,454
0,211
0,268
Yelp
CNCF
OHE
21
64
0,453
0,219
0,274
Table 6.12. Performance metrics for different feature representation Frappe and Yelp dataset
with One-Hot-Encoding (OHE) (Nf corresponds to Number of factors)
Table 6.12, shows that the compact version of the data improves the model CNCF
accuracy when trained with a factor equal to eight.
Whereas with the Frappe dataset, the improvements are not significant.
When
comparing results between the CNCF model using a factor of eight across two differ-
ent feature representations, the compact version with 12 contextual features performs
slightly better than the model using 21 contextual features. Specifically, 0.65% higher
in Hit Ratio (HR), 2.30% higher in Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR), and 1.92% higher
in Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG). However, these differences are
not substantial. Additionally, when a factor of 64 is used, the model with the original
representation incorporating 21 contextual features outperforms the compact version.
Similarly, in the Yelp dataset, better results are also obtained when the compact
version of the features is used, but the improvement is more significant. The model that
uses 13 contextual features is 11,95% better in HR, 8,20% better in MRR, and 9,33%
better in NDCG, indicating that for this dataset, a more compact representation of the
features helps improve recommendation accuracy. In contrast, when a factor of 64 is
used, the model’s accuracy does not improve with the compact version; there is only a
very small improvement (0.001) in HR, which is not significant. From the results, it can
be concluded that the representation of contextual features affects the models when the
neural network architecture is not very complex.
==PAGE:87==
6.2 Neural Models
75
6.2.7
Analysis of the Autoencoder Performance
The objective of the experiment was to validate how well the autoencoder was performing.
Additionally, it aimed to verify if a more compact representation of the context could
improve, or decrease, the performance of the autoencoder and, consequently, improve
the performance of the recommendation model.
Although a more compact version of the data does not help to achieve better effec-
tiveness using One-Hot Encoding, as seen in Section 6.2.6, the results obtained with
the CNCF model using an autoencoder for the Yelp dataset surpassed those obtained
with OHE. For this reason, it was decided to investigate if this performance could be
improved by improving the performance of the autoencoder. Table 6.13, shows a com-
parison of the recommendation performance using an autoencoder with different context
representations versus OHE.
Dataset
Model
Encoding
Context
Nf
HR@10
MRR@10
NCDG@10
Frappe
CNCF
AE
12
8
0,904
0,801
0,826
Frappe
CNCF
AE
21
8
0,920
0,798
0,828
Frappe
CNCF
AE
12
64
0,925
0,850
0,868
Frappe
CNCF
AE
21
64
0,934
0,885
0,783
Yelp
CNCF
AE
13
8
0,732
0,387
0,469
Yelp
CNCF
AE
21
8
0,740
0,386
0,470
Yelp
CNCF
AE
13
64
0,461
0,224
0,280
Yelp
CNCF
AE
21
64
0,503
0,243
0,304
Table 6.13. Performance metrics for different feature representation Frappe and Yelp dataset
with an autoencoder (Nf corresponds to Number of factors)
Table 6.13 shows that, contrary to the previous experiment 6.12, the model’s perfor-
mance does not improve when using a more compact data representation. This suggests
that the autoencoder can transform the data into the latent space and subsequently
reconstruct it accurately, despite the sparsity caused by one-hot encoding.
As explained in Section 5.4, a standard train-test split was used. Furthermore, as
detailed in Section 4.2.4, an autoencoder with an hourglass structure was initially em-
ployed. This model used a ReLU activation function, appropriate since all data had
been transformed and encoded to have values between 0 and 1.
All experiments involving the autoencoder were conducted using the ADAM opti-
mizer and the mean squared error (MSE) loss function. Additionally, all experiments
with the autoencoder were evaluated using two metrics: mean absolute error (MAE) and
root mean squared error (RMSE). Table 6.14, shows a summary of the accuracy of the
autoencoder trained with different contextual representations for the Frappe and Yelp
datasets.
==PAGE:88==
76
6 Experiments
Batch Size
lr
Data
Context
Layers
RSME
MAE
Loss
256
0,001
Frappe
12
[12, 9]
0,105
0,049
0,011
256
0,001
Frappe
21
[21, 9]
0,462
0,431
0,214
256
0,001
Yelp
13
[13, 6]
0,173
0,116
0,030
256
0,001
Yelp
21
[21, 9]
0,145
0,091
0,021
Table 6.14. Performance metrics Summary AutoEncoder
Table 6.14 shows that when using the Frappe dataset, the reconstruction error is
much higher when 21 contextual features are used. This is somewhat contradictory to
the results obtained with the recommendation model, as the model’s accuracy is better
when the autoencoder trained with 21 contextual features is used as detailed in Table
6.13. Sanity checks to ensure the performance and implementation of the autoencoder
were conducted and are explained in Section 4.2.4.
This indicates that the hypothesis that the neural component does not add value
to the model is quite plausible, as the accuracy of the model that only uses GMF is
quite similar to the accuracy of the models with a neural component.
Additionally,
considering that the autoencoder’s reconstruction error is high and does not affect the
model’s final accuracy, this suggests that the influence of the neural part on the accuracy
of the recommendations is not very high.
In contrast, when using the Yelp dataset, the autoencoder has a low reconstruction
error for both contextual representations. Comparing this with the results obtained by
the recommendation model, it can be observed that the autoencoder with a lower recon-
struction error, which uses 21 contextual features, is more accurate than the model that
uses 13 contextual features. This indicates that in this dataset, the neural component
may have more influence than in the Frappe dataset.
From the results obtained, it can be concluded that data sparsity due to One-Hot
Encoding for small datasets can lead to problems when using an autoencoder to represent
features in a latent space. Additionally, a more compact representation of contextual
features in a large dataset does not improve the accuracy of the autoencoder; if there is
enough data, the sparsity due to One-Hot Encoding is not an issue.
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusions
In this thesis, a comprehensive evaluation was conducted across three types of recom-
mender models: General Matrix Factorization (GMF), Neural Collaborative Filtering
(NCF), and Context-Aware Neural Collaborative Filtering (CNCF). Initial experiments
with Top Pop and GMF focused on performance comparisons, the impact of varying the
number of latent factors, and the effects of different data filtering techniques. Subse-
quent analyses explored models with neural components (NCF) and additional context
(CNCF). These analyses delved into how data filtering influenced the neural models, ex-
amined the enhancement of model performance through adjustments in the number of
latent factors, assessed the performance sensitivity to the number of negative instances
used during evaluation, and investigated various contextual representations and their
effective transformation into the latent space.
It can be concluded that data filtering, whether 5-Core or 2-Core, does not signif-
icantly affect model accuracy. This is because the leave-one-out strategy ensures all
users are evaluated, and users with 2 to 4 interactions do not notably diminish model
accuracy. Additionally, it can be concluded that the performance of models using the
Yelp dataset improves when contextual features are represented in an extensive space
(21 features). This is because the data sparsity induced by One-Hot Encoding (OHE)
affects more smaller datasets, such as Frappe, because it leads to a high-dimensional
and sparse feature space. Additionally, the model performance with OHE is higher com-
pared to the model that uses an autoencoder (AE), which indicates that while the use
of an AE can help in selecting the most relevant features while reducing dimensionality,
it may not always encode suﬀicient information to outperform models that use OHE if
the dataset is big enough. Therefore, selecting the right contextual features and how to
encode them is crucial to enhance model performance.
Future investigations should examine whether the size of the item pool impacts model
performance in larger datasets, such as Yelp, and whether the representation of contex-
tual features in simpler neural network architectures affects performance when using
datasets with higher dimensionality.
The limitations of the study are highlighted by the extended processing times and
computational constraints encountered with the Yelp dataset. With over 3.5 million data
points, each training epoch required approximately 107 minutes on a GPU. Additionally,
access to the High Performance Computer was restricted to 72 hours, permitting only
partial training. These constraints significantly impacted the potential to fully explore
and optimize the model’s performance
==PAGE:90==
78
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX A
Data
This appendix describes the data used for the reproducibility of the Neural Collaborative
Filtering model, specifically the MovieLens 1M dataset. As in section 4.3, the distribu-
tions of users and items are detailed. Next, all the features available in the Frappe and
Yelp datasets are described.
MovieLens
The MovieLens dataset is a collection of movie data where users rate the movies they
have watched from 0 to 5. The dataset includes 6,400 users, 3,900 movies, and 1,000,209
interactions. This dataset consists of three files: ratings.dat, movies.dat, and users.dat.
The first file contains user interactions and ratings of movies. The second file includes
metadata about the movies, specifically titles and genres. The third file contains meta-
data about the users, specifically demographic data such as age and gender.
These data have been used solely to verify and replicate the results obtained in
the article [10]. For this reason, the data have been obtained directly from the oﬀicial
implementation found in the repository of Xiangnan He, one of the co-authors of the
article [71]. Figure A.1 shows the distribution of users in the MovieLens 1M dataset.
Figure A.1. MovieLens 1M Dataset: Distribution of User interactions
==PAGE:92==
80
A Data
Figure A.1 shows a long tail distribution. This indicates that there are many users
with few interactions. The users exhibit an average of 165 interactions, and 50% of the
users have at least 96 interactions. The graph reveals that there is consistency in the
minimum number of interactions, as the tail end remains constant and does not fade
away. These data indicate that most users could contribute value to a recommendation
system due to the number of interactions they have. Figure A.2 shows the distribution
of the items.
Figure A.2. MovieLens 1M Dataset: Distribution of User interactions
Figure A.2 shows that the distribution of the items is similar to the distribution
of users shown in A.1, with a large number of items having few interactions.
The
items exhibit an average of 269 interactions, with 50% of the items having at least 123
interactions. In this case, it can be observed that there is a higher average number of
interactions compared to the users; however, Figure A.2 reveals that there are some
items with very few interactions and that there is no consistent minimum number of
interactions. To gain a better perspective, the interaction frequency of the users and
items has been plotted. Figure A.3 shows the interaction frequency of the users is shown.
==PAGE:93==
A Data
81
Figure A.3. MovieLens 1M Dataset: Categorical Distribution per user interactions
Figure A.4 reveals that the minimum number of interactions per user is consistent;
users have at least 10 interactions. Additionally, it can be stated that only 86 users have
between 10 and 20 interactions. All other users have more than 20 interactions. Figure
A.4 shows the frequency interaction per item.
Figure A.4. MovieLens 1M Dataset: Categorical Distribution per item interactions
==PAGE:94==
82
A Data
Figure A.4 reveals that there is no minimum number of interactions per item. In
this case, 332 items have 5 or fewer interactions, and 116 items have between 6 and 9
interactions, inclusive. Items with few interactions will provide little information to the
recommendation algorithm, as having so few interactions means the model will not be
able to learn enough to recommend them correctly.
Since the MovieLens dataset has been used exclusively to replicate the results ob-
tained in the paper Neural Collaborative Filtering [10], the data have not been prepro-
cessed and have been used directly from the repository [71]. Additionally, the train-test
split used in the paper has been employed, and after analysis, it was concluded that no
user or item was removed. Therefore, there is no guarantee of a minimum number of
interactions per item or user. The percentage of items and users not represented in the
test set can be found in Table 4.6.
A.1
Frappe Dataset
This section describes the Frappe dataset, which consists of two files.
The first file
contains data such as user ID, item ID, and contextual features, while the metadata file
contains information about the items, particularly information about the application,
such as a description, categories, photo, etc.
Below, the features and their types are described, starting with the data file (Data).
Data
• User (Nominal): Represents the unique identifier for each user in the dataset.
• Item (Nominal): Represents the unique identifier for each mobile application in
the dataset.
• Cnt (Ratio): Number of times the app has been used by the user.
• Daytime (Nominal): The time of app usage into several intervals: morning, af-
ternoon, evening, sunset, night, noon, sunrise
• Weekday (Nominal): The day of the week when the app was used: Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday.
• Isweekend (Nominal): Indicates whether the app usage occurred during the week-
end or a workday
• Homework (Nominal): Distinguishes the user’s location: Unknown, Home, Work
• Cost (Nominal): Identifies whether the app is free or paid.
• Weather (Nominal): Describes the weather conditions at the time of app usage:
Sunny, Cloudy, Unknown, Foggy, Rainy, Stormy, Drizzle, Snowy, Sleet
==PAGE:95==
A.2 Yelp Dataset
83
• Country (Nominal): Lists the user’s country: United States, Spain, Switzerland,
India, Canada, etc.
• City (Nominal): Provides a city identifier: City Id
Below, the data, types, and definitions present in the file containing the metadata
information about the mobile app and the interaction.
Metadata
• Item (Nominal): Represents the unique identifier for each mobile application in
the dataset.
• Package (Nominal): Unique identifier assigned to an Android application on the
Google Play Store.
• Category (Nominal): Genre or category each application belongs to, such as
”Games”, ”Productivity”, ”Education”, etc.
• Downloads Ordinal: Number of download ranges or buckets (e.g., 1-1,000; 1,001-
5,000; etc.).
• Developer (Nominal): Indicates the developer or publisher of the application.
• Icon (Categorical): Associated icon, which is a visual representation of the app
• Language (Nominal): Languages the apps are available in or support, ISO 639-1
standard language codes.
• Description (Textual data): Detailed description of the app provided by the
developer.
• Name (Nominal): The name of the application.
• Price (Nominal / Ratio): Price of the application, Free, Unknown, amount in
dollars.
• Rating (Ratio): Ratings on a scale from 1-5 stars, 1 decimal.
• Short desc (Textual data): A shorter, concise description of the app.
A.2
Yelp Dataset
This section will explain the features of the Yelp dataset. The dataset consists of six
files: Business, Review, User, Checkin, Tip, and Photo, of which only the first three—
Business, Review, and User—were used. Below, the files are briefly described, and the
data features are detailed.
==PAGE:96==
84
A Data
Business
This JSON file contains comprehensive information about various businesses. Key details
include, among others, the business name, location, the year it joined Yelp, and global
metrics such as the average rating received.
• Business_id (Nominal): A unique 22-character identifier string for the business.
• Name (Nominal): A string representing the business’s name.
• Address (Nominal): A string indicating the full address of the business.
• City (Nominal): A string denoting the city where the business is located.
• State (Nominal): A 2-character string representing the state code.
• Postal code (Nominal): A string representing the postal code.
• Latitude (Interval): A float indicating the latitude of the business location.
• Longitude (Interval): A float showing the longitude of the business location.
• Stars (Ordinal): A float for the star rating, rounded to half-stars. (Ratings imply
an order but are not measured on a standard interval scale).
• Review_count (Ratio): An integer indicating the number of reviews.
• Is_open (Nominal): An integer (0 or 1) indicating whether the business is closed
or open, respectively.
• Attributes (Nominal): An object mapping business attributes to values, noting
that some attribute values might be objects, such as RestaurantsTakeOut (boolean)
and BusinessParking (an object detailing parking options).
• Categories (Nominal Array): An array of strings representing the business cate-
gories.
• Hours (Nominal): An object mapping days of the week to the business’s operating
hours, using a 24-hour clock.
User
Next, details from the users are described. The file, also in JSON format contains rele-
vant information about the users, such as: Name, when it started using the application,
and information about the user profile like the number reviews he/she has done, number
of friends, fans, etc.
==PAGE:97==
A.2 Yelp Dataset
85
• User_id (Nominal): A unique 22-character identifier string that maps to the user
in user.json.
• Name (Nominal): A string representing the business’s name.
• Review_count (Ratio): An integer denoting the total number of reviews the
user has written.
• Yelping_since (Interval): A string indicating the date the user joined Yelp, for-
matted as YYYY-MM-DD. (Assuming regular intervals make sense in the context
of years)
• Friends (Nominal Array): An array of strings, each representing a unique user_id
of the user’s friends.
• Useful (Ratio): An integer representing the total number of useful votes the user
has received.
• Funny (Ratio): An integer denoting the number of funny votes received by the
user.
• Cool (Ratio): An integer showing the number of cool votes the user has received.
• Fans (Ratio): An integer indicating the total number of fans the user has.
• Elite (Ordinal Array): An array of integers, each representing a year the user was
considered elite on Yelp.
• Average_stars (Ratio): A float representing the average rating across all of the
user’s reviews, correctly considered Ratio as it represents a proportion scale from
1 to 5 stars.
• Compliment_hot (Ratio): An integer denoting the number of hot compliments
the user has received.
• Compliment_more (Ratio): An integer showing the number of more compli-
ments received by the user.
• Compliment_profile (Ratio): An integer indicating the number of profile com-
pliments received.
• Compliment_cute (Ratio): An integer representing the number of cute compli-
ments the user has received.
• Compliment_list (Ratio): An integer denoting the number of list compliments
received by the user.
• Compliment_note (Ratio): An integer indicating the number of note compli-
ments received.
==PAGE:98==
86
A Data
• Compliment_plain (Ratio): An integer showing the number of plain compli-
ments received by the user.
• Compliment_cool (Ratio): An integer denoting the number of cool compliments
received.
• Compliment_funny (Ratio): An integer indicating the number of funny com-
pliments received.
• Compliment_writer (Ratio): An integer representing the number of writer com-
pliments received by the user.
• Compliment_photos (Ratio): An integer showing the number of photo compli-
ments received.
Review
Lastly, the file that contains the reviews. This file includes information related to the
interaction from the user and the business. It mainly includes information about the
interaction as the review, the rating, the day of the review, etc.
• Review_id (Nominal): A unique 22-character identifier string for the review.
• User_id (Nominal): A unique 22-character identifier string that maps to the user
in user.json.
• Business_id (Nominal): A unique 22-character identifier string that maps to the
business in business.json.
• Stars (Ordinal): An integer indicating the star rating given in the review.
• Date (Interval): A string representing the date the review was posted, formatted
as YYYY-MM-DD. (While dates can be seen as ordinal in many contexts, they
are treated as interval data because the length of time between any two dates is
meaningful.)
• Text (Textual data): A string containing the text of the review itself, detailing
the user’s experience.
• Useful (Ratio): An integer representing the number of useful votes the review has
received.
• Funny (Ratio): An integer indicating the number of funny votes received by the
review.
• Cool (Ratio): An integer showing the number of cool votes received by the review.
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX B
Code setup examples
This appendix explains the structure of the base repository, along with a brief explana-
tion of the code, demonstrating the modular programming practices used. More than
7000 lines of code have been used to define models, training loops, data preprocessing,
and PyTroch dataloaders. Below, in Figure B.1, a representation of the outside folder
infrastructure can be found:
Figure B.1. Project structure: first level
As can be seen in the directory tree in Figure B.1, the data is located outside the main
repository due to its large size. Three different datasets have been used, FRAPPE, YELP
and MovieLens 1 Million. The last one has only been used to verify the correct operation
of the models coded on ”PyTorch”, as the original Neural Collaborative Filtering (NCF)
was coded in ”TensorFlow”.
Additionally, version control has been implemented to
ensure workflows. Below, in Figure B.2 a more detailed overview on the project can be
found.
==PAGE:100==
88
B Code setup examples
Figure B.2. Project structure: second level (src)
The main code contains, under ”resys/src/models”, 7 different models: Autoencoder
(AE), Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering with an Autoencoder (CNCF_AE),
Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering Interaction (CNCF_I), Contextual Neural
Collaborative Filtering Rating (CNCF_R), General Matrix Factorization (GMF), Neu-
ral Collaborative Filtering (NCF), and Popular Item (PopularItem). Additionally, two
different embeddings models can be found under models/Embedding, one for a general
approach, for models that do not use context and one tailored to deal with the extra
dimension, the context.
Except for the popular Item model, all have been defined using PyTorch, for several
reasons, including mastery of the library and the ability to tailor the models in greater
detail for training.
Additionally, although the models are not too complex, the code has been modular-
ized to make it more understandable. This means that the models can be instantiated
directly in a training process, to train the model in question, or they can be instantiated
within another model as part of it. For example, GMF can be instantiated and directly
trained, as has been done in train/GMF.py, or it can be instantiated to be part of the
NCF model, as has been done in models/NCF.py. Furthermore, the models can be used
==PAGE:101==
B Code setup examples
89
to predict interactions; this is the probability of an item being interacted by a user, or
the rating prediction, that is, the rating a user could give to an item once interacted
with it.
Below, part of the NCF model is shown to illustrate the modularization:
1 from typing import List
2 import torch
3 from torch import nn
4 from src.models.Embeding.general_embeddings import GeneralEmbeddings
5 from src.models.GMF.gmf import GeneralMatrixFactorization
6 from src.models.MLP.mlp import MultiLayerPerceptron
7
8 class NeuralCollaborativeFiltering(nn.Module):
9
def __init__(
10
self,
11
num_users: int,
12
num_items: int,
13
mf_dim: int,
14
layers: List[int],
15
binary_classification: bool = True,
16
) -> None:
17
super().__init__()
18
mlp_in_layer = layers[0]
19
mlp_out_layer = layers[-1]
20
self.binary_classification = binary_classification
21
self.embeddings = GeneralEmbeddings(num_users , num_items , mf_dim,
mlp_in_layer)
22
self.GMF_model = GeneralMatrixFactorization()
23
self.MLP_model = MultiLayerPerceptron(layers)
24
self.predict_layer = nn.Linear(mf_dim + mlp_out_layer , 1)
25
26
def forward(self, user_input , item_input):
27
mf_user_latent , mf_item_latent , mlp_vector = self.embeddings(
28
user_input , item_input
29
)
30
mf_prediction_vector = self.GMF_model(mf_user_latent ,
mf_item_latent)
31
mlp_prediction_vector = self.MLP_model(mlp_vector)
32
prediction_vector = torch.cat(
33
[mf_prediction_vector , mlp_prediction_vector], dim=-1
34
)
35
prediction = self.predict_layer(prediction_vector)
36
if self.binary_classification:
37
prediction = torch.sigmoid(prediction)
38
return prediction
39
40
return prediction
==PAGE:102==
List of Figures
2.1
Basic understanding of a recommendation [17] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Taxonomy of recommended system model types [18] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Basic recommendation model [19] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
User-based Collaborative Faltering [28] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Item-based Collaborative Filtering [28] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.1
Neural Collaborative Filtering architecture [10]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering architecture [11] . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Frappe dataset: distribution of user interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Frappe dataset: distribution of item interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5
Frappe Dataset: Categorical Distribution per user interactions . . . . . . . .
28
4.6
Frappe dataset: categorical distribution per item interactions . . . . . . . . .
29
4.7
Yelp Dataset: Logarithmic distribution of Users Interactions . . . . . . . . .
30
4.8
Yelp dataset logarithmic distribution of items interactions
. . . . . . . . . .
31
4.9
Yelp dataset: categorical distribution of users interactions
. . . . . . . . . .
31
4.10 Yelp dataset: categorical distribution of items interactions
. . . . . . . . . .
32
4.11 Frappe cnt feature distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1
Graphical Representation of HR with an evaluation list of length 3 items [64]
46
5.2
Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering Frappe 5-Core test loss . . . . . .
54
6.1
General Matrix Factorization with Frappe 5-Core subset . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.2
General Matrix Factorization with Yelp 5-Core subset . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.3
General Matrix Factorization with Frappe 2-Core subset . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.4
General Matrix Factorization with Yelp 2-Core subset . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.5
Neural Collaborative Filtering MovieLens 1M
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.6
Neural Collaborative Filtering Frappe 5 - Core . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.7
Neural Collaborative Filtering Yelp 5 - Core . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.8
Neural Collaborative Filtering Yelp 5 - core test loss
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.9
Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering Frappe 5 - Core . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.10 Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering Yelp 5 - Core
. . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.11 Contextual Neural Collaborative Filtering Yelp 5 - Core loss function per
number of factor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.1 MovieLens 1M Dataset: Distribution of User interactions . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.2 MovieLens 1M Dataset: Distribution of User interactions . . . . . . . . . . .
80
==PAGE:103==
List of Figures
List of Figures
A.3 MovieLens 1M Dataset: Categorical Distribution per user interactions . . . .
81
A.4 MovieLens 1M Dataset: Categorical Distribution per item interactions
. . .
81
B.1 Project structure: first level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
B.2 Project structure: second level (src) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
Page II of X
==PAGE:104==
List of Tables
2.1
User-Item Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.1
Frappe and Yelp data summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Frappe dataset and subsets overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Reduction overview in frappe dataset and subsets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Yelp dataset and subsets overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5
Reduction overview in Yelp dataset and subsets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.6
Item representation in tests datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.7
Example season dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.8
Example season dataset One-Hot-Encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.9
Example isweeked . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.10 Example isweeked binarized . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.11 Feature ID and description Frappe dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.12 Frappe day time to hour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.13 Yelp hour to daytime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.14 Date ranges for each season
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.15 Feature ID and description Yelp dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.16 Minimum and maximum values on features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.1
Performance metrics AutoEncoder Frappe 5-Core Normal distribution.
. . .
53
5.2
Performance metrics AutoEncoder Frappe 5-Core default initialization
. . .
53
5.3
Performance metrics AutoEncoder Frappe 5-Core Random Data . . . . . . .
55
5.4
Performance metrics AutoEncoder no sparse random data. . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.5
Performance metrics AutoEncoder Frappe5 compact hyperbolic tangent . . .
56
6.1
Performance metrics for Top Pop and GMF on Frappe and Yelp datasets . .
58
6.2
Performance metrics for different numbers of factors on Frappe and Yelp
5-Core subset (Nf corresponds to Number of factors) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.3
Performance metrics for Top Pop and GMF on Frappe and Yelp datasets
5-Core and 2-Core
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.4
Performance metrics for different numbers of factors on Frappe and Yelp
2-Core subset (Nf corresponds to Number of factors) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.5
Performance metrics for different numbers of factors MovieLens 1M Dataset
(Nf corresponds to Number of factors) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.6
Performance metrics for Top Pop and GMF on Frappe and Yelp datasets . .
64
6.7
Performance metrics for different models on 2-Core vs 5-Core on Frappe dataset 65
==PAGE:105==
List of Tables
List of Tables
6.8
Performance metrics for different models on 2-Core vs 5-Core on Yelp dataset 66
6.9
Performance metrics for different number of factors NCF and CNCF for
Frappe and Yelp (Nf corresponds to Number of factors)
. . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.10 Training & evaluation time CNCF Frappe subset 5-Core
. . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.11 Performance metrics CNCF Frappe subset 5-Core with pool and without
pool of items (Nf corresponds to Number of factors and Ni corresponds to
Number of items)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.12 Performance metrics for different feature representation Frappe and Yelp
dataset with One-Hot-Encoding (OHE) (Nf corresponds to Number of factors) 74
6.13 Performance metrics for different feature representation Frappe and Yelp
dataset with an autoencoder (Nf corresponds to Number of factors) . . . . .
75
6.14 Performance metrics Summary AutoEncoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
Page IV of X
==PAGE:106==
Bibliography
[1]
G. Adomavicius and A. Tuzhilin, “Context-aware recommender systems,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’08, (New
York, NY, USA), p. 335–336, Association for Computing Machinery, 2008.
[2]
B. Sarwar, G. Karypis, J. Konstan, and J. T. Riedl, “Application of dimensionality
reduction in recommender system-a case study,” 2000.
[3]
Y. Gu, J. Song, W. Liu, L. Zou, and Y. Yao, “Camf: Context aware matrix factor-
ization for social recommendation,” Web Intelligence, vol. 16, pp. 53–71, 03 2018.
[4]
H. Wermser, A. Rettinger, and V. Tresp, “Modeling and learning context-aware
recommendation scenarios using tensor decomposition,” in 2011 International Con-
ference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining, pp. 137–144, 2011.
[5]
Z. Yan, “Bandits for recommender systems,” eugeneyan.com, May 2022.
[6]
A. Ahmed and N. Salim, “Markov chain recommendation system (mcrs),” Interna-
tional Journal of Novel Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering,
vol. 3, pp. 11–26, 01 2016.
[7]
W. Song, C. Shi, Z. Xiao, Z. Duan, Y. Xu, M. Zhang, and J. Tang, “Autoint:
Automatic feature interaction learning via self-attentive neural networks,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management, CIKM ’19, ACM, Nov. 2019.
[8]
J. Xiao, H. Ye, X. He, H. Zhang, F. Wu, and T.-S. Chua, “Attentional factorization
machines: Learning the weight of feature interactions via attention networks,” 2017.
[9]
S. Funk, “Netflix update:
Try this at home.” https://sifter.org/~simon/
journal/20061211.html, 2006. Accessed:2024-02-05.
[10] X. He, L. Liao, H. Zhang, L. Nie, X. Hu, and T.-S. Chua, “Neural collaborative
filtering,” 2017.
[11] M. Unger, A. Tuzhilin, and A. Livne, “Context-aware recommendations based on
deep learning frameworks,” ACM Trans. Manage. Inf. Syst., vol. 11, may 2020.
[12] F. Ricci, L. Rokach, B. Shapira, and P. Kantor, Recommender Systems Handbook.
Springer US, 2010.
==PAGE:107==
VI
Bibliography
[13] G. Adomavicius and A. Tuzhilin, “Toward the next generation of recommender sys-
tems: a survey of the state-of-the-art and possible extensions,” IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 734–749, 2005.
[14] G. Linden, B. Smith, and J. York, “Amazon.com recommendations: item-to-item
collaborative filtering,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 76–80, 2003.
[15] C. A. Gomez-Uribe and N. Hunt, “The netflix recommender system: Algorithms,
business value, and innovation,” ACM Trans. Manage. Inf. Syst., vol. 6, dec 2016.
[16] G. Björklund, M. Bohlin, E. Olander, J. Jansson, C. Walter, and M. Au-
Yong Oliveira, An Exploratory Study on the Spotify Recommender System, pp. 366–
378. 01 2022.
[17] Y. Zhang and X. Chen, “Explainable recommendation: A survey and new perspec-
tives,” Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 1–101,
2020.
[18] J. Rocca, “Introduction to recommender systems.”
[19] D. Patel, F. Patel, and U. Chauhan, “Recommendation systems: Types, applica-
tions, and challenges,” pp. 2210–142, 05 2023.
[20] Y. Deldjoo, M. Schedl, P. Cremonesi, and G. Pasi, “Recommender systems lever-
aging multimedia content,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 53, sep 2020.
[21] R. J. Mooney and L. Roy, “Content-based book recommending using learning for
text categorization,” in Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference on Digital Li-
braries, DL ’00, (New York, NY, USA), p. 195–204, Association for Computing
Machinery, 2000.
[22] T. Peng, W. Wang, X. Gong, Y. Tian, X. Yang, and J. Ma, “A graph indexing
approach for content-based recommendation system,” in 2010 Second International
Conference on Multimedia and Information Technology, vol. 1, pp. 93–97, 2010.
[23] B. R. Cami, H. Hassanpour, and H. Mashayekhi, “A content-based movie recom-
mender system based on temporal user preferences,” in 2017 3rd Iranian Conference
on Intelligent Systems and Signal Processing (ICSPIS), pp. 121–125, 2017.
[24] B. Xu, J. Bu, C. Chen, and D. Cai, “An exploration of improving collaborative
recommender systems via user-item subgroups,” in Proceedings of the 21st Interna-
tional Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’12, (New York, NY, USA), p. 21–30,
Association for Computing Machinery, 2012.
[25] R. Sharma, D. Gopalani, and Y. Meena, “Collaborative filtering-based recommender
system: Approaches and research challenges,” in 2017 3rd International Conference
on Computational Intelligence Communication Technology (CICT), pp. 1–6, 2017.
==PAGE:108==
Bibliography
VII
[26] J. S. Breese, D. Heckerman, and C. Kadie, “Empirical analysis of predictive algo-
rithms for collaborative filtering,” 2013.
[27] Y. Li, K. Liu, R. Satapathy, S. Wang, and E. Cambria, “Recent developments in
recommender systems: A survey,” 2023.
[28] D. Roy and M. Dutta, “A systematic review and research perspective on recom-
mender systems,” Journal of Big Data, vol. 9, pp. 1–59, 2022.
[29] C. Choudhary, I. Singh, and M. Kumar, “Sarwas: Deep ensemble learning tech-
niques for sentiment based recommendation system,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 216,
apr 2023.
[30] H.-w. An and J. Kim, “Design of recommendation system for tourist spot using sen-
timent analysis based on cnn-lstm,” Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized
Computing, vol. 13, 03 2022.
[31] T. Liu, Q. Wu, L. Chang, and G. Tianlong, “A review of deep learning-based
recommender system in e-learning environments,” Artificial Intelligence Review,
vol. 55, 05 2022.
[32] E. Çano and M. Morisio, “Hybrid recommender systems: A systematic literature
review,” Intelligent Data Analysis, vol. 21, p. 1487–1524, Nov. 2017.
[33] F. Ricci, L. Rokach, and B. Shapira, Recommender Systems Handbook. Springer
Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2nd ed., 2015.
[34] L. Song, C. Tekin, and M. van der Schaar, “Online learning in large-scale contextual
recommender systems,” IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, vol. 9, no. 3,
pp. 433–445, 2016.
[35] ￿. Lozano Murciego, D. M. Jiménez-Bravo, A. Valera Román, J. F. De Paz Santana,
and M. N. Moreno-García, “Context-aware recommender systems in the music do-
main: A systematic literature review,” Electronics, vol. 10, no. 13, 2021.
[36] G. Adomavicius, R. Sankaranarayanan, S. Sen, and A. Tuzhilin, “Incorporating con-
textual information in recommender systems using a multidimensional approach,”
ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. 23, p. 103–145, jan 2005.
[37] C. Palmisano, A. Tuzhilin, and M. Gorgoglione, “Using context to improve predic-
tive modeling of customers in personalization applications,” IEEE Transactions on
Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 1535–1549, 2008.
[38] L. Baltrunas, B. Ludwig, and F. Ricci, “Matrix factorization techniques for context
aware recommendation,” in Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference on Recom-
mender Systems, RecSys ’11, (New York, NY, USA), p. 301–304, Association for
Computing Machinery, 2011.
==PAGE:109==
VIII
Bibliography
[39] B. Mobasher, “Context-aware user modeling for recommendation.” https://www.
kdd.org/kdd2014/tutorials/KDD-%20The%20RecommenderProblemRevisited-
Part2.pdf, 2013. Accessed:2024-02-05.
[40] S. Raza and C. Ding, “Progress in context-aware recommender systems — an
overview,” Computer Science Review, vol. 31, pp. 84–97, 02 2019.
[41] A. Karatzoglou, X. Amatriain, L. Baltrunas, and N. Oliver, “Multiverse recommen-
dation: n-dimensional tensor factorization for context-aware collaborative filtering,”
in Proceedings of the Fourth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys
’10, (New York, NY, USA), p. 79–86, Association for Computing Machinery, 2010.
[42] S. Rendle and L. Schmidt-Thieme, “Pairwise interaction tensor factorization for
personalized tag recommendation,” in Proceedings of the Third ACM International
Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, WSDM ’10, (New York, NY, USA),
p. 81–90, Association for Computing Machinery, 2010.
[43] M. J. D.M. Blei, A.Y. Ng, “Latent dirichlet allocation.” http://refhub.elsevier.
com/S1574-0137(18)30212-0/sb48, 2003. Accessed:2024-018-06.
[44] M. Allahyari and K. Kochut, “Semantic context-aware recommendation via topic
models leveraging linked open data,” in Web Information Systems Engineering –
WISE 2016 (W. Cellary, M. F. Mokbel, J. Wang, H. Wang, R. Zhou, and Y. Zhang,
eds.), (Cham), pp. 263–277, Springer International Publishing, 2016.
[45] H. Kung-Hsiang, “A deep dive into latent dirichlet allocation (lda) and its applica-
tions on recommender system.”
[46] M. Quadrana, P. Cremonesi, and D. Jannach, “Sequence-aware recommender sys-
tems,” 2018.
[47] S. Brooks, A. Gelman, G. Jones, and X.-L. Meng, Handbook of markov chain monte
carlo. CRC press, 2011.
[48] R. He and J. McAuley, “Fusing similarity models with markov chains for sparse
sequential recommendation,” in 2016 IEEE 16th International Conference on Data
Mining (ICDM), pp. 191–200, 2016.
[49] F. Eskandanian and B. Mobasher, “Modeling the dynamics of user preferences for
sequence-aware recommendation using hidden markov models,” 2019.
[50] D. Bouneffouf, A. Bouzeghoub, and A. L. Gançarski, “A contextual-bandit algo-
rithm for mobile context-aware recommender system,” in Neural Information Pro-
cessing (T. Huang, Z. Zeng, C. Li, and C. S. Leung, eds.), (Berlin, Heidelberg),
pp. 324–331, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012.
[51] A. Zhang, Z. C. Lipton, M. Li, and A. J. Smola, Dive into Deep Learning. Cambridge
University Press, 2023. https://D2L.ai.
==PAGE:110==
Bibliography
IX
[52] L. Baltrunas, K. Church, A. Karatzoglou, and N. Oliver, “Frappe: Understanding
the usage and perception of mobile app recommendations in-the-wild,” 2015.
[53] YELP, “Yelp business dataset.”
[54] 42matters, “Google play statistics and trends 2024.”
[55] D. Jannach, M. Zanker, A. Felfernig, and G. Friedrich, Recommender Systems: An
Introduction. Cambridge University Press, 2010.
[56] P. Cremonesi, Y. Koren, and R. Turrin, “Performance of recommender algorithms
on top-n recommendation tasks,” in Proceedings of the Fourth ACM Conference on
Recommender Systems, RecSys ’10, (New York, NY, USA), p. 39–46, Association
for Computing Machinery, 2010.
[57] H.-m. Lu, “Quasi-orthonormal encoding for machine learning applications,” pp. 11–
17, 01 2020.
[58] B. Avanzi, G. Taylor, M. Wang, and B. Wong, “Machine learning with high-
cardinality categorical features in actuarial applications,” ASTIN Bulletin, vol. 54,
pp. 1–26, 04 2024.
[59] S. Saxena, “What are categorical data encoding methods | binary encoding.”
[60] T. J. Cleophas and A. H. Zwinderman, Logarithmic Transformations, a Great Help
to Statistical Analyses, pp. 243–247.
Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2016.
[61] G. Lee, L. Alzamil, B. Doskenov, and A. Termehchy, “A survey on data cleaning
methods for improved machine learning model performance,” 09 2021.
[62] K. Cabello-Solorzano, I. Ortigosa de Araujo, M. Peña, L. Correia, and A. J. Tallón-
Ballesteros, “The impact of data normalization on the accuracy of machine learn-
ing algorithms: A comparative analysis,” in 18th International Conference on Soft
Computing Models in Industrial and Environmental Applications (SOCO 2023)
(P. García Bringas, H. Pérez García, F. J. Martínez de Pisón, F. Martínez Álvarez,
A. Troncoso Lora, Á. Herrero, J. L. Calvo Rolle, H. Quintián, and E. Corchado,
eds.), (Cham), pp. 344–353, Springer Nature Switzerland, 2023.
[63] T. Mahajan, G. Singh, G. Bruns, G. Bruns, T. Mahajan, and G. Singh, “An ex-
perimental assessment of treatments for cyclical data,” in Proceedings of the 2021
Computer Science Conference for CSU Undergraduates, Virtual, vol. 6, p. 22, 2021.
[64] E. A. Team, “10 metrics to evaluate recommender and ranking systems.”
[65] E. A. Team, “Mean reciprocal rank (mrr) explained.”
[66] DTU Computing Center, “DTU Computing Center resources,” 2022.
==PAGE:111==
X
Bibliography
[67] NVIDIA, “Nvidia a100 tensor core gpu.”
[68] M. Unger, A. Bar, B. Shapira, and L. Rokach, “Towards latent context-aware rec-
ommendation systems,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 104, 04 2016.
[69] D. Margaris, C. Vassilakis, and D. Spiliotopoulos, “On producing accurate rating
predictions in sparse collaborative filtering datasets,” Information, vol. 13, no. 6,
2022.
[70] grouplens, “Movielens 1m dataset.”
[71] X. He, “Neural collaborative filtering.”
==PAGE:112==
