==PAGE:1==
Acousto-optic study of sound fields in
enclosures
Master’s Thesis
Author
Chloé Balmes s222740
Supervisors
Efren Fernandez Grande, Samuel Arturo Verburg Riezu,
Manuel Hahmann
July 3, 2024
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Acoustic Technology
Ørsteds plads, Building 352,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 63 52
www.electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The goal of this thesis is to present a study of sound fields in enclosures
using acousto-optic method. This new way of measuring sound pressure
is non invasive, enabling to measure without any disturbance of the sound
field. The basic ideas and equations of this new measuring method are ex-
plained first, before an attempt of simulating them using COMSOL Multi-
physics. A post processing method to be used to reconstruct the sound field
inside an enclosure, using integrated pressure data is then presented, and
its results discussed. To obtain this data, both simulation using COMSOL
Multiphysics and experiment with a laser doppler vibrometer have been
done. Some discussion about the real experiment are presented in the last
part of this report.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Samuel Arturo Verburg Riezu and
Manuel Hahmann for all the time they gave me along the many insights,
feedback and pastries. I learned a lot thanks to you.
I would like to thank my supervisor Efren for giving me the opportunity
to study this subject and write my Master Thesis with him.
I would like to thank Henrik for all the help to create the box, move the
robots and for all the nice conversations.
I would like to thank Salvador for allowing me to borrow his Laser Doppler
Vibrometer as well as his robot, and for taking the time to search for
documentations and codes to make everything work together.
I would like to thank my coworkers at COMSOL for the help on the project
and for always encouraging me to try new models. Thank you for always
giving the possibility to work on whatever I wanted to.
I would like to thank my boyfriend for always being so supportive and
helping go through those six months of work.
I would like to thank my parents for guiding me and encouraging during
the whole Master. It was not always easy, but they always supported me.
I would like to thank my friends for being there when I needed to clear my
==PAGE:4==
iii
mind and take a break.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
5
2.1
Acousto-optic effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Optical interferometer measurements . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Plane wave expansion of acousto-optic data
. . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Holographic reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Simulations
12
3.1
Introduction to COMSOL Multiphysics . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Acousto-optic effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Simulation and post-processing of measurements in a box .
18
3.3.1
Implementation of the simulation . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.2
Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Experimental study
30
4.1
Transparent box . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2.1
Wall Vibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2.2
Impulse Response and its frequency spectrum . . .
37
4.2.3
Repeatability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2.4
Visualization of the integrated pressure . . . . . . .
40
4.2.5
Results of the reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Conclusion
42
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Acousto-optic measurement is a new and promising way of describing
acoustic environments without using microphones.
The principle of the acousto-optic method is based on the fact that when
an acoustic wave propagates in a media, the density of this media will
change, and alters the propagation of light. If it is possible to describe
those variations in the light propagation, the sound field can be recon-
structed. As written in [1], acousto-optic sensing methods can be divided
into three different categories: diffraction, deflection, and retardation of
light. Those three methods depend on how light is described and used in
different situations. The light diffraction happens when the wavelength of
the acoustic wave is smaller than the light beam width, acting as a moving
phase grating. This observation can be used to study the propagation of
acoustic waves in fluid [2], [3], or in the visualisation of ultrasound [4], [5].
In some situations, assumptions can be made to model light beams with
ray optics. The acoustic wave will create a gradient in the refractive index
of the media, and that will deviate the ray from its straight line path. This
method is used to visualise shock in fluid mechanics [6], and in ultrasound
imaging [7], [8], [9]. When light is described as an electromagnetic wave, its
phase depends on the index of the media that itself changes with pressure
variations. By using a laser vibrometer, it is possible to measure the phase
==PAGE:7==
2
shift that will be proportional to the integral of the acoustic pressure along
the laser path. It is then necessary to use post-processing calculation to
obtain the pressure at specific points. This method is presented in [1], [10]
and will be the one used in this project.
One of the advantages of acousto-optic measurements is that this optic
method is non-invasive. It allows you to realize the measurements without
disturbing the sound field.
With microphones, it is usually possible to
compensate in the post-processing for the disturbance of the tool in the
sound field [11], but without this compensation, the error can be more
than 10 dB at 20 kHz for a 1/2inch microphone. Acousto-optic can also
be used in cases where it is not possible to use a microphone, such as in a
media with strong airflow, high temperatures or a strong magnetic field.
This project was created with the idea that the high-quality sound in cars
has high expectations and demand, but the acoustic conditions inside are
very complex. Multiple studies have been done [12], [13], [14] using mi-
crophone arrays, but they usually depend on elaborated installations that
can influence the sound field and create a limitation in the spatial resolu-
tion. As presented before, acousto-optic measurements could be a solution
to this problem by measuring from the windows of the car and obtain
high-resolution results. It was, however, first decided to build a smaller
experiment where more variables could be controlled. The experiment con-
sists of a box made of plexiglass excited by a loudspeaker on its side. Due
to experimental troubles and time constraint, it has not been possible to
obtain any results in the car experiment.
The experiment is based on the capacity of a Laser Doppler Vibrometer
(LDV) to measure the phase shift of light and transform it into a voltage
signal that can be processed. An LDV has an output velocity proportional
to the time derivative of the phase of the light. The way an LDV works
is presented in Figure 1.0.1. A laser beam is generated and then split into
two, to form a sensing beam and a reference. In this project, the LDV is
not used to measure the velocity of a vibrating surface, but to obtain the
integrated pressure along the light path of length L. This idea is presented
in Figure 1.0.2.
==PAGE:8==
3
Figure 1.0.1: Schematic of a laser doppler vibrometer [15].
Figure 1.0.2: Schematic of the use of the LDV for the acousto-optic mea-
surement realized in this project. The black square representing the body
of the LDV, the red line being the light beam and the box showing a rep-
resentation of the experimental set-up with a loudspeaker (circle) on its
right side.
This report is divided into a theory part, highlighting the equations of
==PAGE:9==
4
the acousto-optic method and the important step needed for the post-
processing of the data, a simulation section, showing the different sim-
ulations made in COMSOL and their results, and an experimental part
presenting the set-up and the results of the experiment.
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Theory
In this chapter, the main equations necessary to understand the acousto-
optic will be derived in the first part. The following sections present the
steps used in the post-processing of the measured data.
2.1
Acousto-optic effect
The refractive index of a media depends on the acoustic pressure fluctu-
ations. To see how it is influenced, it is necessary to first start with the
Gladstone-Dale relation for a media,
n = Kρ + 1,
(2.1.1)
where n is the refractive index, ρ is the density of the studied media and
K is a constant characteristic of the media. In the assumption of adiabatic
conditions, the following equation then links total pressure pt and density
ρ in the following way,
pt
p0
= ( ρ
ρ0
)γ,
(2.1.2)
with ρ0 being the density of the media in the static case, p0 is the static
pressure and pt = p0 + p the total pressure is the sum of the static and the
acoustic pressures. The heat capacity ratio γ is a function of temperature.
==PAGE:11==
2.2 Optical interferometer measurements
6
By combining those two equations, it is possible to obtain the relation
between the refractive index and the acoustic pressure
n = Kρ0(p + p0
p0
)
1
γ + 1 = (n0 −1)(1 + p
p0
)
1
γ + 1,
(2.1.3)
where n0 is the refractive index under static atmospheric conditions. In
air, n0 ≈1 is a function of temperature, pressure, humidity and CO2
content. By realizing a first order Taylor expansion, with the assumption
that |p| << p0, the equation becomes
n ≈n0 + n0 −1
γp0
p.
(2.1.4)
n0−1
γp0 ≃2∗10−9 is called the piezo-optic coefficient. For reference, it changes
approximately 0.35% with a 1C temperature change, 0.031% with 10%
relative humidity change and 0.002% with 1kPa static pressure change [1].
Seeing how small this coefficient is, it can be said that the acousto-optic
interaction is weak.
2.2
Optical interferometer measurements
After seeing how to define the acousto-optic effect, it is interesting to
highlight how it is possible to measure it using the retardation of light
method. Lets consider a pressure field p = p(r)ejωt in a source free re-
gion Ω(r ∈Ω|Ω⊂R3), and a light beam as an electromagnetic wave
E = E0(r)ej(ω0t+Φ(r,t)), with ω0 being the angular frequency, E0 a complex
number taking into account the amplitude and the polarization of light
and Φ the phase of light. According to [10] [16], it is correct to write the
electromagnetic wave like this even in the presence of sound if | 1
n
∂n
∂t T| << 1
where T is the oscillation period of the electric field.
As presented in [17], after the light beam propagates in Ω, its phase varies
with the refractive index of the medium as,
Φ = k0
Z L
0
ndl,
(2.2.1)
where k0 is the wave number of light in vacuum, L is the length of the
==PAGE:12==
2.3 Plane wave expansion of acousto-optic data
7
path of the light beam. By combining Equation 2.1.4 and Equation 2.2.1,
Φ can be written as,
Φ = k0n0L + k0
n0 −1
γp0
Z L
0
pdl = k0n0L + ∆Φ.
(2.2.2)
In a case where there would not be any sound field, Φ = k0n0L corresponds
to the phase shift of a light wave propagating in a homogeneous quiet
medium. ∆Φ then corresponds to the phase shift created by the presence
of an acoustic field.
As presented in the introduction, a laser doppler vibrometer has an output
velocity proportional to the time derivative of the phase of the light. This
statement can be written with the following equation
v(t) =
1
k0n0
dΦ
dt ,
(2.2.3)
By deriving the phase, only the integral term of Equation 2.2.2 stays. The
output velocity can be written
v(t) = n0 −1
γp0n0
d
dt(
Z L
0
p(r)dr).
(2.2.4)
2.3
Plane wave expansion of acousto-optic data
In this thesis, a plane wave expansion had been used with the acousto-
optic data. Some research has been made on another type of expansion,
the spherical harmonic expansion [18]. However, this method is a bit more
difficult to implement. in this project, the sound field is studied in a box
with the sound source on its side. That could create some difficulties when
describing the sound field on the excited surface when the vector r would
have a module equal to zero. It is also possible to argue that both acoustic
sources and pressure inside an enclosure such as a box can be represented
by a sum of plane waves. The principle of the chosen method is to represent
the pressure field in a source free region Ω, at a position r as a sum of N
==PAGE:13==
2.3 Plane wave expansion of acousto-optic data
8
plane waves,
p(r,an,kn) =
N
X
n=1
ane−jkn·r,
(2.3.1)
where an is the complex amplitude and kn = [kx,ky,kz]T is the wave number
vector of the n-th wave. To construct the base of plane waves, the Fibonacci
lattice is used to evenly distribute the N direction on a unit sphere, as
shown in Figure 2.3.1 [19]. The number of waves actually used is a possible
parameter of the methodology.
Figure 2.3.1: Representation of the Fibonacci sphere with 500 waves evenly
distributed.
By replacing p in Equation 2.2.4, the output velocity of the LDV can be
written as
v(an,kn) = jωn0 −1
γp0n0
N
X
n=1
an
Z L
0
e−jkn·r.
(2.3.2)
In this project the light follow a straight line path, so the integral can be
resolved analytically. For one laser beam, the origin q, the orientation Ψ
and the length L will be defined as presented in Figure 2.3.2.
==PAGE:14==
2.3 Plane wave expansion of acousto-optic data
9
Figure 2.3.2: Scheme explaining the definition of q, Ψ and L.
Equation 2.3.2 can then be rewritten as,
v(an,kn) = jωn0 −1
γp0n0
N
X
n=1
an
e−jkn·q −e−jkn·(ΨL+q)
jkn · Ψ
.
(2.3.3)
This is the result for one laser beam, but during the experience M beams
will be used with different origins, orientations and path lengths. It is
then possible to rewrite, at each frequency, the problem with vectors and
matrices,
v(an,kn) = Hv(kn)a(an),
(2.3.4)
with v ∈CM being the vector of the M output velocities of the LDV, a ∈
CN corresponds to the complex amplitudes and Hv ∈CM×N containing
the results of the rest of Equation 2.3.3. To be a bit clearer, the elements
of Hv can be written as,
{Hv}m,n = ωn0 −1
γp0n0
e−jkn·q −e−jkn·(ΨL+q)
jkn · Ψ
.
(2.3.5)
==PAGE:15==
2.4 Holographic reconstruction
10
The problem represented by Equation 2.3.4 is ill conditioned and a reg-
ularization is needed to obtain a stable solution.
Both the Truncated
Singular Value Decomposition (TSVD) and the Tikhonov regularization
were looked at. However as presented in [20], eventhough TSVD is intu-
itive, it requires the computation of the singular value decomposition and
this can be computationally heavy. Computing the L-curve to obtain the
regularization parameter is also complex since the problem, in this case, is
discrete.
According to [20] the most successful regularization method of all time is
the Tikhonov regularization. By choosing this method, it is possible to
find the estimated complex amplitudes ar as solutions to,
ar = arg min
a∈CN {∥Hva −v∥2
2 + λ2∥a∥2
2},
(2.3.6)
with λ being the regularization parameter that controls the weighting be-
tween the two parts of the problem. The term ∥Hva−v∥2
2 represents how
well the solution a predicts the noisy data v. ∥a∥2
2 is the regularity of the
solution. By controlling the norm of a, the goal is to be able to suppress
the large noise components of the solution. To chose the value of λ the
L-curve criterion is used. The idea behind the criterion is that the plot of
the logarithm of ∥a∥2 depending on the logarithm of ∥Hva −v∥2 looks
like the letter L. A good λ would then corresponds to the corner of this L
and would define a good balance of the regularization and the perturbation
error. In the case of the Tikhonov regularization, λ will correspond to the
value for which the curvature cλ is maximal. Other regularization method
could be considered, but the Tikhonov one was working well and was well
enough documented to be used in this study.
2.4
Holographic reconstruction
After obtaining the complex amplitude estimates, it is possible to recon-
struct the sound field pr at a point r using
pr(r,kn,ar) = hT
p (kn,r)ar,
(2.4.1)
==PAGE:16==
2.4 Holographic reconstruction
11
with ar the estimated complex amplitudes find through the Tikhonov
regularization and hp the complex vector of dimension N corresponding
to reconstruction vector of the pressure field and its n-element written
hp,n = e−jkn·r.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Simulations
In this chapter, the different simulations performed during this project
will be presented with their corresponding results. First, a section will
give the basic information on the structure of models implemented using
the software COMSOL Multiphysics and the vocabulary going with it.
Then the model of the acousto-optic effect is described as a preliminary
simulation, before the box simulation and the post processing of the obtain
simulated data for the reconstruction of the pressure field.
3.1
Introduction to COMSOL Multiphysics
COMSOL Mutliphysics is a software created in 1986 in Sweden. As pre-
sented on their website [21], it is a simulation platform that provides fully
coupled multiphysics and single-physics modeling capabilities. It allows
you to work in very different field such as acoustics, electrical, mechanical
or fluid areas. Real problems usually have influence from one or more of
those fields, titled in COMSOL, physics, and that is where this software
gives you a simple interface to realize the wanted couplings.
The different steps you need to realize to build a model are the following,
• Geometry definition - It is possible to create 3D, 2D Axisymmet-
==PAGE:18==
3.1 Introduction to COMSOL Multiphysics
13
ric, 2D, 1D Axisymmetric, 1D and 0D geometries. Once you decided
on the number of dimensions of your model, called Component, you
can start drawing using the build-up tools. In Figure 3.1.1 is a pic-
ture of the different possibilities you can use in the case of a 3D
Model.
Figure 3.1.1: Snapshot of the COMSOL Multiphysics interface for the
geometry definition of a 3D component.
• Material properties - Once you have defined your geometry, you
can give material properties to your different domains or boundaries.
Some materials are already predefined such as air, water or steel but
you can also create your own. You can define its parameters like
Young’s modulus, Poisson’s ratio, density, depending on what you
will need in your physics.
• Physic choice and description - Once the two previous steps are
done you can define your physics, meaning the set of equations you
want to consider in your simulation. In the models presented be-
low, Geometrical Optics, Pressure Acoustics, Frequency Domain and
Electrical circuit will be used, but there are also Solid Mechanics,
Fatigue, Heat Transfer in Fluids...
Most of the physics in COM-
SOL are based on Finite Element Method (FEM). It means that the
structure of the component is divided in smaller elements (mesh)
where the equations are easier to resolve. It is however also possi-
ble to use Boundary Element Method (BEM), a method where only
the boundaries are divided in smaller elements. Depending on the
studied problem, one or the other can be chosen.
• Mesh definition - As said just above, it is necessary to mesh the
full domain if it is a FEM simulation or the boundaries if it is a
BEM problem. This part is really important because you need a
coarse enough mesh to be able to retrieve the correct results you
wanted but the smaller the mesh size is the longer your simulation
==PAGE:19==
3.1 Introduction to COMSOL Multiphysics
14
will take to compute. Figure 3.1.2 is an example of a mesh taken
from a COMSOL library model, Car Cabin Acoustics - Frequency
Domain Analysis.
Figure 3.1.2: Example of a mesh from the library model of Car Cabin
Acoustics - Frequency Domain Analysis.
• Creation of studies - In this step, you define what you want to
compute. A lot of different possibilities are offered in COMSOL like
Frequency Domain study where you analyze your problem for differ-
ent input frequencies, Stationary if you want to look at a stationary
(static) problem, a Time Dependant for transient studies or in the
case of optic or acoustic problems Ray Tracing.
In this thesis, the simulations were done using COMSOL Multiphysics.
This choice has been made because the software allows easy coupling be-
tween physics like Pressure Acoustics, Frequency Domain and Electrical
Circuit to represent the box experiment with the acoustic inside the en-
closure and the excitation from the loudspeaker. As it will be presented in
the next section, an attempt to couple Geometrical Optics and Pressure
Acoustics, Frequency Domain was also experienced but it did not give good
enough results. COMSOL Multiphysics also gives a lot of parameters and
figures that could easily be compared with the results obtain through the
Python reconstruction as it will be presented in a later section.
==PAGE:20==
3.2 Acousto-optic effect
15
3.2
Acousto-optic effect
Since there is the possibility to couple physics in COMSOL Multiphysics,
it is interesting to try to model the acousto-optic effect. The goal would
be to be able to obtain ∆Φ as it is defined in Equation 2.2.2.
∆Φ = k0
n0−1
γp0
R L
0 pdl
where k0 = 2∗π
λ0 = 2π
600 = 1.048 · 107 m−1, n0−1
γp0 = 2 · 10−9 and L = 3 m.
As a first approximation, the pressure field can defined as a plane wave in
the x-direction with an amplitude of A = 10 Pa. To simplify the calcula-
tion, the start of the laser beam is placed in (0,0,0) m. The formulation
can then be simplified a lot and can be written as,
∆Φ = k0
n0 −1
γp0
LA = 36 deg
(3.2.1)
As defined in the theory chapter, ∆Φ is the phase shift between a light
wave propagating in a homogeneous quiet medium and the same light wave
propagating in a homogeneous medium perturbed by an acoustic field.
Using COMSOL Multiphysics, it is possible to model the propagation of a
light beam in the two medias and then compare the phase of the light in
both cases. In the quiet medium, A = 0 Pa and when the acoustic field is
present A = 10 Pa.
The first step of the modeling is to create the geometry. An air domain
of a length l = 3.5 m is created to surround the whole trajectory of the
light. A mirror, imported from the COMSOL library, is placed at (x,y,z) =
(0,0, −0.2) m. The geometry is presented in Figure 3.2.1.
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Acousto-optic effect
16
Figure 3.2.1: Geometry of the acousto-optic simulation with the air field,
the starting point of the laser beam and the mirror.
For the material definition, the predefined air material is selected for the
cylinder representing the air domain. There is no need to define a material
for the mirror, since the light will be reflected on it and will not cross it.
With the first approximation of the sound field pressure being just an
amplitude of 10 Pa, there is no need to add a Pressure Acoustic physics.
Only the Geometrical Optics is used. The air is then described with a
refractive index of n = 1 + 2 · 10−9 × Ae−jk0x. The mirror is defined as
perfectly reflective and positioned at (0,0,0) m. The laser is designed to
start at (0,0, −3.2) m, so that the distance to the mirror could be L = 3
m. It propagates in the z direction, as presented in Figure 3.2.1.
The mesh is very simple and is made of tetrahedrons that cover the whole
domain, see Figure 3.2.2.
==PAGE:22==
3.2 Acousto-optic effect
17
Figure 3.2.2: Representation of the mesh of the acousto-optic simulation.
The study is defined as a ray tracing computation, where the calculations
will stop when the light will have covered a distance of 6 meters to have
both the light travelling to the mirror and the reflection coming back to
the starting point. This study will be realized with both A = 0 Pa and
A = 10 Pa. The two computations take an overall time of 19 seconds. It
is then possible to have access to the phase of the laser beam through the
COMSOL parameter gop.Psi and by doing the subtraction of the phase in
the quiet case and when the acoustic pressure is present. The results given
by COMSOL is ∆Φ = 36 deg, as expected.
Once this very simple case is working, it is interesting to verify, by plac-
ing the laser starting point somewhere else than (0,0,0) m, like (0.25,0,0) m,
that the results are still correct. In this new case, ∆Φ = k0
n0−1
γp0 LAe−jk0×0.25 =
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Simulation and post-processing of measurements in a box
18
−25.456 + 25.456j deg. The result of the COMSOL simulation is ∆Φ =
−25.456 deg. The software only gives the real part of the phase of the light.
There might be another way of obtaining the phase shift in the software
that could give the complex value. Creating a plane wave propagating in
the y-direction gives the same conclusion, the problem being symmetric.
In the case of the plane wave propagating in the z direction, the calcu-
lation are not converging. Taking the time to understand how COMSOL
computes integral Equation 2.2.2 would help resolving this issue.
Light propagates way faster than sound, around 850 000 times faster. It
means that the acoustic and optic problems are decoupled. The light will
see the pressure as stationary, not depending on time. It would then be
possible to calculate the pressure field in the box for each frequency and
then use the Ray Optics to calculate the phase shift. However, as presented
above, this method only gives the real part of the phase. COMSOL having
the possibility to realize line integral directly as a post-processing, it seems
easier to only focus on the acoustic problem using the inbuilt feature to
obtain the integrated pressure than using the optic formulation to calculate
the integral and obtain ∆Φ.
3.3
Simulation and post-processing of mea-
surements in a box
3.3.1
Implementation of the simulation
As presented in the introduction, this project has been constructed around
an experiment of a sound field in a transparent box. To test the different
steps of the acousto-optic measurement and post-processing that will be
use for the actual measurements, a COMSOL simulation has been pro-
duced. The details of the box will be presented in the next chapter.
Using the COMSOL Multiphysics geometry interface, a cuboid was de-
signed with the length H = 0.4 m, W = 0.5 m and L = 0.6 m. A circle was
drawn on the side to represent the loudspeaker membrane. The geometry
is presented in Figure 3.3.1
==PAGE:24==
3.3 Simulation and post-processing of measurements in a box
19
Figure 3.3.1: Geometry of the box and the loudspeaker (red circle).
Air is designated as the filling material for the volume inside the box.
For the different physics, first, the Electrical Circuit is defined to be able to
represent the loudspeaker response. Using different electrical elements, a
lump version of a mid-woofer is designed, see Figure 3.3.2 and Table 3.3.1.
This circuit and its characteristics have been taken from another library
model from COMSOL, Car Cabin Acoustics - Frequency Domain Analysis.
Figure 3.3.2: Lump circuit of the loudspeaker.
V 0 (V )
R1 (Ω)
L1 (H)
H (Ω)
L2 (H)
R2 (Ω)
C1 (F)
2.38
6
3.5 · 10−4
6
1.8 · 10−2
1.4
2.5 · 10−3
Table 3.3.1: Parameters of the lump circuit representing the loudspeaker.
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Simulation and post-processing of measurements in a box
20
After this step, it is necessary to define the Pressure Acoustic physic. First,
the geometric circle needs to be associated with the lump circuit using
Lumped Speaker Boundary. Then the walls of the box are designated as
Sound Hard Boundary Wall. This is an hypothesis made for the simula-
tion, because in reality the walls of the box will vibrate, especially at low
frequencies. Other hypothesis are that there is no sound leakage from the
box, and that the temperature and the air flow are constant inside and
outside the box. They will not influence the line integration of the laser
beam.
A simple mesh build of tetrahedrons is define, see Figure 3.3.3.
Figure 3.3.3: Mesh of the box model.
The study is a Frequency Domain study with frequencies going from 300 Hz
to 5000 Hz with steps of 10 Hz. After the computation, a lot of parameters
are accessible, but the one that interest us in this project is the total
acoustic pressure acpr.pt, that is defined in every point of the volume of
the box.
As presented in the theory section, the doppler laser vibrometer will give
the integration of the pressure over the light path. The variable acpr.pt can
then be integrated over one direction, here x to obtained the integrated
==PAGE:26==
3.3 Simulation and post-processing of measurements in a box
21
pressure. The results of this action are then evaluated at different points
on the back wall of the box, see Figure 3.3.4.
Figure 3.3.4: Simulated measurement points (blue) on the integrated pres-
sure simulated plane.
Once the integrated pressure is evaluated at different points, it can be
imported in Python for each points and studied frequency. By using the
plane wave expansion and by resolving the ill-posed problem defined in
Equation 2.3.4 with the Tikhonov regularization,the sound field in every
point of the domain can be reconstructed, see Figure 3.3.5.
Figure 3.3.5: Plan A is the integrated pressure on the simulated measured
plan (x=0.5 m,y,z) in Pa·m at 420 Hz. Plan B is a reconstructed pressure
in Pa at 420 Hz on the plan (x=0.2 m,y,z). Plan C is a reconstructed
pressure in Pa at 420 Hz on the plan (x=0.05 m,y,z).
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Simulation and post-processing of measurements in a box
22
3.3.2
Results and Discussion
Simulation of the measurements in only one direction
The first step of the reconstruction is to create the matrix Hv and the
vector of weight a from Equation 2.3.4 associated to the problem for each
frequency so that it corresponds to the simulated integrated pressure. As
a first check, it is possible to go back and use the just defined Hv and
a to reconstruct the integrated pressure. The result is presented for one
frequency 670 Hz in Figure 3.3.6.
Figure 3.3.6:
Simulated integrated pressure and its reconstruction at
670 Hz on the simulated measurement plane, plan A. The color represents
Pa · m. The first column is the reference corresponding to the integrated
pressure at the selected frequency for every point. The second column is
the result of Hva and the thrird column is the difference between the first
two.
The matrix and weight do represent well the integrated pressure. This
result is valid for other frequencies and assume to work for all. That means
that the calculated weights do represent well the integrated pressure.
Another test is to verify only the reconstruction in itself, forming the weight
from the reference pressure. It means forming this time the hp matrix
and a vector using the simulated reference pressure. The result for the
frequency 670 Hz are presented in Figure 3.3.7. It will show how well the
model fits to the data.
==PAGE:28==
3.3 Simulation and post-processing of measurements in a box
23
Figure 3.3.7: Reconstruction realized from the reference pressure for the
frequency 670 Hz on plan B. The color represents Pa. The first column is
the reference corresponding to the pressure on the plan B at the studied
frequency. The second column is the result of the reconstruction hT
p a. The
third column shows the difference between the first two.
The difference represents the smallest difference that one could obtain
using the reconstruction method. It seems to be an acceptable result, but
to create a better fitting, one could consider other regularization methods.
The reconstruction can be realized in every point of the box volume. It is,
however, more interesting to compare the results on a plane perpendicular
to the direction of propagation of the light. In this case, a (y,z) plane was
chosen with a x coordinate of 0.2 m, corresponding to plan B.
The results for four frequencies 430 Hz, 670 Hz, 1600 Hz and 4000 Hz are
presented in Figure 3.3.8.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Simulation and post-processing of measurements in a box
24
Figure 3.3.8: Results of the reconstruction method on plan B for 430 Hz,
670 Hz, 1600 Hz and 4000 Hz. The color represents Pa. The first column
represents the reference. The second column is the result of the reconstruc-
tion when there is one set of simulated measurements. The third column
is the difference between the first and the second column.
The first frequency 430 Hz is close to the resonance frequency of the (0,0,1)
mode. It would be expected that the reconstruction should work well in
that case, since the integration is made along the x axis. It looks like the
result is good, with just a small difference between the reconstruction and
the reference. 670 Hz is the resonance frequency for the (2,0,2) mode. The
reconstruction should be difficult having only one direction of simulated
measurement. That is what we can see here, the reconstruction is farther
away from the reference. The higher the frequency, the more difficult it
becomes to reconstruct correctly the pressure field since waves come from
a lot of directions, and that what is shown in the cases of 1600 Hz and
4000 Hz.
But to really grasp the result of this reconstruction at all frequencies, the
normalized root mean square error (NRMSE) and the spatial coherence
==PAGE:30==
3.3 Simulation and post-processing of measurements in a box
25
(SC) were defined as follow,
NRMSE =
q
1
M
PM
m=1 |pz(rm) −pr,z(rm)|2
|pmax −pmin|
(3.3.1)
SC =
| PM
m=1 p∗
z(rm)pr,z(rm)|2
(PM
m=1 p∗
z(rm)pz(rm))(PM
m=1 p∗
r,z(rm)pr,z(rm))
(3.3.2)
with M being the number of studied points, rm the length of the vector
of the studied position, pz the simulated pressure, pr,z the reconstructed
pressure, pmax and pmin respectively the maximum and minimum of the
simulated pressure. The smaller the NRMSE is, the more accurate the
reconstruction is. The closer to one the SC is, the better the spatial align-
ment between mode shape is. The results are presented in Figure 3.3.9
and Figure 3.3.10.
Figure 3.3.9: Normalized root mean square error in the case of one simu-
lated measurement direction for the reconstruction on plan B.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Simulation and post-processing of measurements in a box
26
Figure 3.3.10: Spatial coherence in the case of one simulated measurement
direction for the reconstruction on plan B.
It is easier to obtain a good reconstruction at low frequencies, however
having only one direction of simulated measurement makes it difficult to
have good reconstruction when the frequencies correspond to modes in the
(x,y) and (x,z) planes. That is why both the normalized mean root square
error and the spatial coherence vary a lot depending on the frequencies.
For example, at 670 Hz, where the mode is in the (x,z) direction, the
NRMSE is at 25.8 % and the SC is at 27.0 %. However, the results look
worse than expected. To try to obtain better NRMSE and SC a second
direction of simulated measurement is going to be added.
Simulation of the measurements in two directions
Using the same simulation from COMSOL Multiphysics, it is possible to
integrate the sound pressure level in the z direction, creating a new set
of simulated measurements. By having the two results, the reconstruction
can be expected to be improved.
The results of the reconstruction on plan B at the same frequencies pre-
sented before are shown in Figure 3.3.11.
==PAGE:32==
3.3 Simulation and post-processing of measurements in a box
27
Figure 3.3.11: Result of the reconstruction method on plan B for 430
Hz, 670 Hz, 1600 Hz and 4000 Hz. The color represents Pa. The first
column represents the reference. The second column is the result of the
reconstruction when there is only one set of simulated measurements. The
third column is the result of the reconstruction when the pressure has been
integrated over two directions. The fourth column is the difference between
the first and second columns, and the fifth is the difference between the
first and the third column.
The first thing to notice is that the mode at 670 Hz that was difficult to
reconstruct, when having only the integrated pressure along the x-direction
is nicely reconstructed, when adding the simulated measurements in the z
direction. The already good reconstruction at 430 Hz also had a smaller
difference with the reference using the two directions. The higher frequen-
cies are however still difficult to reconstruct. The reconstruction is different
at those high frequencies but still far from the reference.
The normalized root mean square error and the spatial coherence are pre-
sented in Figure 3.3.12 and Figure 3.3.13.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Simulation and post-processing of measurements in a box
28
Figure 3.3.12: Normalized root mean square error in the case of two sim-
ulated measurement directions for the reconstruction on plan B. Result of
the reconstruction with one direction of integration (blue line) and result
of the reconstruction when two simulated measurements as input (orange
line).
Figure 3.3.13: Spatial coherence in the case of two simulated measurement
directions for the reconstruction on plan B. Result of the reconstruction
with one direction of integration (blue line) and result of the reconstruction
when two simulated measurements as input (orange line).
==PAGE:34==
3.3 Simulation and post-processing of measurements in a box
29
In term of the error, the high peaks disappeared at low frequencies, but it
seems to have become higher at high frequencies. For the spatial coher-
ence, adding the second direction helped having a better value, when the
reconstruction was already good and it corrected it at frequencies where
having only one direction of simulated measurements was not enough to
reconstruct, as it was seen with 670 Hz. The NRMSE at this frequency
is now equal to 1.3 % and the SC is 99.7 %. Those values have improved
a lot compared to the results with only one set of measurements. The
high frequencies are still difficult to reconstruct, probably because of the
high complexity of the field at those frequencies. Adding simulated mea-
surements in the third direction or having measurement plans that are not
orthogonal, could maybe help improving even more the results by giving
more information on the sound field. However, the NRMSE and SC could
have been expected to be better, especially at low frequencies. That is
probably due to the way the ill posed problem is stated. Maybe having
another regularization or changing the way the Tikhonov regularization
has been implemented could give better results.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4
Experimental study
4.1
Transparent box
The goal of this project is to see if it is possible to reconstruct the sound
field in enclosures using acousto-optic measurements.
The first step of
the experiment is to create a simple enclosure inside which the air can be
excited. To do so, a transparent box with a loudspeaker plugged on the
side has been built, see Figure 4.1.1.
Figure 4.1.1: Picture of the measurement box with the plexiglass walls,
two of them covered with reflective tape (back and top panels) and the
loudspeaker box fixed on the right side.
==PAGE:36==
4.1 Transparent box
31
The size of the box is defined using one of the Sepmeyer’s ratios: H = C, W
= 1.28C, L = 1.54C. This helps having the resonance frequencies spread out
at low frequencies. By deciding that W = 0.5 m,the dimensions become:
H = 0.4 m, W = 0.5 m and L = 0.6 m. The first resonance frequencies are
then theoretically: 286 Hz, 343.2 Hz, 429.01 Hz, 446.76 Hz. In Figure 4.1.2
is presented the pressure field inside the box for the first three modes using
COMSOL Multiphysics.
Figure 4.1.2: Representation of the first three modes in the box at 286 Hz,
343.2 Hz and 429.01 Hz.
The walls are made of plexiglass to be able to measure inside the box, see
Figure 4.1.1. The idea behind a transparent box is to be able to measure in
every direction to help in the reconstruction, as presented in the simulation
chapter. Each of the panels have a thickness of 12 mm. While choosing
the thickness, it is important to find a middle ground between the need
to have as few diffraction of the light as possible and the sturdiness of the
structure, with the hope that once the panels are screwed together, the
vibration of one panel would not propagate too much to the others.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Transparent box
32
A closed loudspeaker was glued on the side of the box.
An important
thing, is that you want to reduce the leakage of sound outside of the box.
It would cause sound pressure to be integrated by the laser even before
entering the box adding some errors in the data. The loudspeaker was
fixed using silicone paste.
The LDV that is used is the Polytech OFV-505 Sensor Head, see Fig-
ure 4.1.5. It acts both as the source of the light and as the sensor, as pre-
sented in the introduction. It is thus necessary for the light to be reflected
once it has propagate inside the box. For this reason, some reflective tape
has been placed on the surface of some of the panels. It has been tested
that not all the tape or reflective surfaces could be use in this project,
because the signal to noise ratio needs to be high to be able to recover
correctly the pressure field. It also happened that one of the tape had a
mirror behavior, so it was then very sensitive to the angle of incidence of
the laser beam, see Figure 4.1.3.
Figure 4.1.3: Pictures of the two tested tapes. The picture on the right is
without a flash, the left one is with the flash. The tape at the top is the
one that has not been selected because of its mirror behavior, the bottom
is the used one.
To recover the 3D pressure field, it is necessary to realize the measure-
==PAGE:38==
4.1 Transparent box
33
ments at multiple points. It has been decided in this project, to move the
vibrometer along the y and z axis. To do so a 2D axis robot was used. It
consists of two Baldor BSM80C-275AF motors, controlled by two Baldor
Microflex e100, see Figure 4.1.4 [22], [23]. The two axis have a precision of
a millimeter. This robot also has the possibility to have its arm rotating
around the z-axis, but this feature has not been used. The motors can be
disabled, meaning locked, or enabled/unlocked.
Figure 4.1.4: Picture of the two axis BALDOR robot with the two direction
of movements highlighted by two black arrows.
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Transparent box
34
Figure 4.1.5: Picture of the Microflex e100 used to control the motors on
the righ and picture of the LDV on the left.
It is possible to control the robot using an Excel sheet where instructions
are written in the Mint Basic language. The main structure was provided
by Salvador Barrera Figueroa. Using Matlab, the sheet can be called and
modified to be able to move the robot to the desired place. The experiment
was then working with the following steps:
• Turning the vibrometer on.
• Enabling the motors.
• Moving the laser to the first position.
• Disabling the motors. This step is important because the motors do
a lot of noise even when they are not moving.
• Running a sweep of which the characteristics are defined below.
• Saving the data.
==PAGE:40==
4.2 Results and Discussion
35
• Enabling the motors.
• Moving the laser to the second position
• Disabling the motors...
The steps being repeated for the number of desired positions.
The laser is moved in the y direction on a distance of 0.52 m and in the z
direction on 0.28 m with steps of 1 cm. That is equivalent to a maximum
frequency that can be supposedly measured with two per wavelength of 17
150 Hz. The exponential sweep lasts ten seconds followed by a two seconds
silence. The frequency range is from 4000 Hz to 20 000 Hz. The overall
experiment takes eight hours for 1925 laser position.
4.2
Results and Discussion
4.2.1
Wall Vibration
As explained before, the walls of the box are vibrating when the loud-
speaker is playing. The laser beam is thus measuring both the vibration
and the acousto-optic effect. The measurement of the vibration from one
of the wall is compared to the overall measurement. The result is presented
in Figure 4.2.1. A sweep from 300 Hz to 20 kHz is used.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Results and Discussion
36
Figure 4.2.1: Measurement of the wall vibration compared to the measure-
ment including both the wall vibration and the acousto-optic effect is the
top plot. Measurement of the total measurement divided by the measure-
ment of the wall vibration is the bottom plot.
==PAGE:42==
4.2 Results and Discussion
37
It is visible on those figures that up to around 5 kHz, the wall vibrations
are predominant over the acousto-optic effect. It is then more interesting
in this project to start measuring at 4 kHz. The decision of putting the
reflective tape inside the box can here be discussed. Putting it on one of
the wall means that the distance covered by the laser beam varies in time
with the vibration of the panel. The tape could have been placed after
the box on a fixed surface. However, in that case, the laser beam would
have crossed the plexiglass four times in total, going back and forth. That
would have added a lot of diffraction, potentially decreasing the signal to
noise ratio of the signal from the LDV. That is why it has been decided to
tape directly one of the panel of the box.
4.2.2
Impulse Response and its frequency spectrum
In Figure 4.2.2 and Figure 4.2.3 are represented the impulse response of the
box obtained at the second point of measurement and its corresponding
frequency spectrum.
Figure 4.2.2: Impulse response measured by the LDV at the second mea-
surement point.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Results and Discussion
38
Figure 4.2.3: Frequency spectrum constructed by the Fourier transform of
the impulse response measured by the LDV at the second measurement
point.
Since the sweep starts already at 4000 Hz, it is difficult to differentiate the
resonance frequencies of the box. However, the noise does not look too
high in Figure 4.2.2, after the exponentially decaying part. This comment
can be highlighted with the results in Figure 4.2.5, where it is possible
to visualize the wave propagation using the impulse response measured at
each points.
4.2.3
Repeatability
The impulse response for three measurements made at the same position
with the same excitation sweep are presented in Figure 4.2.4 for both the
two seconds of silence and a close up on the first five milliseconds.
==PAGE:44==
4.2 Results and Discussion
39
Figure 4.2.4: Impulse response for three repetitions of the same sweep and
silence time at the same position. The overall response is presented in
the top figure and a close up on the first five milliseconds is shown in the
bottom figure.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Results and Discussion
40
The results look close for each repetition. The relative error (the norm of
the difference divided by the norm of one of the measurement) is approxi-
mately equal to 17 % each time when comparing one by one the different
measurements. That could be explained by machinery noise in the room
during the measurements, or an air flow in the path of the light beam
outside the box, due to some windows opened during the measurements.
A change in temperature or humidity is less likely to have that big of an
impact on this set of measurement considering the short time needed for
each sweep and silence.
4.2.4
Visualization of the integrated pressure
It it interesting to look at the integrated pressure measured with the LDV.
The output velocity of the LDV, that is proportional to the integrated
pressure, is presented at different time for every measured point in Fig-
ure 4.2.5.
Figure 4.2.5: Output velocity at each points for different time. The figure
is to be read top to bottom with first the left column and then the right
one. They correspond to increasing times.
The repeatability of excitation for each of the measurements points is so
==PAGE:46==
4.2 Results and Discussion
41
good that the transients can be superposed in an image. It is possible to see
what seems to be the direct sound propagating followed by some reflections
from the walls. However, it is important to keep in mind that what is plot
here is a value proportional to the integrated pressure. That means there
is also reflections from the front and back walls that are present here. It
is not a 2D problem.
The image shows that the integration over the optical path is much faster
than the time evolution of pressure which can thus be considered quasi-
static as it has been said in the acousto-optic effect simulation.
4.2.5
Results of the reconstruction
Using the reconstruction model presented in the precedent section about
simulations, it is possible to reconstruct the sound field. However, it is
important to have in mind that the results shown in the simulation section
highlighted that it is difficult to reconstruct correctly the sound field at
high frequencies especially with only measurement in one direction. The
reconstruction should therefore not be taken as good until there is a possi-
bility to verify the result, using a microphone for example. The results are
presented in Figure 4.2.6 for the plane (x=0.2m,y,z) and the frequencies
6000 Hz, 7500 Hz and 15000 Hz.
Figure 4.2.6: Reconstruction on plan B of the pressure field in Pa at 6000
Hz, 7500 Hz and 15000 Hz based on the real measurements.
The sound field looks very complex so hard to correctly reconstruct, espe-
cially at 15000 Hz, where the resolution is not good enough.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
This thesis had the objective of setting up an experiment to understand
if using acousto-optic measurements could help study sound fields in en-
closures. Even though there has not been enough time to experiment the
set up in a car, it has been possible to realize functional and high quality
measurement inside a plexiglass box excited on its side by a loudspeaker.
The post processing of the data has been implemented in Python and
already gives interesting result, showing the possibility of reconstructing
the sound pressure at every points inside a box for different frequencies.
This method works with both simulated and real measurements.
The
results show that the reconstruction method works well at some frequencies
but has trouble giving good results at a lot of frequencies, especially at
high frequencies.
To improve, measurements in another direction have
been added. That gave better results at low frequencies but not at the
higher ones. The explanation coming probably from the inverse problem
being not well enough stated. The Tikhonov regularization, or at least the
way it is programmed here, might not have been the right choice for this
post processing. Bad reconstructions at high frequencies did not allowed
good post processing on the experimental results for which the frequency
range starts at 4000 Hz.
==PAGE:48==
43
The next step would be to correct the post processing to obtain better
overall results. A way of obtaining a reference for the measurements should
also be added to the box, like a microphone on the side. But this project
highlighted the possibility to use this method in enclosures and therefore
in a car. Another idea could be to use the transparent box to obtain the
acoustical impedance of samples placed as one of the panel.
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1] S. A. Verburg, E. G. Williams, and E. Fernandez-Grande, “Acousto-
optic holography,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
vol. 152, pp. 3790–3799, Dec. 2022.
[2] B. Cook, E. Cavanagh, and H. Dardy, “A Numerical Procedure for
Calculating the Integrated Acoustooptic Effect,” IEEE Transactions
on Sonics and Ultrasonics, vol. 27, pp. 202–207, July 1980. Conference
Name: IEEE Transactions on Sonics and Ultrasonics.
[3] G. S. Kino, “Acoustic waves : devices, imaging, and analog signal
processing,” (No Title).
[4] J. W. Wolf, T. H. Neighbors, III, and W. G. Mayer, “Optical analysis
of finite-amplitude ultrasonic pulses,” The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, vol. 87, pp. 1004–1009, Mar. 1990.
[5] E. Blomme and L. Oswald, “Acousto-optical reconstruction of pulsed
ultrasonic signal,” Optical Engineering, vol. 31, pp. 2122–2128, Oct.
1992. Publisher: SPIE.
[6] G. S. Settles, Schlieren and Shadowgraph Techniques:
Visualizing
Phenomena in Transparent Media. Springer Science & Business Me-
dia, Sept. 2001. Google-Books-ID: HWtB2R0gWFgC.
[7] N. Kudo, “Optical methods for visualization of ultrasound fields,”
Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 54, p. 07HA01, June 2015.
Publisher: IOP Publishing.
[8] G. Wissmeyer, M. A. Pleitez, A. Rosenthal, and V. Ntziachristos,
“Looking at sound: optoacoustics with all-optical ultrasound detec-
==PAGE:50==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
45
tion,” Light: Science & Applications, vol. 7, p. 53, Aug. 2018. Pub-
lisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[9] E. Koponen, J. Leskinen, T. Tarvainen, and A. Pulkkinen, “Acoustic
pressure field estimation methods for synthetic schlieren tomography,”
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 145, pp. 2470–
2479, Apr. 2019.
[10] A. Torras-Rosell, S. Barrera-Figueroa, and F. Jacobsen, “Sound field
reconstruction using acousto-optic tomographya),” The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, vol. 131, pp. 3786–3793, May 2012.
[11] K. Yatabe, K. Ishikawa, and Y. Oikawa, “Acousto-optic back-
projection: Physical-model-based sound field reconstruction from op-
tical projections,” Journal of Sound and Vibration, vol. 394, pp. 171–
184, Apr. 2017.
[12] C. Choi, L.-h. Kim, Y. Oh, S. Doo, and K.-M. Sung, “Assessment of
sound field in a car,” AES, Oct. 2002.
[13] K. Satoh, “The development of a car sound field measurement system
using compact pc,” AES, Sept. 2000.
[14] S. Brix, C. Sladeczek, A. Franck, A. Zhykhar, C. Clausen, and
P. Gleim, “Wave field synthesis based concept car for high-quality
automotive sound,” AES, Sept. 2012.
[15] Polytec, “Vibrometry products - IVS-500 Industrial Vibration Sensor
- Polytec.”
[16] P. M. Morse and K. U. Ingard, Theoretical Acoustics. Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1986. Google-Books-ID: KIL4MV9IE5kC.
[17] S. A. Verburg, E. Fernandez-Grande, and S. Barrera-Figueroa,
“Acousto-optic sensing of the sound field in a lightly damped room,”
INTER-NOISE and NOISE-CON Congress and Conference Proceed-
ings, vol. 259, pp. 7240–7248, Sept. 2019.
[18] P. D. Nguyen, K. Ishikawa, N. Harada, and T. Moriya, “Acousto-optic
reconstruction of exterior sound field based on concentric circle sam-
pling with circular harmonic expansion,” Nov. 2023. arXiv:2311.01715
[cs, eess].
==PAGE:51==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
46
[19]
González, “Measurement of Areas on a Sphere Using Fibonacci
and Latitude–Longitude Lattices,” Mathematical Geosciences, vol. 42,
pp. 49–64, Jan. 2010.
[20] P. C. Hansen, Discrete Inverse Problems: Insight and Algorithms.
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Jan. 2010.
[21] M. COMSOL, “COMSOL: Multiphysics Software for Optimizing De-
signs.”
[22] Baldor, “BSM80C-275AF.”
[23] Baldor, “MicroFlex e100 - Dynamic performance for demanding ap-
plications.”
