==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
A methodology for calculation of levelised 
cost of electricity and hydrogen for a hybrid 
offshore wind farm
Alessandro Hruby
DTU Wind-M-0833 
July 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0833
July 2024
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Anastasia Ioannu
Niels-Erik Clausen
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Louis Martine
Suguang Dou
EDF Energy
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at he 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author:
Alessandro Hruby
Title:
A methodology for calculation of 
levelised cost of electricity and 
hydrogen for a hybrid offshore wind 
farm  
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Hydrogen, as a clean energy carrier, holds substantial potential to decarbonize various
sectors, including those that are diﬀicult to abate. To realize this potential, hydrogen
production must be emission-free. Europe’s commitment to expanding offshore wind
capacity positions offshore wind as a viable solution to enhance green hydrogen produc-
tion through electrolysis, making it more economically feasible. This thesis explores the
integration of hydrogen production with offshore wind farms to assess their economic
viability and determine optimal configurations and technologies, using levelised costs as
a key metric.
To achieve this, a versatile mathematical model is developed to calculate the levelised
Cost of Electricity, levelised Cost of Hydrogen, and a combined levelised cost of energy
metric that encompasses both commodities.
Results are obtained by applying such
model to a case study based on a potential 1320 MW hybrid offshore wind farm located
in the Dogger Bank D site in the North Sea.
The analysis considers CAPEX and OPEX for both the wind farm and hydrogen produc-
tion components across various configurations, electrolyser capacities, and technologies.
Three hydrogen plant placements are evaluated: centralized, turbine-based, and onshore.
Results indicate that the centralized onshore layout is the most cost-effective for com-
bined energy production, except when all the generated power is devoted to hydrogen
production, in which case centralizing hydrogen production offshore becomes more com-
petitive.
Alkaline Electrolysis technology is identified as the most cost-effective for
higher hydrogen production levels, achieving an LCoH of 3.4 €/kg in a centralized lay-
out with a 100% hydrogen capacity allocation, potentially making it competitive with
blue hydrogen.
i
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my gratitude to my supervisors Niels-Erik Clausen and Anastasia
Ioannou for supporting me throughout this thesis and providing valuable feedback on
my work.
Likewise, I would like to thank Louis Martine for his availability in answering my ques-
tions and willingness to share his opinions and views on the topic while allowing me to
chart my own course for the thesis.
I am grateful to my friends, who have stood by me and cheered me on during the highs
and lows of this work.
Lastly, I would like to give a special thanks to my parents Andrea and Lorena, to my
sister Caterina and to my grandmother Rita. Their constant love and support has helped
me more than I can put into words.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives of the Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
4
2.1
Hydrogen Production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Electrolysis Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Hydrogen Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Project Configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Hydrogen Production Layouts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
High-Voltage Electricity Export . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Levelised Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.1
Levelised Cost of Electricity (LCoE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.2
Levelised Cost of Hydrogen (LCoH)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.3
Levelised cost of energy for Hydrogen
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Methodology
18
3.1
Layout Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Production process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
Wind Power Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.2
Hydrogen Split . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.3
Calculation of Pressure Drop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.4
Electricity Split . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Electricity Transmission losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.1
Cable Losses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.2
Component Losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4
CAPEX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4.1
Project Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4.2
Wind Farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4.3
Hydrogen Plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.4.4
Electricity Export System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.4.5
Hydrogen Pipelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.5
OPEX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.6
levelised Costs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.6.1
LCoE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.6.2
LCoH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.6.3
Combined LCoE, Thermal based . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.6.4
Combined LCoE, Electricity based . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
iii
==PAGE:6==
4
Case Study
48
4.1
Location Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.2
Model Inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Results
56
5.1
Base Case Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.1.1
Commodity Export Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.1.2
CAPEX Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.1.3
OPEX Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.1.4
Levelised Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.2
Further Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.2.1
Technology Choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.2.2
Electricity Export System Choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.2.3
Electrolyser Parameters sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6
Discussion
80
6.1
Model Performance Valuation and Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.2
Answering the Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
7
Conclusion
85
Bibliography
87
A Appendix
90
A.1 Appendix: Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
A.1.1
Hourly Hydrogen Pipeline Losses Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
A.1.2
Pipeline pressure drop graph
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
A.1.3
Conversion to €2023
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
A.1.4
Turbines and Foundations Installation Costs
. . . . . . . . . . . .
92
A.1.5
Hydorgen Production Components Mass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
A.2 Appendix: Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
A.2.1
Components Operational Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
A.2.2
LCoEcombined
electrical Graphs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
A.2.3
Complete levelised Costs Values
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
A.2.4
Complete CAPEX Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
A.2.5
Complete Average OPEX Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
A.2.6
Complete Average Export Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
iv
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
Acronyms
CO2
Carbon Dioxide
H2
Hydrogen Molecule
H2O
Water Molecule
O2
Oxygen Molecule
AC
Alternating current
AEL
Alkaline Electrolysis
BOP
Balance of Plant
CCS
Carbon Capture and Storage
CCUS
Carbon Capture Utilisation and Storage
CfD
Contracts for Difference
D&C
Design and Construction
DC
Direct current
DEA
Danish Energy Agency
EDF
Électricité de France SA
EU
European Union
GHG
Green House Gasses
HHV
Higher Heating Value
HVAC
High-voltage alternating current
HVDC
High-voltage direct current
IEA
International Energy Agency
IRENA
International Renewable Energy Agency
IRR
Internal Rate of Return
KOH
Potassium Hydroxide
LCoE
levelised Cost of Electricity
LCoH
levelised Cost of Hydrogen
LHV
Lower Heating Value
MMC
Modular Multilever Converter
MnOx
Manganese Oxide
NaOH
Sodium Hydroxide
NPV
Net Present Value
PEM
Proton Exchange Membrane Electrolysis
SOEL
Solid Oxide Electrolysis
YSZ
Yttria-Stabilised Zirconia
Symbols
∆Ppipe
Pipeline pressure drop (m)
˙mH2,loss
Hydrogen loss in pipelines (kg/h)
˙mH2
Hydrogen mass production rate (kg/h)
˙QH2
Volumetric flowrate of hydrogen (m3/h)
˙VH2O
Volumetric flowrate of water (m3/h)
˙Wdes
Electrolyser desalinated water consump-
tion per kg of hydrogen (15 l/kg)
ηdeg
Electrolyser stack degradation (%/1,000
h)
ηelec
Electrolyser system electrical eﬀiciency
(%)
γ
Ratio between specific heat capacities of
hydrogen
µH2
Dynamic viscosity of hydrogen (kg/m/s)
ρH2
Hydrogen density (kg/m3)
AH2
Electrolyser plant footprint (m2/GW)
Apipe
Pipeline cross-sectional area (m2)
CArray
Total array cables cost (M€)
Ccomp
Total compressor cost (M€)
Celec
Electrolyser cost (€/kW)
Celec
Total electrolyser cost (M€)
CF oundations
Total foundations cost (M€)
CHV cab
High-voltage cable cost (M€)
Cjacket
Foundation pile cost (€)
Cjacket
Turbine jacket cost (€)
CP latform
Jacket
Offshore platform jacket cost (M€)
CP latform
Jacket
Offshore platform piles cost (M€)
CMMC
MMC cost (M€)
CP D
Project development cost (M€)
Cpipe
Hydrogen pipeline cost (M€)
CP latform
Total offshore platform cost (M€)
Cshunt
Shunt reactor cost (M€)
CSR
Electrolyser
Stack
Replacement
Cost
(€/kW)
Csub
Offshore substation platform cost (M€)
CP latform
T opside
Offshore platform Topside cost (M€)
Ctrans
Transformer cost (M€)
CT urbines
Total turbines cost (M€)
Cwp
Working platform cost (€)
Cwts
Total water treatment system cost (M€)
Dpipe
Pipeline diameter (m)
Ecable
Energy thought cable (MWh)
Ecomponent
Component energy consumption (MWh)
Ecomponent
Energy through component (MWh)
Ecomp
Compressor energy consumption (MWh)
Eelec,i
Single turbine electrolyser energy con-
sumption (MWh)
Eelec
Electrolyser energy consumption (MWh)
Eexport,y
Electricity exported to the grid in year y
(kWh)
Eexport
Energy effectively exported to the grid
(MWh)
Efarm
Energy produced by the wind farm
(MWh)
Eloss,array
Array cable energy loss (MWh)
Eloss,component Energy loss in component (MWh)
Eloss,HV cab
Energy loss in high-voltage cable (MWh)
Eloss,HV
Energy loss in HV transmission (MWh)
Eloss,MMC
Energy loss in MMC (MWh)
Eloss,shunt
Energy loss in shunt reactor (MWh)
Eloss,trans
Energy loss in transformer (MWh)
Eptx
Total energy consumption of hydrogen
plant (MWh)
Eshore
Energy delivered to shore (MWh)
Esubstation
Energy available at the offshore substa-
tion (MWh)
Eturbine
Energy produced by a single turbine
(MWh)
Ewts,i
Energy production of each turbine de-
voted to the centralized compressor in
the Turbine layout (MWh)
Ewts,i
Single turbine water treatment energy
consumption (MWh)
Ewts
Water treatment system energy con-
sumption (MWh)
FLL
Component full-load losses (%)
GH2
Gas gravity of hydrogen (0.0696)
Hy
Hours in year y (hours)
HH
Turbine hub height (m)
ICArray
Array cables installation cost (M€)
v
==PAGE:8==
ICArray
Compressor treatment system installa-
tion cost (M€)
ICArray
Electrolyser installation cost (M€)
ICArray
Water treatment system installation cost
(M€)
ICF oundations Foundations installation cost (M€)
ICT urbines
Turbines installation cost (M€)
IF
Electrolyser Installation Factor (%)
Larray
Array cable length (km)
LIG,i
Length of inter array cable i (km)
Lshore
Distance to shore (km)
Lstring
Length of the cable for a single turbine
string (km)
Lsub
Distance between between first turbine of
each string and substation (km)
Lturbine
Distance between turbines of the same
string (km)
LHVH2
Hydrogen Lower Heating Value (33.33
kWh/kg)
LTstack,years
Stack lifetime in years (years)
Mcompressor
Compressor mass (Tonnes)
Melec
Electrolyser mass (Tonnes)
mH2,export,y
Hydrogen exported in year y (Kg)
Mjacket
Foundation pile mass (kg)
Mjacket
Turbine platform mass (kg)
M P latform
Jacket
Offshore platform jacket mass (Tonnes)
M P latform
P iles
Offshore platform piles mass (Tonnes)
M P latform
T opside
Offshore platform Topside mass (Tonnes)
Mwp
Working platform mass (kg)
Mwts
Water Treatment System mass (Tonnes)
nHV cab
Number of high-voltage cables
nMMC
Number of modular multilever convert-
ers (MMC)
NST
Number of compression stages of the
compressor
ntrans
Number of transformers
nturbines
Number of wind turbines
NLL
Component no-load losses (%)
OHmax
Electrolyser stack lifetime (h)
OPEXelec,EQ Cost for planned and unplanned electrol-
yser maintenance (M€/year)
OPEXelec,F AC Cost for electrolyser facility mainte-
nance (M€/year)
OPEXelec,F AC Cost for electrolyser stack replacement
(M€/year)
OS
Factor introduced to account for higher
offshore installation costs. Equal to 1 for
Centralized and Turbine layouts, 0 for
Onshore.
parray,in
Array pipelines inlet pressure (bar)
parray,out
Array pipelines outlet pressure (bar)
Pcable
Instantaneous
power
thought
cable
(MW)
pcomp,in
Compressor inlet pressure (bar)
pcomp,out
Compressor outlet pressure (bar)
Pcomponent
Component power rating (MW)
Pelec,tot
Total electrolyser capacity (MW)
Pelec
Single electrolyser capacity (MW)
pelec
Electrolyser operating pressure (bar)
pexport,in
Export pipeline inlet pressure (bar)
pexport,out
Export pipeline outlet pressure (bar)
Pfarm
Total wind farm capacity (MW)
Pturbine
Wind turbine capacity (MW)
PY W T
Wind farm power density (MW/km2)
Qshunt
Shunt
reactor
reactive
power
rating
(MVAr)
R
Gas constant (8.314 J/molK)
Rcable
Resistance of the cable (ohm)
Re
Reynolds number
S
Sutherland constant for hydrogen (72 K)
SCArray
Array cables supply cost (M€)
SCArray
Compressor
treatment
system
supply
cost (M€)
SCArray
Electrolyser supply cost (M€)
SCArray
Water treatment system supply cost
(M€)
SCF oundations Foundations supply cost (M€)
SCT urbines
Turbines supply cost (M€)
SplitH2
Hydrogen capacity as a percentage of
wind farm capacity (%)
t
Hour t
Telec
Electrolyser operating temperature (◦C)
Tmean
Mean temperature (285.15 K)
v
Flow
velocity
of
hydrogen
inside
pipelines (10 m/s)
vi
Turbine cut-in wind speed (m/s)
vi
Turbine cut-out wind speed (m/s)
Vcable
Cable voltage (kV)
wloss
Wind farm wake loss (%)
WD
Water Depth (WD)
y
Year y
r
Discout rate (%)
vi
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Hydrogen is emerging as a pivotal element in the quest for global decarbonization and
sustainable energy solutions. As the simplest and most abundant element in the uni-
verse, hydrogen offers a versatile and eﬀicient energy carrier capable of transforming
various sectors.
Its potential to significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions lies in
its ability to serve as a clean fuel when produced from renewable sources. Hydrogen
can be utilised in fuel cells to generate electricity, with water as the only byproduct,
making it an environmentally friendly alternative to fossil fuels. Additionally, it can
be integrated into industrial processes, transportation, and power generation, thereby
facilitating a transition towards a low-carbon economy. By leveraging hydrogen’s unique
properties and scalability, substantial progress can be made in mitigating climate change
and achieving long-term energy sustainability.
Green Hydrogen Production
A key aspect of hydrogen’s role in decarbonization is the production of green hydrogen,
which is derived through electrolysis powered by renewable energy sources such as wind,
solar, and hydropower.
Unlike conventional hydrogen production methods that rely
on fossil fuels, green hydrogen is produced without emitting carbon dioxide, making
it a truly clean energy carrier. The process involves using electricity generated from
renewable sources to split water into hydrogen and oxygen, thereby creating a sustainable
and zero-emission fuel. This synergy between green hydrogen production and renewable
energy not only maximizes the utilization of intermittent renewable resources but also
provides a reliable storage solution for excess energy. By harnessing the full potential of
green hydrogen, the gap between renewable energy generation and consumption can be
bridged, paving the way for a resilient and carbon-neutral energy future.
Offshore Wind Energy Integration
Offshore wind energy, with its vast potential and high capacity factors, presents a com-
pelling synergy with green hydrogen production. The advantage of harnessing wind en-
ergy offshore lies in the stronger and more consistent wind speeds available at sea, leading
to higher eﬀiciency and energy output compared to onshore wind farms. Additionally,
offshore wind farms can be situated away from densely populated areas, minimizing land
use conflicts and visual impacts.
By integrating hydrogen production facilities with offshore wind farms, a share of the
energy can be utilised to produce green hydrogen through electrolysis. This process could
potentially address the issue of intermittency associated with wind power and provide
a method to store and transport renewable energy in the form of hydrogen. Moreover,
pairing green hydrogen generation with offshore wind would allow large quantities of
1
==PAGE:10==
emission-free hydrogen to enter the market, helping to pave the way for a widespread
adoption of this commodity with the goal of a greener energy system.
Case Studies and Current Projects
Several pioneering projects are demonstrating the potential of offshore wind and hy-
drogen integration. The NortH2 project in the Netherlands aims to build a large-scale
hydrogen production facility powered by offshore wind, with plans to generate up to 4
gigawatts of green hydrogen by 2030 [1]. Similarly, the Hywind Scotland project, the
world’s first floating wind farm, is exploring the production of hydrogen from offshore
wind to supply clean energy to the Orkney Islands [2].
Hydrogen produced from offshore wind can be transported via existing natural gas in-
frastructure, converted back to electricity in fuel cells, or used as a feedstock in various
industrial applications. This versatility makes it a key component in the transition to a
sustainable energy system.
Economic Competitiveness
Ensuring that technologies for green hydrogen production and offshore wind energy are
economically competitive is crucial for their widespread adoption and long-term viability.
One effective way to measure and compare the economic eﬀiciency of these technologies
is through metrics such as levelised Cost of Electricity (LCoE) and levelised Cost of
Hydrogen (LCoH). LCoE provides a standardized measure of the average net present
cost of electricity generation for a specific energy source over its lifetime, factoring in all
associated costs such as capital, operation, and maintenance. Similarly, LCoH measures
the cost of producing hydrogen, including the expenses related to the production process,
distribution, and storage. These metrics are essential for evaluating the cost-effectiveness
of renewable energy projects and identifying areas where technological improvements or
cost reductions are needed. By focusing on reducing LCoE and LCoH, policymakers and
industry stakeholders can make informed decisions that drive investments and innova-
tion, ultimately making green hydrogen and offshore wind energy more competitive with
traditional fossil fuels.
However, while the levelised cost of electricity of traditional offshore wind farms is al-
ready well understood and documented, research is still needed to define methodologies
and frameworks to determine the levelised costs of hybrid offshore wind projects that
combine both electricity and hydrogen export. This is mainly due to the large number
of configurations such a project can be realised with, including the choice of whether
to locate the hydrogen production equipment offshore or onshore, the type of hydrogen-
producing technology to adopt, and the choice of the export system.
1.2
Objectives of the Study
This study is therefore aimed at developing a versatile model and methodology that
allows a potential developer to determine the levelised costs of energy associated with
a hybrid offshore wind farm under different configurations and determine the optimal
2
==PAGE:11==
one, taking the geographical characteristics and wind profile of the selected location as
inputs. To guide this study, the following research questions were posed:
• How can the total costs of hydrogen-producing offshore wind farms be calculated?
• How can their electricity and hydrogen export be modeled and quantified?
• How can a levelised cost metric that takes into account both electricity and hy-
drogen export be developed?
• Under which configuration and technology choice is an hybrid wind farm most
competitive?
1.3
Thesis Structure
To provide a structured approach to addressing the research questions, this study is
organized into the following chapters:
Literature Review
This chapter presents existing research on hydrogen production, electrolysis technolo-
gies, and hydrogen handling. It introduces various project configurations for hydrogen
production and high-voltage electricity export, as well as the concept of levelised costs
for energy projects.
Methodology
This chapter details the development of the study’s model, including different layouts,
production and export processes, and both electricity and hydrogen system losses. It
also explains the methodologies for modeling CAPEX, OPEX, and a combined levelised
cost metric for hydrogen and electricity.
Case Study
The model is applied to a potential hybrid offshore wind farm to obtain meaningful
results and evaluate its performance. This chapter discusses the selection of the location
and provides the model inputs used for the analysis.
Results
This chapter presents and discusses the base case results, including commodity export,
CAPEX, OPEX, and levelised costs. It also explores further investigations into technol-
ogy choices, electricity export systems, and electrolyser parameters.
Discussion
This chapter evaluates the model’s performance against real-world data and third-party
sources. It contextualises the case study results to address the research questions.
Conclusion
The conclusion summarizes the key findings and implications of the study, highlight-
ing cost-effective configurations and technologies for hybrid offshore wind farms with
hydrogen production and providing inspiration for future work.
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Literature Review
In this section, the main findings from the literature review that was conducted prior
to developing the model are presented. In particular, these include the possible layouts
in which hydrogen production can be paired with offshore wind, the various electrolysis
technologies through which hydrogen can be produced, the transport of hydrogen to
shore and its possible connection to the gas network.
2.1
Hydrogen Production
Hydrogen can be produced using a number of different methods with varying eﬀiciencies
and environmental impacts, and is typically classified into colours depending on the
method and feedstock used [3]. Table 2.1 shows all the types of hydorgen production,
along with their colour code, feedstock, production technology and emissions. Among
these, three are the most widely discussed in literature and benchmarked against one
another, mainly due to their larger spread in industry.
Grey Hydrogen
Grey hydrogen is the most common and is produced from natural gas through a pro-
cess called steam methane reforming. This method generates significant carbon dioxide
emissions, as there is no mechanism to capture and store the carbon dioxide (CO2) pro-
duced. It accounts for a major portion of the hydrogen produced today, contributing
substantially to greenhouse gas emissions.
Blue Hydrogen
Blue hydrogen is also produced from natural gas via steam reforming, but it incorpo-
rates carbon capture and storage (CCS) to capture and store the CO2 emissions rather
than releasing them into the atmosphere. While this reduces the environmental impact
compared to grey hydrogen, the process is not entirely carbon neutral, as some emissions
can escape capture.
Green Hydrogen
Green hydrogen emits no greenhouse gases during production, making it the cleanest and
most sustainable form of hydrogen. It holds significant promise for the future as a key
component in the transition to a low-carbon economy and can theoretically be produced
in a variety of ways, using fossil fuels (Through reforming or gasification), using waste
like wood, plastic and municipal solid waste, or, most notably, through electrolysers.
electrolysers use electricity as feedstock and allows hydrogen production to be powered
by renewable energy sources such as wind, solar, or hydropower.
Due to this wide
array of implementations and promises of decarbonization, hydrogen production through
electrolysis has gained significant attention from industry and technologies are being
developed and improved constantly [3]. As mentioned, this study focuses on the coupling
4
==PAGE:13==
of offshore wind with three of these elecrolysis technologies, which are explored in the
following section.
Table 2.1: The colours of hydrogen and resulting Green House Gas (GHG) emissions. Table
created with information from [4].
Produced
using
Colour of
hydrogen
Feedstock
Production
technology
Direct GHG
emissions (kg
CO2e/kg H2)
Indirect GHG
emissions (kg
CO2e/kg H2)
Electricity
Green
Renewable
electricity, water
and/or steam by
thermolysis
Electrolysis
-
>0c
Yellow
Grid electricity,
water
-
<1
30 (depends on
the carbon
intensity of the
grid mix)
Pink
Nuclear electricity,
water
-
>0c
Fossil Fuels
Grey
Natural gas
Methane reforming
9 – 11
0.5 – 4
Brown
Lignite
Gasification
18 – 20
1 – 7
Black
Black coal
Gasification
18 – 20
1 – 7
Blue
Natural gas or coal
Methane reforming
with CCS,
Gasification with
CCS
0.5 – 4
0.5 – 7
Turquoise
Natural gas
Pyrolysis
Solid carbon
(by-product)
0.5 – 5
Green
Biogas or biomass
Reforming with or
without CCS,
Gasification with
or without CCS
Possibility of
negative
emissions with
CCS
1 – 3
Other
Red
Nuclear heat,
water
Thermolysis
-
>0c
Purple
Nuclear electricity
and heat, water
Thermolysis and
electrolysis
-
>0c
Orange
Solar irradiance,
water
Photolysis
-
>0c
Green
Waste wood,
plastic, municipal
solid waste
Thermochemical
Possibility of
negative
emissions with
CCS
Not assessed as
variabilities in
the value chains
are too great to
accurately
represent the
GHG equivalent
emissions
2.1.1
Electrolysis Technologies
The general working principle of electrolysers revolves around splitting water molecules
(H2O) into hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2) gases using electrical energy in a process
called electrolysis.
All electrolyser types consist of two electrodes (an anode and a
cathode) immersed in an electrolyte solution.
5
==PAGE:14==
The basic principle of electrolysis involves applying an external voltage to drive the
reaction. In the context of water electrolysis, the overall reaction is represented as:
2H2O(l) →2H2(g) + O2(g)
The different types of electrolysers are classified based on the type of electrolyte used
and the operational conditions. For this study, three types of electrolysers are taken into
account and integrated into the model: Alkaline (AEL), Proton Exhcange Membrane
(PEM) and Solid Oxide (SOEL).
When considering the system that these three technologies require to produce hydrogen,
it can be divided in electrolysis stack, which is where the actual electrochemical reaction
occurs to produce hydrogen and oxygen, and Balance of Plant (BOP), which includes
the rest of the components and systems required to support the operation of the stacks.
Alkaline electrolysers use an alkaline solution, usually potassium hydroxide (KOH) or
sodium hydroxide (NaOH), as the electrolyte. These have been in use for many decades
and are characterized by their robustness and lower cost compared to PEM electrolysers.
However, they generally have lower current densities and eﬀiciencies [5].
PEM electrolysers use a solid polymer electrolyte that conducts protons from the anode
to the cathode while separating the gases produced. PEM electrolysers are known for
their high eﬀiciency and ability to operate at varying loads, making them suitable for
applications with fluctuating energy inputs such as solar and wind power [6, 7].
Solid Oxide electrolysers, operating at high temperatures (typically between 500-1000°C),
use a solid oxide or ceramic electrolyte. These electrolysers are highly eﬀicient as the
high operating temperature reduces the electrical energy required for the reaction. SOEs
are particularly suitable for industrial applications where waste heat can be utilised [5].
Alkaline Electrolysis (AEL)
Alkaline electrolysers represent the most mature and commonly available electrolyser
technology on the market. They are also considered the most economical due to their
construction from readily available materials and their long cell stack life of upwards
of 70,000 hours [8], which translates to fewer replacements and lower operational and
maintenance costs. The electrodes, typically made of steel, nickel, or nickel-plated steel,
are separated by a microporous diaphragm to prevent gas mixing and are immersed in
an aqueous solution of potassium hydroxide as the electrolyte.
While AEL technology has traditionally operated at atmospheric pressure, pressurized
systems have recently been introduced.
These pressurized systems require less com-
pression, which is generally needed for most applications, and are better equipped to
respond to fluctuations in power input, such as those from renewable energy sources.
This adaptability allows pressurized alkaline electrolysers to remain competitive with
other technologies like Proton Exchange Membraneelectrolysers when combined with
renewable energy. For these reasons, pressurized AEL technology has been selected for
the study, with an operating pressure of 30 bars [8].
6
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.1: Working principle of an alkaline water electrolyser, taken from [9].
The chemical reactions are given in the Equations 2.1-2.2.
At the cathode, water
molecules are reduced by electrons to hydrogen and negatively charged hydroxide ions.
At the anode, hydroxide ions are oxidized to oxygen and water while releasing electrons.
Overall, a water molecule reacts to hydrogen and oxygen in the ratio of 2:1 [10].
Cathode:
2 H2O(l) + 2 e−→H2(g) + 2 OH−(aq)
(2.1)
Anode:
2 OH−(aq) →0.5 O2(g) + H2O(l) + 2 e−
(2.2)
Figure 2.1 illustrates a schematic flow diagram of the alkaline water electrolysis process.
In this setup, the electrolyte is circulated through the electrolysis stack where hydrogen
and oxygen gases are generated. Although natural convection can be a cost-effective
option, it may lead to gas coverage on the electrode surfaces, increasing the required
cell voltage and operational costs. To address this, most alkaline water electrolyser sys-
tems include temperature control mechanisms to keep the electrolyte within an optimal
temperature range. For this study, an operating temperature of 80◦C was selected [8].
After leaving the electrolysis cell, the electrolyte and product gas mixture enters gas
separators. These separators often use large tanks with high residence times to achieve
phase separation. The product gases are then demisted and dried before being purified
to the desired level. The separated liquid electrolyte is pumped back into the electrolysis
stack.
Proton Exchange Membrane Electrolysis (PEM)
PEM electrolysers utilise a solid polymer electrolyte to conduct protons from the anode
to the cathode, separating the generated hydrogen and oxygen gases. The core of a PEM
electrolyser is the membrane electrode assembly, which consists of a proton-conductive
7
==PAGE:16==
membrane sandwiched between two electrodes, an anode, and a cathode [11], as observed
in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Working principle of PEM electrolyser, taken from [9].
The operation of a PEM electrolyser, as shown in Equations 2.3-2.4, begins with the
application of an external voltage across the electrodes. At the anode, water molecules
are oxidized, releasing oxygen gas, protons, and electrons. The protons generated at the
anode migrate through the proton-conductive membrane to the cathode, driven by the
electric field. At the cathode, these protons combine with electrons from the external
circuit to form hydrogen gas.
Anode:
2 H2O(l) →O2(g) + 4 H+ + 4 e−
(2.3)
Cathode:
4 H+ + 4 e−→2 H2(g)
(2.4)
The key advantage of PEM electrolysers is their ability to operate at high current den-
sities, resulting in compact systems which maintain good eﬀiciencies while experiencing
rapid responses to changes in power input. This makes PEM electrolysers particularly
suitable for integration with renewable energy sources, which are characterized by an
intermittent power output.
PEM electrolysers also benefit from their ability to produce high-purity hydrogen (>99.999%)
without the need for extensive gas separation processes. The highly reactive nature of
the polymer membrane allows for quick adaptation to variations in electricity supply,
making it possible for PEM electrolysers to switch between full power and standby modes
within seconds [11].
These electrolysers typically operate at temperatures between 50°C and 80°C and, in
theory, can reach eﬀiciencies of around 80% under optimal conditions. However, the
8
==PAGE:17==
performance and eﬀiciency of PEM electrolysers are influenced by several factors, with
the most notable being the performance of the complete electrical system associated
with this technology, which has been less researched and commercialised than its Al-
kaline counterpart [11]. In addition, despite being more suitable to the varying loads
associated with renewable energy, this type of power supply will bring a further reduc-
tion in eﬀiciency. For these reasons, the electrical eﬀiciency of PEM electrolyser systems
hovers between 60% and 70%.
Solid Oxide Electrolysis (SOEL)
Solid oxide electrolysers (SOEL) (Figure 2.3) operate based on the principle of electro-
chemical water splitting, which involves the use of high-temperature solid oxide cells to
convert steam into hydrogen and oxygen. The key components of an SOEL are a dense
ionic conducting electrolyte and two porous electrodes. Steam is fed to the porous cath-
ode where it is dissociated into hydrogen gas and oxygen ions at the cathode-electrolyte
interface. The hydrogen gas diffuses to the cathode surface and is collected, while the
oxygen ions are transported through the dense electrolyte to the anode. At the anode,
the oxygen ions are oxidized to form oxygen gas, which is then released. The chemical
reactions at the cathode and anode are [12]:
Cathode:
H2O + 2e−→H2 + O2−
(2.5)
Anode:
O2−→1
2O2 + 2e−
(2.6)
SOEL electrolysers typically operate at high temperatures to enhance ionic conductivity
and reaction kinetics, which explains the operating temperature range for SOEL, which
is generally between 600°C and 1000°C [8]. Higher temperatures are advantageous as
they decrease the electrical energy demand and allow the utilization of industrial waste
heat, thereby improving overall system eﬀiciency. Common electrolyte materials such
as yttria-stabilised zirconia (YSZ) perform optimally at these high temperatures due to
their high ionic conductivity and chemical stability [12].
The electrical eﬀiciency of SOEL electrolysis is perhaps the most significant advantage
that this technology has compared to AEL and PEM. SOEL electrolysers are known for
their high electrical eﬀiciency, which can reach up to 90% under optimal conditions. This
high eﬀiciency is attributed to the lower electrical energy requirement for the electrolysis
process at elevated temperatures, where a significant portion of the energy is supplied
in the form of heat [12].
The operating pressure of Solid Oxide Electrolysis (SOEL) systems can vary based on
their specific design and application. Typically, Solid Oxide Electrolysis cells are de-
signed to function at atmospheric pressure. However, higher pressures can be utilised
to boost reaction rates and improve hydrogen production eﬀiciency [12]. Currently, this
technology is still emerging, and while pressurized, large-scale SOEL systems do not yet
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.3: Working principle of SOEL electrolysers, taken from [9].
achieve the high pressures seen in pressurized Alkaline Electrolysis and Proton Exchange
Membrane systems.
Another point of distinction with the other two technologies is the operating lifetime of
SOEL stacks. Degradation in SOEL mainly happens because of the high temperatures
and harsh conditions the cell parts are subjected to. Common issues include the move-
ment of manganese oxide (MnOx) from the anode material into the YSZ electrolyte, the
creation of poorly conducting materials. These problems can increase the cell’s resistance
and lower its electrochemical reactivity. Although studies have shown that SOEL stacks
can operate reliably for several thousand hours, long-term stability remains a challenge
due to issues such as electrode degradation and impurity buildup at the triple-phase
boundary, which can affect cell performance over time [12].
2.2
Hydrogen Handling
One of the challenges that hydrogen faces as an energy commodity is the complexity
in transporting and storing it due to its low density of 0.08375 kg/m3 at atmospheric
pressure. This is especially true in the case of an hybrid offshore wind farm, where the
hydrogen is produced at sea and needs to be transported back to shore. In addition,
when it reaches shore, hydrogen needs to be either stored or transported to where it is
needed in some way.
The solution to the first problem comes from two strategies, which are transporting the
hydrogen to shore via ships or via pipelines. The choice between two options depends
largely on the distance and scale of transport. Pipelines are more economical for shorter
distances and larger volumes, while vessels offer competitive costs for longer distances.
According to the European Union’s (EU) Assessment of Hydrogen Delivery Options pub-
lished in 2021, for distances over 3,000 km compressed hydrogen transport via pipelines
10
==PAGE:19==
proves to be the cheapest option [13], as shown in Figure 2.4. For this reason and due
to offshore wind farms typically being located much closer to shore than the mentioned
threshold, pipelines have been selected as the only method of hydrogen export to shore
in this analysis and their modelling is further detailed in the methodology section of this
report.
Figure 2.4: Hydrogen delivery costs for a simple (point to point) transport route, taken from
the European Union’s website [13]. The shaded areas highlight the most cost effective transport
pathway depending on the distance
Despite the fact that the transmission of hydrogen once it reaches shore is not considered
to be within the scope of this study, the handling of the hydrogen before export still has
to be considered as it could lead to additional project costs. For instance, the hydrogen
would need to be compressed either for storage in a tank or to be transported via high
pressure pipelines.
When considering the latter, experiments have been carried through in Europe to assess
whether a blend of hydrogen and natural gas could be transported in the already existing
gas network.
In 2019 for instance, the Italian energy infrastructure company Snam
introduced hydrogen in the traditional Italian gas system with a blend of up to 10%,
leading to the system working flawlessly and without need for replacement [14].
In
addition, Snam also calculated that ”At least 70% of the lines in Italy are already ready
to carry 100% hydrogen at a pressure equal to or slightly lower than the one used for
natural gas and remain safe for 50 years.” - Alverà, 2021 [14]. Notably, in other countries
such as the UK, pipelines are already being updated from mainly wrought-iron pipes to
polyethylene pipes, which are able to carry hydrogen without complications associated
with traditional lines.
11
==PAGE:20==
2.3
Project Configurations
2.3.1
Hydrogen Production Layouts
As previously mentioned, When pairing hydrogen production with offshore wind, differ-
ent electrolyser placements can be considered. In particular, when considering existing
literature and planned future projects, layouts have been conceptualised by placing the
electrolysers either Onshore or Offshore.
When electrolysers are placed onshore, the electricity produced by all wind turbines is
collected at a central offshore substation and transmitted to shore via a high voltage
system, where hydrogen is produced by a single electrolyser, then compressed to grid
pressure. An example can be found in EDF’s Tees Green Hydrogen project, which is has
secured funding from the UK government’s Net Zero Hydrogen Fund [15]. Essentially,
this layout simply involves powering a hydrogen production plant located onshore with
a traditional offshore wind farm instead of electricity coming from conventional power
generators to allow for the production of green H2.
If the electrolysis process is placed offshore, the hydrogen is produced with energy from
the wind farm using desalinated seawater and then compressed and transported to shore
via pipeline. However, under this configuration two different layouts are possible. In
the first one, a single electrolyser is placed on a central offshore platform and powered
by all the wind turbines, as envisioned by RWE with its AquaVentus initiative [16]. In
the second layout, the electrolysers, paired with desalination units, are located directly
inside or next to each wind turbine. An example of this is given by Vattenfall’s Aberdeen
Bay Project [17].
Since the aim of this study is to explore how to the levelised costs very under different
configurations, all three electrolyser placement layouts were taken into consideration to
implement into the model, and are further detailed in chapter 3, where diagrams of each
layout are also shown. It is also worth noting that throughout most of the literature,
projects that pair hydrogen production with offshore wind only consider that all the
power generated by the turbines is devoted to hydrogen export, and no electricity is sold
to the grid. In chapter 3 it will be explained how this study takes in consideration both
hydrogen and electricity export.
2.3.2
High-Voltage Electricity Export
As mentioned, since both hydrogen and electricity export are considered in this study,
the impact of the electricity export system also has to be assessed.
From literature
review, it was found that there are two different types of bulk electric transmission that
are employed in offshore wind farms: High Voltage Alternating Current (HVAC) and
High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC).
There are benefits and tradeoffs for both; The transformer substations of HVAC imply
fewer losses and are cheaper than their HVDC analogues. However, as a result of the skin
effect and the self-induced reactance, HVAC cables require a larger section for the same
amperage, thus, their cost per unit of length is higher than their HVDC equivalents [18].
12
==PAGE:21==
Throughout literature, it is agreed that at higher distances from shore, HVDC starts
being more economically competitive than HVAC. Although the exact distance at which
this happens depends on the specific project, it is usually quoted between 50 and 80 km
from shore [18, 19].
It should be noted however that the impact of the electricity export system on levelised
cost of hydrogen production has not been researched as thoroughly, and is therefore
another point that this study aims to address.
2.4
Levelised Costs
As mentioned, the key output of the model that was developed for this study are the
levelised costs of the commodities produced by the hybrid offshore wind farm, being
electricity and hydrogen. Typically, the levelised cost of electricity and levelised cost of
energy are both referred to as LCoE, as they are both expressed in currency over watt-
hour. On the other hand, the production of hydrogen is quantified in kg and thus the
levelised cost of hydrogen is treated saparately and expressed in €/kg. The term LCoE,
without any subscripts or superscripts, exclusively denotes the levelised cost of exported
electricity, not the levelised cost of energy. To combine the two into a single levelised
cost metric, this study proposes a method based on the hydrogen’s energy content, as
will be discussed in section 3.6.
2.4.1
Levelised Cost of Electricity (LCoE)
The Levelised Cost of Electricity is a crucial economic metric used to assess the average
cost of energy production over the lifespan of a project. Expressed typically in €/kWh
in Europe, LCoE offers a standardized way to compare the financial performance of
different energy technologies and monitor their cost trends over time. From an economic
feasibility standpoint, LCoE represents the break-even cost at which energy must be sold
to cover all expenses and yield an acceptable return over the project’s lifetime [20].
LCoE formulation
Different organizations employ various methodologies for calculating LCoE, which can
result in significant discrepancies in estimates.
The International Renewable Energy
Agency (IRENA), for instance, emphasizes direct project costs, including capital invest-
ment, operations, maintenance, and fuel costs, while omitting taxes. In contrast, the
International Energy Agency (IEA) incorporates taxes to provide a more comprehen-
sive cost assessment for developers. The Danish Energy Agency (DEA) takes an even
broader approach, including externalities such as climate impacts and system costs in
their LCoE calculations [20].
Given that this study focuses on the impact that technical aspects have on a poten-
tial hybrid offshore wind project, a simplified approach to LCoE calculation is adopted,
aligning with IRENA’s methodology. In practice this means that LCoE is treated as
a constant value that, when multiplied by the electricity output, equals the total dis-
counted costs of the project.
Mathematically, this can be expressed as:
13
==PAGE:22==
n
∑
y=0
LCoE · Eexport,y
(1 + r)y
=
n
∑
y=0
TCy
(1 + r)y
(2.7)
In this equation, Eexport,y represents the electricity exported by the project to the grid in
year y (measured in kWh), TCy denotes the total cost incurred in year y,n is the number
of years over which the project is evaluated, and r is the discount rate that accounts for
the time value of money.
Rearranging the above equation to solve for LCoE, the following is obtained:
LCoE =
∑n
y=0
TCy
(1+r)y
∑n
y=0
Eexport,y
(1+r)y
(2.8)
This formula represents the most general form of LCoE calculation [20]. It allows for the
inclusion of all relevant costs, whether they are real or nominal. Taxes and other costs
could also be considered but as mentioned, this study will only take nominal costs into
account, which are calculated accounting for the projected inflation over the lifetime of
the project, as detailed in subsection A.2.3 in the Appendix.
Offshore wind LCoE projections
The levelised Cost of Electricity for offshore wind in Europe has seen significant changes
over recent years. In 2015, the LCoE was approximately 0.15 €/kWh. By 2024, this
figure is projected to be less than 0.05 €/kWh [21]. This decline is attributed to techno-
logical advancements, economies of scale, and competitive auction processes that drive
down prices.
Advancements in turbine technology, such as larger and more eﬀicient
turbines, better installation techniques, and improved maintenance practices, have sig-
nificantly contributed to reducing the LCoE. Investments in infrastructure, including
port facilities and specialised installation vessels, have also supported these improve-
ments[22].
Government policies and market mechanisms have significantly impacted the LCoE of
offshore wind. Competitive bidding processes have also encouraged cost reductions. For
instance, the UK’s Contracts for Difference (CfD) scheme has been pivotal in driving
down costs through competitive auctions. The recent increase in the ceiling price for the
UK’s offshore wind auctions further demonstrates the dynamic nature of the market and
the importance of regulatory frameworks in shaping cost trends[22]. Record investments
have been another key factor in reducing the LCoE. In 2023, Europe saw a record €30
billion invested in offshore wind projects, financing 9 GW of new capacity. This influx
of capital has been essential in achieving economies of scale and driving further cost
eﬀiciencies. The European Union’s commitment to expanding offshore wind capacity to
meet its climate targets has also provided a stable investment environment[22]. Looking
ahead, Europe aims to install 248 GW of offshore wind capacity in the North Seas by
2050, underscoring the long-term potential for continued cost reductions[21].
14
==PAGE:23==
2.4.2
Levelised Cost of Hydrogen (LCoH)
Similarly to LCoE, the Levelised Cost of Hydrogen is an essential economic metric used
to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of hydrogen production technologies over their entire
lifecycle. Typically expressed in currency per kilogram of hydrogen, LCoH provides a
standardized framework for comparing different hydrogen production methods. More
importantly, it can be used to assess the economic viability of green hydrogen compared
to the cheaper fossil-fuel dependent alternative ways of producing it.
LCoH formulation
From a mathematical perspective, LCoH follows the same logic as LCoE, but considering
the mass of hydrogen mH2,export,y exported in the period y instead of the electricity.
Thus, for hydrogen, Equation 2.8 becomes:
LCoH =
∑n
y=0
TCy
(1+r)y
∑n
y=0
mH2,export,y
(1+r)y
(2.9)
LCoH Projections
Due to hydrogen’s new role as a clean energy carrier and its promise to decarbonise many
sectors of industry, a lot of emphasis is put into its cost of production. If hydrogen is to
compete, for example, with natural gas in heating and coal for industry, in most countries
its levelised cost needs to get somewhere below 2 €/kg, at which level hydrogen begins to
displace fossil fuels in many sectors around the world [14]. For context, Figure 2.5 shows
the costs of hydrogen production in Europe from various sources both in 2023 and the
forecast for 2030 for a scenario in which countries are able to achieve their announced
hydrogen production capacity pledges. As it can be seen, as of now, green hydrogen’s cost
of production is in the range of 4.8 to 8.5 €/kg in Europe. Grey hydrogen produced using
natural gas is much cheaper at around 2.2 to 3.0 €/kg, while blue hydrogen produced with
Carbon Capture Utilisation and Storage (CCUS) hovers between 3 to 3.4 €/kg. However,
IEA’s prediction for 2030 sees the price of green hydrogen produced via electrolysis
decrease significantly to as low as 2.5 €/kg when coupled with offshore wind, becoming
competitive with grey hydrogen and getting closer to the 2 €/kg threshold.
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.5: Levelised cost of hydrogen via selected technologies in Northwest Europe in the
Announced Pledges Scenario, 2023-2030. Taken from IEA [23]. CCUS stands for Carbon Caputre
Utilization and Storage.
2.4.3
Levelised cost of energy for Hydrogen
When first approaching the topic of this study, considerable diﬀiculties were encountered
when trying to assess how to combine electricity and hydrogen into a single levelised cost
metric. This was mainly due to the fact that, as previously mentioned, levelised cost of
hydrogen is traditionally expressed in terms of currency per kilogram (€/kg).
Converting this to currency per kilowatt-hour (€/kWh) provides a more direct compar-
ison with other energy sources such as electricity, and reflects the actual energy output
of hydrogen in its applications. In order to perform this conversion, the energy content
of hydrogen can be used. The key point to note is that the energy content of hydrogen
can be measured differently based on its usage. Therefore, it is essential to grasp the
concepts of Lower Heating Value (LHV) and Higher Heating Value (HHV) of hydrogen,
understand their applications, and recognize their importance in various hydrogen end
16
==PAGE:25==
uses.
Lower Heating Value vs. Higher Heating Value
The Lower Heating Value represents the amount of heat released during the combustion
of hydrogen, excluding the latent heat of vaporization of water. This value is approxi-
mately 120 MJ/kg or 33.33 kWh/kg for hydrogen [14]. On the other hand, the Higher
Heating Value includes the total heat released, including the latent heat of vaporization
of water, and is approximately 142 MJ/kg or 39.44 kWh/kg for hydrogen [14].
In specific industrial processes where the complete recovery of heat, including water
vapor, is feasible, the higher heating value is often utilised. In general, this makes it
suitable for applications where all potential energy can be harnessed, such as in certain
high-eﬀiciency industrial systems.
On the other hand, the lower heating value is preferred for most practical applications
where the latent heat of vaporization is not recovered. This includes internal combustion
engines, fuel cells, and various energy conversion technologies where water remains in its
vapor form. LHV provides a more realistic measure of the usable energy content under
these conditions, reflecting the actual energy that can be converted into work without
the recovery of water vapor’s latent heat.
Given its practical relevance, LHV can be seen as a better candidate for calculating the
levelised Cost of Energy of hydrogen. This approach aligns with the operational realities
of energy conversion technologies, ensuring that eﬀiciency assessments and economic
models accurately reflect the usable energy available in real-world applications.
17
==PAGE:26==
3
Methodology
In order to tackle the objectives and research questions outlined in section 1.2, a mathe-
matical model was developed and built into Python. The model is able to determine the
hydrogen and electricity export of an hybrid offshore wind farm as well as its CAPEX
and OPEX under different configurations, thus allowing for the calculation of its lev-
elised costs under different metrics. This chapter provides an in-depth explanation of
the components and elements considered in the model, as well as the methodologies
employed for their representation.
3.1
Layout Development
As mentioned, the three electrolyser placement layouts discussed in subsection 2.3.1
were developed into the model. These will be referred to as ”Centralized” (Figure 3.1),
”Turbine” (Figure 3.2) and ”Onshore” (Figure 3.3). Here, a brief overview of the logic
of each configuration is provided, whilst the following sections will focus more on the
operating parameters and principles of each component.
Centralized Layout
In this layout, the hydrogen production equipment, which includes the electrolyzers,
water treatment system and compressor is centralized on the offshore platform, which
also serves as a substation.
In practice, this means that total energy produced by
each turbines is sent to the platform via alternating current (AC) array cables. Once
it reaches the platform, a certain share of the electricity, which is further detailed in
subsection 3.2.2, is used to power the hydrogen production equipment after being trans-
formed to direct current (DC) by a converter. The remaining electricity is sent to shore
via a high-voltage transmission system. This can be either HVAC or HVDC, and the
choice will impact both the costs and energy losses of the electricity export to shore. As
for the hydrogen, it is compressed and then sent to shore via pipeline.
18
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.1: Simplified visual representation of Centralized layout. Hydrogen production equip-
ment is located on the offshore platform. All energy produced by the turbines is sent to the
platform via AC cables. There, part of the electricity is converted to DC to power the hydrogen
production equipment, while the rest is sent to shore via a high-voltage transmission system
(HVAC or HVDC). The hydrogen is compressed and sent to shore through a pipeline.
Turbine Layout
In the turbine layout, an electrolyser and its relative water treatment system are placed
on each turbine, while the compressor is still centralized on the offshore platform. The
design choice is further explained in subsubsection 3.2.2. Depending on the size of the
electrolyser, a portion of the electricity produced by the turbine is converted from AC to
DC and then used to power its respective water treatment system and electrolyser. From
here, array pipelines are introduced to allow for hydrogen to be sent to the centralized
compressor, where it follows the same steps as in the centralized layout. The portion
of electricity produced by each turbine that is not devoted to hydrogen production is
sent to the offshore substation through AC array cables, where again it follows the same
process as the centralized layout, being sent to shore via high voltage cables.
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.2: Simplified visual representation of Turbine layout. Each turbine has its own elec-
trolyser and water treatment system. A centralized offshore platform houses the compressor.
Hydrogen is sent via array pipelines to the central compressor. Remaining electricity is sent to
the offshore substation and then to shore through high voltage cables.
Onshore Layout
The onshore layout sees significant changes compared to the two discussed before. In
essence, it is composed of a ”classic” offshore wind farm, where the energy is sent to shore
via either an HVAC or HVDC system and the energy split between hydrogen production
and electricity export is done on shore. Here, similarly to the Centralized layout, both
the electrolyser and the water treatment are concentrated into a single unit. An onshore
compressor is still required to bring the produced hydrogen to the appropriate export
pressure.
20
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.3: Simplified visual representation of Onshore layout. Energy generated by the wind
turbines is sent to shore using an HVAC or HVDC system, where it is then split between hydrogen
production and electricity export. Both the electrolyser and water treatment are combined into
one unit.
An onshore compressor is included to bring the hydrogen to the required export
pressure.
3.2
Production process
One of the key parameters to be taken into account when calculating the levelised costs of
an energy project is its production over the lifetime. In this section, the methodology for
the modelling of both hydrogen and electricity export of a hybrid offshore wind project
is presented.
Throughout this section, a differentiation of the energy flows between the three consid-
ered layouts, as discussed in section 3.1, is often made. For better clarity and to allow for
an easier understanding of the production under the different configurations, Figure 3.4
has been included. These diagrams showing the flow of energy, hydrogen and losses for
the three layouts, along with the components power ratings. Nomenclature follows the
same one used throughout the rest of the section.
Please note that the power ratings for the Water Desalination System, Compressor, and
Electricity Transmission Components are utilised in the CAPEX and OPEX calculations.
These ratings are determined as the maximum energy passing through each component,
based on the following equation:
Pcomponent = max (Ecomponent(t))
∀t
(3.1)
21
==PAGE:30==
(a) Centralized layout
(b) Turbine layout
(c) Onshore layout
Figure 3.4: Diagrams for Centralized (a), Turbine (b) and Onhsore (c) layouts showing the flow
of energy (in yellow), hydrogen (in cyan) and losses (in red). Components power ratings are also
included. Nomenclature follows the same one used throughout the Methodology section. Note
that due to space constraints, only a few turbines (WTG) have been represented.
22
==PAGE:31==
3.2.1
Wind Power Generation
The project location’s hourly wind speed data is taken as input by the model. If possible,
this data should encompass multiple years in order to provide a better representation of
the wind profile over project’s lifetime of n years. In case this is not possible, the model
replicates input data for the whole period. The wind speed profile is then interpolated
with the chosen wind turbine model’s power curve to obtain the energy production of
a single turbine, taking into account the cut-in and cut-off wind speeds, also taken as
inputs by the model.
Subsequently, the turbine’s energy production Eturbine in MWh is multiplied by the
number of turbines nturbines to approximate the wind farm’s hourly production profile
Efarm. It should be mentioned that this method is only a rough approximation of a
wind farm’s output, as other factors such as wake effect would have an impact on the
overall production. However, these largely depend on the OWF’s layout and can be
considered to be outside of the scope of this analysis, which is more focused on the
economic viability of hydrogen integration. For this reason, the wake loss is taken into
account by multiplying the farm’s energy production by the term (1−wloss), where wloss
is the percentage of production that is lost due to wake effect.
The total energy production from the turbines can thus be calculated as:
Efarm(t) = Eturbine(t) · nturbines · (1 −wloss)
(3.2)
3.2.2
Hydrogen Split
A key concept in the methodology of this study is that the project is considered hydrogen-
driven. This means that the energy produced by the wind turbines is first used to power
the electrolyser system, which has a total capacity of Pelec,tot. Any excess energy beyond
this requirement is then exported to the grid as electricity. Therefore, at any given hour
t, the system prioritizes meeting the capacity needs of the hydrogen production system
with wind energy, and only the surplus energy, if available, is exported as electricity.
Pelec,tot is calculated using Equation 3.3, where the parameter SplitH2 is introduced.
This ranges from 0% to 100% and is considered as an input to the model that can
be changed by the user. In essence, SplitH2 determines the total electrolyser capacity
as a percentage of the total wind farm power rating Pfarm.
For example, if a 1000
MW windfarm is considered, a value of SplitH2 = 40% means that the total installed
electrolyser capacity amounts to 400 MW.
Pelec,tot = SplitH2 · Pfarm
(3.3)
Due to the discussed hydrogen-driven nature of the project, the electric energy Eelec
that is used to power the electrolyzers, is calculated using the following equations, which
vary depending on which layout is taken into consideration. It is to be noted that the
term min(x, y) is introduced to ensure that the energy sent to hydrogen production also
23
==PAGE:32==
covers the operation of the water treatment system and compressor, which themselves
depend on the amount of hydrogen being produced, as discussed in subsubsection 3.2.2
and subsubsection 3.2.2:
Eelec,centralyzed(t) = min (Pelec,tot · ∆t, Efarm(t) −Eloss,array(t) −Ewts(t) −Ecomp(t))
(3.4)
Eelec,turbine,tot(t) =
nturbines
∑
i=1
Eelec,turbine,i =
nturbines
∑
i=1
min (Pelec,i · ∆t, Eturbine,i(t) −Edes,i(t) −Ecomp,i(t))
(3.5)
Eelec,onshore(t) = min (Pelec,tot · ∆t, Efarm(t) −Eloss,array)−Eloss,export(t)−Ewts(t)−Ecomp(t)
(3.6)
Pelec,i, in Equation 3.5, is the nominal capacity of the electrolyser installed on a single
turbine in MW; Eloss,array(t) and Eloss,export(t) are, respectively, the energy lost in the
array and export cables in MWh, calculated in section 3.3; Ewts is the energy required
by the water desalination and purification system; Ecomp is the energy required by the
compressor installed on the centralized platform to pressurize the hydrogen for export
via pipeline to shore. Both Ewts and Ecomp are in MWh depend on the amount of
hydrogen produced, as discussed in subsubsection 3.2.2 and subsubsection 3.2.2. From
Equation 3.5, it can be observed how the array losses are not taken into account in
Eelec,turbine(t), as each electrolyser is placed directly at the turbine. In addition, for the
turbine layout, since the compressor is located on the centralized platform, the term
Ecomp,i(t) is introduced to ensure that each turbine contributes equally to its energy
requirement, and is calculated as:
Ecomp,i(t) = Ecomp(t)
nturbines
(3.7)
Overall, for the three layouts, the energy Eptx used to power the hydrogen production
system, can be expressed as:
Eptx(t) = Eelec(t) + Ewts(t) + Ecomp(t)
(3.8)
As mentioned, Ewts(t) and Ecomp(t) will be calculated in sections 3.2.2 and 3.2.2, re-
spectively.
24
==PAGE:33==
Electrolyser Parameters
To evaluate the viability of the three technologies for green hydrogen production in
conjunction with offshore wind, they were modeled using the parameters outlined in
Table 3.1, which are presented along with their respective sources.
The selection of
these parameters follows the literature review conducted in subsection 2.1.1. It should
be mentioned that, due to the amount of different values presented in literature and
the rapid development of electrolysis technologies, a comprehensive sensitivity analy-
sis on the three technologies was conducted and is presented as part of the results in
subsection 5.2.3.
Table 3.1: Electrolyser system operational parameters for alkaline (AEL), proton exchange mem-
brane (PEM), and solid oxide electrolyser (SOEL).
Parameter
AEL
PEM
SOEL
Refs.
electrolyser cost, Celec [€/kW]
550
600
600
[24]
Installation factor, IF [%]
0.27
0.33
0.63
[24]
Stack replacement cost, CSR [€/kW]
420
525
525
[24]
Operating pressure, pelec [bar]
30
55
5
[8, 24]
Operating temperature, Telec [◦C]
80
85
675
[8, 24]
System electrical eﬀiciency ηelec,0 [%]
64
60
82
[24]
Stack operating time, OHmax [h]
70,000
55,000
21,250
[8]
Degradation, ηdeg [%/1,000 h]
0.10
0.10
0.50
[24, 25]
Plant footprint, AH2 [m2/GW]
25,000
10,000
30,000
[8]
Weight, melec [kg/MW]
8,500
7,000
7,000
[26]
electrolyser production
Using the parameters from Table 3.1, the amount of hydrogen produced using electricity
supplied by the wind farm on an hourly basis, ˙mH2, is estimated using Equation 3.9 in
kg/h:
˙mH2(t) = Eelec(t)
LHVH2
ηelec(t)
(3.9)
Where LHVH2 is the lower heating value of hydrogen, equal to 33.33 kWh/kg. ηelec(t)
is the eﬀiciency of the electrolyser at the hour t, which is also technology dependent and
is calculated as [24]:
ηelec(t + 1) = ηelec(t) ·
(
1 −ηdeg
1000
)
(3.10)
Where ηdeg is the rate of eﬀiciency degradation with ηelec(t = 0) = ηelec,0. Where ηelec,0
is the nominal eﬀiciency of the electrolyser technology (Table 3.1). This means that it
25
==PAGE:34==
is assumed that the stack eﬀiciency is a assumed to decrease linearly over time, with a
different rate for each technology.
Water Treatment
A water treatment system is only necessary for the two offshore layouts, as in the case
of onshore layout, fresh water is purchased from the grid and is treated as an operating
cost in section 3.5. This is due to the fact that purchasing fresh water is cheaper than
the desalination process, and is therefore convenient if the hydrogen production plant
is located onshore [27]. As for the two offshore layouts (Centralized and Turbine), the
water used as feed stock to the electrolyser system is taken directly from the sea and is
purified through a desalination system. In this study, the water treatment is assumed
to be conducted via reverse osmosis and the energy needed is expressed as [24]:
Ewts(t) = ˙VH2O(t) · Ewts · 10−6
(3.11)
Where Ewts is the energy required by the water treatment system per cubic meter of
processed seawater, assumed to be 3.5 kWh/m3 [28]. ˙VH2O(t) is the nominal volumetric
flow rate of the desalination unit in m3/h, calculated as:
˙VH2O(t) = ˙mH2(t) · Wdes · 10−3
(3.12)
Where Wdes is the water consumption for each kilogram of hydrogen produced, assumed
to be 15 l of water per kilogram of hydrogen [24].
Hydrogen Pipelines
As previously mentioned, pipelines have been selected as the only method of hydrogen
export to shore in this analysis. The model assumes that, once it reaches shore, hydrogen
is directly fed into a high-pressure gas network, thus eliminating the need for storage.
The pressure at which this gas network operates can be chosen as input and represents
the pressure at the export pipeline outlet, pexport,out. As a base case, the model assumes
pexport,out = 70 bar, which represents the typical pressure at which High Pressure (HP)
pipelines in the UK are maintained [29]. In addition, the flow velocity v of hydrogen
inside the export pipeline is assumed to be 10 m/s [4], while the maximum allowable
operating pressure (MAOP) is set at 160 bar [4]. A central compressor system is used
to increase the pressure of the produced hydrogen to allow for a higher rate of export to
shore.
In the Turbine layout, array pipelines are also implemented to transport the hydrogen
produced at each turbine to the central offshore platform. Due to the shorter distance,
array pipelines can operate at pressures as low as 30 bar [26], which is lower than the
operating pressures of the selected AEL and PEM electrolyser technologies (Table 3.1).
Therefore, it is assumed that the hydrogen produced at the turbines is directly sent
through the array pipelines to the central offshore substation, where, similarly to the
Centralized layout, it will be compressed by a singular compressor prior to entering the
26
==PAGE:35==
export pipeline.
In the case of SOEL electrolyser technology, the pressure at which
hydrogen is produced is only 5 bar (Table 3.1). Thus, if SOEL electrolyzers are placed
at each turbine, compressors will also need to be installed on the turbines to allow the
hydrogen to be transported through the array pipes.
Compared to the already existing gas network and the possibility of hydrogen blend
discussed in section 2.2, where existing pipeline materials are assumed to be adopted, the
transmission pipeline from the offshore platform to shore has to be built using materials
for 100% hydrogen piping. In that respect, polyethylene (PE) can be considered to be a
good candidate, since it can be extruded and can also withstand 100% hydrogen, avoiding
embrittlement issues [18]. However, these PE pipelines still present hydrogen losses due
to diffusion, which are estimated to be around 483 kg/(kmyear) for the outlined export
pipeline operating conditions [30].
Since the consulted literature only provides a yearly value of hydrogen losses through a
pipeline, a method was developed to distribute the yearly hydrogen losses proportion-
ally to the hourly mass flow rate profile to obtain the hourly hydrogen pipeline losses
˙mH2,loss(t) in kg/h, and can be found in subsection A.1.1 of the appendix.
The hydrogen that is effectively exported to the gas network was thus modelled to take
these losses into account when considering the two offshore layouts. As for the Onshore
layout, it corresponds with the hydrogen produced:
˙mcentralized
H2,export (t) = ˙mH2(t) −˙mH2,loss(t)
(3.13)
˙mturbine
H2,export(t) = ˙mH2(t) −˙mH2,loss(t)
(3.14)
˙monshore
H2,export(t) = ˙mH2(t)
(3.15)
Where ˙mH2(t) is the hydrogen produced by the combined electrolysers in each layout.
Compressor
In order for the hydrogen to be transported over long distances via pipeline and to then
be fed into the gas network, it needs to be compressed to higher pressures than the
operating conditions of each electrolyser technology (Table 3.1). In case of the onshore
layout, the a compressor is placed on shore and is needed to make the pressure of the
produced hydrogen match the 70 bars of the gas network.
Regardless of the layout, the energy requirement Ecomp(t) for every compressor place-
ment in MWh is calculated using the formula for adiabatic compression [31]:
Ecomp(t) =286.76 · ˙mH2(t) · Tmean
ηcomp · GH2 · 3.6 · 109 ·
(γ · NST
γ −1
)
·
[(pcomp,out
pcomp,in
)
γ−1
γ·NST −1
]
· ∆t
(3.16)
27
==PAGE:36==
Where ηcomp is the compression eﬀiciency, assumed to be 50% [24] due to frequent load
variations; γ is the ratio between the specific heat capacities for hydrogen (γ = cp/cv);
NST is the number of compression stages, for simplicity assumed as 1; GH2 is the gas
gravity of the hydrogen, 0.0696, defined as the molar mass of hydrogen divided by the
molar mass of air; Tmean is the mean temperature, assumed to be 285.15 K.
The compressor’s input pressure pcomp,in is determined by the layout that is chosen,
along with the outlet pressure pcomp,out as shown in Table 3.2. For the Centralized and
Onshore layouts, pcomp,in = pelec, which is the operating pressure of the electrolyser.
For the turbine layout the hydrogen has to travel through the array pipelines before
reaching the compressor, therefore pcomp,in = parray,out, which is the pressure at the
end of the array pipelines and is calculated in subsection 3.2.3. As for the compressor’s
outlet pressure, it is equal to the 70 bars of the high-pressure gas network discussed
in subsubsection 3.2.2 for the Onshore layout, while for the Centralized and Turbine
layouts the pressure loss along the pipelines has to be considered. Therefore for these
configurations pcomp,out = pexport,in, which is the needed inlet pressure of the export
pipeline, also calculated in subsection 3.2.3.
Inlet pressure pcomp,in
Outlet pressure pcomp,out
Centralized
pelec
pexport,in
Turbine
parray,out
pexport,in
Onshore
pelec
70 bar
Table 3.2: Compressor inlet and outlet pressures depending on layout.
3.2.3
Calculation of Pressure Drop
The pressure drop in the hydrogen pipelines is essential for determining the pressure
pcomp,out at which the hydrogen should be brought to by the compressor and, in the case
of the turbine layout, at which pressure parray,out the hydrogen enters the compressor
after travelling through the array pipelines. This section aims at detailing the process
through which the pressure drop is modelled.
Hydrogen Properties
Given the temperature (Telec) and pressure (pelec) at which hydrogen is produced, it
is possible to calculate the density and dynamic viscosity of hydrogen. The density of
hydrogen ρH2 in kg/m3 can be calculated using the ideal gas law:
ρH2 =
pelec
R · Telec
(3.17)
where pelec is the production pressure of hydrogen in bar, R is the gas constant and Telec
is the production temperature of hydrogen in K. Both of these parameters depend on
which electrolysis technology is chosen, as shown in Table 3.1.
28
==PAGE:37==
The dynamic viscosity of hydrogen µH2 can be calculated using Sutherland’s formula in
kg/m/s:
µH2 = µ0
( Telec
Tmean
)3/2 Tmean + S
Telec + S
(3.18)
where µ0 is the reference dynamic viscosity, Tmean is the reference temperature in K,
and S is the Sutherland constant for hydrogen, equal to 72 K.
Flow Rate and Velocity
To calculate the pipeline diameter, the volumetric flow rate ( ˙QH2) and the given flow
velocity (v) are used. The volumetric flow rate in m3/s used for these calculations is
derived from the mass flow rate as:
˙QH2 = max( ˙mH2(t))
3600 · ρH2
(3.19)
Where, for safety, the term max( ˙mH2(t)) represents the maximum mass flow rate over
the considered period in kg/h. The volumetric flow rate is itself related to the cross-
sectional area (A) and the flow velocity by the equation:
˙QH2 = Apipe · v
(3.20)
where ˙QH2 is the volumetric flow rate, Apipe is the cross-sectional area of the pipeline in
m2, and v is the flow velocity, assumed equal to 10 m/s [4].
Pipeline Diameter
The cross-sectional area Apipe can be expressed in terms of the pipeline diameter Dpipe
for a circular pipeline as follows:
Apipe =
πD2
pipe
4
(3.21)
By substituting the area formula into the flow rate equation, the diameter Dpipe in m is
obtained as:
Dpipe = 2
√
Apipe
π
(3.22)
29
==PAGE:38==
Pressure Drop
The pressure drop in the pipeline is estimated using the Darcy-Weisbach equation:
∆Ppipe = f ·
L
Dpipe
· ρv2
2
(3.23)
where ∆Ppipe is the pressure drop across the pipeline in bar, f is the dimensionless Darcy
friction factor, L is the length of the pipeline in m, Dpipe is the diameter of the pipeline
in m, ρH2 is the density of hydrogen from Equation 3.17 and v is the flow velocity.
To find the friction factor f, the Colebrook-White equation for turbulent flow is used:
1
√f = −2 log
(ϵ/Dpipe
3.7
+ 2.51
Re√f
)
(3.24)
where ϵ is the roughness of the pipe, assumed equal to 1.56 × 10−6 m and Re is the
Reynolds number. The Reynolds number Re is calculated by:
Re = ρvDpipe
µH2
(3.25)
where µH2 is the dynamic viscosity of hydrogen, calculated in Equation 3.18.
∆P can then be used to calculate the pressure pexport,in at which hydrogen should be
brought to at the inlet of the export pipeline, which corresponds with pcomp,out:
pexport,in = pcomp,out = pexport,out + ∆Pexport
(3.26)
Likewise, Equation 3.23 can also be used in the turbine layout to calculate the pressure
parray,out at the exit of the array pipeline, which in this case corresponds with the inlet
pressure pcomp,in of the centralized compressor:
parray,in = pcomp,in = pelec −∆Parray
(3.27)
For validation purposes, the variation in pressure drop across the export pipeline with
changes in diameter is illustrated in Figure A.1 in Appendix A. As anticipated, the
pressure drop follows a logarithmic trend, decreasing as the pipeline diameter increases.
3.2.4
Electricity Split
The remaining electricity available for export in MWh at the offshore substation for the
three layouts can then be calculated as:
Esubstation,centralized(t) = Efarm(t) −Eloss,array(t) −Eptx,centralized(t)
(3.28)
30
==PAGE:39==
Esubstation,turbine(t) = Efarm(t) −Eloss,array(t) −
nturbines
∑
i=1
Eptx,turbine,i(t)
(3.29)
Esubstation,onshore(t) = Efarm(t) −Eloss,array(t)
(3.30)
Where Eloss,array(t) is the electricity loss of the array cables, calculated in subsec-
tion 3.3.1.
The electricity effectively exported to shore by the three layouts is then
calculated as:
Eshore(t) = Esubstation(t) −Eloss,HV (t)
(3.31)
Where Eloss,HV (t) is the energy lost in the high voltage export system (HVAC or HVDC)
in MWh, also calculated in section 3.3. For the two offshore layouts (centralized and
turbine), Eshore(t) is also the final electricity that is sold to the grid:
Eexport,centralized(t) = Eshore,centralized(t)
(3.32)
Eexport,turbine(t) = Eshore,turbine(t)
(3.33)
As for the onshore layout, a portion of Eshore(t) needs to be used for hydrogen produc-
tion. Thus, recalling the term Eptx,onshore from Equation 3.6, the electricity exported to
the grid can be calculated as:
Eexport,onshore(t) = Eshore,onshore(t) −Eptx,onshore(t)
(3.34)
3.3
Electricity Transmission losses
High voltage transmission losses depend on which export configuration is chosen between
HVAC and HVDC. In general, losses are assumed to originate from the high-voltage ex-
port cables and other transmission components such as transformers. The exact number
of cables and components depends on the case study and is detailed in subsubsection 4.2.
As for the array cable losses, both configurations assume that the array is made up of
66 kV AC cables. Here, a description of the two setups is provided, followed by the
calculations of cable and component losses.
High Voltage Alternating Current (HVAC)
In the HVAC setup, the turbines are linked to an offshore substation equipped with
50 Hz transformers to increase the voltage. The electricity is subsequently transmitted
via 230 kV HVAC cables. Reactive compensation, provided by shunt reactors, is used
to counteract the cable capacitance.
These reactors can be installed at the onshore
31
==PAGE:40==
substation, the offshore substation, or on a separate platform, contingent on the overall
cable length [19]. HVAC transmission losses in MWh can thus be calculated as:
Eloss,HV AC(t) = ntransEloss,trans(t) + nHV cabEloss,HV ACcable(t) + Eloss,shunt(t)
(3.35)
Where ntrans and nHV cab are, respectively, the number of transformers and export cables.
High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC)
In an HVDC export system, the voltage is increased at the substation using one or more
50 Hz transformers, followed by conversion to HVDC by a modular multilevel converter
(MMC). The electricity is then transmitted from the HVDC platform to shore through
HVDC cables rated at ±320 kV . At the onshore substation, another MMC is employed
before integrating the power into the network [19]. Losses for HVDC transmission are
calculated as:
Eloss,HV DC(t) = ntransEloss,trans(t)+nHV cabEloss,HV DCcable(t)+nMMCEloss,MMC(t)
[MWh]
(3.36)
Where nMMC is the number of MMC converters
3.3.1
Cable Losses
As mentioned, in this study, three types of cables are investigated and their parameters
are shown in Table 3.3. Array cables are considered to operate with alternatic current
and a voltage of 66 kV . High voltage cables, used for export, can be either HVAC or
HVDC. Regardless, the method for calculating the energy losses is shared between them,
with the only difference being the parameters values.
Inter-Array (AC)
HVAC
HVDC
Source
Voltage (kV)
66
230
320
[19]
Cross Section Area (mm2)
300
1200
1400
[19]
Length (km)
Larray
Lshore
Lshore
-
Table 3.3: Cable parameters and respective sources
Starting from the energy Ecable(t) flowing through the cable at a certain hour t, the
instantaneous power in MW, which is assumed to be constant for that hour, can be
found as:
Pcable = Ecable
3600s
(3.37)
From here, the current I flowing through the cable in A is calculated:
32
==PAGE:41==
I =
Pcable
Vcable · 1000
(3.38)
Where Vcable depends on which cable is being considered and is expressed in kV . Now,
to find the instantaneous power loss:
Ploss,cable = I2 · Rcable
[W]
(3.39)
Where the resistance Rcable is calculated assuming that the cable cores are made of
copper with resistivity ρ of 1.68 × 10−8 and length and area from Table 3.3. Finally, it
is now possible to obtain the energy losses on an hourly basis:
Eloss,cable(t) = Ploss,cable · 3600s
[Wh]
(3.40)
3.3.2
Component Losses
Losses of Transformers, MMC converters and Shunt reactor in MWh for each hour t are
calculates using the no-load and full-load loss values from Table 3.4 and Equation 3.41,
where Et and Pmax are, respectively, the energy at time t and the component’s power
rating [19].
Eloss,component(t) = NLL +
( Ecomponent(t)
Pmax,component
)2
· FLL
(3.41)
Component
NLL (%)
FLL (%)
Source
MMC converter
0.1
0.8
[32]
Transformer
0.055
0.3
[33]
Shunt reactor
0.055
0.3
[19]
Table 3.4: Component no-load and full-load losses, from [19]
3.4
CAPEX
The model calculates the project’s CAPEX via parametric equations in order to make
it viable for a variety of geographical locations and conditions. For a clearer view, the
CAPEX has been divided in three main sections: Wind Farm, Hydrogen System, Export
System. Therefore, the toal project’s capital expenditures can be written as:
CAPEXproject = CPD + CAPEXfarm + CAPEXH2 + CAPEXexport
(3.42)
Where CPD is the cost of project development, which includes expenses such as feasibility
studies, permitting, licensing, engineering costs and planning.
33
==PAGE:42==
In this analysis, cost equations were sourced from various studies that utilised data from
different base years. To ensure consistency and comparability, these cost formulas were
adjusted to account for the inflation of the euro, bringing all costs into nominal €2023
terms. This standardization process involved multiplying the original figures by appro-
priate inflation factors thereby ensuring that all cost estimates reflect current economic
conditions and provide a reliable basis for analysis. The inflation rates and factors used
in this study are shown in subsection A.1.3 in the Appendix.
3.4.1
Project Development
The cost of project development is diﬀicult to estimate due to the considerable degree
of variation from project to project. The Danish Energy Agency proposes the following
equation to determine CPD in M€ as a portion of the total CAPEX before the inclusion
of CPD itself, which is obtained from on a regression rate performed on a number of
projects in Europe [34]:
CPD = (−0.021∗ln (Pfarm) + 0.1804)∗CAPEXbeforeDC
(3.43)
3.4.2
Wind Farm
The windfarm CAPEX can be divided in sub-elements and calculated as follows:
CAPEXfarm = CTurbines + CFoundations + Carray
(3.44)
Where CTurbines is the total cost of the turbines, CFoundations is the cost of the turbines
foundations and Carray is the cost of the array cables.
Turbines
The cost of the turbines is given by the sum of their supply and installation cost:
CTurbines = SCTurbines + ICTurbines
(3.45)
The supplu cost SCTurbines is calculated using the following equation [35], while the
procedure for estimating the installation costs ICTurbines is more complex and for more
clarity of the main body of this study, is detailed in subsection A.1.4 in the appendix:
SCTurbines =
(
1.6 −
1.9
Pturbine
)
× (Pfarm)0.9984 , with Pturbine ≥2
(3.46)
Turbine Foundations
In order to ensure that the model could be used for a wide range of water depths, jacket
foundations are the only type of foundation that was taken into account. This represents
an important assumption to the model and was made for simplicity and time constraint.
34
==PAGE:43==
Similarly to the cost of turbines, the cost of the foundations is also composed of cost of
supply (SC) and cost of installation (IC), and is modelled as follows:
CFoundation = SCFoundation + ICFoundation
(3.47)
According to DNV’s study on offshore hydrogen production [26], the cost of jacket foun-
dations can be calculated from the sum of the costs of its three main components, these
being the working platform, the jacket itself and the piles used to anchor the jacket to
the seabed. The cost equations of the components are obtained from the mass of the
components themselves, and are shown in Table 3.5
SCFoundation = Cwp + Cjacket + Cpile
(3.48)
In the case of the electrolysis process being housed on each turbine, the design of the
turbine foundations is still conceptual. Therefore, DNV’s view was considered for the
model [26]. This design assumes the jacket working platform to be extended to allow
for placing electrolysis equipment, as shown in Figure 3.5. This variation in design was
taken into account in the mass formula of the working platform in Table 3.5, where AH2
represents the additonal space required if the hdyrogen production equipment is placed
on each turbine.
As for the foundations’ installation cost ICFoundations, like the installation cost of the
turbines, it is detailed in subsection A.1.4.
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.5: Main elements of an offshore turbine sub-structure Left: a ’conventional’ jacket
structure. Right: an extended structure for hydrogen production.
Component
Mass (M), in kg
COST (C), in €
Working
Plat-
form (WP)
(√
Pturbine
0.00031 × 0.0368 + 3 + AH2
)
× 0.25
MWP × 7500
Jacket
(0.0013 + Pturbine + 0.055) × WD
+ (0.1 × Pturbine + 6.3) × WD
+ (100 + Pturbine −237.5)
MJacket × 3400
Pile
(0.2826 × Pturbine −0.9476) × Pturbine
+ (6.9983 × Pturbine + 513.26)
MPile × 1500
Table 3.5: Mass and Cost Formulas for Foundation Components. Taken from [4].
Array Cables
Likewise, the cost of the array cables Carray results from the sum of supply and instal-
lation costs of the array cables [24]:
SCarray =
∑
i
LIG,i ·
[
94.94 · 10−3+ 86.2 · 10−3 · e
( 2.05·Pfarm
108
)
]
(3.49)
36
==PAGE:45==
ICarray =
∑
i
0.33 · LIG,i
(3.50)
Where LIG,i is the length and rated power of the i-th inter array cable in km.
3.4.3
Hydrogen Plant
Costs for the hydrogen production systems of offshore wind farms are still uncertain as
very few implementations have been realised. In addition, the complexity of installing
these systems offshore rather than on land has to be taken into account. For this reason,
the cost of the Electrolyzers (Celec), Water Treatment System (Cwts) and Compressor
(Ccomp) are considered as the sum of their supply and installation costs. The term OS
that appears in the installation costs equations is equal to 1 if the layout is Centralized
or Turbine and 0 if the layout is Onshore. This term is included to account for the
increased cost of installation in case the electrolyser system is installed offshore, which
according to [24] can be considered to be double that of an onshore installation.
Overall, the total CAPEX CAPEXH2 of the hydrogen production system can be found
as:
CAPEXH2 = Celec + Cwts + Ccomp
(3.51)
electrolyser
As mentioned, electrolyser costs are calculated as the sum of supply costs SCelec and
installation costs ICelec, both of which are expressed in € in Equations 3.53 and 3.54,
taken from [24]:
Celec = SCelec + ICelec
(3.52)
With
SCelec = Pelec · Celec · 1000
(3.53)
ICelec = SCelec · (1 + IF · OS) · 1000
(3.54)
Where Pelec is the capacity of the electrolyser in MW, Celec is the cost of the electrolyser
in €/kW and IF is the installation factor in %. Both Celec and IF depend on the chosen
electrolyser technology, as shown in Table 3.1.
The parameter OS is equal to 1 for the Centralized and Turbine layouts, and 0 for
the Onshore configuration. Essentially, this parameter is introduced by the source as
an approximation to account for the higher installation costs associated with placing
hydrogen equipment offshore.
37
==PAGE:46==
In addition, significant cost savings for electrolyzers can be achieved through economies
of scale. One common guideline for estimating these economies is known as the 0.6 rule,
which states that as size increases, the cost rises with an exponent of 0.6. However, in
an electrolyser plant, a substantial portion of costs are attributed to the stacks, which
do not benefit as much from scaling. Once the stack capacity is reached (typically a
few megawatts, depending on the manufacturer), further scaling involves adding more
stacks rather than benefiting from economies of scale.
Consequently, stacks do not
exhibit significant economies of scale beyond a few megawatts, whereas the Balance of
Plant (BoP) components do.
To evaluate the economies of scale for the entire electrolyser plant, including both stacks
and BoP, different scaling exponents should be applied. DNV analyzed data from man-
ufacturers and public sources to determine suitable scaling factors for both components.
They found that stack costs scale almost linearly, with a scaling factor of 0.95 providing
a good fit. For the BoP, a scaling factor of 0.75 was appropriate. These scaling factors
can be used to calculate cost advantages when scaling up, as outlined in Equation 3.55
and Equation 3.56, and should be applied to Celec of Equation 3.52. For this purpose,
the model assumes that the stacks cost account for 40% of Celec and the BoP for 60%,
as researched by DNV [26].
Scaling advantage stacks (%) = P 0.95
elec
Pelec
· 100
(3.55)
Scaling advantage stacks (%) = P 0.75
elec
Pelec
· 100
(3.56)
Water Treatment System
Similarly to the method used to estimate the cost of electrolyzers, the water treatment
CAPEX is calculated as:
Cwts = SCwtc + ICwts
(3.57)
Where SCwts and ICwts are, respectively, the supply cost and installation cost of the
water treatment system, taken from [26]. Again, the parameter OS is introduced to
account for the higher installation costs for the offshore layouts:
SCwts = 13000 × Pelec
(3.58)
ICwts = 0.1 × SCwts · (1 + OS)
(3.59)
Where Pelec is the electrolyser power rating in MW and both SCwts and ICwts are given
in €.
38
==PAGE:47==
Compressor
Finally, the compressor’s CAPEX is calculated as:
Ccomp = SCcomp + ICcomp
(3.60)
With SCcomp and ICcomp are given in euros as [36]:
SCcomp = 3000 × Pcomp
(3.61)
ICcomp = 0.1 × SCcomp · (1 + OS)
(3.62)
Where Pcomp is the rated power of the compressor in kW, which is considered to be the
maximum value of Ecomp(t) over the considered time period.
3.4.4
Electricity Export System
As mentioned the export system comprises of two parts: electricity export via high
voltage (HV) cables and hydrogen export via pipelines. To provide a more comprehensive
overview of the possible layouts, both HVAC and HVDC export configurations were
taken into account in this study and considered as an input choice in the model.
Cost formulas for the electricity export were taken from [19], in which costs are given
in €2021. Therefore, the appropriate inflation index was taken into account to obtain
values in €2023. Again, information about inflation rates and indexes can be found in
subsection A.1.3 in the Appendix.
HVAC vs HVDC
In the the HVAC layout, wind turbines are connected in parallel strings using 66 kV
AC cables. These strings are then linked to an offshore substation equipped with 50 Hz
transformers to increase the voltage. Electricity is then transmitted to shore via 230
kV HVAC cables. To counteract the cable capacitance, reactive compensation through
shunt reactors is employed. These reactors can be situated at the onshore substation,
the offshore substation, or on a separate platform [19]. In this study, shunt reactors were
placed on the offshore substation, allowing for compensation of reactive power close to
the generation source, reducing the amount of reactive power transmitted over long dis-
tances.
The HVDC design shares the same collector system with the HVAC configuration, where
the voltage is increased using one or more 50 Hz transformers before being converted to
HVDC through a modular multilevel converter (MMC), housed on an HVDC platform.
The power is then transmitted from the HVDC platform to shore via HVDC cables rated
at ±320 kV. Finally, a second MMC is located onshore.
Therefore, the CAPEX of the two configurations is calculated as follows:
39
==PAGE:48==
CAPEXHV AC = ntransCtrans + nHV cabCHV cab + nshuntCshunt + nsubCsub
(3.63)
CAPEXHV DC = ntransCtrans + nHV cabCHV cab + nMMCCMMC + nsubCsub
(3.64)
Where ntrans, nHV cab, nshunt, nsub and nMMC are the number of transformers, export ca-
bles, shunt reactors, modular multilever converters and substations, respectively. Ctrans,
CHV cab, Cshunt, Csub and CMMC are their respective costs.
Cables Cost
For both designs, the median cost of HV cables can be calculated using the following
equation [19]:
CHV cab = 1.452 ·
(
A · P 2
cab + B · Pcab + C + D
)
· Lcable
(3.65)
Where CHV cab the cost of the transmission cable in M€,Pcab is the power rating of the
cable, Lcable is its length. The dimensionless parameters A,B,C,D differ between HVAC
and HVDC and are shown in Table 3.6.
Table 3.6: Cost parameters used in Equation 3.65 for HV cables
Parameter
HVAC
HVDC
A
5.05 × 10−6
1.31 × 10−7
B
−1.32 × 10−3
1.47 × 10−4
C
0.43
0.29
D
0.79
0.85
Electrical Components Cost
The cost of a single transformer in M€ is given by [19]:
Ctrans = 1.1495 ·
(
0.0427 · (Ptrans)0.7513)
(3.66)
Where Ptrans is the power rating of the trasformer in MVA. For the HVAC layout, the
cost shunt reactor in M€ is considered in Equation 3.67 [19]:
Cshunt = 1.452 · (0.0177 · Qshunt + 0.96)
(3.67)
Where Qshunt is the reactive compensation that the shunt reactor needs to provide in
MVAr, which is calculated as:
40
==PAGE:49==
Qshunt = V 2
HV AC · ωCLHV cab
(3.68)
Where VHV AC is the voltage of the HVAC cable in kV, ω is the angular frequency
(ω = 2πf, with f = 50Hz) and LHV cab is the length of the export cable.
For the HVDC design, the cost of the high power converter (MMC) in M€ is calculated
using the equation
CMMC = 0.1437 · PMMC
(3.69)
Where the power rating PMMC of the converter is expressed in MW.
Substation Platform
As for the offshore substation platform, it is considered to be split in three main com-
ponents: Topside, Jacket and Piles, as shown in Figure 3.6. Consequently, its cost is
calculated as the sum of the costs of these components:
CPlatform = CPlatform
Topside
+ CPlatform
Jacket
+ CPlatform
Piles
(3.70)
Figure 3.6: Main elements of an offshore substation platform with jacket foundation.
41
==PAGE:50==
Similarly to the turbines foundations, the cost formulas for CPlatform
Topside
, CPlatform
Jacket
and
CPlatform
Piles
are also based on mass and are shown in Table 3.7.
Component
Mass (M) in tonnes
COST (C) in €
Topside
MPlatform
Topside
MPlatform
Topside
× 7500
Jacket
WD × 1.7 × (MPlatform
Topside
)0.4557
MPlatform
Jacket
× 3400
Piles
-
0.0235 × (MPlatform
Jacket
+
MPlatform
Topside
+534)×1500
Table 3.7: Mass and Cost Formulas for Substation Components according to DNV [26]
.
In Table 3.7, the topside mass MPlatform
Topside
depends on which layout is chosen. For the
Onshore layout, the topside mass in tonnes is simply given by the electric components
needed for electricity export and is approximated with [26]:
MOnshore
Topside = 865 ∗PTurbine
1000
(3.71)
Where Pturbine is expressed in MW. As for the other two layouts, the topside mass also
includes the mass of the entire hydrogen plant (electrolyser, water treatment system,
compressor) for the Centralized layout, and of the compressor for the Turbine layout
[26]:
MCentralized
Topside
= 865 ∗PTurbine
1000
+ Melec + Mwts + Mcompressor
(3.72)
MTurbine
Topside = 865 ∗PTurbine
1000
+ Mcompressor
(3.73)
where Melec, Mwts and Mcompressor are the masses of electrolyser, water treatment system
and compressor in tonnes, calculated in Table A.3 in the Appendix.
3.4.5
Hydrogen Pipelines
As mentioned, the model allows for hydrogen to be exported to shore via pipeline.
The pipeline cost depends on the hydrogen mass flow rate ˙mH2 and velocity v and is
calculated using [35]
Cpipe =
(
16, 000max( ˙mH2)
ρH2vπ
+ 1, 197.2
√
max( ˙mH2)
ρH2vπ
+ 329
)
· Lpipe
(3.74)
42
==PAGE:51==
Where max( ˙mH2) is the maximum electrolyser production rate over the considered pe-
riod in kg/s, v is the average fluid velocity and ρH2 is the density of hydrogen, both of
which were already introduced and discussed in subsection 3.2.3. Finally, Lpipe is the
length of the export pipeline.
The same process is used for the export pipelines, which are present in both Centralized
and Turbine layouts, and for the array pipelines, which are exclusive to the Turbine
layout (Figure 3.2). The difference being the value of ˙mH2 flowing through the pipeline
and the length Lpipe.
3.5
OPEX
Maintaining offshore assets presents unique challenges due to the increased diﬀiculty
in accessing them compared to onshore locations. Offshore operations and maintenance
(O&M) require specialised vessels to reach the assets, resulting in longer transit times and
necessitating extensive crew training. Additionally, adverse weather conditions further
complicate these efforts. When estimating O&M costs, it is crucial to factor in these
challenges as well as develop an effective O&M strategy. However, such a strategy for
offshore hydrogen production has not yet been formulated, as the concept remains in
its early stages. The implementation of electrolysers offshore is still under development,
requiring further research and optimization.
The increased O&M costs might lead to design modifications of the electrolyser to min-
imize maintenance needs, potentially raising capital expenditures (CAPEX). Currently,
typical electrolyser maintenance involves inspections on a weekly to monthly basis and
scheduled maintenance every six months to a year. Advances in this field could reduce
the inspection and maintenance frequency to once a year, thereby lowering O&M costs.
However, more operational experience with the latest generation of electrolysers, par-
ticularly those directly connected to wind power, is necessary to evaluate the need for
corrective maintenance.
An effective O&M strategy should also consider whether the offshore asset will be
manned or unmanned, a factor that impacts both cost and safety.
This considera-
tion is particularly important for centralized hydrogen production on a platform.
A
significant advantage lies in the potential synergies between the O&M of the wind farm
and the electrolyser, allowing for combined maintenance campaigns, especially in an
integrated setup.
Nonetheless, offshore maintenance of electrolysers remains an area
requiring further research to provide detailed and accurate cost estimates [26].
In this study, the literature reviewed frequently provided estimates for the operational
expenditures of the project’s components as percentages of their respective CAPEX.
To account for the added complexity of O&M operations offshore, the parameter OS
is again applied to the hydrogen system components. The OPEX values (in M€/year)
for the various project components, along with their respective sources, are detailed in
Table 3.8.
43
==PAGE:52==
electrolyser OPEX
An exception is made to calculate the OPEX of the electrolyser system, as it involves
more complex operational expenses such as the stack replacement cost.
The model
calculates the electrolyser total OPEX in M€/year as:
OPEXelec = OPEXelec,EQ + OPEXelec,SR + OPEXelec,FAC
(3.75)
In this equation, OPEXelec,EQ is the cost for planned and unplanned maintenance ac-
cording to [24, 37] and OPEXelec,FAC covers the other operational expenditure related
to the facility level [24, 38], given by:
OPEXelec,EQ = CAPEXelec · (1 −IF · (1 + OS)) · 3.44% ·
(
Pelec · 103)−0.155
(3.76)
OPEXelec,FAC = 4% · CAPEXelec · (1 −IF · (1 + OS))
(3.77)
Lastly, OPEXelec,SR is the cost concurred when the stacks need to be replaced. For
simplicity, the electrolyser is assumed to always be on and the cost of replacement is
assumed to be paid only in the year in which the stacks are replaced, which depends on
the stack’s operating hours OH shown in Table 3.1 and is calculated as:
LTstack,years =
OHmax[h]
8760[h/year]
[years]
(3.78)
OPEXelec,SR,y = CSR [€/kW]·Pelec [kW]
∀y ∈{1, . . . , N}
if
y
mod LTstack,years = 0
(3.79)
Where OPEXelec,SR,y is the OPEX coming from the stack replacement in the year y,
LTstack,years is the lifetime of the technology in years and CSR is the stack replacement
cost in €/kW (As shown in Table 3.1).
44
==PAGE:53==
Table 3.8: Operational Expenditure (OPEX) of Different Components, expressed in M€/year,
along with their respective sources.
OPEX Parameter (M€/year)
Value
Source
Turbines
0.019 · CAPEXTurbines
[34]
Array
0.002 · CAPEXArray
[39]
electrolyser
OPEXelec,EQ + OPEXelec,SR + OPEXelec,FAC
[40]
WTC
0.025 · CAPEXwtc · (1+OS)
[41]
Compressor
0.04 · CAPEXCompressor · (1+OS)
[42]
Array Pipe
0.02 · CAPEXArray Pipe
[41]
Platform
0.02 · CAPEXPlatform
[19]
Transformers
0.0015 · CAPEXTransformers
[19]
Shunt
0.0015 · CAPEXShunt
[19]
Export Cables
0.025 · CAPEXExport Cables
[19]
MMC Offshore
0.02 · CAPEXMMC Offshore
[19]
MMC Onshore
0.007 · CAPEXMMC Onshore
[19]
Export Pipe
0.02 · CAPEXExport Pipe
[41]
3.6
levelised Costs
Analysis of the levelised costs is considered to be the main focus of this study.
To
provide a better context of the availability of the project, the model is able to calculate
four different types of levelised costs. The first two, being LCoE and LCoH, are a well
established methodology and have been adopted multiple times in literature, as already
discussed in the Literature Review section of this study. As for the last two levelised
costs, wich will be discussed in sections 3.6.3 and 3.6.3, they have been implemented as
a way to combine the two outputs of a hybrid project, being electricity and hydrogen,
into a single metric.
3.6.1
LCoE
The levelised Cost of Electricity (LCoE), which was already discussed in subsection 2.4.1,
represents the per-unit cost in €/kWh of building and operating an electricity generating
plant over an assumed financial life and duty cycle. Starting from Equation 2.8, the
total costs TCy in the year y can be expressed as CAPEX + OPEXy. Furthermore, it
is assumed that the initial capital investment costs (CAPEX) are incurred in the year
before production starts (year 0) while the operation and maintenance costs (OPEX)
vary each year depending on when the electrolyser stacks are replaced. Therefore the
LCoE can be expressed as:
LCoE =
CAPEX + ∑n
y=1
OPEXy
(1+r)y
∑n
y=1
Eexport,y
(1+r)y
[€/kWh]
(3.80)
45
==PAGE:54==
Where r is the discount rate, n is the operational lifespan of the project in years and
Eexport,y is the amount of electricity produced and exported by the project in year y in
kWh, calculated as:
Eexport,y =
Hy
∑
t=1
Eexport(t) · 1000
(3.81)
Where Eexport(t) was expressed in MWh, hence the correcting factor 1000. Hy represents
the hours in year y.
3.6.2
LCoH
The levelised Cost of Hydrogen is calculated in an analogous manner to LCoE, but per-
tains specifically to hydrogen production. Typically and in this study, LCoH is expressed
as the cost per kilogram of hydrogen, as this unit of measurement provides greater ver-
satility, reflecting hydrogen’s various potential applications. From Equation 2.9 , the
model calculates LCoH in €/kg as follows:
LCoH =
CAPEX + ∑n
y=1
OPEXy
(1+r)y
∑n
y=1
mH2,export,y
(1+r)y
[€/kg]
(3.82)
Where mH2,export,y is the mass of hydrogen exported in year y, calculated as:
mH2,export,y =
Hy
∑
t=1
˙mH2,export(t)
(3.83)
3.6.3
Combined LCoE, Thermal based
In the context of evaluating the economic viability of energy production for thermal
applications, particularly in industrial processes such as steel manufacturing, it is crucial
to account for both electricity and hydrogen as potential energy sources. The formula
for the combined levelised Cost of Electricity and Hydrogen for thermal applications
(LCoEthermal) provides a comprehensive metric to assess the cost-effectiveness of these
energy inputs.
The formula is as follows:
LCoEcombined
thermal
=
CAPEX + ∑n
y=1
OPEXy
(1+r)y
∑n
y=1
Eexport,y+mexport,H2,y·LHVH2
(1+r)y
[€/kWhThermal]
(3.84)
Where LHVH2 is the lower heating value of hydrogen, representing the energy content
per unit mass.
46
==PAGE:55==
This formula effectively combines the costs of generating electricity and hydrogen while
considering their end use in thermal applications. For instance, in electric furnaces used
for steel manufacturing, electricity can be directly applied with an assumed eﬀiciency of
100%. Conversely, hydrogen can be combusted, and its energy contribution is calculated
using its lower heating value (LHV), which quantifies the usable energy released during
combustion.
By incorporating both energy sources into a single cost metric, the formula allows for
a more nuanced evaluation of the overall economic feasibility of energy production for
industrial thermal applications.
This approach is particularly relevant for industries
looking to transition to cleaner energy sources, as it provides a clear comparison be-
tween traditional electricity usage and emerging hydrogen technologies. Additionally, it
helps in identifying the most cost-effective energy strategy, considering both capital and
operational expenditures, as well as the specific energy needs of the application.
3.6.4
Combined LCoE, Electricity based
The same reasoning can be applied when considering electric applications. This metric
would assume that hydrogen is converted to electricity via fuel cells, as it integrates the
eﬀiciency of the fuel cell into the cost evaluation.
The formula is as follows:
LCoEcombined
electrical =
CAPEX + ∑n
y=1
OPEXy
(1+r)y
∑n
y=1
Eexport,y+mexport,H2,y·LHVH2·ηfc
(1+r)y
[EUR/kWhElectrical]
(3.85)
Where ηfc is the eﬀiciency of the fuel cell.
This formula calculates the combined cost of generating electricity from both direct
electrical sources and hydrogen converted to electricity via fuel cells. The inclusion of
ηfc reflects the conversion eﬀiciency of hydrogen to electricity. Much like electrolysers,
fuel cell eﬀiciency depends on which technology is chosen. Literature lists fuel cells of
different types to have a combined eﬀiciency range of 40% to 80% [43]. For this study,
an average value of 60% is chosen.
While theoretically valuable, this approach has limitations in real-world applications.
The eﬀiciency of fuel cells can vary significantly, and their current high costs and infras-
tructure requirements may render this combined cost metric less relevant for immediate
implementation. Moreover, the integration of hydrogen fuel cells into existing electrical
grids and industrial processes remains a complex and costly endeavor.
For this reason, and also due to the fact that the difference with the thermal-based
combined levelised costs is simply the inclusion of ηfc, the electricity-based combine
levelised cost of energy will not be included in the results of the main body of this study.
Rather, refer to Appendix A for the results of LCoEcombined
electrical .
47
==PAGE:56==
4
Case Study
To provide a comprehensive demonstration of the model’s performance and outputs, a
case study was conducted using an existing offshore wind project as the foundation.
This approach allowed for benchmarking the model’s traditional wind farm component,
followed by the integration of the hydrogen production aspect to create a hybrid project.
To allow for more clarity in the results and easier comparisons between the graphs in the
results section, a base-case was developed. From this, further results and discussions arise
from changing the layout, technologies, and inputs taken by the model. The following
section details and motivates the base-case parameters associated with the case study,
which are also summarized in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Case study base-case input parameters
Parameter
Description
Value
Units
y0
Base year, project start-up
2024
-
n
Lifetime of the project
30
years
r
Discount rate
7.5
%
Pfarm
Wind farm capacity
1320
MW
Pturbine
Wind turbine power rating
15
MW
nturbine
Number of wind turbines
88
-
Lshore
Distance from the substation to shore
200
km
WD
Water Depth
30
m
vi
Turbine cut-in wind speed
11
m/s
vo
Turbine cut-off wind speed
31
m/s
HH
Hub Height
150
m
Lturbine
Distance between turbines of the same string
3.65
km
Lsub
Distance between strings and substation
3.65
km
Lstring
Length of cable for single string of turbines
29.21
km
Larray
Total array cable length
321.33
km
nsub
Number of offshore substations
1
-
Layout Choice
Centralized
-
electrolyser technology thoice
PEM
-
Export cable choice
HVDC
-
ncab,export
Number of export cables
3
-
4.1
Location Selection
The selection of the specific project for the case study was made in collaboration with
EDF.
48
==PAGE:57==
EDF typically conducts forecasts and cost analyses of future offshore projects by examin-
ing certain defined cases or project types. According to the company’s R&D department,
the most popular fixed-bottom project type, in terms of growth potential, has the fol-
lowing characteristics: a capacity of 1 GW, located in 35 meters deep soft soil, 125 km
from shore, with an average wind speed of 10.5 m/s at 100 meters hub height, utilizing
monopile or jacket foundations and HVDC transmission.
To maximize the value derived from the model for EDF and facilitate a more familiar
comparison of the results, sites with these characteristics were considered for the case
study. The identified sites that fit these criteria were Dogger Bank, East Anglia, and
Sofia. After careful consideration, the Dogger Bank site was chosen due to its advanced
development stage and comprehensive data availability from existing projects such as
Dogger Bank A, B, and C. This site provided an ideal basis for applying the model and
evaluating its performance in real-world scenarios, thereby demonstrating its practical
applicability and economic assessment capabilities.
Dogger Bank Location
Dogger Bank is a distinct sandbank in the central to southern North Sea, spanning
the waters of the UK, Germany, Denmark, and the Netherlands. Historical research
indicates that this area, once known as Doggerland, was a land bridge connecting the
UK to mainland Europe. It became an island due to rising sea levels after the last ice
age and was completely submerged between 8000 and 5500 years ago.
The Dogger Bank Offshore Development Zone, shown in Figure 4.1, covers approximately
8,660 square kilometers, located 125 to 290 kilometers off the Yorkshire coast, with
water depths ranging from 18 to 63 meters. The first phase, Dogger Bank A, is about
131 kilometers offshore and covers 515 square kilometers, with a planned generation
capacity of 1.2 gigawatts (GW). Dogger Bank A and B, together producing 2.4 GW, will
connect to the Creyke Beck substation near Cottingham in East Yorkshire via subsea
export cables, transitioning to underground cables north of Ulrome before reaching the
converter stations.
Dogger Bank C, also with a capacity of 1.2 GW, spans 560 square kilometers and lies 196
kilometers offshore. Its connection will be to the Lackenby Substation in Teesside. Upon
completion, Dogger Bank will significantly contribute to the UK’s renewable energy
capacity, supporting millions of homes with clean energy [44].
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.1
Dogger Bank D, the proposed fourth phase of the Dogger Bank Wind Farm, aims to
significantly enhance the UK’s renewable energy capacity by generating up to 1.32 gi-
gawatts (GW) of electricity and will be located within the boundaries of the Round 3
Zone of Figure 4.1 [44]. Initially, there were plans to direct some of this energy towards
onshore green hydrogen production. This option would have involved using the electric-
ity from the offshore wind farm to produce hydrogen at a dedicated electrolysis facility in
the Humber region, potentially making it the UK’s largest green hydrogen project [45].
However, following public consultation in autumn 2023, the decision was made to focus
solely on electrical transmission, retiring the hydrogen production option. Instead, SSE
Renewables and Equinor decided to focus entirely on electricity generation following the
securing of a grid connection point at the Birkhill Wood substation in East Riding of
Yorkshire, which is part of National Grid’s network expansion efforts [46].
This decision was likely influenced by the practical considerations and convenience of
integrating the wind farm’s output directly into the electrical grid, as well as the skepti-
cism surrounding the future of hydrogen and the development of a solid market for this
energy commodity.
This study will use Dogger Bank D as the case study geographical site, effectively ex-
50
==PAGE:59==
ploring the case in which the project went forward with the hydrogen production option.
It is to be mentioned that, although the geographical characteristics used as inputs will
be the same as Dogger Bank D, the design of both the wind farm and the hydrogen
production component will be dictated by the model, as detailed in chapter 3.
For
instance, since the original investigation of the project conducted in October 2023 al-
ready explored possible locations for the hydrogen production plant and landfall points,
as shown in Figure 4.2, these will be used as reference for the model when modelling
the ”Onshore” layout. More specifically, the Aldbrough site and the adjacent landfall
area will be chosen to avoid the additional costs and complexity that would arise from
choosing the Saltend site.
Figure 4.2: Potential sites for hydrogen infrastructure and landfall explored by SSE Renewables
and Equinor in 2023, taken from [47].
4.2
Model Inputs
Geographical Data
As mentioned, geographical data such as distance to shore Lshore and average water
depth WD is dictated by the Dogger Bank D project location. As mentioned in [45], the
distance from shore, taken from the offshore substation to the point of landfall is 210 km,
while the average water depth is equal to 40 m. In addition, the project’s operating port
has been selected to be the Port of Tyne, in accordance with the already existing Dogger
Bank wind farms [44]. The ditance from the operating port to the selected Dogger Bank
D location Lport is approximately 220 km.
Wind Turbine Data
As mentioned in chapter 3, the power curve of the selected turbine model is needed to
allow for the model to estimate the energy production of the wind farm. For this case
51
==PAGE:60==
study, the Vestas V236-15.0 MW was chosen. The turbine’s key parameters and power
curve are shown in Table 4.2 and Figure 4.3, respectively.
Table 4.2: Model input parameters for the Vestas V236-15.0 MW turbine
Parameter
Description
Value
Units
Pturbine
Power Rating
15,000
kW
vi
Cut-in wind speed
3
m/s
vo
Cut-out wind speed
31
m/s
HH
Hub height
150
m
Figure 4.3
Wind Data
Wind speed data for the specified Dogger Bank location was obtained using NASA’s
POWER Project Access Viewer [48], which models wind speed data for a desired ge-
ographical location.
For this case study, an hourly resolution was chosen, and data
was retrieved for every year from January 1, 2004, to December 31, 2023. This com-
prehensive dataset allowed the creation of an average yearly wind profile, as shown in
Figure 4.4. This profile serves as input for the model and is repeated annually over the
assumed 30-year project lifespan.
52
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.4: Average yearly wind profile at Dogger Bank D site, 150 meters above sea level
It is important to note that NASA’s POWER Project Access Viewer provides wind speed
data up to 50 meters above sea level. Given that the turbine hub height in this case
study is 150 meters, vertical wind shear must be accounted for. Considering the project
is located above water, which corresponds to a roughness length (z0) of approximately
0.0002 m, the logarithmic wind profile is a suitable estimation for vertical wind shear:
v150m,h = v50m,h
ln
(
150
z0
)
ln
(
50
z0
) ,
∀h ∈{1, . . . , H}
(4.1)
where v150m,h and v50m,h represent the hourly wind speeds at 150 m and 50 m, respec-
tively, and H is the total number of hours in a year.
Wind Farm Layout
The designed offshore wind farm has a total capacity of 1.32 GW, achieved by installing
88 wind turbines of 15 MW each. The layout adopted for the arrangement of the turbines
is of a radial type, a design that allows optimal distribution of the energy generation
units in relation to the grid connection point. This type of configuration offers several
advantages, including greater eﬀiciency in transporting the generated energy, reduction
of load losses, and better management of wind intermittency. The turbines are arranged
so that the transmission lines converge towards a central substation, thereby minimizing
the distance and number of cables required. This approach not only enhances the overall
eﬀiciency of the wind farm but also helps reduce long-term operational and maintenance
costs [49].
53
==PAGE:62==
More specifically, for this case study, the turbines were arranged in 11 strings of 8
turbines each, which ten connect to the offshore substation thorough 66 kV AC cables.
The total length of the array cable is derived from the sum of each inter-array string
in km, Lstring, which is computed by summing the distances between individual wind
turbines, Lturbine, and the mean distance from each first turbine in the string to the
substation, Lsub, as given in Equation 4.2 and detailed in [24].
Larray =
nturbines
∑
i
Lstring,i =
nturbines
∑
i
Lturbine,i · (nturbines −1) + Lsub,i
(4.2)
The separation between each wind turbine, denoted as Lturbine, is determined using
Equation 4.3, also in kilometers.
Lturbine,i = 2
√
Pturbine
PY WT
(4.3)
Where PY WT represents the power density of the wind farm in MW/km2. The Danish
Energy Agency uses a power density of 4.5 for its studies related to the North Sea [50],
so this number was also used for the case study. For simplicity, the average distance
from each string to the substation, Lsub, is assumed to be equal to the distance between
turbines Lturbine. In reality, this distance depends on the layout chosen by the developer.
Results are displayed in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Inter-array length values for the chosen case study layout
Parameter
Description
Value (km)
Lturbine
Distance between turbines of same string
3.65
Lsub
Distance between first turbine of each string and substation
3.65
Lstring
Length of singular string 66 kV cable
29.21
Larray
Total array cable length
321.33
Export components
While the base case assumes that the electricity export will be done using an HVDC
configuration, the HVAC design option is still considered to allow for a comparison of
the two. Due to the fact that the capacity of both the selected wind turbines and the
total wind farm is within the range of the case study in [19], the same number and
characteristic of components were chosen for this study, and are shown in Table 4.4.
Discount rate
Discount rate is diﬀicult to estimate as it varies depending on project type, size and
country. According to IEA, the discount rate of offshore wind projects in EMEA coun-
tries ranges from 4% to 7% [51]. However, other estimates such as Grant Thornton
54
==PAGE:63==
Table 4.4: Wind farm design results for the base case
Parameter
HVAC
HVDC
String cable CSAs (mm2)
300
300
Number of transformers
4
4
Transformer MVA
265
265
Number of export cables
3
1
Export cable CSA (mm2)
1200
1400
Reactive compensation (MVAr)
950
0
present an higher value of 7.5% [52], while other sources go as low as 4.2% [53]. Due to
the project’s innovative hybridization with hydrogen and considerable distance to shore,
the value of 7% was selected as the discount rate r for the project.
55
==PAGE:64==
5
Results
This chapter presents the outcomes derived from the model for the base case config-
uration of the hybrid offshore wind farm. The results have been carefully selected to
highlight the most significant findings and are displayed using various graphs and tables
for clarity. The analysis focuses on several key aspects of the project: hydrogen and
electricity export, CAPEX, OPEX and levelised costs. These parameters are examined
in relation to variations in the SplitH2 parameter. Again, it is worth reminding that
this parameter determines the total capacity of installed electrolysers Pelec,tot as a per-
centage of the total windfarm capacity Pfarm. At each hour, energy generated by the
wind turbines is first sent to hydrogen production to cover the full energy demand of the
hydrogen production system and the remaining is exported as electricity to the grid.
The discussion begins with an overview of the production results of the base case study,
offering insights into how hydrogen and electricity production and export interact and
fluctuate over different temporal resolutions and total electrolysis capacities.
Subsequent sections analyze the economic metrics of the project, including CAPEX
and OPEX, under varying configurations and hydrogen power splits. These analyses
are crucial for evaluating the economic viability and identifying cost drivers within the
project. Finally, the levelised costs of hydrogen and electricity are explored, presenting
them as benchmarks to compare the economic attractiveness of different configurations.
Lastly, a more in depth analysis is performed by changing parameters such as technology
choice, electricity export system type and distance from shore, as well as a sensitivity
analysis on each electrolyser technology operating parameters.
5.1
Base Case Results
5.1.1
Commodity Export Results
Before presenting the results in this section, it is important to clarify the difference
between production and export for the two commodities to avoid any confusion. As
discussed in chapter 3, the production of electricity is represented by the energy Eturbine
produced by each turbine or the energy Efarm produced by the entire farm. On the other
hand, Eexport refers to the energy that is finally exported as electricity, after accounting
for all losses.
Similarly, for hydrogen,
˙mH2 denotes the hydrogen production of the
electrolyser in kg/h, while ˙mH2,export represents the hydrogen that is actually exported
to the gas network, considering pipeline losses. The results and graphs in this section
focus on the exported share of both commodities, which includes these losses.
In order to assess the levelised costs of the project, the export of both hydrogen and elec-
tricity has been examined under various power allocation splits. Additionally, different
temporal resolutions were utilised to highlight the behavior of the hybrid wind farm over
its lifetime. To allow for better appreciation of both hydrogen and electricity export, the
56
==PAGE:65==
graphs presented in this section assume a value of SplitH2 = 50%, which translates to a
Pelec,tot of 660 MW. It is important to note that for daily and monthly resolutions, the
three different layouts did not exhibit significant differences in their production plots.
Therefore,these graphs are only shown for the Decentralized layout, which still provides
a comprehensive view of the project’s performance.
For details regarding the components operational parameters such as power rating,
pipeline diameters and pressures, refer to subsection A.2.1 in the Appendix, where a
discussion of these elements is conducted considering a 50% hydrogen capacity split.
Hydrogen-driven Operation
However, before diving into the analysis of the production graphs, it is worth explaining
the hydrogen-driven nature of the project.
Figure 5.1 illustrates the hourly export of hydrogen and electricity during the first day
of operation for the hybrid project, utilizing a centralized layout with a 50% hydrogen
generation split. To keep units consistent, hydrogen is shown based on its energy content
considering LHVH2 = 33.33kWh. In the graph, the purple line corresponds to the total
available energy sent by the wind turbines to the offshore substation, which is then split
between hydrogen production (blue line) and electricity for export (yellow line).
The graph underscores the hydrogen-driven nature of the system. In fact, when the
available energy at the substation is lower that the capacity of the electrolyser system,
which occurs between 00:00 and 17:30 of this particular day, all available energy is sent
to hydrogen production, resulting in no electricity to export. After 17:30, the wind farm
production is enough to cover the electrolyser capacity and thus the remaining (yellow
area) is exported via electricity, which explains why the yellow line in this period does
not rest at 0. The reason why the hydrogen production does not exactly mach the energy
available at the substation is because of both the energy lost as heat in the electrolyser
stacks and the portion of energy that is used to power the water treatment system and
the compressor, whose energy demand depends on the amount of hydrogen produced,
as per Equations 3.11 and 3.16.
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.1: Graph detailing the hydrogen-driven nature of the model for the first day of operation
considering centralized layout, 50% capacity split and PEM technology. Note how the available
energy at the substaion is first used to cover hydrogen prodcution capacity, while the excess, if
any, is exported to the grid.
Furthermore, Figure 5.2 illustrates the Sanky diagram for the energy flow in MWh for
the same Centralized layout using PEM technology, and still assuming a hydrogen split
(SplitH2) of 50%. The graph can be considered as a picture of the energy flow in a specific
hour, which was chosen to be the one with the highest wind speed over the 30-year
period under consideration to allow for a more significant visual representation. Again,
to ensure consistency in units, hydrogen is depicted based on its LHV. The eﬀiciency
ηelec,t of the PEM electrolyser during this peak wind hour is 60%, which explains the
disparity between the energy required by the electrolyser and the hydrogen produced.
Once again, it is noted how out of the 1317.9 MWh available at the offshore substation,
the full 660 MW of the hydrogen system are covered, while the remaining 657.9 MWh
are exported as electricity. It is worth reminding that the energy sent to the hydrogen
plant is also used to power the water treatment system and the compressor, which in
this particular case consume 0.6 MWh and 3.6 MWh, respectively. Taking into account
also the electrolyser energy losses in the form of waste heat, this results in a total
hydrogen production of 395.4 MWh, of which 395 are finally exported to the gas netork,
corresponding to 11,851,2 kg.
58
==PAGE:67==
Figure 5.2: Sanky diagram showing the flow of energy in MWh for the Centralized layout, using
PEM technology and assuming SplitH2 = 50%. The hour that is considered in the graph is the
hours of highest wind speed throughout the 30 years considered. To keep units consistent, hy-
drogen is shown based on its energy content considering LHVH2 = 33.33kWh. PEM electrolyser
eﬀiciency at this particular hour is 60%.
Hydrogen Export: Monthly resolution
To better appreciate the hydrogen export profile throughout the project’s 30-year lifes-
pan, it is plotted with a aggregated monthly resolution, as shown in Figure 5.3. Due
to the resolution of the graph and the rather small differences in production bewteen
the three layouts at this resolution, only the production for the centralized layout is
shown. Here, the vertical red dotted lines indicate when the stack is replaced. Between
these lines, it can be observed how the hydrogen export displays a decreasing trend over
the years. This trend is expected and results from the degradation of the electrolyser
system, as discussed in subsubsection 3.2.2. Given the short time-span covered by the
graph compared to the 55,000-hour lifetime of the PEM stacks (Table 3.1).
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.3: Aggregated monthly hydrogen export for centralized layout, PEM technology, 50%
split. Dotted red lines represent the point in time when the stack is replaced. An overall decrease
in production is observed during the periods between stack replacements. Note that the y axis
starts from 4.5 × 106kg.
Hydrogen Export: yearly resolution
Table 5.1 shows the yearly production values of both hydrogen (in kg) and electricity
(in MWh) of the base case study over its 30 year lifespan, considering different layouts
and values of SplitH2. Note that, since the electrolyser eﬀiciency decreases over time,
the table displays the maximum, average and minimum yearly H2 production.
As for the electricity export, since the recorded average wind profile is repeated for every
year and there is no degradation to be taken into account, its yearly value is the same
for every year. When considering SplitH2 = 0%, electricity export is the same across
the three layouts. This happens beacuse when no hydrogen production components are
considerd, there is effectively no distinction between the three layouts, and they can all
be seen as a traditional offshore wind farm. As for the case in which SplitH2 = 50%,
it is possible to oberve that the Turbine layout is the one that allows for the highest
export of electricity, followed by the Centralized layout. The reason why the offshore
layouts have a larger yearly electricity export is due to the fact that part of the energy
is sent to shore via hydrogen in pipelines, thus significantly reducing the power that is
lost in both array (for the Turbine layout) and export cables. As the power travelling
these cables increases, the proportional power losses also increase.
In addition, hydrogen export of all three layouts was plotted in a yearly resolution in
Figure 5.4 under 50% and 100% hydrogen split. Here, the decrease in production due
to stack degradation is even more evident. Note that the y-axis starts from 6.8 × 107 kg
for the 50% Split case (Figure 5.4a) and 1.07 × 108 kg for the 100% case (Figure 5.4b).
It can be observed that for the 50% split case, the onshore layout appears to export the
60
==PAGE:69==
most hydrogen, followed by the centralized and turbine layouts. Similarly to the case for
electricity, this is due to hydrogen losses in the pipelines, which were assumed to be 483
kg/(km year) in subsubsection 3.2.2. Considering the total length Larray of the array
pipelines amounts to 321 km and the total length of the export pipeline Dshore amounts
to 200 km, the total hydrogen losses for the turbine layout amount to 251,643 kg/year.
In the case of the 100% hydrogen split, the yearly export values are considerably closer
between the three layouts. This is because the pipeline losses of hydrogen are offset by
the power losses occurring in the array cables of the centralized layouts and the electricity
export system of the onshore layout.
Hydrogen (kg)
Maximum
Average
Minimum
Electricity (MWh)
SplitH2 = 0%
Centralized
-
-
-
6,284,742
Turbine
-
-
-
6,284,742
Onshore
-
-
-
6,284,742
SplitH2 = 50%
Centralized
71,257,524
69,704,479
68,106,438
2,283,738
Turbine
71,096,471
69,550,389
67,952,431
2,289,700
Onshore
71,370,127
69,815,554
68,215,973
2,279,481
SplitH2 = 100%
Centralized
111,868,900
109,440,680
106,942,599
-
Turbine
111,842,032
109,417,964
106,917,068
-
Onshore
111,909,602
109,477,490
106,975,536
-
Table 5.1: Hydrogen and Electricity yearly export of the base case study considering Centralized,
Turbine and Onshore layouts and varying hydrogen splits. No hydrogen export occurs when
SplitH2 = 0%. Likewise, no electricity export occurs when SplitH2 = 100%.
(a) 50% split
(b) 100% split
Figure 5.4: Yearly hydrogen export for the different layouts, PEM technology. Dotted red lines
represent the point in time when the stack is replaced.
61
==PAGE:70==
5.1.2
CAPEX Results
In this section, CAPEX results are presented for the three layouts under three different
hydrogen power split allocations: 0%, 50%, and 100%. Analyzing how the initial invest-
ment varies across different layouts and power allocation splits is crucial, as it offers early
insights into the economic viability of each proposed solution. Additionally, the graphs
illustrate the contribution of each component to the total CAPEX, which is essential for
identifying the factors driving the differences in CAPEX between layouts.
0% Hydrogen Split
Figure 5.5: Project CAPEX by component using PEM technology, 0% Hydrogen Split
Under 0% hydrogen power allocation split, the project effectively becomes a regular
offshore windfarm in all three layouts and for this reason, their CAPEX is equal. As
it can be seen in Figure 5.5, no hydrogen production components are installed and the
cost distribution follows the pattern of most existing offshore wind farms.
CAPEX (M€/MW)
Centralized
3.05
Turbine
3.05
Onshore
3.05
Table 5.2: Total CAPEX in €/MW for the three layouts considering 0% hydrogen split
62
==PAGE:71==
50% Hydrogen Split
Figure 5.6: Project CAPEX by component using PEM technology, 50% Hydrogen Split
When the project exports both hydrogen and electricity, components essential for pro-
ducing these commodities are installed. In scenarios with a 50% power allocation split
and generally for all configurations where both commodities are exported the Turbine
layout exhibits the highest CAPEX among the three layouts, as shown in Figure Fig-
ure 5.6. It is followed by the Centralized and Onshore layouts.
The higher CAPEX of offshore configurations is primarily due to the increased costs
associated with the more expensive installation of hydrogen equipment compared to
onshore, as well as the addition of the export pipeline.
Specifically for the Turbine
layout, the introduction of the array pipeline and the reduction in economies of scale
due to the decentralized electrolyser system further elevate the CAPEX.
Notably, for the two offshore layouts, the cost of the electricity export system decreases,
whereas it remains unchanged from the 0% case in the onshore configuration.
CAPEX (M€/MW)
Centralized
3.22
Turbine
3.44
Onshore
3.14
Table 5.3: Total project CAPEX in €/MW for the three layouts considering 50% hydrogen split
63
==PAGE:72==
100% Hydrogen Split
Figure 5.7: Project CAPEX by component using PEM technology, 100% Hydrogen Split
In the case where 100% of the power is dedicated to hydrogen production, the CAPEX
evaluation shifts significantly in favor of the offshore layouts, as shown in Figure Fig-
ure 5.7. The Centralized and Turbine layouts benefit from excluding the electricity ex-
port system, which is considerably more expensive than exporting hydrogen via pipelines.
The Onshore configuration still requires the electricity export system, as the hydrogen
system is powered by turbines located offshore.
Moreover, the Centralized layout benefits from economies of scale with a single elec-
trolyser and water treatment system, resulting in lower supply and installation costs.
However, an advantage of the Turbine layout is that its CAPEX is lowered by the
complete replacement of array cables by array pipelines, which, similarly to the export
system, are considerably less expensive.
CAPEX (M€/MW)
Centralized
2.61
Turbine
2.91
Onshore
3.21
Table 5.4: Total project CAPEX in €/MW for the three layouts considering 100% hydrogen split
5.1.3
OPEX Results
In a similar manner to the project’s CAPEX analysis, this section presents the OPEX
results for the three layouts, evaluated for different values of SplitH2: 0%, 50%, and
64
==PAGE:73==
100%. The OPEX calculations are performed on an annual basis, distributing the total
cost of stack replacement evenly over the project’s 30-year lifespan.
0% Hydrogen Split
Figure 5.8: Project OPEX per year by component using PEM technology, 0% Hydrogen Split.
Stack replacement costs have been spread equally over the project’s lifetime.
As previously discussed, with a 0% hydrogen power split, the project effectively functions
as a conventional offshore wind farm, resulting in no differences between the three lay-
outs. Therefore, the OPEX remains the same for each layout, as illustrated in Figure 5.8.
Additionally, it is evident that the turbines contribute the most to the project’s OPEX
under this configuration, amounting to approximately 38 M€/year. This is followed by
the export cables and other electrical system components. For ease of comparison with
existing offshore wind farms, the OPEX results are displayed in thousand €/(MW year)
in Table 5.5.
OPEX (thousand €/(MW year))
Centralized
47.05
Turbine
47.05
Onshore
47.05
Table 5.5: Total OPEX in thousand €/(MW year) for the three layouts considering 0% hydrogen
split
65
==PAGE:74==
50% Hydrogen Split
Figure 5.9: Project OPEX by component per year using PEM technology, 50% Hydrogen Split.
Stack replacement costs have been spread equally over the project’s lifetime.
When hydrogen production is introduced to the project, the OPEX increases sharply.
This is primarily due to the considerable costs incurred in replacing the electrolyser
stacks and maintaining the hydrogen production equipment. This trend is evident for
both PEM and SOEL technologies, which have high stack replacement costs and low
operating lifetimes, as shown in Table 3.1. For Alkaline electrolysers, the OPEX is lower
due to their higher stack lifetime of 70,000 hours [8] and lower stack replacement costs.
OPEX (thousand €/(MW year))
Centralized
86.52
Turbine
91.97
Onshore
83.86
Table 5.6: Total OPEX in thousand €/(MW year) for the three layouts considering 50% hydrogen
split.
66
==PAGE:75==
100% Hydrogen Split
Figure 5.10: Project OPEX per year by component using PEM technology, 100% Hydrogen Split.
Stack replacement costs have been spread equally over the project’s lifetime.
In the case of 100% power split to hydrogen, the OPEX is further increased for all three
layouts. Notably, the OPEX related to the electricity export infrastructure is no longer
present for the offshore layouts, while it is still considered for the onshore configuration.
OPEX (thousand €/(MW year))
Centralized
112.96
Turbine
126.97
Onshore
120.3
Table 5.7: Total OPEX in thousand €/(MW year) for the three layouts considering 100% hy-
drogen split
5.1.4
Levelised Costs
As previously mentioned, levelised costs are the primary focus of this study, serving as
a clear benchmark for evaluating the economic attractiveness of a project compared to
others. This section presents the four types of levelised costs discussed in section 3.6 of
the base case study, supported by both a table and a graph for an accurate and visual
representation of the results across different hydrogen power splits.
Note that for a 0% hydrogen power split, LCoH results are not included, as no hydrogen
is exported. Similarly, the LCoE is not considered for a 100% split, since no electricity
is exported.
67
==PAGE:76==
Levelised Cost of Hydrogen
As anticipated, increasing the power allocated to hydrogen production lowers the LCoH,
due to the project exporting more hydrogen relative to electricity. This trend follows an
inverse exponential pattern, with reductions in LCoH becoming progressively smaller as
the power split increases, as shown in Figure 5.11 and Table 5.8.
Comparing the three layouts, the LCoH results of the base case generally align with the
CAPEX findings discussed in subsection 5.1.2. The Turbine layout consistently shows
the highest levelised cost of hydrogen across most power splits, while the Onshore layout
has the lowest.
However, a different trend emerges at a 100% hydrogen split. Here, the Centralized
layout achieves the lowest LCoH, while the Onshore configuration slightly exceeds the
Turbine layout. The significant drop in LCoH for the Centralized and Turbine layouts
results from the absence of the electricity export system, which remains in the Onshore
layout. In fact, the difference in hydrogen export between the 90% and 100% case is
relatively small, resulting in a sharp drop of levelised cost when CAPEX and OPEX are
reduced.
Notably, all three configurations fall within the average green hydrogen range at rela-
tively low values of SplitH2. The Centralized and Onshore layouts cross the 8.5 €/kg
threshold at a 60% hydrogen split. Despite this, the base case study cannot compete
with the cost of grey hydrogen in any configuration, as shown in Figure 5.11.
68
==PAGE:77==
Figure 5.11: LCoH of the base case study for different splits of power allocation to hydrogen for
the three layouts. The grey, blue and green band represent, respectively, the ranges of average
cost of grey (2.2 €/kg - 3 €/kg), blue (3.0 €/kg - 3.4 €/kg) and green (4.8 €/kg - 8.5 €/kg)
hydrogen in Europe in 2023 according to IEA [23].
LCoH (€/kg)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Centralized
N/A
23.38
12.71
9.21
7.49
6.49
5.84
5.39
5.06
4.82
3.82
Turbine
N/A
24.53
13.38
9.74
7.96
6.93
6.26
5.96
5.64
5.40
4.27
Onshore
N/A
22.76
12.39
8.97
7.28
6.30
5.66
5.21
4.89
4.64
4.47
Table 5.8: Base case LCoH results for the three layouts considering different hydrogen power
splits, PEM technology
levelised Cost of Electricity
As shown in Table 5.9, the LCoE of the project demonstrates an exponential correlation
with the increase in hydrogen power split. This is expected, as allocating more power to
hydrogen production results in less electricity being exported. Additionally, the Onshore
and Centralized layouts exhibit very similar LCoE values, with the Onshore layout being
the least expensive. Conversely, the Turbine layout is the most costly, particularly at
higher SplitH2 values.
In Figure 5.12, the yellow band indicates the average LCoE range for offshore wind
in 2024, according to Wind Europe [21]. At a 0% hydrogen split, where the project
functions as a conventional offshore wind farm, the LCoE falls within this range, serving
as a sanity check for the model.
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure 5.12: LCoE of the base case study for different splits of power allocation to hydrogen
for the three layouts. The yellow band represents the current range of average LCoE of offshore
wind in Europe (0.05 €/kWh - 0.072 kWh) according to Wind Europe [21].
LCoE (€/kWh)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Centralized
0.062
0.077
0.095
0.12
0.15
0.20
0.27
0.39
0.64
1.43
N/A
Turbine
0.062
0.08
0.10
0.13
0.16
0.21
0.29
0.43
0.70
1.58
N/A
Onshore
0.062
0.076
0.093
0.12
0.15
0.19
0.26
0.38
0.62
1.39
N/A
Table 5.9: Base case LCoE results for the three layouts considering different hydrogen power
splits, PEM technology
Combined levelised Cost
Finally, the results of the combined levelised cost of hydrogen and electricity discussed
in subsection 3.6.3 are illustrated in Figure 5.13. It should be mentioned that at the
extreme points of 0% and 100% hydrogen split, the combined levelised costs correspond
to the levelised cost of electricity and hydrogen, respectively.
It is noted that increasing the share of power dedicated to hydrogen production results
in higher combined levelised costs of energy. This means that the levelised cost of energy
is cheaper when considering an electricity-only export wind farm, and is most expensive
when allocating the majority of power generation to hydrogen production while still
maintaining the electrical infrastructure, which occurs at SplitH2 = 90%.
Regardless, when the wind farm is completely devoted to hydrogen production instead
of electrcity (SplitH2 = 100%), the two offshore layouts show a sharp reduction on
70
==PAGE:79==
LCoEcombined
thermal , displaying values similar to those obtained for SplitH2 = 70%. This is due
to the significant reduction in costs that comes from avoiding the installation of a high-
voltage export system, as well as the lower losses incurred when transporting hydrogen
via pipelines compared to transmitting electricity via cables. When SplitH2 = 100%,
the Centralized layout stands out as the most competitive, reaching a LCoEcombined
thermal
of
0.11 €/kWh.
However, it is important to point out that, even when the project is solely exporting
hydrogen, the levelised cost of energy is still higher than that of when the project exports
just electricity, meaning that, in this configuration the lower CAPEX that is achieved by
the 100% hydrogen configuration compared to a classic electricity-exporting project is
not able to offset the energy losses that occur when producing hydrogen via electrolysis,
which are seen in Figure 5.2. However, this result could change when considering different
electrolyser technologies such as AEL or SOEL, which have a higher stack lifetime and
electrical eﬀiciency, respectively. For this reason, the following section 5.2 explores how
the LCoH and LCoEcombined
thermal
vary when considering AEL and SOEL electrolysis.
Figure 5.13: Combined levelised costs of energy for hydrogen and electricity considering thermal
end use based on LHVH2, PEM technology
71
==PAGE:80==
LCoET hermal (€/kWh)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Centralized
0.062
0.069
0.076
0.083
0.091
0.098
0.11
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.11
Turbine
0.062
0.072
0.080
0.088
0.096
0.10
0.11
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.13
Onshore
0.062
0.068
0.075
0.081
0.088
0.096
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
Table 5.10: Base case LCoET hermal results for the three layouts considering different hydrogen
power splits, PEM technology.
5.2
Further Investigation
In this section, modifications are made to the base case study detailed in chapter 4 to ex-
plore how the levelised costs respond to variations in both parameters and configuration
choices. The analysis focuses on the impact of:
• Technology choice: AEL, PEM, and SOEL
• Electricity export system type: HVDC and HVAC
• electrolyser operating parameters
The results in this section have been selected for their ability to generate meaning-
ful discussion. For a thorough and detailed overview of all the results across different
configurations, please refer to section A.2 of the Appendix.
5.2.1
Technology Choice
The results presented so far assumed the adoption of PEM electrolysis technology due
to its potential adaptability to offshore wind and tolerance towards frequent load varia-
tions discussed in subsubsection 2.1.1. However, future improvements in reliability and
adaptability of AEL and SOEC electrolysers might render them more viable for pairing
with offshore wind. For this reason, their performance was bench marked against PEM
and the comparison is shown with respect to LCoH and LCoEcombined
thermal .
Varying Technology Choice - LCoH
Results of LCoH for different technologies are displayed in Figure 5.14, with exact values
presented in subsection A.2.3 in the appendix. Note that now the lines show the LCoH of
each technology, not the layout as was shown in previous graphs. Instead, each subfigure
of Figure 5.14 refers to a specific layout.
As it can be observed, when looking at each single technology, the behaviour of the
three layouts to the change in SplitH2 follows what was observed in Figure 5.11, with
the onshore layout having the lowest LCoH until a 100% split in power dedicated to
hydrogen is reached, where the centralized layout becomes the most cost-effective.
However, when comparing the three technologies it can be seen how the lowest LCoH is
achieved by different technologies hydrogen production capacity is increased. Namely,
for lower values of SplitH2, SOEL electrolysis manages to yield a lower LCoH than the
other two. This holds true until SplitH2 = 30%, at which point the AEL technology
72
==PAGE:81==
becomes more convenient for the remaining splits in all three layouts. In addition, from
SplitH2 = 50% onwards, PEM also becomes more competitive the SOEL but still has
higher LCoH than AEL. It is also worth nothing that Alkaline technology manages to
be competitive with grey hydrogen reaching its upper boundary of 3.4 €/kg when used
in a Centralized layout with a 100% hydrogen split, as shown in Figure 5.14a.
The behaviour of SOEL electrolysers with the increase of SplitH2 can be explained
by the technology’s considerably lower stack lifetime and higher degradation than the
other two technologies, as shown in Table 3.1.
For lower values of hydrogen power
allocation, the higher eﬀiciency of 82% brings a sharp reduction in LCoH. However,
as the electrolysis capacity increases, so does the stack that need to be replaced and
the OPEX becomes significantly higher than that of the other two technologies (See
Figure A.8 in the Appendix). In order to fully understand how big of an impact stack
replacement cost and lifetime have on SOEL, these have been included in Figure 5.20 of
the sensitivity analysis (subsection 5.2.3).
73
==PAGE:82==
(a) Centralized layout
(b) Turbine layout
(c) Onshore layout
Figure 5.14: LCoH when varying power devoted to hydrogen for different electrolyser technologies
and layouts. Note that now the lines show the LCoH of each technology, not the layout as was
shown in previous graphs. Each subfigure refers to a specific layout. The grey, blue and green
band represent, respectively, the ranges of average cost of grey (2.2 €/kg - 3 €/kg), blue (3.0
€/kg - 3.4 €/kg) and green (4.8 €/kg - 8.5 €/kg) hydrogen in Europe in 2023 according to IEA
[23].
Varying Technology Choice - LCoEcombined
thermal
The results of LCoEcombined
thermal
for different technologies are displayed in Figure 5.15, with
exact values presented in Appendix A.
Compared to the previously observed LCoH, the combined levelised cost of energy for
the three technologies retains their relative positions for all values of SplitH2. Notably,
AEL consistently exhibits the lowest combined LCoE across all three layouts.
However, it is evident that even with this technology, the combined levelised cost of
energy increases with higher electrolyser capacities. Furthermore, even when the project
exclusively exports hydrogen, the levelised cost of energy remains higher than that of a
project exporting solely electricity. This indicates that, despite the competitive advan-
74
==PAGE:83==
tage of lower CAPEX achieved by the 100% hydrogen configuration, it is still insuﬀicient
to offset the energy losses incurred during hydrogen production, even when considering
AEL technology.
(a) Centralized layout
(b) Turbine layout
(c) Onshore layout
Figure 5.15: LCoEcombined
thermal when varying total electrolyser capacity for different technologies and
layouts. Note that now the lines show the LCoEcombined
electrical of each technology, not the layout as
was shown in previous graphs. Each subfigure refers to a specific layout.
5.2.2
Electricity Export System Choice
Shifting focus to electricity export, another design choice for the base case study was the
use of a HVDC export system for electricity. This decision was informed by the literature
review in subsection 2.3.2, which indicates that HVDC becomes more cost-effective at
distances greater than 50 to 70 km from shore.
However, these conclusions are project-specific. While they provide general guidance,
they should be cautiously applied to different projects. The model developed for this
study, on the other hand, considers multiple parameters, yielding results tailored to the
specific case study.
75
==PAGE:84==
Additionally, the literature review focuses only on the impact of the electrical export
system on the levelised cost of electricity and not on the levelised cost of hydrogen,
which would be especially relevant for the Onshore layout. This section explores how
the LCoH and LCoE change as the distance from shore increases from 0 to 300 km. For
the LCoH, 50% and 100% power splits are considered, while for the LCoE, 0% and 50%
power splits are analyzed. To keep the results comparable with the base case study, the
technology considered is still PEM.
Levelised Cost of Hydrogen
From Figure 5.16a it can be seen how, with a 50% hydrogen production power split,
the Onshore layout has the lowest LCoH for every distance, wih HVDC transmission
becomes more competitive than HVAC starting from approximately 70 km from shore.
As for the Centralized and Turbine layouts, HVDC starts to show a lower LCoH from
100 km onwards.
Figure 5.16b shows the case in which 100% of the power generated by the farm is
devoted to hydrogen. It is important to note that here the offshore layouts do not have
an electrical export system, therefore a single line shows the dependency of their LCoH
on the distance from shore, and is solely influenced by the costs related to the export
pipeline. This results in the Centralized layout being the best choice in this context at
every distance. On the contrary, the Onshore layout still uses electricity export, and the
distance at which HVDC becomes more competitive is again at 70 km.
(a) 50% Hydrogen split, PEM
(b) 100% Hydrogen split, PEM
Figure 5.16: LCoH comparison between HVAC and HVDC export systems for each layout,
varying the distance from shore.
Each layout has its own color, HVDC is represented by a
continuous line while HVAC is represented with a dotted line. Grey vertical line shows the base
case distance from shore.
Levelised Cost of Electricity
Figure 5.17a illustrates how the LCoE of the project varies with distance from shore,
assuming 0% of the power is devoted to hydrogen. In this scenario, the project functions
as a standard offshore wind farm, with no differences between the three layouts. Thus,
76
==PAGE:85==
the lines are superimposed, and the only distinction lies between the HVAC and HVDC
export systems. Consistent with the LCoH results, the break-even distance between the
two systems is 70 km.
For a 50% capacity split, the results in Figure 5.17b closely follow the trend observed for
the LCoH. Here, the Onshore layout remains the most competitive across all distances,
with HVAC being preferable up to 70 km and HVDC becoming more advantageous
beyond that point. Notably, around the 70 km mark, the Centralized layout with an
HVAC export system competes closely with the Onshore configuration.
(a) 0% Hydrogen split, PEM
(b) 50% Hydrogen split, PEM
Figure 5.17: LCoE comparison between HVAC and HVDC export systems for each layout,
varying the distance from shore.
Each layout has its own color, HVDC is represented by a
continuous line while HVAC is represented with a dotted line. Grey vertical line shows the base
case distance from shore.
5.2.3
Electrolyser Parameters sensitivity analysis
During the literature review process of this study, a considerable amount of sources was
consulted to obtain operational data and parameters for the three electrolyser technolo-
gies. It became clear that there is a degree of uncertainty regarding the performance of
each technology when coupled with wind power, especially when the electrolysers them-
selves are placed offshore. While PEM is credited to be better suited to be paired with
renewable enrgy sources, the other two technologies could be improved in the future and
be made more viable for this sort of applications. For instance, SOEC electrolysis is an
immature but promising technology, which is expected to achieve even higher eﬀiciencies
in the future.
For these reasons, a sensitivity analysis was conducted on the LCoH of the project by
changing the operational parameters of the three technologies, which were presented
in Table 3.1. To allow for more appreciable results, a 100% power split to hydrogen
was considered for this sensitivity analysis, thus maximisnig the impact that changes in
electrolyser parameters would have on the LCoH. Results are displayed in Figures 5.18,
5.19 and 5.20.
77
==PAGE:86==
It is evident that across the three technologies, the stack replacement cost significantly
impacts the LCoH. This is primarily due to the frequent stack replacements required
over the 30-year lifespan of the project and the rate at which these stacks deteriorate,
hindering their eﬀiciency. This impact is especially pronounced for SOEL electrolysers,
which have a stack lifetime of only 21,250 hours [8] and a degradation rate of 0.5% every
1000 hours.
As anticipated, the electrolyser cost also plays a significant role in all configurations,
particularly for the turbine layout. This layout fails to benefit from economies of scale
and incurs additional installation and maintenance costs due to the offshore location
of components. In contrast, the electrolyser cost and installation factors have a lower
impact on the onshore layout. Interestingly, decreasing the operational pressure consid-
erably increases the LCoH, while increasing it has a positive reducing effect. Lastly, the
impact of degradation on LCoH is generally lower than other parameters across most
configurations.
78
==PAGE:87==
(a) Centralized Layout
(b) Turbine Layout
(c) Onshore Layout
Figure 5.18: PEM electrolyser sensitivity analysis, 100% Hydrogen split. Red bars represent a
50% increase of the parameter while the blue bars represent a 50% decrease.
(a) Centralized Layout
(b) Turbine Layout
(c) Onshore Layout
Figure 5.19: AEL electrolyser sensitivity analysis, 100% Hydrogen split. Red bars represent a
50% increase of the parameter while the blue bars represent a 50% decrease.
(a) Centralized Layout
(b) Turbine Layout
(c) Onshore Layout
Figure 5.20: SOEL electrolyser sensitivity analysis, 100% Hydrogen split. Red bars represent a
50% increase of the parameter while the blue bars represent a 50% decrease.
79
==PAGE:88==
6
Discussion
In this section, a critical analysis of the study’s key findings and model’s performance is
presented. In the first part of this discussion, the model is bench marked and validated
against real world data.
In the second part, the presented results will be put into
perspective to answer the initial research questions discussed in chapter 1.
6.1
Model Performance Valuation and Validation
Evaluating the performance of the model is crucial to determine its applicability in real-
world scenarios. While performing a sanity check for hydrogen production in the offshore
wind farm is challenging due to the lack of real-world data on hybrid wind farms, a
meaningful comparison can still be made. By considering a 0% split in power allocated
to hydrogen production, we can compare the results of the model with conventional
offshore wind farms.
In this scenario, the wind farm exhibits a CAPEX per MW of 3.05 M€ and an OPEX
of 47.05 thousand €/MW. These values were compared with data from 4C’s Project
Opportunity Pipeline database from December 2023, which was provided by EDF. The
database provides 4C’s global averages and predictions for offshore wind CAPEX and
OPEX values. CAPEX is presented as a global average from 2010 to 2040, while OPEX is
provided as a 2023 average categorized by turbine size. Figure 6.1 and Figure 6.2 display
the comparison between 4C’s estimates and this study’s model base case CAPEX and
OPEX results, respectively.
80
==PAGE:89==
Figure 6.1: Graph showing 4C’s modelling of CAPEX in million €/MW over the years, taken
from 4C’s Project Opportunity Pipeline database from December 2023. The red dot was added
manually and shows the base case study CAPEX considering no hydrogen production.
Figure 6.2: Graph showing 4C’s modelling of OPEX in thousand €/MW/year for different turbine
sizes, taken from 4C’s Project Opportunity Pipeline database from December 2023. The red dot
was added manually and shows the base case study OPEX considering no hydrogen production.
While the results do not exactly match those obtained by 4C, they are considerably close.
Additionally, when considering the project’s LCoE, Figure 5.11 shows that for a 0% split
in hydrogen generation, the levelised cost of energy falls within the average European
values published by Wind Europe [22]. These proximities in results, especially when
81
==PAGE:90==
modeling a simple offshore wind farm without hydrogen generation, further strengthen
the validity of the model used in this study.
As for validating the model’s hydrogen generation component, it is observed from Figures
5.11 and 5.14 that the obtained LCoH values for SplitH2 = 100% are not too distant but
still lower IEA’s 2023 lower bound estimate of green hydrogen cost in Northern Europe
of 4.8 €/kg, as was shown in Figure 2.5. This indicates that the model might be rather
optimistic when estimating the LCoH of the project.
6.2
Answering the Research Questions
Calculating the total costs of a Hybrid Offshore Wind Farm
The first research question finds its answer in the Literature Review and Methodology
presented in this study. A considerable number of sources provide methods and paramet-
ric equations to calculate the cost of traditional offshore wind farms, which can be used
to build a flexible model that can approximate the CAPEX and OPEX of such projects.
These have mostly been derived from regression models by the respective authors, which
take a considerable amount of wind farms and their relative data into account.
The same cannot be said when it comes to integrating the hydrogen production compo-
nents into the project. While most sources agree that the main components to take into
consideration are the electrolysers, water treatment system, compressor and pipelines,
a lack of large scale implementations of offshore hydrogen technology means that the
way in which these components are located is still unclear. This study introduced the
concept of the three layouts, being Centralized, Turbine and Onshore for this reason.
Another source of uncertainty is the complexity that locating such equipment to shore
entails. This leads to significant increases in both capital and operational expenditures.
This can be observed from Figures 5.6 and 5.9, where for a value of SplitH2 = 50%, the
main driver of the increase of CAPEX and OPEX compared to the Onshore layout is the
increased cost of installation and maintenance of components given by the parameter
OS that was introduced in the methodology to account for the added costs of locating
them offshore. Again, this is just an approximation that was made in order to allow for
this increase in costs to be modelled. In reality, this number might change, as synergies
with installation and maintenance of traditional offshore wind components such as the
turbines themselves could lower these added costs, which is a perspective shared by DNV
[26].
Modelling the Electricity and Hydrogen Export
Compared to the cost modeling approach, which primarily used parametric equations
derived from regression models, the production of electricity and hydrogen is based on the
physical properties of the project’s components. As a result, this production modeling
can be considered more accurate.
Nevertheless, due to time constraints and the specific focus of this thesis, a series of
assumptions were made to model the production and export of these two commodities.
82
==PAGE:91==
For example, the wake effect of the turbines was assumed to cause a fixed percentage
decrease in total wind farm production, although in reality, this effect would vary de-
pending on wind speed and conditions over time. Additionally, hydrogen production
was modeled such that electricity generated by the wind farm is first used to meet the
installed hydrogen plant capacity, determined by the parameter SplitH2, with any excess
electricity being exported to the grid. This approach is detailed in subsection 3.2.2 and
illustrated in Figure 5.1. In practice, a developer of such a hybrid project would likely
employ a more flexible strategy, allowing for dynamic allocation of energy between hy-
drogen production and grid export to maximize returns based on current market prices.
Despite this, the primary focus of this study is on the levelised costs of hybrid projects,
which inherently account for yearly production. This focus helps to mitigate the impact
of the simplified assumptions on the overall results.
The most significant factor influencing hydrogen production has been identified as the
lifetime and degradation rate of the chosen electrolyser technology. This impact is ev-
ident from the variation in annual output shown in Table 5.1, where yearly hydrogen
export fluctuates by as much as 4.9 million kg when considering a 100% capacity allo-
cation to hydrogen.
Developing a Combined levelised Cost of Energy
One of the research questions of this thesis was how to combined both hydrogen and
electricity into a single levelised cost metric. This allowed to evaluate the performance
of the hybrid project for values of SplitH2 different than 0% and 100%, meaning when
the farm is exporting both hydrogen and electricity.
The process began with converting the traditional levelised Cost of Hydrogen from
€/kg to €/kWh. This conversion utilised the Lower Heating Value of hydrogen (33.33
kWh/kg), which is more appropriate for practical applications where the latent heat of
vaporization is not recovered. From this, two different metrics were developed based on
the end use of the two commodities.
For thermal applications, the combined levelised Cost of Electricity and Hydrogen
(LCoEcombined
thermal ) was developed to assess the economic viability of using both energy
sources in industrial processes, such as steel manufacturing.
The formula integrates
CAPEX, OPEX, and the energy contributions from both electricity and hydrogen.
For electrical applications, the combined levelised Cost of Electricity and Hydrogen
(LCoEelectrical) was developed to consider hydrogen converted to electricity via fuel cells.
This formula includes the eﬀiciency of fuel cells (ηfc), acknowledging a range of eﬀicien-
cies and using an average eﬀiciency of 60%. However, due to the practical limitations,
high variability in fuel cell eﬀiciency, and costs, which were also confirmed following a
meeting with EDF’s Hynamics team, (LCoEelectrical) was considered less useful for the
study.
83
==PAGE:92==
Choosing the best Configuration & Tecnology
Lastly, this study also set out to determine which configuration and technology would
lead to more competitive levelised costs. This has to be evaluated for the three types
of levelised costs (LCoE, LCoH and LCoEcombined
thermal ) considering 4 different parameters,
which were presented in the Results Section: Hydrogen capacity split (SplitH2), Layout,
Technology Choice and Electrical Export system.
Starting from the most evident outcome, both LCoE and LCoH results determine that
after approximately 70 km from shore, the HVDC electrical export system becomes
more competitive across all three layouts. For LCoE, this confirmed what was found
in literature, and further strengthens the preference for HVDC by showing the same
behaviour for LCoH.
As for the value of SplitH2, it is reasonable that the levelised cost of electricity increases
with higher share of hydrogen capacity, and it does so with an exponential realtionship,
as seen in Figure 5.12. On the opposite side, LCoH decreases in an inversely propor-
tional manner to an increase in SplitH2. To get a better understanding, the results of
LCoEcombined
thermal
presented in Table 5.10 indicate that increasing the share of power ded-
icated to hydrogen production results in higher combined levelised costs. This implies
that the cost of energy is cheaper for an electricity-only export wind farm and most ex-
pensive when allocating the majority of power to hydrogen production while maintaining
electrical infrastructure. Energy losses during hydrogen production via electrolysis con-
tribute to higher levelised costs for hydrogen compared to electricity. Even with lower
CAPEX for a 100% hydrogen configuration, these energy losses result in a higher overall
cost.
When deciding between Centralized, Turbine and Onshore positioning of hydrogen gen-
eration, results show that the Onshore layout is preferable for the three types of levelised
costs across all values of SplitH2 except 100%. This is due to increase in costs brought
by the positioning of components offshore, which is then overcome when no electricity
export infrastructure is included for SplitH2 = 100%.
Lastly, subsection 5.2.1 details how AEL technology offers the best performance for both
LCoH and LCoEcombined
thermal
at higher hydrogen production levels. More specifically, Al-
kaline Electrolysis emerges as the most cost-effective technology when SplitH2 exceeds
30%. It consistently shows the lowest LCoEcombined
thermal
across all layouts and can achieve
an LCoH of 3.4 €/kg in a centralized layout with a 100% hydrogen split. Solid Ox-
ide Electrolysis achieves the lowest LCoH for SplitH2 values up to 30%, thanks to its
high eﬀiciency of 82%. However, its competitiveness decreases at higher capacities due
to higher degradation and increased operational costs, which stem from frequent stack
replacements. Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) electrolysis, selected for its adapt-
ability and tolerance to load variations, becomes competitive at SplitH2 values of 50%
and above, though its LCoH remains higher than AEL.
84
==PAGE:93==
7
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to investigate the integration of hydrogen production with offshore
wind farms to evaluate the economic viability and determine the optimal configurations
and technologies using levelised costs as a metric. By developing a model to calculate
LCoE, LCoH as well as a combined levelised cost of energy metric and applying this
model to a case study off of the UK coast, this study provided insights into the cost
dynamics of hybrid projects.
Positioning the hydrogen production components in a centralized onshore layout emerged
as the most cost-effective strategy across various splits in hydrogen capacity, except
when the power allocation to hydrogen is 100%, for which the offshore Centralized lay-
out proved the most competitive. Alkaline Electrolysis technology was identified as the
most cost-effective for higher hydrogen production levels, consistently showing the low-
est combined LCoE across all layouts and achieving an LCoH value of 3.4 €/kg in a
Centralized layout with a 100% hydrogen split, which would allow such a project to
compete with the current cost of blue hydrogen production.
Although the results obtained for LCoEcombined
thermal
show that the implementation of hydro-
gen production to an offshore wind farm results in an proportional increase in levelised
cost of energy, this should not lead to developers discarding the idea of such hybrid
projects. In fact, hydrogen could prove to be an advantageous pairing to wind for a
number of factors. For instance, developers could strategically choose to produce either
hydrogen or electricity when the demand for each commodity is higher, thus maximising
their revenue. Furthermore, hydrogen storage could also be used as energy storage for
when the production from wind exceeds the energy demand of the grid.
Lastly, it is very important to highlight that technology for offshore electrolysis remains
underdeveloped, especially concerning the essential infrastructure and its integration
with offshore power systems at the gigawatt scale. Consequently, the input data for the
hydrogen infrastructure of this study are approximations derived from literature review
and parametric equations. Furthermore, to maintain simplicity in the model and to yield
results that can be interpreted more accurately, a number of simplifications were made.
For this reason, a degree of uncertainty is expected from the model, as was highlighted
in section 6.1.
Future Work
The points raised emphasize the potential for future research on this topic, which could
not be included in this study due to time and resource constraints.
One of the most impactful additions to the model would be the inclusion of hourly
electricity prices as an input. This would allow exploration of how hydrogen production
or storage could be optimized during periods of low electricity demand, as previously
mentioned.
85
==PAGE:94==
LCoE and LCoH do not account for commodity prices since they focus on a project’s costs
rather than its revenues. However, economic metrics such as Net Present Value (NPV)
and Internal Rate of Return (IRR) would be significantly influenced by changes in the
energy market and are of great interest to project developers. Therefore, incorporating
NPV and IRR would be another valuable enhancement to this work.
Additionally, this study assumed the wind farm would be constructed using jacket foun-
dations. With recent advancements in floating wind farms and their potential to lower
the levelised costs of offshore wind by accessing areas with stronger and more consistent
wind profiles, this technology could be a significant addition to future studies.
86
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[1]
RWE. NortH￿: A green hydrogen hub in North-
west Europe. https://www.rwe.com/en/research-
and-development/hydrogen-projects/north2/. Ac-
cessed: 2024-07-11. 2024.
[2]
Equinor. Hywind Scotland - the world’s first float-
ing wind farm. https://www.equinor.com/energy/
hywind-scotland. Accessed: 2024-07-11. 2024.
[3]
“Grey, blue, green – the many colours of hydrogen
explained”. In: World Economic Forum (2023).
url: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/
07/clean-energy-green-hydrogen/.
[4]
DNV. Hydrogen Forecast to 2050: Energy Tran-
sition Outlook 2022. Tech. rep. Hydrogen forecast
to 2050. DNV, 2022. url: https://www.dnv.com/
focus-areas/hydrogen/forecast-to-2050/.
[5]
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy. “Wa-
ter Electrolysis Technologies for Green Hydrogen
Production”. In: International Journal of Hydro-
gen Energy (2022). url: https://www.journals.
elsevier . com / international - journal - of - hydrogen -
energy.
[6]
Fuel Cell Store. “Introduction to Electrolyzers”.
In: (2022). url: https://www.fuelcellstore.com.
[7]
Department of Energy. “Hydrogen Production:
Electrolysis”. In: (2022). url: https : / / www .
energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/hydrogen- production-
electrolysis.
[8]
Danish Energy Agency. Technology Data for Re-
newable Fuels. Accessed: 2024-05-20. 2024. url:
https : / / ens . dk / en / our - services / technology -
catalogues/technology-data-renewable-fuels.
[9]
Oliver Schmidt et al. “Future cost and perfor-
mance of water electrolysis: An expert elicitation
study”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen En-
ergy 42 (2017), pp. 30470–30492. url: https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:103163965.
[10]
Jörn Brauns and Thomas Turek. “Alkaline Wa-
ter Electrolysis Powered by Renewable Energy: A
Review”. In: Processes 8 (Feb. 2020), p. 248. doi:
10.3390/pr8020248.
[11]
Marcelo Carmo et al. “A comprehensive review on
PEM water electrolysis”. In: International Jour-
nal of Hydrogen Energy 38.12 (2013), pp. 4901–
4934. issn: 0360-3199. doi: https : / / doi . org /
10 . 1016 / j . ijhydene . 2013 . 01 . 151. url: https :
/ / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0360319913002607.
[12]
Meng Ni, Michael KH Leung, and Dennis YC Le-
ung. “Technological development of hydrogen pro-
duction by solid oxide electrolyzer cell (SOEC)”.
In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 33.9
(2008), pp. 2337–2354.
[13]
European Union. “Assessment of Hydrogen Deliv-
ery Options”. In: JRC Policy Brief (2021). url:
https : / / joint - research - centre . ec . europa . eu /
document/download/5cdbd6f7- 7ab4- 447b- be0a-
dde0a25198ab_en.
[14]
M. Alverà. The Hydrogen Revolution: A Blueprint
for the Future of Clean Energy. Basic Books, 2021.
isbn: 9781541620421. url: https://books.google.
dk/books?id=6xgiEAAAQBAJ.
[15]
EDF Renewables UK. Tees Green Hydrogen. Ac-
cessed: 2024-07-07. 2024. url: https://www.edf-
re.uk/our-sites/tees-hydrogen/.
[16]
RWE. AquaVentus: RWE is Partner of Land-
mark Project Involving the Offshore Production
of Green Hydrogen. Accessed: 2024-07-07. 2024.
url: https://www.rwe.com/en/research- and-
development/hydrogen-projects/aquaventus/.
[17]
Vattenfall. World’s First Hydrogen-Producing Off-
shore
Wind
Turbine
Gets
GBP
9.3
Million
Funding Boost. Accessed: 2024-07-07. 2022. url:
https : / / group . vattenfall . com / press - and -
media/pressreleases/2022/worlds-first-hydrogen-
producing - offshore - wind - turbine - gets - gbp - 9 .
3million-funding-boost.
[18]
Rafael d’Amore-Domenech, Teresa J. Leo, and
Bruno G. Pollet. “Bulk power transmission at sea:
Life cycle cost comparison of electricity and hy-
drogen as energy vectors”. In: Applied Energy 288
(2021), p. 116625. issn: 0306-2619. doi: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.116625. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306261921001604.
[19]
Victor Timmers et al. “All‐DC offshore wind
farms: When are they more cost‐effective than AC
designs?” In: IET Renewable Power Generation
17 (July 2022), n/a–n/a. doi: 10.1049/rpg2.12550.
[20]
Technical University of Denmark Lena Kitzing.
Feasibility Studies of Energy Projects: Lecture
Note 7 - Levelized Cost of Energy. Course 46205,
Fall 2023 (E23). 2023.
[21]
WindEurope.
“Our
energy,
our
future”.
In:
WindEurope (2019). url: https://windeurope.org/
newsroom/press- releases/lots- of- good- news- in-
offshore-wind-including-in-the-supply-chain/#:~:
text=Things%20are%20looking%20up%20again,
built%20over%20the%20coming%20years..
[22]
WindEurope. “Lots of good news in offshore wind,
including in the supply chain”. In: WindEurope
(2023). url: https://windeurope.org.
[23]
IEA. Levelised cost of hydrogen via selected tech-
nologies in Northwest Europe in the Announced
Pledges Scenario, 2023-2030. Licence: CC BY 4.0.
Paris, 2024. url: https://www.iea.org/data-and-
statistics/charts/levelised- cost- of- hydrogen- via-
selected-technologies-in-northwest-europe-in-the-
announced-pledges-scenario-2023-2030.
[24]
Alessandro Singlitico, Jacob Østergaard, and Spy-
ros Chatzivasileiadis. “Onshore, offshore or in-
87
==PAGE:96==
turbine electrolysis? Techno-economic overview of
alternative integration designs for green hydrogen
production into Offshore Wind Power Hubs”. In:
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Transition 1
(2021), p. 100005. issn: 2667-095X. doi: https :
/ / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . rset . 2021 . 100005. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S2667095X21000052.
[25]
Andreas Zauner et al. Innovative large-scale en-
ergy storage technologies and Power-to-Gas con-
cepts after optimization: Analysis on future tech-
nology options and on techno-economic optimiza-
tion. Deliverable Number D7.7. Co-funded by the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and in-
novation programme under Grant Agreement no.
691797. European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme, 2019.
[26]
Danish Energy Agency. Cost and Performance
Data for Offshore Hydrogen Production. Hellerup,
Denmark: DNV Denmark A/S, 2023. url: https:
//www.dnv.com.
[27]
DANVA. Water in figures. Godthåbsvej, 83, DK-
8660 Skanderborg. 2019. url: https://www.danva.
dk/media/6355/2019_water-in-figures_web.pdf.
[28]
International Energy Agency. The Future of Hy-
drogen. 2019, p. 203. url: https://www.iea.org/
reports/the-future-of-hydrogen.
[29]
National Grid Gas. Climate Change Adaptation.
Second Round Adaptation Response. 2016. url:
https : / / assets . publishing . service . gov . uk /
media/5a80153540f0b62305b89112/climate-adrep-
national-grid-gas.pdf.
[30]
Marianne Mintz et al. “Hydrogen Delivery Sce-
nario Analysis Model for Hydrogen Distribu-
tion Options”. In: Transportation Research Record
1983 (Jan. 2006), pp. 114–120. doi: 10.3141/1983-
16.
[31]
E Shashi Menon. Pipeline planning and construc-
tion field manual. Gulf Professional Publishing,
1978.
[32]
R. Li and L. Xu. “A unidirectional hybrid HVDC
transmission system based on diode rectifier and
full-bridge MMC”. In: IEEE Journal of Emerging
and Selected Topics in Power Electronics (2020).
url: https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/328790825.
pdf.
[33]
R. Walling and T. Ruddy. “Economic optimiza-
tion of offshore windfarm substations and collec-
tion systems”. In: Proceedings of the Fifth Interna-
tional Conference on Offshore Wind Engineering.
Paper presented at fifth international conference.
2020.
[34]
The Danish Energy Agency and Energinet. Tech-
nology data – generation of electricity and district
heating. 414. 2020. url: https://ens.dk/en/our-
services/projections-and-models/technology-data/
technology-data-generation-electricity-and.
[35]
QV Dinh et al. “A geospatial method for estimat-
ing the levelised cost of hydrogen production from
offshore wind”. In: International Journal of Hydro-
gen Energy (2023). doi: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2023.
01.016. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.
2023.01.016.
[36]
Per Agrell and Peter Bogetoft. TCB18 Pan-
European cost-eﬀiciency benchmark for gas trans-
mission system operators. July 2019. doi: 10 .
13140/RG.2.2.21739.21281.
[37]
Luca Bertuccioli et al. “Development of water
electrolysis in the European Union”. In: (2014).
[38]
E. Tractebel and H. Engie. Study on early business
cases for h2 in energy storage and more broadly
power to h2 applications. Tech. rep. EU Commis-
sion, 2017, p. 228. url: https://hsweb.hs.uni-
hamburg.de/projects/star- formation/hydrogen/
P2H_Full_Study_FCHJU.pdf.
[39]
Kaushik Das and Nicolaos Antonios Cutululis.
Offshore Wind Power Plant Technology Catalogue
- Components of wind power plants, AC collection
systems and HVDC systems. English. 2017.
[40]
Angeliki Spyroudi et al. Solving the Integration
Challenge: OSW-H2. Tech. rep. Offshore Renew-
able Energy Catapult, 2020.
[41]
C. Jepma et al. North sea energy D3.6 towards
sustainable energy production on the North Sea-
Green hydrogen production and CO2 storage: on-
shore or offshore? As part of topsector energy,
TKI Offshore Wind & TKI New Gas. 2018.
[42]
M. Reuß et al. “Seasonal storage and alternative
carriers: a flexible hydrogen supply chain model”.
In: Applied Energy 200 (2017), pp. 290–302. doi:
10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.05.050.
[43]
Ziyad Salameh. “Chapter 4 - Energy Storage”. In:
Renewable Energy System Design. Ed. by Ziyad
Salameh. Boston: Academic Press, 2014, pp. 201–
298. isbn: 978-0-12-374991-8. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-12-374991-8.00004-0. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780123749918000040.
[44]
Dogger Bank Wind Farm. About The Dogger Bank
Wind Farm Projects. https://doggerbank.com/
about/. Accessed: 2024-06-11.
[45]
Dogger Bank D Wind Farm Oﬀicial Website.
Accessed:
2024-06-11.
2024.
url:
https : / /
doggerbankd.com/.
[46]
FuelCellsWorks. “SSE Renewables and Equinor
Abandon Green Hydrogen Project at Dogger
Bank D”. In: FuelCellsWorks (2024). Accessed:
2024-06-11. url: https : / / fuelcellsworks . com /
news/sse-renewables-and-equinor-abandon-green-
hydrogen-project-at-dogger-bank-d/.
[47]
Dogger Bank D. Dogger Bank D Project Webi-
nar. Accessed: 2024-06-11. 2024. url: https : / /
doggerbankd.com/DBDWebinar.pdf.
88
==PAGE:97==
[48]
NASA POWER Project. NASA POWER Data
Access Viewer. Accessed: 2024-06-12. 2024. url:
https://power.larc.nasa.gov/data-access-viewer/.
[49]
Davide Cazzaro, David Franz Koza, and David
Pisinger. “Combined layout and cable optimiza-
tion of offshore wind farms”. In: European Jour-
nal of Operational Research 311.1 (2023), pp. 301–
315. issn: 0377-2217. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2023.04.
046. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0377221723003442.
[50]
Energistyrelsen. Offshore Wind Potential in the
North Sea. Tech. rep. Accessed: 2024-06-12. Ener-
gistyrelsen, 2021. url: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.
dk/files/Vindenergi/offshore_wind_potential_in_
the_north_sea.pdf.
[51]
International Energy Agency. The Cost of Capital
in Clean Energy Transitions. Accessed: 2024-06-
12. 2020. url: https://www.iea.org/articles/the-
cost-of-capital-in-clean-energy-transitions.
[52]
Grant Thornton. Tipping Point to Grid Parity.
Accessed: 2024-06-12. 2024. url: https://www.
grantthornton.global/en/insights/articles/tipping-
point- to- grid- parity/#:~:text=Some%20key%
20results%20of%20the,wind%20and%20offshore%
20wind%20respectively.
[53]
Offshore Renewable Energy Catapult. FOW Cost
Reduction Pathways to Subsidy Free. Accessed:
2024-06-12. 2021. url: https://ore.catapult.org.
uk/wp- content/uploads/2021/01/FOW- Cost-
Reduction-Pathways-to-Subsidy-Free-report-.pdf.
[54]
World Bank. World Bank Open Data. https://
data.worldbank.org/. Accessed: 2024-07-09. 2024.
89
==PAGE:98==
A
Appendix
A.1
Appendix: Methodology
A.1.1
Hourly Hydrogen Pipeline Losses Calculation
First, the total yearly losses for the entire pipeline were calculated. Considering a pipeline
length of Lshore, the total yearly losses were obtained by multiplying the hourly losses
per kilometer by the pipeline length and the number of hours in a year:
Total yearly losses = 483 kg/km/year × Lshorekm
(A.1)
To distribute these total yearly losses proportionally to the hourly mass flow rate profile,
the total mass flow rate for the entire year was computed by summing the hourly flow
rates. Then, for each hour, the proportion of the total mass flow rate that occurs during
that hour was determined by dividing the hourly flow rate by the total yearly flow rate.
This proportion was used to allocate the total yearly losses to each hour.
Mathematically, for each hour t, the hourly loss ˙mH2,loss(t) was calculated as:
˙mH2,loss(t) = Total Yearly Losses ×
˙mH2(t)
∑8760
t
˙mH2(t)
(A.2)
90
==PAGE:99==
A.1.2
Pipeline pressure drop graph
Figure A.1: Pressure drop with varying diameter across 200km hydrogen export pipeline, as-
suming a gas velocity v of 10 m/s and an outlet pressure of 70 bar.
A.1.3
Conversion to €2023
In this section, the methodology for converting costs from their respective base year to
€2023 is described.
Inflation rates from 2010 to 2023 were obtained from World Bank Open Data [54] and
are shown in Table A.1. Inflation factors (ii) for each year y were calculated using the
following:
iiy+1 = iit · (1 + it+1)
(A.3)
Where i is the inflation rate. For the base year y = 0, the inflation index ii is equal to 1.
Results are displayed in Table A.2. To obtain the nominal 2023 value of a certain cost
it is suﬀicient to multiply the real price in a year with the corresponding inflation index
in 2023.
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Inflation
5.42%
8.38%
2.59%
0.25%
1.21%
1.74%
1.54%
0.24%
0.03%
0.43%
1.35%
2.50%
2.71%
1.62%
Table A.1: Euro inflation rates from 2010 to 2023, from World Open Bank [54].
91
==PAGE:100==
From/To
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2010
1.00
1.08
1.11
1.11
1.13
1.15
1.17
1.17
1.17
1.17
1.19
1.22
1.25
1.27
2011
1.08
1.00
1.03
1.03
1.04
1.06
1.08
1.08
1.08
1.08
1.10
1.12
1.16
1.17
2012
1.11
1.03
1.00
1.00
1.01
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.06
1.07
1.10
1.13
1.14
2013
1.11
1.03
1.00
1.00
1.01
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.07
1.09
1.12
1.14
2014
1.13
1.04
1.01
1.01
1.00
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.04
1.04
1.05
1.08
1.11
1.13
2015
1.15
1.06
1.03
1.03
1.02
1.00
1.02
1.02
1.02
1.02
1.04
1.06
1.09
1.11
2016
1.17
1.08
1.05
1.05
1.03
1.02
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.01
1.02
1.05
1.07
1.09
2017
1.17
1.08
1.05
1.05
1.04
1.02
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.02
1.04
1.07
1.09
2018
1.17
1.08
1.05
1.05
1.04
1.02
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.02
1.04
1.07
1.09
2019
1.17
1.08
1.06
1.05
1.04
1.02
1.01
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.01
1.04
1.07
1.08
2020
1.19
1.10
1.07
1.07
1.05
1.04
1.02
1.02
1.02
1.01
1.00
1.03
1.05
1.07
2021
1.22
1.12
1.10
1.09
1.08
1.06
1.05
1.04
1.04
1.04
1.03
1.00
1.03
1.04
2022
1.25
1.16
1.13
1.12
1.11
1.09
1.07
1.07
1.07
1.07
1.05
1.03
1.00
1.02
2023
1.27
1.17
1.14
1.14
1.13
1.11
1.09
1.09
1.09
1.08
1.07
1.04
1.02
1.00
Table A.2: Inflation factors from year to year. The rows represent the base year, while the
columns the year the value is converted into. The column of interest is the one corresponding to
2023.
A.1.4
Turbines and Foundations Installation Costs
In this section, the modelling of installation costs of both turbines (ICTurbines) and
foundations (ICFoundations) is detailed. A key concept for this methodology is the round-
trip time that the installation vessel takes to reach the wind farm site:
Tsite =
2Dport
Vvessel · [ hour ]workingday
(A.4)
Where Dport is the distance in km from nearest port to the project site. Vvessel is the
speed in, assumed to be 20 km/h [35]. [hour]workingday is the length of the working day,
assumed to be 12 hours.
From this, the two installation costs in M€ can be calculated as [35]:
ICTurbines =
[
nturbinesTt,install + nturbines
nt,trip
Tsite
]
PriceV essel
(A.5)
ICFoundation =
(
nturbinesTf,install + nturbines
nf,trip
Tsite
)
Pricevessel
(A.6)
Where the term PriceV essel represents the vessel price per day, assumed to be equal to
0.15 M€/day, Tt,install is the time in days to install one turbine (2 days) and nt,trip is
the number of turbines carried per trip (5 turbines). Likewise, nf,trip is the number of
foundations that can be carried per trip (5 foundations) and Tf,install is the time in days
to install one jacket foundation (3 days). Values assumed for these parameters were
taken from [35].
92
==PAGE:101==
A.1.5
Hydorgen Production Components Mass
Mass (tonnes)
Electrolyser
melec · Pelec · 1000
Water Treatment Sys.
500 · Pwts · 1000
Compressor
250 · Pcomp · 1000
Table A.3: Mass equations of hydorgen plant components, from DNV [26]. melec is the specific
weight of the electrolyser in kg/MW, from Table 3.1.
Pelec, Pwts and Pcomp are the power
ratings of each component in MW. It is reminded that Pelec is determined in Equation 3.3, while
Pelec and Pwts are taken as the maximum value of their component’s energy requirement over
the considered time period.
A.2
Appendix: Results
A.2.1
Components Operational Parameters
While the primary focus of this study is to evaluate the levelised costs of the hybrid
offshore wind farm, it is crucial to present the operational parameters that support
these cost metrics. These include: export pipeline diameter Dpipe,export, array pipeline
diameter Dpipe,array, compressor inlet and outlet pressure pcomp,in and pcomp,out, rated
power of the compressor Pcomp, high-voltage export system Pexport, and water treatment
system Pdes.
Including these operational values provides insight into the design’s feasibility and helps
optimize system performance, supports future research and enhances transparency. For
these reasons, Table A.4 has been included in this section, where the parameters values
are divided according to the three layouts.
It is important to note that the results
are shown for a 50% power split between hydrogen and electricity, resulting in a total
installed electrolyser capacity of 660 MW.
It is worth reminding that equipment power ratings are taken as the maximum values
of the component’s energy requirement over the project’s lifetime. Similarly, pipeline
diameters are derived from the maximum volumetric flowrate of the pipelines Qpipe(t)
From Table A.4, several observations can be made. First, there is a considerable differ-
ence in the rated power of the export system between the two offshore layouts and the
onshore one. This difference arises because part of the wind farm’s energy production
is devoted to hydrogen generation, reducing the amount of electricity that needs to be
transferred to shore via cables. Both offshore layouts feature an export pipeline diameter
of 0.4 m, which is appropriate for the project’s scale. Similarly, the turbine layout has
an array pipeline diameter of 0.16 m.
Regarding the compressor, the inlet pressure for the Centralized and Onshore layouts
matches the operating pressure of the PEM electrolyser, as they are directly connected
93
==PAGE:102==
Centralized
Turbine
Onshore
Pelec∗(MW)
660
7.5
660
Pdes∗(MW)
0.62
0.007
0.62
Pcomp (MW)
3.6
3.6
1.6
Pexport (MW)
657.9
659.5
1317.9
Dpipe,export (m)
0.4
0.4
-
Dpipe,array (m)
0.16
-
-
pcomp,in (bar)
55
51.5
55
pcomp,out (bar)
92.2
92.2
70
Table A.4: Operational parameters results, PEM, 50% Hydrogen split. ∗For the turbine layout,
Pelec and Pdes refer to the electrolyser and water treatment system rated power placed on each
of the 88 turbines
with virtually no pressure loss in the pipes. However, in the Turbine layout, hydro-
gen generated at each turbine must be transported to the offshore platform via array
pipelines, incurring pressure losses that result in a compressor inlet pressure of 51.5 bar.
Similarly, a pressure loss of 22.2 bar occurs in the 200 km export pipeline, requiring the
compressor to bring the hydrogen to a pressure of 92.2 bar to be injected into the 70 bar
gas network onshore. Since pressure losses after the compressor are assumed negligible
for the Onshore layout, the output pressure corresponds to the 70 bar of the gas network.
A.2.2
LCoEcombined
electrical Graphs
Figure A.2: Combined levelised costs of energy for hydrogen and electricity considering electrical
end use based on LHVH2 and fuel cell eﬀiciency ηfc, PEM technology
94
==PAGE:103==
(a) Centralized layout
(b) Turbine layout
(c) Onshore layout
Figure A.3: LCoEcombined
electrical when varying total electrolyser capacity for different technologies and
layouts. Note that now the lines show the LCoEcombined
electrical of each technology, not the layout as
was shown in previous graphs. Each subfigure refers to a specific layout.
95
==PAGE:104==
A.2.3
Complete levelised Costs Values
Figure A.4: Centralized layout levelised costs results for each electrolyser technology considering
different values of SplitH2.
96
==PAGE:105==
Figure A.5: Turbine layout levelised costs results for each electrolyser technology considering
different values of SplitH2.
97
==PAGE:106==
Figure A.6: Onshore layout levelised costs results for each electrolyser technology considering
different values of SplitH2.
98
==PAGE:107==
A.2.4
Complete CAPEX Values
Figure A.7: CAPEX results for each layout and electrolyser technology, considering different
values of SplitH2.
99
==PAGE:108==
A.2.5
Complete Average OPEX Values
Figure A.8: Average OPEX values across the 30-year lifetime of the project in M€/year. Results
are displayed for each layout and electrolyser technology, considering different values of SplitH2.
100
==PAGE:109==
A.2.6
Complete Average Export Values
Figure A.9: Average yearly hydrogen export values across the 30-year lifetime of the project in
kg/year. Results are displayed for each layout and electrolyser technology, considering different
values of SplitH2.
101
==PAGE:110==
Figure A.10: Average yearly electricity export values across the 30-year lifetime of the project
in MWh/year. Results are displayed for each layout and electrolyser technology, considering
different values of SplitH2.
102
==PAGE:111==
103
==PAGE:112==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej, 399
4000 Roskilde, Denmark
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.wind.dtu.dk
