==PAGE:1==
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on
Ethereum
DTU Entrepreneurship
Master Thesis
DTU Entrepreneurship
Department of Entrepreneurship
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
DTU Entrepreneurship
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
William Mendis
Catalin­Ioan Roman
Nicolai Verbaarschot
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Stable Diffusion, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Entrepreneurship, Anker Engelunds Vej, Building
101, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.entrepreneurship.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Entrepreneurship,
Technical University of Denmark, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
William Mendis
s153476
Signature
Date
Catalin­Ioan Roman
s223062
Signature
Date
Nicolai Verbaarschot
s155932
Signature
Date
ii
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
12. July 2024
12. July 2024
12. July 2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The increasing prominence of digital assets has highlighted the need for innovative solu­
tions to enhance their liquidity and accessibility. This thesis introduces a novel fractional
NFT platform that fractionalizes NFTs into ERC1155 tokens, diverging from the conven­
tional ERC20 standard typically used for fractionalization. Our research, structured within
the Design Science Research (DSR) framework, begins with a comprehensive analysis of
existing fractionalization methods and their limitations, in addition to the challenges, risks,
and economic implications associated with fractionalization. The analysis informed the
design and implementation of our ERC1155­based platform. The results indicate that this
approach offers significant advantages in maintaining the indivisibility and unique char­
acteristics of the original NFT, while facilitating broader access and liquidity in the digital
asset market. This thesis contributes to the ecosystem by presenting a novel digital as­
set fractionalization platform that leverages common NFT standards to revolutionize the
digital asset market.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Thomas James Howard, Professor, Head of Innovation and Group Leader of Technol­
ogy Entrepreneurship and Design, DTU Entrepreneurship
We would like to express gratitude to our thesis supervisor, Thomas. His expressed sup­
port and belief in our project has been invaluable. His encouragement and guidance has
strengthened us as a team and his insights have helped us see the true value in what we
are building. We are grateful for his supervision.
Danny Grydholt­Jantzen, Portfolio Manager, DTU Entrepreneurship
We would also like to express gratitude to Danny, for his generous support in procurement
of an office for the duration of our thesis. His kindness and belief in our work has been
instrumental to our progress.
iv
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:7==
Preface
The development of this thesis has been influenced by prior work undertaken in two
courses: X­Tech and X­Tech+. During X­Tech, the team laid the groundwork by con­
ceptualizing the idea that this thesis explores. The X­Tech+ course provided the team
with the opportunity to transform this concept into a tangible prototype. The prototype
informed the design decisions made in this thesis, however no previous work is directly
included in the work presented by this analysis or solution.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Problem Statement
3
2.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Significance of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Methodology
5
3.1
Research Design and Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Development Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Data Collection and Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.4
Primary Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.5
Secondary Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Background
7
4.1
Blockchain Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Ethereum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.3
Smart Contracts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.4
NFTs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.5
Token Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.6
DAOs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.7
Layer 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.8
Fractional Ownership
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.9
IPFS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5
Analysis
11
5.1
NFT Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.2
Fractional NFTs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5.3
Fractionalization Platforms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5.4
The Challenges and Risks of Fractionalized NFTs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.5
Economic Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6
Motivation
23
6.1
Fractionalizing NFTs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.2
Adding Value to Fractions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.3
Buyout Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.4
Monetization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
7
System Requirements
27
8
Technical Development
29
8.1
System Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
vii
==PAGE:10==
8.2
System architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
8.3
Parallelization of development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
8.4
Smart Contracts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
8.5
Web Application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
9
Evaluation
45
9.1
Evaluation Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
10 Discussion
49
10.1 On acquiring underlying assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
10.2 On Governance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
10.3 On Community Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
10.4 On Scaling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
11 Conclusion
51
12 Future Work
53
12.1 Layer 2 support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
12.2 Smart Contract Security and Audit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
12.3 Design and Marketing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
12.4 Web Application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Bibliography
57
Appendices
61
A System Overview
62
B Competitor Analysis
63
C Key Interview Question to DVK
65
D Key Interview Questions to Gustav Arentoft
66
E
Key Interview Questions to Irena Sophia
67
Acronyms
70
Glossary
71
viii
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
For hundreds of years art has served as a medium for self­expression, storytelling, and
cultural preservation. The value of art is not just in its aesthetic beauty, but also in its
ability to convey powerful messages and evoke complex emotions.
Traditionally, art has also been an effective investment asset. Blue chip artwork, in partic­
ular, has been an investment choice among high net worth individuals and institutional
investors.
Contemporary art specifically, has demonstrated the key characteristics of
an attractive alternative asset class on an absolute return basis. Contemporary art has
demonstrated 14.0% annualized price appreciation from 1995 through 2020[1]. Besides
supply and demand, at its core, the value of blue chip art is derived from the culmination
of an ever­growing cultural context that surrounds and feeds into the work itself.
It’s not difficult to see why art makes for such an attractive investment. The very nature
of its value places it on a trajectory for appreciation; The more time that passes, the
more cultural context is fed back into the work. According to recent reports by Deloitte
and ArtTactic, it is estimated that the total global value of art and collectables is $2.2
trillion (3­4% of which is traded on an annual basis) [1]. This implies that the asset class
is similarly sized to other major private markets, yet it has limited participation from the
broader market as it is typically reserved for wealthy investors and collectors.
However, in recent years there have been a number of approaches to lowering the bar­
rier of entry to the blue chip art market, with one notable candidate being the introduction
of blockchain technology. Advancements seen at the intersection of art and technology
have benefited the development of the asset class and the democratization of blue chip
art. Blockchain technology is one such technology that provides possibilities for fractional
ownership of blue chip art[2]. This is enabled through tokenization, which makes it possi­
ble for collectors to possess a fraction of an artwork[3].
Security tokens became increasingly popular and common for tokenizing physical assets,
such as art[1][3]. These can represent a tradeable asset in the digital space and can
be divided quickly, easily, and securely into shares as comparable to a security paper
issued digitally[4], with information and rights stored in a secure manner[3]. With multiple
initiatives being regulated by financial regulators for the first time, worldwide interest in
fractional art investment has grown significantly, with the estimated AUM (assets under
management) being more than US$1 billion in 2023. “We may have entered a new era of
fractional ownership in art which could have a greater chance of gaining mass adoption
this time.” [1]
With the state of the traditional art market and fractional ownership laid out, attention is
drawn to a particularly interesting development coming out from the rapid advancement
of blockchain technology: non­fungible tokens (NFTs).
NFTs are unique digital assets that may take shape as digital art, collectibles, or virtual
real estate[5].The introduction of NFTs has allowed for the creation and trading of digital
assets that are unique and verifiable, providing a new medium for artists to showcase
and sell their work. For collectors, NFTs provide the opportunity to buy and resell these
artworks in an open market[1].
The inclusivity, opportunities, and benefits brought about by the inception of the NFT has
profoundly impacted the digital art market. At the market’s peak in January 2022, there
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
1
==PAGE:12==
were over 300,000 first­time NFT buyers and over half a million distinct buyers[1]. Around
the same time, the highest ever recorded market capitalization of the global NFT market
was approximately US$65 billion. This peak was driven by the surge in interest and in­
vestment in NFTs, especially within the digital art sector[6]. Since then, the NFT market
has stabilized, with the market capitalization of digital artwork hovering around US$7 bil­
lion[1][7].
However, the new digital art market brings with it many of the same barriers to entry as
its traditional sibling. Blue chip NFTs, much like their physical counterparts, may be out of
reach for regular investors and collectors. For instance, the sale of Beeple’s ”Everydays:
The First 5000 Days” for $69 million at Christie’s in March 2021 exemplified the potential
for high valuations within the digital art market[8]. There are plenty of promising digital
creators producing blue chip work regularly, all of which present investment opportunities
to those who can afford it.
In an attempt to democratize access to these high value digital assets, a few platforms
have launched solutions which allow for fractionalization of NFTs. In fact, a world record
breaking NFT sale took the shape of a fractionalized sale to over 28,000 unique owners –
The Merge, by artist Pak, sold for $91.8m in 2021[9]. NFT data analytics platforms such
as Nansen have even developed and made available NFT indexes for blue chip digital art
[10].
Fractionalization of digital artwork denoted by NFTs typically involves locking the NFT in
a smart contract that issues fungible tokens representing the fractional ownership. These
tokens can be traded on primary and secondary markets, as well as staked for yield, or
used as collateral in decentralized finance (DeFi) applications [11].
Current fractionalization approaches, even though successful at democratizing access to
digital artwork, lack the tangible aspect of owning art, since the fractional ownership is
represented by a fungible token ­ similar to a certificate of ownership. We believe that the
full potential of digital art fractionalization is not yet realized on the blockchain. Current
solutions fail to capitalize on providing users with a visual representation of their fractional
ownership. If you own a share of a digital artwork, shouldn’t you have some art to show
for it?
To address these shortcomings, we propose a novel fractionalization solution, paving the
way for a new type of NFT, the segmented NFT (s­NFT). The s­NFT provides fractional
owners with a visual representation of the underlying asset, making ownership more than
just a financial stake. This aesthetic fractional experience has the potential to tap into the
most valuable digital artwork.
2
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:13==
2
Problem Statement
Despite the ability to own fractions of high value digital artworks, current fractional own­
ership methods lack the tangible aspect of art ownership. Fractional owners receive a
fungible token but do not possess a visual representation of their share, potentially dimin­
ishing the emotional and aesthetic connection to the artwork. This limitation may not only
create a gap in value perception but may also hinder the broader adoption and apprecia­
tion of fractionalized digital art.
This thesis is intent on presenting the process of building, evaluating, and documenting
the development of a novel NFT fractionalization platform, wherein partial ownership is
represented by non­fungible fractions. This allows fractions to be used in ways not possi­
ble with fungible tokens. In order to showcase this potential, the solution is presented as
a fully functional platform which can support the fractionalization method envisioned and
presented.
2.1
Objectives
To address the problem statement, we derive the following objectives:
• Conduct a comprehensive analysis of the fractional NFT market.
• Use the findings from the analysis to inform the design of a novel NFT frac­
tionalization platform.
• Implement a system based on the design.
2.2
Significance of the Thesis
This thesis aims to provide the following academic and practical contributions:
2.2.1
Academic Contributions
• Market Analysis: The study will provide a comprehensive analysis of the current
state of the NFT and fractionalized NFT markets, offering insights into their growth,
challenges, and future potential. The analysis serves as a basis for further research
into the fractional digital asset market.
2.2.2
Practical Contributions
• Novel NFT fractionalization platform: By developing a fractionalization platform
on the basis of Segmented NFTs, the team introduces a solution that addresses the
shortcomings of existing fractional platforms.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:15==
3
Methodology
To deliver on the objectives and contributions outlined in section 2 the team employs the
Design Science Research (DSR) framework as interpreted by Hevner and Chatterjee[12].
DSR emphasizes the creation of innovative, purposeful artifacts to extend the boundaries
of human and organizational capabilities. This framework is particularly suited to the
development and evaluation of the s­NFT system, as it combines both theoretical and
practical aspects of research, aiming to produce a tangible and impactful technological
solution[12].
3.1
Research Design and Approach
With this methodology, the team explores and validates the concept of fractionalized NFTs,
specifically through the development and evaluation of s­NFTs. The research follows
a mixed­method approach, combining qualitative and quantitative techniques to derive
system requirements from a comprehensive analysis of the proposed solution and its
potential impact on the digital art market.
3.2
Development Framework
• Problem Identification and Motivation: Identify the limitations of current fraction­
alized NFT systems and the need for a more effective solution. Motivate the re­
search by highlighting the potential benefits of a novel s­NFT system for the digital
art market.
• Define the Objectives for a Solution: Establish clear objectives for the s­NFT sys­
tem, such as improving liquidity, enhancing user experience, and ensuring security
and compliance. These objectives guide the design and development process, en­
suring the end product meets the identified needs.
• Design and Development: Implement secure and efficient smart contracts for NFT
segmentation in conjunction with a web application to facilitate interaction with the
s­NFT system.
• Evaluation: Assess the s­NFT system in respective to the established system re­
quirements.
• Communication: Discuss relevant findings resulting from the design and develop­
ment of the platform.
3.3
Data Collection and Analysis
To ensure the thesis yields both practically viable and academically relevant results, the
data collection and analysis process encompasses both primary and secondary data
sources.
This multifaceted approach ensures a comprehensive understanding of the
fractionalization process, motives, and key opportunities. It also identifies challenges
that demand consideration when deriving system requirements. The overall collection
and analysis of data serves to guide the development and refinement of the proposed
fractionalization platform, ensuring it meets the needs of potential users in the fractional
ownership space and stands out in a competitive market.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
5
==PAGE:16==
3.4
Primary Data
The primary data for this study is sourced through direct engagement with key stakehold­
ers within the blockchain and digital art industries. The data includes in­person and online
talks with fractional ownership industry participants, digital artists, and art collectors in or­
der to gain insights into possible challenges. Additionally it identifies opportunities related
to technical and market dynamics of NFT fractionalization. Key findings of the primary
data serve to inform the design and development of the solution.
3.5
Secondary Data
Secondary data is sourced from existing literature, market reports, and on­chain analyt­
ics. Referring to secondary data contributes to a comprehensive understanding of the
fractionalization process, methods and their underlying opportunities, and challenges.
Furthermore, it motivates and informs the development of the s­NFT platform. As such,
secondary data includes:
• Academic Publications and Articles: Provide a theoretical background on NFTs,
blockchain technology, and smart contracts, with the objective to contextualize the
study within the existing body of knowledge and identify key implications relevant to
the development of the proposed solution.
• Industry Reports and Whitepapers: Includes publications from leading market
analysts such as Deloitte in addition to on­chain data analytics tools such as Dune,
NFTGo, and blockchain explorers. This data can aid in understanding the broader
market dynamics and technological challenges and advancements that influence
the fractionalization process.
• Platform Case Studies: Provide an in­depth analysis of existing NFT fractionaliza­
tion platforms, examining their features, drawbacks, and market performance data
with the objective of identifying best practices, opportunities, as well as potential
pitfalls.
6
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:17==
4
Background
4.1
Blockchain Technology
Blockchain is a decentralized ledger technology that records transactions across a net­
work of computers. Each block contains a list of transactions, and once the network has
found consensus on a block, it is added to the chain in a linear, chronological order[13].
This decentralized nature ensures the security and immutability of the data, making it ideal
for verifying ownership and provenance of unique digital assets like non­fungible tokens
(NFTs). Key features of blockchains that support NFTs include:
• Decentralization: No single entity has control over the entire blockchain network,
making it secure and resistant to censorship, downtime or fraud[14].
• Transparency: All transactions are recorded on a public ledger, allowing for easy
verification of authenticity and ownership[15].
• Immutability: Once a transaction is recorded on the blockchain, it cannot be altered
or deleted, ensuring the permanence of ownership records[16].
4.2
Ethereum
Ethereum is a decentralized, open­source blockchain system that was proposed by Vitalik
Buterin in late 2013 and went live on July 30, 2015[17]. Ethereum introduced a Turing­
complete programming language, allowing developers to create smart contracts, which
are tamper proof programs with pre­defined logic that can store, manipulate and create
digital assets.[18].
The fundamental innovation of Ethereum lies in its ability to support a wide range of de­
centralized applications (DApps) beyond just simple transfers of value, as seen in Bitcoin.
Ethereum’s blockchain serves as a global, decentralized computer where applications
can run exactly as programmed without any possibility of downtime, censorship, fraud,
or third­party interference[17]. The Ethereum platform enables developers to deploy a
diverse array of applications, including financial services, social networks, games, and
more, using its native programming language, Solidity.
At launch Ethereum utilized the Proof of Work (PoW) consensus mechanism, similar to
Bitcoin, but it has since transitioned to using the Proof of Stake (PoS) consensus mech­
anism with the launch of an upgrade called “the merge” due to energy and economic
concerns[19]. “Gas” is used in Ethereum to prevent Denial­of­Service (DoS) attacks, the
gas consumption of a transaction represents the amount of resources required to exe­
cute the transaction[20]. When using a DApp, users must pay these gas fees to execute
functions in a smart contract[17].
4.3
Smart Contracts
The concept of smart contracts was first proposed by Nick Szabo in 1997, who described
them as computerized transaction protocols that execute the terms of a contract[21].
Ethereum significantly advanced the idea of smart contracts by integrating them into its
blockchain, allowing developers to create decentralized applications that operate exactly
as programmed without any risk of fraud or third­party interference[18].
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
7
==PAGE:18==
In Ethereum, smart contracts are written in Solidity, a statically­typed, object­oriented
programming language. These contracts are compiled into bytecode and deployed to
the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM), which executes them[22]. Smart contracts facil­
itate, verify, and enforce the terms and can be coded to be immutable once deployed,
meaning their code cannot be altered, ensuring trust and security in the transactions they
govern[18]. Smart contracts are used to create NFTs.
4.4
NFTs
Non­fungible tokens are unique digital assets verified using blockchain technology. Unlike
cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin or Ether, which are fungible, NFTs are unique in that they
can individually posses distinct information or attributes. The property of non­fungibility is
what enables NFTs to serve as tokens of ownership of specific digital or physical assets,
such as art, music, videos, or virtual real estate[5].
The concept of NFTs emerged from the broader development of blockchain technology,
particularly Ethereum, which introduced smart contracts. Ethereum’s ERC­721 standard,
introduced in 2017, was the first to enable the creation of unique tokens on its blockchain,
laying the groundwork for the development of NFTs[23].
4.5
Token Standards
Smart Contracts may create any number of different digital assets. To ensure that these
contracts can interoperate and handle assets created by other contracts across the global
network, standards are needed. The following are the most commonly used industry
standard token types:
• ERC­20: This standard is used to create fungible tokens on the Ethereum blockchain.
ERC­20 tokens are “fungible” meaning they are represented by a decimal balance
with tokens fully interchangeable[24].
• ERC­721: This standard enables the creation of non­fungible tokens. Each ERC­
721 token is unique, allowing for the representation of distinct assets[23].
• ERC­1155: The ERC­1155 standard, developed by Witek Radomski et al.[25], is a
smart contract standard meant to be able to accommodate multiple different tokens
within a single contract on the Ethereum network. Unlike ERC­20 (fungible tokens)
and ERC­721 (non­fungible tokens), the ERC­1155 standard enables for the cre­
ation and management of both fungible and non­fungible tokens within the same
contract, which means that it can reduce complexity and increase efficiency in a
variety of applications, such as gaming, collectibles, and digital art.
• ERC­165: The ERC­165 standard outlines a uniform approach for smart contracts
to expose and communicate their supported interfaces [23]. The supports Interface
function of ERC­165, when called with a specified interface ID, returns a boolean
value indicating whether the contract implements the requested interface.
4.6
DAOs
A DAO or ”Decentralized Autonomous Organisation” is an organisational structure without
a typical management or board of directors. Instead, the organisation votes on the actions
of the organisation through a smart contract based token, known as a governance token.
These Organisations may pay members, manage a treasury of different assets, manage
related smart contracts, or carry out actions based on governance token votes. Votes
may be acted upon automatically by smart contracts.[26]
8
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:19==
4.7
Layer 2
A Layer 2 or simply ”L2” is a blockchain network that settles its transactions to another
blockchain network (the Layer 1). These systems are proposed as the solution to the
blockchain trilemma [27] which states that a blockchain can only have two of the following
properties: Highly Decentralized, Highly Scalable, and Highly Secure. Layer 2 networks
aggregate many transactions into a cryptographic proof, and then submit this proof to a
smart contract on the Layer 1. This then allows users of the Layer 2 to withdraw their
funds from the smart contract on the Layer 1 network by submitting the latest proof to
the contract. The result is that computational power and storage requirements can be
offloaded from the Layer 1 network and handled by a more computationally powerful Layer
2 network, without sacrificing on the security and decentralization of the Layer 1 network.
Usage of L2’s have been increasing dramatically over the short term. See below for an
aggregated overview of L2 usage.
Figure 4.1: Diagram showing increasing usage of Layer 2 networks [28]
4.8
Fractional Ownership
Fractional ownership in the context of non­fungible tokens involves dividing a single NFT
into smaller fractions that multiple individuals can own and trade. This approach can de­
mocratize access to high­value assets by allowing investors to purchase fractions instead
of entire NFTs, making investment into these assets more affordable. Fractional own­
ership of NFTs is facilitated by smart contracts on blockchain platforms like Ethereum,
which manage the division and ownership distribution of these otherwise non­divisible
digital assets[11].
Each token represents a share of ownership in the underlying NFT, granting the holder
certain rights and privileges, such as the ability to trade their share on secondary markets
or participate in governance decisions related to the underlying NFT[11].
4.9
IPFS
IPFS, or the InterPlanetary File System, is a peer­to­peer hypermedia protocol designed
to make the web faster, safer, and more open. It allows users to host and share content
in a decentralized manner, similar to how BitTorrent works. Instead of using traditional
HTTP protocols to locate a resource based on its location (e.g., a web address), IPFS
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
9
==PAGE:20==
uses content addressing, where files are retrieved based on their unique cryptographic
hash. This means the same content can be accessed from multiple nodes in the network,
leading to increased efficiency and redundancy.
10
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:21==
5
Analysis
This chapter is meant to present a comprehensive data analysis conducted to evaluate the
state of the NFT market including fractional ownership, as well as the evaluation of frac­
tionalization methods in order to derive key insights behind their mechanics, challenges,
but also opportunities. Context to the analysis is added by including and showcasing plat­
forms which have achieved NFT fractionalization. This analysis serves as the foundation
for formulating strategic recommendations and deriving key system requirements, ensur­
ing that the s­NFT platform is well­positioned to address the needs of the NFT fractional
ownership market and its participants.
5.1
NFT Market
NFTs exist on virtually all public blockchain networks. The most prominent NFT network
based on total value and volume, at the time of writing, is the Ethereum network. Non­
fungible digital Assets on Ethereum makes up around 80 percent of the NFT market [29].
Provided is a timeline on the development of the NFT market. Outlining the key milestones
that have defined this space from its inception to the present day, showcases the rapid
development, to where it stands today.
Key Milestones in NFT Development:
• Colored Coins (2012­2013): Early experiments with blockchain technology that
involved attaching metadata to Bitcoin transactions to represent assets[30].
• ERC­721 Standard (2017): Ethereum’s ERC­721 standard formalized the creation
and transfer of NFTs, providing a robust framework for developers[23].
• CryptoKitties (2017): One of the first mainstream applications of NFTs came with
the launch of CryptoKitties on the Ethereum blockchain in 2017. This game allowed
users to collect, breed, and trade unique digital cats, each represented by an NFT.
CryptoKitties brought significant attention to the potential of NFTs, demonstrating
their use case in digital collectibles[31].
• CryptoPunks (2017): One of the first NFT projects on the Ethereum blockchain,
created by Larva Labs. It featured 10,000 unique collectible characters and became
a significant cultural cornerstone for the NFT community[32].
• Decentraland (2018): A virtual reality platform where users can purchase, develop,
and trade parcels of virtual land using NFTs, showcasing the potential for virtual real
estate[33].
• Beeple’s ”Everydays: The First 5000 Days” (2021): The NFT market experienced
exponential growth in 2020 and 2021, with high­profile sales making headlines glob­
ally. Notable sales included Beeple’s digital artwork ”Everydays: The First 5000
Days,” which sold for $69.3 million at Christie’s auction house. This period marked
the mainstream adoption of NFTs, with various artists, celebrities, and brands en­
tering the space[8].
• Fractional Ownership Emerges (2021­2022): As the NFT market matured, the
concept of fractional ownership began to gain traction. Platforms such as Frac­
tional.art emerged, enabling the division of NFTs into smaller, tradeable pieces rep­
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
11
==PAGE:22==
resented by fungible tokens. Within the same period, the record for the highest­
priced NFT sale was made. The Merge by Pak, was sold for $91.8 million in a
fractionalized sale to over 28,000 unique owners[34].
• Market Correction (2022­2024): The NFT market faced a significant downturn. Af­
ter peaking in early 2022, the market saw a substantial decline in trading volumes
and market capitalization. The Art & Finance Report 2023 highlights that the spec­
ulative bubble burst resulted in a market correction, impacting both primary and
secondary markets for digital art NFTs. Many NFTs lost a significant portion of their
value in the process. Nevertheless, the total market capitalization of NFTs repre­
sented by digital art currently sits at over $B4.7 even after the market correction.
Furthermore, the total number of unique NFT holders across all collections is con­
tinuously on the rise, with the current estimates being approximately 7M[7].
NFTs are included and given utility in the broader market in the following ways:
• Primary and Secondary Markets: The primary market involves the initial sale of
NFTs, often through platforms like OpenSea, Rarible, and Foundation. The sec­
ondary market allows for reselling and trading of NFTs, providing liquidity and price
discovery mechanisms[35].
• NFT Exchanges and Aggregators: NFT exchanges facilitate buying, selling, and
trading, while aggregators consolidate listings from multiple platforms, offering users
a comprehensive view of the market. Examples include Blur and MagicEden[35].
• Utility through Borrowing, Lending, and Staking: Platforms like Blend (pow­
ered by Blur) and NFTfi enable NFT owners to use their assets as collateral for
loans. Other NFT­backed lending platforms include BendDAO and Astaria which
are pooled lending protocols, as opposed to the former, which are peer­to­peer trad­
ing protocols[36]. Staking allows users to earn rewards by holding and participating
in specific NFT ecosystems, enhancing the financial utility of NFTs[35].
Figure 5.1 provides an accurate perspective on the NFT Markets user activity by showcas­
ing total trading volume. An interesting remark can be drawn from this: Blur, the platform
for borrowing, lending, and staking, sees most of the trading volume share.
Figure 5.1: NFT Markets Trading Volume [37]
12
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:23==
5.2
Fractional NFTs
Technical Mechanics of Fractional Ownership
The process of fractionalizing an NFT, typically involves several key standard steps in the
following order:
• Locking the NFT: The original NFT is locked in a smart contract known as a vault.
This vault ensures that the NFT is securely held and cannot be transferred until
the conditions of the smart contract are met. The locking mechanism prevents any
single entity from unilaterally altering or moving the NFT, maintaining the integrity of
fractional ownership[11]
• Creating Fractions: The locked NFT is divided into multiple fractions, each rep­
resented by ERC­20 tokens. These fractions can be bought, sold, or traded indi­
vidually. This process is automated by the smart contract, which mints a specific
number of ERC­20 tokens corresponding to the fractions of the NFT[11].
• Distribution: The NFT owner or curator can distribute the fractions through various
means, such as initial offerings or secondary markets. This increases liquidity and
accessibility for investors, allowing them to participate in the ownership of high­value
NFTs.
• Buyout and Redemption: Fractional ownership contracts typically include a buyout
option, allowing someone to purchase all fractions and gain full ownership of the
NFT. The buyout process often involves burning the fractions and distributing the
proceeds to the fractional owners based on their share. This mechanism ensures
that there is a clear pathway for consolidating ownership if desired. The redemption
process should be designed to be transparent and fair, ensuring that all owners
receive their rightful share of the proceeds[11].
Common methods for fractionalizing NFTs include as follows:
• DAO­Based Fractionalization: Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs)
are another approach to fractionalization. In this model, a DAO is created to collec­
tively own and manage one or several NFTs. Members of the DAO purchase gov­
ernance tokens that give them voting rights and a share in the NFT(s). This method
emphasizes community ownership and decision­making, allowing token holders to
vote on whether to sell the NFT, rent it out, or take other actions[11][1].
• Bonding Curves: Another innovative method involves using bonding curves for
fractionalization. A bonding curve is a mathematical curve that defines the relation­
ship between the price of a token and its supply. When an NFT is fractionalized
using this method, the price of each fraction increases as more tokens are pur­
chased. This creates a dynamic pricing model that can help discover the value of
the NFT over time. Bonding curves can provide liquidity and price discovery but
may be more complex to implement and understand[11].
• Auction­Based Fractionalization: In this approach, an NFT is auctioned off in
pieces, with each winning bid receiving a fraction of the NFT. This method can create
a competitive bidding environment, potentially increasing the total value realized
from the NFT sale. Auction­based fractionalization can be particularly effective for
high­profile or highly desirable NFTs[4].
Furthermore, fractionalization methods can be categorized into two distinct types:
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
13
==PAGE:24==
• Aggregation: Aggregation is a method where different types of NFTs, such as ERC­
1155 and ERC­721 tokens, are merged into a single collection or pool. This pool
is then tokenized, allowing users to purchase fractions that represent ownership
stakes in the combined collection. The main advantage of this approach is that it
lowers the entry barrier for smaller investors, enabling them to own portions of high­
value NFTs. Additionally, token holders may receive governance rights over the as­
sets within the pool, which can potentially enhance the value of income­generating
NFTs[11]. However, aggregation also presents significant challenges. Redeem­
ing individual NFTs from the pool can be complex, as it often requires purchasing
the entire pool. Moreover, the absence of a unified price floor for the aggregated
bundle complicates the valuation process, as each NFT needs to be assessed in­
dependently. These complexities can deter potential investors and add difficulty to
the valuation process[11].
• Indexation: Indexation involves grouping NFTs of the same type into a single pool,
such as only ERC­1155 or ERC­721 tokens, without mixing them. This approach
creates a collection of NFTs with similar price ranges, establishing a price floor for
the series. This simplifies the redemption of underlying NFTs and makes the valu­
ation process easier, as the NFTs in the pool share the same type and similar price
ranges[11]. Despite these advantages, indexation has its drawbacks. Pools un­
der this method only accept the same type of NFTs and do not distinguish between
common and rare items. This lack of differentiation can lead to valuation challenges
within the pool and may reduce the attractiveness to investors who are specifically
interested in rare or unique NFTs[11].
Methods for Buyout and Redemption Mechanisms
Buyout mechanisms are an essential aspect of the technical mechanics for fractional own­
ership, providing a way for an individual or entity to purchase the underlying NFT and gain
full ownership of the NFT. Common methods for buyout mechanisms include the follow­
ing:
• Fixed Price Buyout: In a fixed price buyout mechanism, the smart contract spec­
ifies a predetermined price at which the entire NFT can be bought out. Once an
individual or entity pays this price, the smart contract automatically transfers all frac­
tions to the buyer, consolidating full ownership. This method provides certainty for
both fractional owners and potential buyers but may not reflect the current market
value of the NFT[11].
• Dynamic Pricing Buyout: A more flexible approach involves dynamic pricing, where
the buyout price is determined based on market conditions or bidding processes.
For example, the price may be set according to the average trading price of the
fractions over a certain period, or through a bidding auction where the highest bid
wins. This method ensures that the buyout price reflects the current market value
of the NFT, providing a fairer outcome for fractional owners[11][1].
• Voting­Based Buyout: In DAO­based fractionalization, buyout decisions can be
made through a voting process. Token holders vote on whether to accept a buyout
offer, with the decision based on a majority or supermajority vote. This democratic
approach ensures that all stakeholders have a say in the buyout process, but it can
be slow and may not always lead to the optimal market outcome[4].
• Bonding Curve Buyout: For NFTs fractionalized using bonding curves, the buyout
price can be dynamically adjusted based on the bonding curve parameters. As
14
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:25==
more tokens are purchased, the buyout price increases according to the curve. This
method can provide liquidity and incentivize early buyouts, but it requires careful
design to avoid excessive price volatility and ensure fairness[11].
• Instant Buyout: The instant buyout mechanism is based on the fixed price buy­
out where a buyer can purchase the entire asset immediately. This mechanism is
suitable for low­to­medium value assets. Advantages include providing a quick and
easy way to buy the entire asset. It can also help to reduce uncertainty around the
sale process and it has the least integration complexity[11].
• Dutch Auction: In this mechanism, the price of the asset is gradually lowered over
time until a buyer is found. Dutch auctions create a sense of urgency among buyers,
helping to discover the true market value of the asset and providing transparency
around the sale process. However, the final price may be lower than the asset’s true
value, and buyers may wait until the last minute to bid, leading to uncertainty[11].
• Voting Auction: This traditional auction format involves bidders competing to offer
the highest price for the asset. It creates a competitive bidding environment that can
drive up the price, making it suitable for high­value assets. However, it may not be
as efficient for time­sensitive assets compared to the Dutch auction[11].
5.3
Fractionalization Platforms
5.3.1
Tessera (formerly Fractional.art)
Tessera was a pioneering platform in the NFT fractionalization space. It allows users to
convert whole NFTs into fractional ownership tokens, enabling broader access to high­
value digital assets[38][11].
Fractionalization Process and Vault Phases
Vaults go through the following distinct phases[39]:
• NFT Vault Creation: The NFT owner locks the NFT into a vault by transferring it to
a smart contract on the Tessera platform. This vault acts as a secure container for
the NFT.
• Issuance of ERC­1155 Tokens: Once the NFT is locked in the vault, the platform
issues ERC­1155 tokens representing fractional ownership of the NFT. These tokens
were called ”Raes.”
• Distribution and Trading: These fractions can be distributed to multiple owners
and traded on secondary marketplaces such as decentralized exchanges, providing
liquidity and broader market access. The distribution phase begins at the beginning
of the auction and lasts a maximum of 26 hours. Once every available fraction has
been purchased, this phase is over.
• Governance and Buyout: Fraction owners can participate in governance deci­
sions, such as setting reserve prices and managing buyout proposals. Any user
can initiate a buyout auction by offering a bid for the entire NFT. If the bid meets the
reserve price and is approved by a majority of fraction holders, the NFT is sold, and
the proceeds are distributed to the fraction owners. Everyone has the opportunity to
see the specifics of the buyout plan on the vault page and either accept it or reject
it (by buying the “Raes” from the offer). This phase enables the reconstitution of all
Vaults through last Price Dutch Auction where bidders receive a reimbursement for
the difference between their bid and the final sale price of the Rae[39].
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
15
==PAGE:26==
5.3.2
NFTX
NFTX is another platform in the NFT fractionalization market, providing a platform for
buying and selling fractional shares of NFTs. It focuses on providing liquidity to illiquid
NFT assets by allowing users to create and trade fungible tokens backed by NFTs. The
protocol is ultimately governed by NFTX token holders.[40].
Fractionalization Process and Vault Phases
Vaults go through the following distinct phases:
• NFT Vault Creation: NFT owners deposit their NFTs into NFTX vaults. Each vault
is dedicated to a specific NFT category or collection. In return for depositing NFTs,
users mint fungible ERC­20 tokens called vTokens, which represent fractional own­
ership of the NFTs in the vault[40].
• Distribution and Trading: vTokens tokens can be traded on the dedicated NFTX
marketplace and other decentralized exchanges, offering liquidity and market par­
ticipation[40].
• Governance and Buyout: NFTX offers a buyout mechanism, allowing any user to
initiate a buyout auction. The auction begins when a user locks a specified amount
of vTokens in a buyout contract. The highest bid wins, and the NFT is transferred
to the winning bidder, with proceeds distributed to vToken holders. NFTX utilizes a
decentralized governance model where vToken holders can vote on various platform
proposals, including vault management and buyout conditions[40].
5.3.3
Floor Protocol
Floor Protocol offers a sophisticated approach to NFT fractionalization. Floor Protocol
stands out in the NFT fractionalization market due to its unique mechanisms for security,
user interaction, and liquidity management. Below is a detailed analysis of its fractional­
ization process and vault phases, along with the key features that distinguish it from other
platforms, according to their official documentation[41].
Fractionalization Process and Vault Phases
Vaults go through the following distinct phases:
• Vault Creation and µToken (ERC­20) Issuance: The protocol begins by creating
a vault where NFTs are securely stored. These vaults are smart contract­based,
ensuring automated and transparent management of the stored assets. Upon vault
creation, fractional tokens called µTokens are issued. These tokens represent frac­
tional ownership of the NFT stored within the vault and can be traded on decentral­
ized exchanges[41].
• Safeboxes and Key Management: Safeboxes are specialized vaults within the
Floor Protocol, providing an extra layer of security and categorization. Safeboxes
are tiered based on the level of user participation and staking loyalty. Higher­tier
safeboxes offer enhanced benefits and access privileges. Access to Safeboxes is
controlled through a key management system. Users must possess specific keys
to interact with the vaults. Each Safebox is identified by a unique Safebox Key,
granting exclusive access and control over the contents. These keys are acquired
through staking and participation in the protocol and need periodic renewal, ensuring
ongoing user engagement and security[41].
16
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:27==
• Auction Mechanism and Redemption: The fees for redeeming NFTs from the
vault are dynamic and linked to the Reserve Ratio. This ratio measures the liquid­
ity and stability of the vault. When the Reserve Ratio is high, redemption fees are
lower, and vice versa. This mechanism prevents the rapid depletion of vault assets.
When the Reserve Ratio falls below a certain threshold (e.g., 20%), standard vault
redemptions are paused. Users must then bid in µTokens to redeem NFTs, ensur­
ing that only serious and fair­value offers are accepted. This auction mechanism
maintains market balance and liquidity[41].
• Governance and Buyout: Fractional owners holding µTokens participate in gover­
nance decisions, influencing the management and operational policies of the vault.
This decentralized approach ensures the platform remains user­centric and adapt­
able. Similar to other platforms, Floor Protocol includes a buyout feature where
users can initiate an auction to buy out the entire NFT. If the bid meets the reserve
price and is approved by a majority of fraction holders, the NFT is sold, and proceeds
are distributed accordingly[41].
5.4
The Challenges and Risks of Fractionalized NFTs
Fractionalized NFTs, while democratizing access to high­value digital assets and provid­
ing increased liquidity, come with a set of inherent risks. These risks span to technical,
financial, regulatory, and operational domains. Drawing upon the detailed analysis, the
following challenges are presented.
5.4.1
Valuation Challenges
The valuation of fractionalized NFTs, especially those in aggregated or indexation pools,
can be complex and opaque. Determining the fair market value of individual fractions is
challenging due to the varying nature and rarity of the underlying assets. Buyout pro­
cesses, such as those involving Dutch auctions or dynamic pricing models, can create
uncertainty and price discrepancies. Fractional owners may not receive fair value during
buyouts, particularly in volatile markets[11].
5.4.2
Reconstitution Challenges
Reconsolidating the fractional shares back into a whole NFT presents significant diffi­
culties. The reconstitution process often requires unanimous consent from all fractional
owners or a predefined mechanism within the governing smart contract[42]. Coordinating
agreement among all shareholders is inherently complex, and not being able to provide
clearly defined and pre­agreed terms, disputes may arise, leading to operational difficul­
ties but also user dissatisfaction. The decentralized nature of blockchain technology can
complicate enforcing these agreements without a central authority. Economic aspects
of reconstitution also poses challenges. Aligning all shareholders on a fair reconstitution
price can be problematic, especially if the NFTs market value has significantly changed
since its fractionalization. Furthermore, the reconstitution process may require consider­
able computational resources, leading to increased transaction fees and further compli­
cating the process[42].
5.4.3
Decentralization Issues
Despite claims of decentralization, some platforms retain significant control over critical
operations, such as vault management and governance mechanisms. This centralization
can lead to unilateral decision­making and undermine the democratic ethos of decentral­
ized finance (DeFi)[4]. By contrast, decentralized governance models, while democratic,
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
17
==PAGE:28==
can be inefficient and slow. Decision­making processes that rely on voting can be subject
to low participation rates, governance attacks, or voter apathy, affecting the platform’s
responsiveness to critical issues[11]. In DAO­based fractionalization, conflicts of inter­
est may arise among token holders. Major stakeholders can influence decisions to their
advantage, potentially at the expense of minority owners[4].
5.4.4
Financial Risks
The value of fractionalized NFTs is subject to the same volatility as the broader cryp­
tocurrency and NFT markets. Sharp price swings can lead to substantial financial losses
for investors, particularly those with significant exposure to specific fractions[11]. When
it comes to liquidity, while fractionalization aims to improve it, low trading volumes and
limited market interest can result in illiquid positions, which means that fractional owners
may find it challenging to sell their assets at desired prices, leading to potential losses.
This might hinder the overall valuation of the underlying NFT asset[40].
5.4.5
Transaction Fee Challenges
Gas fees, the costs associated with executing transactions on the Ethereum blockchain,
pose another important challenge in the fractionalized NFT ecosystem. These fees vary
significantly based on network congestion, resulting in unpredictable and sometimes pro­
hibitively high costs[42]. For fractionalized NFTs, gas fees impact both the initial frac­
tionalization and the subsequent trading of fractional shares. High gas fees can deter
investors, particularly small investors who may find the costs outweigh the benefits. Fre­
quent transactions, such as buying, selling, or transferring fractional shares, can accu­
mulate substantial gas fees over time, eroding investment value. Complexity in smart
contracts governing fractional NFTs can exacerbate gas fees. More intricate contracts
require more computational power to execute, leading to higher costs[42].
5.4.6
Security Vulnerabilities
Smart contracts, which manage the fractionalization process, are susceptible to bugs and
vulnerabilities. Exploits in these contracts can lead to significant financial losses. While
many platforms undergo security audits to mitigate risks, audits are not foolproof. The
reliance on audits creates a false sense of security, as new vulnerabilities can emerge
post­audit. For this reason, the reliability of fractionalization platforms is critical[1][11].
5.4.7
Regulatory Risks
The regulatory environment for fractionalized NFTs is still evolving. Different jurisdictions
may classify these digital assets differently, leading to legal uncertainties. For example,
some regions may view fractionalized NFTs (in the form of fungible tokens) as securities,
subjecting them to stringent regulatory requirements. For instance, the U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC) might classify fractionalized NFTs as securities, invok­
ing the stringent regulations of the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934. In contrast, other jurisdictions may not yet have specific regulations for these as­
sets, creating a gray area that complicates compliance. This lack of a uniform regulatory
framework can result in operational challenges for platforms operating internationally[4].
The use of fungible tokens (ERC­20) in fractionalized NFTs raise issues related to con­
sumer protection, such as the risk of misleading marketing, insufficient disclosure of risks,
and the potential for market manipulation[11]. Fungible tokens enable liquidity and ease
of trading, however this increased liquidity can attract regulatory scrutiny, particularly if
these markets are perceived to lack transparency or are susceptible to manipulation[11].
18
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:29==
If fractional ownership tokens are classified as securities, platforms must ensure that their
issuance and trading comply with securities regulations, including those governing ini­
tial coin offerings (ICOs) and secondary market activities[4]. Overall, the lack of global
regulatory coordination can create challenges for platforms operating across multiple ju­
risdictions. Adhering to diverse regulatory requirements can impose significant costs on
platforms. These costs include legal fees, compliance personnel, and technological in­
vestments to monitor and enforce regulatory standards[4]. In conclusion, the regulatory
risks associated with fractionalized NFTs can be significant especially if fractional owner­
ship tokens are classified as securities.
5.5
Economic Implications
The economic implications of fractionalized NFTs (F­NFTs) are profound and multifaceted,
impacting various aspects of the financial ecosystem, from market dynamics and invest­
ment strategies to valuation methods. Fractionalization introduces new economic consid­
erations that require thorough analysis.
5.5.1
Valuation of NFTs
The valuation of NFTs is inherently complex due to their unique and non­fungible nature.
Unlike fungible tokens, each NFT collection has distinct characteristics that affect its value.
Various methods are employed to estimate the value of NFTs:
• Unrevealed Collection Rarity: When NFT collections launch with unrevealed art­
work or metadata, they create a sense of mystery and anticipation among buyers.
This practice often leads to increased excitement and speculation, driving up initial
demand and prices. Unrevealed NFTs typically use placeholder images until the ac­
tual artwork is revealed. This uncertainty can attract collectors looking to gamble on
acquiring rare and valuable traits, thus boosting the perceived value of the entire col­
lection. The reveal event itself often becomes a major milestone, creating additional
market activity as collectors trade based on the newly disclosed attributes[43].
• Scarcity and Rarity: The uniqueness and limited supply of NFTs, such as one­
of­a­kind digital art or limited­edition collectibles, drive their value. The concept of
scarcity is fundamental to their appeal and market price[35].
• Historical Sales Data: Similar to real estate valuation, historical sales data provide
a basis for estimating the value of similar NFTs. This method, however, requires a
sufficiently large dataset of past transactions, which is often lacking for many NFTs.
Nevertheless, past sales performance and price history is set to influence current
valuations. High previous sale prices can set benchmarks, creating expectations
for future transactions[35].
• Creator Reputation: NFTs created by well­known artists or endorsed by celebrities
tend to have higher values. The reputation and following of the creator play a crucial
role in driving demand[44].
• Utility and Functionality: NFTs offering additional utilities, such as access to ex­
clusive events, memberships, or options for loaning them to the broader market,
are valued higher. The potential for NFTs to serve multiple purposes enhances their
desirability[35].
• Market Sentiment and Community Engagement: As with other asset classes,
market sentiment and trends can cause significant fluctuations in NFT prices. Strong,
active communities around specific NFT projects can significantly impact valuation.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
19
==PAGE:30==
Engagement through social media, forums, and events creates a sense of belonging
and drives demand[44].
• Speculation: Last but not least, the speculative nature of the NFT market often
leads to price volatility. Investors and collectors may purchase NFTs with the expec­
tation of future value appreciation, contributing to significant price fluctuations[44].
The NFT market exhibits significant volatility and unique return characteristics, which fur­
ther complicate valuation efforts. Additionally, community engagement and speculation
are essential factors influencing NFT prices[44].
5.5.2
Valuation of Fractionalized NFTs
Valuing fractionalized NFTs introduces new complexities. Traditional valuation methods
for NFTs may not directly apply to fractional units, requiring adjustments and new ap­
proaches. The increased frequency of trades in fractional units can lead to discrepancies
in the perceived value of the entire asset. Additionally, investors may face difficulties in
assessing the true value of their fractional holdings, especially in the absence of stan­
dardized valuation frameworks. The correlation between NFT market returns and cryp­
tocurrency market trends suggests that fractional NFT prices may also be influenced by
broader crypto market dynamics, adding another layer of complexity to valuation[44].
5.5.3
Economic Benefits of Fractionalized NFTs:
• Enhanced Market Liquidity through Accessibility: One of the primary economic
benefits of fractionalized NFTs is enhanced market liquidity. By allowing multiple
investors to own fractions of a high­value NFT, the market can attract a larger pool of
participants, thereby increasing the overall trading volume. Enhanced liquidity can
lead to more frequent trading and better price discovery, as smaller units are easier
to buy and sell compared to whole NFTs. Data from platforms like OpenSea and
Rarible indicate that fractionalized assets often experience higher trading volumes
compared to their non­fractionalized counterparts. This democratization can drive
up demand and, consequently, the overall valuation of the underlying asset[35].
• Broadened Market Access: Fractionalization lowers the entry barriers for smaller
investors who may not be able to afford whole NFTs. This democratization of access
enables a more diverse group of investors to participate in the digital art market. By
allowing investors to buy fractions, the market can tap into a broader base of po­
tential buyers, increasing overall market participation and diversity. This broadened
access can also enhance the social value of NFTs, as more individuals can own
and trade high­value assets. Shared ownership of a high­value NFT can create a
collective sense of pride and belonging, driving up interest and value[44]. For NFTs,
social value is focal, meaning that when more social value is at stake (e.g., an NFT is
well­liked, upvoted, or discussed, thereby popular), scarcity can constitute a threat
rather than a benefit: the fewer NFTs available, the fewer opportunities for access to
social value[45]. Thus, the effects of scarcity on price can become negative, and as
such, broadened market access to valuable and scarce NFTs, can have a positive
effect on their price.
• Portfolio Diversification: Fractionalized NFTs offer new opportunities for portfolio
diversification. Investors can hold smaller stakes in multiple high­value NFTs rather
than committing large sums to a single asset. This diversification can reduce risk
and lead to more sophisticated investment strategies, akin to those employed in
traditional financial markets. The potential for NFT index funds, where investors
20
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:31==
buy shares representing a diversified portfolio of NFTs, further exemplifies the di­
versification benefits. Such financial products can attract institutional investors and
enhance overall market stability[44].
• Price Discovery and Market Efficiency: The division of NFTs into fractional units
can lead to more efficient price discovery mechanisms. With more frequent trading
of fractional units, market participants can gain better insights into the value of the
underlying assets. This increased trading activity can contribute to a more accurate
reflection of market supply and demand, leading to more efficient market operations.
As observed in the broader cryptocurrency markets, enhanced liquidity through frac­
tional trading can mitigate price volatility and promote market stability[44].
5.5.4
Economic Risks of Fractionalized NFTs:
• Speculative Risks: The democratization of access to high­value NFTs through frac­
tionalization might attract speculative investors seeking quick profits. This specu­
lative behavior can lead to price distortions and market instability, as observed in
other high­liquidity markets. The potential for speculative bubbles in the F­NFT mar­
ket cannot be ignored. Increased participation by investors with a short­term profit
motive could exacerbate market volatility and undermine long­term value[44].
• Volatility: While fractionalized NFTs can enhance market liquidity and investment
opportunities, they also introduce new economic risks. The increased market partic­
ipation and trading volume could lead to heightened volatility, similar to other high­
liquidity markets. The NFT market already exhibits significant volatility, with weekly
returns being more than twice as high as those of the cryptocurrency market. This
volatility can pose risks to investors, particularly those with lower risk tolerance or
shorter investment horizons[44].
• Fragmentation and Market Saturation: The proliferation of fractionalized NFTs
could lead to market fragmentation and saturation. As more NFTs are fractionalized,
the market could become overwhelmed with a multitude of small, illiquid assets.
This fragmentation can make it challenging for investors to navigate the market and
identify valuable investment opportunities. Additionally, the saturation of fractional
units may dilute the perceived value of the underlying NFTs, potentially leading to
depreciation and reduced investor interest[44]
The economic implications of fractionalized NFTs are diverse and significant, encompass­
ing enhanced market liquidity, broadened access, portfolio diversification, and improved
price discovery. However, these benefits come with challenges, including valuation com­
plexity, speculative risks, heightened volatility, and potential market fragmentation.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
21
==PAGE:32==
22
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:33==
6
Motivation
Drawing on the data analysis provided above, together with the inclusion of findings from
primary data, this chapter is meant to motivate the system requirements for the develop­
ment of the s­NFT platform.
As data analysis suggests, there is no doubt that fractional ownership can have the power
to democratize the NFT market, allowing a broader range of investors to participate in the
ownership of high­value digital assets. By splitting high­value NFTs into smaller and more
affordable fractions, more individuals can invest in assets they otherwise could not afford.
This inclusivity can enhance market liquidity and participation, leading to a more dynamic
trading environment[35][1]. Furthermore, increased liquidity can facilitate more efficient
price discovery, as a wider array of market participants engage in trading, reflecting di­
verse valuations and perceptions of an asset’s value[44].
The practice of fractionalizing NFTs also supports investment diversification. Investors
can spread their risk across multiple digital assets by acquiring fractions of different NFTs
instead of investing in a single, high­value NFT. This diversification reduces the risk as­
sociated with individual asset volatility and potentially enhances overall returns[1].
At the same time, empirical findings also suggest that there are a few key challenges
which must be considered within the NFT fractional ownership market. The chosen frac­
tionalization method, especially the buyout and redemption mechanism, can influence
liquidity, market behavior, as well as investor and collector appeal [11] (see appendix C
and D.
The complexity of valuing fractionalized NFTs adds up to further challenges. Unlike whole
NFTs, whose value is influenced by factors such as rarity, artist reputation, and community
engagement, fractionalized NFTs also depend on the liquidity of the fractions and the
platform’s reputation facilitating the fractionalization. Interestingly enough, the liquidity of
the fractions may be directly influenced by the chosen method of fractionalization together
with the valuation and popularity of the underlying NFT[44].
For fractionalized NFTs, value considerations include the perceived potential for future ap­
preciation, as well as perceived utility and desirability of the fractional assets exclusively,
and not least, the platform’s reputation facilitating the fractionalization process. All in all,
fractionalization adds another layer of complexity, as the liquidity and market dynamics of
the fractions themselves become crucial determinants of value[35][44].
6.1
Fractionalizing NFTs
At its core, the s­NFT solution aims to democratize access to high­value digital art through
the newly established representative fractional ownership (the s­NFT approach). Achiev­
ing this goal means that it could enable smaller investors and collectors to participate in
the blue­chip digital art market. This goal aligns with findings from both primary and sec­
ondary data, which emphasize the potential of fractionalized NFTs to broaden investor
access and diversify portfolios[11](as per appendix C). At the same time, the solution pre­
sented (representative fractional ownership through NFTs) may help to address liquidity
issues inherent in the NFT market(see appendix D).
The approach of representative fractional ownership for such NFT collections, could be
able to enhance market liquidity but also attract a wider range of investors and collectors,
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
23
==PAGE:34==
as suggested by studies on the economic implications of fractionalization[44]. Further­
more, by opening the marketplace for highly valuable digital artworks as well as fostering
inclusion and community engagement, the s­NFT solution aims to mitigate risks of mar­
ket illiquidity and fractional ownership devaluation. According to Borri and Shastri[44], for
NFTs, fractionalization does not results in value dilution for desired and valuable artworks;
Instead, it can enhance the value by opening up opportunities for community engagement
and interest, which can drive higher demand and liquidity for both whole and fractionalized
NFTs.
6.2
Adding Value to Fractions
As evidenced in the analysis about the valuation of fractionalized NFTs, traditional valu­
ation methods for NFTs may not directly apply to fractional units in the absence of stan­
dardized valuation frameworks[44]. Whilst this statement is true for fractional units rep­
resented by fungible tokens, it does not mean that it is the same for those represented
by NFTs. The s­NFT solution treats fractions as unique tokens, which means that most,
if not all of the valuation techniques of whole NFTs can be applied to s­NFTs, including
unrevealed collection rarity. As such, the s­NFT platform has the objective to transfer
and implement all the distinct characteristics that affect valuation of whole NFTs but with
respect to fractional ownership market constraints.
6.3
Buyout Mechanism
As evidenced in the data analysis of fractionalization processes, voting auctions have the
ability to involve bidders competing to offer the highest price for the asset. It creates a
competitive bidding environment that can drive up the price, making it suitable for high­
value assets[11]. As further suggested, coordinating agreement among all shareholders
is inherently complex, leading to platform operational difficulties and ultimately user dis­
satisfaction[42] (see appendix D). To address the difficulties in coordinating agreement
among shareholders, the preferred buyout mechanism is one comprised of a voting sys­
tem designed to reach unbiased consensus on minimum auction price. The goal is to
engage and align all fractional owners on a fair reconstitution price through voting and to
make the auction based buyout process as transparent as possible.
6.4
Monetization
Monetization is a crucial aspect of sustaining and scaling the proposed novel fractional
NFT platform. Two non­mutually­exclusive options are considered for monetization: the
issuance of a governance token and the implementation of transaction/minting fees.
6.4.1
Governance Token
The governance token will play a central role in the platform, serving multiple purposes be­
yond mere monetization. Token holders will have voting rights on key platform decisions,
such as feature updates, fee structures, and strategic partnerships. This decentralized
governance model ensures that the platform evolves in alignment with the community’s in­
terests. Given its utility in project governance, in particular in regards to potential attacks,
the issuance of a governance token is indispensable.
Timing governance token issuance is important, without proper distribution of the gov­
ernance token the project may suffer from governance centralization issues. Before the
issuance of a governance token, a Points system can be used to incentivize use of the
platform. This points system can then be used to decide distribution of the token once the
team feels that the distribution would be sufficiently decentralized.
24
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:35==
6.4.2
Transaction and Minting Fees
Transaction and minting fees will provide a direct revenue stream for the platform. Users
may incur small fees when conducting transactions or minting new fractional NFTs. These
fees can be adjusted or even removed to gain a competitive advantage in the market,
offering flexibility in our pricing strategy to attract and retain users.
6.4.3
Integrated Monetization Approach
Our integrated monetization approach leverages the strengths of both options:
Governance Token
• Monetization: Allows the team and early investors to capitalize on the valuation of
the project at an early stage compared to traditional companies.
• Utility: Beyond monetization, the governance token empowers users with decision­
making capabilities, fostering a community­driven platform.
• Incentives: Token holders will be incentivized to actively participate in governance,
ensuring the platform’s development aligns with user needs and preferences.
Transaction and Minting Fees
• Revenue: Provides a continuous revenue stream from platform activities.
• Flexibility: The ability to adjust or remove fees enables strategic flexibility, allowing
us to enhance user acquisition and retention.
By combining these two monetization strategies, we ensure a robust and sustainable eco­
nomic model. The governance token facilitates community engagement and platform gov­
ernance, while transaction and minting fees offer a direct and adjustable revenue source.
In summary, the issuance of a governance token is essential for not only for its utility
but also for the monetary benefit of early investors and the team. Transaction/minting
fees provide a flexible revenue stream. Together, these strategies support the platform’s
sustainability and competitive positioning in the evolving NFT market.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
25
==PAGE:36==
26
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:37==
7
System Requirements
The following are the requirements for the developed system, as derived from the motiva­
tion and analysis sections. They follow the MoSCoW Method [46] of must­have, should­
have, could­have, and won’t­have.
Must have
• On Ethereum
This is where the vast majority of valuable artwork exists. See section 5.1
• Fractionalize into NFTs
See section 6.1 on fractionlazing NFTs.
• Support both major NFT standards, ERC­721 and ERC­1155
These are the two most popular NFT standards on Ethereum [47].
• Redemption mechanism is transparent and fair
Users need to know that their representative fraction is directly tied to the underlying
asset, without a transparent and fair redemption mechanism this is not guaranteed.
• Mystery mint
See section 6.2 on adding value to fractions.
• Redeemable with all cards
If a user owns all fractions of an underlying asset, this is synonymous with ownership
of the underlying collateral and it must therefore be directly redeemable.
• Vote­based auction buyout
See section 6.3 on buyout mechanism.
• Points system
see section 6.4 on monetization.
Should Have
• Layer 2 support
See section 4.7 on L2s
• Available
High availability. Frontend access to the contract functionality should not depend on
a centralized service.
• Accessible
Be accessible to users with disabilities.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
27
==PAGE:38==
Could have
• NFT fractions representing the specific portion of the underlying
asset that a user owns
The visual representation of fractions is important, but is ultimately a graphical de­
sign decision and it is important that it be left open for consideration. See appendix
C and E.
Won’t have
• An interface for owners of potential underlying collateral to
fractionalize on the platform
An objective for the platform is to be a highly curated source of investment in digital
art. Currently, the fractional NFT market is saturated with bi­directional marketplaces
(see appendix B). The proposed solution is an attempt to target a potential blue­
ocean by offering a novel service. Therefore, procurement of artwork and thereby
its fractionlization is reserved for the owners of the system.1
1It is important to note, that the decision to prohibit anyone from fractionalizing on the platform does
not prevent the system from being extended with bidirectional marketplace support to supplement existing
services at a future date.
28
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:39==
8
Technical Development
This section documents the development of the proposed solution. The section will start
with a brief overview of the developed system and then have dedicated sections for Smart
contract development, Front­end development and Back­end development.
8.1
System Overview
Appendix A provides a high­level overview of the developed product. It illustrates how
digital assets are locked in their respective vaults, and thereafter fractionalized into cards.
These cards are placed into the gumball contract. Once the gumball contract is unlocked
users can burn packs they have purchased to receive a randomized set of cards. Card
owners vote on their desired reserve price of the underlying asset, collective votes deter­
mine the minimum auction bid required to start an auction. An external buyer can initiate
an auction, the winner of which receives the underlying asset. Once the auction is com­
pleted card owners can burn their respective cards in exchange for their share of the final
sales price. Alternatively, a card collector can amass all fractions of a given vault, and
thereby directly redeem the underlying asset.
8.2
System architecture
Figure 8.1: System architecture of the developed system
Figure 8.1 illustrates the high­level architecture of the system described in section 8.1.
The separation into three components corresponds to the different logical networks used
in the system; The Ethereum network, the IPFS network, and the traditional web network.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
29
==PAGE:40==
The Ethereum network is host to the smart contract system. The IPFS network is host to
metadata and images belonging to the fractionalized NFTs. The traditional web is host to
the systems web application. The composition of the components have been simplified
for the sake of visualization, each of which are elaborated in depth in sections 8.4 and
8.5.
Figure 8.2: Use case diagram
Figure 8.2 illustrates the actions different actors can engage in with the developed system.
8.3
Parallelization of development
Work on the Smart Contract system and the Web Application happened independently.
When a new version of the Smart Contract system was finished, a new interface in the
form of an ABI is given to the Web application to ensure compatibility.
30
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:41==
8.4
Smart Contracts
The developed technical solution is made up of several interconnected smart contracts,
and utilizes multiple third party smart contract standards for interoperability with a wide
array of digital assets. This section outlines how the proposed smart contract system is
designed, and explains the different contracts and details their implementation.
8.4.1
Smart Contract System Design
Figure 8.3: General architecture of the developed Smart Contract system
Note that some file names in figure 8.3 have been simplified for the sake of clarity. Grey
boxes are dependencies and core system contracts are displayed in blue.
Design Considerations
The fractionalization flow starts with the Underlying digital assets that need to be fraction­
alized. The system needs to support a wide array of assets, and as such we’ll need to
support the most widely used token standards. For this implementation we’ll focus on the
ERC­721 standard pioneered by the ”cryptokitties” project in 2017 [48] and subsequently
used by many of the most traded high­value projects such as ”Bored Ape Yacht Club” [49],
”Azuki”[50] and Fidenza [51]. By supporting the ERC­721 standard we’ll ensure that the
developed system can support the fractionalization of any digital asset built on ERC­721.
An important property of the deployed system is that it can be upgraded for future main­
tenance and upgrades. The developed system needs to use an upgradeable proxy (”Ini­
tializedProxy” in 8.3) to facilitate this.
One ”pack” should contain fractions from many different vaults and as such the team
decided to keep Vault contracts (”VaultFactory.sol”) and Pack opening contracts (”Gum­
ballMachine.sol”) separate to ensure different pack setups.
One ”GumballMachine.sol” may contain a mix of fractions. using multiple instances of
GumballMachine.sol for a single pack can help ensure properties of the resulting cards.
One example is ensuring that a pack always includes at least one card from a specific
GumballMachine.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
31
==PAGE:42==
8.4.2
Tooling
Solidity
Solidity is a statically­typed programming language designed for smart contract develop­
ment [52]. The proposed and implemented smart­contract system is entirely written in the
Solidity smart contract language. Solidity files use the ”.sol” file extension.
OpenZeppelin
OpenZeppelin[53] is a suite of open source libraries used to implement many common to­
ken standards such as ERC­721, these libraries also have multiple useful utility contracts
such as utilities to pause smart contracts or change owners of contracts after deployment.
These libraries were used extensively during the implementation of the smart contract
system and multiple of the contracts import these libraries.
Foundry
Foundry[54] is a smart contract development toolchain. This set of tools can be used to
test smart contracts locally without having to deploy to a public testnet. Foundry provides
an extensive set of tools for gas monitoring, testing, debugging and contract deployment.
During development of the solution the gas monitoring and printed gas reports provided
by foundry gave insights into the gas performance of the implementation.
Remix
Remix [55] is an online IDE that was used for debugging and testing contracts. This IDE
offers an easy to way deploy contracts and interact with the deployed contracts on a public
Ethereum Testnet.
8.4.3
Implementation
Underlying Digital Assets
A simple ERC721 implementation was deployed to act as the underlying token to be
fractionalized by the system. On Ethereum Mainnet this token would instead be a high
value non­fungible token. This mock ERC721 contract was deployed multiple times to act
as multiple different high value non­fungible tokens. This simple contract implements the
SafeMint() from the OpenZeppelin ERC721 token standard, and is shown in listing 1
VaultFactory.sol
The Vaultfactory.sol contract is a factory contract, meaning it instantiates other con­
tracts. This contract is used to instantiate Vaults for individual Non­fungible tokens that
we want to fractionalize. The contract implements the following external functions:
• Mint()
This function instantiates a new vault with a set listPrice, and a Non­fungible token
to be used for collateral (Token address and Token id). the caller must also decide
Supply of cards to be minted by the vault.
• pause() disables the mint function
• unpause() re­enables the mint function
Imports
• InitializedProxy.sol
This contract uses a standard InitializedProxy contract to ensure that the implemen­
tation of the Vault (the contract that we instantiate) is upgradeable in the future.
32
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:43==
1
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
2
pragma solidity ^0.8.20;
3
4
import "@openzeppelin/contracts@5.0.0/token/ERC721/ERC721.sol";
5
import "@openzeppelin/contracts@5.0.0/token/ERC721/extensions/ERC721URIStorage.sol";
6
import "@openzeppelin/contracts@5.0.0/token/ERC721/extensions/ERC721Burnable.sol";
7
import "@openzeppelin/contracts@5.0.0/access/Ownable.sol";
8
9
contract TestingToken is ERC721, ERC721URIStorage, ERC721Burnable, Ownable {
10
uint256 private _tokenIdCounter;
11
string private _baseTokenURI;
12
13
constructor(address initialOwner, string memory baseTokenURI)
14
ERC721("Mock Collateral", "mock")
15
Ownable(initialOwner)
16
{
17
_baseTokenURI = baseTokenURI;
18
}
19
20
function safeMint(address to) public {
21
uint256 tokenId = _tokenIdCounter;
22
_tokenIdCounter++;
23
_safeMint(to, tokenId);
24
_setTokenURI(tokenId, _baseTokenURI);
25
}
26
27
}
Listing 1: Simple OpenZeppelin ERC721 test contract, used as collateral to be fractional­
ized
• OpenZeppelin
This contract imports the Ownable, Pausable, and ERC721.sol, ERC721Holder.sol
logic from the standard OpenZeppelin library. These are used to pause the contract
and enable the transfer of ownership of the contract itself and the Non­fungible to­
kens it needs to support.
• Settings.sol
This contract is deployed and then given as an argument to the constructor of
VaultFactory.sol. This contract is then also given as an argument to every in­
stantiated Vault.sol. The purpose of the contract is to set and change default
values such as MaxAuctionLength, MinAuctionLength, MinBidIncrease,
MinVotePercentage, MaxReserveFactory, MinReserveFactor.
This contract is
owned and controlled by the deployer of the system, and also inherits the Owner
logic from OpenZeppelin.
Vault.sol
The Vault.sol contract is where tokens are fractionalized. It custodies the underlying
non­fungible token, mints ERC­1155 tokens that can vote on the state of the vault, and
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
33
==PAGE:44==
has auction logic. The vault is also where fractional owners can redeem their funds in
case the underlying digital asset is sold. The contract implements the following external
functions:
• initialize()
This function sets up the vault with initial values and mints a given amount of tokens
to govern the vault, also called fractions. The initialize function takes the following
arguments: address, id, supply, listPrice, uri. ”address” is the address of
the token to be fractionalized, ”id” is the id of the token to be fractionalized, ”supply”
is the amount of fractions to be minted, ”listprice” is the initial reserve price of the
collateral piece, and ”uri” is where fractional token metadata can be found (such as
the image of the fractional tokens). This contract also takes the Settings.sol contract
as an argument in the constructor, which is given by the VaultFactory.
• reservePrice() This is a public view function that anyone can call. It returns the
current reserve price for the vault, as decided by fractional token holders.
• updateAuctionLength() This is a function that can only be called by the owner of
the settings contract, and can not be called if the auction is live. It updates the length
of auctions.
• updateUserPrice() This function is called by fractional token holders to update
their desired reserve price for the collateral. This function cannot be called while
the auction is live. The function currently sets the reserve price for all vault tokens
held by the address that calls the function. The function aggregates the function
callers vote for the reserve price with previous votes for reserve price and sets the
new reserve price of the vault. The function also ensures that the desired value falls
within the parameters given by the settings.sol contract.
• start() This is a payable function that anyone can call. If the address calling this
function pays an amount at or above the current reserve price, an auction is started.
This changes the state of the vault and calculates when the auction will end based
on current block timestamp and the previously set auction length.
• bid() This function is used by auction participants to bid on the collateral dur­
ing a live auction. This function also ensures that the new bid is higher than the
minBidIncrease given by the settings.sol contract. The function takes the bid amount
and returns the current winning bid to the previous bidder. This function also cur­
rently extends the end of the auction by 15 minutes if a new bid is given during the
last 15 minutes of the auction.
• end() This function can only be called after an auction for the vault has ended. This
function then transfers the vaulted non­fungible token to the auction winner and
changes the vault state to ”ended”.
• redeem() This function attempts to transfer all fractional tokens from the function
caller to the vault. The function reverts if the caller does not have all fractions. If the
vault receives all fractions it will transfer the vaulted non­fungible token to the caller.
This by­passes the auction process and puts the vault in a special ”redeemed” state
to ensure that an auction cannot be started.
• cash() This function can only be called if a vault is in the ”ended” state. The function
sends the entire fractional token balance of the function caller to the vault and returns
their share of the proceeds from the auction.
34
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:45==
Imports
• OpenZeppelin
The Vault.sol contract imports the OpenZeppelin library to hold the underlying
ERC721 token, and to issue ERC1155 fractions.
• Settings.sol
The contract also imports the settings.sol contract given by the VaultFactory
GumballMachine.sol
The system needs a way for users to open their pack of cards. This is facilitated by a smart
contract that takes the pack as payment and gives back a defined amount of random cards
to the user. The deployer of the contract needs to fill up the contract with cards before
use. The team likened this functionality to a gumball machine.
The GumballMachine.sol contract only accepts a specified ERC721 token type (the pack),
burns it, and gives a specified amount of non­fungible tokens back. This contract is meant
to be ”filled up” with tokens created by Vault.sol described above.
Randomness
An important property of the gumball machine is that it returns a random alotment of
fractions when a pack token is burned. Ethereum contracts are deterministic, so true ran­
domness cannot be achieved without input from some external source. One option that
was considered is Chainlink VRF[56], this oracle network can provide true randomness
to contracts however has some downsides. Calls to Chainlink VRF are paid and take
some time to respond. Instead of using Chainlink VRF the GumballMachine.sol con­
tract derives pseudo random values by hashing values available to the contract such as
blockhash, timestamps, caller address, packsize etc. This source of randomness was
considered strong enough for the purpose by the team.
The GumballMachine.sol contract implements the following external functions:
• initialize()
This function is called by the deployer to setup the GumballMachine, the function
requires the deployer to give a title and currency. The title sets the name
of the GumballMachine contract, the currency is the address of the deployed pack
contract. The token contract given as currency will then be the only token accepted
to call the play() function.
• play()
This is the main function that users interact with to open their packs. The play()
function only takes a token ID, and initiates a transfer of a pack from the user to
the contract. If the user signs the transaction and the transaction is successful then
the GumballMachine uses a random number to decide what cards to dispense. The
pack used in the transaction is burned by sending it to a ”burn” address. This is
done by calling the internal function transferTokens(), This function can be seen
in Listing 2.
• getNFT()
This function returns information about what non­fungible token is available at some
specific index in the GumballMachine.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
35
==PAGE:46==
1
/// @dev this transfers the pack to the zero address
2
function _transferTokens(uint256 _tokenId) private {
3
4
// Log token ID
5
emit DebugTokenId("Inside transferTokens", _tokenId);
6
7
address packOwner = IERC721(currency).ownerOf(_tokenId);
8
require(packOwner == msg.sender, "Caller is not token owner");
9
10
IERC721(currency).transferFrom(msg.sender,
0x000000000000000000000000000000000000dEaD, _tokenId);
!→
11
}
Listing 2: internal ”transferTokens” function that burns the users pack as part of play()
execution
• getRemainingPrizesAmount()
This function returns the total amount of remaining fractions still in the GumballMa­
chine.
• registerNft()
This function is called to load up the GumballMachine by the deployer of the contract.
This function can only be called when the GumballMachine is in a ”locked” state and
only by the deployer.
Imports
• BubblegumManager.sol
This contract is kept separate from the main contract for the sake of simplification.
The main job of BubblegumManager.sol is to register and let the administrator man­
age the tokens in the BubblegumMachine.sol contract. The administrator of the
contract can directly remove tokens from the BubblegumMachine.sol by calling the
removeNft() function. This contract also has logic to register when non­fungible to­
kens are sent to the BubblegumMachine.sol
• StateManager.sol
This is an admin controlled contract similar to the Settings.sol contract. It’s main
purpose is to change settings on the GumballMachine. The functions made avail­
able to the deployer include setPackSize(), this decides how many fractions are
returned to the player when a pack is burned. lock() this puts the GumballMa­
chine contract into a ”locked” state that lets the deployer register new fractions with
the contract. and unlock() re­enables the machine and let’s users burn packs for
fractions.
• OpenZeppelin
To handle and interface with ERC­721 and ERC­1155 tokens, we import the relevant
OpenZeppelin libraries.
36
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:47==
Pack.sol
The Pack.sol contract is a deployed contract functionally identical to the ERC721 con­
tract used for the underlying collateral seen in Listing 1. This simple implementation of
an ERC721 non­fungible token acts as the ”pack” in the system. The pack’s contract ad­
dress is given to the GumballMachine and ensures that only non­fungible tokens from this
contract can be used to redeem fractions. The individual pack tokens are burned in the
process of interacting with the GumballMachine.
Gas considerations
As mentioned in section 4.2 on Ethereum, users of the network need to pay transac­
tion costs, denominated in ”gas”. These costs depend on how computationally intensive
any given smart contract interaction is. To ensure that the developed product is usable,
the team needed to ensure that the smart contract system was not overly expensive to
interact with. Gas estimations from Remix and Foundry helped inform the team during
development of any large inefficiencies.
Even the most simple transactions on Ethereum may end up too expensive for some
users. As shown in section 4.7, Ethereum is currently scaling through the concept of
Layer 2 networks. As Layer 2 support is one of the system requirements, the team has
not spent extensive time gas optimizing all system functions, and expect costs on Layer
2’s to be negligible for the end user.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
37
==PAGE:48==
8.5
Web Application
To supplement the smart contracts, an accompanying traditional web application is pro­
vided to allow users to interact with the system. The web application embraces both
newer aspects of web 3.0 development as well as traditional methods of web 2.0 devel­
opment. Herein, the Web Application as a whole refers to two distinct applications; The
primary application is a single fullstack application (frontend and backend) with an addi­
tional backend points service, and the secondary application is a solitary decentralized
frontend.
The primary application serves as the main interface between users and the system. The
secondary decentralized application serves the purpose of complimenting the decentral­
ized and thereby robust nature of the systems smart contracts. That is, it is designed and
deployed in such a manner that does not require the owners of the system to host and
maintain it. It provides users access to all of the core functionality of the contracts while
being absent of quality­of­life features that are present in the primary application but not
technically possible under the conditions of the decentralized deployment.
An outline of each of the components of the web application is provided, in addition to a
specification of underlying technologies and services used throughout development and
during deployment. The tooling established to facilitate continued development for future
work, in the context of the business case is presented in addition to implementation details
relevant to the achievement of desired qualities of the system.
8.5.1
Technology stack & Tooling
Herein lies the current state of the technology stack and tooling used for the development
and deployment of the Web Application as a whole.
SvelteKit
SvelteKit is a modern fullstack framework for building web applications using Svelte, a
javascript UI framework [57]. SvelteKit provides a comprehensive solution for develop­
ing performant and scalable applications by providing features like server­side rendering,
static site generation, and client­side hydration. It simplifies the development process with
a file­based routing system, a powerful built­in state management system, and seamless
integration with various deployment platforms.
PostgreSQL
PostgreSQL, or more commonly Postgres, is a an open­source relational database man­
agement system [58]. Known for its robustness, flexibility, and standards compliance,
Postgres supports a wide range of advanced data types and performance optimization
features. It is highly extensible, allowing users to define their own data types, operators,
and index methods. PostgreSQL also provides strong support for concurrent process­
ing, ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) transactions, and comprehensive
data integrity.
Docker
Docker is an open­source platform designed to automate the deployment, scaling, and
management of applications using containerization [59]. Containers are lightweight, portable,
and consistent environments that bundle an application and its dependencies, ensuring
it runs reliably across different computing environments. Docker provides tools for creat­
ing, distributing, and running containers, enabling developers to package applications with
all necessary components, which simplifies development workflows, improves scalability,
and enhances resource efficiency.
38
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:49==
Vercel
Vercel is a cloud platform for static sites and serverless functions, designed to simplify
the deployment and scaling of web applications [60]. It integrates seamlessly with various
front­end frameworks like SvelteKit, providing features such as automated deployments,
global CDN, and real­time collaborative development.
Fleek
Fleek is a cloud platform much like Vercel, but targets the decentralized web [61]. It
leverages the Interplanetary Filesystem (IPFS) for decentralized storage and integrates
with popular tools and frameworks for web development.
Supabase
Supabase is an open­source backend­as­a­service platform that provides developers with
a suite of tools to build scalable web and mobile applications [62]. As part of it’s offerings,
users have access to generous free tiered fully managed postgres database instances.
8.5.2
Architecture
The web application is described in two contexts, development and deployment. The
relevance of the development context is to underpin the dictated workflow for any potential
future employee developers. The relevance of the production context is to describe how
the product is deployed and made available to users.
Figure 8.4: Full stack web application architecture in development
Figure 8.4 illustrates the architecture of the entire web application when run in a devel­
opment context. Here, the entire stack is run on the developers host machine, with the
database containerized with Docker. The repository contains tooling through devenv [63]
to ensure all dependencies are available, making onboarding of new developers seamless
and adaptable. The points server, and both frontends interface directly with the Ethereum
network through the ABIs derived from the systems smart contracts.
Figure 8.5 illustrates the architecture of the entire web application when run in a production
context. Currently, the database is hosted by Supabase (8.5.1) but is seamlessly deployed
elsewhere due to the establishment of the docker files otherwise used in development.
The points server is hosted on a Hetnzer virtual machine. The primary web application
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
39
==PAGE:50==
Figure 8.5: Full stack web application architecture in staging/production
is deployed and hosted on Vercel (8.5.1). By using Vercel the architecture deviates from
the development context; In development the primary web application runs a dedicated
instance of nodejs to handle requests from the frontend. In production Vercel transforms
all nodejs functionality into serverless functions. These abstract away the infrastrucutre
and execute server­side code on demand. The deviation is opaque from the developers
perspective and therefore does not impose any overhead. By using serverless functions,
the round­trip time of a server request can be reduced as the server­side code can be
executed as close to the user as possible within Vercels network. It is important to note
that blocking requests that rely on the database are still bound by the physical location
of the Supabase database instance. The secondary decentralized application is hosted
on IPFS (4.9) through Fleek (8.5.1). By hosting the secondary application on IPFS we
can ensure that users always have an interface to the smart contract system even if our
primary application experiences downtime. This is how we, in part, achieve our desired
trait of availability of the system.1
8.5.3
Implementation
Herein lies documentation of implementation specific details for each of the components
of the web application. Uninterested readers can skip this section at their liberty.
Primary Application
The primary application is implemented as a fullstack application using Sveltekit. This
means that frontend code and backend code is co­mingled. A natural question when
developing a web3 application is if there is any need for a centralized backend and asso­
1In practice, ensuring availability on IPFS demands that the content is pinned (hosted) by at least one node
in the IPFS network. As the application increases in popularity it is expected that the number of independent
nodes participating in pinning increases, strengthening the availability and permanence.
40
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:51==
ciated database at all. The motivation behind the decision to include a centralized back­
end in the product is to enhance the user experience when using the primary application;
Since the the assets owned by users is accounted for on­chain maintaining a separate
database is not required, but relying exclusively on the Ethereum network for providing
data directly to the frontend has shortcomings.
The primary shortcoming that is addressed by the introduction of the centralized backend
in the developed system is that of a reliance on a third party RPC. While there are al­
ternative solutions outside of such a reliance, due to time­constraits such solutions have
been left as points of discussion in section 10. For the frontend application to exchange
information directly with the network it does so through an API provided by a service with
access to an Ethereum node/s. The design of such APIs is not standardized and are gen­
eral, the implication of this being that getting the data that we want demands multiple calls
as well as additional logic for things like pagination, filtering, sorting, etc. These factors
not only increase latency for the user but also impose costs on the system owner in the
form of fees paid to the service providing the API.
Writing data to the network, which is what happens when a user buys a pack for example,
is handled by the users wallet and is not a cost to the system. Reading data however,
which is required for displaying a users packs and cards is not. So to avoid the aforemen­
tioned shortcomings of relying on a third­party for such functionality, the solution instead
opts to use emitted events from the smart contract that are present in the transaction re­
ceipts generated by the users wallet in conjunction with our own API and database for
this purpose.
The relational database contains three tables, Accounts, Packs, and Cards. Accounts
have a one­to­many bidirectional relationship to packs and cards, and packs have a one­
to­many bidirectional relationship to cards. When a user connects their wallet to the ap­
plication for the first time the frontend makes a request to the server to create an account
record in the database with the wallets address. Packs and cards are added and linked to
the account in similar fashion pending a successful transaction receipt from the Ethereum
network.
A concrete example of how this is achieved is provided in listing 3. This function is called
when a user opens a pack. First, the application ensures that the user has connected a
wallet before it proceeds to attempt the write operation. It then uses the relevant contracts
ABI, passing the wallet address and tokenID of the pack to initiate a write operation on the
contract. At this point, an internal state store is set, allowing for visual feedback in the UI.
The user is then prompted to approve this transaction in their wallet. The write process is
asynchronous and therefore we create a promise through waitForTransactionReceipt.
Once the promise is fulfilled we parse the logs, which contains information on which cards
the user has received. This information is then included in a request to the backend
which updates the database accordingly, adding the assets in addition to awarding points.
Following the resolution of the write operation the internal stores used for visual feedback
are restored to their default state.
For loading the data and displaying newly added packs and cards the application makes
use of sveltekits server load functions. These functions are special in that they run once
on the server on initial page load, with the implication that users do not need to wait for
their packs or cards to load when they visit the application as they are already included in
the markup delivered to the browser. Furthermore, by calling the invalidateAll function
on the frontend we trigger a re­run of the server load functions, seamlessly updating all
of the users packs and cards from the database without having to refresh the browser.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
41
==PAGE:52==
1
export const playGumball = async (tokenId: number) => {
2
const currentAddress = get(accountAddress);
3
if (currentAddress !== undefined) {
4
try {
5
const hash = await writeContract(get(wagmiConfig), {
6
address: gumballAddress[11155111],
7
abi: gumballAbi,
8
functionName: "play",
9
args: [tokenId as unknown as bigint],
10
});
11
cardTransactionPending.set(true);
12
const transactionReceipt = await waitForTransactionReceipt(
13
get(wagmiConfig), { hash },
14
);
15
cardTransactionPending.set(false);
16
const logs = parseEventLogs({
17
abi: gumballAbi, logs: transactionReceipt.logs,
18
});
19
const tokenDebug = logs.find((l) => l.eventName === "DebugTokenId");
20
const packTokenId = tokenDebug?.args.tokenId;
21
const transferEvents = logs.filter((l) => l.eventName === "TokenSent");
22
const results = [];
23
for (const event of transferEvents) {
24
const cardTokenID = event.args._TokenID;
25
const cardTokenAddress = event.args._tokenAddress;
26
if (cardTokenID && cardTokenAddress) {
27
const result = await postCards(
28
currentAddress, cardTokenAddress, Number(cardTokenID), Number(packTokenId),
29
);
30
updateAccount.set(!get(updateAccount));
31
invalidateAll();
32
results.push(result);
33
}
34
}
35
return { results };
36
} catch (error) {
37
cardTransactionPending.set(false);
38
throw error;
39
}
40
} else {
41
return null;
42
}
43
};
44
}
Listing 3: The implementation of the pack opening function
All smart contract interactions follow roughly the same implementation as the example in
listing 3
42
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:53==
Points Service
The points service is implemented as a rust script that is responsible for awarding users
points based off of indirect actions. Currently the system awards points for holding packs
and holding cards, but can be extended to support any number of passive actions. The
service runs every five minutes, wherein it reads all accounts from the database and
updates the users points accordingly.
Decentralized Application
The decentralized application provides all of the smart contract interactions that are pro­
vided by the primary application, but does not display the users packs or cards. In place
of the otherwise rich interface present in the primary application, where users interact
with the contract more seamlessly by, for example, clicking on their pack to open it, the
decentralized application has text fields that the user manually populates with information
required by the contract write calls. This is a necessary compromise given the current im­
plementation as the nature of this application is that it does not depend on the centralized
server and database present in the primary application.
The decentralized application is also built using SvelteKit and shares most of the code
with the primary application. Where it differs is that it compiles the source code into static
html and javascript files that are able to be deployed to IPFS. Deployment is handled by
Fleek (8.5.1).
(a) Primary Application
(b) Decentralized Application
Figure 8.6: A side­by­side comparison of the primary and secondary application
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
43
==PAGE:54==
44
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:55==
9
Evaluation
The following evaluation assesses whether the developed system meets the system re­
quirements laid out in Chapter 7: System Requirements, and ends with a brief evaluation
summary.
Table 9.1: Must Have
Requirement
Comments/Remarks
Met?
On Ethereum
The
developed
system
is
on
Ethereum
Yes
Fractionalize into NFTs
The developed systems enables the
fictionalization of collateral into new
Non­fungible tokens
Yes
Support both major NFT standards,
ERC­721 and ERC­1155
The developed system supports ERC­
721 and ERC­1155
Yes
Redemption mechanism is trans­
parent and fair
The Smart contract code is currently
closed­source and not verified on
Etherscan.
The redemption mecha­
nism itself is built to be transparent
and fair.
Once the vault contract is
open­sourced and verified on­chain
this requirement is met
Partly
Mystery mint
The developed system implements
packs that can be opened and results
in a randomized selection of cards
Yes
Redeemable with all cards
Redemption of all cards are supported
Yes
Vote­enforced auction­based buy­
out
The
developed
system
has
vote­
enforced auction­based buyout
Yes
Points system
The developed system has a points
system
Yes
9.1
Evaluation Summary
The developed system meets all Must Have requirements as given by the system require­
ments in Chapter 7, pending vault logic being open sourced and verified.
The team has a clear path towards achieving Layer 2 support, more on the work required
to meet this requirement can be found in the future work section 12.1.
The system has successfully met its primary objective of enabling fractional ownership of
non­fungible tokens (NFTs) and fulfills the core goals of the implementation laid out in the
requirements.
The user interface has been implemented with semantic HTML, ensuring that all neces­
sary user actions for the fractionalization process are accessible to users with disabilities.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
45
==PAGE:56==
Table 9.2: Should Have
Requirement
Comments/Remarks
Met?
Layer 2 support
The developed system is entirely on Layer 1 Ethereum, see
section ”future work”
No
Available
The developed system has a decentralized front­end on
IPFS for high availability
Yes
Accessible
The developed system support Semantic HTML that allows
people with disabilities to use the site through screen read­
ers
Yes
Table 9.3: Could Have
Requirement
Comments/Remarks
Met?
NFT fractions representing the spe­
cific portion of the underlying asset
that a user owns
Left open for consideration as sug­
gested, see section ”future work”
No
The path towards meeting all requirements is clear and the team will be actively working on
fulfilling outstanding requirements going forward. In conclusion the team feels confident
in this novel approach to fractional ownership, and is optimistic about it’s ability to deliver
substantial value.
46
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:57==
Table 9.4: Won’t Have
Requirement
Comments/Remarks
Met?
An interface for owners of potential
underlying collateral to fractional­
ize on the platform
The developed system does not have
an interface for owners of underlying
collateral to fractionalize on the plat­
form
Yes
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
47
==PAGE:58==
48
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:59==
10
Discussion
10.1
On acquiring underlying assets
The developed platform needs digital assets to fractionalize. There are several paths
towards acquiring these assets, the following is a non­exhaustive list.
10.1.1
The team directly acquires needed assets
This option assumes that the team has secured the needed funding to acquire what is
deemed necessary to launch the first pack. In the case of an unsuccessful pack launch,
meaning the pack is not sold out during the pack sale, the team will have to sell the assets
back to the public market and incur a potential loss due to price fluctuations.
10.1.2
Partner incurs asset volatility risk
This option would be a short­term loan of needed assets with the lender willing to take
the asset volatility risk on behalf of the team by purchasing the needed assets from the
market. The team would then pay the loan back with proceeds from the pack sale or the
loaned assets in case of an unsuccessful sale.
10.1.3
Partnership with asset holder
This is the preferred option as no additional risk is incurred by either party. By partner­
ing with a current digital asset holder that wishes to sell the digital asset, the best­case
scenario is that the asset is sold through the fractionalization process with the worst case
being the previous status quo for both parties.
10.2
On Governance
The system requirements included a ”Points System”. This requirement was chosen on
the basis of the monetization strategy that requires a governance token be issued for
the system. A governance token would allow holders to vote on decisions around the
management of the project.
Governance may also help discourage attempts at griefing vaults. One potential attack
vector that can be mitigated by an overarching governance structure is an adversary buy­
ing and burning an amount of fractions that ensures that consensus cannot be reached
on a reserve price for the vault. This effectively makes other vault fractions worthless as
the collateral asset cannot be unlocked. If a reserve price cannot be agreed upon be­
cause some fractions cannot or are not voting, governance could intervene ensuring that
the underlying vault asset could be released and sold for the benefit of fractional asset
holders.
10.3
On Community Building
The team believes that the presented fractional NFT solution needs a unique focus on
community building as fractionalizing into non­fungible tokens (NFTs) rather than fungible
tokens is one of the defining features.
The team hopes that this distinction can help foster a unique sense of ownership among
fractional owners, enhancing connections to the project and the fractions themselves.
Unlike fungible tokens, non­fungible fractions allow for new (and fun?) interactions and
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
49
==PAGE:60==
sub­community formation, hopefully encouraging active and lasting engagement with the
project.
This focus may also help create an active DAO for the project once a governance token
is released, helping community members become integral to the project’s success. The
team sees this as one of the core long­term goals for the project.
10.4
On Scaling
As we plan for the future beyond this thesis, scaling our fractionalization platform becomes
a critical objective.
Our approach to implementation has been intentionally designed
to support this long­term vision, ensuring scalability, maintainability, and adaptability to
changes in the ecosystem.
Throughout the development process, we have prioritized establishing robust coding prac­
tices and development standards. This includes adhering to coding conventions, seman­
tic versioning, git­flows, and conducting code reviews. By maintaining high standards,
we ensure that our platform’s codebase remains organized, efficient, and scalable as it
evolves. Comprehensive documentation is essential for facilitating future development
and onboarding new contributors. We have diligently documented our codebase, APIs,
and architectural decisions. To support seamless collaboration and development conti­
nuity, we have invested in creating reproducible development environments. By using
tools like Docker, Devenv, and versioned dependencies, we ensure that developers can
replicate the exact environment needed to build and test the platform across different host
system setups and configurations.
Furthermore, our web application has been architected to be deployment­agnostic, allow­
ing flexibility in scaling strategies. By decoupling deployment specifics from core func­
tionalities, we can rapidly adapt to changes in deployment environments, infrastructure
providers, or evolving requirements. This flexibility enhances our ability to scale efficiently
without being tied down by specific technological choices.
50
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:61==
11
Conclusion
In this thesis, we explored the concept of fractionalized NFTs, explaining the underly­
ing technologies, market dynamics, and associated challenges. Our investigation began
with an introduction to blockchain technology and the Ethereum ecosystem as a whole,
detailing among other concepts smart contracts, token standards, and decentralized au­
tonomous organizations (DAOs).
We employed the Design Science Research (DSR) methodology to guide our research
process. This approach enabled us to systematically design, develop, and evaluate ar­
tifacts related to fractionalized NFTs, ensuring that our solutions were both practical and
theoretically grounded. Through iterative cycles of problem identification, solution design,
and evaluation, we achieved a robust understanding of the domain.
We examined the NFT market, highlighting the increasing significance of fractional owner­
ship as a means to democratize access to high­value digital assets. Through detailed case
studies of platforms like Tessera, NFTX, and Floor Protocol, we identified key mechanisms
and business models driving the fractionalization of NFTs. Our analysis underscored the
economic implications, both potential benefits and inherent risks, of this emerging sector.
The challenges associated with fractionalized NFTs were thoroughly discussed, includ­
ing difficulties with regards to valuation, reconstitution issues, decentralization concerns,
financial risks, transaction fees, security vulnerabilities.
In conclusion, fractionalized NFTs represent a promising yet complex innovation within
the blockchain space. They offer exciting opportunities for democratizing asset ownership
and fostering new economic models, but also require careful consideration of technical,
financial, and regulatory challenges. Our research, guided by the DSR methodology and
enriched by the practical development of a fractionalization platform, provides a founda­
tional framework for understanding and navigating these complexities, paving the way for
future developments of the platform.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
51
==PAGE:62==
52
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:63==
12
Future Work
12.1
Layer 2 support
As noted in the evaluation section, Layer 2 support is the single biggest currently missing
system requirement. This implementation will be the main focus of the team going forward.
As noted in the motivation section, this will enable the developed system to launch into
ecosystems that not only have many users but also have a unique need for a solution
such as the developed system.
As noted in the competitor analysis there is a demonstrated product market fit on Layer 1.
It may be worth considering launching on Layer 1 first. Figure 12.1 is a high­level design
diagram of how the team envisions the Layer 2 integration from a smart contract system
perspective.
Figure 12.1: Diagram of envisioned Smart Contract Layer 2 integration
The implementation would consist of launching a vault, gumball machine and pack identi­
cal to the developed ones on the chosen Layer 2. This Layer 2 vault would mint cards and
users would be able to open their packs on the Layer 2 network, with negligible transac­
tion fees. The Layer 2 vault would then, through a Layer 2 bridge, update the state of the
Layer 1 Vault that custodys the underlying collateral with information about the fractional
users desired reserve price. The auction would still happen on Layer 1, with the proceeds
bridged to the Layer 2 vault. Layer 2 card holders would then redeem their share of the
proceeds from the Layer 2 vault.
12.2
Smart Contract Security and Audit
Even though the developed smart contract system has all the required functionality, test
coverage is not complete. The team needs to ensure full test coverage of the system,
and continue work ensuring the safety of the system. Even after the team completes this
work, a security audit should be completed by an external security auditor. Such an audit
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
53
==PAGE:64==
could help identify security problems, and also helps ensure users of the safety of the
system through the given auditor branded stamp of approval. If the system is to custody
highly valuable assets, a security audit is required before public launch.
12.3
Design and Marketing
Before this product can go to market, proper brand identity, graphical design and market­
ing strategy needs to be formed. The team did not focus on these areas during develop­
ment as they lie outside of the expertise of the team.
12.4
Web Application
Figure 12.2: Potential improvements to web application
The decision to leverage a traditional backend and database to improve user experience
comes at a cost under the current implementation. Since updates to the database are
triggered by the completion of transactions on the client, there exist conditions under
which the backend is not notified of a state change. For example, if a user closes the
browser tab whilst waiting for a transaction to complete, the server will never know if it
was successful or not and therefore the database will not be updated. This is not critical,
as it only effects the presentation layer and their assets are secured by the Ethereum
network. In such events, they can always use the secondary application to interact with
the contracts.
There are two solutions planned to address this. The first is to only submit the transaction
hash to the server when the transaction is initiated, and then await the resolution of the
transaction on the server. This dramatically reduces the likelihood of such events as they
would only be able to occur between the approval of the transaction and the immediate
ping to the server thereafter, however it is still technically possible. This solution is very
straight forward to implement as it is simply moving existing logic from the client to the
server. The implication of this is that it adds overhead in the form of additional computation
to the server which is undesirable.
The second solution ensures that such database synchronization issues do not occur is to
remove the transaction­specific communication between the server and client entirely and
instead listen directly for these events on the Ethereum network from the server. This way
the database will always have the correct image of the network and no transactions are
dropped. This represents a larger architectural change that requires more development
than the first.
54
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:65==
Both changes can be represented by a new line of communication between the server
and the smart contract system illustrated in figure 12.2.
Beyond improvements to be made on the primary application, the secondary application
has future work that can dramatically improve it’s user experience. Currently it is igno­
rant to the existence of the centralized server belonging to the primary application, this
doesn’t have to be the case. It can optimistically use the server in the same fashion as
the primary application, delivering an identical user experience, only to fail gracefully if the
server and/or database is not available. Such a change is represented by the additional
communication line between the decentralized frontend and the server illustrated in figure
12.2.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
55
==PAGE:66==
56
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
Deloitte Private and ArtTactic Art & Finance Reports. 2023. URL: https://www.delo
itte.com/lu/en/services/financial-advisory/research/art-finance-report.html.
[2]
Art of the Deal: Contemporary Art in a Global Financial Market. 2014. URL: https:
//press.princeton.edu/books/paperback/9780691157887/art-of-the-deal.
[3]
Johann Kranz, Esther Nagel, and Youngjin Yoo. “Blockchain Token Sale”. In: Busi­
ness & Information Systems Engineering: The International Journal of WIRTSCHAFTSIN­
FORMATIK 61.6 (Dec. 2019), pp. 745–753. DOI: 10.1007/s12599-019-00598-. URL:
https://ideas.repec.org/a/spr/binfse/v61y2019i6d10.1007_s12599-019-00598-z.html.
[4]
Thomas Lambert, Daniel Liebau, and Peter Roosenboom. “Security token offer­
ings”. In: Small Business Economics 59 (June 2022). DOI: 10.1007/s11187-021-005
39-9.
[5]
Qin Wang et al. Non­Fungible Token (NFT): Overview, Evaluation, Opportunities
and Challenges. 2021. arXiv: 2105.07447 [cs.CR]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2105
.07447.
[6]
The Art Basel and UBS Global Art Market Report. 2023. URL: https://d2u3kfwd92f
zu7.cloudfront.net/The_Art_Market_2023_Press_Release_E.pdf.
[7]
NFTs Market Analysis. 2024. URL: https://nftgo.io/macro/market-overview.
[8]
Beeple|EVERYDAYS: THE FIRST 5000 DAYS. 2021. URL: https://onlineonly.chris
ties.com/s/beeple-first-5000-days/beeple-b-1981-1/112924.
[9]
Pak’s Experimental Ethereum NFT Drop Ḿ ergeŚells for Nearly $92M. 2021. URL:
https://decrypt.co/87694/pak-experimental-ethereum-nft-merge-sells-nearly-92-millio
n.
[10]
NFT Market Overview ­ Index. 2024. URL: https://app.nansen.ai/nfts.
[11]
Wejdene Haouari and Marios Fokaefs. “Towards a Standardization of Fractionaliza­
tion Smart Contracts for Non­Fungible Tokens”. In: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
International Conference on Computer Science and Software Engineering. CAS­
CON 2́ 3. Las Vegas, NV, USA: IBM Corp., 2023, pp. 132–141.
[12]
Alan Hevner et al. “Design Science in Information Systems Research”. In: Manage­
ment Information Systems Quarterly 28 (Mar. 2004), pp. 75–.
[13]
Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A Peer­to­Peer Electronic Cash System. 2008. URL:
https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf/.
[14]
Zibin Zheng et al. “An Overview of Blockchain Technology: Architecture, Consen­
sus, and Future Trends”. In: 2017 IEEE International Congress on Big Data (BigData
Congress). 2017, pp. 557–564. DOI: 10.1109/BigDataCongress.2017.85.
[15]
Fran Casino, Thomas K. Dasaklis, and Constantinos Patsakis. “A systematic lit­
erature review of blockchain­based applications: Current status, classification and
open issues”. In: Telematics and Informatics 36 (2019), pp. 55–81. ISSN: 0736­
5853. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2018.11.006. URL: https://www.sciencedire
ct.com/science/article/pii/S0736585318306324.
[16]
Arvind Narayanan et al. “Bitcoin and Cryptocurrency Technologies”. In: (2016). URL:
https://www.lopp.net/pdf/princeton_bitcoin_book.pdf.
[17]
Vitalik Buterin. “Ethereum White Paper”. In: (2014). URL: https://blockchainlab.com
/pdf/Ethereum_white_paper-a_next_generation_smart_contract_and_decentralized
_application_platform-vitalik-buterin.pdf.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
57
==PAGE:68==
[18]
DR. GAVIN WOOD. “ETHEREUM: A SECURE DECENTRALISED GENERALISED
TRANSACTION LEDGER PARIS VERSION”. In: (2024). URL: https://ethereum.gi
thub.io/yellowpaper/paper.pdf.
[19]
Vitalik Buterin. “EIP­2: Homestead Hard­fork Changes, Ethereum Improvement Pro­
posals, no. 2”. In: (2015). URL: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2.
[20]
Christopher Signer. “Gas Cost Analysis for Ethereum Smart Contracts”. In: (2018).
URL: https://www.research-collection.ethz.ch/bitstream/handle/20.500.11850/31291
4/TMeineOrdnerMaster-ArbeitenHS18Signer_Christopher.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed
=y.
[21]
Nick Szabo. “The Idea of Smart Contracts”. In: (1997). URL: https://www.fon.hum
.uva.nl/rob/Courses/InformationInSpeech/CDROM/Literature/LOTwinterschool2006
/szabo.best.vwh.net/idea.html.
[22]
Chris Dannen. “Introducing Ethereum and Solidity: Foundations of Cryptocurrency
and Blockchain Programming for Beginners”. In: (2017). URL: http://ndl.ethernet.e
du.et/bitstream/123456789/26027/1/Chris%20Dannen.pdf.
[23]
William Entriken et al. “ERC­165: Standard Interface Detection, Ethereum Improve­
ment Proposals, no. 165”. In: (2018). URL: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-165.
[24]
Fabian Vogelsteller and Vitalik Buterin. “ERC­20: Token Standard, Ethereum Im­
provement Proposals, no. 20”. In: (2015). URL: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip
-20.
[25]
Witek Radomski et al. “ERC­1155: Multi Token Standard, Ethereum Improvement
Proposals, no. 1155”. In: (2018). URL: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1155.
[26]
Cristiano Bellavitis, Christian Fisch, and Paul Momtaz. “The rise of decentralized
autonomous organizations (DAOs): a first empirical glimpse”. In: Venture Capital
25 (Aug. 2022), pp. 1–17. DOI: 10.1080/13691066.2022.2116797.
[27]
Marc Principato et al. “Towards Solving the Blockchain Trilemma: An Exploration of
Zero­knowledge Proofs”. In: ICIS (Dec. 2023).
[28]
L2 activity. URL: https://l2beat.com/scaling/activity.
[29]
Nicholas Boey. Top NFT blockchains by market share. Feb. 2024. URL: https://w
ww.coingecko.com/research/publications/market-share-nft-blockchains.
[30]
Alex Mizrah. “A blockchain based property ownership recording system”. In: (2014).
URL: https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5e26f18cd5824c7138a9118b/t/5e3c1c7d
6d5ff061da34da80/1580997757765/A-blockchain-based-property-registry.pdf.
[31]
Crypto Kitties. 2017. URL: https://www.cryptokitties.co/about.
[32]
Crypto Punks. 2017. URL: https://cryptopunks.app/.
[33]
Decentraland. 2018. URL: https://docs.decentraland.org/player/.
[34]
Pak’s Experimental Ethereum NFT Drop ’Merge’ Sells for Nearly $92M. 2021. URL:
https://decrypt.co/87694/pak-experimental-ethereum-nft-merge-sells-nearly-92-millio
n.
[35]
The Elgar Companion to Decentralized Finance, Digital Assets, and Blockchain
Technologies. 2024. URL: https://www.e-elgar.com/shop/gbp/the-elgar-compa
nion-to-decentralized-finance-digital-assets-and-blockchain-technologies-97810353077
53.html.
[36]
Paradigm, Blend: Perpetual Lending With NFT Collateral. 2023. URL: https://nftg
o.io/macro/market-overview.
[37]
Weekly Volume, in USD, Past 2 Years. 2024. URL: https://dune.com/hildobby/ethe
reum-nfts.
[38]
Getting Started with Tessera. 2022. URL: https://medium.com/tessera-nft/getting-s
tarted-with-tessera-c9709293ee88.
58
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:69==
[39]
Lifecycle of a Vault with Tessera. 2022. URL: https://medium.com/tessera-nft/lifecy
cle-of-a-vault-5868c1aef1fd.
[40]
Protocol Overview ­ NFTX. 2023. URL: https://docs.nftx.io/protocol-overview.
[41]
Protocol Overview ­ Floor Protocol. 2024. URL: https://docs.fp.io/.
[42]
Wonseok Choi, Jongsoo Woo, and James Won­Ki Hong. “Fractional non­fungible
tokens: Overview, evaluation, marketplaces, and challenges”. In: International Jour­
nal of Network Management n/a.n/a (2024), e2260. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002
/nem.2260. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/nem.2260. URL:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/nem.2260.
[43]
How Prices Are Determined in NFTs? 2023. URL: https://www.doubloin.com/learn
/price-determination-nft-marketplace.
[44]
Brett Falk et al. Economics of NFTs: The Value of Creator Royalties. May 2024.
[45]
Reto Hofstetter, Martin P Fritze, and Cait Lamberton. “Beyond Scarcity: A Social
Value­Based Lens for NFT Pricing”. In: Journal of Consumer Research 51.1 (May
2024), pp. 140–150. ISSN: 0093­5301. DOI: 10.1093/jcr/ucad082. eprint: https://a
cademic.oup.com/jcr/article-pdf/51/1/140/57655215/ucad082.pdf. URL: https://doi
.org/10.1093/jcr/ucad082.
[46]
Visual Paradigm. Prioritizing requirements with Moscow Method: A Guide for Agile
Projects. Mar. 2023. URL: https://guides.visual-paradigm.com/prioritizing-requireme
nts-with-moscow-method-a-guide-for-agile-projects/.
[47]
TOKEN STANDARDS. URL: https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/standards/to
kens/.
[48]
ERC­721: An Intro to the ERC721 Token Standard. 2023. URL: https://komodopla
tform.com/en/academy/erc-721-token-standard/.
[49]
BAYC ­ Yuga Labs. 2021. URL: https://boredapeyachtclub.com/about.
[50]
Azuki. 2022. URL: https://www.azuki.com/about.
[51]
Fidenza – Tyler Hobbs. 2021. URL: https://www.tylerxhobbs.com/words/fidenza.
[52]
Solidity.org. 2014. URL: https://soliditylang.org/.
[53]
OpenZeppelin Project. 2015. URL: https://www.openzeppelin.com/about.
[54]
Foundry. URL: https://book.getfoundry.sh/.
[55]
Remix­project.org. 2017. URL: https://remix-ide.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.
[56]
Chainlink VRF. URL: https://docs.chain.link/vrf.
[57]
URL: https://kit.svelte.dev/.
[58]
URL: https://www.postgresql.org/.
[59]
URL: https://www.docker.com/.
[60]
URL: https://vercel.com/.
[61]
URL: https://fleek.xyz/.
[62]
URL: https://supabase.com/.
[63]
URL: https://devenv.sh/.
[64]
Fractional Raises $20M And Rebrands To Tessera. 2022. URL: https://thedefiant.i
o/news/nfts-and-web3/tessera-20m-raise.
[65]
NFTX Protocol Dashboard. 2023. URL: https://analytics.dapplooker.com/public/das
hboard/805fe7ac-4ae5-4981-898b-52f5625bbf47.
[66]
Floor Protocol Data Analytics. 2024. URL: https://dune.com/floor_protocol/floor-pr
otocol-data-analytics.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
59
==PAGE:70==
60
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:71==
Appendices
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
61
==PAGE:72==
A
System Overview
62
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:73==
B
Competitor Analysis
Competitor
Tessera
NFTX
Floor Protocol
Service type
Bidirectional marketplace
Bidirectional marketplace
Bidirectional marketplace
Platform Operational Status
Ceased all operations
Active
Active
Platform Total Valuation in USD
N/A
+16M
+128M
Ecosystem Total Value Locked
in USD
N/A
+M22
+11M
Fractions Total Trading Volume
in USD
+2B[64]
N/A
+504M
Fractionalization Method
ERC­1155 tokens called ”Raes”
ERC­20 tokens called ”vTokens”
ERC­20 tokens called ”µTokens”
Vault Mechanism
NFT locked in a smart contract
vault
NFTs locked in specific vaults,
shards created
NFTs locked in specialized vaults
(Safeboxes)
Vault Method
Aggregation
Indexation
Indexation
Governance
Fraction owners vote on reserve
prices, buyouts
vToken holders vote on platform
proposals
µToken holders vote on vault
management
Buyout Mechanism
Last Price Dutch Auction initiated
by any user
Buyout auction with highest bid
win
Dynamic redemption fees, buy­
out auction if Reserve Ratio low
Trading
Raes traded on primary market­
places
vTokens traded on NFTX market­
place and DEXs
µTokens traded on DEXs
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
63
==PAGE:74==
Special Features
Decentralized
asset
manage­
ment for vault creation
Dedicated marketplace for frac­
tions
Exclusive Safebox keys for spe­
cific artwork redemption and con­
trol, VIP tiers
Flexibility after NFT locking
N/A
N/A
Flexible locking periods and stak­
ing options
Platform Native Token
N/A
Yes
Yes
Points System
No
No
No
Trading Fees
N/A
Yes
Yes
Table B.1: Comparison of Fractionalization Platforms. Source: Own work derived from analysis of Protocol Docs at[41],[40], Blockchain Data
Explorers at[65],[66], and online articles at[38],[64],[39].
64
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:75==
C
Key Interview Question to DVK
DVK is an acclaimed multi­disciplinary artist and curator, whose profound artistic prowess
has captivated audiences worldwide through compelling exhibitions. DVK’s diverse range
of creative expressions encompasses illustration, graphic design, and extensive expertise
in working with AI.
Q: How important is the visual representation of the fractional ownership model presented
such as the s­NFT?
A: I really like that by implementing this fractionalization method, the rarity of some unique
segments out of the underlying artwork is being exposed, and I can see this solution being
quite suitable for artworks which are worth millions of dollars. However, I believe that in
this case, curation of these segments matter a lot. As a digital art creator and curator
myself, I know how important it would be that my creation, once fractionalized, still holds
visual values. As such, the segments themselves should be curated in the best way
possible, to emphasize their unique value. By the way, maybe your solution is also great
for museum artworks? I know for a fact that museums pay lots of money to basically have
certain artwork displayed and maintained. Perhaps they can try to tokenize some of that
artwork and use your solution for creating subscription models for fractional ownership of
certain artworks. But this is definitely something to investigate after you get it right with
digital artwork.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
65
==PAGE:76==
D
Key Interview Questions to Gustav
Arentoft
Gustav Arentoft is an active member of the Web3 community with an expertise in NFTs,
art, gaming, DAOs, and decentralized finance. He co­founded StableLab (a decentralized
governance solution), and is an advisor at 1inch Network (a distributed network for various
protocols), as well as a former business development for MakerDao (an open­source
project on the Ethereum blockchain and a Decentralized Autonomous Organization).
Q1: Do you believe that democratization of blue­chip digital art still has to be improved?
A1: I definitely believe so, and there is a need for liquidity improvement for these NFTs.
However this is a hard mission.
Q2: Why so?
A2: I have been in the NFT fractional ownership market since its beginning, where I
had the opportunity to have an inside look at Fractional.art and later Tessera. I believe
that the solution you are working on is quite nice but also complex. The best feedback
I can give you is that you have to investigate the mechanisms behind fractionalization
processes, especially the buyout and redemption stage. You should try to get this part
right. For example, Tessera has struggled with this specific stage as the system became
quite complex and the buyout couldn’t be properly achieved. I know for a fact that if you
can get your fractionalization processes right with your solution, you have a pretty good
chance to achieve something nice in the NFT fractional ownership market.
66
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:77==
E
Key Interview Questions to Irena
Sophia
rena Sophia is an independent visual artist, curator, and digital art experimenter. She also
holds a fine art degree.
Q1: How do you see the difference between the digital art investors and collectors?
A1: I think that investors don’t really care about the art as much as the potential of making
profits, and that’s a shame. Hard­core collectors are the opposite. These ones also really
want to engage with the artists and the broader community.
Q2: Do you see any particular ways of curating fractional NFTs, which appeal to you as
an art creator?
A2: Yes, curation of segments can be done in many ways. For example, for traditional
art, it could be based on composition, color harmony, perspective, visual elements and
shapes, symmetry, patterns and lines, as well as proportions and movement dynamics.
This also greatly depends on the particular underlying artwork. I think your solution could
be very interesting for museums to try to engage with their visitors. I would definitely
buy a segment of an artwork in the form of a NFT from their gift shop. But to answer your
question, the curation of segments coming from an NFT/digital artwork, most likely cannot
be based on the same elements as for traditional artwork. Nevertheless, I do still believe
that the curation aspect is still relevant and you should try your best to increase their visual
value in whatever form deemed interesting by NFT owners but also by creators as you
probably don’t want to upset those by messing up too much with their creations.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
67
==PAGE:78==
68
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:79==
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
69
==PAGE:80==
Acronyms
ABI Application Binary Interface.
API Application Programming Interface.
AUM Assets under management.
DAO Decentralized autonomous organisation.
DApp Decentralized Application.
DeFI Decentralized Finance.
DoS Denial of service.
DSR Design Science Research.
EVM Ethereum virtual Machine.
F­NFT Fractionalized non­fungible tokens.
ICO Initial coin Offfering.
IPFS InterPlanetary File System.
L2 Ethereum layer 2.
NFT Non­fungible token.
PoS Proof­of­Stake.
PoW Proof­of­Work.
s­NFT Segmented non­fungible token.
SEC Securities and Exchange Commission.
70
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
==PAGE:81==
Glossary
blue chip An extremely valuable asset.
fullstack application Software application that includes both the front­end and back­end
components.
gas Unit that measures the amount of computational effort required to execute operations
on the Ethereum blockchain.
governance token Token that grants holders the right to participate in the governance
of a decentralized protocol or platform.
on­chain any data, transaction, or operation that is recorded directly on the blockchain.
solidity High­level, statically­typed, object­oriented programming language designed for
developing smart contracts on Ethereum.
Novel Digital Asset Fractionalization on Ethereum
71
==PAGE:82==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej, Building 101
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.entrepreneurship.dtu.dk
