==PAGE:1==
Automated Behavioral Coding in Child and Adolescent Psychiatry using
Artificial Intelligence
- Enhancing Multimodal Emotion Recognition for Low-Resource Settings
Master Thesis
Kristoffer Nielsen (s194644)
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The child and adolescent psychiatry system in Denmark has been facing significant challenges re-
sulting in long waiting times for diagnosis. These long waiting times can be reduced by automating
behavioral coding, which aids in diagnosis. Behavioral coding consists of a wide spectrum of areas,
with emotion recognition being a notable aspect. The literature review shows that multimodal mod-
els with artificial intelligence have been developed for emotion recognition automating the process
of recognizing emotions. However, due to few annotated datasets for affective computing, especially
in low-resource settings, developing efficient models for emotion recognition can be challenging.
This study aims to address these issues by identifying potential elements for automated behavioral
coding in low-resource settings, with a focus on emotion recognition. The study contributes to the
existing research by exploring how multimodal models perform with limited data resources and
identifying trends in the best-performing models. An ablation study is conducted to determine the
most important aspects of multimodal modeling and to assess the relative importance of audio,
text, and visual modalities. In addition to that transferability of the models are examined through
few-shot learning. The ablation study reveals that in some cases, using only two modalities can
achieve results comparable to using three. It also highlights the importance of the individual feature
extractors in enhancing performance, especially with fewer modalities. The best performing feature
extractors in the ablation study are carried through to the development of three fusion models.
Two of the three models consists of different compositions of Cross-Attention blocks, that capture
the intercorrelation between modalities, where the last is a simpler attention model. These models
are evaluated on source data and in cross-corpus settings to investigate the necessity of extensive
annotated data in domains where such data is scarce and labor-intensive to make. The cross-corpus
setting include zero-shot and few-shot learning. The Cross Attention with Hadamard (CAH) model
achieves the highest performances on source data, where the more complex Cascade Multi-Head
Attention (CMHA) model exhibits the best performance in few-shot learning with limited data
amounts. Given the insight that the most complex models perform better in few-shot learning, but
as the amount of data increases, the performance differences become less significant.
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a master’s degree
in Business Analytics.
Kristoffer Nielsen (s194644)
July 16, 2024
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgement
I would like to extend my gratitude to my supervisors Line Katrine Harder Clemmensen (DTU) and
Sneha Das (DTU) that has provided guidance and insights of the domain of affective computing.
They have provided support, but also allowed me to follow the ideas of my own.
In addition to that the inspiration of the subject is based on the work that has been established by
my two supervisors Line Katrine Harder Clemmensen (DTU) and Sneha Das (DTU) in collabora-
tion with Nicole Nadine Lønfeldt (Gentofte Hospital).
Thank you, Kristoffer Nielsen
iii
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Transferability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Feature extractors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Modality fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Deep Learning methodology
11
3.1
Supervised learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Self-Attention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Cross-Attention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Transformer encoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Deep Learning techniques
17
4.1
Facial Feature Extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Textual Feature Extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Audio Feature Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Encoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.5
Classification head . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Modality fusion
26
5.1
Unimodal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Attention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3
Cross-attention with Hadamard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4
Cascade Multi-Head Attention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6
Experimental setup
32
6.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.2
Evaluation metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.3
Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.4
Model training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.5
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
7
Results and discussion
41
7.1
Ablation study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.2
Zero-shot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.3
Fusion techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.4
Transferability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8
Assessments
56
9
Conclusion
58
Appendix A Loss curves
66
Appendix B Results
68
Appendix C Confusion matrices
72
Appendix D Residuals
75
==PAGE:7==
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
In recent years, the child and adolescent psychiatry system in Denmark has faced significant chal-
lenges, characterized by long waiting times and extensive waiting lists. Only a small fraction of
patients gets diagnosed within the 30-day period aimed for, a situation that has garnered attention
in the political scene, but also media outlets. [Ernst and Raundahl 2024] highlights that 71% of
children and adolescents does not get their evaluation within the 30-day period, which is equivalent
to 28000 children and adolescents from 2019 to 2022. One reason for the above is that the number
of children and adolescents with diagnoses have been increasing with 39% in the last ten years.
The extensive waiting time results in parents turning towards the private sector for evaluation and
treatment. However, the private sector also faces issues keeping up with their capabilities as per
[Schmidt 2024].
Furthermore the private sector and the public sector do not cooperate well as
[Ernst 2024] mentions, when handling patients in between the two sectors. This concerning state in
the psychiatry underscores the urgent need for innovative approaches to improve psychiatric care
accessibility and efficacy. It also leads to an interest in standardizing the evaluation method, so
that the sectors have more cohesiveness.
One promising avenue for enhancing psychiatric diagnosis and treatment is the integration of ad-
vanced technologies such as automated behavioral coding [Creed et al. 2022, Idalski Carcone et
al. 2019, Tymofiyeva et al. 2019]. Automating behavioral coding used for diagnosis could lead to
shorter waiting lists, and resources being redistributed differently, resolving some of the issues the
psychiatry is facing. Behavioral coding offers a systematic framework for analyzing patient be-
havior, using specific behavioral codes such as positive-affect, negative-affect and anxiety [Lønfeldt
et al. 2023]. Emotion recognition is a pivotal component within this domain for all these behavioral
codes. Emotion recognition, facilitated by sophisticated algorithms, not only helps with diagnos-
tics but also free up time for therapists. For instance, research by [Heyman et al. 2014] highlights
the significance of behavioral coding in psychiatric assessments and emphasizes the importance of
incorporating emotion recognition techniques for accurate diagnosis and standardized methods.
Significant strides have been made in the field of emotion recognition, particularly with the advance-
ments of deep learning techniques, resulting in the creation of several effective models [Siriwardhana
et al. 2020, Dutta and Ganapathy 2024, Lv et al. 2021]. Despite this progress, a notable gap exists
in the development of models tailored for emotion recognition in low-resource settings. Various deep
learning techniques requires extensive data in order to perform sufficiently to be used in industry
settings. However, for emotion recognition there are few annotated datasets to train upon, and
little to none, when developing models for low resource languages [Ezzameli and Mahersia 2023, H.
Lian et al. 2023]. Therefore, the objective of this study is to address this gap by designing models
specifically tailored for low-resource languages. The ultimate goal is to create models that not only
performs well across a diverse range of languages but also demonstrates effective transferability,
thereby enhancing emotion recognition capabilities in linguistically diverse settings.
1
==PAGE:8==
1.1
Problem definition
1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Problem definition
The overall aim of this project is to automate behavioral coding using artificial intelligence in the
Child- and Adolescents Psychiatry. The project will be focusing on the behavioral codes positive-
affect, negative-affect and anxiety, specifically aiming to develop and optimize multimodal emotion
recognition models for use in low-resource settings.
By expanding the existing work within the research field of machine-generated behavioral codes I
will investigate:
• What are the effects on performance and robustness of multimodal emotion recognition models
when individual modalities are removed from the model architecture?
• How well does a multimodal model perform when evaluated on low-resource languages and
can transfer learning increase the performance.
1.2
Overview
An overview of the thesis is presented to give an insight of the literature, methodology and results.
Section 2 introduces the related work that has been established already, while it elaborates on the
gap that the study tries to fill in the current literature. In Section 3 the deep learning methodology
is described, where a thorough examination of the relevant theory and methods are displayed. The
architecture of the three final models are shown in Section 5, where the individual components
presented in Section 4 and the fusion models are combined. The experimental setup and evaluation
metrics are explained in Section 6, where the processing of data, training scheme and model training
are also elaborated upon.
The results of the experiments and modeling are described and analyzed in Section 7 with a subsec-
tion including transferability of the model. Comparison with the presented related work are carried
out in Section 8, together with a presentation of limitations and ideas for future work. Lastly, the
study is concluded in Section 9.
The implementation can be found on [GitHub].
2
==PAGE:9==
2
LITERATURE REVIEW
2
Literature Review
Despite the advanced methods in emotion recognition existing models are primarily trained on En-
glish data, encompassing both audio and text modalities, which inherently limits their performance
when applied to low-resource languages. This limitation stems from a scarcity of datasets, as an-
notating emotional data is a labor-intensive process. Simultaneously, recognizing other people’s
emotions are nearly impossible to do, as it is more of an emotion perception. Even the person
experiencing the emotion might have troubles putting it into words and quantifying the emotion,
participating to the making it difficult to annotate.
This scarcity is amplified for low-resource languages, where available datasets are virtually non-
existent. There has been research on methods to deal with the scarcity of data in previous works.
One method is transfer learning, where in Speech Emotion Recognition (SER) there has been stud-
ies [Chopra et al. 2021, Ahn, Lee, and Shin 2021] using respectively meta learning and few-shot
learning in cross-corpus settings. This allows for a fast adaptation on a number of unseen target
languages simultaneously, while still performing on a high level. Also within Sentiment Analysis
(SA) zero-shot learning has been explored by [Kumar and Albuquerque 2021], where they used
a multilingual language model in order to perform zero-shot learning on a low-resource language
like hindi. The study results in an effective solution to sentence-level analysis of sentiments in a
low-resource setting.
Multilingual and multitask learning was also studied [Mamta, Ekbal, and
Bhattacharyya 2022] as an attempt to deal with the low-resource setting, where a multilingual
adversial framework was utilized in order to leverage knowledge from a high-resource language by
mapping to shared word embeddings. However, few has tried to combine the different unimodal
models for low resource languages to a multimodal model. When using the unimodal frameworks
dealing with low-resource settings, it has limitations when it comes to emotion recognition, as it
lacks the capability of capturing the intercorrelation of the modalities.
Transferring multimodal models trained in English to other languages is challenging due to lin-
guistic, cultural, and resource differences [D. Wang and T. F. Zheng 2015]. Each language has
unique syntax, semantics, and emotional expressions, making direct transfer difficult. Addition-
ally, English-trained models lack access to linguistic resources and annotated datasets available for
other languages, hindering their adaptability. Pronunciation variations and cultural nuances further
complicate the transfer process. These factors collectively limit the effectiveness of English-trained
models in accurately recognizing emotions in diverse linguistic contexts. The only modality which
transcends the language barrier is the visual, which transfers well to other datasets.
The emotion recognition models in the current landscape mostly consists of pretrained models
for each modality and then a fusion layer on top of the unimodal models. In section 2.3 several of
these models are reviewed and related to this study. To investigate the previous work within emo-
tion recognition, the tools for developing a generalisable and transferable model within the domain
3
==PAGE:10==
2.1
Transferability
2
LITERATURE REVIEW
of emotion recognition are surveyed at first. This is followed by a display of techniques used for
feature extraction, and lastly the techniques on how to fuse the modalities are presented together
with an introduction of the datasets.
2.1
Transferability
Transfer learning has been a deep learning technique that has shortened training time and the need
for computational power immensely by fine-tuning pre-trained large models [Zhuang et al. 2021].
As transfer learning allows for a shorter training time as well as minimizing the requirement of large
datasets, it is important for emotion recognition. As already mentioned the data is scarce in emo-
tion recognition, leveraging the need for transfer learning when developing future models. However
transfer learning has developed from the fine-tuning models to various ways of learning from other
domains. With recent advancements, zero- and few-shot learning as well as meta-learning have been
techniques for learning from other domains. With attention to emotion recognition the following
section elaborates on these techniques.
Regular transfer learning has been studied and explored several times, both in terms of unimodal
models, but also multimodal models. [Padi et al. 2022] uses transfer learning for both speech and
text models, by fine-tuning a pre-trained model on a downstream task on the same language, in
order to gain a better performance. They utilizes transfer learning, where they train the models for
one task, and then train again for other tasks. Transfer-learning can also be utilized to transfer from
one language to another. [Tang et al. 2023] applies the pre-trained wav2vec 2.0 [Baevski et al. 2020]
in order to embed audio waveforms from different languages into a shared feature space. This allows
for reducing the variability of the different languages, while utilizing the benefits of transfer learning.
Learning to learn is often referred to, when meta-learning is being explored. Meta-learning is a
technique, where the network tries to avoid overfitting and learning overall tendencies in order to
have a good groundwork to transfer to new tasks. [Chopra et al. 2021] has implemented a model
using Model Agnostic Meta-Learning for speech emotion recognition, performing better than regu-
lar transfer learning and multitask learning.
[Isbister, Carlsson, and Sahlgren 2021] proposes to use machine translation where they show that,
using machine translation and a English trained model instead of using monolingual in the given
language it performs just as good or better. However the sentiment is based on reviews, where the
reviews are grouped in classes being negative and positive. Given that emotions are more nuanced
than positive/negative sentiments, machine translation might not work as well in this study, which
is also highlighted by [Troiano, Klinger, and Pad´o 2020]. The study of the emotional properties of
the sentences showed that the emotions are toned down when using machine translation, given a
4
==PAGE:11==
2.2
Feature extractors
2
LITERATURE REVIEW
very narrow comparison basis.
Another way of dealing with the scarcity of data is using multilingual models that are trained
on various languages and are often better to extract features, that are not specific to the semantics
and linguistics of a single languages, but catches high-level speech representations. That approach
is attempted in [Zhang et al. 2021] in which they discovered that upstream models using the unsu-
pervised pre-trained model could extract the essential feature representations of the acoustic signal
better in shared embedding spaces. Multilingual models for speech emotion recognition like XLSR,
Whisper, and MMS significantly outperform traditional CNN-LSTM approaches for cross-language
Speech Emotion Recognition [Shoukat et al. 2023]. Both literature works show advancements in
multilingual models, and the prominent performance of feature extraction from these models.
Given the related work in transfer learning and emotion recognition this study will focus on lever-
aging these techniques. This especially includes transfer learning from one language to another and
utilizing multilingual pre-trained models. Most studies have employed transfer learning, by trans-
fering pre-trained models to other languages by fine-tuning on a new language. Most of the studies
only focuses on unimodal or bimodal models. Few studies have researched upon experimenting
with zero-shot and few-shot learning to further enhance emotion recognition in multimodal models.
Therefore this study tries to emphasis using generalizable feature extractors and fusion models that
can transfer without vast amounts of data. To elaborate on this, feature extractors and fusion
models are studied upon in the upcoming section.
2.2
Feature extractors
Emotion recognition consists of extraction of features from different modalities, using these features
to recognize the emotion which is present. There are several different modalities that can be used,
and the ones related to this study are visual, audio and textual. The different modalities will be
presented in the following sections. Pre-trained feature extractors and their roles are studied closely
by [Z. Lian, L. Sun, et al. 2024], which finds deep neural networks suitable for feature extraction
and yielding the highest performance. This will serve as an inspiration point throughout the study,
when choosing feature extractors for all modalities, and also the ablation study carried out. Before
choosing the suitable feature extractors, the recent advancements within each modality are studied
and presented.
5
==PAGE:12==
2.2
Feature extractors
2
LITERATURE REVIEW
Visual modality
Behavioral coding and emotion recognition have been piloted by the advantages of computer vision,
especially how it transcends language barriers. Advancements in computer vision techniques, partic-
ularly Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in facial
emotion recognition (FER). In a comprehensive overview of FER models [Cˆırneanu, Popescu, and
Iordache 2023], emphasizing their potential, different architectures of CNN such as VGG, DenseNet,
ResNet and EfficientNet are highlighted due to their significant results and are described as hav-
ing been the most dominant in FER along with other CNN architectures. Despite various studies
of novel frameworks optimizing the visual modality and finetuning pretrained models, the regular
pretrained models function well as features extractors as are. The study by Punuri et al. 2023 also
shows that on the FER2013, ResNet152, DenseNet121 and VGG perform on par or better than
their proposed model and in general in more previous work these architectures have shown great
performance. However state-of-the-art models, leveraging pre-training of deep neural networks and
transfer learning strategies, have showcased significant potential in accurately identifying and inter-
preting emotional cues from facial expressions [Karnati et al. 2023]. Especially vision transformers
are highlighted to have outperformed other state-of-the-art FER techniques such as convolutional
neural networks. CLIP [Radford et al. 2021] is one of these state-of-the-art models, which combines
a vision transformer with a large language model, and is suitable for feature extraction for FER
[Zhao and Patras 2023]. The study presents a model for FER using CLIP as feature extractor for
both visual and textual features. By learning latent representations of the modalities and comput-
ing the similarity it results in state-of-the-art performance.
Text modality
Natural Language Processing (NLP) has not seen the same popularity in behavioral coding and
emotion recognition so far, since it cannot transcend the language barrier. But with the rise of
transformers [Vaswani et al. 2017], the NLP landscape has seen important growth and the potential
has increased rapidly. This thesis revolves around the Danish language, which comes with sev-
eral challenges, especially regarding available data, and the large pre-trained models often being
trained on English data. [Ng et al. 2015] discusses strategies for overcoming data scarcity through
transfer learning approaches. To address limited data challenges, approaches like zero- and few-
shot learning-based human behavior recognition models will be explored, with meta-learning as
another viable approach to overcome data scarcity [Yin 2020]. These developments in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, coupled with trends in transfer learning and few-shot learning methodologies,
offer promising avenues for overcoming language barriers and data scarcity. Recent research by
[Acheampong, Nunoo-Mensah, and W. Chen 2021] explores the latest studies in NLP for emotion
recognition. It especially discusses the potential of transformer-based models in sentiment analysis
6
==PAGE:13==
2.3
Modality fusion
2
LITERATURE REVIEW
tasks, highlighting BERT and BERT inspired models as well performing feature extractors. Large
Language Models (LLM) are in general performing good in emotion recognition [Venkatakrishnan,
Goodarzi, and Canbaz 2023].
Audio modality
Speech emotion recognition (SER) has long been led by Mel-frequency cepstral coefficient and fea-
tures extractors, which are more classical methods, learning the signals in the audio.
However
recent advancements have seen that deep learning also emerge in speech emotion recognition. But
as seen with NLP, audio also has the barrier of language. Emotion are presented very differently
in different cultures, making in harder to developing one model, that performs well in multiple
languages. [Al-Dujaili and Ebrahimi-Moghadam 2023] discovers the different approaches to SER,
and discusses the advantages of each method. One approach is to embed multiple language with the
same model allowing for a shared representation [Tang et al. 2023]. The study utilized Wav2Vec 2.0,
which is a common model architecture that recurs in many studies. [Pepino, Riera, and Ferrer 2021]
also proposes a transfer learning method applying Wav2Vec 2.0 to extract embeddings, which even
without fine-tuning achieves superior performance. Further a multilingual pre-trained Wav2Vec 2.0
is also applied in a speech emotion recognition multitask achieving good results [Sharma 2022] in a
multilingual setting.
Common for all recent studies about the modalities is the use of pre-trained deep learning models,
especially those based on transformer architectures. These models often do not require extensive
fine-tuning, making them effective for emotion recognition and require less data, which are neces-
sary in a low-resource settings. The ability of these models to learn and adapt to new data with
minimal additional training helps in zero-shot and few-shot learning. With the findings from each
modality in mind and the study by [Z. Lian, L. Sun, et al. 2024], the selected feature extractors will
consist of transformer based pre-trained models. The feature extractors are presented in Section 4.
2.3
Modality fusion
The notion of multimodality emerges as a compelling aspect for improving emotion recognition
systems. Humans do not only take one modality into account, when processing the information
it receives, trough a conversation with another. It will tend to process information from various
modes of expression. Combining visual, lexical, audio features and potentially other modalities
mimics human behavior and promises more robust, and nuanced emotion recognition capabilities
as stated by [W. Liu et al. 2022].
7
==PAGE:14==
2.4
Datasets
2
LITERATURE REVIEW
Existing research in multimodal sentiment analysis underscores its potential in transcending the
limitations of single-modal approaches, offering insights into the complex interplay between differ-
ent modes of expression. [Lai et al. 2023, Y. Wang et al. 2022 and Gandhi et al. 2023] discusses the
evolving field of multimodal sentiment analysis and highlights its applications in diverse domains,
while [Ezzameli and Mahersia 2023] provide a comprehensive review of going from unimodal to
multimodal emotion recognition, including deep learning approaches, information on fusion tech-
niques and dataset considerations. It is highlighted that the unimodal models lack the opportunity
of getting the intermodality characteristics, from the various modalities. Studies by, [Zong et al.
2023, Dutta and Ganapathy 2024, J. Zheng et al. 2023] containing multimodality approaches, have
already shown promising results, fueling the necessity of exploiting the advantages of multimodality
and the importance of the fusion techniques. Three fusion models will be tested in this thesis, which
are based on a baseline from [Z. Lian, L. Sun, et al. 2024] and two models achieving state-of-the-art
performance [Siriwardhana et al. 2020, J. Zheng et al. 2023].
When using fusion techniques, the challenges of aligning the modalities sequences arise, which
[Siriwardhana et al. 2020] tries to solve by using a self-attention to extract embeddings followed
by a cross-modal transformer block to capture intermodality information.
Finally a Hadamard
product is applied to extract most important information to make predictions. Another approach
explored by [J. Zheng et al. 2023] tries to reduce the heterogeneity between the output features of
different encoders through unsupervised training. Besides the unsupervised training of encoders a
fusion model introduces a hierarchical method by applying multi-head attention modules in series
to capture intercorrelation between modalities through supervised training. This approach showed
state-of-the-art performance on two datasets. These two fusion technique inspires the fusion models
in this paper.
Despite these advancements, challenges persist, particularly with language barriers and scarcity
of data. The literature review gave insights to overcome these challenges with effective transfer-
ability techniques and fusion models. The related work will serve as an inspiration point for the
selection of feature extractors and fusion models with consideration of transferability. Besides the
technical aspects of emotion recognition in low-resource settings the real-world deployment of these
technologies in psychiatric settings demands robust validation, integration with existing diagnostic
frameworks, and consideration of ethical implications.
2.4
Datasets
The datasets are presented here and examples from the datasets are given. This subsection will
explain the structure of the datasets, display the labels available, and present the data splits.
8
==PAGE:15==
2.4
Datasets
2
LITERATURE REVIEW
IEMOCAP
The Interactive Emotional Dyadic Motion Capture (IEMOCAP) [Busso et al. 2008] dataset is a
widely used resource in the field of affective computing and natural language processing. IEMO-
CAP is an English dataset that consists of recordings of acted dyadic interactions, where pairs of
actors engage in scripted scenarios designed to demonstrate emotions. Some of the interactions are
also improvised, but most parts are scripted. The dataset contains audio and video recordings,
transcriptions, and annotations of emotional states. It also contains Motion Capture (MOCAP)
data, but that will not be utilized in this study.
The dataset includes a range of emotions such as happiness, sadness, anger, frustration, and neutral-
ity, among others. It also includes dimension labels like valence, activation and dominance. Only
the dimensional label valence will be utilized, since the MER (the second dataset) only contains
that single dimensional label. Valence is a continuous metric that measures emotion in a range
from negative such as sad and angry to positive like happy and excited, and in IEMCOAP it is
measured at a scale from 1-5. Each conversation is split into utterances, where emotions are labeled
and annotated by multiple annotators at a utterance level. Below is an example of the videos in
the dataset given.
Figure 1: Examples from IEMOCAP dataset
The videos have to be processed before any modeling, but more on that part in Section 6. This
dataset does not provide any testset in advance, but is divided into 5 sessions. One session is often
[Dutta and Ganapathy 2024, Siriwardhana et al. 2020] held out as the testset, and the approach of
this study will also be explained in Section 6.
9
==PAGE:16==
2.4
Datasets
2
LITERATURE REVIEW
MER
The second dataset is presented in the paper ”MER 2023: Multi-label Learning, Modality Robust-
ness, and Semi-Supervised Learning” [Z. Lian, H. Sun, et al. 2023], and will be referred to as MER
in this study. MER is also a comprehensive multimodal dataset that integrates audio, visual, and
textual information, enabling robust analysis and recognition of emotions across different types of
input data. MER is a Chinese dataset that extends on the CHEAVD dataset [Li et al. 2016]. It
is collected through movies and TV series and is split into single video clips. The movies and TV
series are split using timestamps from the subtitles.
This dataset contains the emotions labels happiness, sadness, anger, worry, surprise and neutral,
and in addition to that it contains the continuous label valence. In this dataset valence is measured
at a scale from -5 to 5. Three examples are given in Figure 2, and as the videos show, these are
already prepared for further work.
Figure 2: Examples from MER dataset
This dataset has predetermined splits of the data. Is it divided into four sets, namely Train&Val,
MER-MULTI, MER-NOISE, MER-SEMI. Train&Val and MER-MULTI share similar distributions,
as these two set are similar clips split into two. Train&Val is the training data, with the remaining
three as testsets. In MER-NOISE there is introduced noise, where blurring is used to introduce
noise in the visual data. For audio noise is introduced using noise corpus called MUSAN [Snyder,
G. Chen, and Povey 2015]. The last set MER-SEMI is a larger dataset, which uses semi-supervised
learning on unlabeled data to annotate the data.
10
==PAGE:17==
3
DEEP LEARNING METHODOLOGY
3
Deep Learning methodology
The study consists of several methodologies from deep learning, and in the first section the more
overall concepts will be explained. This allows for a general overview and more in depth explana-
tion of more complex and precise methods used in the study. This section represents the theoretical
foundation and methodologies employed throughout the study. The parts presented here are ele-
ments of models and configurations presented later, hence laying the groundwork for further study
and analysis.
3.1
Supervised learning
The main objective of this work is the recognition of the emotion labels and the continuous met-
ric valence, which recalls for the use of a supervised learning objective [Goodfellow, Bengio, and
Courville 2016].
fθ(x) =
 
y1
y2
!
(3.1)
where fθ(x) =
 
y1
y2
!
is a vector with the targets: y1 and y2, and x is the input from the different
modalities, audio, video and text. The task is therefore a multi-task learning process. Multi-task
learning is where there is more than one objective in the training process. In this case there are two
supervised objectives, one classification and one regression. However later in the thesis in few-shot
learning the only task is predicting of the emotion label. For this occasion 3.1 will only consist of
y1 and not y2.
In some machine learning tasks, especially those involving multi-task learning or hybrid models,
it can be beneficial to combine different loss functions to optimize multiple aspects of model per-
formance. In this approach Cross Entropy Loss (CE) for the classification task is combined with
Mean Squared Error (MSE) for the regression task.
Cross Entropy Loss is used for classification tasks. It measures the performance of a classifica-
tion model whose output is a probability value between 0 and 1. The loss increases as the predicted
probability diverges from the actual label. For multi-class classification, the Cross Entropy Loss is
defined as:
CE(y1, fθ(x)1) = −
C
X
i=1
y1,i log(fθ(x)1,i)
(3.2)
where y1,i is the true label, fθ(x)1,i is the predicted probability for each class i and C is the number
of classes.
11
==PAGE:18==
3.2
Transformer
3
DEEP LEARNING METHODOLOGY
MSE is commonly used for regression tasks.
It measures the average of the squares of the er-
rors—that is, the difference between the actual and predicted values.
MSE(y2, fθ(x)2) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(y2,i −fθ(x)2,i)2
(3.3)
where n is the number of observations, y2,i is the actual value and fθ(x)2,i is the predicted value for
each class i.
The combined loss function is a weighted sum of Cross Entropy Loss and MSE. This allows the
model to optimize both classification and regression tasks simultaneously, where α and β are the
weights for the CE and MSE, respectively. These weights can be tuned to balance the importance
of each component. The combined loss it given as:
L(y1, y2, fθ(x)) = α · CE(y1, fθ(x)1) + β · MSE(y2, fθ(x)2)
(3.4)
Training the model involves optimizing the loss function that quantifies the discrepancy between
the predicted labels and the true labels. The supervised learning objective is then to minimize
Equation 3.4, with respect to the parameters of f. In this study the two losses are weighted equally.
The optimization algorithm Adam, that is elaborated upon in Section 6 is used to minimize this
loss. During training, the model iteratively adjusts its parameters to better align its predictions
with the actual emotional labels and the valence.
3.2
Transformer
The transformer architecture first introduced in ”Attention Is All You Need” [Vaswani et al. 2017]
is a solution to the problems from recurrent neural networks (RNN) and long short-term memory
(LSTM) networks, that struggles with long term dependencies. Transformers are based solely on
the attention mechanism that allows the decoder to obtain information from all the hidden states
of the encoder, not just the last hidden state.
Transformer is a model architecture using stacked attention layers paired with fully connected
layers and layer normalization in both the decoder and the encoder. The benefits of a transformer
block is that it relies entirely on an attention mechanism to draw global dependencies between input
and output. Besides the benefits of being able to learn the long term dependencies it also allows
for parallelization and thereby faster computation. The encoder processes the input sequence and
generates a set of continuous representations, which the decoder then transforms to the output
sequence. The architecture introduced by [Vaswani et al. 2017] is shown in Figure 3.
12
==PAGE:19==
3.3
Self-Attention
3
DEEP LEARNING METHODOLOGY
Figure 3: Transformer architecture. Figure from Vaswani et al. 2017
To delve further into the transformer architecture the Multi-Head Attention are explained in the
following sections. This includes the regular Self-Attention applied by [Vaswani et al. 2017], but
also a Cross-Attention [Tsai et al. 2019], that allows for attention that captures interdependencies
between the modalities.
3.3
Self-Attention
Self-Attention have revolutionized deep learning and are the building blocks of most state-of-the-art
models in NLP and Computer Vision. Many of the feature extractors and fusion models presented
in this study are built on transformers, highlighting the necessity of an explanation of the attention
mechanism. Attention enables models to focus on the most relevant parts of the input data, thereby
improving their performance, especially in tasks involving complex and high-dimensional data.
The implementation of Self-Attention involves several key steps. First, the input data is transformed
into query, key, and value vectors through learned linear projections with dimensions dk, dk, dv, re-
spectively. [Vaswani et al. 2017] introduces the Scaled Dot-Product Attention, where the similarity
scores are computed between the query and key vectors using the dot product. Then the similarity
score is scaled using the square root of the dimension of the key vector. These scores are passed
through a softmax function to obtain attention weights, and at last the dot product between the
attention weights and the value vector is computed. This output vector is then used as input to
subsequent layers of the model, enabling it to make informed predictions based on the most relevant
13
==PAGE:20==
3.4
Cross-Attention
3
DEEP LEARNING METHODOLOGY
parts of the input data. The attention layers are comptued as follows:
headi = Attention (Qi, Ki, Vi)
= softmax
 
Qi (Ki)⊺
p
dk/h
!
Vi
= softmax
 
QiW Q
i
 KiW K
i
⊺
p
dk/h
!
ViW V
i .
(3.5)
where W Q
i
∈Rd×dk, W K
i
∈Rd×dk and W V
i
∈Rd×dv are trainable parameters and d refers to the
dimensions of the input data. Multiple attention layers can be computed to introduce Multi-Head
Attention, where the layers are referred to as heads. The different heads are computed similarly but
with different linear projections to learn different representations of the input data. The Multi-Head
Attention works by concatenating the heads and a linear projection of the multiple heads are used
to compute the final results. The different heads can be computed in parallel, which are one of the
main reasons why the computation of transformers are faster.
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat (head1, . . . , headh) W O,
(3.6)
Here W 0 ∈Rhdv×d is the weight matrix in the linear projection.
3.4
Cross-Attention
Self-Attention is used in models where it does not need to carry aspects from several modalities.
In this thesis multimodal aspects of the model are important, hence learning correlation between
modalities is as well. One way of learning about the intercorrelation and the factors from conjunc-
tion of modalities are Cross-Attention. Cross-Attention maps the query vector from one modality
with key and value vectors from another modality, and learns the intercorrelation [Tsai et al. 2019].
The Cross-Attention block can be used by itself or in transformer architectures where several layers
of Cross-Attention will be stacked, just as a normal attention block. A single head in Cross-Attention
is formulated as below:
headi = Attention

QM1
i
, KM2
i
, V M2
i

= softmax


QM1
i

KM2
i
⊺
p
dk/h

V M2
i
= softmax


QM1
i
W Q
i

KM2
i
W K
i
⊺
p
dk/h

V M2
i
W V
i .
(3.7)
14
==PAGE:21==
3.5
Transformer encoder
3
DEEP LEARNING METHODOLOGY
where W Q
i
∈RdM1×dk, W K
i
∈RdM2×dk and W V
i
∈RdM2×dv are trainable parameters. Here dM1 and
dM2 refers to the dimensions from two different inputs M1 and M2. Again the Cross-Attentions can
be used in Multi-Head Attention, and follow the same structure as in Self-Attention.
MultiHead(M1, M2, M2) = Concat (head1, . . . , headh) W O,
(3.8)
Here W 0 ∈Rhdv×dM1 is the weight matrix in the linear projection.
3.5
Transformer encoder
Transformers mostly contain both encoders and decoders, but some models only depend on encoders
[Devlin et al. 2019] and some only on decoders [Workshop et al. 2023]. Encoders and decoders orig-
inally consist of Self-Attention layers [Vaswani et al. 2017], but can also use Cross-Attention layers
[Tsai et al. 2019] or even other variants as the attention mechanism. In multimodal emotion recog-
nition Cross-Attention can learn the intercorrelation between modalities, and is therefore preferred
by many [Dutta and Ganapathy 2024, J. Zheng et al. 2023, Siriwardhana et al. 2020]. Common for
these studies is the use of transformer using an encoder and no decoders in order to compute rep-
resentations. In Figure 4 two transformer encoders containing Self-Attention and Cross-Attention
respectively are presented.
15
==PAGE:22==
3.5
Transformer encoder
3
DEEP LEARNING METHODOLOGY
(a) Self-Attention
(b) Cross-Attention
Figure 4: Comparison of transformer encoder architectures with Self-Attention and Cross-Attention
The presented encoder using Cross-Attention in Figure 4b is used in the fusion models presented in
the later stages of the thesis, where some of the feature extractors use the Self-Attention encoder.
In the later stages the Cross-Attention encoder will be presented as in Figure 5
Figure 5: Cross-Attention architecture presented as it will be displayed in later sections
Here Q is the query vector, K is the key vector and V is the value vector, and these can come from
multiple modalities. Figure 5 depicts the entirety of Figure 4b in a more dense display.
16
==PAGE:23==
4
DEEP LEARNING TECHNIQUES
4
Deep Learning techniques
The techniques used in order to develop the final model consists of several encoder blocks for each
modality, and a block that fuses the modalities before the final prediction of an emotion. The final
end-to-end approach is presented in this section.
Figure 6: End-to-end approach with all elements of the model displayed. The orange box frames the parts of the
model that are trained, and other colors refer to the different modalities
Figure 6 illustrates the multimodal machine learning pipeline, designed to process and integrate
inputs from three distinct modalities: video, audio, and text. The orange box outlines the parts of
the model that are trained in this study. The remaining parts are either inputs, outputs or feature
extractors, where the pre-trained models are utilized without fine-tuning. The modalities are pre-
sented with colors, where video, audio and text are red, blue and green respectively. The colors are
pervasive throughout the presentation of each fusion model. Initially, each input type undergoes a
separate feature extraction phase. In this stage, raw video, audio, and text data are processed by
dedicated feature extractors, which are responsible for identifying and extracting relevant features
from each modality. Once the features are extracted, they are passed through encoders specific to
each modality.
The extracted features can be represented as utterance-level features, that is one dimensional rep-
resentation of a sequence, as done by [Z. Lian, L. Sun, et al. 2024] or as several other studies use
frame-level features [Siriwardhana et al. 2020, J. Zheng et al. 2023], resulting in two dimensional
representations. Frame-level features often improves the performance, but also increases complex-
ity and computational requirements. In this study utterance-level features are selected in order to
minimize computation time, such that more experiments can be conducted. This allows for more
comparisons in an ablation study and the performance of fusion models.
The modality specific encoders transform the extracted features into encoded representations that
are suitable for further processing. The encoded video, audio, and text features are then fed into
a fusion model. Three different fusion models will be presented in Section 5, where they will be
17
==PAGE:24==
4.1
Facial Feature Extraction
4
DEEP LEARNING TECHNIQUES
explained and discussed. Therefore this figure only has a fusion model block, since it can be various
models that are interchangeable. The fusion model plays a crucial role in integrating the information
from all three modalities, combining the encoded features into a unified representation that captures
the essence of the input data across video, audio, and text. After the fusion model has combined
the features, the output is passed through a classification head. This component of the pipeline is
designed to process the combined features and make a final prediction on which emotion it is and
the continuous metric valence. The loss functions uses the predicted measures and backpropagates.
The various elements of the pipeline are presented in the following parts of this section.
The
extraction of features from three modalities will first be displayed, followed by the encoder and
classification head used in all models. The fusion of modalities will be described in Section 5. The
fusion models presented can all be put into the fusion model placeholder in Figure 6. The feature
extractors will briefly be explained, without going into elaborated details. The selection of feature
extractors are based on the literature review in Section 2.2, and the findings found by [Z. Lian,
L. Sun, et al. 2024].
4.1
Facial Feature Extraction
In facial features extraction several methods are used in the literature. There is the more classical
methods, including facial landmarks, estimating pose, and others. However, since neural networks
are well developed today, newer studies mostly utilize a neural network to extract the features.
This study applies CLIP as the visual feature extractor presented by [Radford et al. 2021]. CLIP
is a multi-modal model that enables both visual and lexical features. CLIP as a model transfers
to most tasks even without training data from task specific datasets. It often performs on par or
better than supervised baselines trained on datasets from the specific tasks. CLIP is capable of
performing zero-shot image classification, by creating a dataset of the classes from the given task.
The model then encodes the image and the possible texts and finds the most likely pairing of image
and text embeddings resulting in the classified image.
18
==PAGE:25==
4.2
Textual Feature Extraction
4
DEEP LEARNING TECHNIQUES
Figure 7: Clip architecture. Figure by [Radford et al. 2021]
The architecture from CLIP is pictured in Figure 7. CLIP employs a visual transformer like Vision
Transformer (ViT) [Dosovitskiy et al. 2021] to extract visual features and a language model to
derive text features. The features computed by the language model and the vision transformer are
then projected into a latent space with the same dimensions. From this latent space a similarity
score is computed by applying the dot product to the projected features. These computations are
mapped as the contrastive pre-training in Figure 7. In this study only the image encoder is applied
to extract features from the videos.
4.2
Textual Feature Extraction
Ever since the development of transformers, as described in section 3.2, Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP) has seen mayor improvements, and are still evolving every day. The Bidirectional
Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) is a Large Language Model (LLM) utilizing
the transformer architecture with some adjustments, for a more robust performance on sentence-
level tasks. At the time BERT was developed, it obtained state-of-the-art in several NLP challenges.
Later many variants have been developed, and several LLMs has become state-of-the-art. As the
literature review presented BERT-like architectures and LLMs were the best performing and this
affects the choice of extractors. Three different textual feature extractors will be applied in this
study, and they are presented in the parts below.
The first textual feature extractor is RoBERTa [Y. Liu et al. 2019], which applies the same ar-
chitecture as BERT, but uses a different tokenizer and a different training scheme, as the authors
found that BERT was undertrained. [Devlin et al. 2019] introduced the model BERT, which applies
a bidirectional transformer pretrained using a combination of masked language modeling objective
and next sentence prediction. RoBERTa however is not trained using next sentence predicition,
and employ other modifications to obtain a better gradient learning.
19
==PAGE:26==
4.2
Textual Feature Extraction
4
DEEP LEARNING TECHNIQUES
Figure 8: BERT and RoBERTa architecture. Figure by [Y. Liu et al. 2019]
Figure 8 introduces the BERT and RoBERTa architecture, which simply masks words out, that the
transformer has to predict using the transformer architecture. Besides removing the next sentence
prediction, three other modifications were also applied. They increased the datasize and let the
model train for a longer time with larger batches. The batches consisted of 256 sequences in BERT
whereas RoBERTa employ 8000 sequences. The masking was also changed to be dynamic instead
of fixed from the start. These modifications allowed for better gradient learning and resulted in
RoBERTa having state-of-the-art performances in multiple tasks.
The next feature extractor is BigScience Large Open-science Open-access Multilingual Language
Model (BLOOM) [Workshop et al. 2023].
BLOOM is a LLM, trained on the ROOTS corpus.
ROOTS consists of 46 languages and 13 programming languages that is hardly distinguishable from
text written by humans. After pretraining the model they used multitask prompted finetuning.
That is finetuning the model to continue writing on text given from a prompt on vast amounts of
text data.
Figure 9: BLOOM architecture. Figure by [Workshop et al. 2023]
20
==PAGE:27==
4.3
Audio Feature Extraction
4
DEEP LEARNING TECHNIQUES
Figure 9 displays the decoder-only architecture BLOOM utilizes, which includes a fairly simple
transformer decoder architecture coupled with extra layer normalizations and with Attention with
Linear Biases (ALiBi) positional embeddings [Press, Smith, and Lewis 2022]. ALiBi does not add
positional embeddings to word embeddings as regular positional embeddings strategies. Instead, it
adds a bias to query-key attention scores that are penalized according to their distance.
Multilingual EmbEddings from bidirEctional Encoder rEpresentations (e5) [L. Wang, N. Yang,
Huang, L. Yang, et al. 2024] is the third feature extractor for text in this study. The multilingual e5
is an extension of the monolingual e5 [L. Wang, N. Yang, Huang, Jiao, et al. 2024]. e5 is developed
for the purpose of text embeddings, and achieves good performance in zero-shot classification.
Figure 10: e5 architecture. Figure from [L. Wang, N. Yang, Huang, Jiao, et al. 2024]
e5 employs a pre-trained Transformer-based encoder, which forms the backbone of its architecture.
The model uses two encoder blocks that shares the same encoder for all input texts. This means
that both the query and the passage are processed by the same Transformer encoder, ensuring con-
sistent embeddings for similar inputs. The query and the passage are defined by shorter phrases and
the word sequence of an arbitrary length, respectively. The embeddings obtained from the encoders
are compared using cosine similarity. The similarity is scaled with a temperature hyperparameter.
This similarity measure is used in the contrastive learning process, where the goal is to distinguish
between similar and dissimilar text pairs.
4.3
Audio Feature Extraction
Audio feature extractors has also developed from extracting features like Mel-frequency cepstral
coefficients (MFCCs), pitch, and energy to using neural networks to extract meaningful represen-
tations. These neural networks are increasingly used for speech feature extraction, because of their
ability to leverage self-supervised learning to pre-train representations from unlabeled speech data.
All three selected models utilizes the Wav2Vec 2.0 framework [Baevski et al. 2020], and therefore
the architecture is explained here at first. The Wav2Vec 2.0 architecutre consists of a convolutional
neural network that processes raw audio waveforms to extract latent speech representations. These
21
==PAGE:28==
4.3
Audio Feature Extraction
4
DEEP LEARNING TECHNIQUES
representations are then fed into a transformer network, which models the temporal dependencies
in the speech signal. The objective of the model is to predict masked speech parts, and to provide
a clear objective, it employs a quantization module. The module discretizes the latent speech rep-
resentations from the convolutional neural network into a finite set of speech units, that are used as
the final objective. This ends the pre-training, and the model is then finally fine-tuned on labeled
datasets.
XLSR (Cross-Lingual Speech Representation) [Babu et al. 2021] is an extension of the Wav2Vec
2.0 framework [Baevski et al. 2020]. XLSR is pre-trained on speech data from multiple languages
simultaneously, whereas the original Wav2Vec is only trained on English data. This helps the model
to learn shared representations that capture the commonalities across different languages.
Figure 11: XLSR architecture. Figure from [Babu et al. 2021]
Similar to Wav2Vec 2.0, XLSR employs a self-supervised learning approach. It uses a contrastive
loss to predict masked parts of the speech signal from the unmasked parts. The main difference
from Wav2Vec 2.0 is the training data, in order to perform speech translation and improve speech
processing tasks in more languages.
Hidden-Unit BERT (HuBERT) [Hsu et al. 2021] is also a self-supervised learning framework for
speech representation learning.
HuBERT employs a self-supervised learning approach, where it
learns from large amounts of unlabeled speech data and apply similar architecture as Wav2Vec
2.0. During training, HuBERT masks a portion of the input speech signal and predicts the masked
parts based on the surrounding context. This method is inspired by BERT which was described
previously in Section 4.2.
22
==PAGE:29==
4.3
Audio Feature Extraction
4
DEEP LEARNING TECHNIQUES
Figure 12: HUBERT architecture. Figure from [Hsu et al. 2021]
A main difference from Wav2Vec 2.0 is the learning process. Initially, HuBERT clusters the raw
acoustic features of the speech data from MFCC and uses the label as target for the prediction task
as seen in Figure 12. After the initial training, the model trains a discrete latent model, in order to
generate new clusters on the learned latent representation. This is an iterative process that helps
the model to assign better clusters and also to improve the latent representation.
WavLM [S. Chen et al. 2022] extends on the HuBERT framework and focuses on both automatic
speech recognition (ASR) and non-ASR tasks. The model employs a training strategy that involves
masked speech prediction and denoising. The inputs to the model are masks in order to simulate
noisy data. This allow for the model to improving its ability to handle noisy and overlapping speech
scenarios. This learning process also benefits from the models ability to handle non-ASR tasks. This
includes speaker identification, separation, and diarization tasks.
Figure 13: WavLM architecture. Figure by [S. Chen et al. 2022]
Again as Figure 13 shows, the model is an extension of HuBERT. WavLM follows the same architec-
23
==PAGE:30==
4.4
Encoder
4
DEEP LEARNING TECHNIQUES
ture but utilizes a Transformer-based architecture enhanced with gated relative position bias. This
bias is computed based on the distance between the “key” and “query” vectors in the Transformer.
4.4
Encoder
After the features are extracted, an encoder is utilized for two purposes. One is to learn relevant
information from the modalities independently and the other is to reduce the computation, by
reducing the dimensionality of the features. The encoder is simple and inspired by the encoder
in [Z. Lian, L. Sun, et al. 2024], where a Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP) is used. The encoder
performs a series of operations on the input tensor: dropout for regularization, followed by three
fully connected layers with ReLU activation functions. This combination of operations is commonly
used in deep learning models for tasks such as video and audio processing, providing both feature
transformation and regularization. The full architecture of the multi layer perceptron is shown
below:
hm
0 = Dropout (fm) ,
m ∈{a, l, v},
(4.1)
hm
1 = ReLU (hm
0 W m
0 + bm
0 ) ,
m ∈{a, l, v},
(4.2)
hm
2 = ReLU (hm
1 W m
1 + bm
1 ) ,
m ∈{a, l, v},
(4.3)
hm
3 = ReLU (hm
2 W m
2 + bm
2 ) ,
m ∈{a, l, v},
(4.4)
where W m
0 ∈Rdm×h, W m
i
∈Rh×h, i ∈{1, 2} and bm
i ∈Rh, i ∈{0, 1, 2} are all trainable parameters.
Here the first fully connected layer reduces the dimensionality, whereas the last two keeps the same
modality. The dimensionality dm is the dimensionality of the feature extractors, and h is the hidden
dimensions, which is a hyperparameter, that varies based on a selection when training the model.
The hyperparameters will be explained more in depth in section 6.3.
The same encoder is used in every model architecture that are presented in the following sec-
tion. Having only one encoder, it allows for comparison of the fusion models, and not the different
encoders.
4.5
Classification head
The classification head is the last element of the entire model, which follows the modality fusion
block and receives a single tensor, z, that encapsulates information from all modalities. The purpose
of the classification head is to utilize this tensor z to predict emotion and valence. The architecture
of the classification head inspired by [Siriwardhana et al. 2020,Z. Lian, L. Sun, et al. 2024] is
described as follows:
z0 = Dropout (ReLU (zWz + bz)) ,
(4.5)
ˆvi = z0Wv + bv,
(4.6)
24
==PAGE:31==
4.5
Classification head
4
DEEP LEARNING TECHNIQUES
ˆei = softmax (z0We + be) ,
(4.7)
where Wz ∈Rh×h, bz ∈Rh, Wv ∈Rh × 1, bv ∈R1, We ∈Rh×C, and be ∈RC are trainable parame-
ters. Here, C is the number of classes, and h is the hidden dimension specified in the model.
The first layer applies a linear transformation to the output tensor z from the fusion block. The
layer ˆvi = z0Wv + bv computes the valence prediction as a linear transformation of z0. Finally, the
layer ˆei = softmax(z0We +be) computes the emotion prediction by applying a linear transformation
to z0 followed by a softmax function to produce a probability distribution over the emotion classes.
The two predictions are used to compute the loss, when training the model, and also utilized when
testing the performance in the end.
25
==PAGE:32==
5
MODALITY FUSION
5
Modality fusion
This section introduces the various fusion models used in this study.
The model’s architecture
and the reasoning behind are presented allowing for further discussion in Section 7. Based on the
methods presented in section 3, the fusion strategies can be assembled by the different elements.
The fusion models presented in this section, will serve as the fusion model in Figure 6. Together
with the three fusion models that will be utilized in the thesis, the unimodal and bimodal models
are also shortly introduced.
5.1
Unimodal
In unimodal experiments there are of course no fusion of modalities. Therefore when doing uni-
modal experiments, the hidden features hm, m ∈{a, l, v} are fed directly into equation 4.6 and 4.7
to make prediction with the single modality. In the following fusion models each model computes
the last state z, which are fed into the equations 4.6 and 4.7 instead of the individual modalities.
5.2
Attention
The first model is based on the simple attention model by [Z. Lian, L. Sun, et al. 2024]. The model
receives the input from the encoder exhibited in section 4.4.
Figure 14: Attention architecture with encoders for each modality and attention mechanism
The model works by concatenating the outputs from the encoders.
h = Concatdim=1

ha, hl, hv
,
(5.1)
The attention weights are then learned by using two fully connected layers.
26
==PAGE:33==
5.3
Cross-attention with Hadamard
5
MODALITY FUSION
hα = (hW + b)
(5.2)
α = (hαWα + bα)
(5.3)
where W ∈R3h×h, b ∈Rh, Wα ∈Rh×3 and bα ∈R3. The last step computes z by multiplicating
the attention weights with the hidden features.
hz = Concatdim=2

ha, hl, hv
,
(5.4)
z = hzα
(5.5)
The first model is a simple model without any complex fusion technique. Here the modalities are
simply concatenated and attention weights are learned in order to highlight the most important
information from the modalities. An ablation study will be carried out in section 7, and this model
is going to be used for both bimodal and multimodal combinations. The ablation study focuses on
the importance of the modalities and the feature extractors, hence the necessity to keep this model
simple for analysis of the single modalities and their importance. The simple fusion technique allows
for the modalities to have a higher impact, than when a complex model can attribute to improving
performance of the modalities. Therefore the model will be important in the ablation study that
will be carried out, but also serve as a baseline, when comparing with the other models.
For the bimodal models, the primary difference lies in the dimensionality of the weights used in
equation 5.3. When training and evaluating the bimodal model, the dimensionality of Wα is ad-
justed to Wα ∈Rh×2d, accommodating the two modalities. This adjustment ensures that the model
correctly captures the intercorrelation between the two modalities without unnecessary parameters
for the excluded third modality.
5.3
Cross-attention with Hadamard
The second model is inspired by the Multimodal Emotion Recognition With Transformer-Based
Self Supervised Feature Fusion model [Siriwardhana et al. 2020]. The model presented in the paper
is using Cross-Attention transformer blocks that are followed by a Hadamard product. The Cross-
Attention with Hadamard model will be referred to as CAH throughout the study. In Figure 15 a
subset of the model is shown.
27
==PAGE:34==
5.3
Cross-attention with Hadamard
5
MODALITY FUSION
Figure 15: Subset from CAH architecture. Encoders from each modality, Cross-Attention blocks to capture intercor-
relation and a Hadamard product to reduce computation.
First the features are extracted from each of the modalities, followed by an attention block used to
capture intercorrelation of the modalities. The attention block in Figure 15 consists of the cross
attention encoder presented in Figure 4b. This Cross-Attention allows the model to integrate in-
formation from different sources effectively.
Figure 15 only illustrates two of the six Cross-Attention blocks, where one modality is modeled
as the query vector, and the two other modalities as key and value vectors. An example of the
subset where audio (A) is chosen as the query vector can be modeled as follows, according to the
theory presented in Section 3.4
CA→T = MultiHead(A, T, T)
(5.6)
CA→V = MultiHead(A, V, V )
(5.7)
CA→TV = CA→T ⊙CA→V
(5.8)
Combining all the modalities results in six separate attention blocks. Computing the Hadamard
product between the Cross-Attention blocks having the same query vector results in 3 representa-
tions, where one representation is displayed in Figure 15. The two other representations, CV →AT
and CT→AV are computed alike, just with other combinations of query, key and value vectors.
z = Concat(CV →AT , CA→TV , CT→AV )
(5.9)
These three representations are concatenated into a single representation, z, and passed through
the classification head to predict the emotion and valence.
The use of Cross-Attention in transformer blocks allows the model to attend to specific aspects
of different modalities, enhancing the feature fusion process and the intercorrelation between the
28
==PAGE:35==
5.4
Cascade Multi-Head Attention
5
MODALITY FUSION
modalities. This approach not only improves the model’s ability to recognize emotions from mul-
timodal data but also ensures that the most relevant information is retained before fusing all rep-
resentations. The Hadamard product is used as the final fusion method. It is a simple yet effec-
tive technique to reduce computational complexity without significantly losing information. The
Hadamard product, which is an element-wise multiplication, results in fewer parameters and em-
phasizes relevant features by focusing on the element-wise interactions between different modality
features.
5.4
Cascade Multi-Head Attention
The third model in this study is inspired by Cascade Multi-Head Attention (CMHA) for Multi-
modal Emotion Recognition [J. Zheng et al. 2023]. This model aims to further enhance the feature
fusion process by incorporating a hierarchical Cross-Attention computing the attention between two
modalities at first, then later performing Cross-Attention with the remaining modality.
Initially, features are extracted from each modality using encoders, similar to the previous models.
These features are then passed through attention blocks designed to capture the intercorrelation
between different modalities. In CMHA the attention blocks are also the Cross-Attention encoder
from Figure 4b. Again a subset of the model is shown below:
Figure 16: Subset from CMHA architecture. Encoders from each modality and hierarchical Cross-Attention blocks
paired with convolutional layers (Conv)
The third model architecture depicted in Figure 16 shares similarities with the model in 5.3, but in-
troduces a hierarchical fusion technique resulting in more attention blocks. In the CAH model there
is a total of 6 Cross-Attention blocks, whereas CMHA has 12 allowing for more complex relations
29
==PAGE:36==
5.4
Cascade Multi-Head Attention
5
MODALITY FUSION
to be captured. After the initial attention blocks are computed the resulting tensors are processed
through a convolutional layer. In this fusion strategy it is not Cross-Attention blocks having the
same query vector that are concatenated. Instead it is Cross-Attention blocks computed by the
same modalities with different combinations of the q, k and v vectors. The convolutional layer
merges and refines the features extracted from the two Cross-Attention blocks, but also reduces the
dimensionality. The first part of the hierarchical model subset shown in Figure 16 are computed as:
CA→T = MultiHead(A, T, T)
(5.10)
CT→A = MultiHead(T, A, A)
(5.11)
CAT = Conv(CA→T , CT→A)
(5.12)
The processed features are then fed into another set of attention blocks. These attention blocks
once again apply Cross-Attention, where in one attention block the output from the convolutional
layer as the query vector interact with keys and values vectors from the last modality and vice versa
in the other Cross-Attention block. This repeated Cross-Attention mechanism allows for deeper
integration and understanding of the relationships between different modalities, leveraging local
dependencies and hierarchical global features.
CV →CAT = MultiHead(V, CAT , CAT )
(5.13)
CCAT →V = MultiHead(CAT , V, V )
(5.14)
The next step passes the output from the second set of attention blocks through a convolutional
layer.
CATV = Conv(CV →CAT , CCAT →V )
(5.15)
The output of the convolutional layer represents one of the three representations from subset of
the model. The two other representations CAV T and CTV A are computed in the same way, and
the order of the two first modalities does not change the computation, therefore resulting in a to-
tal of three representations. These three representations are concatenated to give the final output z:
z = Concat(CV AT , CATV , CTAV )
(5.16)
The use of convolutional layers in combination with Cross-Attention blocks allows the model to
capture both local and global dependencies in the data. This approach enhances the model’s ability
to recognize complex patterns and relationships within multimodal inputs.
30
==PAGE:37==
5.4
Cascade Multi-Head Attention
5
MODALITY FUSION
These three models presented in this section will be used to recognize the emotion and valence
in the different datasets and training schemes. In section 6 more information about the datasets
and the training schemes is given. The models presented have different complexities allowing for
deeper analysis of the importance of capturing complex patterns versus simpler models with lower
computational requirements. The first model is the simplest having a single attention mechanism,
whereas the second has six attention blocks compared to the last with 12. The two last models
applying attention blocks, only utilizes one stacked layer of the attention block with eight attention
heads. The remaining parameters are tuned and varies throughout the experimental setup.
31
==PAGE:38==
6
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
6
Experimental setup
In this section, a detailed overview of the experimental setup is provided. This includes an outline
of the preparation of the data and description of the data flow throughout the process. The specific
configurations and hyperparameters tuned to optimize model performance are discussed together
with the evaluation metrics used to assess this performance. This section also covers the method-
ologies employed for model training, including the techniques used for an improved convergence and
gradient learning.
6.1
Data
The steps involved in preparing the data are presented in this subsection. Specifically it includes the
preprocessing of data, which emotions from the datasets described in Section 2.4 that are elected
for the prediction task and how the data is split into training, validation and test sets.
Processing
Before the data is fed into the model, the features are extracted by the different feature extractors
explained in Section 4. However the data has to be processed before the feature extractors are able
to handle it. In the case of IEMOCAP the videos are an entire conversation with two cameras
filming at two individual persons simultaneously, depicted in Figure 1. This means that the videos
has to be split into single utterances, and also into frames, with only the person of interest in the
video. The text and audio modalities are already split into the right sequences. The data in MER
is also split correctly from the beginning.
When the data are prepared, different tokenizers are used for each of the modalities. For speech
feature extractors both WavLM and XLSR use a tokenizer provided by Wav2Vec 2.0 [Baevski et al.
2020] and HuBERT convert the raw audio to Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficient [Abdul and Al-
Talabani 2022] features, that the model then uses as input. The textual feature extractors applies
similar strategies to tokenize the sequences. RoBERTa and Bloom utilize tokenizers that are based
on byte-level Byte-Pair-Encoding (BPE) and e5 is based on SentencePiece [Kudo and Richardson
2018], which also includes BPE. Clip uses a processor that normalizes, scales and resizes the image
to convert it to input values for the model.
The tokenizers allow for the data to be handled by the feature extractors to extract the relevant
information from each modality. The feature extraction happens before the modelling and training
process in order to reduce the training time. This is possible, since the feature extractors are not
32
==PAGE:39==
6.1
Data
6
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
being trained within the model, as the pre-trained models are used without fine-tuning to extract
information. The entire process is also displayed in the Figure 6, where the feature extraction is ap-
plied at the early stage of the machine learning approach. The figure also highlights which parts of
the model that are fine-tuned to the prediction task, where the feature extractors are not included.
Emotions
The two datasets, elaborated on in Section 2.4, contain many emotions and only some of them are
in the union from both datasets. The selected emotions worked on in the analysis are therefore the
biggest union set, between the datasets. The union set is {happy, sad, anger, neutral}, and the
maximum union is chosen in order to make the comparison easier, and the two datasets aligned. For
IEMOCAP excitement is also added to the happy emotion to increase the number in that class, and
according to literature [Dutta and Ganapathy 2024, J. Zheng et al. 2023] it is hard to distinguish
between these, which serves as the argument of combining the two emotions. Besides the emotion
labels, there are also valence in both datasets.
Validation folds
After the features are extracted and the relevant emotions selected, the data is prepared for training,
validation and test. The methods for doing so are different for each dataset, since the original data
is split differently from the source owners.
IEMOCAP is divided into five sessions, and in the training process, three sessions are chosen for
training, and one for validation and test respectively. Each configuration of the hyperparameter is
run five times to mitigate the effect to randomness. Therefore one session is the validation set once
and the test set once. For example the first fold could be that session 1-3 are the training set and 4
and 5 are, respectively for validation and test. Then the next fold have session 2-4 as the training
set, session 5 as validation and session 1 hold out for testing. This rotation is cycled through five
times to get the resulting five folds. In the MER dataset there is already three testsets denoted
from the creators of the dataset. This makes the five fold easier, as the remaining dataset is split
into 5 folds, where each fold is selected as the validation once.
The validation sets are used to minimize overfitting and to be able to chose the best hyperpa-
rameters from the hyperparameter tuning. The different hyperparameters are elaborated in a later
part of this section.
33
==PAGE:40==
6.2
Evaluation metrics
6
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
6.2
Evaluation metrics
In this section the evaluation metrics that are used to compare performance are introduced. Eval-
uation metrics can differ from the loss functions, but at times it can also be the same used in both
scenarios. The evaluation metrics reported in the study correspond to the ones applied by [Z. Lian,
L. Sun, et al. 2024].
For the classification task the evaluation metric is weighted average F1 score (WAF). The F1 score
is a measure of a test’s accuracy and is the harmonic mean of precision and recall. Precision and
recall are defined as:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(6.1)
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(6.2)
The F1 score is given by:
F1 = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
(6.3)
To account for class imbalance, the weighted average F1 score is used, which is calculated as follows:
WAF =
N
X
i=1
ni
n · F1i
(6.4)
where N is the number of classes, ni the number of true instances for class i, n is the total number
of instances, and F1i is the F1 score for class i.
Valence is a continuous metric, where a regression metric is needed.
The Mean Squared Error
(MSE) measures the average of the squares of the errors. The MSE is already defined in Section 3,
and in this case the same metric is included in both the loss function and the evaluation metric.
Besides the two quantitative evaluations metrics some qualitative measures are also used to dis-
play the performance of the model. One qualitative method to check the performance of a model
is using a confusion matrix, to see how well the model predicts the different emotions, and which
emotion is the hardest to recognize. A confusion matrix is a table used to describe the performance
of a classification model on a set of test data for which the true values are known. It allows visu-
alization of the performance of a model. For multi-class classification, the confusion matrix is an
N × N matrix where N is the number of classes. Each cell Cij represents the number of instances
34
==PAGE:41==
6.3
Hyperparameters
6
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
of class i that were predicted as class j.
Class 1
Class 2
· · ·
Class N
Class 1
C11
C12
· · ·
C1N
Class 2
C21
C22
· · ·
C2N
...
...
...
...
...
Class N
CN1
CN2
· · ·
CNN
The confusion matrix is only valid for discrete labels like the emotion label. For regression tasks
a confusion matrix is not applicable because the predictions and true values are not discrete cate-
gories but continuous values. Instead, a residual plot is used to visualize the model’s performance.
In regression the residual is the difference between the observed value and the predicted value by
the model.
6.3
Hyperparameters
The model is trained in a multi-task learning setting, as described in Section 3. Training the model is
a difficult task, where endless of model configurations are available in order to increase performance
and reduce computation. These numerous configurations can be explained as hyperparameters.
The goal of hyperparameter tuning is to improve the model’s gradient learning and generalization
capability, improving its performance on unseen data. Hyperparameter tuning is an important step
in machine learning, aimed at optimizing the performance of a model by finding the best set of hy-
perparameters. Hyperparameters are configuration settings used to structure the training process,
influencing the model’s ability to learn from data. Unlike model parameters, which are learned
during training, hyperparameters are set prior to training and remain fixed throughout the process.
The process involves systematically searching through a predefined space of hyperparameters, train-
ing and evaluating models with different combinations, and selecting the configuration that yields
the best performance. This is achieved through grid search [Bengio 2012], where each combination
are tested. In the end the best performing combination of hyperparameters is selected.
In this project, three hyperparameters are selected for tuning. This includes the starting learn-
ing rate, dropout rate and the hidden dimension of the fusion models following the same approach
as [Z. Lian, L. Sun, et al. 2024]. Each of these hyperparameters affects the final output and the
convergence of the model in training. Learning rate controls the step size at each iteration while
moving toward a minimum of the loss function. Dropout [Srivastava et al. 2014] is a regulariza-
tion technique to prevent overfitting by randomly setting input units to 0 at each update during
training. The number of inputs set to 0 depends on the dropout rate. The hidden dimension is the
number of units in the hidden layers of the encoders and fusion models. The selected values for the
hyperparameter tuning setup are represented in the following scheme:
35
==PAGE:42==
6.4
Model training
6
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Hyperparameter
Values
Learning Rate
{0.001, 0.0001}
Dropout Rate
{0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5}
Dimensions
{64, 128, 256}
Throughout the analysis an ablation study is carried out, where the hyperparameters are tuned for
each experiment. This includes the unimodal, bimodal and multimodal models for both IEMOCAP
and MER. After the ablation study, fusion model are trained and these configuration also apply
hyperparameter tuning. However, the last section consists of few-shot learning, where the hidden
dimensions from the best hyperparameter found in the analysis of fusion models are used, as the
hidden dimensions of the model cannot be changed subsequently. The dropout rate and learning
rate are still tuned, and for few-shot learning, the potential learning rate values are expanded to
{0.001, 0.0001, 0.00001}. The lowest learning rate is included to allow the model to only slightly
adapt to the new data.
6.4
Model training
Besides hyperparameters there are also other techniques to improve the convergence of the models.
This section highlights these techniques that provide good training and enhance the model conver-
gence. The techniques applied for improved gradient learning are presented in this subsection.
Optimization
Stochastic gradient decent (SGD) is the most common method when training a deep learning model.
SGD is a method that tries to minimise the loss function by back-propagating. The back-propagation
algorithm is used to differentiate the loss with respect to the weights of the network [Goodfellow,
Bengio, and Courville 2016]. One stochastic gradient decent algorithm is Adam [Kingma and Ba
2017]. The Adam optimizer is widely used because it combines the benefits of adaptive learning
rates and with low computation since it only requires first-order gradients.
Weight decay is a specific type of L2 regularization applied during the optimization process. When
using an optimizer like Adam, weight decay involves adding a term to the update rule that reduces
the size of the weights after each update step. This technique helps preventing the weights from
growing too large, thereby reducing overfitting. In this study the weight decay is set to 0.00001 as
by [Z. Lian, L. Sun, et al. 2024].
36
==PAGE:43==
6.4
Model training
6
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Besides the chosen optimizer and addition of the weight decay, learning rate schedulers are im-
portant in gradient learning. The learning rate decided in Section 6.3, might not be optimal during
the entire training process. To enhance the convergence a learning rate scheduler can be introduced
[Bengio 2012]. A learning rate scheduler dynamically adjusts the learning rate during training to
improve the performance and convergence speed of the model. Using a learning rate scheduler can
help avoid issues such as overfitting the training data or getting stucked in a local minimum.
There are several benefits of using a learning rate scheduler. It can help by leading to improved con-
vergence. By reducing the learning rate as training progresses, the model is able to make smaller and
more precise adjustments to the weights, which result in better convergence. To avoid overfitting an
initially high learning rate enables the model to learn quickly in the early stages of training and as
the training progresses, lowering the learning rate allows for fine-tuning of the model, thereby reduc-
ing the risk of overfitting. A learning rate scheduler can also lead to enhanced efficiency. Adaptive
learning rates contribute to faster training times by permitting larger updates when appropriate
and smaller updates when necessary.
There are several types of learning rate schedulers, and in this project, a cosine annealing scheduler
is used to ensure efficient training and to achieve the best possible performance of the model. Cosine
annealing [Loshchilov and Hutter 2017] reduces the learning rate by cosine decay. It is originally
introduced with warmup restarts, but this is not applied in this study. The learning rate scheduler
is displayed in the Figure 17, starting at a learning rate of 0.0001 and being reduced over 100 epochs
to a learning rate at 0.00001.
Figure 17: Learning rate using the learning rate scheduler with cosine decay for 100 epochs.
37
==PAGE:44==
6.4
Model training
6
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The learning rate scheduler can begin with any initial learning rate and will decrease it to one-tenth
of its starting value over the course of 100 epochs.
Early Stopping and saving the best model
Early stopping [Prechelt 2012] is a regularization technique used to prevent overfitting by mon-
itoring the model’s performance on a validation set and stopping the training process when the
performance stops to improve. The main benefits of early stopping includes reducing training time,
preventing overfitting, and improving generalization. By stopping the training process once the
model’s performance on the validation set starts to degrade, early stopping ensures that the model
does not continue to learn from the training data, which can lead to overfitting. This results in a
model that generalizes better to new, unseen data. Early stopping is often paired with saving the
best model, which is also the case in this study. By saving the model with the lowest validation
loss, it is ensured that the final model used for predictions is the one that generalizes best to new
data, avoiding the potential pitfalls of the model at the last training epoch. The last training epoch
might have overfitted to the training data, hence not being good at generalizing.
In this study, early stopping is employed by monitoring the validation loss. If the validation loss
does not decrease for a predetermined number of epochs, the training process is stopped to prevent
further overfitting and to save computational resources. The early stopping patience is initially set
at 25 epochs.
Loss curves
One way of getting insights to whether a model provides good gradient learning is looking at the
learning curves. More loss curves are in Appendix A. This gives a good indication whether the
model under- or overfits, or whether the model is not learning well enough. Here four examples
from the experiments are provided to show the divergence of the models. The selected learning
curves are from the final fusion models trained on the IEMOCAP dataset and a learning curve from
a unimodal experiment.
38
==PAGE:45==
6.5
Experiments
6
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
(a) Attention loss
(b) CAH loss
(c) CMHA loss
(d) WavLm loss
Figure 18: Comparison of loss curves from the fusion models and a single unimodal model using WavLM as feature
extractor.
The learning curves show that the models have converged. The CMHA shows tendencies of overfit-
ting at the end, but saving the model with the lowest loss, ensures that the overfitted version of the
model is not used for prediction. A slightly better tuned model could perhaps train better, but the
experimental setup was somewhat fixed and other modifications were not made, to ensure a better
comparison.
6.5
Experiments
In this section, an explanation of the experiments to set the framework for the analysis is presented.
The experiments are initialized with an ablation study. The ablation study begins with unimodal
testing, where the feature extractors are evaluated on both datasets independently. This initial step
provides a baseline performance measure for each feature extractor when operating in a unimodal
setting. The unimodal testing applies a simple classification head from Section 4.5 without any
fusion. The simplified version is displayed in Figure 19
Figure 19: Unimodal model used in the ablation study.
39
==PAGE:46==
6.5
Experiments
6
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The ablation study also includes multimodal testing. In this phase, the best-performing feature
extractor from the unimodal tests is utilized in both bimodal and multimodal configurations across
both datasets. This step aims to assess the performance improvement when combining multiple
modalities of data. Following the multimodal tests, a zero-shot evaluation is conducted. Here, the
unimodal and multimodal models trained on the IEMOCAP dataset are tested on the MER dataset.
This zero-shot testing explores the models’ ability to generalize to a new, unseen dataset without
additional training.
After zero-shot testing, the fusion models are tested in few-shot learning. In this part the models
trained on IEMOCAP are subsequently trained further on data from MER. Four data amounts are
considered: 5, 50, 250, and All. The data amount presents how many from each class is represented.
So a data amount of 5 means there are 5 samples from each class in the dataset. Then one sample
would be considered the validation set and the remaining four samples are part of the training
set. For higher amounts of data, 20% is used as validation set. The varying amount of data tests
how much data are needed to yield sufficient performances and evaluates the transferability of each
model.
40
==PAGE:47==
7
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
7
Results and discussion
In this section the results from the feature extractors and model architectures discussed in Section
5 are presented and evaluated. To address the inherent randomness of model training, both the
tests of feature extractors and the model architectures are run five times. The mean of these five
runs are reported, along with the standard deviation between the runs to provide estimates of un-
certainty. The metrics reported throughout the analysis are the metrics explained in Section 6.2,
namely Weighted Average F1-score (WAF) and Mean Squared Error (MSE).
Each combination of the hyperparameters outlined in Section 6.3 is fine-tuned on a validation
set, with the partitioning of the training and validation sets explained in Section 6.1. A total of 24
hyperparameter combinations are explored, but only the set yielding the best results for each model
configuration is reported here. Details about the best hyperparameter set for each configuration or
model can be found in Appendix B.
The analysis begins with an ablation study to investigate the performance of different feature
extractors and the significance of each modality in bimodal and multimodal settings. This study
aims to identify which feature extractors and modality combinations are most effective for emotion
recognition. The ablation study is followed by zero-shot learning using the same model configura-
tions. These experiments are designed to evaluate the ability of the feature extractors to transfer
knowledge to other language settings without additional training, highlighting the robustness and
adaptability of the models.
Finally, the impact of various model architectures in both standard and cross-lingual settings are
assessed. In the cross-lingual settings, focus is on the transferability of the models and the amount
of data required to improve this transferability. The objective is to determine the effectiveness of
different model architectures in recognizing emotions across different languages and to understand
how much training data is necessary to achieve optimal performance.
7.1
Ablation study
In the ablation study, feature extractors are tested on both the IEMOCAP and MER datasets.
First, the unimodal tests are displayed to indicate which feature extractors perform the best on
both datasets. This is followed by bimodal and multimodal results to observe how the modalities
affect the final outcome and to determine if any modalities have a larger influence when used in
conjunction with others. The feature extractors selected for testing are primarily based on perfor-
mance presented by [Z. Lian, L. Sun, et al. 2024], but also with the fact that feature extractors
should perform well when transferring to other languages.
41
==PAGE:48==
7.1
Ablation study
7
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Unimodal
Firstly the results from the IEMOCAP ablation study is shown in table 1. The table displays the
unimodal runs, allowing for comparison of feature extractors for each modality. The best results
for each metric from each modality are highlighted.
IEMOCAP
A
T
V
WAF (↑)
MSE (↓)
Unimodal Results
XLSR
–
–
64.43 ± 2.30
0.55 ± 0.05
HuBERT (EN)
–
–
67.02 ± 2.47
0.52 ± 0.05
WavLM
–
–
69.27 ± 1.68
0.49 ± 0.05
–
e5
–
65.55 ± 3.51
0.50 ± 0.05
–
BLOOM
–
66.78 ± 2.58
0.52 ± 0.06
–
RoBERTa
–
62.01 ± 1.93
0.61 ± 0.05
–
–
CLIP
43.39 ± 5.32
0.90 ± 0.25
Table 1: Unimodal results on the IEMOCAP dataset. The table presents the mean WAF scores and MSE, along
with their standard deviations, for different unimodal models across the acoustic (A), textual (T), and visual (V)
modalities.
For audio, WavLM and XLSR are multilingual, but WavLM is primarily trained on English data,
whereas HuBERT is only trained on English data. HuBERT is selected to compare how a multilin-
gual model performs in comparison with a monolingual model on the source language. In Table 1 it
is shown that WavLM has the highest WAF and the lowest MSE compared to XLSR and HuBERT
as feature extractors for the acoustic modality. The WAF from WavLM at 69.27% is approximately
2 and 5 percentage points higher than XLSR and HuBERT, respectively. This indicates that having
a large amount of data from the source language is important, as WavLM and HuBERT perform
best. However, multilingual audio feature extractors perform almost on par with models trained
only on monolingual data.
Given that the lexical modality is also sensitive to language, multilingual extractors are tested
against a monolingual extractor.
BLOOM and e5 are both multilingual, whereas RoBERTa is
trained on English data only. For the text modality, feature extractors trained on multiple lan-
guages perform better than monolingual models. BLOOM has the highest WAF at 66.78%, but
only the second-lowest MSE, which is 0.02 higher than the MSE of 0.50 based on e5 as the feature
extractor. RoBERTa performs worst in both metrics. The visual modality is not affected by lan-
guages, therefore, the feature extractor with the best performance presented in [Z. Lian, L. Sun,
et al. 2024], which is CLIP, is selected without comparison to other extractors. This assumption
42
==PAGE:49==
7.1
Ablation study
7
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
is made as the transferability is not expected to change significantly based on the selected fea-
ture extractor. The visual modality has the lowest WAF and highest MSE across the modalities,
highlighting the challenges of recognizing emotions based on the visual modality in the IEMOCAP
dataset.
The ablation study on the IEMOCAP dataset showed that acoustic feature extractors are more
reliant on having a large amount of source data than lexical feature extractors. Based on these
results, only some of the feature extractors from the first part of the ablation study are carried for-
ward. In the following part, the same process is followed, but the dataset is the Chinese MER. The
acoustic feature extractors selected for this part are the same. Even though XLSR performed worse
than WavLM and both are multilingual, XLSR is not discarded to examine whether WavLM was
better on IEMOCAP due to having a large amount of English data. Besides the extractors tested
on IEMOCAP, a Chinese monolingual HuBERT is also tested to compare the effect of having large
amounts of source data. Neither an English nor a Chinese RoBERTa is tested since multilingual
lexical feature extractors proved to be better performing than monolingual ones.
MER-MULTI
MER-NOISE
MER-SEMI
Average
A
T
V
WAF (↑)
MSE (↓)
WAF (↑)
MSE (↓)
WAF (↑)
WAF (↑)
MSE (↓)
Unimodal Results
XLSR
–
–
62.83 ± 1.27
2.10 ± 0.02
61.13 ± 0.48
1.80 ± 0.03
73.71 ± 1.67
65.89
1.95
HuBERT (CN)
–
–
77.26 ± 1.55
1.07 ± 0.03
73.77 ± 0.49
1.03 ± 0.03
89.75 ± 0.15
80.26
1.05
HuBERT (EN)
–
–
64.82 ± 1.76
1.87 ± 0.07
62.39 ± 1.45
1.74 ± 0.07
78.46 ± 0.92
68.56
1.81
WavLM
–
–
66.35 ± 2.03
1.86 ± 0.07
64.83 ± 1.33
1.55 ± 0.06
81.76 ± 0.60
70.98
1.71
–
e5
–
57.13 ± 1.65
2.23 ± 0.03
48.40 ± 0.80
2.18 ± 0.03
48.65 ± 1.22
51.39
2.21
–
BLOOM
–
61.53 ± 1.94
2.05 ± 0.07
52.12 ± 1.18
1.96 ± 0.07
53.81 ± 4.40
55.82
2.01
–
–
CLIP
75.18 ± 1.66
1.14 ± 0.04
78.22 ± 0.88
0.98 ± 0.04
69.21 ± 1.48
74.20
1.06
Table 2: Unimodal results on the MER dataset. The table presents the mean WAF scores and MSE, along with their
standard deviations, for different unimodal models across the acoustic (A), textual (T), and visual (V) modalities.
For the MER dataset, both Chinese and English models are used for feature extraction to com-
pare and provide an indication of the influence of using monolingual English, monolingual Chinese,
and multilingual models.
The results from the tests on MER are displayed in Table 2, and as
expected, the Chinese-trained HuBERT performs best on audio with an average score of 80.26%,
which is approximatly 10 percentage points higher than WavLM, the second best. WavLM, proven
to perform well on English data as seen in Table 1, still provides a decent performance on Chinese
data. As in IEMOCAP XLSR had the lowest performance. For the textual modality, BLOOM
outperformed e5 again, and the difference is more significant than when testing on the IEMOCAP
dataset. Again there is only one visual feature extractor selected, and for the MER dataset the
visual modality yields a much higher performance. This suggests that emotions are more accessible
through the visual modality in the MER dataset compared to the IEMOCAP dataset. The lexical
modality performs better on IEMOCAP, whereas the acoustic modality is more dominant on the
MER dataset. The features extracted from text has a less significant impact for MER than seen on
IEMOCAP. On average it is respectively 25 and 19 percentage points lower than the acoustic and
43
==PAGE:50==
7.1
Ablation study
7
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
visual modality regarding WAF and has almost double the mean squared error, when compared
with the best within the modalities.
Since the focus of this thesis is on transfer learning and low-resource settings, the English, not
the Chinese HuBERT, will be utilized moving forward. This is to demonstrate that the model can
work on low-resource languages and not just on languages with well-performing pretrained models
in their given language. This aligns with the motivation of using it in the child and adolescent
psychiatry system in Denmark, where large HuBERT models are not available, thus necessitating
the possibility of transfer learning.
To conclude on the unimodal ablation studies, there is a pattern of acoustic feature extractors
being more dependent on large amounts of data in the source language, whereas lexical extractors
relied less on data from the source language. With these results in mind, the feature extractors se-
lected for further analysis are WavLM, HuBERT, e5, BLOOM, and CLIP, with HuBERT being the
English version. The performance of each modality seems to be very depending on the dataset, as
the results from each dataset varies a lot. This tendency will be further analyzed in the multimodal
configurations of modalities.
Multimodal
After examining the unimodal results, the analysis is expanded to include bimodal and multimodal
configurations to understand how combining modalities affect performance. The most promising
feature extractors identified in the unimodal tests are utilized in these bimodal and multimodal
models. In the bimodal and multimodal evaluations, the top feature extractors from the unimodal
ablation study are used, ensuring their applicability to both Chinese and English datasets. This
selection criterion ensures that the feature extractors not only perform well individually but also
demonstrate robust performance across different languages and datasets. The bimodal and multi-
modal configurations are trained and tested with the attention model from Section 5.2.
The bimodal results for the IEMOCAP dataset are shown in Table 3 and this section compares
the performance of feature extractors when two modalities are combined. The multimodal results
further explore the synergy between all three modalities, with the results being displayed in the
same table. This table presents the performance of various bimodal and multimodal using the WAF
and MSE. The results are divided into Bimodal Results and Multimodal Results.
44
==PAGE:51==
7.1
Ablation study
7
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
IEMOCAP
A
T
V
WAF (↑)
MSE (↓)
Bimodal Results
HuBERT
BLOOM
–
76.05 ± 1.81
0.61 ± 0.15
WavLM
BLOOM
–
76.26 ± 2.26
0.43 ± 0.04
HuBERT
e5
–
74.49 ± 2.72
0.44 ± 0.07
WavLM
e5
–
75.86 ± 1.76
0.41 ± 0.04
–
BLOOM
CLIP
70.11 ± 3.29
0.49 ± 0.04
–
e5
CLIP
66.87 ± 2.13
0.50 ± 0.10
HuBERT
–
CLIP
67.81 ± 3.01
0.81 ± 0.49
WavLM
–
CLIP
68.61 ± 2.71
0.98 ± 0.51
Multimodal Results
HuBERT
BLOOM
CLIP
76.70 ± 2.26
0.37 ± 0.06
HuBERT
e5
CLIP
75.35 ± 2.46
0.81 ± 0.29
WavLM
BLOOM
CLIP
76.97 ± 2.70
0.71 ± 0.29
WavLM
e5
CLIP
76.06 ± 1.99
0.38 ± 0.03
Table 3: Bimodal and multimodal results on the IEMOCAP dataset. The table presents the mean WAF scores and
MSE, along with their standard deviations, for different bimodal and multimodal models across the acoustic (A),
textual (T), and visual (V) modalities.
For the bimodal models, combining audio and language modalities without the visual modality, four
combinations are presented. The combination of HuBERT and BLOOM achieved a WAF of 76.05%
and an MSE of 0.61. The combination of WavLM and BLOOM slightly outperformed this with a
WAF of 76.26% and a lower MSE of 0.43, indicating better performance in terms of error reduc-
tion. Combinations including e5 has in general a lower WAF, and a MSE that are on par with the
MSE from combinations including BLOOM. For the language-visual combinations, using BLOOM
and CLIP outperforms the combination of e5 and CLIP having a higher WAF and MSE. In the
audio-visual combinations, the combination of HuBERT and CLIP had a WAF of 67.81%, whereas
the WavLM and CLIP combination improved slightly in WAF to 68.61%. The reverse applies in
MSE, where the combination of HuBERT and CLIP has the lowest MSE of 0.81 compared to 0.98.
From bimodal combination including text as a modality the results show that BLOOM returns
the best performance when comparing with e5.
The acoustic modality indicates that WavLM
performs slightly better than HuBERT. The results also indicate that combining audio and text
modalities generally lead to better performance than other bimodal combinations. For instance, the
combination of WavLM and BLOOM achieves the highest WAF of 76.26% with a corresponding
MSE of 0.43. This is closely followed by another audio-langauge combination, namely the HuBERT
and BLOOM combination. In terms of the audio and vision combination and the text and vision
combination, the performance is notably lower, reflecting the challenges of visual emotion recogni-
tion as previously observed in the unimodal analysis.
45
==PAGE:52==
7.1
Ablation study
7
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The multimodal results, incorporating all three modalities (audio, language, and visual), show
improved performance across most metrics. Every result from the various combinations are within
the same range with small deviations. The combinations including BLOOM outperform the com-
binations with e5. This aligns with what was presented in the bimodal results, where BLOOM also
had significantly better performances. The combination of HuBERT, BLOOM, and CLIP achieved
a WAF of 76.70% and the lowest MSE of 0.37, whereas the WavLM, BLOOM, and CLIP combina-
tion achieved the highest WAF in the multimodal results at 76.97%, but had a notable higher MSE
of 0.71.
The combination of WavLM and BLOOM in the bimodal results shows strong performance with the
highest WAF and a low MSE. In the multimodal results, the combination of WavLM, BLOOM, and
CLIP achieved the highest WAF, while the combination of HuBERT, BLOOM, and CLIP achieved
the lowest MSE, indicating a balanced performance across accuracy and error metrics. The re-
sults highlight the effectiveness of combining multiple modalities, particularly with the inclusion
of acoustic data, in enhancing model performance for the IEMOCAP dataset. Furthermore the
results also show that the importance of the individual feature extractors becomes less important
the more modalities that are present. As an example looking at bimodal combinations of text and
video the performance difference between the two configurations of feature extractors in WAF is
around 4 percentage points. Adding audio as modality using the same feature extractor, narrows
the difference to around 1 percentage point. This shows that adding more modalities increase the
robustness of the model, and the exact selected feature extractor affects the performance less. Even
though it becomes more robust to having different feature extractors, the feature that proved to be
the best from the unimodal results, also has a significant better performance in these results. Even
though the multimodal models perform the best as expected, the bimodal combinations of audio
and text provide almost equally good results. This highlights the effectiveness of some bimodal
configurations, and that having two modalities might be sufficient in order to recognize emotions.
Whether the same is applicable for MER is reported in Table 4.
This table presents the per-
formance of various bimodal and multimodal models evaluated on three scenarios (MER-MULTI,
MER-NOISE, and MER-SEMI). The results are divided into bimodal results and multimodal re-
sults, with the average scores across the scenarios also provided.
46
==PAGE:53==
7.1
Ablation study
7
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
MER-MULTI
MER-NOISE
MER-SEMI
Average
A
T
V
WAF (↑)
MSE (↓)
WAF (↑)
MSE (↓)
WAF (↑)
WAF (↑)
MSE (↓)
Bimodal Results
HuBERT
BLOOM
–
69.56 ± 1.70
1.68 ± 0.06
61.19 ± 3.39
1.60 ± 0.03
73.46 ± 3.01
68.07
1.64
WavLM
BLOOM
–
71.08 ± 0.78
1.58 ± 0.04
63.29 ± 2.60
1.47 ± 0.06
76.86 ± 1.84
70.41
1.53
HuBERT
e5
–
70.14 ± 2.25
1.56 ± 0.01
64.92 ± 1.42
1.72 ± 0.07
78.67 ± 2.79
71.24
1.64
WavLM
e5
–
71.71 ± 1.52
1.51 ± 0.05
67.74 ± 0.58
1.52 ± 0.03
80.89 ± 2.13
73.45
1.51
–
BLOOM
CLIP
77.36 ± 1.22
1.13 ± 0.04
76.77 ± 1.89
0.99 ± 0.03
76.25 ± 1.23
76.79
1.06
–
e5
CLIP
77.74 ± 0.37
1.01 ± 0.03
79.17 ± 0.80
0.90 ± 0.02
76.53 ± 1.66
77.81
0.96
HuBERT
–
CLIP
78.45 ± 1.02
0.90 ± 0.03
82.97 ± 0.55
0.75 ± 0.03
83.28 ± 1.31
81.57
0.82
WavLM
–
CLIP
79.97 ± 1.05
0.85 ± 0.05
83.16 ± 0.79
0.68 ± 0.03
83.46 ± 1.22
82.20
0.77
Multimodal Results
HuBERT
BLOOM
CLIP
79.83 ± 0.68
0.88 ± 0.05
79.72 ± 2.14
0.80 ± 0.04
83.03 ± 1.70
80.86
0.84
HuBERT
e5
CLIP
82.38 ± 1.22
0.85 ± 0.04
82.50 ± 1.60
0.80 ± 0.04
85.04 ± 1.19
83.31
0.83
WavLM
BLOOM
CLIP
80.74 ± 1.12
0.80 ± 0.04
80.17 ± 0.71
0.72 ± 0.02
83.60 ± 2.06
81.50
0.76
WavLM
e5
CLIP
82.67 ± 1.53
0.81 ± 0.06
83.22 ± 0.90
0.71± 0.04
86.74 ± 0.48
84.21
0.76
Table 4: Bimodal and multimodal results on the MER dataset. The table presents the mean WAF scores and MSE,
along with their standard deviations, for different bimodal and multimodal models across the acoustic (A), textual
(T), and visual (V) modalities.
In the bimodal results, where two modalities are combined, several model combinations were evalu-
ated. The combination of WavLM and e5 performed the best among the audio-language combina-
tions resulting in the highest average scores of 73.45% for WAF and the lowest MSE of 1.51, however
the combination of WavLM and BLOOM achieves the best performance in two of the six tests. In
the language-visual bimodal configurations the combination of e5 and CLIP performed slightly bet-
ter than BLOOM and CLIP across the table, with average scores of 77.81% for WAF and the lowest
MSE of 0.96 compared to the scores from BLOOM and CLIP having average scores of 76.79% for
WAF and 1.06 for MSE. In the audio-visual combinations, HuBERT and CLIP achieved average
scores of 81.57% for WAF and 0.82 for MSE. Additionally, audio-vision combinations perform rel-
atively well, with WavLM and CLIP reaching a WAF of 82.20% and an MSE of 0.77, underscoring
the strength of visual features in the MER dataset. In the multimodal results, which combine all
three modalities, the combination of WavLM, e5, and CLIP performed the best resulting in the
highest average scores of 84.21 for WAF and the lowest MSE of 0.76.
Among the bimodal results, WavLM and CLIP consistently achieve the highest WAF and lowest
MSE scores across all scenarios, indicating superior performance in error reduction and accuracy. In
the multimodal results, the combination of WavLM, e5, and CLIP outperforms other combinations,
showing the highest overall WAF and the lowest MSE, highlighting its effectiveness in leveraging
multiple modalities for enhanced performance.
In general WavLM, e5 and CLIP, which is the
best combination of three feature extractors, are also the best in the various bimodal combination.
These feature extractors were not the best when comparing with the unimodal results in Table 2,
where BLOOM was significantly better than e5. This points to e5 having features that align better
with other feature extractors. For MER the audio-visual combination provides performance not far
off the multimodal, again as in IEMOCAP displaying the capabilities of only having two modalities.
47
==PAGE:54==
7.1
Ablation study
7
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
To summarize the multimodal configurations across the two datasets, the results reveal distinct
patterns. In the MER dataset, e5 significantly outperforms BLOOM across all metrics, whereas
the opposite is true for the IEMOCAP dataset.
Trained on MER both WavLM and HuBERT
demonstrate similar performances in terms of WAF and MSE, showing little variation between dif-
ferent configurations. This consistency is also observed in Table 3, where HuBERT and WavLM
also exhibit indistinguishable performances. In contrast, with the IEMOCAP dataset, where the
acoustic modality combined with text yields the highest performance, MER has the lowest WAF in
the bimodal combinations including audio and text. This is despite audio being the most promising
modality in unimodal results for both datasets. Notably, the combination of audio and video in
the MER dataset provides promising results, mirroring the best performance in multimodal settings.
The findings from the bimodal and multimodal results reinforce most of the results from the
unimodal analysis, particularly for the IEMOCAP dataset, where the best feature extractors in
unimodal also are the best when combined with others. The complementary nature of audio and
text modalities consistently outperforms other combinations in the IEMOCAP dataset, where visual
features add less value when combined with audio and text. Audio in conjunction with text almost
yield the same performance as the mulitmodal model with all three modalities in IEMOCAP. For
MER the acoustic-visual is the best performing bimodal configuration with results that also close
by the performance of the multimodal results. Both datasets exhibit that the multimodal model
yields the highest performance, but both datasets have bimodal configurations that are nearly as
effective.
To get an overall overview of the entire ablation studies across unimodal, bimodal, and multimodal
the best configurations are displayed in the Figure 20
48
==PAGE:55==
7.1
Ablation study
7
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 20: The figure shows WAF for different configurations across the two datasets. In this figure, “A”, “T”, and
“V” colored in green represent audio, text, and vision, respectively. ”AT”,”TV”,”AV” is the bimodal configurations
colored in red, and the blue bar denoted ”M” represents the multimodal model combining of all three modalities.
The figure display well how for IEMOCAP the visual modality has its limitations both in unimodal
but also in bi- and multimodal. The same is not present for MER, where the lexical modality
returns the worst results. Figure 20 also displays that some bimodal configurations are close in
performance to the multimodal models. The ablation study provides a comprehensive understand-
ing of the strengths and limitations of various feature extractors. The selected extractors WavLM,
HuBERT (EN), e5, BLOOM, and CLIP demonstrate promising results and will be further investi-
gated in subsequent analyses to optimize emotion recognition systems for practical applications.
The intricate task of emotion recognition also leads to various patterns in the results based on
the dataset that are tested. The differences between the results on the two datasets are especially
how the modalities performance differ when utilized in the two datasets. Also the feature extractors
providing best results in one dataset were not necessarily the best in the other dataset. However
there are still things that can be deduced from the results so far. In general, more modalities pro-
vides better results, and the performance becomes less fluctuating the more modalities are utilized,
even though the unimodal test of the feature extractors varies significantly. These differences only
become smaller with more modalities. These insights from the ablation study will guide the selec-
tion of feature extractors for further analysis, focusing on configurations that maximize performance
while maintaining flexibility to adapt to low-resource settings.
49
==PAGE:56==
7.2
Zero-shot
7
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
7.2
Zero-shot
After establishing the groundwork from the ablation study and getting indication from feature
extractors, the analysis is continued towards more focus on transferability and in this instance zero-
shot learning.
The Table 5 presents the performance of various unimodal, bimodal, and multimodal models in
the context of zero-shot learning, evaluated using the WAF. The models are trained on IEMOCAP
and tested on the MER dataset. Valence is measured differently in the datasets, and therefore
the mean squared error regarding valence are not compared in zero-shot and later on in few-shot
learning.
The results are divided into three sections: Unimodal Results, Bimodal Results, and
Multimodal Results.
MER-MULTI
MER-NOISE
MER-SEMI
Average
A
T
V
WAF (↑)
WAF (↑)
WAF (↑)
WAF (↑)
Unimodal Results
HuBERT
–
–
37.98 ± 3.74
40.68 ± 4.04
51.56 ± 9.13
43.41
WavLM
–
–
42.51 ± 5.37
36.02 ± 4.46
52.11 ± 7.24
43.55
–
BLOOM
–
37.31 ± 3.33
38.21 ± 3.27
30.33 ± 2.91
35.28
–
e5
–
36.01 ± 2.28
32.28 ± 3.00
40.01 ± 2.20
36.10
–
–
CLIP
40.01 ± 4.27
34.42 ± 2.97
48.90 ± 5.70
41.11
Bimodal Results
HuBERT
BLOOM
–
46.42 ± 5.61
47.06 ± 2.17
50.93 ± 13.85
48.14
WavLM
BLOOM
–
49.70 ± 7.18
44.27 ± 8.19
56.71 ± 2.58
50.23
HuBERT
e5
–
39.19 ± 2.63
39.26 ± 2.85
53.54 ± 4.60
44.00
WavLM
e5
–
42.35 ± 6.57
37.01 ± 4.65
48.31 ± 7.94
42.56
–
BLOOM
CLIP
46.25 ± 3.92
42.42 ± 5.34
41.29 ± 5.94
43.32
–
e5
CLIP
44.68 ± 3.12
37.93 ± 5.28
47.38 ± 3.79
43.33
HuBERT
–
CLIP
45.35 ± 4.25
42.89 ± 3.24
58.15 ± 4.51
48.80
WavLM
–
CLIP
52.07 ± 5.26
45.26 ± 4.71
62.86 ± 8.91
53.40
Multimodal Results
HuBERT
BLOOM
CLIP
51.91 ± 7.26
48.46 ± 6.52
63.33 ± 6.08
54.57
HuBERT
e5
CLIP
41.97 ± 3.73
41.28 ± 4.65
55.71 ± 2.66
46.32
WavLM
BLOOM
CLIP
49.66 ± 5.77
42.88 ± 9.43
55.17 ± 10.39
49.24
WavLM
e5
CLIP
48.59 ± 4.07
39.45 ± 4.45
58.53 ± 5.27
48.86
Table 5: Zero-shot results on the MER dataset. The table presents the mean WAF scores along with the standard
deviations, for different models across the acoustic (A), textual (T), and visual (V) modalities.
For the unimodal results, the features extractors performing best in cross-language setting is almost
the same that performed best on the source dataset. WavLM, BLOOM and CLIP were the best
50
==PAGE:57==
7.3
Fusion techniques
7
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
feature extractors for IEMOCAP and WavLM was also when doing zero-shot. CLIP has nothing
to compare to, and therefore always the best. For the textual modality BLOOM and e5 is equally
good. e5 was the best when trained and tested on MER, where BLOOM outperformed e5 when
trained and tested on IEMOCAP.
The results reported in bimodal models prove the fact that the best feature extractors on the
source language also perform good when tested on another languages. The same combination of
bimodal configurations from the ablation study on IEMOCAP is still the best in zero-shot. For
MER this is not the case, as the best lexical-visual combination was e5 and CLIP and in zero-shot
it is BLOOM and CLIP. The best combination of all three modalities is different in all three cases.
As mentioned in the ablation study the more modalities that are included, the less the model is
sensitive to which feature extractor is utilized. That also applies in this case, which leads to an un-
derstanding that feature extractors only partially contribute to achieving good model performance.
In general, the WAF lays around 50% for the bimodal and multimodal results, which is not par-
ticularly high. This leads to consideration of how it can be improved, both in terms of adding
more data, so the models see some of the target data but also the question whether another fusion
technique can provide better results. The following sections investigate these questions, starting by
looking at fusion techniques. Furthermore no particular feature extractor combination have turned
out to be the best in all cases. However, before moving into fusion techniques and few-shot learning,
a single combination of feature extractors will be selected to narrow the analysis. Therefore consid-
ering both the results from the ablation study and the results just presented regarding zero-shot the
feature selected as the final for further analysis is WavLM, BLOOM and CLIP. The main consider-
ation has been for BLOOM and e5, since e5 looked to be slightly better performing on MER, but
BLOOM outperformed e5 on IEMOCAP and most configurations in the task of zero-shot. WavLM
has mostly been dominant against HuBERT, hence being selected for further studies.
7.3
Fusion techniques
The analysis has so far had a focus on the feature extractors and how the modalities compare and
perform in conjunction. In this part of the analysis the importance of model architecture are evalu-
ated. Various architectures is presented and analyzed in the following section, leading to exploration
of attention mechanisms and their relevance in emotion recognition.
The three fusion model were presented in Section 5, and the fusion models are Attention [Z. Lian,
L. Sun, et al. 2024], CAH [Siriwardhana et al. 2020] and CMHA [J. Zheng et al. 2023]. In Table
6 the three selected fusion architectures are evaluated on IEMOCAP, where the metrics WAF and
MSE are reported and compared.
51
==PAGE:58==
7.3
Fusion techniques
7
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
IEMOCAP
Fusion
WAF (↑)
MSE (↓)
Attention
76.97 ± 2.70
0.71 ± 0.29
CAH
78.77 ± 1.74
0.38 ± 0.04
CHMA
77.94 ± 1.86
0.35 ± 0.03
Table 6: This table provides the results from the different fusion techniques trained and tested on IEMOCAP. The
mean WAF scores and MSE are reported together with their standard deviations.
In terms of performance analysis, the CAH model has the highest WAF, indicating it is the most
effective in terms of correctly identifying and weighting the different emotions. The CHMA and At-
tention techniques follow, with CHMA performing slightly better than Attention. Regarding MSE
performance, CHMA stands out with the lowest MSE, suggesting it has the least prediction error
when predicting valence. Both the Attention and CAH techniques have higher MSEs, indicating
relatively higher prediction errors compared to CHMA.
(a) Attention confusion matrix
(b) CAH confusion matrix
(c) CMHA confusion matrix
Figure 21: Comparison of confusion matrices for each fusion model
Figure 21 shows a comparison of confusion matrices for the three fusion models. Each confusion
matrix provides a visual representation of the performance of these methods in classifying the four
emotions. The remaining confusion matrices from the experiments are placed in Appendix C. A
tendency from the confusion matrices is that recognition angry is the easiest and all models find
it hardest to recognize neutral as an emotion. Neutral might be harder to distinguish from other
emotions because it is a middle state and can show behaviors associated with all other emotions. A
person may feel slightly sad, angry, or happy, and these emotions are often perceived as either the
specific emotion or as neutral.
To examine the MSE Figure 22 shows the residual plots from each of the fusion models. Again
the remaining plots are placed in Appendix D. Each residual plot illustrates the differences between
the observed values and the values predicted by the respective methods. Attention has a tendency
52
==PAGE:59==
7.3
Fusion techniques
7
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
to predict low values even lower and high values even higher, especially looking at some of the
residual plots in the appendix. The CAH and CMHA models show a similar pattern with a uniform
spread of residuals and a few outliers.
(a) Attention residual plot
(b) CAH residual plot
(c) CMHA residual plot
Figure 22: Comparison of residuals for the three fusion models.
While none of the fusion techniques differ significantly from one another, the more complex models
exhibit a slight advantage over the simpler attention mechanism. This observation holds true when
the models are trained and tested on the same dataset. However, the evaluation of model architec-
tures in the context of transfer learning is discussed below.
In Table 7 the performance of various fusion methods in the context of zero-shot learning, eval-
uated using the Weighted Average F-score (WAF) is presented. The MSE is again not considered
based on the same reasons as in Section 7.2. The table compares three fusion methods: Atten-
tion, CAH, and CHMA across three different MER scenarios: MER-MULTI, MER-NOISE, and
MER-SEMI, as well as the average performance across these scenarios.
MER-MULTI
MER-NOISE
MER-SEMI
Average
Fusion
WAF (↑)
WAF (↑)
WAF (↑)
WAF (↑)
Attention
49.66 ± 5.77
42.88 ± 9.43
55.17 ± 10.39
49.24
CAH
51.83 ± 5.32
50.62 ± 3.40
51.46 ± 10.21
51.30
CHMA
60.74 ± 2.85
55.10 ± 3.25
64.55 ± 7.19
60.13
Table 7: This table provides the results from the different fusion models trained on IEMOCAP, and tested on MER.
The mean WAF scores are reported with the standard deviations.
Overall, the CHMA method is the most effective fusion technique for zero-shot learning, consistently
achieving higher WAF scores across all scenarios compared to the Attention and CAH methods.
This superiority is reflected both in individual scenario performances and in the average WAF
score, highlighting CHMA’s robustness and reliability in handling zero-shot learning challenges.
This also reflects the pattern that the more complex model yields the better performance, and it is
significantly higher in zero-shot tests. It is approximately 10 percentage points higher than the two
other architectures, which is quite a large difference. Whether this holds true in few-shot learning
will be reported in the coming section, where the same architectures are trained with few samples
53
==PAGE:60==
7.4
Transferability
7
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
from the target dataset.
7.4
Transferability
In this section the models from Section 7.3 above will be tested in transferability by utilizing few-shot
learning. The models will be initialized with the weights, from when it was trained on IEMOCAP,
but will be further trained on a specific amount of data from MER. The amount of data will vary,
in order to analyze how much data is needed to get a sufficient performance.
MER-MULTI
MER-NOISE
MER-SEMI
Average
Data amount
Fusion
WAF (↑)
WAF (↑)
WAF (↑)
WAF (↑)
5
Attention
58.72 ± 4.15
54.60 ± 6.15
63.33 ± 6.06
58.88
CAH
58.27 ± 3.25
53.60 ± 2.07
54.24 ± 6.83
55.37
CMHA
62.74 ± 2.57
55.80 ± 3.10
67.74 ± 4.87
62.76
50
Attention
68.06 ± 4.10
63.59 ± 4.97
76.63 ± 4.66
69.43
CAH
68.65 ± 3.35
66.42 ± 2.74
74.89 ± 2.68
69.99
CMHA
71.04 ± 2.18
67.95 ± 2.12
76.47 ± 2.99
71.82
250
Attention
76.05 ± 3.06
76.63 ± 2.14
81.69 ± 2.82
78.12
CAH
76.44 ± 1.55
75.11 ± 1.91
82.39 ± 1.13
77.98
CMHA
77.59 ± 1.20
71.65 ± 1.32
83.22 ± 1.62
77.49
All
Attention
81.28 ± 1.43
81.51 ± 1.70
86.29 ± 1.06
83.03
CAH
81.08 ± 1.12
80.72 ± 1.49
85.27 ± 1.27
82.36
CMHA
81.35 ± 1.28
80.87 ± 1.22
84.27 ± 1.15
82.16
Table 8: This table provides the results from the different fusion techniques.
The models are firstly trained on
IEMOCAP and afterwards trained on MER with the given data amount presented in the table. The mean WAF
scores with the standard deviation are displayed.
Table 8 displays and compares the performance of each model for the given amount of data. The
performance of each method generally improves as the data amount increases, indicating the positive
impact of more training data on few-shot learning. In the MER-MULTI scenario, CMHA consis-
tently performs the best across all data amounts, with the highest WAF scores. CMHA shows
strong performance, particularly dominant when the data amount is smaller. As the data increases,
the performance gap between methods narrows. In the MER-SEMI scenario, CMHA outperforms
other methods when training on five and 250 samples, but the Attention method slightly surpasses
it when the data amount is 50 and ”All”.
As seen in Figure 23, CMHA is generally the most effective method across different MER sce-
narios and data amounts, particularly excelling in the MER-MULTI and MER-SEMI scenarios.
The Attention model also show strong performance, especially as the data amount increases. The
CAH method is competitive but generally falls behind CMHA, especially with smaller data amounts.
54
==PAGE:61==
7.4
Transferability
7
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 23: In this figure the three fusion techniques are displayed. The WAF score are reported for each amount of
data from MER the model is trained upon besides the training data from IEMOCAP.
The overall learning from few-shot learning is that the CMHA method is the most robust fusion
technique for enhancing few-shot learning and transferability, particularly when data is limited.
As more data becomes available, all methods show significant improvement, with the Attention
model proving highly effective in maximizing performance. Given that the study aims to investigate
multimodal models in low-resource settings, a significant finding is the tendency of the more complex
models achieving higher performances in settings where data is scarce. It provides a better basis
for transfer learning, and optimization of emotion recognition models in these settings.
55
==PAGE:62==
8
ASSESSMENTS
8
Assessments
This section presents a comprehensive discussion and assessment of the findings, evaluating their
limitations. Additionally, potential areas for future research are considered together with ethical
aspects of the future applications.
A significant focus of this research has been on transfer learning and the comparison of differ-
ent models. Transfer learning, which involves leveraging pre-trained models on new, related tasks,
has shown considerable promise. The use of pre-trained models reduced the computational require-
ments, and still provided promising results in Section 7. The pre-trained feature extractors were
not fine-tuned in this case, which could have provided better results. [Z. Lian, L. Sun, et al. 2024]
highlights that fine-tuning the pre-trained model on task-specific data can be a double-edged sword.
It can enhance the performance of the model, but also lead to overfitting, especially when data is
limited. Since this study focuses on low-resource settings, it was not deemed a viable option. How-
ever, it could be considered for future research.
Representing the features extracted as utterance-level features were selected as time was a con-
straint, but it also minimizes the computational requirements. Given that many configurations of
hyper-parameters had to be tested, it was chosen in order to make a broad spectrum of experiments.
However utterance-level features simplify the sequence into a single tensor, versus frame-level fea-
tures that offers a more sophisticated representation of the features. This can affect the performance
of the models in the end. Therefore a future work could be to extend on the best performing fusion
models and make an end-to-end approach where frame-level features were used instead of utterance-
level features. Leading models in the literature [Zong et al. 2023,Tsai et al. 2019, J. Zheng et al. 2023,
Siriwardhana et al. 2020] use frame-level features, which allows for better performance. Frame-level
features might have the disadvantage of needing more annotated data, as the representation is more
complex, which can be a limitation to the models.
The encoders used in the study were fixed early in the process, in order to attend the focus on
the fusion models and the feature extractors. This naturally sets a limitation within the learned
information from each modality.
Encoders play an important role in transforming the features
extracted into a good representation of the modalities individually. Poor individual representation
affects the fusion model’s ability to learn the intercorrelation between modalities, impacting the
overall accuracy and efficiency of the model.
These limitations can be dealt with in numerous
ways. One is to experiment with other encoders, such a transformer based encoders. The choice of
encoders can introduce variability in performance, as different architectures may be better suited
for the given task. More complex encoders can lead to overfitting, but also learn better representa-
tions of the individual modalities. Another way of enhancing the encoders it so use other learning
approaches.
56
==PAGE:63==
8
ASSESSMENTS
Another learning approach could be unsupervised learning. Therefore further research could consist
of unsupervised learning as part of the encoders as presented by [Zong et al. 2023]. Unsupervised
loss functions present another promising area for future exploration. By incorporating unsupervised
learning objectives, the need for extensive labeled datasets, which are often a bottleneck in training
models for emotion recognition especially in low-resource language, can be reduced. Unsupervised
learning can help to recognize emotions in low-resource language, but also in the child and adoles-
cents psychiatry, where the data can differ statistically from adults.
In addition to the technical considerations, there are also ethical considerations to be addressed.
One major concern with automating behavioral coding lies in the ethical perspectives when it comes
to its implementation. Whether artificial intelligence can be used to provide diagnoses is an eth-
ical question that has to be considered. The potential for AI to make diagnostic decisions raises
issues related to accuracy, bias, patient privacy, and the need for human oversight. Accuracy is a
quantitative measure that is estimated based on the decision made from the annotators. In terms
of this study the annotators have annotated the emotion they perceive from the person in focus.
This emotion might be wrong in the first place, as well as the fact that the emotional labels are
very limited. To capture a single emotion in a label can lead to one-dimensional representation of
a very complex matter. Therefore to quantify the decision from AI-based decision solely based on
accuracy, might not be rightful. Furthermore models can include bias and lead to errors, which can
lead to fatal consequences. These ethical considerations must be addressed to ensure that the use
of AI in behavioral coding is both responsible and beneficial.
57
==PAGE:64==
9
CONCLUSION
9
Conclusion
A robust foundation was provided through a literature review where the significant advancements
and persistent challenges in the field of automated behavioral coding was presented, which provided
the direction of interest in this study. This review gathered insights in order to understand the
current state of multimodal machine learning in emotion recognition. The current studies highlight
the importance of the feature extractors and the architecture used to fuse the modalities. This
led to the conduction of an ablation study to study the feature extractor, but also a comparison of
different fusion models. The state-of-the-art fusion techniques presented in the literature all applied
Cross-Attention transformer techniques. This attention mechanism effectively learns intercorrela-
tions between modalities, which led to the fusion models in this study to utilize them as well.
Besides that, the literature review also exhibited the potential of transfer learning to model emo-
tions in low-resource settings. Transfer learning revolves around the ability to learn from one dataset
and apply that knowledge in other domains. A common application of this is using self-supervised
models pre-trained on large datasets. The literature review showed the extensive use of pre-trained
models for feature extraction in emotion recognition, but also in studies about transfer learning in
low-resource settings. However few studies combined three modalities in multimodal models with
low-resource settings and studied the effect of few-shot learning. To cover this aspect, the study
investigated whether few data samples is enough to get sufficient performances, and the importance
of the fusion models.
Based on the literature the chosen feature extractors and the fusion models were presented and
discussed. Three fusion models with different complexities were selected in order to compare the
impact and relevance of the architectures. An experimental setup was also presented in order to
evaluate the feature extractors and fusion models, together with the ability to learn from one dataset
and transfer the knowledge to another.
The examination of feature extractors and their impact on performance was tested through an
ablation study. This ablation study provided a deeper insight into their roles within the model
architecture.
By systematically adding more modalities and combining them into bimodal and
multimodal models, the study showed how each modality and feature extractor contributed to the
overall performance. It became clear that certain modalities were more impactful than others, by
contributing with a better accuracy and efficiency of the models. The significance of the modalities
differed in the two dataset, highlighting the differences of the datasets. For IEMOCAP configu-
rations containing audio yielded the best performances, where for MER the visual modality was
more important. Not only did the modalities affect the performance of the models, but also the
selected feature extractors creating representations of these modalities were of importance. The
ablation study showed that language specific extractors performed well, indicating the necessity of
having a pre-trained models trained on the source language. Furthermore the ablation also showed
58
==PAGE:65==
9
CONCLUSION
a certain robustness to missing modalities, given that some bimodal models performed almost as
good as multimodal modalities, being few percentages off the performance of multimodal models.
Not only the ablation study, but also the results from zero-shot displayed similar insights. This
detailed understanding of feature extractors and the combination of them indicates the importance
of feature extractor selection, but also that sometimes two modalities can be enough to recognize
emotions with sufficient performances.
The fusion models did not show significant differences in terms of performance, when evaluated on
the source data, but in zero- and few-shot learning some tendencies occurred. The more complex
models showed notably better performance with no data and smaller amounts of data, emphasizing
the importance of model selection and optimization in low-resource settings. The more data used in
the few-shot learning process the more the models had similar performances, and the performance
increased. This performance advantage when data are limited further highlights the importance of
the fusion models. The more complex models proved to yield more robust and reliable outcomes
with limited data. This concludes that the transferability of multimodal models is highly affected
by the architecture, when trying to enhance performance when evaluated on low-resource languages.
Throughout the thesis it has been proven difficult to develop and optimize multimodal models
for emotion recognition, especially in low-resource settings. However by choosing feature extractors
exhibiting qualities within transfer learning and delving into complex architectures, it is possible to
enhance the performance even in low-resource settings.
59
==PAGE:66==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
References
Abdul, Zrar Kh. and Abdulbasit K. Al-Talabani (2022). “Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficient and
its Applications: A Review”. In: IEEE Access 10, pp. 122136–122158. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.
2022.3223444.
Acheampong, Francisca Adoma, Henry Nunoo-Mensah, and Wenyu Chen (2021). “Transformer
models for text-based emotion detection: a review of BERT-based approaches”. In: Artificial
Intelligence Review 54.8, pp. 5789–5829.
Ahn, Youngdo, Sung Joo Lee, and Jong Won Shin (2021). “Cross-Corpus Speech Emotion Recogni-
tion Based on Few-Shot Learning and Domain Adaptation”. In: IEEE Signal Processing Letters
28, pp. 1190–1194. doi: 10.1109/LSP.2021.3086395.
Babu, Arun et al. (2021). XLS-R: Self-supervised Cross-lingual Speech Representation Learning at
Scale. arXiv: 2111.09296 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.09296.
Baevski, Alexei et al. (2020). wav2vec 2.0: A Framework for Self-Supervised Learning of Speech
Representations. arXiv: 2006.11477 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11477.
Bengio, Yoshua (2012). Practical recommendations for gradient-based training of deep architectures.
arXiv: 1206.5533 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1206.5533.
Busso, Carlos et al. (Dec. 2008). “IEMOCAP: Interactive emotional dyadic motion capture database”.
In: Language Resources and Evaluation 42, pp. 335–359. doi: 10.1007/s10579-008-9076-6.
Chen, Sanyuan et al. (Oct. 2022). “WavLM: Large-Scale Self-Supervised Pre-Training for Full Stack
Speech Processing”. In: IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing 16.6, pp. 1505–
1518. issn: 1941-0484. doi: 10.1109/jstsp.2022.3188113. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/JSTSP.2022.3188113.
Chopra, Suransh et al. (2021). “Meta-Learning for Low-Resource Speech Emotion Recognition”. In:
ICASSP 2021 - 2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), pp. 6259–6263. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP39728.2021.9414373.
Cˆırneanu, Andrada-Livia, Dan Popescu, and Dragos, Iordache (2023). “New Trends in Emotion
Recognition Using Image Analysis by Neural Networks, A Systematic Review”. In: Sensors
23.16. issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s23167092. url: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/
23/16/7092.
Creed, Torrey A et al. (2022). “Enhancing the quality of cognitive behavioral therapy in community
mental health through artificial intelligence generated fidelity feedback (Project AFFECT): a
study protocol”. In: BMC health services research 22.1, p. 1177.
Devlin, Jacob et al. (2019). BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language
Understanding. arXiv: 1810.04805 [cs.CL].
Dosovitskiy, Alexey et al. (2021). An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recog-
nition at Scale. arXiv: 2010.11929 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929.
Al-Dujaili, Mohammed Jawad and Abbas Ebrahimi-Moghadam (Mar. 2023). “Speech Emotion
Recognition: A Comprehensive Survey”. In: Wirel. Pers. Commun. 129.4, pp. 2525–2561. issn:
60
==PAGE:67==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
0929-6212. doi: 10.1007/s11277-023-10244-3. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11277-
023-10244-3.
Dutta, Soumya and Sriram Ganapathy (2024). HCAM – Hierarchical Cross Attention Model for
Multi-modal Emotion Recognition. arXiv: 2304.06910 [eess.AS].
Ernst, Anders Ejbye (Feb. 14, 2024). “Forældre betaler for genvej, men deres syge børn ryger bag
i køen”. In: DR. url: https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/indland/foraeldre-betaler-genvej-
men-deres-syge-boern-ryger-bag-i-koeen (visited on 02/17/2024).
Ernst, Anders Ejbye and Louise Raundahl (Feb. 7, 2024). “Forældre betaler for genvej, men deres
syge børn ryger bag i køen”. In: DR. url: https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/indland/titusinder-
af-saarbare-boern-og-unge-svigtes-det-er-en-skandale (visited on 02/17/2024).
Ezzameli, K. and H. Mahersia (2023). “Emotion recognition from unimodal to multimodal analysis:
A review”. In: Information Fusion 99, p. 101847. issn: 1566-2535. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.inffus.2023.101847. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S156625352300163X.
Gandhi, Ankita et al. (2023). “Multimodal sentiment analysis: A systematic review of history,
datasets, multimodal fusion methods, applications, challenges and future directions”. In: In-
formation Fusion 91, pp. 424–444. issn: 1566-2535. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
inffus.2022.09.025. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1566253522001634.
Goodfellow, Ian, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville (2016). Deep Learning. http : / / www .
deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press.
Heyman, R.E. et al. (Jan. 2014). “Behavioral observation and coding”. In: Handbook of research
methods in social and personality psychology, pp. 345–372.
Hsu, Wei-Ning et al. (2021). HuBERT: Self-Supervised Speech Representation Learning by Masked
Prediction of Hidden Units. arXiv: 2106.07447 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.
07447.
Idalski Carcone, April et al. (2019). “Developing machine learning models for behavioral coding”.
In: Journal of pediatric psychology 44.3, pp. 289–299.
Isbister, Tim, Fredrik Carlsson, and Magnus Sahlgren (2021). Should we Stop Training More Mono-
lingual Models, and Simply Use Machine Translation Instead? arXiv: 2104.10441 [cs.CL].
Karnati, Mohan et al. (2023). “Understanding deep learning techniques for recognition of human
emotions using facial expressions: A comprehensive survey”. In: IEEE Transactions on Instru-
mentation and Measurement 72, pp. 1–31.
Kingma, Diederik P. and Jimmy Ba (2017). Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. arXiv:
1412.6980 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
Kudo, Taku and John Richardson (2018). SentencePiece: A simple and language independent sub-
word tokenizer and detokenizer for Neural Text Processing. arXiv: 1808.06226 [cs.CL]. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.06226.
Kumar, Akshi and Victor Hugo C. Albuquerque (June 2021). “Sentiment Analysis Using XLM-R
Transformer and Zero-shot Transfer Learning on Resource-poor Indian Language”. In: ACM
61
==PAGE:68==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
Trans. Asian Low-Resour. Lang. Inf. Process. 20.5. issn: 2375-4699. doi: 10.1145/3461764.
url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3461764.
Lai, Songning et al. (2023). Multimodal Sentiment Analysis: A Survey. arXiv: 2305.07611 [cs.CL].
Li, Ya et al. (2016). “CHEAVD: a Chinese natural emotional audio–visual database”. In: Jour-
nal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing 8, pp. 913–924. url: https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:3570814.
Lian, Hailun et al. (2023). “A Survey of Deep Learning-Based Multimodal Emotion Recognition:
Speech, Text, and Face”. In: Entropy 25.10. issn: 1099-4300. doi: 10.3390/e25101440. url:
https://www.mdpi.com/1099-4300/25/10/1440.
Lian, Zheng, Haiyang Sun, et al. (2023). MER 2023: Multi-label Learning, Modality Robustness, and
Semi-Supervised Learning. arXiv: 2304.08981 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.
08981.
Lian, Zheng, Licai Sun, et al. (2024). MERBench: A Unified Evaluation Benchmark for Multimodal
Emotion Recognition. arXiv: 2401.03429 [cs.HC]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.03429.
Liu, Wei et al. (2022). “Comparing Recognition Performance and Robustness of Multimodal Deep
Learning Models for Multimodal Emotion Recognition”. In: IEEE Transactions on Cognitive
and Developmental Systems 14.2, pp. 715–729. doi: 10.1109/TCDS.2021.3071170.
Liu, Yinhan et al. (2019). RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach. arXiv:
1907.11692 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11692.
Lønfeldt, Nicole Nadine et al. (2023). “Scaling-up Behavioral Observation with Computational
Behavior Recognition”. In.
Loshchilov, Ilya and Frank Hutter (2017). SGDR: Stochastic Gradient Descent with Warm Restarts.
arXiv: 1608.03983 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.03983.
Lv, Fengmao et al. (2021). “Progressive Modality Reinforcement for Human Multimodal Emotion
Recognition from Unaligned Multimodal Sequences”. In: 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2554–2562. doi: 10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.
00258.
Mamta, Asif Ekbal, and Pushpak Bhattacharyya (Sept. 2022). “Exploring Multi-lingual, Multi-
task, and Adversarial Learning for Low-resource Sentiment Analysis”. In: ACM Trans. Asian
Low-Resour. Lang. Inf. Process. 21.5. issn: 2375-4699. doi: 10.1145/3514498. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3514498.
Ng, Hong-Wei et al. (2015). “Deep Learning for Emotion Recognition on Small Datasets using
Transfer Learning”. In: Proceedings of the 2015 ACM on International Conference on Multi-
modal Interaction. ICMI ’15. Seattle, Washington, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
pp. 443–449. isbn: 9781450339124. doi: 10.1145/2818346.2830593. url: https://doi.org/
10.1145/2818346.2830593.
Padi, Sarala et al. (2022). Multimodal Emotion Recognition using Transfer Learning from Speaker
Recognition and BERT-based models. arXiv: 2202.08974 [cs.SD].
62
==PAGE:69==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
Pepino, Leonardo, Pablo Riera, and Luciana Ferrer (2021). Emotion Recognition from Speech Using
Wav2vec 2.0 Embeddings. arXiv: 2104.03502 [cs.SD]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.
03502.
Prechelt, Lutz (2012). “Early Stopping — But When?” In: Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade:
Second Edition. Ed. by Gr´egoire Montavon, Genevi`eve B. Orr, and Klaus-Robert M¨uller. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 53–67. isbn: 978-3-642-35289-8. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-642-35289-8_5. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-35289-8_5.
Press, Ofir, Noah A. Smith, and Mike Lewis (2022). Train Short, Test Long: Attention with Linear
Biases Enables Input Length Extrapolation. arXiv: 2108.12409 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2108.12409.
Punuri, Sudheer Babu et al. (2023). “Efficient Net-XGBoost: An Implementation for Facial Emotion
Recognition Using Transfer Learning”. In: Mathematics 11.3. issn: 2227-7390. doi: 10.3390/
math11030776. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2227-7390/11/3/776.
Radford, Alec et al. (2021). Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervi-
sion. arXiv: 2103.00020 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.00020.
Schmidt, Anders Legarth (Feb. 9, 2024). “Psykiatrien er s˚a presset, at forældre selv punger ud”.
In: Politiken. url: https://politiken.dk/danmark/sundhed/art9755475/Psykiatrien-er-
s%C3%A5-presset-at-for%C3%A6ldre-selv-punger-ud (visited on 02/17/2024).
Sharma, Mayank (2022). “Multi-lingual multi-task speech emotion recognition using wav2vec 2.0”.
In: ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Process-
ing (ICASSP). IEEE, pp. 6907–6911.
Shoukat, Moazzam et al. (2023). “Breaking Barriers: Can Multilingual Foundation Models Bridge
the Gap in Cross-Language Speech Emotion Recognition?” In: 2023 Tenth International Con-
ference on Social Networks Analysis, Management and Security (SNAMS), pp. 1–9. doi: 10.
1109/SNAMS60348.2023.10375468.
Siriwardhana, Shamane et al. (2020). “Multimodal Emotion Recognition With Transformer-Based
Self Supervised Feature Fusion”. In: IEEE Access 8, pp. 176274–176285. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.
2020.3026823.
Snyder, David, Guoguo Chen, and Daniel Povey (2015). MUSAN: A Music, Speech, and Noise
Corpus. arXiv: 1510.08484 [cs.SD]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1510.08484.
Srivastava, Nitish et al. (2014). “Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting”.
In: The journal of machine learning research 15.1, pp. 1929–1958.
Tang, Duowei et al. (2023). End-to-end Transfer Learning for Speaker-independent Cross-language
Speech Emotion Recognition. arXiv: 2311.13678 [eess.AS].
Troiano, Enrica, Roman Klinger, and Sebastian Pad´o (Dec. 2020). “Lost in Back-Translation: Emo-
tion Preservation in Neural Machine Translation”. In: Proceedings of the 28th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics. Ed. by Donia Scott, Nuria Bel, and Chengqing Zong.
Barcelona, Spain (Online): International Committee on Computational Linguistics, pp. 4340–
4354. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.coling-main.384. url: https://aclanthology.org/2020.
coling-main.384.
63
==PAGE:70==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
Tsai, Yao-Hung Hubert et al. (2019). Multimodal Transformer for Unaligned Multimodal Language
Sequences. arXiv: 1906.00295 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.00295.
Tymofiyeva, Olga et al. (2019). “Application of machine learning to structural connectome to predict
symptom reduction in depressed adolescents with cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)”. In:
NeuroImage: Clinical 23, p. 101914.
Vaswani, Ashish et al. (2017). Attention Is All You Need. arXiv: 1706.03762 [cs.CL].
Venkatakrishnan, Radhakrishnan, Mahsa Goodarzi, and M. Abdullah Canbaz (2023). “Exploring
Large Language Models’ Emotion Detection Abilities: Use Cases From the Middle East”. In:
2023 IEEE Conference on Artificial Intelligence (CAI), pp. 241–244. doi: 10.1109/CAI54212.
2023.00110.
Wang, Dong and Thomas Fang Zheng (2015). Transfer Learning for Speech and Language Process-
ing. arXiv: 1511.06066 [cs.CL].
Wang, Liang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Binxing Jiao, et al. (2024). Text Embeddings by Weakly-
Supervised Contrastive Pre-training. arXiv: 2212.03533 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2212.03533.
Wang, Liang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Linjun Yang, et al. (2024). Multilingual E5 Text Embed-
dings: A Technical Report. arXiv: 2402.05672 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.
05672.
Wang, Yan et al. (2022). “A systematic review on affective computing: emotion models, databases,
and recent advances”. In: Information Fusion 83-84, pp. 19–52. issn: 1566-2535. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2022.03.009. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1566253522000367.
Workshop, BigScience et al. (2023). BLOOM: A 176B-Parameter Open-Access Multilingual Lan-
guage Model. arXiv: 2211.05100 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.05100.
Yin, Wenpeng (2020). Meta-learning for Few-shot Natural Language Processing: A Survey. arXiv:
2007.09604 [cs.CL].
Zhang, Zhaohang et al. (2021). “A Multilingual Framework Based on Pre-training Model for Speech
Emotion Recognition”. In: 2021 Asia-Pacific Signal and Information Processing Association
Annual Summit and Conference (APSIPA ASC), pp. 750–755.
Zhao, Zengqun and Ioannis Patras (2023). Prompting Visual-Language Models for Dynamic Facial
Expression Recognition. arXiv: 2308.13382 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.
13382.
Zheng, Jiahao et al. (2023). “Multi-Channel Weight-Sharing Autoencoder Based on Cascade Multi-
Head Attention for Multimodal Emotion Recognition”. In: IEEE Transactions on Multimedia
25, pp. 2213–2225. doi: 10.1109/TMM.2022.3144885.
Zhuang, Fuzhen et al. (2021). “A Comprehensive Survey on Transfer Learning”. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE 109.1, pp. 43–76. doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2020.3004555.
Zong, Daoming et al. (2023). “AcFormer: An Aligned and Compact Transformer for Multimodal
Sentiment Analysis”. In: Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Multime-
dia. MM ’23. Ottawa ON, Canada: Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 833–842. isbn:
64
==PAGE:71==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
9798400701085. doi: 10.1145/3581783.3611974. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3581783.
3611974.
65
==PAGE:72==
A
LOSS CURVES
A
Loss curves
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 24: Loss curves from attention model
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 25: Loss curves from CAH model
66
==PAGE:73==
A
LOSS CURVES
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 26: Loss curves from CMHA model
67
==PAGE:74==
B
RESULTS
B
Results
IEMOCAP
A
T
V
Learning rate
Dropout
Hidden dimensions
Unimodal Results
XLSR
–
–
0.001
0.2
64
HuBERT (EN)
–
–
0.0001
0.4
128
WavLM
–
–
0.001
0.3
128
–
e5
–
0.0001
0.3
64
–
BLOOM
–
0.0001
0.4
128
–
RoBERTa
–
0.0001
0.1
128
–
–
CLIP
0.001
0.2
256
Table 9: Best hyperparameters for each configuration in Table 1 and the unimodal models in Tabel 5
MER
A
T
V
Learning rate
Dropout
Hidden dimensions
Unimodal Results
XLSR
–
–
0.0001
0.2
256
HuBERT (CN)
–
–
0.0001
0.4
128
HuBERT (EN)
–
–
0.001
0.1
218
WavLM
–
–
0.0001
0.2
128
–
e5
–
0.0001
0.4
128
–
BLOOM
–
0.0001
0.1
256
–
–
CLIP
0.0001
0.2
256
Table 10: Best hyperparameters for each configuration in Table 2
68
==PAGE:75==
B
RESULTS
IEMOCAP
A
T
V
Learning rate
Dropout
Hidden dimensions
Bimodal Results
HuBERT
BLOOM
–
0.0001
0.4
128
WavLM
BLOOM
–
0.001
0.2
64
HuBERT
e5
–
0.001
0.5
256
WavLM
e5
–
0.001
0.3
256
–
BLOOM
CLIP
0.001
0.5
64
–
e5
CLIP
0.001
0.4
128
HuBERT
–
CLIP
0.0001
0.3
128
WavLM
–
CLIP
0.0001
0.5
64
Multimodal Results
HuBERT
BLOOM
CLIP
0.001
0.3
128
HuBERT
e5
CLIP
0.0001
0.4
64
WavLM
BLOOM
CLIP
0.0001
0.5
64
WavLM
e5
CLIP
0.001
0.5
128
Table 11: Best hyperparameters for each configuration in Table 3 and the bi- and multimodal models in Table 5
69
==PAGE:76==
B
RESULTS
MER
A
T
V
Learning rate
Dropout
Hidden dimensions
Bimodal Results
HuBERT
BLOOM
–
0.0001
0.3
256
WavLM
BLOOM
–
0.0001
0.4
128
HuBERT
e5
–
0.001
0.5
64
WavLM
e5
–
0.0001
0.5
64
–
BLOOM
CLIP
0.0001
0.4
256
–
e5
CLIP
0.0001
0.4
64
HuBERT
–
CLIP
0.0001
0.1
128
WavLM
–
CLIP
0.0001
0.1
256
Multimodal Results
HuBERT
BLOOM
CLIP
0.001
0.2
64
HuBERT
e5
CLIP
0.0001
0.2
256
WavLM
BLOOM
CLIP
0.001
0.2
128
WavLM
e5
CLIP
0.0001
0.4
256
Table 12: Best hyperparameters for each configuration in Table 4
IEMOCAP
Fusion
Learning rate
Dropout
Hidden dimension
Attention
0.0001
0.5
64
CAH
0.0001
0.4
64
CHMA
0.0001
0.5
128
Table 13: Best hyperparameters for each model in Table 6, and the models in Table 7
70
==PAGE:77==
B
RESULTS
Data amount
Fusion
Learning rate
Dropout
Hidden dimensions
5
Attention
0.0001
0.4
64
CAH
0.0001
0.3
64
CMHA
0.00001
0.2
128
50
Attention
0.001
0.3
64
CAH
0.001
0.5
64
CMHA
0.00001
0.4
128
250
Attention
0.001
0.5
64
CAH
0.0001
0.2
64
CMHA
0.00001
0.3
128
All
Attention
0.0001
0.5
64
CAH
0.0001
0.3
64
CMHA
0.00001
0.2
128
Table 14: Best hyperparameters for each model in Table 8
71
==PAGE:78==
C
CONFUSION MATRICES
C
Confusion matrices
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 27: Confusion matrices from attention model
72
==PAGE:79==
C
CONFUSION MATRICES
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 28: Confusion matrices from CAH model
73
==PAGE:80==
C
CONFUSION MATRICES
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 29: Confusion matrices from CMHA model
74
==PAGE:81==
D
RESIDUALS
D
Residuals
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 30: Residual graph from attention model
75
==PAGE:82==
D
RESIDUALS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 31: Residual graph from CAH model
76
==PAGE:83==
D
RESIDUALS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 32: Residual graph from CMHA model
77
