==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Investigation of the role of energy 
communities in the future energy system
Author:  
Maiken Fauerskov 
DTU Wind-M-0799 
July 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0799
July 2024
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors: 
Sophie Nyborg 
David Philipp Rudolph
DTU Wind & Energy Systems 
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at 
the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of 
Denmark Department of Wind and 
Energy Systems Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: 
Maiken Fauerskov
Title:
Investigation of the role of energy communities in the 
future energy system
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The green transition requires innovation and investment to be fulfilled. Major parts of
society will be electrified in the coming years, and this is a burden to not only the Danish
electricity grid but to the entire European grid. To fight this the European Union has
initiated two directives on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources and
on common rules for the internal market for electricity and amending. These directives
define energy communities as a legal entity important for decentralising the electricity
grid and for fighting energy poverty. This is implemented into Danish legislation, but the
implementation has become the centre of a controversy in Denmark. The Danish DSO
Radius has developed a new local collective tariffing method that aims at helping the
Danish energy communities which experience issues with energy sharing.
Using Actor-Network Theory this thesis aims to map the controversy around energy com-
munities in Denmark and the implementation of the two aforementioned EU directives
into Danish legislation. The study is based on field work such as interviews, participant
observation and other means of information gathering. Several actors involved in the
controversy have voiced their opinions on the subject, and from this work three main
issues have been analysed.
The major findings in this study is the battleground of determining what a cost reflective
electricity tariff for energy communities is, and the examination of the issues surrounding
the local collective tariff developed by Radius. The pro energy community people believe
that the method needs some changing if larger energy communities are to benefit from
it. The tariffs must be cost reflective, and the obligation of ensuring that is placed upon
the DSO and the Danish Utility Regulators making them an obligatory passage point in
this controversy.
Energy communities have the opportunity to strain relief the electricity grid if their
production and consumption of electricity is concurrent, and this concurrency can help
strain relieve the electricity grid. Besides this energy communities are able to grant the
local community both social, economical and environmental benefits, which exemplifies
another battleground in the controversy: The role of energy communities in the future
energy system. Can the pro energy community people generate enrolment on the believe
that the core task of energy communities is the strain relief of the grid, or will the actors
arguing for a much smaller and local role for the energy communities be victorious when
this controversy is black boxed?
i
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Working on this thesis have been a lot of fun, but venturing into the world of sociology
as an engineer has not been without problems. I would like to thank my two wonderful
supervisors David Philipp Rudolph and Sophie Nyborg who have been incredible discus-
sion partners and helped me navigate through the controversy jungle. Thank you for
being so nice to me and supportive, when one of my first interviews went wrong.
Additionally I would like to send a huge thanks to both my mom, dad and my won-
derful boyfriend Bjarke - thank you for cooking for what feels like a month straight. I
could not have finished this without your help, and without my writing camps at home.
Thank you for being patient with me, and for proofreading my thesis with me.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
SME: Small and Midsize Enterprise
DSO: Distribution System Operator
TSO: Transmission System Operator
ANT: Actor-Network Theory
EU: The European Union
RE: Renewable energy
REC: Renewable energy community
CEC: Citizen energy community
iii
==PAGE:6==
Definitions
Virtual Metering Point (Virtuelt m˚alepunkt): A point where the quantity of energy from
multiple physical meters can be measured
Imbalance interval (Ubalanceinterval): The interval where imbalances in the electric-
ity grid must be handled.
Balance responsible party (Balanceansvarlig aktør): A balance responsible party is eco-
nomically responsible for imbalances between production and consumption.
Cost reflective (Omkostningsægte): The principle that every consumer in the electric-
ity grid must pay for their share of expenses their use of the electricity grid causes
Strain relief of the electricity grid (Aflastning af elnettet): Using the electricity grid
in a way that relieves the strain and load on the grid, which prevents blackouts, but also
reduces the need for expansion of the electricity grid.
Direct lines (Direkte linjer): Electricity lines that can be used when sharing electric-
ity, making energy sharing outside of the collective grid possible.
Peer-to-Peer trading (Peer-to-Peer handel): Sharing or selling your own produced elec-
tricity to another consumer in the electricity grid directly without using other actors in
the electricity grid. This energy sharing can be done using direct lines.
Peak shaving: Used to describe moving electricity consumption from high demand peri-
ods to low demand periods. This removes the demand peaks which are problematic for
the electricity grid.
Concurrency (Samtidighed): Ensuring the the production and consumption of either
one comer or an energy community uses the electricity while it is produced, by the the
load on the electricity grid is reduced.
Datahub: All information regarding the Danish consumers electricity usage can be found
in Datahub, which is a database developed by Energinet that is used to monitor the
electricity consumption in Denmark
DK1 and DK2: Denmark is divided into two electricity bidding zones - DK1 consist
of Jutland, Funen and the rest of the country west for the Great Belt, DK2 consist of the
eastern part of Denmark. DK1 is connected to the Central European frequency allocation
and DK2 is connected to the Nordic frequency allocation
iv
==PAGE:7==
Prosumer: A contraction of the word consumer and producer. It is used to describe
electricity consumers that also generates their own electricity - for instance single-family
houses with solar panels on the roof.
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Contextual Framework
3
2.1
The European Directives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
The incentive behind the RE- and Electricity Market Directives .
3
2.1.2
Rights of energy communities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Peer-to-peer trading and direct lines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.4
Similarities between RECs and CECs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.5
Differences between between RECs and CECs . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.6
Other directives affecting energy communities . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Implementation of European legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Additional literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Incorporation into Danish legislation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
The Danish Power Supply Law
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
The Electricity Tax Law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.3
The Law on Common Housing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.4
The Law on Promotion of Renewable Energy . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.5
The Consolidation Act on Renewable Energy Communities and Cit-
izen Energy Communities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Theoretical background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.1
Black boxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.2
Translation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Methodology
18
3.1
Actor Network Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.1
Controversies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Field Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
Information searching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
Conducting interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.3
The interviewing process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.4
Participant observation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.5
Ethics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Analysing my data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.1
Coding my interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.2
The five observation lenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Describing the controversy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
vi
==PAGE:9==
4
Analysis
30
4.1
Changes in the Danish Power Supply Law and other legislation . . . . . .
31
4.1.1
Sharing electricity through direct lines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.2
Too complex legislation? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.3
The local collective tariff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.4
How can we strain relieve the electricity grid? . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.5
What is an energy community? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.1.6
Radius’ concerns regarding the local collective tariff . . . . . . . .
38
4.1.7
The energy sharing platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Energy communities and energy justice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2.1
Cost reflective tariffs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2.2
Energy communities and energy poverty
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2.3
Creating an energy community as common housing . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
The role of Energy communities in the future energy grid . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3.1
Are energy communities a necessary addition to the collective grid?
45
4.3.2
Do energy communities help protect the electricity grid?
. . . . .
46
4.3.3
Documentation on strain relief of the electricity grid . . . . . . . .
48
4.3.4
Ensuring local support via energy communities
. . . . . . . . . .
49
5
Discussion
52
5.1
Implementation of the EU directives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6
Conclusion
57
Main References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I
Additional References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
II
A Timelines
IV
A.1 Timeline of Hearings, articles and other . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV
A.2 Timeline of changes in the Danish Power Supply Law . . . . . . . . . . .
X
B Initial Actor-Network
XIV
C Empirical date besides the interviews
XV
D Coding Examples
XVI
D.1 Overarching themes of the coding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XVI
D.2 Examples of detailed coding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XVII
vii
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In 2015, 195 countries, including the member states of the European Union, agreed to
combat climate change and pledged that the global temperature increase should be kept
well below 2°C, with efforts to limit the increase to 1.5°C. This agreement was named
the Paris Agreement (European Commission and Directorate-General for Energy, 2019),
and constitutes the foundation of the ”Clean Energy for All Europeans” package adopted
by the European Union in 2019. This package forms the framework for the EU’s efforts
towards CO2 neutrality by 2050. To achieve this, the EU has outlined five areas of work
described in the package.
One of these is the goal of giving electricity consumers in
Europe more rights in the energy transition. The European Union emphasises locally
produced energy as crucial for success in the green transition, which paves the way for
the implementation of energy communities.
In this landscape the Danish government alongside the vast majority of the Danish Par-
liament passed the Danish Climate Action Law in 2020. This law pledges a 70% reduction
in CO2 emissions in 2030 compared to 1990 and 100% climate neutrality by 2050. This
ambition requires innovation and investment in almost every part of the society.
One of the requirements to achieve the reduction target is to electrify the energy sys-
tem. Fuel must be transitioned from fossil fuels to electricity as well as heating also must
be transitioned from burning of gas and coal to electricity driven heat pumps. All of
this electricity must be transported via the Danish collective electricity grid, and this
expansion in electricity necessitates the expansion of the grid. The Danish consulting
engineering group Rambøll has calculated the investment cost of the electricity grid to
be 110 billion Danish Kroner. These expenses are necessary for ensuring an electricity
grid that is capable of handling the future electricity demand, and these expenses must
partially be paid by the electricity consumers - the Danish population.
To reduce the need of grid expanding a greater flexibility is needed in the demand of
electricity, and here energy communities can contribute. Energy communities consist of
citizens that join forces to produce their own electricity and then share this electricity
among themselves. This creates flexibility that can be utilised by the common grid.
The European Union has implemented a definition of energy communities in their re-
newable energy (RE) and Electricity Market Directives (RE Directive, 2018), (Electricity
Market Directive, 2019). This definition of energy communities is new, however com-
1
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
munal and collective energy have been a part of the Danish electricity system since the
1970s. Here the Danish electricity grid was more decentralised, and several smaller wind
turbines were erected by nuclear power protesters. An example of this is the Tvind wind
turbine project that built one of the first modern wind turbines in Denmark. From this
several wind energy cooperatives emerged, but with the centralisation and liberalisation
of the electricity market in the 1990s these energy communities faded into the background
until the energy crisis in 2022 gave rise to an awareness of electricity prices and security,
which made more and more people interested in energy communities again, and multiple
energy communities have begun to form. However these energy communities experience
economical issues with sharing their electricity, as the shared electricity is still subject to
tariffs and taxes.
With the changes in the Danish Power Supply Law (Elforsyningsloven) in light of the
Renewable Energy (RE) and Electricity Market Directives from the EU, Radius/Cerius
has developed the local collective tariff (Lokal kollektiv tariffering) as a way of complying
with energy communities. Several actors do however experience some issues both relating
to the local collective tariff, and to the Danish legislation in general. The implementa-
tion of the EU directives leads to the introduction of the local collective tariff and the
controversy of this implementation will be examined in this thesis.
Using Actor-Network theory (ANT) the aim of this thesis is to map the controversy
around energy communities in Denmark and the implementation of the two EU direc-
tives on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources and on common rules
for the internal market for electricity and amending into Danish legislation. The basis
for this will be field work consisting of participant observation, information search and
interviews with actors involved in the controversy. The European directives are rather
new, and so is their implementation. Several research papers have been written on the
implementation of the European legislation, however none deals with the implementation
of the directives into Danish legislation as thoroughly as this thesis has.
Sociology is not my main field of work, but as an engineer in a sociologist field, I aim at
using the knowledge gained as an engineering student and combine this knowledge with
social science to develop a deeper understanding of this controversy.
Firstly the contextual background for this study will be presented. Here the European
legislation and the implementation into Danish law will be described. Thereafter addi-
tional literature as well as the theoretical background are presented.
The methodology chapter covers the field work performed in this study as well as the
other means of data gathering. The data processing for the analysis is also described
This will be followed by the analysis where the empirical findings will be presented
through three storylines that constitute the controversy.
Lastly the main findings will be discussed as well as limitations and future work of the
study will be presented.
2
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Contextual Framework
2.1
The European Directives
The introduction of the Clean Energy for all Europeans package was followed by two di-
rectives: ”On the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources” (RE Directive,
2018), also known as the renewable energy (RE) directive and ”On common rules for the
internal market for electricity” (Electricity Market Directive, 2019) known as the Elec-
tricity Market Directive. These two directives outline the EU’s visions and regulations for
the expansion of renewable energy in Europe, as well as the rules for the electricity mar-
ket in Europe. Most importantly, they describe how the EU believes energy communities
should fit into the future energy market in Europe.
2.1.1
The incentive behind the RE- and Electricity Market Di-
rectives
The incentive behind is described in the preamble of both directives. The RE directive
was introduced due to the need of expanding the production of renewable energy. It out-
lines many new regulatory changes within the energy sector that will help the EU achieve
the Paris Agreement’s goals of limiting global temperature rise and the EU’s own goal of
reducing CO2 emissions by at least 40% compared to 1990 levels by 2030. Additionally,
in 2014, the European Commission decided that the share of renewable energy consumed
in the European Union should be at least 27% by 2030. The Parliament wants to in-
crease this target to 32%, and to achieve this goal, the European Commission believes it
is necessary to introduce energy communities that can produce renewable energy at the
local level. Smaller installations, in particular, ”can be of great benefit to increase public
acceptance and to ensure the rollout of renewable energy projects” (RE Directive, 2018,
Preamble).
The Electricity Market Directive has been developed to strengthen the European elec-
tricity markets and prepare them for a future, where increased electrification of society
creates a need for transporting significantly more electricity than today. To achieve this,
all end customers in Europe must have the opportunity to contribute to energy security.
This is accomplished by strengthening the electricity markets and providing citizens with
opportunities to manage their own consumption and achieve energy savings. One of these
opportunities is the construction of energy communities.
The European Parliament lists several aspects of the challenges the European electricity
3
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. CONTEXTUAL FRAMEWORK
grid will face in the future, which they believe energy communities can help handle, and
therefore the rights and opportunities for energy communities should be enhanced.
When producing energy, The European Parliament deems it important to consider the
broad value created in the process. Local energy communities can generate significant
value in the local community — not only for citizens actively participating in the com-
munity but also for those outside of it. These benefits include local development op-
portunities, export possibilities, greater social cohesion, and employment opportunities.
Additionally, energy communities help foster acceptance of renewable energy (RE Direc-
tive, 2018, Preamble).
Energy communities focus on providing cheap energy to their members, unlike traditional
electricity companies that focus on profit. Energy communities can promote the use of
new technology and new consumption patterns; they can enhance energy efficiency and
by lowering energy consumption, they reduce demand and thus the price of energy, a
step towards combating energy poverty. Furthermore, energy communities enable peo-
ple, who previously did not have the opportunity, to participate in the electricity market.
This can create economic, environmental, and social benefits for members of the energy
community as well as others in the local community (Electricity Market Directive, 2019,
Preamble).
Another valuable aspect of locally produced electricity is its positive impact on the lo-
cal community, where having local energy sources and increased supply security creates
value. On a more national level, reducing the transport distances for energy also decreases
transmission losses (RE Directive, 2018, Preamble).
2.1.2
Rights of energy communities
The two directives also describe two different types of energy communities: renewable
energy communities (RECs) and citizen energy communities (CECs). These are similar
in many ways but have some differences in powers and limitations. These differences and
similarities will be explained in the following, however firstly both directives grant energy
communities some rights, which will be described.
With the directives the European Parliament states energy communities should have
the same opportunities and requirements as other actors to operate in the market. This
includes the associated obligations. Additionally, energy communities should not be sub-
jected to ”regulatory restrictions” (Electricity Market Directive, 2019, Preamble) when
sharing their energy internally within their community. This should apply both when
sharing occurs via direct lines1 and when sharing occurs over the collective grid:”Citizen
energy communities should not face regulatory restrictions when they apply existing or
future information and communications technologies to share electricity produced using
generation assets within the citizen energy community among their members or share-
holders based on market principles... [] even over the public network, provided that both
metering points belong to the community”(Electricity Market Directive, 2019, Preamble)
These same rights are present in the RE directive.
One of the barriers for energy communities is the lack of transparent rules and coordina-
tion among the responsible authorities that need to provide guidance on the regulations in
this area. This needs to change to make it easier for the initiators of energy communities
to understand the rules. Additionally, it is necessary to”establish a regulatory frame-
1See subsection 2.1.3 for definition of direct lines
4
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. CONTEXTUAL FRAMEWORK
work which would empower renewables self-consumers to generate, consume, store, and
sell electricity without facing disproportionate burdens.” (RE Directive, 2018, Preamble)
These rules should apply not only to single-family households but also to citizens living
in apartment complexes.
In addition to proper guidance, it is also important that renewable energy communi-
ties are not subjected to unreasonable rules and requirements or unjustified fees. This
also means that renewable energy communities should not be taxed if they consume the
energy they produce. Moreover, their positive contributions towards achieving climate
and energy goals, as well as the benefits they provide to the collective energy system,
should be recognised. ”Renewables self-consumers should not face discriminatory or dis-
proportionate burdens or costs and should not be subject to unjustified charges. Their
contribution to the achievement of the climate and energy target and the costs and bene-
fits that they bring about in the wider energy system should be taken into account.” (RE
Directive, 2018, Preamble).
Member states must establish a framework that can promote and facilitate the devel-
opment of self-consumption. This framework should also apply to ”including those in
low-income or vulnerable households;” (RE Directive, 2018, Article 21). The framework
should also ensure that self-consumers contribute fairly to the collective electricity grid
and share the costs associated with the supply of their excess electricity.
Just as for self-consumers, member states must create frameworks for the development
of energy communities. They should assess and estimate the barriers and potentials that
exist for energy communities in the current legislation. Based on these, ”unjustified reg-
ulatory and administrative barriers to renewable energy communities are removed” (RE
Directive, 2018, Article 22), and member states should create favourable conditions that
can promote and facilitate the development of energy communities.
2.1.3
Peer-to-peer trading and direct lines
In subsection 2.1.4 the description of the two versions of energy communities will be dis-
cussed. In these definitions the term ’direct lines’ are used, and therefor the definition
from The Electricity Market Directive is described even though this does not relate di-
rectly to the regulation of energy communities.
Direct lines are electricity connections that share electricity locally, bypassing the col-
lective electricity grid, and are used to ”link an isolated generation site with an isolated
customer.” (Electricity Market Directive, 2019, Article 7) Member states must ensure
that all producers, including energy communities, have the opportunity to share their
electricity via direct lines, and that sharing via these lines is not subjected to ”dispropor-
tionate administrative procedures or costs” (Electricity Market Directive, 2019, Article
7).
In the RE directive peer-to-peer trading is defined as ”the sale of renewable energy between
market participants by means of a contract with predetermined conditions”(RE Directive,
2018, Article 2). This trading can be conducted by the members of an energy community,
and is a way of ensuring energy sharing. For this energy trading it is beneficial to use
direct lines, as these direct lines can bypass the collective grid, and therefore this energy
sharing will be without tariffs and taxes.
5
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. CONTEXTUAL FRAMEWORK
2.1.4
Similarities between RECs and CECs
Both directives introduce definitions of consumers producing their own electricity and
consolidations of producing consumers. In the RE directive they are defined as ’Renew-
ables self-consumers’ in article 21 and ’Renewable energy communities’ in article 22. In
the Electricity Market Directive consumers producing their own electricity are defined
as ’Active costumers’ in article 15 and consolidations of active customers are defined as
’Citizen energy communities’ in article 16. The definitions of consumers producing their
own electricity in article 21 and 15 share many similarities just as the consolidations of
producing consumers in article 22 and 16 does.
Definitions
A renewable energy self-consumer is an final customer who produces electricity for their
own consumption and has the option to sell excess energy, as defined by ”a final cus-
tomer operating within its premises located within confined boundaries... [] who generates
renewable electricity for its own consumption, and who may store or sell self-generated
renewable electricity, provided that, for a non- household renewables self-consumer, those
activities do not constitute its primary commercial or professional activity;”(RE Direc-
tive, 2018, Article 2)
A renewable energy community is defined as a legal entity consisting of at least two
renewable energy self-consumers who acting ”jointly... [] who are located in the same
building or multi-apartment block;” (RE Directive, 2018, Article 2), coming together to
form a ”jointly acting renewables self-consumers” This community has the following three
requirements:
1. A renewable energy community is independent and based on voluntariness, and
must be owned and controlled by local shareholders or members.
2. The local shareholders must be natural persons, SMEs, or local authorities.
3. Their main purpose is to provide economic, environmental, or social benefits to its
members.
A citizen energy community has the same possibilities as renewable energy communities
for self-producing electricity and is also defined as an association of self-consumers —
referred to in the directive as active customers. The directive states that citizen energy
communities ”may engage in generation, including from renewable sources, distribution,
supply, consumption, aggregation, energy storage, energy efficiency services or charging
services for electric vehicles or provide other energy services to its members or sharehold-
ers;” (Electricity Market Directive, 2019, Article 2).
Thus, there are many similarities between renewable energy communities and citizen
energy communities, as both are legal entities consisting of various actors, whose main
purpose is to provide economic, environmental, or social benefits to their members.
Electricity self-consumers
Now the specification for consumers producing their own electricity will be covered. This
relates to both article 21 of the RE-directive and article 15 of the Electricity Market
Directive. One defines renewable self consumers and the other active customers. Again
6
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. CONTEXTUAL FRAMEWORK
these have many similarities which will be covered. In the following the joint notion self-
consumers will be used to describe both active customers and renewable self consumers.
Firstly the European Union secures the right for every citizen to be a self-consumer,
and secure their right to trade their own produced electricity, and this trade must be
without being subject to ”to discriminatory or disproportionate procedures and charges,
and to network charges that are not cost-reflective;” (RE Directive, 2018, Article 21).
This applies both to the electricity that is sold and to the electricity that remains with
the self-consumer that the charges must be ”cost reflective (omkostningsægte) (Electricity
Market Directive, 2019, Article 15). An equivalent right is described in the Electricity
Market Directive.
Energy communities
With self-consumers described it is possible to define what an energy community is ac-
cording to the European Union. Energy communities are also introduced in both direc-
tives, in the RE directive as renewable energy communities and in the Electricity Market
Directive as citizen energy communities. Just as for self-consumers the definitions of
two types of energy communities share several similarities which will be described in the
following, where the joint notion ’energy communities’ will be used for the two definitions.
Energy communities largely have the same rights and opportunities as self-consumers.
Member states must ensure that end customers have the right to participate in an energy
community. This must be done in a way so that participants in energy communities
maintain their status as end customers, with the associated obligations and rights, and
at the same time do not face unreasonable requirements, conditions, and procedures —
just as for self-consumers. And as self-consumers, energy communities have the right to
produce, consume, sell, and store energy, and they have the right to share their energy
freely within the community. This right should be available to energy communities with-
out being subject to discriminatory treatment. Additionally, it must be ensured that
energy communities have access to all energy markets. (RE Directive, 2018, Article 22).
A similar definition is also found in the Electricity Market Directive.
Energy communities are based on voluntariness, and it must be possible for participants
in an energy community to withdraw from this community. Members of the community
should be treated as active customers, and the obligations and rights associated with
this status, as well as the status as consumers, must be maintained for participants in a
citizen energy community. (Electricity Market Directive, 2019, Article 16).
In this context, it is also important that all citizens have access to participate in a re-
newable energy community — including those in low-income or vulnerable households.
2.1.5
Differences between between RECs and CECs
As evident from the description in subsection 2.1.4 renewable energy communities and
citizen energy communities share much of the same rights and obligations as intentions.
They are however implemented as two separate entities, and therefore there are some dif-
ferences between the two, which will be discussed now. This section is based on my own
interpretation of the directives, but it is backed by (Loebbe, Sioshansi, and Robinson,
2022, Chapter 2), where the differences between the two definitions have been discussed
thoroughly.
7
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. CONTEXTUAL FRAMEWORK
The Electricity Directive introduces the possibility for CECs to become Distribution
System Operators (DSOs) both under the general scheme already in place and as ”closed
distribution system operators.”(Electricity Market Directive, 2019, Preamble)
In the RE directive there is no limitation on what kind of energy a REC can produce,
where it is specifically electricity that CECs are able to produce in the Electricity Mar-
ket Directive. This electricity however, where the energy must come from a renewable
sources in the REC, the Electricity Market Directive does not state that the produced
electricity from CECs must be from a renewable source. Thus it is possible to generate
a CEC centred around fossil fuels even though this is a very unlikely scenario.
RECs have a geographically limited scope, as participants in the community must be
in close proximity, where this limitation is not present in the Electricity Market Direc-
tives description of CECs, and these energy communities therefore have the potential to
spread across the entire county if this is deemed beneficial.
2.1.6
Other directives affecting energy communities
In addition to the two directives described above, the directive ”on the internal market
for electricity” (Internal Market Directive, 2019) is adopted as an extension of the Elec-
tricity Market Directive. This directive focuses on the distribution side of the electrical
grid and contains provisions that are important for energy communities, which will be
described below.
The task of DSOs in the electricity grid is to facilitate the integration of renewable
energy and decentralised production, as well as to promote flexible electricity consump-
tion. The Internal Market for Electricity Directive concerns the internal electricity market
and addresses both the distribution and transmission networks. It mandates that DSOs
create equal conditions for all market participants by ensuring that network tariffs are
non-discriminatory for the actors in the network. Instead, they should ensure that both
the need for increased flexibility in the electricity grid and the improvement of energy
efficiency are met. It is also defined here that all market participants are balance respon-
sible. A balance responsible party (balanceansvarlig aktør) is economically responsible for
imbalances between production and consumption. This responsibility can be delegated,
but all market participants are financially responsible for the imbalances they contribute
to the grid - this includes energy communities.
Network operators have the right to charge fees for the use of their distribution and
transmission networks, but these fees and tariffs must be cost-reflective. This means
that the actors in the electricity grid must pay a reasonable fee for their use of the grid.
These costs cover the fixed expenses of the network operators, but also provide economic
incentives for market participants to increase energy efficiency and promote supply secu-
rity. The costs should reflect the actual expenses the network operators have with the
respective market actors, including active customers and energy communities.
8
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. CONTEXTUAL FRAMEWORK
2.2
Literature Review
Before describing energy communities and the literature written about them, there is one
important issue that must be addressed. This thesis argues that energy communities are
a new actor in the electricity grid, which has been implemented by the European Union
as described in section 2.1. Many people however - especially in Denmark, will argue that
energy communities by no means are a new actor in the Danish energy system, as com-
munal energy has been a considerable part of the Danish electricity system, and also one
of the pioneers for the position Denmark has in the wind farm industry today(Johansen,
2021) and (J. K. Kirkegaard, Cronin, et al., 2021).
Both are correct, and this is because the two mentioned energy communities are differ-
ent entities. Communal energy - which has rightfully been called energy communities,
has been present in Denmark for a long time, since the Tvind Wind turbine project in
Western Jutland in the 1970s. These energy communities were developed by passion-
ate often left-wing local groups that had a desire to produce their own electricity from
an ideological point of view. The people developing energy communities today are still
very passionate, and it is still locally founded, but what is new is the formalisation of
the energy community as a legal entity as defined be the European Union. This legal
entity have a very specific formal definition as described in section 2.1, and therefore it
is different from the historical energy communities.
2.2.1
Implementation of European legislation
As discussed this thesis examines energy communities as defined by the European Union.
The 27 member states of the EU all have to interpret this new legislation and incorporate
it into the given states’ own legislation on the matter. This implementation will undoubt-
edly be different for every state, as each state has their own legislation on their electricity
grid and supply. This has caused some issues in the literature research for this thesis.
Several articles have been written on the subject of how the legislation is implemented
into member states, but for every article a new member state is addressed.
Some countries are included more often than others in the literature on the implementa-
tion of the EU directive. These countries are namely Germany, France, Italy and Spain.
The implementation in several other countries are also mentioned in different papers,
such as, Poland, Austria, Norway, Portugal and Latvia. The implementation of the two
directives is different for each country, and in the paper by (L´opez et al., 2024) the gen-
eral implementation of some of the mentioned countries is described. In this article, it is
briefly described that Denmark has not implemented the right for energy communities to
own distribution networks, but has implemented the opportunity to offer geographically
differentiated tariffs. In general terms the paper concludes that the implementation of
the European legislation is at different stages in the different countries, and that some of
the bottlenecks of the implementation are that the legislation can be confusing.
The paper by (Inˆes et al., 2020) compares the local legislation for energy communities in
9 different European countries - not including Denmark however. This paper describes
how energy communities as a concept have not been a part of the legislation in some of
the countries: Belgium, Croatia and Italy having to change their legislation in order to
allow collective self-consumers, whereas energy communities have had more favourable
frameworks already in France, Germany, the Netherlands and the UK. Again Denmark
9
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. CONTEXTUAL FRAMEWORK
is not included in this paper, but as Denmark has a history of advantageous legislation
for energy communities, Denmark is one of the countries that does not have to change
much in their legislation to meet the minimum requirements of the European legislation,
as much of what is introduced in the directives already is implemented into Danish leg-
islation.
In the paper by (Krug, M. Di Nucci, et al., 2023) the implementation of the European
legislation is also described for 9 countries - not including Denmark. The article centres
on the employment in the local legislation, and describes the timeline and completeness
of this implementation. The article concludes that much of the implementation into local
legislation is yet to be achieved in a proper way simply because the European framework
was and is still new.
The European legislation affects millions of people and is therefore subject for much re-
search. The research described in this section mostly aim at giving an overview of the
status for many countries, and focus on which parts of the legislation are implemented
and which are not. As customary for European legislation the two directives implement
several rights and obligations in order to streamline the legislation so that every country
has the same basis. Thus some countries like Belgium, Croatia and Italy have much from
the directives they must now include in their implementation, as collective self-consumers
do not exist in their legislation yet, and some countries such as Denmark will have the
upper hand as it has much experience and a history of energy communities.
Some articles question the legislation on a more theoretical level without looking at the
implementation, such as (Busch et al., 2021) and (Roberts, 2020), where the latter paper
specifically gives an insight into the uncertainties of the legislation. The framework is
unparalleled, but the incentives behind can only be achieved if implemented and used in
the member states. This is a completely different aspect, but it does not provide much
detail - rather the opposite. A common aspect of the articles however is that none of
them is centred around Denmark, and none has described the detailed implementation
of the European legislation into Danish law. Geographically differentiated tariffs are ap-
proved, but how are they enacted in Denmark? This question has not been answered
yet. Some more specific implementations of the European legislation has been made for
countries like Italy and Germany (Krug, M. R. Di Nucci, et al., 2022) and the several
research papers on energy communities in the UK have been made e.g. (Hannon et al.,
2023) and (Walker and Devine-Wright, 2008), but this can for obvious reasons not tell
anything about the implementation in Denmark.
The legal implementation in Denmark has very briefly been described in (L´opez et al.,
2024), but the practical implications and potential challenges related to the execution of
the legal framework has not been explored. This is what will be addressed in this thesis.
2.2.2
Additional literature
To understand energy communities, their role and contribution to the electricity grid, it
is also important to understand what challenges they face. This is a major focus of the
thesis, and therefore previous research on the subject was examined by reading the paper
by (J. K. Kirkegaard, Nyborg, et al., 2023). This paper focuses on issues that energy
communities faces especially in relation to the tendering process, where local energy com-
munities have an economical disadvantage compared to some of the larger commercial
10
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. CONTEXTUAL FRAMEWORK
actors due to economies of scale. This harms the local communities and with that the
local support for the energy projects (J. K. Kirkegaard, Nyborg, et al., 2023).
Energy communities is not an European invention. Energy communities exist outside
the European Union, and this has also been researched. The paper by (Gui and MacGill,
2018) examines how energy communities in Australia can contribute to the future energy
system. In the book by (Loebbe, Sioshansi, and Robinson, 2022) several topics related
to energy communities are covered and in chapter 3 and 7 energy communities in the
US and Northern America are described. The book also covers energy communities in
Brazil, Italy, Denmark and several post communist countries. The book also covers the
legal framework in the countries and the European legislation as mentioned in subsec-
tion 2.1.5.
The description of energy communities in Denmark is related to the historical version
of energy communities, it describes the history of energy communities in Denmark, and
how they aided Denmark in achieving the position it has today as a significant player
in the wind turbine market, but does not discuss the implementation of the European
directives into Danish law.
It is evident that energy communities have several meanings and positions in the elec-
tricity system across the globe. Thus energy communities as a research subject have way
too many aspects to be covered by just one thesis. Therefore there are several interesting
aspects of energy communities that cannot be addressed in this thesis. This subject and
the legislation is still in the very early stages of implementation, which is why the liter-
ature on the subject is scarce, especially the subject of the Danish implementation. In
this thesis I will only focus on the implementation of the two aforementioned directives
(RE Directive, 2018) and (Electricity Market Directive, 2019), discuss how they are im-
plemented into Danish law, and what the implications are for both the electricity system
in Denmark and the developing energy communities in Denmark.
2.3
Incorporation into Danish legislation
After the adoption of the directives described in section 2.1, the Danish legislation has
been updated. The directives affect various laws in Denmark, with the Power Supply
Law (Elforsyningsloven) being the most important. In addition, the Law on Common
Housing (Almenboligloven), the Electricity Tax Law (Elafgiftsloven) and the Law on Pro-
motion of Renewable Energy (VE-loven) are also affected. This is all consolidated in the
Consolidation Act on Renewable Energy Communities and Citizen Energy Communities
(Bekendtgørelse om VE-fællesskaber og borgerenergifællesskaber).
Wind turbine and solar cooperatives have already been implemented in Danish legis-
lation since the liberalisation of the electricity grid in the 1990s. These cooperatives had
a local focus. (VE-loven, 2024, §21, stk 2) includes a proximity requirement and states
that a wind turbine cooperative must have at least 10 participants. If these two require-
ments are met, it is possible to receive a state guarantee for costs. This demonstrates
a willingness and acceptance from the Danish state for citizens to join in local energy
supply cooperatives.
Thus much of the intention of the two directives from the EU is already implemented
11
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. CONTEXTUAL FRAMEWORK
in Danish legislation. It is possible to generate your own electricity and participating in
energy communities has been possible for decades. One of the issues energy communities
face is the economical aspect of the energy sharing, as taxes and tariffs are imposed on the
electricity shared through the collective grid. This is one of the issues that is addressed
in the new local collective tariff from Radius.
2.3.1
The Danish Power Supply Law
In the Danish Power Supply Law the terms active customers and citizen energy communi-
ties from the Electricity Market Directive have been implemented, where active customers
have the right to produce and store their own electricity (Elforsyningsloven, 2023, §5 4)
), and citizen energy communities are a legal entity based on voluntariness consisting of
several active customers whose primary purpose is to generate social, economic or envi-
ronmental benefits (Elforsyningsloven, 2023, §5 5) ). RE self-consumers are defined as
an electricity costumer who produces electricity for own consumption (Elforsyningsloven,
2023, §5 34) ).
The regulations for the Danish DSOs are also defined in this legislation. In (Elforsyn-
ingsloven, 2023, §73) the regulation on electricity tariffs is described. Here the require-
ment that tariffs must be fair, objective and nondiscriminatory is described. Here the
regulation concerning geographically differentiated tariffs is also described. Geographi-
cally differentiated tariffs are only allowed for electricity customers connected to the 10
kV grid and for local consolidations across all voltage levels.
The tariffs of the Danish electricity consumers must be controlled and approved by the
Danish Utility Regulator (Forsyningstilsynet), and every method developed by the Danish
DSO must be reported to the Danish Utility Regulator for approval (Elforsyningsloven,
2023, §73 a.).
2.3.2
The Electricity Tax Law
In the Electricity Tax Law the tariffs and taxes imposed on the Danish electricity con-
sumers are defined. Electricity produced utilising renewable energy sources such as solar
and wind power are excepted from tariffs if the production is located on the property
where it is consumed directly by the owner or renter of the electricity production facility
(Elafgiftsloven, 2023, §2 c.). This implies that home owners do not have to pay taxes and
tariffs on the consumed electricity coming from their own solar panels.
2.3.3
The Law on Common Housing
The primary function of a common housing association is to construct, rent out, manage,
maintain, and modernise social housing with associated communal facilities(Almenboligloven,
2023, §6). In (Almenboligloven, 2023, §6 stk 2) it is declared that the housing association
can carry out activities that have a natural connection to the residences.
On the basis of the definition in (Almenboligloven, 2023) a Consolidation Act has been
composed which declares that ’activities that have a natural connection to the residences’
can be expanded to include production and distribution of heat and electricity production
facilities. These facilities can include solar panels and combined heat and power supplies.
12
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. CONTEXTUAL FRAMEWORK
The requirements are that the heat and electricity production must come from renewable
sources.
2.3.4
The Law on Promotion of Renewable Energy
The Law on Promotion of Renewable Energy describes how Denmark can increase the
production of renewable energy, and this is a key legislation in the attempt to achieve
the goal of 70 % reduction of CO2 before 2030.
In this legislation a RE-community is defined in the same way it is in the Danish Power
Supply Law. This law enables the energy minister to provide energy communities with
financial warranty that can be used for communities or private individuals wanting to
establish renewable energy. The requirement for this warranty is described in (VE-loven,
2024, §21), and includes a minimum requirement of 10 people in the collective where the
majority must have a legal address in the proximity of the placement of the turbines or
solar panels.
2.3.5
The Consolidation Act on Renewable Energy Communi-
ties and Citizen Energy Communities
The changes in the Danish Power Supply Law lead to the consolidation Act, where the
rights and obligations for energy communities are directly described.
In this consolidation both RE communities and citizen communities are defined in the
same way they are in the Danish Power Supply Law. They are a legal entity based on
open and voluntary participation, and their primary objective is to grant the participants
environmental, economic and social benefit by producing electricity for their own use.
The general regulation for energy communities is described in (Bekendtgørelse om en-
ergyfællesskaber, 2021, §5). Participants keep their rights and obligations as electricity
consumers, which includes the right to withdraw from an energy community and the right
to choose their own electricity provider.
The company form of an energy community can be either an association, a partnership,
a cooperative society, or a corporation, and the participants cannot be involved profes-
sionally in the electricity sector.
Energy communities are balance responsible parties as they are economically responsible
for the imbalances they impose on the electricity system. It is however not allowed for
energy communities to own, establish or run a distribution network entailing that the
the electricity produced within an energy community must be shared using the collective
electricity grid. With this interaction with the grid they should be treated in a non-
discriminating and timely manner.
The distribution system operators must cooperate with the energy communities to ease
the sharing of electricity within the energy community. In continuation of this energy
communities should be compensated by the DSOs if their action results in a decrease in
the strain on the electricity grid. This compensation should be developed on basis of an
assessment of the benefits energy communities can have on the electricity grid. If this
benefit is found then the differentiated tariff must by approved by the Danish Utility
Regulator.
13
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. CONTEXTUAL FRAMEWORK
What has not been implemented into Danish law
Many rights and requirements from the directives are implemented, but lastly the most
important omitted aspects are touched upon.
As briefly mentioned in subsection 2.3.5 the right for energy communities to own a distri-
bution network is not implemented into the legislation. Instead it is possible for energy
communities to share their electricity using either the collective grid - on which they
must pay taxes and tariffs, or to use direct lines, which are a electricity connection where
the individual consumer can run cables within a building even though the connection is
between multiple electricity consumers. If energy communities wish to share electricity
between several houses the collective grid must however be used.
Radius/Cerius proposal of a new local collective tariffing method
One of the implications of the EU directives that has been implemented in the Danish
Power Supply Law is the opportunity for the Danish distribution system operators to
implement geographically differentiated tariffs. This is voluntary, but the Danish DSO
Radius/Cerius has decided to develop a method that can compensate energy communities
if their ”use of the grid results in savings for the DSOs” (Cerius/Radius, 2024). This
new tariffing method has been named the local collective tariff. It has been developed by
Radius/Cerius and was reported to the Danish Utility Regulator for approval in March
2024.
This new tariffing method is applicable for consolidations of energy self-consumers, and
it is a requirement that the consolidations create concurrency (samtidighed) of their
production and consumption to obtain the reduced tariff. This method uses a virtual
metering point (virtuelt m˚alepunkt) to generate a joint account for the entire energy
community. The terms of creating a consolidation of consumers are:
1. The consolidation must be connected to the same transformer station on the low
voltage side of the 0.4/10 kV grid.
2. The consolidation must have electricity production
3. At least two independent consumers are required in the consolidation
4. The consolidations must be registered with a CVR number.
The pricing of the tariffs must be developed following these principles: They must be cost-
reflective, transparent, simple and efficient. This tariffing is applied on the electricity that
is shared through the collective grid. It is also possible to share electricity via direct lines
within buildings. As a rule of thumb one branch connection is made for each electricity
consumer besides if the building is an energy community consisting of several electricity
consumers, then only one branch connection is applied even though there are several
separate electricity consumers in the building, and the account is shared.
The energy sharing platform developed by Energinet
The last important aspect of the changes in the Danish Power Supply Law is the energy
sharing platform that must be developed by the Danish Energy Agency and Energinet -
the Danish Transmission System Operator (TSO). This is a implementation of the Elec-
tricity Market Directive article 4 (Electricity Market Directive, 2019), where it is stated
14
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. CONTEXTUAL FRAMEWORK
that member states must make sure that every consumer can have several energy sharing
arrangements at the same time. This can be implemented using the data already avail-
able in the Danish Datahub. Here the electricity producers can establish a ”sharing pool”
(Energinet, 2024), where multiple producers can sign up, and then electricity consumers
can gain access to this shared electricity optionally by paying a sharing cost. The energy
sharing will occur via the energy sharing platform, which will be implemented and devel-
oped by Energinet.
The energy sharing via the platform will be available for every household, small and
medium sized companies and public institutions - not only for energy communities. The
sharing must happen through the collective grid, and it is only renewable energy that
can be shared. As it is shared through the collective grid the shared electricity is subject
to taxes and tariffs, and energy cannot be shared between the two bidding zones - DK1
and DK2, it must remain within the same bidding zone. Additionally it is not possible
to share electricity between imbalance intervals (ubalanceintervaller) which is every 15
minutes (00, 15, 30 and 45 on the clock).
The energy sharing can be both coincidental (implicit), where the consumer and pro-
ducer ”gamble” and assume that there is energy available for sharing - e.g. charging your
electric vehicle when the sun is shining, or it can be synchronised (explicit). When the
sharing is explicit the consumption is directly linked and synchronised with renewable
electricity production - chargers that is connected to a wind turbine.
The energy sharing platform must be able to handle all the technical aspects of the energy
sharing parties - for both producers, consumers, the energy supplier (elhandler) and the
balance responsible parties, and it must be possible for the active costumer to determine
whether it is the entirety or just part of their production that is shared, just as it must
be possible to withdraw an electricity producing plant from energy sharing if desired.
2.4
Theoretical background
The aim of this thesis is to map the controversy around energy communities in Den-
mark and the implementation of the two EU directives on the promotion of the use of
energy from renewable sources and on common rules for the internal market for elec-
tricity into Danish legislation. To do so Actor-Network Theory (ANT) is employed to
map the controversy. Actor-Network Theory is a social theory which has been developed
by Michel Callon, John Law and Bruno Latour and it describes a way of examining the
social through actors and networks (Venturini, 2010) (Papazu, 2016). ANT seeks to ob-
serve and describe the actors in a controversy without the need of any prior knowledge
or theories. The offset of working with ANT is to observe the actors and what they do,
and then try to make sense out of it - not expecting the actors to feel or behave in a
certain way dictated by theory, and then seeking to fit the observations into a theory.
The goal of ANT is not to apply some theory that can explain the behaviour of the actors
- according to ANT there is no such underlying theory, and the goal is just to describe
how the landscape of the controversy is and how the actor-network unfolds (Latour, 2005)
(Nyborg and Røpke, 2015) (J. Kirkegaard and Nyborg, 2021).
Instead of having a specific theory to guide the observations the methodology of ANT
is to ”follow the actor” (Latour, 2005). The understanding here is that by observing
15
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. CONTEXTUAL FRAMEWORK
the actors and understanding their behaviour, the connections between the actors - the
actor-network is unveiled. An important aspect of ANT is that everything can be both
a network and an actor, it depends on the eyes that watch, and it is these interactions
that are examined in ANT. Depending on what you want to map, a wind turbine can
either be a network consisting of multiple small components all working together in a
vast network making the blades spin, or be mapped as an actor in an energy community
network. The actors interact with each other and thus create the Actor-Network land-
scape (Cressman, 2009) (Bencherki, 2017). It is important to note here that everything
in an Actor-Network can be an actor. One of the special aspects of ANT is the fact
that nonhuman actors can have just as prominent role in a controversy as human actors.
Even though ’legislation’ does not have a mind of its own, it can easily be an actor that
effects the network surrounding it (Bencherki, 2017) (Venturini, 2010). These actors and
the network they participate in change constantly as the social dynamics change. How-
ever when the network settles and everyone agrees on the different aspects present in the
Actor-Network and acts in unison - not necessarily the way they themselves believe is
the optimal way, but everyone agrees on this settlement; then the entire network can be
black boxed (Nyborg and Røpke, 2015).
2.4.1
Black boxes
A core concept of ANT is ”opening the black box”. The term black box is not unique
to ANT, and is often used to describe technical systems that are settled and apparent
to the viewer. A black box can be anything that operates as it should - a bike, an oven
etc, these objects are operated by everyday people without question and knowledge on
the underlying processes - you just know that by pressing this button you turn on the
oven, and after 60 minutes the cake is done. ANT is very interested in the processes
and systems within the black box. Who decided what should be inside the black box?
Why did the system end up looking like it did? Who thought the system should look
different, and why did their perspective not end up being the final system? All of these
questions are already answered in a black boxed system, but a crucial part of examining
a controversy using ANT is to try to open the black box to figure out the mechanics and
processes within (Callon, 1986b) (Cressman, 2009).
The powerful aspect of unboxing the black box is that by opening the black box and
question the ideas and structures that are taken for granted, it is possible to re-think
these ideas and understand the power structures that are built into these black boxes
(Cressman, 2009) (J. Kirkegaard and Nyborg, 2021). At the time a network is initially
black boxed, every actor in the network ha accepted one specific definition of the system
and how it should operate. However as time passes every black boxed system can expe-
rience being cracked open, and ”leak” disputing ideas and points of view from inside the
black box out to the outside world (Cressman, 2009). These ”leaks” are the beginning
of controversy, of competing ideas, of fighting over power and the right to define and
determine what is eventually black boxed. When the black box start to leak and contro-
versy breaks out ANT is a very effective tool to use when trying to unpack controversies
and all the issues related to the controversy. In relation to energy communities the tariff
methods used to be black boxed as everyone used to pay the same, but now this notion is
up to debate, and how much various actors in the electricity network must pay in tariffs
is no longer black boxed.
16
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2. CONTEXTUAL FRAMEWORK
2.4.2
Translation
When the black box has started to leak the conflicting viewpoints are being unveiled
and new system definitions can be established. This is what makes leaking black boxes
interesting to examine as you can observe actors and how they use different moments
of translation to win over new allies in the battleground of winning power and closing
the controversy as the ”winner”. (Cressman, 2009) In this translation process there are
four moments of translation as described by (Callon, 1986a) that will be described in the
following:
In the paper Callon writes about scallops in France, and uses this controversy to de-
scribe the different moments of translation. The scallops are declining in number, which
affects the fishermen living of selling the scallops, and scientists try to solve the problem
by growing scallops like some have been successful in doing in Japan. Here the first
moment of translation is described as the problematisation. Here the scientists have a
definition of the problem, and this definition of the problem requires their expertise. In
their definition they are the obligatory passage point of the controversy. This is a very
beneficial position to have, as this ensures that you are the most important actor in the
controversy, and from this position you have the ability to set the direction of the con-
troversy. What you deem most important is the most important as the remaining actors
depend on you to succeed.
This is however a position that can be challenged by the other actors in the network.
They themselves can have an entirely different problem they deem most important, or
they have another solution to the problem. The battle of power begins with interesse-
ment. This is the process of actors trying to create new connections to other actors in
the network, and use these connections to win over these actors to their own problema-
tisation - their cosmos and their points of view. Here it is important to get the attention
of other actors and get them to show an interest in your viewpoints. To do this you need
arguments or interessement devices that can support your claims, a report backing your
standpoint e.g. However no matter how well articulated you are or how certain the actors
are in their own perception of the true nature of the controversy, success is never certain,
and the interessement of the other actors are not assured to lead to alliances. The process
of enrolling other actors in your perception on the controversy might end in failure, but
if successful these alliances and enrolment will enable the spokesperson of the group to
make actual statements representing a position in the controversy. An actor is enrolled
in the alliance lead by the spokesperson, if the actor accepts the role they are assigned,
or if they can be given a certain incentive. Once enrolled in an alliance the actor can
start mobilising other actors by translating their position to others outside the alliance.
By being mobilised the actor does not only accept the interpretation of the controversy
but is actively supporting the spokesperson in their efforts to close the controversy with
their viewpoints as the globally accepted ”winning” position. Who will earn the right of
defining energy communities role in the future energy system, when the controversy is
black boxed?
17
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Methodology
As briefly touched upon in section 2.4 ANT is both a theory and a method. In this
methodology section the different approaches of gathering data and analysing these will
be described. The overarching method applied is ANT which is combined with field work,
where both interviews and participant observation are utilised. Additionally the ethical
considerations regarding my field work are discussed as well as a description of my coding
process. The description of ANT as a method is mainly based on the Diving in Magma
paper (Venturini, 2010) that gives an overview of ANT based on the work done by Michel
Callon, Bruno Latour and John Law.
3.1
Actor Network Theory
As described in the theoretical background one of the core practices of ANT is to observe
the actors and describe what is seen without trying to apply theory on their actions - the
observations should be bottom up instead. This is described in a quote by Bruno Latour
in (Venturini, 2010, p 259): ”Just look at controversies and tell what you see”. This
sentence has many implications and as described by (Venturini, 2010) the word ’just’ has
three very important implications:
The first relates to the importance of actually observing what is happening, and not just
describe what you as an observer believe is happening. When observing a controversy, it
is important as an observer to have an open mind and not to focus on a specific theory
in your approach. When starting the observations it is important to keep an open mind
to what is observed, then if need be, theory can be applied afterwards. This follows the
second element of Latour’s ’just’, namely that the actors should have the largest say in
what is important in the controversy - after all it is them participating in it. The observer
must ensure that their own assumptions are put aside and the voice of the actor is listened
to. By actively listening to what actors have to say it will also be less likely to be affected
by your own bias, which is the third and last implication, which the observer must be
aware of. No one is entirely impartial, everyone has an opinion on a given subject, and
to make up for this bias you must accept it and try to make your observations as wide
as possible. Therefore actively listening to what the actors say - following the actor, you
will be less likely to destroy the observation with bias, and if the actors are able to speak
their mind, invaluable knowledge needed to map the controversy can be achieved.
18
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
3.1.1
Controversies
A big part of the mapping is to define what a controversy is, and how you can use ANT
to map it.
Here the definition of a controversy is ”controversies are situations where actors disagree
(or better, agree on their disagreement). The notion of disagreement is to be taken in
the widest sense: controversies begin when actors discover that they cannot ignore each
other and controversies end when actors manage to work out a solid compromise to live
together. Anything between these two extremes can be called a controversy” (Venturini,
2010, p 261). This is a really broad definition, but there are some limiting factors in a
controversy. (Venturini, 2010) states 5 aspects of a controversy which will be described
here:
1. Controversies involve all kind of actors. As described in section 2.4 everything can
be an actor, and everything is an actor in a controversy if their presence or lack of
makes a difference in the controversy.
2. Controversies display the social in its most dynamic form. A controversy starts
when a black box starts leaking, and the machinery within the closed system begins
to become visible. This ’liquefaction’ of the social is the main reason why mapping
controversies is so interesting. When a controversy is unsettled every term and
definition is up to debate, before anybody gains the power to determine how the
controversy will be black boxed the social changes from determined solids to liquid
form, and this process continues until the entire controversy is black boxed again.
3. Controversies are reduction-resistant.
People acting in a controversy have very
different opinions about the problem at hand, but often they not only disagree on
how to solve the problems at hand, they often cannot agree on which questions are
the most important to address.
4. Controversies are debated. As the controversy is emerging ideas that was accepted
by everyone is unboxed, and suddenly actors disagree on things, they used to agree
on.
The essence of a controversy is disagreement, and in a controversy debate
and discussion is emerging amongst actors in their fight to close the controversy as
winners. The translation process is very dependant on the debate as the voicing of
different positions enables the actors to enrol in the position they deem right.
5. Controversies are conflicts. When you have a controversy, you have actors disagree-
ing on aspects that impact their lives in some way. This clash of understanding will
always result in a conflict - not necessarily open fight, but actors in controversies
always takes their part in the controversy very seriously, and thus a conflict will
arise.
Applying this description of a controversy the controversy on energy communities and
the local collective tariff can be mapped. This will be done as dictated by ANT: following
the actor and describe the controversy as they experience it. By looking at the actor-
network of the controversy the dynamics of the social system and its changes are unveiled.
Something which is set in stone might end up in a liquid changing state just to become
certain again.
This happens constantly in controversies, and it is these changes and
dynamics that is examined in this thesis.
19
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
3.2
Field Work
The primary work of this thesis was done in the field as a controversy is best under-
stood when experienced. The controversy around the local collective tariff is a public
controversy, as all procedures regarding tariff payment in Denmark must be open to the
general public. Therefore it has been fairly easy to locate the needed material as well
as gaining access to seminars and forums where this topic is discussed. This following
section describes how the field work in this thesis was done and my ethical considerations
following my work.
All the information gathered below was used as data for my analysis.
It is however
not everything that is directly cited in this thesis even though it is used in the analysis.
Therefore a complete list of all literature is included in the bibliography called ”Additional
References”.
3.2.1
Information searching
Writing the empirical background required knowledge of not only the directives from
the EU, the Danish legislation and the new local collective tariffing method made by
Cerius/Radius, but also the search for research articles about energy communities to
gather information on has previously been written written on the subject.
This was
proven rather difficult as the scope of most articles were outside the scope of my thesis.
The result of my search is written in chapter 2, and the basis for the research papers and
other knowledge on the European legislation on energy communities were these search
words:
• Energy communities EU directive
• EU directive
• Collective tariff
• Remuneration
• Support schemes
• Geographically differentiated consumption tariff
• Collective RE prosumers
• Citizen energy communities
• Distribution of the costs
The document searches using these search words have been done in electronic databases
and search engines (primarily Web of Science, DTU Findit and Google Search). Addi-
tional literature was found by chasing references in the previously discovered papers.
20
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Finding statements using information searching
The first step in determining important actors in the controversy was to comb the internet
for statements related to either energy communities or the local collective tariff. For this
purpose Infomedia was a valuable tool, and it was used to look up public contributions
to the debate from news articles and other popular science articles. As the electrical grid
in Denmark is a very complicated system that not everyone understands completely, the
controversy of energy communities in relation to the local collective tariff is not debated
broadly in Denmark. This discussion is mostly kept within the people having a direct
professional relationship to either energy communities or the electricity grid. There is
still a lot of material on the subject online, as the collective tariff is initiated by the
Danish government and the Danish Energy Agency, and their actions are public and
easily available. In this process of gathering information, it was very important to keep
an open mind on the subjects emerging in the process of following the actor. As I did not
yet know what would end up being important in the issue of the collective tariff, I ended
up spending some time investigating themes and issues that I initially thought would be
important, but turned out to be minor parts of the controversy - or just not important
after all. Some of them are listed below
• The tendering process
• District heating
• Energy communities in Europe and the rest of the world
• Different legislation in European countries
• Producer payment in the Danish energy sector
• the different iterations of the tariff models in Denmark
• Journalists who have been writing about this subject
• What does the electricity bill consist of?
• The behind the meter arrangement (Bag m˚aleren ordning)
These topics ended up outside the scope of the controversy and were deemed not impor-
tant for the future work of my thesis.
The work of this thesis have also concentrated much around creating an overview of the
changes in the Power Supply Law, and what have lead to these changes. This is a major
task, and to do that the two time lines seen in Appendix A.1 and A.2 is created. These
time lines are not used in the analysis but have been used to decide which hearing docu-
ments were beneficial to include in the analysis.
An important aspect of this thesis to touch upon is that the controversy in ongoing
and still ongoing at the hand in date of this thesis. Thus this thesis will be based on
in-situ research - I look at the issues relating to the local collective tariff and the other
implementations of the European directives as they happen and unfolds. The work on my
thesis started in late January, the method for local collective tariff was sent to the Danish
Utility Regulator on March 12, the briefing of the energy sharing platform was held on
March 14, and my first interview was on March 18. This grants me the opportunity to
21
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
observe the controversy as it is happening and has given me access to many issues as
there are so much of the controversy that is not yet black boxed. The last interview was
completed on May 1st, and this marked the end of my information gathering. In the
meantime a new European directive has been passed in the European Parliament, and
on June 28 the hearing process of the changes from this directive in the Danish Power
Supply Law was published. Thus this thesis captures the controversy at the time between
the publication of the local collective tariffing method and the implementation of the new
Eu directive, which will surely add some new perspectives to this controversy which is
not included in this thesis.
3.2.2
Conducting interviews
The main sources of information for the analysis has been retrieved from interviews with
actors in the controversy. These interviewees have been determined after the initial pro-
cess of following the actor, as described earlier. From this initial research three prominent
actors were determined:
• The organisation Energifællesskaber Danmark (Energy Communities Denmark), a
newly founded interest ground concerned with the development of energy commu-
nities
• Radius/Cerius which is the largest DSO in Denmark. Also the DSO that is devel-
oping the new local collective tariffing method
• A researcher and former professor at Aalborg University who has conducted research
on energy communities and sustainability
Further research into the legislation from the EU and the implementation of this into
Danish law resulted in contact with both the Danish Energy Agency, Energinet and a
representative in BL - Danmarks Almene Boliger (Common Housing Denmark).
When the first interviews were conducted, the news of an energy sharing platform devel-
oped by Energinet and the Danish Energy Agency was rumoured. This shifted the focus
of the study slightly and therefore I conducted two interviews with representatives from
Energinet: One whith a chief consultant at Energinet, working with Energinet’s tariffs,
and one with another chief consultant at Energinet and who is working on the new energy
sharing platform.
At this point I figured that having insight on the process from someone who is part of an
energy community would provide new insight as well, and therefore I contacted a repre-
sentative the board of Sk˚arup Bæredygtige Energifællesskab (Sk˚arup Sustainable Energy
Community). Sk˚arup is a small town on Funen that are in the process of developing an
energy community.
Lastly the Danish Energy Agency; they did not have the time or resources to participate
in an oral interview, however they agreed on answering some of my questions in writing.
These questions were formulated before information about the energy sharing platform
was spread, and thus there are no questions about it. The questions were answered by a
student worker at the Danish Energy Agency.
22
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
3.2.3
The interviewing process
An interview is a structured conversation with a specific goal between a researcher and an
interviewee (Kvale and Brinkmann, 2009). The interview comes in many different forms,
and the semi-structured interview that is described by Kvale and Brinkmann is the main
method of acquiring data for this thesis. A semi-structured interview is defined as ”an
interview with the purpose of obtaining descriptions of the life world of the interviewee
in order to interpret the meaning of the described phenomena.”(Kvale and Brinkmann,
2009, p. 3). In an interview the roles are clearly predefined, the interviewer will ask the
interviewee questions, and it is only the interviewee who will answer the questions. As
opposed to a normal conversation this is the only roles for the interviewer and interviewee,
thus the interviewer is the one who dictates the topics of conversation, however as the
interviewee answers the interviewers questions, they have the opportunity to touch upon
topics that they may find important and that the interviewer may not have considered
beforehand.
For the interviews I conducted I made an interview guide beforehand. This interview
guide served as a guideline for the interview, where several questions within varying
themes were written. Depending on the interview subject and their relationship to the
controversy I changed the interview questions I asked slightly - the interview with the
representative from Sk˚arup Sustainable Energy Community differed greatly from the in-
terview with the representative from Radius, as they have two very different backgrounds
for answering questions, and therefore the interview guide was different as well. Using
the interview guide as a directory, the questions in the interview evolved throughout the
interview, where I asked follow up questions to the answers given by the interviewees.
Every interview was recorded, however the recording of the interview with the represen-
tative from Radius was corrupted, and therefore the transcript of this interview is done
partly on memory and partly on an auto recording that Microsoft Word provides using
AI-technology that is normally used for dictating. and is not suited for recognising con-
versation. This was compared to the interview note I made just after the interview was
done, and as a last resort ChatGPT was used to reconstruct the sentences. This tran-
script from ChatGPT was used very carefully as the language model is very unreliable.
This will have an effect on my findings, but this will be addressed in subsection 3.2.5.
Creating the interview guide
Before conducting the interviews an initial interview guide was created. This interview
guide contained four themes with a selection of guiding questions corresponding to each
theme. The themes were What can energy communities contribute to?, Issues for en-
ergy communities/the EU legislation and the implementation of this, The local collective
tariff and Energy justice. After the initial information gathering these themes started
to emerge, and they represented issues that have been voiced in the public debate by
various actors as well as aspects of the controversy I found relevant. This is more specifi-
cally the theme of energy justice, as my initial interest in energy communities arose from
the debate about energy communities related to energy justice, and I wanted to explore
them in my interviews. These themes have set the direction in the interview process, and
in the following analysis. The themes relate to my research question which have been
developed throughout the work on my thesis, and the issues I discovered in my initial
exploration of the subject when finding interviewees. These themes were the starting
point of the conversation of the interviews. In the interviewing process I ensured to keep
23
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
the questioning and exploration as open as possible. This was also evident in relation
to the energy sharing platform. This actor was not one I initially had discovered in my
research, but since it was mentioned by several actors, questions related to the platform
was developed for the further interviewing process.
Besides the addition of questions regarding the energy sharing platform, the interview
guide was almost the same for every interview. However during the interview the ques-
tions were worded differently every time, as it is in a normal conversation. The interview
guide did however change when I became aware of the energy sharing platform. Prior to
my knowledge of that I had already conducted my first interview with the representative
from BL, the researcher and the representative from Radius, which is why their view-
points on this matter have not been addressed. Adding to this it may be indicative of
their knowledge about it or how much significance they attached to it at the time of the
interview. Additionally the interview guide made for the interview with the representa-
tive from Sk˚arup Energy Sustainable Community was also rather different, as I figured
that they would have a more hands on opinion about energy communities and because of
this most of the legislative questions were replaced with more practical questions related
to the actual process of developing an energy community.
3.2.4
Participant observation
Some of my field work has included the participation in seminar or forums held for people
in the business. The specific meetings will be described later, but firstly my role as a
participating observer is described.
Participant observation is also field work, and it is a way of learning about participants,
and observe their behaviour in a given setting. Here the researchers participate in the
social setting that they seek to observe, and must be aware of their own role in this set-
ting, and how this affects your study (Mackellar, 2013) (Hurst, 2023, Chapter 13). Here I
am in literal terms following the actors to their forums and meetings and observing what
occupies their minds in this controversy. As described in section 2.4 I am not applying
theory to describe an underlying reasoning for behaviours, but merely mapping the ac-
tor network, and here observing participants in debates and forums can provide much
context to the controversy. By listening to what they say on the forums and observe
their their intern relationships and which point of interest they have as a group. It is
very effectual in a combination with interviews, as I in this setting am able to observe
the actors without having a direct contact with them. This also poses some new ethical
problems that I will address in a later section.
Retail Market Forum hosted by Energinet
The Danish TSO Energinet hosts a biannual forum about the Danish retail market for
electricity. This forum is both a way for Energinet to inform other actors in the energy
sector about their work, but also to discuss their methods and considerations regarding
their work. The forums are public thus everyone is welcome to join. The participants in
the forum that occurred on May 1st in which I made my observations were representatives
from Energinet, Green Power Denmark, Forsyningstilsynet, different Danish DSOs such
as EnergiFyn and Radius and various energy providers such as Ørsted and Norlys. The
forum took place at Trinity Hotel & Conference Centre in Fredericia, and there were 44
24
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
participants besides the people from Energinet hosting the forum.
Since this is a biannual event the people participating know each other fairly well, and it
seems like most of the participants join every year. Probably partly because of this, there
were no introduction phase of the forum, where everyone could introduce themselves -
which means that I did not have the opportunity to introduce myself and explain my
attendance. Additionally I do not know the names of the participants, nor what kind of
actor they are, as that was almost never stated when an opinion was voiced. Thus the
observations from this forum will be rather anonymous, and their opinions will be dealt
with accordingly.
DaCES Webinar
Danish Centre for Energy Storage (DaCES) is a Danish organisation that cooperates with
universities and research oriented companies in order to develop and improve energy
storage.
As a part of this work they hosted a webinar about what can be done to
encourage Danish energy communities the November 22, 2023. In this webinar several
speakers attended in talks and a panel debate. The speakers attending the webinar were
• A Senior advisor at Axcelfuture
• Two representatives from the Danish Energy Agency (Did not attend the panel
debate)
• A representative from Cerius/Radius who is head of department
• A representative from Energy Communities Denmark
• A former professor who has conducted research on energy communities and sus-
tainability (Only attended the panel debate)
The webinar was recorded and can be found on DaCES website1, and the knowledge
gained from this webinar was used as preliminary observations to gather initial informa-
tion on the subject of my thesis.
3.2.5
Ethics
Conducting interviews and using this data in research requires some ethical reflection.
As this controversy is about a real life subject, there are real life people affected by it,
and it is my obligation to ensure that I represent my interviewees viewpoints as fair and
correct as possible. It was also important to make sure that all actors had an opportu-
nity to voice their position in this controversy. This is obviously not possible in the time
frame I had, but I tried my best to make sure that actors heavily affected or affecting
the controversy had an opportunity to speak their mind. This is the ethic codex behind
my interviewing process.
Every oral interview was recorded to make the transcribing process easier, and everyone
of my interviewees agreed to this use of the recording. The aim of this study is to ex-
amine positions and different actors opinions of the subject of energy communities - the
direct wording of the interviewees positions can be important to underpin or justify their
1https://daces.dk/2023/11/24/webinar-hvordan-kan-vi-fremme-energifaellesskaber-i-danmark/
visited the 11th of July 2024
25
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
position, and therefore the interviews are transcribed true to their wording as often as
possible. But since the underlying opinion is the most important in my thesis the tran-
scribed interviews are not always transcribed word for word. Most of the interviews are
transcribed true to what the interviewee said, but empty words - like umh, are removed
from the transcripts, when they did not contribute with something meaningful. Lastly
every interviewee have been anonymised, and the quotes included in the analysis have all
been approved by the corresponding interviewee.
Two of the interviews for this thesis did no go as planned. Firstly the interview with the
Danish Energy Agency was a written interview, as they first only agreed on a written
interview due to time constraints, and when they offered an oral interview the deadline
of my thesis was too close to have time to incorporate it in my analysis. This resulted in
a less useful interview than could have been, as the questions asked were questions posed
in the earlier stages of my research, and therefore not all of the questions related to the
themes in my analysis have been posed to the Energy Agency.
The interview with the representative from Radius also met some issues. The audio file
was corrupted, meaning the only material I have from this interview is my interview
notes and the live transcript which was very incohesive. With the joint forces of my
memory and the language model ChatGBT, some of the overall meaning of the interview
was made. As this is a result of very sketchy data processing, these viewpoints of the
representative from Radius have been backed up greatly by information gathered on Ra-
dius official viewpoints gained from both their web page, their hearing answer to their
methodology on the collective tariff and public quotes from representatives of Radius.
Because of this I have been forced to mostly talk about Radius as an organisation that
can voice opinions, and occasionally I have knowledge gained from my interview with the
representative from Radius.
In relation to the participant observations made in both the DaCES webinar and the
Retail Market Forum hosted by Energinet, there are also some ethical reflections that
need to be considered. The DaCES webinar was recorded and moderated and the partic-
ipants speaking were aware that the webinar would be uploaded to a web page. However
they are not aware of my usage and thus did not agree for their opinions to be used in
a thesis. Therefore no one from the webinar is mentioned by their name in my thesis,
and as mentioned earlier the webinar was mostly used in the earlier stages of literature
gathering, and not in the final analysis.
The Retail Market Forum hosted by Energinet is a public event, but I did not have an
opportunity to make my presence known to the participants, and because of this this
forum is also just used as background knowledge.
The knowledge obtained from the
forum is mostly used to back some viewpoints that I have discovered in my interviews.
Again nobody from the forum is aware that their viewpoints are featured in my thesis,
and because of this nobody is mentioned by their name. The main goal of attending the
forum was to examine what the concerns in the electricity sector of Denmark are, and
this knowledge is again also used as background knowledge and not in the final analysis.
As described most of the empirical data that is gathered and used in the analysis are the
eight conducted interviews. These interviews are backed by hearing documents, news ar-
ticles and observations from the webinar hosted by DaCES and the Retail Market Forum
hosted by Energinet. The full extend of analysis data aside from the interviews can be
seen in Appendix C.
26
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
3.3
Analysing my data
Having all my empirical data from the process of following the actors and conducting the
interviews, the interviews are inductively coded in different themes that are used to map
out the controversy. This inductive process started with the themes that was the basis
of the interview guide, but also empirically grounded themes emerging from my open
exploratory follow the actor approach.
3.3.1
Coding my interviews
The main objective of coding is to identify key themes relevant to your study and pat-
terns throughout you dataset. When doing a qualitative analysis you gain a vast amount
of data that you need to organise and manage in order to retrieve the most important
information. This process can be supported and structured by coding the data. Coding
is an organisation method, where you attach a specific set of codes to the data, and
through this process, the codes help organise the data, and afterwards these codes can be
used further in the analysis. Here coding can be seen as the connection process from the
very early stages of organisation and early interpretation of the data to the final analysis
results (Hurst, 2023, Chapter 18).
The act of coding is immense and takes up a lot of time in the analysis, because you often
do not know which parts of your data that are most relevant before you actually have
finished coding everything. Because of this, the coding process is very iterative, and you
will have to code the document various times to achieve the final codes for your work.
The process of coding involves many aspects, but the main objective is to highlight what
initially seams relevant or interesting, and attaching a colour,word or something third
that describe this finding, and then labelling every other part of the data that touches
on the same topic or theme with the same colour or word. Thus you have begun the
sorting process of coding. The assigning of a certain code is the first part, which helps
the important part of coding - identifying patterns between the different codes and data
sets identifying the link between the different codes (Coffey and Atkinson, 1996). Coding
is not to find every detail that might be interesting, but more to determine what is most
important in the data overall.
In this thesis coding is used as a measure to condensate the data by simplifying as
described in (Hurst, 2023, Chapter 18 & 19) and (Coffey and Atkinson, 1996). There are
many ways of coding, but reducing the analysis data was deemed the best approach in
this thesis.
The most important role of coding when you want to simplify is to undertake three differ-
ent kinds of operations as described by Seidel and Kelle in (Coffey and Atkinson, 1996).
These operations are (a) Noticing relevant phenomena (b) collecting examples of those
phenomena, and (c) analysing those phenomena in order to find commonalities, differ-
ences, patterns and structures. These steps are important when analysing a controversy
to map the different actors and their stands.
The work of starting by noticing relevant phenomena began from the start of the project.
There are some key issues that kept showing themselves throughout the data collection
work, and these became even more clear once the interviews were conducted. At the
beginning of the coding process a coding list was generated using these themes or issues
that initially came to mind. This list was partially made from the topics of the interview
27
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
guide, but also the topics that emerged from the interviews. Throughout the coding
of the first three interviews all the positions that seemed relevant was given a certain
colour. And many topics were added to the list after this first reading. Fairly quickly the
same topics and codes kept resurfacing, meaning the last coding went fairly easily. The
final codes of the interviews can be seen in Appendix D.1. The codes did however cover
some fairly big topics, therefore they were divided in the final coding step into several
subcategories that were used to generate the results in the analysis. This process of as-
signing subcategories was also iterative. The sub-codes emerged throughout the process
of assigning quotes and therefore some of the early assigned quotes were revisited and put
into several categories. Some of the topics did not fit very well into the predetermined
codes, and these were given their own separate ”miscellaneous” code, so that I made
sure that I was not blinded by my own codes and missed something important, and this
was eventually also separated into several miscellaneous sub-categories. An example of
subcategories can be seen in Appendix D.2.
3.3.2
The five observation lenses
Besides coding the interview I have used the five observation lenses described in (Ven-
turini, 2010). These describe the process of examining a controversy, and they are also
used in my analysis.
1. From statements to literature
2. From literature to actors
3. From actors to networks
4. From networks to cosmoses
5. From cosmos to cosmopolitics
These five lenses describe the progress of observing and describing a controversy, and can
be translated to the different stages of my thesis.
The first lens was applied during the very early stages of the project. Here overall state-
ments and various types of data were gathered. In this process internet research was
important to discover different statements and understanding the magnitude of the con-
troversy, and what the arena of controversy is - what landscape do the different statements
form? To determine this I read several hearing documents and also observed the DaCES
webinar as described in section 3.2.4.
From these initial investigations I was able to
determine some actors in the controversy network. These included some of my intervie-
wees, organisations such as Energy Communities Denmark, Green Power Denmark and
Avedøre Energy community, various Danish legislation and EU legislation. This actor-
network is shown in Appendix B, and represents my initial mapping of this controversy.
To create this map I had to determine actors that participate in this controversy and the
network in which they participate.
From this initial network map, I started my interviewing process, and in these interviews
the main objective was to determine the interviewees position on the various themes of
the questions in the interview guide and from these gain an idea of what their cosmoses
are, and how their viewpoints translate this cosmos and their cosmopolitics.
28
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
3.4
Describing the controversy
From this analysis I will try to describe the controversy. Like the observation, the de-
scription of the controversy should stay true to the actors and their experiences without
my presumptions. This is true to the nature of ANT, and the reasoning behind it to
strive for the fullest inclusion of all actors: ANT is often hesitant when it comes to taking
a stand. It comes from the fear of shortcutting the debate before it had the time to deploy
its full richness, of pushing an interpretation before all actors had a chance to express
their own (Venturini, 2010, p 268). Thus I will not conclude on who is in the right or
the wrong or declare what is the truth - as this truth does not exist. Additionally I do
not aim to draw conclusions, where I impose a solution to the problem. This is not my
aim, it is the actors themselves who need to act in this controversy. Social life flows
like magma in a double movement of liquefaction and solidification. When we observe
controversies, we focus on the liquid side. When we describe controversies, we contribute
to the solidification of some portions of social magma (Venturini, 2010, p 268). My aim
is to examine and shed light on all the liquidity of the controversy - all of the unboxed
parts of the controversy that are dynamic and not agreed upon, however hopefully I can
help to solidify some of the liquid in the controversy by describing what I have observed
in the controversy.
29
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Analysis
In this analysis the main findings from the conducted interviews and the additional
gathered data. The interviewees all voiced several interesting points of view and positions
in the controversy, and the goal of this analysis is to include those that was mentioned by
most actors. As my research question as point of reference, I tried to trace the implications
of the European directives and their implementation into three main issues:
1. The implementation of the directives from the European Union dictates changes in
the Danish Power Supply Law which allows geographically differentiated tariffs to
be developed - leading to the method developed by Radius.
2. The European Union consider energy communities a significant role in the fight
against energy poverty
3. The European Union deems energy communities an important actor in the green
transition, the decentralisation of the electricity grid and as an actor that can ensure
local support to renewable energy
These three issues will be discussed thoroughly in the coming pages and summarised in
the discussion.
This controversy comprises of several actors - many more than I have had the oppor-
tunity to interview, but many of the actors share the same position in this controversy.
The Danish authority - the Danish Energy Agency, the DSOs and Energinet generally
share a desire to protect the grid, and as the grid responsible parties they share much of
the same interests.
On the other hand several actors argue for the benefits and opportunities that energy
communities represent. These actors are broadly represented as engineers, interest or-
ganisations, researchers and laypeople. In this thesis this broad collection of actors will
be addressed as the ”pro energy community people”. These actors have very different
interests and reasoning for their position in this controversy, but their objective is the
same - to ensure favourable conditions for energy communities.
30
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
4.1
Changes in the Danish Power Supply Law and
other legislation
As described in section 2.1 the consequence of the European directives is the changes in
the Danish Power Supply Law (Elforsyningsloven) and the energy community act that
followed and dictated the rules for energy communities in Denmark. The important im-
plications from this legislation are the formal rules that energy communities in Denmark
have to comply and the opportunity for net companies to develop a virtual metering point
that can be used to develop a geographically differentiated consumption tariff. Besides
this the law also instructs Energinet to develop a platform that can be used for energy
origin tracking and certifications. The two latter implications result in the energy sharing
platform and the local collective tariff, which will be discussed later. Firstly the Danish
legislation and its significance for energy communities will be discussed.
4.1.1
Sharing electricity through direct lines
As described in section 2.3 some of the intentions from the EU legislation have not reached
the changes in the Danish Power Supply Law. Most significantly the law does not grant
energy communities the right to create direct lines between buildings to distribute their
power, just as the opportunity to act as a DSO is not implemented into the Danish law
either. Several of the interviewed actors have voiced confusion of why this is the case,
as this has some implications for potential energy communities in common housing in
particular. The laws of direct lines have been changed so that energy communities have
the right to create direct lines to distribute energy between multiple electricity consumers
but only if they live in the same building - such as an apartment complex. This gives
people living in common housing the opportunity to install solar panels on their shared
roofs and then distribute their energy between the apartments without having to pay
taxes and tariffs - just like for house owners. The issue arises when a housing associa-
tion which owns multiple buildings is interested in installing solar panels that will cover
energy consumption for several buildings. This energy has to be shared on the common
electricity grid, when it is transported from the solar panels on the roof of one of the
buildings to the consumers in another building. And this is the main critique point from
the common housing. They do not understand the reasoning behind the definition in the
law, and argue that a restriction to install direct lines within your entire property and
not each separate building would not only increase the amount of solar panels benefiting
the green transition, but ultimately ensure the business case for the energy communities.
This restriction is dictated by the Danish Energy Agency, and the reason behind the
choice of limiting the availability of direct lines for energy communities to be within
buildings is that sending electricity from one building to another is considered distri-
bution. Now, distribution of electricity is monopolised by the legislation to the Danish
DSOs. They have monopoly of distributing the electricity, and their role is to represent
the interest of the society because of their monopolised rights. The reasoning behind the
monopoly of net distribution is both to ensure that economical interests cannot hinder
people living in the peripheral parts of Denmark, where the population is more sparse,
and the price of maintaining cables might be deemed non feasible in an economical sense.
This consideration of the collective as well as the avoidance of inefficient expansion of the
electricity grid with parallel electricity lines is the most significant reasoning behind this
31
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
monopoly.
With this monopoly various obligations have to be met from the DSOs: They have to
ensure third party access for external users, they have to meet requirements both regard-
ing technical and financial capacity etc. These requirements would have to be imposed
energy communities, if they were able to distribute their electricity between buildings in
their own small distribution networks. This has been deemed as an unreasonably large
burden for energy communities to handle, and therefore distribution monopoly is kept
reserved for the DSOs.
Additionally the representative from Radius argues that the strength of the collective
system is the fact that energy communities do not themselves have to deal with every
considerations the DSO have to, and thereby the collective electricity grid is a great ad-
vantage for the energy communities. This viewpoint might be supported when looking at
the general experience of creating and running an energy community. As will be described
further later, energy communities find the legislation confusing and complex. Since the
people creating energy communities are ordinary citizens, they have to spend a lot of
time getting acquainted with all the requirements and legislation. A great concern for
the representative from Sk˚arup Sustainable Community is that the general responsibility
that people pay their electricity bills - and that they pay the right amount, is now their
responsibility, and that is a great burden to deal with, when being just a layperson. The
thought of appointing an additional responsibility of distribution requirements to these
people does not seem like something anyone actually would want. The burden is already
immense, and the legislation difficult. This would add a whole different layer that proba-
bly would be far too overwhelming for energy communities to handle, and therefore this
consideration from the Danish Energy Agency might has been just.
These regulations and requirements apply to DSOs as their main task is to distribute
electricity, and their main concern is to maintain the electricity grid and ensure access to
electricity to everyone living in Denmark. However, the representative from BL cannot
believe that it is impossible to create legislation that can maintain the electricity grid
while giving people the opportunity to share their own electricity between the buildings
they own without having to pay taxes and tariffs. As they say ”I can understand the
consideration that as a utility company, you have certain obligations to ensure that all
citizens in Denmark receive electricity. But there should be room for a more flexible in-
terpretation and a middle ground, which means that, of course, you should be allowed to
share the electricity you produce within your own department without tariffs and taxes.
That simply cannot be the straw that breaks the camel’s back.”
The bottom line of this for the representative from BL is that if you can share energy
within a building, why not share it with all of the buildings you own? It is still the
same people who benefit from the electricity, and by keeping the power within their own
property, the result should be the same for the DSOs. They have one consumer, that
has direct lines within their own property, and then they are connected to the electricity
grid. It is just a matter of definition of where the direct lines can go, and therefor you do
not have to talk about distribution. This is the main driver for, why many people want
the legislation changed so that direct lines can be run between all buildings within your
property and not just internally in each building.
Here the spokesperson of BL uses the legislation as an interessement device to prob-
32
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
lematise the legislation made on direct lines. More specifically they use the wording of
the legislation - by just changing this simple word, then the legislation could become
better. They further argue that Denmark is missing out on a lot of additional green
energy, when the legislation is designed the way it is. BL has made a calculation saying
that there is a large unutilised potential for solar power on apartment buildings. Accord-
ing to these calculations the Danish production of solar power would increase with 39 %
compared to all solar energy production in Denmark1 if 25 % of the rooftops of common
housing were utilised. This argument is also used as an interessement device by the BL
to obtain enrolment.
4.1.2
Too complex legislation?
This change in regulation from building to property seems like a somewhat smaller change
in legislation, and you could question why this has not just happened yet. This is at least
what many people in energy communities and common housing perceive. In their ex-
perience the political will for energy communities is not existing, and as a result the
implementation of the energy community directives from the EU is not smoothly imple-
mented into Danish law.
There have been confusion because both renewable energy communities and citizen en-
ergy communities have been implemented into legislation, and this distinction have made
the development of energy communities slow and difficult. The energy communities have
a vast amount of legislation, electricity account settlement, contracts with electricity sup-
plier, decisions on purchase of energy sources etc. Creating an energy community is of
course voluntary, and if you do not think you can manage these things listed, then energy
communities might not be a project to embark on. However because the work load is
immense when developing an energy community, and because there are so much you have
to consider and gain knowledge on, the actors lack the clear guide and intuitive regu-
lations that would come from a smooth regulation on the subject. This have made the
representative from Energy Communities Denmark to problematise the difficulty of cre-
ating energy communities this way: ”I usually say that there isn’t much ’citizen’ in citizen
energy communities. It is really complicated. So I wouldn’t venture into it unless.. [] You
need access to some form of professional help – both legal and technical.” The pro energy
community people deem the legislation much too complex and confusing, and when you
top this with the fact that laypeople need to have the capacity to acquaint themselves
with law, the different actors in the electricity grid and the legislation, the task becomes
too overwhelming, and therefore energy communities are compelled to seek professional
guidance that can guide the communities and try to help remove the uncertainty they
feel and the fear of breaking the law or disregarding something important.
Opposing this those making the legislation - both the the Danish Energy Agency and
the electricity market actors such as the DSOs and Energinet have a slightly different
view on this subject. The present electricity market is very complex, and a part of the
Danish critical infrastructure. Because of this many and complex regulations are needed,
if failure in the electricity grid should be prevented and the electricity grid maintained.
This necessity is combined with increasingly complex consumption patterns, such as con-
sumers with a suddenly very high electricity consumption because they both own an
electric car and a heat pump they can turn on and off whenever they wish to, and also
1Having May 2021 as a baseline
33
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
consumers that produce their own energy, when the electricity production already is at
its max, while consumption is low (Solar energy production in the middle of the day).
This generates a possible blackout of the entire system if not handled correctly, and this
is the reasoning behind the very complex legislation. It is simply impossible to create this
electricity grid with all the possibilities of prosumers and energy communities without
having complex legislation. Or as said by one of the representatives from Energinet: ”Ev-
ery time we add another opportunity, another complexity is added. I cannot see a path,
where the legislation is simpler, while we have all these opportunities simultaneously... []
To say, ”This legislation is too complex.” It is not really an option if we want to give the
citizens these opportunities.”
Again, the pro energy community people problematise the legislation and uses this prob-
lematisation of the legislation as an argument for their view point that there lacks political
will for energy communities. On the other hand the Danish DSOs and Energinet does
not enrol into this problematisation, as they use the legislation as interessement device
to argue that the legislation cannot be simple, and that it has to be complex in order to
grant energy communities the rights that they have achieved. Thus the Danish legislation
becomes an interessement device for both of the competing view points, but it is used to
frame different positions.
4.1.3
The local collective tariff
These laws and regulations that some deem to complex and some deem just as complex
as they should be, have one aspect that people trying to establish energy communities
consider their main problem, namely that you have to share you own produced electricity
using the collective electricity grid, and thereby being forced to pay taxes and tariffs.
This causes many energy community business cases to be non-feasible, and it is espe-
cially a problem for common housing, as energy sharing becomes in-optimal. Some might
experience having to pay for solar panels through their rent without receiving any benefit
from it, which is difficult to legitimise, and therefore the investment often is rejected.
Additionally the legislation does not grant any benefit when deliberately sharing your
energy with others, as sharing energy with your neighbour will cost the same in tariffs
and taxes as just selling the electricity to the grid. The solution to this problem has been
declared to be the local collective tariff - therefore the pro energy community people were
disappointed when the changes in the Danish Power Supply Law was made. As the regu-
lation did not make it mandatory to establish geographically differentiated consumption
tariffs through virtual metering points. This made them fear that no one would take on
the task as it was voluntary.
Issues relating to the local collective tariff
Cerius/Radius decided to develop a new tariffing method - the local collective tariff, and
this decision is met very positively from the energy communities, as they feared they
would not do it, when it was voluntary. They deem this a very important first step
in defining the framework conditions for energy communities. This method implements
virtual metering points, which is exactly what energy communities have requested, but
several aspects of the method are made in such a way that energy communities believe
that this method is useless.
34
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
The biggest limiting factor according to the energy communities is the fact that energy
communities have to be connected to the low voltage grid of < 10kV . This entails that
larger energy communities experience several issues. Larger energy communities are con-
nected to multiple transformers and have a desire to establish wind turbines as a power
generation method. Wind turbines have an electricity output that has to be connected
to the electricity grid of > 10kV . Thus if energy communities want to establish wind
turbines they cannot benefit from this new method. It is possible to connect the turbines,
as it is claimed by Radius. The energy community will simply receive multiple electric-
ity account settlements (elafregning), one for each transformer connected to the energy
community, and here the wind turbine will be included, but energy communities argue
that having multiple electricity account settlement for each transformer eliminates their
chance to optimise and control their production and consumption. The method proposed
by Radius grants the opportunity to apply a discount on individual transformers and thus
as a lot of the energy communities are connected to multiple transformers, this method
is not very useful for them.
The reasoning from Radius is that the benefit that the distribution net can gain from
energy communities are difficult to determine when you look at the electricity grid of
> 10kV , and the calculations needed to determine are troublesome. Therefore the method
only involve the low voltage grid even though Radius is aware that a lot of energy com-
munities are more interested in a method that can be used higher up in the electricity
grid. This argument is not very well received by the energy communities as stated by the
interviewed researcher ”Of course it is difficult to determine which electron goes where
exactly on the other side of the transformer station, and calculating losses is more diffi-
cult, but that is okay, you were able to handle this in the current tariff models... [] Let
us just negotiate some reasonable levels of losses and strain - it has to be paid”.
Another argument of why Radius has decided to develop the method on the low voltage
grid is because they claim that the consumers, they received most enquiries from, are
consumers connected to the low voltage side of the grid, namely apartment buildings.
This is addressed in their hearing from their actor meeting in September 2023. Here
it is written that it has mainly been these consumers that expressed a desire to form
energy communities, which is something that the representative from Energy Commu-
nities Denmark does not understand: ”They also write that they are building the model
based on all the inquiries they have received over the past 2 years, and that is my com-
plaint. Because we had Knud Pedersen [chairman of the board in Radius and Cerius]
visit us at the Avedøre Energy Community 2 years ago, we sent them a case collection
on energy communities in Denmark, we made a proposal for a tariff model that we think
could make sense... [] We participated in the stakeholder engagement in September. So
honestly, I think they are neglecting the inputs we have been providing continuously, and
Energy Communities Denmark is founded on these energy communities that span across
many substations. Therefore, I find it somewhat frustrating that they write that they
primarily received inquiries from housing associations. It is true that they have received
many inquiries from housing associations, but I would say that in many cases, they are
not energy communities; they are looking at a ”behind the meter” solution, where they
need to use internal electricity connections. It is the term ’energy communities’ that is
causing confusion.” Here the representative from Energy Communities Denmark touches
upon several issues. They address several instances where they reached out to Radius to
35
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
try to translate the desires they and the interest group Energy Communities Denmark
have. This has not been accepted by Radius as their perception is that most energy
communities are small apartment buildings that can easily use their method as they are
only connected to the low voltage side of the grid.
When asked about the method made by Radius the representative from BL does however
not believe that this methodology is beneficial or something that can solve the econom-
ical problems common housing organisations face, when they try to establish an energy
community. The connection to the low voltage side is beneficial for them, however even
though Radius made this method, where they grant energy communities the opportu-
nity to pay a smaller tariff, this method still have to oblige to the current legislation in
Denmark - it has to be cost reflective. In order to ensure a cost reflective tariff, Radius
has to make sure that the strain relief of the electricity grid (aflastning af elnettet) is
present. This is easier to determine with larger facilities - bigger energy communities.
Therefore the capacity of the energy community has to be greater than 25 kW, and this is
solar facilities that are much larger than what can be installed on rooftops of apartment
buildings, and when common housing buildings cannot strain relieve the common grid in
the magnitude needed according to the new method, then the method is not applicable
for the common housing.
The pro energy community people and Radius has two very different stands on the local
collective tariff. The fighting ground is the definition of an energy community, and who
it should be directed to, and in relation to this on which grid the tariff should be applied.
The pro energy community people problematise the method made by Radius, and uses
the connection of wind turbines as interessement devices - turbines cannot be connected
to the low voltage grid, and therefore the method is useless for energy communities. Ra-
dius uses their interaction with the common housing as interessement device when they
argue that energy communities are apartment buildings, and therefore the method is
designed for them.
4.1.4
How can we strain relieve the electricity grid?
Being a DSO Radius has one major motive. They have to ensure that the consumption of
electricity is matched by the production and the capacity of the electricity grid. In their
cosmos all consumption peaks are shaved away, and the energy demand never exceeds
the capacity of the grid. This was true once in Denmark, when the electricity grid was
black boxed. The production of electricity could easily be adjusted the consumption as
the electricity came from coal powered plants that could be turned on and off, and the
primary use of electricity was cooking and to some extend heating. In this world the
major peaks in consumption is in the morning when the kettle is turned on to produce
the cup of coffee you need in the morning, and the largest peak was from 17 - 19 when
dinner was cooked, and everyone used their stoves and ovens. This is still the case, the
Danish electricity consumption is still by far greatest between 17 and 21, however the
black box of electricity is leaking as our consumption of electricity has changed quite a bit
by the introduction of the electrification of the society. The government has decided that
Denmark have to reduce green house gas emissions by 70 % in 2030, and a great amount
of the saving needs to come from replacing coal and oil driven machines that are replaced
by their electricity driven counterparts - the electrical car and the heat pump. This vast
36
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
increase in electricity consumption combined with a much less reliable electricity source
- namely wind and solar causes great concern in the Danish electricity market.
The
electricity consumption of electric cars is immense, and when this consumption is added
alongside the electricity need for heating and cooking dinner, then the electricity grid
risks blackout. This has already happened multiple times during Christmas Eve, as this
is the time of year the Danish electricity consumers use by far most of their electricity,
and the last couple of years the maximum load capacity of the electricity grid have been
reached several places during the 24th of December.
This is the reality that Radius faces alongside Energinet.
They have to change our
behaviour and move electricity consumption away from the peaks and to times where
there is abundance of electricity and capacity in the grid to avoid the major expansions
of the grid. This issue consists of two parts, the electricity grid should both be capable of
balancing production and consumption and should be able to avoid peak demand. This
is why their major concern when creating their tariffing method is to create incentives
to use the electricity grid in a way that generates the most value to everyone. They
ultimately are responsible for that Danish consumers receive electricity, when they turn
on the lights. Because of this their major concern is to ensure that charging of electric
cars and laundering is done at all other times than from 17 to 21. It is this mindset
they have when creating their collective tariff method. However this is a focus that the
pro energy community people disregard. Their complaint is that the focus on the peaks
in the early evening is a much too narrow way of thinking about the problems for the
future energy grid. Regarding the tariff method applicable for energy communities, they
believe that the energy communities themselves are able to balance their production and
consumption in such a way that they can peak shave their consumption at evening times.
This will be done with batteries that can save their electricity produced by solar panels
at midday. They believe that Radius should be much more concerned about all the elec-
trical cars that the Danish population is about to invest in. As put by the representative
from Energy Communities Denmark: ”When we succeed with this electrification of our
society, the amount of electricity we use for electric cars, heat pumps, and all these other
things will be entirely different. It’s like the classic example of everyone turning on the
Christmas duck on Christmas Eve. I believe that in the future, Christmas Eve will be just
a tiny bump in the huge electricity consumption...[] Just imagine the load on the power
grid when everyone on the street turns on the electricity for their electric cars at the same
time.” This relates directly to the cosmos the representative from Energy Communities
Denmark and several other actors have talked about. The electricity grid faces a future
where increasing electrical consumption and production requires change in the consump-
tion patterns. And how will we manage that? Multiple people share the same cosmos
about the future - that the grid have to handle electricity consumption on a completely
different scale than before, and here the representative from Energy Communities Den-
mark and the other pro energy community voices argue that the increased issues with
peak shaving requires a solution including energy communities.
On the other hand Radius has their concerns about the current electrical grid probably
of the same reasons, namely that the grid have to deal with a much larger load in the
future. This point that the peaks are the most important is very logical, as a chain is only
as strong as it’s weakest link, and Radius uses this consensus as a mean to translate their
concern about the grid to other actors. Here the peaks in the electricity consumption
is used as an interessement device. The peak demand of Christmas Eve is always men-
37
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
tioned when peak shaving is discussed. According to Radius the importance of moving
the consumption will only increase as more of our society is electrified.
4.1.5
What is an energy community?
Some interviewed actors have an experienced a great deal of confusion about the term
energy communities. Often smaller apartment buildings are seeking guidance in estab-
lishing an energy community, when the most beneficial to them would be a ’behind the
meter’ arrangement, where you can share your electricity within a building behind the
electricity meter. These installations do not require an energy community. These actors
argues that smaller energy communities such as apartment buildings are outside the scope
of the European legislation. Using the definition from the two directives from the EU
they argue that energy communities inherently consists of multiple larger actors such as
stores and municipal buildings. They try to enrol other actors into allies by convincing
them that a true energy community is much larger than the housing associations that
Radius’ new collective tariff method applies to. This problematises the foundation of
the method developed by Radius and because it is not possible to utilise the method for
larger energy communities, the opportunity to control and strain relieve the electricity
grid vanishes for energy communities. According to some actors this also does not grant
the economical incentives needed for energy communities to fulfil, what they believe is
the core task of energy communities - strain relieving of the electricity grid. This also
generates insecurity for energy communities as their economical situation becomes un-
certain. The fear is that the method instead contributing with clarification for energy
communities will increase this insecurity, which will obstruct the development of energy
communities.
4.1.6
Radius’ concerns regarding the local collective tariff
In Denmark it is up to the DSOs to determine the tariffs they impose on their consumers.
This must be done under the current Danish legislation, and they have to cover their cost
of maintaining the grid, but according to the representative from Radius, they also want
their tariffs to create a beneficial interaction with the consumers of their grid so that
their tariffs can be made in a way that generates the most value for every user of the
grid. This is their core obligation. Radius has experienced a desire from energy commu-
nities to share energy and this is their reasoning behind the need for the new collective
tariff. They are aware that some citizens do not agree on the regulations they have made,
but Radius has to oblige to several different rules regulations and requirements for their
tariffing methods - both including where they tariff e.g.
at which interface, but also
considerations for the individual rights of the citizens of Denmark. And all of this has to
be done cost reflective, transparent and non-discriminatory. This makes their room for
action somewhat limited - and it is a big machinery that have to function. The Danish
distribution network is an old institution in Denmark, and old institutions move slowly,
as they must meet all the regulations imposed on them.
One of these regulations is that every change the DSOs want to make in their tariffing
methods have to be approved by the Danish Utility Regulator. This public institution is
tasked to make sure that the electricity tariffs made both by Energinet and also Radius
and the other DSOs comply with the law. This process takes a long time, and Radius has
also at some point had a tariffing method being declined by the Danish Utility Regulator.
38
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
This might be why Radius has decided that their tariffing method is only applicable on
the low voltage side of the grid - even though they are perfectly aware that the demand
is on a method that can be used on the > 10kV grid. They have once experienced that
a method went ”too far” and was rejected, and that is a waste of resources. Therefore
it might be beneficial for Radius to take this establishing of the local collective tariff in
smaller steps - even though some argue that the method could easily be implemented in
all layers of the grid.
This is the first step in this method, and Radius has to make sure that their tariffing
method is cost reflective, as the representative from Radius says, it is not possible to
determine the cost of energy communities on the grid beforehand. Therefore they have
to fully hedge against the risk that energy communities have an undesirable load on the
electricity grid - making the Danish Utility Regulator reject the method. Lastly it is
also agreed upon broadly that the method calculations of loss and strain are much more
difficult when moving further up in the electricity grid. If they had to develop the method
100 % for all of the grid as a first step, the process would be much slower, and the ex-
perience gained from this initial method would not be obtained to be utilised in further
development of the method.
This is a process that takes time and this method is the first step. Energy communities
want this method to be extended and they try their best to convince both politicians,
Radius and the general public that energy communities are important for the future
energy grid and that the local collective tariff should be extended. In their experience
Radius does not understand their needs and their role in the electricity system. On the
other hand Radius tries to develop a tariff that pleases both energy communities and the
Danish Utility Regulator. And they admit that this is a difficult process that they want
all the other actors to participate in - this is a starting point which will be developed
further in the future, and it is the hope of the representative from Radius that by creating
this method, energy communities will gain some further insight into the infrastructure
of the electricity grid and a deeper understanding of the considerations that Radius and
the other DSOs must make.
Here Radius uses the concern of the grid and the Danish Utility Regulator as inter-
essement devices to generate enrolment. Here the Danish Utility Regulator becomes an
obligatory passage. They can discard the method if they do not believe in the calculations
backing it up, and Radius uses this argument to generate interessement.
4.1.7
The energy sharing platform
The last implication of the change in the Danish Power Supply Law is the development of
the energy sharing platform. This platform is being developed by Energinet in collabora-
tion with the Danish Energy Agency, as it is requried by the Electricity Market Directive
that every consumer can have several energy sharing arrangements at once. This platform
is meant to be an easy way for the citizens of Denmark to share their excess energy with
their family, neighbours or other people they know. This energy sharing has to be within
the same electricity bidding zone (DK1 or DK2) and within the same imbalance settle-
ment interval (ubalance afregnings interval). This entails that energy produced by solar
panels on a consumers rooftop can only be shared within the same imbalance interval as
the electricity is produced, which is a way to ensure that the electricity is self-balanced.
The introduction of the energy sharing platform simultaneously with the new collective
39
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
tariff method has been extremely confusing for the energy communities. At first the op-
portunity of sharing energy just using Energinet’s platform seems much more simple than
all the hassle of creating an energy community, with all the required rules, regulations,
administration and contracts. As stated by the representative from Energy Communities
Denmark: ”Imagine that you can simply log in with your MitID ... [] and say ”I would
like Sophie’s electricity,” and Sophie agrees to it. Then you don’t need to do anything
more. And if that’s an option, one might ask: why even create an energy community? ...
[] Why do all the things that need to be done, which are insanely complicated?”
One of the representatives from Energinet have been a major part of developing the
energy sharing platform, and they have also helped Radius with their local collective
tariff. They have a great knowledge on the process on the work with the energy sharing
platform. Namely that the local collective tariff should be developed further than how
it is shaped today, and this would result in a giving cooperation with the energy sharing
platform. As the platform is shaped today - or as the platform is gonna be shaped, as it
is still in the very early development phase, it is a very primitive means of sharing energy.
Consumers can share their energy with each other, but they do not have any incentive yet
to share their electricity through the platform rather than just selling it on the electricity
market at spot price. Here the local collective tariff is much more advanced, and it is
only through the collective tariff that you can reap the benefits from the energy sharing
done through the platform. And in order to use the local collective tariff you have to
be a consolidation of consumers - an energy community (Cerius/Radius, 2024). Thus
energy communities become the missing link between the energy sharing platform and
the local collective tariff. You have to be an energy community to be rewarded by the
local collective tariff for the energy sharing done through the energy sharing platform.
In energy communities the energy sharing platform can be used as an administrative tool,
and a way of relieving the energy communities of some of their administrative tasks, as
this will be dealt with by the new platform. This platform can additionally become a
powerful tool for the energy communities, when they have to prove their strain relief on
the electricity grid. The local collective tariff compensates energy communities by the
amount of strain they relieve the electricity grid, and if they have a software developed
by the Danish authorities then their argumentation becomes much more robust. This
is the claim from the pro energy community people.If it is the Danish authorities that
argue for the strain reduction it will become much less likely that Radius and the other
DSOs will neglect the contribution made by energy communities. If this succeeds it is
not only an administrative burden that is lifted from the shoulders of the energy commu-
nities, it might be able to play a key role in determining the benefits energy communities
contribute to the grid.
Having this energy sharing platform working in collaboration with the local collective
tariff, it is the hope and cosmos of one of the representatives from Energinet that you
will be able to extend the local collective tariff to ensure a better use of electricity in
the future: ”It will be the first time that tariffs with load-reducing measures support the
green transition. Because normally, as it is today, if it’s very windy and there is cheap
electricity at 5 PM, the DSOs say, ’It’s too expensive to transport it because everyone is
cooking,’ so they raise the tariffs. These two things can work against each other today
because it’s load versus renewable energy. But when we bring in energy sharing... [] they
[the DSOs] can say, ’If you just share the energy within the same time frame as the en-
40
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
ergy sharing, we can give a discount on the tariff, because then we don’t need to transport
the energy away.’ So, energy sharing will actually be a super smart initiative together
with local collective tariffing when energy sharing comes. Because then we can experience
tariffs that support the green transition, while also saving on investments.”
Here the cosmos is that you have an electricity grid, where both energy communities, the
local collective tariff and the energy sharing platform have their rightful place to obtain
the final goal - having an electricity grid that supports the green transition by giving
energy communities the opportunity to easily share their electricity using the energy
sharing platform, and getting an economical benefit in the shape of the energy sharing
platform.
4.2
Energy communities and energy justice
As described in section 4.1 Radius has proposed this local collective tariff within what
they believe is the maximum leeway they can give energy communities within the Danish
legislation. As mentioned, the tariffs in Denmark have to be cost reflective, and a great
concern for Radius, but also for politicians, the Danish Energy Agency and other actors
in the electricity grid, is that by allowing energy communities a reduced tariff they do
not contribute to their fair share of costs to the electricity grid. As the electricity grid
faces vast expansion expenses in the foreseeable future that, which is not paid by energy
communities, must be paid by the remaining electricity consumers. This is a great con-
cern for especially Radius that must obey the law that claims that electricity tariffs must
be cost reflective.
Cost reflective tariffs is a principle that is deemed very important for the Danish author-
ities. In the interview with both representatives from Energinet and Radius the legal
requirement of cost reflective tariffing was brought up several times, and in one of the
interviews with a representative from Energinet the cost reflective tariffs was called their
”guiding star”.
4.2.1
Cost reflective tariffs
In short the Danish legislation on energy tariffs is constructed in such a way so that it is
Energinet and all of the DSO that determine the tariff that electricity consumers must
pay, and these tariffs are imposed to cover the expenses related to the maintenance and
development of the electricity grid. As they determine them themselves their tariffs are
required to meet some demands and this is regulated by the Danish Utility Regulator.
One of these demands is that the tariff must be cost reflective. This essentially entails
that every consumer must pay tariffs according to the strain they impose on the collective
grid.
One of the underlying principles of the Danish Power Supply Law is that the collective
electricity grid should be constructed in a fair way so that everyone has access to elec-
tricity at a fair price. And as it is with collective systems, the more everyone shares the
expenses, the cheaper the cost will be for the individual electricity user. This is one of
the reasons why some dislike the idea of reducing the tariffs for energy communities. The
fear that energy communities gain an unjust reduction in electricity tariff, which results
in an increased electricity bill for the rest of the electricity consumers, is a major concern
41
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
for many politicians especially, and an opinion voiced both by the Danish energy minis-
ter Lars Aagaard, and Dansk Folkeparti’s European Parliament candidate in an article
series published by Danmarks Radio leading up to the European Parliament elections.
Here they are both quoted for saying that energy communities risk leaving the bill of the
expansion of the electricity grid to the other consumers, and Lars Aagaard states that ”If
energy communities can document that they can strain relieve the electricity grid, then
they should also pay less to use the electricity grid”, but that energy communities ”do
not live on a secluded island, and we all have to contribute to paying for the party – the
collective electricity grid.” This is a very well founded argument, and a major issue for
energy communities if the Danish Energy minister believes that energy communities is a
burden for the electrical grid, and that they wish to run from the bill, as this will defi-
nitely harm the position of energy communities and their own arguments, if the general
perception is that energy communities do not pay their fair share for the electricity grid.
This is not the intention for anyone who is pro energy communities. Everyone I have
interviewed really does care about the Danish electricity grid, and everyone I have inter-
viewed has mentioned that the Danish electricity grid is important and that it should be
developed and that everyone has to pay their fair share of the costs. Energy communities
do however have a very clear idea of that they are a benefit for the electricity grid, and
that they because of this should pay a lower tariff. But if they cannot create interesse-
ment about their role in the electricity grid, the battle of getting favourable tariffs will
drown in all the other important aspects of the green transition. Therefore having a
minister that is uncertain about energy communities could be a huge problem for energy
communities.
Here two different viewpoints on energy communities emerges. Are lower tariffs for energy
communities cost reflective or not? The electricity grid is used as an interessement device
for both sides. Energy communities use the electricity grid to generate interessement
about their claim that energy communities benefit the grid by controlling their consump-
tion and production to become concurrent (samtidig), and therefore they should have a
lower tariff. On the other hand a general idea of energy communities as freeloaders on
the electricity grid has also risen, and this idea has gained a lot of enrolment, and has
mobilised both the DSOs that voices the concern that energy communities risk leaving
the bill for others to pay, but lastly also politicians such as the energy minister. With
the energy minister mobilised in the belief that energy communities can be harmful to
the grid, the task of enrolling him for energy communities has become a huge challenge.
4.2.2
Energy communities and energy poverty
While Danish politicians and DSOs are sceptical of the role of energy communities and
their affect on other electricity consumers, the EU has a much more positive opinion on
energy communities. The directives have a clear vision of encouraging member states to
create as beneficial legislation for energy communities as possible. The reasoning behind
this is largely that the EU believes that energy communities can play an important role in
the future electricity grid, but also that they can be a safeguard against energy poverty.
Following several events in 2022: Russia invading Ukraine causing sanctions on Russian
gas, Norway’s water reserves was running low harming their hydroelectric power, and
a heatwave in France reduced their output from nuclear power plants to below half of
maximum capacity. This resulted in the first experience of energy poverty in Denmark,
42
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
and the energy crisis was a big problem for the entirety of Europe. This caused the
European Union to pass the council regulation laying down a framework to accelerate the
deployment of renewable energy (Accelerate RE, 2022). Here energy communities were
deemed an important aspect of ensuring a more independent energy supply.
When electricity consumers produce their own electricity, they become less vulnerable to
sudden changes in energy prices - such as what happened in 2022, as they own their own
energy, and as almost everything in the modern day society runs on electricity - cooking
devices, telephones and heating, just to name a few, electricity is a very important re-
source for every European. Therefore energy security has been a reoccurring subject in
the interviews. Both representatives from BL, Energy Communities Denmark, Energinet
and the interviewed researcher highlight energy communities as a constellation that can
help eliminate energy poverty.
Having the European Union’s seal of approval on the benefit of energy communities
on energy poverty, this is another argument that energy communities can use to create
interessement and also use to problematise the idea that energy communities are freeload-
ers on the electricity grid. The major concern is that energy communities leave the bill
for the rest to pay, but if they can achieve enrolment on the idea that energy communi-
ties can help limit energy poverty it could help them change the politicians and DSOs’
attitude towards energy communities.
4.2.3
Creating an energy community as common housing
However the representative from BL believes that the Danish legislation does not han-
dle energy poverty very well: ”When we talk about addressing energy poverty, which is
also one of the major issues highlighted by the EU, we have legislation that is lagging
behind.” They believe that the Danish legislation favours electricity consumers living in
single-family houses, as the legislation is much different, when you produce your own
electricity as a single person, compared to if it is done in a community. Many of the
problems they experience is related to the restrictions on how people living in common
housing can share their electricity, and when they can use direct lines, and when they are
forced to use the collective grid for energy sharing. This has been discussed in section 4.1.
The argument is that people living in apartment buildings do not own their own roofs
and thus have to cooperate with the entire building block to install solar power. This is
problematic because every building is not suitable for solar panels - solar panels on north
facing roofs are very infeasible, and therefore it would be beneficial to construct solar
panels on the roofs of the apartment buildings facing south and then share the electricity
between all the buildings on the property. However since this sharing between buildings
must be done through the collective grid, the business case for most of the solar projects
falls apart. As expressed by the representative from BL: ”If we are not allowed to use
electricity across apartment buildings, it means that all residents will have to invest in
this solar panel installation through their rent, but only the residents in this block will
actually benefit from it. The business case goes down the drain because we have to send
too much to the collective grid, which we do not get paid for. It doesn’t add up.”.
These troubles for common housing in creating energy communities generate another
issue. If it is more difficult to develop energy communities for people living in common
housing than for people owning their own house, the energy policy risks being skewed.
43
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
Most people owning their own house are wealthier than those renting an apartment, and
this creates some further injustices.
Common housing residents often do not have large paychecks and because of this must
spend a large portion of their income on fixed expenses, such as electricity. Thus when
prices on electricity increase they are affected more than people where the fixed expenses
are a smaller portion of the income. The people with larger incomes have a much more
able to just pay the increased electricity bill, where this increase will effect common hous-
ing residents much more. As a protection of these increasing prices you can install solar
panels on your roof, but when establishing energy communities is much more difficult for
common housing than for house owners, the installation of solar panels on the rooftop is
not something everyone in common housing even will have access to, and therefore they
do not have any protection for the increasing prices, and most often they do not have the
extra income to compensate for the lack of self generated electricity.
If we look besides the problem of creating energy communities as common housing, the
aim for energy communities in general is actually to include everyone, as explained by
the representative from Energy Communities Denmark: ”It [Energy communities] is in-
tended for all consumers – for example, the energy community in South Stevns. It is
aimed at all electricity consumers across South Stevns. That includes 1,900 households,
and that’s also what they plan in Sk˚arup [energy community]. They want to reach out
broadly and include as many people as possible, which I think is a common feature of these
energy communities. There is a goal to include everyone – or at least to offer everyone
the opportunity to join.” Here the point is that no matter your financial statues you can
contribute and join an energy community. Energy communities work more value based
(værdibaseret) than normal electricity providers. The overarching goal is to generate
value to the community, and because of this they strive to include everyone.
Energy communities are also a more secure way of investing in green electricity, as you
are able to obtain some lucrative loans in banks as an energy community. This leads to a
more stable and risk free investment for the individual electricity consumer, as the loan
for the solar panels is taken out by the community, and not by the individual consumer.
It is also possible to join an energy community without having the resources to produce
energy, and just buy the electricity that someone else is producing. Everyone pays the
same for electricity in an energy community making it a great way of ensuring a sta-
ble electricity bill. This constellation is also something common housing can participate
in. Even though creating their own energy community is difficult to establish a feasible
business case for, it is still possible to join an energy community with people living in
single-family homes, and through this still be able to benefit from stable energy bills.
Again the legislation is problematised by the representative from BL, who tries to gener-
ate interessement by arguing that residents of common housing are unable to achieve the
benefits from energy communities because of the legislation. The legislation becomes an
interessement device that is used to highlight the injustice of the legislation that single-
family houses have access to lucrative schemes that apartment buildings are not able to
benefit from. Thus the common housing residents are cut off from legislation that single-
family houses have access to. This also relates to the justice talk of rural vs. urban areas.
In general the wealth of society is concentrated around the bigger cities and on the hands
of the few. This would actually be a pull in the other direction as common housing is a
predominant urban concept. The more rural the more single-family houses are available.
44
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
However if energy communities in common housing does not gain currency it would still
be the wealthier citizens that can obtain the benefits related to an energy community.
4.3
The role of Energy communities in the future
energy grid
The European Union also argues that energy communities are an important actor in
the future electricity grid as they can contribute to an increased decentralisation of the
grid. Decentralising the grid can be beneficial for numerous reasons. Firstly it helps
prevent blackouts. When the electricity grid consists of several mostly independent grids
within the overall grid, the entire system will not be affected if only a part of the grid
experiences failure. If the electricity for the entirety of Southern Jutland is dependant on
one power plant that fails, then everyone living in that area will experience blackout, but
if the power is produced less centrally in several smaller plants the amount of affected
consumers is reduced. This is also why a more decentralised energy system is an effective
safeguard against terrorist attacks and sabotage. This decentralisation can be supported
by energy communities which is a point made by both a representative from BL and the
interviewed researcher.
4.3.1
Are energy communities a necessary addition to the col-
lective grid?
While the European Union deems energy communities an important actor in the electric-
ity grid and more specifically in helping decentralising the electricity grid, the position
on energy communities is more reserved when you ask the other actors in the Danish
electricity grid and the Danish politicians. When asked, the Danish Energy Agency told
that they have not ”made an assessment” of energy communities affect on the future
energy supply. The general opinion is that energy communities are more a niche than
an actual benefit for the electricity system. The belief is that energy communities are a
very interesting and valuable addition to the electricity system in other parts of Europe.
The electricity grid is not as strong in the southern parts of Europe as it is in Denmark,
and therefore energy communities and the ability to own distribution net can benefit the
electricity consumers living in Southern Europe, but they are unnecessary in Denmark.
In Denmark the collective grid is very strong, and therefore we should keep investing in
the collective grid instead of creating are more decentralised electricity grid. The solution
to increased strain on the grid lies within the grid itself and can be solved using it. ”What
I feel we have experienced [when we have talked to the Danish authorities about the role
of energy communities] is that ”what we have is good... [] We have the large communi-
ties [the collective electricity grid]. Yes, but the large communities rely on very expensive
infrastructure and very large production facilities.” Here the interviewed researcher prob-
lematises the role of the collective electricity grid. They experience a belief of the Danish
Energy Agency that the collective grid is the answer to the problem, the Danish Energy
Agency makes the collective grid an obligatory passage point. The future issue of the
Danish electricity supply must go through an expansion of the collective grid, but the
interviewed researcher uses the cost and the centralisation of the system as interessement
devices to gain enrolment to the role of energy communities in the electricity grid.
Energy communities are a difficult actor to fit into the electricity grid, because its struc-
45
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
ture can still generally be divided into three main actors: consumers, producers and the
collective grid. Here energy communities become difficult to fit in, as they consist of
many consumers that also produce electricity that they want to share using something
else than the collective grid - or if they use the collective grid, they want to obtain reduced
taxes and tariffs. To make an electricity system where energy communities fit into will
however force some actors in the electricity grid to renounce several responsibilities and
privileges. This will weaken the economical position of some actors in the electricity grid
- namely the DSOs, and therefore they also have an economical interest in keeping the
electricity grid the way it has been since the 1990s.
In this discussion on the importance of the electricity grid, the grid itself becomes an
actor which is imposed several properties - it must be saved, it can help save it self, it
requires more flexibility from energy communities etc. Even though every actor engaged
in this controversy are very concerned with the development of the electricity grid, the
grid is used to generate interessement for various agendas.
4.3.2
Do energy communities help protect the electricity grid?
The position and role of energy communities in the future energy system is one of the
biggest issues for energy communities. They believe that they can play an important role,
however many of the other actors believe them to play a very niche part of the future
energy system. Therefore one of the most important tasks for energy communities is to
convince the other actors that they can contribute to the strain relief of the electricity
grid, which they believe is one of their core tasks. Their primary interessement device
for this is the logistical aspect of electricity production. Most of the electricity today is
produced offshore or in other rural parts of Denmark, and therefore have to be trans-
ported great distances to reach the consumers of the electricity. This transportation of
electricity is costly and one of the factors contributing to the need for expansion of the
electricity grid. Therefore the argument the pro energy community people pose is that if
you produce the electricity close to the consumption, then almost all of the transportation
of that electricity will disappear, and this will reduce the strain on the electricity grid.
This utilisation of electricity is beneficial not only for the bigger full-blown energy com-
munities that consist of multiple actors of varying size and electricity consumption, but
it also applies for energy sharing in common housing. Constructing solar panels on the
roofs of apartment buildings yields multiple benefits, not only is the electricity produced
in almost the exact same place as it is consumed, which reduces the transportation of the
electricity. It also occupies unutilised space that no one uses. This is a great contrast to
some of the major solar panel fields that have been installed throughout Denmark. This
space that is occupied by solar panels could have been utilised for food production or be-
come a forest that could help biodiversity. These conflicting interests are not present on
rooftops, and it can be very beneficial to utilise the vast amounts of rooftops in Denmark
to reduce the need for utilisation of fields.
The reduced transportation expenses of locally produced electricity is widely accepted by
every actor in the Danish electricity market. Both Energinet, the Danish Energy Agency
and the Danish DSOs agree with the pro energy community people on the benefits from
locally produced electricity, however the role of energy communities is still uncertain from
their point of view. The energy communities use the reduced transportation distance as
an interessement device in their positioning of energy communities in the electricity grid,
however the DSOs, Energinet and the Danish Energy Agency do not necessarily equate
46
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
less transportation of electricity with a reduced strain on the electricity grid. If energy
communities use electricity exactly as the average consumer in Denmark, then the strain
relief of the grid is negligible.
To ensure a benefit for the electricity grid the production and consumption of electricity
have to be simultaneous. If energy communities feed excess electricity to the collective
grid at the same time everyone else has excess and buys electricity at the same time ev-
eryone else also demands electricity, then their strain relief of the grid is negligible - and
possibly not present at all. Thus it is important that energy communities have a way of
controlling their consumption and production so that their consumption is simultaneous
with their production. This flexibility and control is a key aspect of the opportunities
that many envision energy communities have.
Unifying multiple actors in an energy
community yields the opportunity to peak shave the consumption as a diverse group of
consumers has diverse energy needs, and this can be utilised to ensure concurrency. When
energy communities are formed, they have the opportunity to create explicit electricity
sharing. Explicit electricity sharing, is energy sharing where e.g. charging of a battery
is directly linked to a wind turbine. In this constellation, the battery only charges when
the turbine is active. In this way it is certainly the turbine that charges the battery
as opposed to implicit electricity sharing, which is what the typical electricity consumer
practices. Implicit electricity sharing is sharing electricity from solar panels with your
neighbour for instance, and then starting the dishwasher every time the sun is shining.
Explicit energy sharing has a much greater affect on strain relieving, as the destination
of the produced energy is certain as opposed to implicit energy sharing. This explicit
energy sharing can also be controlled, meaning that an energy community that has heat
pumps as their main heating source, can control when the heating of houses begins, so
that it occurs simultaneously with the production of their solar panels. This control is
extremely effective when trying to peak shave the consumption of electricity, and also a
way of helping the green transition.
One of the other major benefits of energy communities is their affect on the mindset
of the electricity consumer. This point is made by a representative from Energinet, who
claims that energy communities and energy sharing can make electricity consumers aware
of when they use the electricity grid, and increase awareness of utilising the electricity
when it is produced: ”Therefore, that awareness, it is perhaps in reality the most impor-
tant thing... [] That we can spread the awareness of using renewable energy when it is
available.” This awareness can help the electricity grid in numerous ways. In the near
future the entire Danish electricity production will be on renewable energy, which is a
very fluctuating energy source that requires a new mindset from both producers and con-
sumers. Therefore using electricity when it is produced becomes much more important
than it has been until now. This realisation is one of the core issues for the electricity
system - that energy might not be available at the same time as the consumers demand
it. This issue needs to be solved by both Energinet and the Danish DSOs, otherwise the
electricity grid will not be able to handle the demand in the future. In this future concur-
rency of production and consumption will be vital, and one of the representatives from
Energinet believes that energy communities and energy sharing will play an important
role in this. ”During Corona, Mette Frederiksen was good at promoting the word ’com-
munity spirit.’... [] and there is a bit of that here as well... [] There will be both a sense
of community spirit, but also something.. – we internally call it ’electricity system spirit.’
47
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
Because we do like that this is simultaneous.” This is the cosmos of this representative
from Energinet. That consumers can use energy sharing to create an awareness about
electricity consumption so that the consumption will become more mindful towards the
electricity system.
4.3.3
Documentation on strain relief of the electricity grid
The entire discussion of energy communities ability to strain relief the electricity grid is
centred around economics. The electricity grid needs to be expanded, which costs a lot of
money for the Danish tax payers among others. Some of this could be unnecessary if more
energy communities were established, and this establishment reduced the strain on the
electricity grid. If this is true - that energy communities strain relieve the electricity grid,
then they are eligible for a lower tariff, and this would increase the economic incentive
for energy communities, and therefore more energy communities will appear increasing
the strain relief of the electricity grid.
The question now is: How do we know that this is the case? Will energy communi-
ties be able to strain relieve the electricity grid?
There is also the risk that energy
communities could be harmful for the electricity grid. If the energy storage is insufficient
and calm and cloudy weather occurs during evening time, then the energy communities
will have to use the collective electricity grid at the same time as everyone else, while the
electricity is scarce and very demanded. This would be very harmful to the electricity
grid, and therefore this is a scenario that the DSOs have to consider, when designing their
tariff models. Radius and Energinet are required to create cost reflective tariffs entailing
a lower tariff for consumers that can use electricity in a way that can strain relieve the
electricity grid. However as described in chapter 2 these tariffs have to be cost reflective,
and the Danish Utility Regulator has to approve the method. Therefore Radius and the
other DSOs have to make sure that they can document why energy communities should
pay a lower tariff, because if the Danish Utility Regulator does not accept the calculations
and documentation, then the method will be rejected.
Radius does not have this documentation yet, and because of this they do not know for
certain that energy communities use of the electricity grid results in savings, and until
they know this for sure, they cannot make any changes.
On the other hand however, the pro energy community people actually believe that they
can prove that their use of the electricity grid results in strain relief. In the hearing answer
to the local collective tariff that Energy Communities Denmark made, they reference a
report on ”investment saving potential using demand control” which claims that demand
control can save between 27% and 80% of the investment cost of the electricity grid. This
report is combined with strain relief simulations made on some of the planned energy
communities in Denmark. This is a key interessement device for the organisation. In the
hearing answer they write that these simulations have been sent to Radius, and this can
further back their claim of being an important factor in the electricity grid. The biggest
fighting ground is the possible strain relief of energy communities which Radius needs to
document, if a reduced electricity tariff for energy communities should be a possibility.
And according to energy communities they already have this documentation - they have
even presented it to Radius.
48
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
4.3.4
Ensuring local support via energy communities
Succeeding in reaching the climate goal stipulated by the Danish government in 2019
about 70 % reduction of CO2 in 2030 and achieving 100 % climate neutrality in 2050, it
is vital that the electricity production is increased to produce all the electricity needed,
and this electricity also has to be 100 % green.
The solution to this is obviously to
install more renewable energy, but the major issue is where. Some say that the solution
is to generate huge energy islands in the middle of the ocean, where it is out of sight
and mind, or at least limit the construction of wind turbines to only offshore. This is
however a very expensive priority, which will not help reduce the need of grid expansion.
The electricity must be installed onshore as well. Some renewable energy projects have
however experienced opposition towards renewable energy placed in the local area. The
involvement of local communities and general local opposition to renewable energy close
to their homes have been problematic some places, as this opposition have had impacts
on the completion schedule of the projects. This is underlies the importance of local
engagement in the green transition, and ensuring local support is therefore deemed an
important aspect in the planning of new solar parks and wind farms.
This general perception that citizens do not want to have renewable energy installed in
their local area is challenged by energy communities. These people actually ask for the
installation of renewable energy in their vicinity, as described by the representative from
Energy Communities Denmark: ”I have concrete examples of citizens suddenly beginning
to demand wind turbines and solar panels locally, for example, because you are engaging
with a local area at eye level, meaning you are not coming in as the state or developers
with interests that others have no interest in, aside from some abstract idea of green
transition - and what does that really mean? But when citizens can suddenly see that the
electricity generated by the installations set up in their backyard goes to their electric cars
and heat pumps and their neighbours’ electric cars and heat pumps, then ... [] there is
just something mental about it that makes people feel - we become part of it, and then it’s
okay that the wind turbine is spinning. Because then you have a connection to it. I think
that’s what it’s about.”
This is another main interessement device that the pro energy community uses to gain
enrolment. Energy communities can play a key role in convincing local communities to
accept the construction of renewable energy in their local area, and in return intensify the
green transition with the increased local acceptance of renewable energy. People do want
to be part of the energy transition, but they want to benefit from it rather than having
external developments and developers deciding where the electricity production should
be placed, where they have to deal with the impacts and don’t see any direct benefits.
If local support to renewable energy is problematised as one of the major issues for
the success of the politicians plans of expanding the electricity production, then energy
communities might be able to establish themselves as obligatory passage points in this
discussion as they might hold the answer to the problem with local support.
Concretise the green transition
The majority of the Danish population agrees that the transitioning from fossil fuels to
renewable electricity is major issue that must be solved, however the transition to a more
sustainable way of life can be difficult. There is a lot of habits that needs to change,
and the entire issue is vast and seems boundless to the individual. In this confusion
the development of an energy community can be a helpful way of concretise the green
49
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
transition. By installing solar power on the roof tops of your town, you are actively
contributing to the green transition, and you can see the manifestation of this vague
notion of transition. You can very specifically see the wind turbines, you have requested
for them to be placed exactly where they stand, and you know that the excess power
from the solar panels on your roof top contribute to charging your neighbours car. The
idea of wanting locally produced energy is compared to locally grown vegetables by the
representative from Energy Communities Denmark: ”Here [in an energy community], I
think many people feel they are concretely engaged in doing something, and the fact that
they are doing something for the local area [helps with engagement in the green transition].
I usually compare it a bit to locally produced vegetables, it’s kind of the same. It’s cool [to
buy locally produced vegetables] because they come from the neighbouring farm. There is
something [about energy communities] that has that thing [that we like about things being
locally produced] in it.”
This way of creating a relation to the green transition makes people want to contribute,
and if the community has established an energy community - which comes with some
difficulties as explained in subsection 4.1.2, then contributing to the green transition
becomes easy as the difficult work already has been done, and all that remains is to join -
giving the capacity of the installed electricity is sufficient. Everyone has the opportunity
to join without any prerequisites. Here socioeconomically disadvantaged citizens can join
on the same terms as everyone else and obtain access to the numerous advantages that
comes with an energy community.
Democratise the green transition
One of the advantages that can be obtained from joining an energy community is the
stabilised electricity bill, but besides this there is a lot of additional social, economic and
environmental benefits. This term is used broadly by the Danish authorities when asked
what role energy communities can have in the green transition. This is a very unspecific
benefit, which also frustrates the pro energy community people, as they experience this
term as a shield, the authorities use, when they try to evade questions about changes
in the tariff methods and other precarious subjects. The social, economic and environ-
mental benefits are however one of the important aspects of energy communities and
evidence for the mindset of energy communities. Energy communities have a more value
based foundation than traditional commercial actors, as their primary objective is not to
turn a profit, but to benefit the local environment in every way possible. Much of the
appeal of energy communities is the social aspect according to the representative from
Sk˚arup Sustainable Energy Community. They underline the community part of energy
communities as the most important aspect to him: ”It’s called an energy ”community,”
and it’s the word community that means a lot to me.” This feeling of communion is vital
as it drives the vision of the energy communities. Energy communities are able to turn a
profit, and this profit can also be used to enhance the common goods in the community
and contribute to public services - organising a town fair or constructing a better town
square or park.
This is some of the social benefits, but the economical aspect is also very important. By
ensuring everyone’s access to owning their own electricity, energy communities become a
way to democratise the green transition, as described by the representative from Energy
Communities Denmark: ”The idea is actually that you don’t need to be able to afford
installation of wind turbines to participate in an energy community. You can gain access
50
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
to locally produced wind power by joining an energy community. So, if someone has the
financial means and willingness to take on the financial and construction risks of setting
up wind turbines, you as an ordinary layperson can suddenly access the electricity... [] By
becoming part of an energy community, you share a collective pool of investment capac-
ity, giving you the opportunity to invest in larger facilities together with others. I would
actually say that it’s a way to democratise access to locally produced green electricity.”
In this debate the term social, economic and environmental benefits is used broadly
by several actors, however no one is more specific as to what these benefits actually are,
when they use the term. As described many of the benefits related to energy communi-
ties, which are emphasised in the interviews are either social, economic or environmental.
However when it is used by authorities it is never backed up by any examples, and by
this implied use of the term, the authorities keep it black boxed. This prevents the other
actors from actually challenging the position and utilising the term social, economic and
environmental benefits in their own interessement.
Empowerment in the green transition
Another democratising aspect of energy communities is the issue with the complexity of
the electricity grid. The electricity grid consists of several different actors that generate
value to the system, and in the middle of this, you have the electricity consumer. This
consumer is an average layperson that does not necessarily have the resources to fully
grasp the different actors and their role in the electricity grid. This affects their ability
to act in the market - and even their ability to understand their own electricity bill.
Thus the electricity grid is alienated for the average consumer, and this is a democratic
problem as electricity is one of the most important resources in modern Denmark. And if
you cannot understand your electricity bill it becomes immensely difficult to utilise all the
different opportunities you have as a consumer. It is difficult to change your electricity
supplier, if you do not know you have one - or do not know if it is Energinet, Radius or
Andel.
This complexity of the electricity grid is one of the greatest barriers for engaging laypeople,
but this is also something that energy communities can help change. When initiating the
development of energy communities ordinary laypeople force themselves to interact with
the electricity grid, and by doing so they take ownership of their own electricity and gain
an insight in a very complicated system. This is also described by the representative
from Energy Communities Denmark, when they talk about what the benefits of energy
communities are: ”There is something amazing about ordinary people suddenly beginning
to understand and talk about tariff models and fees. Suddenly, words like these are coming
out of people’s mouths, who almost couldn’t decipher their own electricity bills before... []
So, there’s a pretty cool empowerment perspective here, which also allows people to discuss
at a different level, and I think that’s incredibly interesting — especially in relation to the
green transition.”
51
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5
Discussion
In the analysis three major issues in the controversy on the implementation of the Eu-
ropean directives have been discussed, and in this chapter the findings described in the
analysis will be summarised. Lastly the future work and limitations will be discussed.
Denmark faces major obstacles if the transition to 100 % renewable electricity is to be
fulfilled, and the expansion and maintenance of the collective grid is one of them. This
expansion is going to be very costly for the electricity consumers, and therefore many
actors in the grid work to reduce the cost of this expansion. It is in this conversation
where energy communities try to position themselves as an important and necessary ac-
tor. The questions are, what role are energy communities going to have in the future
energy system - and whether they have a place at all.
The controversy around energy communities in Denmark and the implementation of the
EU directives has two important aspects that must be decided for this controversy to be
black boxed: What is energy communities cost reflective share of the expenses, and does
the electricity grid even need energy communities?
The biggest challenge for the Danish energy communities in this controversy can be
boiled down to three main aspects in which they must gain enrolment. Firstly they must
convince the other actors that they are relevant. Many actors in the electricity market
deem energy communities as too niche-like to make a difference in the electricity market.
The individual consumer can gain several benefits from engaging in an energy community
- feeling an engagement and ownership in the green transition, stable electricity prices
and prosperity in the local community, but when energy communities try to claim a
role as important in the stability of the electricity grid, it does not resonate. Radius
has developed a new tariffing method to comply with energy communities, but they do
not believe that energy communities can help them and the grid - they believe that it
is the other way around - that Radius must help the energy communities. The energy
community people believe that their core task are to strain relief the electricity grid,
but if nobody else accepts this, then their role will be negligible, as they will probably
not secure political support which will be important if energy communities are to have
some of the same privileges as individual self-consumers have - favourable regulations for
consumption and selling of own produced electricity.
Energy communities must convince the other actors that they actually are a benefit
for the electricity grid and that they by generating concurrency between their production
52
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
and consumption can result in strain relief of the electricity grid.
This is a big bat-
tleground, and it is very important that energy communities obtain enrolment on their
position. If nobody but energy communities believe them to be a positive factor to the
electricity grid, it will become increasingly difficult to obtain the rights and benefits they
seek. Energy communities face a political landscape where they are seen as privileged
individuals that feed off on other less fortunate electricity consumers. This generates ap-
athy that can be very harmful for their cause. Not only do they risk not being accepted
as benefits to the grid - as part of the solution to the issues of the future electricity
grid, but they risk ending up being seen as the exact opposite, a burden not only on
the electricity grid, but a burden on society and an unjust association harming the aver-
age electricity consumer. It is crucial for them that the turn this discourse to their benefit.
Lastly energy communities must translate their position to the other actors in the elec-
tricity grid that the tariffing methods available are not cost reflective. To do this they
use their own calculations as interessement devices to generate enrolment. This enrol-
ment process has already started as Radius has developed a new tariffing method - this
would not have happened if Radius did not believe that energy communities can strain
relieve the electricity grid. A major issue for energy communities today is the economic
foundation which is challenged by the Danish legislation, as they cannot run direct lines
between multiple buildings and households. This result in taxes and tariffs which reduce
the economic benefits from self-production, and therefore the energy communities de-
mand a reduced tariff - mainly because they argue that this will be more cost reflective,
but also to ensure a stable financial situation for the energy communities.
Is the tariffing method cost reflective as it is today or do energy communities pay more
than their fair share? This is at the root of the controversy and must be resolved before
the controversy can be black boxed, and here both Radius and the Danish Utility Reg-
ulator have enabled themselves as obligatory passage points. If energy communities are
supposed to have a lower tariff, then the Danish Utility Regulator must approve of the
method, and this approval is only obtained if the method is cost reflective. With the way
the Danish legislation is constructed it is impossible for the Danish energy communities
to obtain a reduced tariff without the Danish Utility Regulator, but it is also impossi-
ble without Radius. As the Danish DSOs have a natural monopoly it is impossible to
change your electricity distributor, and therefore energy communities must use the tar-
iffing methods that their DSO offers. Therefore it is vital for energy communities that
they establish a reliable collaboration with Radius and the other DSOs to make sure their
needs are met. The method is as good as the DSOs make it and as good as the Danish
Utility Regulator approves of, and if the method is abandoned or rejected, the energy
communities will have no way of achieving a more economically favourable tariff method
in the current political landscape. This could be changed by the politicians if they are
willing to create support schemes for energy communities similar to those of single-family
houses. As of today the tariffs must be cost reflective, and thus the DSOs are not able to
help energy communities more than they have done so far with the new tariffing method.
53
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
5.1
Implementation of the EU directives
One of the main issues of the European legislation and its implementation that is brought
up in the interviews is the discussion on the complexity of the legislation. Is the legisla-
tion too complex and therefore a obstacle for the energy communities, or is it exactly as
complex as it should be, as it is impossible to ensure rights and obligations to consumers
in a complex electricity market with a simple legislation?
Much of the implementation into member states’ legislation is difficult as the European
legislation is vast and complex which makes the implementation slow and complicated.
This is not a new issue for European legislation. The European Union is a colossal or-
ganisation, and when comprised of 27 member states with their individual legislation,
history and interests, it becomes very difficult to establish common ground, and this can
affect the legislative work.
Much of the legislative work of the European Unions is about achieving a general stan-
dard that every state must meet - e.g. the legislation changes in France is different to the
changes needed in Italy. Thus for these European directives, many of the requirements
were already fulfilled by Denmark. The Clean Energy Package from 2018 ensured every
citizen in Europe the right to have an electricity meter - at this point everyone in Den-
mark has had meters since the 1980s - and these are already replaced by smart meters.
This exemplifies how Denmark in some aspects of the electricity market has been ahead
of the rest of the EU.
This also affects the Danish perception on the legislation on the electricity market. There
is an unanimous opinion that Denmark has a well-functioning collective grid. But this
perception also generates a rather conservative view on the electricity grid - the collec-
tive grid works well and if it is not broken, then why change it? It is this position that
energy communities must challenge and change if they are to have a meaningful posi-
tion in the electricity grid. The energy communities must translate the viewpoint that
the collective grid is necessary, but that additional actors must be included to reduce
the cost of the expansion. The other actors in the electricity market must be enrolled
into this viewpoint for energy communities to be able to close the black box as ”winners”.
Having an European legislation that is complex and that has not reached the goals it
has set - energy communities have not gained their footing across Europe, the politicians
in Europe have decided to change the legislation to ensure more support to energy com-
munities and make the legislation less complex and complicated. This new legislation
was passed in May 2024, and the changes followed by this is implemented in the new
Power Supply Law in Denmark1.
The goal of this new legislation is to ”tie a knot” on both the energy sharing platform and
energy communities as described by a representative of Energinet. This new legislation
hopefully streamlines the regulation and clarifies the confusion energy communities feel.
This is an perspective that will be interesting to examine closer in future work.
1This law was sent into hearing at June 28, which is why it is not included in the thesis, as time
constraints hindered the exploration of this new legislation before the time of submission of this thesis.
54
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
5.2
Limitations
Generally speaking most of the conducted interviews went really well. The interviewees
were all very talkative and helpful, and they provided a large portion of knowledge on
the controversy which is explored in this thesis. Not all identified topics could be de-
scribed in every detail, but the topics touched upon by the most of the interviewees are
included. The nature of this thesis caused some representation issues as the Danish En-
ergy Agency execute the legislation on behalf of the energy ministry and the DSOs have
the exclusive rights to develop tariff methods. Thus the Danish Energy Agency and Ra-
dius are powerful actors in the controversy, and as most of the remaining interviews were
conducted with representatives from the pro energy community people, these interviews
are important to elaborate on the position of the authorities in this controversy. The
methods developed by Radius and the legislation exercised by the Danish Energy Agency
affect several organisations not to mention multiple electricity consumers. Naturally it
has therefore been easier to conduct interviews with a broad spectrum of interests with
the actors affected by this - and the actors more critical of the method and legislation.
As described in subsection 3.2.3 the recording of the interview with the representative
from Radius was corrupted and thus a lot of detail could not be sufficiently captured.
Additionally the interview with the Danish Energy Agency was written and therefore not
conducted under optimal circumstances. Furthermore the interviewee is a student worker
who most likely has not been employed through the entire process of implementation of
the directives, and might therefore lack some insights.
This is definitely a weakness in my analysis as much of the claims from other interviews
could not be verified properly, and when both the interview with the Danish Energy
Agency and the interview with Radius is unsatisfactory some nuances and interesting
points of view may have remained unexplored. To try and remedy this situation several
other sources have also been studied, such as the rationale behind the local collective tar-
iff, presentations at webinars and the Retail Market Forum. News articles and debates
have also been searched, and included to support and nuance the analysis. With that
being said it is still a shortcoming of the thesis.
Another limitation for this study is the access to legislative papers. Every legislation
is public, but can be difficult to both locate and comprehend for an engineer, who is
not familiar with reading law texts. As this entire thesis relies greatly on legislation,
it could have been beneficial to have reached out for help to understand the legislation
from someone who is familiar with this. I tried to set up an interview with the Danish
Energy Agency, as they are responsible for the implementation of the directives. This
process was initiated in the beginning of the thesis work, but the correspondence with
the Energy Agency was rather slow and in the end the process was advanced so much
that an legislation interview was assigned a lower priority. An interview with the Danish
Energy Agency or with a representative from the European Union could have helped this
study greatly in the beginning.
5.3
Future work
Time constraints hindered the investigation of the newest European legislation and the
implementation into the Danish Power Supply Law. As this legislation change will most
likely result in an entire new wave of changes in the Danish Power Supply Law, it will
55
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
also result in new confusion from energy communities and possibly an update to the tariff
method developed by Radius. This would be interesting to explore.
This new legislation from the European Union was brought to my attention in one of my
interviews with a representative from Energinet. As mentioned the legislation was passed
after my information gathering, and thus is not included.
Eight interviews have provided access to a reasonable amount of empirical data. The
written interview with the Danish Energy Agency was not very fruitful, as they did not
answer the questions in an way that was useful for me, and as the interview was written
follow-up questions were not possible. An employee offered an oral interview, but unfor-
tunately this opportunity fell too late in the process that the time frame of my project
allowed for the interview.
If I have had more time for interviews there are several important actors in this contro-
versy, which I would like to have interviewed but did not manage to arrange an interview
with. This includes an interview with the Danish Utility Regulator as their position in
the controversy is very important and also because they once rejected a method by Ra-
dius, and this would have been interesting to ask about. A more thorough interview with
the Danish Energy Agency could also be beneficial as well as an interview with Green
Power Denmark as they also are engaged in the tariff debate and an interview with an
electricity supplier that could shed some light on their perspective in the controversy.
I believe that examining the new European legislation and this implementation is the
most important next step in the future work with this controversy. Additionally gaining
insights on the workings of the Danish Utility Regulator will be important. As they are
an obligatory passage point of tariffing methods in Denmark their part in the controversy
could be worthwhile to examine.
56
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
An expansion of the electricity grid is inevitable to secure an electricity system that is
capable of withstanding the electricity the green transition demands. The cost of this
immense expansion could be reduced, if the consumption of electricity becomes more
flexible. This flexibility can be provided by energy communities. The European Union
deems energy communities an important actor in the future electricity grid that can not
only provide a more stable decentralisation of the electricity grid, but also help fight
energy poverty.
In this thesis, the controversy surrounding the implementation of the EU directives into
Danish legislation has been mapped. Some of the necessary implications involves the
development of a local collective tariff and energy sharing platform, which both aims
to help citizens share their self-produced electricity and grant energy communities some
economical benefits from their concurrency of electricity production and consumption.
Energy communities are facing a future where their position in the electricity grid is
threatened by negative opinions of their contribution to the electricity grid. They must
convince other actors in the electricity grid that their concurrency of consumption and
production is beneficial to the electricity grid, and that they, based on this strain relief,
should be compensated, so that the tariffs they pay for using the grid are cost reflective.
The battleground on the cost reflective perspective consists of the Danish authorities
and DSOs that, due to the nature of the Danish legislation, cannot offer a differentiated
tariff, if the strain relief of the electricity grid is not documented, and on the other hand
it consists of the pro energy community people who believe that they already have pro-
vided sufficient documentation on their strain relief of the grid. This dispute must be
solved before the controversy can be black boxed. This will require more enrolment for
energy communities and also take time as the calculations of benefits for the grid must
be accepted widely by not only the DSOs but also the Danish Utility Regulators.
The social, economical and environmental benefits of energy communities, such as local
support for renewable energy, engagement in the green transition and stable electricity
prices, are widely accepted and emphasised by the actors in the controversy, but the
position of energy communities as an important contributor in the electricity system has
not yet gained enrolment from all actors in the electricity grid.
These are the overall findings of the three main issues that was found through the analy-
sis. They all contribute to the controversy and shape the battleground which is inevitable
when opening a black box.
57
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION
Main References
“Counsil Regulation (EU) 2022/2577 of 22 December 2022 laying down a framework to
accelerate the deployment of renewable energy”, Accelerate RE, 2022.
“Bekendtgørelse af lov om almene boliger m.v.”, Almenboligloven, 2023.
“Bekendtgørelse om VE-fællesskaber og borgerenergifællesskaber og forholdet mellem
VE-fællesskaber og borgerenergifællesskaber og elhandelsvirksomheder og kollektive
elforsyningsvirksomheder”, Bekendtgørelse om energyfællesskaber, 2021.
“Actor–Network Theory”, Bencherki, Nicolas, 2017.
“Policy challenges to community energy in the EU: A systematic review of the scientific
literature”, Busch, Henner et al., 2021.
“Some elements of a sociology of translation - Domistication of the scallops and the
fishermen of st-Briec Bay”, Callon, Michel, 1986.
“The Sociology of an Actor-Network: The Case of the Electric Vehicle”, Callon, Michel,
1986.
Metodebeskrivelse for tarifering af lokale sammenslutninger af netkunder, Cerius/Radius,
2024.
“Making Sense of Qualitative Data: Complementary Research Strategies”,
Coffey, A.
and P. Atkinson, 1996.
“A Brief Overview of Actor-Network Theory: unctualization, Heterogeneous Engineering
& Translation”, Cressman, Darryl, 2009.
“Bekendtgørelse af lov om afgift af elektricitet”, Elafgiftsloven, 2023.
“Directive (EU) 2019/944 of the European Parliament and of the Counsil of 5 June
2019 on common rules for the internal market for electricity and amending Directive
2012/27/EU (recast)”, Electricity Market Directive, 2019.
“Bekendtgørelse af lov om elforsyning”, Elforsyningsloven, 2023.
Forslag til koncepter for markedgørelse af dedikerede m˚alinger og energideling, Energinet,
2024.
Clean energy for all Europeans, European Commission and Directorate-General for En-
ergy, 2019.
“Typology of future clean energy communities: An exploratory structure, opportunities,
and challenges”, Gui, Emi Minghui and Iain MacGill, 2018.
“Carrots, sticks and sermons: Policies to unlock community energy finance in the United
Kingdom”, Hannon, Matthew et al., 2023.
Introduction to Qualitative Research Methods: A Helpful Guide for Undergraduates and
Graduate Students in the Social Sciences, Hurst, A.L., 2023.
“Regulatory challenges and opportunities for collective renewable energy prosumers in
the EU”, Inˆes, Campos et al., 2020.
“Regulation (EU) 2019/943 of the European Parliament and of the Counsil of 5 June 2019
on the internal market for electricity (recast)”, Internal Market Directive, 2019.
“Blowing in the wind: A brief history of wind energy and wind power technologies in
Denmark”, Johansen, Katinka, 2021.
“Paradigm shift in Danish wind power: the (un)sustainable transformation of a sector”,
Kirkegaard, Julia Kirch, Tom Cronin, et al., 2021.
“ANT Perspective on Wind Power Planning and Social Acceptance — A Call for Inter-
disciplinarity”, Kirkegaard, Julia Kirch and Sophie Nyborg, 2021.
Page I of XVII
==PAGE:68==
“Towards failed renewable energy communities? Activist attempts to change market con-
ditions in the Danish wind energy market”, Kirkegaard, Julia Kirch, Sophie Nyborg,
et al., 2023.
“Implementing EU Provisions and Enabling Frameworks for RECs in Nine Countries:
Progress, Delays, and Gaps”, Krug, Michael, Maria Di Nucci, et al., 2023.
“Mainstreaming Community Energy: Is the Renewable Energy Directive a Driver for Re-
newable Energy Communities in Germany and Italy?”, Krug, Michael, Maria Rosaria
Di Nucci, et al., 2022.
Interviews: Learning the craft of qualitative research interviewing,
Kvale, Steinar and
Svend Brinkmann, 2009.
“Reassembking the Social. An Introduction to Actor-Network Theory”, Latour, Bruno,
2005.
Energy Communities: Customer-Centered, Market-Driven, Welfare-Enhancing?, Loebbe,
S., F. Sioshansi, and D. Robinson, 2022.
“European energy communities: Characteristics, trends, business models and legal frame-
work”, L´opez, Iraide et al., 2024.
“Bekendtgørelse af lov om fremme af vedvarende energi”, VE-loven, 2024.
“Participant observation at events: theory, practice and potential”, Mackellar, Joanne,
2013.
“Heat pumps in Denmark — From ugly duckling to white swan”, Nyborg, Sophie and
Inge Røpke, 2015.
Participatory Innovation: Storying the Renewable Energy Island Samsø, Papazu, Irina,
2016.
“Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December
2018 on the Promotion of the Use of Energy From Renewable Sources”, RE Directive,
2018.
“Power to the people? Implications of the Clean Energy Package for the role of community
ownership in Europe’s energy transition”, Roberts, Joshua, 2020.
“Diving in magma: how to explore controversies with Actor-Network Theory”, Venturini,
Tommaso, 2010.
“Community Renewable Energy: What Should It Mean?”, Walker, Gordon and Patrick
Devine-Wright, 2008.
Additional References
Bekendtgørelser, der implementerer elmarkedsdirektivet, BL, 2020.
Delvis implementering af VE -direktivet, BL, 2020.
Implementering af elmarkedsdiretivet i elforsyningsloven, BL, 2020.
Modernisering og fremtidssikring af elforsyningsloven, BL, 2021.
Accelerering af VE-udbygning, BL, 2022.
EU-Kommissionens ændringer i direktivet for vedvarende energi (VE-direktivet),
BL,
2022.
EU-Kommissionens meddelelse: ”EU Solar Energy Strategy” – støtterammer for VE-
systemer p˚a tagarealer, BL, 2022.
Vilk˚ar og betingelser for lokale sammenslutninger af netkunder, Cerius/Radius, 2024.
“Status styrker synergier - DaCes rapport om energilagring i Danmark 2023”, DaCES,
2023.
II
==PAGE:69==
“Analyse af geografisk differentierede forbrugstariffer og direkte linjer”, Danish Energy
Agency, 2021.
Energideling - Oplæg til implementeringen af elmarkedsdirektivets ret til energideling,
Danish Energy Agency, 2024.
Implementering af EMD artikel 4 - Seriel m˚aling, Danish Energy Agency, 2024.
Brug strømmen, n˚ar den er billigst, Danish Energy Agency.
Find netselskab, Elnet.
Energifællesskaber case samling, Energifællesskaber Danmark, 2023.
Aktuelle tariffer, Energinet.
ModerniseringNV-30-min Modernisering af tarifdesign, Energinet.
Regler for tariffer, Energinet.
Energyfællesskaber Danmark.
“Fremtids-landsbyer med energifællesskab vil sikre et robust elsystem”, Heide, Henrik,
2023.
“Hvorfor vildleder Energistyrelsen politikere om solcelleanlæg?”, Jørgensen, Ulrik, 2021.
“Replik: Vi vildleder ikke om solceller”, Jørgensen, Ulrik, 2021.
“Monopolet og den uklare retstilstand”, Jørgensen, Ulrik, 2022.
H˚andbog for Energifællesskaber, Jørgensen, Ulrik, 2023.
“Borgerinddragelse i energi- og klimapolitikken - gennem boligforeninger og lokale en-
ergifællesskaber”, Jørgensen, Ulrik, Erik Christiansen, et al., 2022.
“Energifællesskaber of borgerinddragelse i udbygning med VE”, Jørgensen, Ulrik, Mikkel
Jungshoved, and Gunnar Boye Olesen., 2023.
“Energilagring kan gøre energifællesskaber rentable”,
Niels Dyreborg Nielsen, Daces,
2023.
Radius.
III
==PAGE:70==
Appendix A
Timelines
A.1
Timeline of Hearings, articles and other
2016
Vedtagelsen af m˚alet om at holde den globale temperaturstigning p˚a maksimalt 1.5 grader
– ogs˚a kendt som Parisaftalen
Concito kommer med deres fremsynsnotat ”Muligheder for aktive el-forbrugere og en-
ergifællesskaber i Danmark”
April
Tarifmodel 2.0 revideret
https://greenpowerdenmark.dk/vejledning-teknik/nettariffer-priser-gebyrer/t
ariffer
2018
December
Europaparlamentets og r˚adets direktiv om fremme af anvendelsen af energi fra vedvarende
energikilder – ogs˚a kaldet VE-direktivet
2019
Maj
Clean energy for all Europeans package
Juni
Europaparlamentets og r˚adets forordning om det indre marked for elektricitet
IV
==PAGE:71==
Europaparlamentets og r˚adets direktiv om fælles regler for det indre marked for elek-
tricitet – ogs˚a kaldet el-markedsdirektivet
November
Energistyrelsens ”Principper for implementering af erhvervsrettet EU-regulering”. Det
er den der skriver, at den danske implementering er en minimumsimplementering.
2020
December
Energistyrelsen udkommer med ”Analyse af tidssvarende udbygning med solceller under
hensyn til gældende EU-regulering”
2021
Juni
Klima-, Energi- og Forsyningsministeriet udgiver Elektrificering af samfundet - Vejen
mod et mere elektrificeret Danmark
August
Københavns Kommune, BL - Danmarks Almene Boliger, Landsforeningen for Økosam-
fund, Middelgrunden Vindmøllelaug, Bærebo og Foreningen Bofællesskab.dk. Disse or-
ganisationer laver en supplering til Klima-, Energi- og Forsyningsministeriets Elektrificer-
ing af lokalsamfundet fra juni 2021. Denne supplering hedder ”Elektrificering af lokalsam-
fundet - Borgerinddragelse og lokale energifællesskaber som drivkraft i den bæredygtige
omstilling”.
26. august opfølgning p˚a foretræde fra mange forskellige aktører bl.a. Ulrik Jørgensen.
Den opsummerer pointen i ’Elektrificering af lokalsamfund - Borgerinddragelse og lokale
energifællesskaber som drivkraft i den bæredygtige omstilling’
September
GridTech debatindlæg fra Ulrik Jørgensen: ”Hvorfor vildleder Energistyrelsen politikere
om solcelleanlæg?”
Modsvar p˚a Ulrik Jørgensens debat indlæg fra Energistyrelsen: ”Replik: Vi vildleder
ikke om Solceller”
December
Energistyrelsen udkommer med ”Analyse af geografisk differentierede forbrugstariffer og
V
==PAGE:72==
direkte linjer”
2022
Januar
Invitation til høring p˚a Christiansborg d. 18. Januar
Energifællesskaber Danmark udkommer med et baggrundsnotat til høringen i Folketing-
sudvalget for Klima-, Energi- og Forsyning om Energistyrelsens ’Analyse af geografisk dif-
ferentierede forbrugstariffer og direkte linjer’. Høringnsnotatet hedder ’Borgerinddragelse
i energi- og klimapolitikken - gennem boligforeninger og lokale energifællesskaber’. Denne
høring er lavet p˚a vegne af rigtig mange organisationer bla. BL og en del af IDA.
Høring p˚a Christiansborg d. 18. januar om borgerinddragelse i energi- og klimapoli-
tikken
Maj
Notat om muligheder og barrierer for egenproduktion i bolig- og energifællesskaber
Juni
Høringssvar om forslag til ’Lov om ændring af lov om elforsyning’ fra Ulrik Jørgensen
Juli
Radius f˚ar godkendt deres 3.0 tarifmetode
August
Monopolet og den uklare retstilstand
https://pro-ing-dk.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/gridtech/holdning/monopolet-og-den-u
klare-retstilstand
Baggrundsnotat til Klima-, Energi- og Forsyningsudvalget med hovedpunkter til fore-
træde 25. august om Potentialer for VE-udbygning, robusthed og elnet ved fjernelse af
barrierer for lokale VE-investeringer og energifællesskaber. Dette notat er skrevet af Ulrik
Jørgensen og Gunnar Olesen
25.
august er der afholdt foretræde for Klima-, Energi- og forsyningsudvalget af Ul-
rik Jørgensen og andre
December
Europar˚adets forordning om en ramme for fremskyndelse af udbredelsen af vedvarende
energi
VI
==PAGE:73==
2023
Tarifmodel 2.0 forventes udfaset fra 2023 og frem til fordel for tarifmodel 3.0.
https://greenpowerdenmark.dk/vejledning-teknik/nettariffer-priser-gebyrer/t
ariffer
Energifællesskaber Danmark laver en casesamling til kommuner med eksempler p˚a en-
ergifællesskaber i Danmark
Februar
8. februar laver Klima-, Energi- og Forsyningsministeren Lars Aagaard en skriftlig frem-
sætning med forslag til ændring i forsyningsloven
https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/ft/20222XX00102
I den forbindelse har Energistyrelsen fremlagt et høringsnotat den 8. februar, der kommer
med ”kommentarer til de mange høringssvar, som de modtog til tre p˚a hinanden følgende
runder af ændringsforslag til Elforsyningsloven fra sommeren” (Citat fra ”Energifællessk-
aber og Borgerinddragelse i udbygningen med VE - fjernelse af barrierer og behov for
befordrende regulering” fra februar 2023)
Baggrundsnotat til høring p˚a Christiansborg d. 1. marts fra mange forskellige aktører.
Notatet hedder ”Energifællesskaber og Borgerinddragelse i udbygningen med VE - fjer-
nelse af barrierer og behov for befordrende regulering”.
Nær placering af elforbrug og elproduktion skal aflaste elnettet
https://www.energy-supply.dk/article/view/900244/naer_placering_af_elforbru
g_og_elproduktion_skal_aflaste_elnettet
Marts
1. marts er der høring om energifællesskaber p˚a Christiansborg
Forsyningstilsynet tager tarif model 3.0 metoden til efterretning
https://greenpowerdenmark.dk/vejledning-teknik/nettariffer-priser-gebyrer/t
ariffer
NEKST – den nationale energikrisestab blev grundlagt af klima-, energi- og forsyn-
ingsminister Lars Aagaard
https://kefm.dk/klima/nekst-den-nationale-energikrisestab
April
Bygherre og ingeniør: `Et ord i loven forhindrer grøn energi i nybyggeri
https://www.altinget.dk/by/artikel/bygherre-og-ingenioer-%C3%A8t-ord-i-lov
VII
==PAGE:74==
en-forhindrer-groen-energi-i-nybyggeri
Juli
Notat om fællesskabsrettede tarif typer. Bidrag til at f˚a opstillet og defineret et beregn-
ingsgrundlag for en tarifmodel
August
Fremtids-landsbyer med energifællesskab vil sikre et robust elsystem
https://ing-dk.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/artikel/fremtids-landsbyer-med-energifae
llesskab-vil-sikre-et-robust-elsystem
Interesseorganisationen Energifællesskaber DK bliver stiftet
https://www.energifaellesskaber.dk/2023/08/03/danmark-faar-landsdaekkende-f
orening-for-energifaellesskaber/
September
19. September Radius og Cerius holder aktørmødet ”Lokal kollektiv afregning for sam-
menslutninger af netkunder”. Præsentation og diskussion af overvejelser og id´eer. Dette
er deres første oplæg til den lokale kollektive tariferingsmodel
DaCES RAPPORT OM ENERGILAGRING I DANMARK udkommer
Energifællesskaber DK udgiver H˚andbog for Energifællesskaber 3. version
November
Energilagring kan gøre energifællesskaber rentable
https://www.energy-supply.dk/article/view/1066936/energilagring_kan_gore_e
nergifaellesskaber_rentable
22.
november DaCES holder webinaret ”Hvordan kan vi fremme energifællesskaber i
Danmark?”
https://daces.dk/2023/11/24/webinar-hvordan-kan-vi-fremme-energifaellessk
aber-i-danmark/
2024
Januar
Næsten alle elkunder betaler nu for strøm efter tarifmodel 3.0
https://greenpowerdenmark.dk/nyheder/tarifmodel-30-snart-udbredt-hele-lan
det
VIII
==PAGE:75==
Marts
7.
marts Radius og Cerius sender deres metodeforslag til en ny teriferingsmetode til
Forsyningstilsynet, der s˚a sender den i høring
7.
marts udgiver Radius og Cerius høringssvarene, til de høringer, der kom p˚a bag-
grund af aktørmødet d. 19. september
14. marts kommer Energinet og Energistyrelsen med et oplæg til en energioprindelses-
platform, der kan bruges til energideling
IX
==PAGE:76==
A.2
Timeline of changes in the Danish Power Supply
Law
2020
Juli
6.
juli – høring vedr.
lovforslag om ændring af elforsyningsloven (implementering af
elmarkedsdirektivet, vinterpakken).
Denne høring svarer BL p˚a i høringssvaret ”Im-
plementering af elmarkedsdiretivet i elforsyningsloven – Høring over ændring af lov om
elforsyning. Ændringerne implementerer elmarkedsdirektivet. Netvirksomheder skal op-
træde som neutrale markedsformidlere ved anskaffelse af elektricitet til dækning af net-
tab.” (1)
https://bl.dk/politik-og-analyser/hoeringssvar/2020/8/24082020-implementer
ing-af-elmarkedsdiretivet-i-elforsyningsloven/
Oktober
12. oktober – høring af bekendtgørelser, der implementerer elmarkedsdirektivet. Denne
høring svarer BL p˚a i høringssvaret ”Bekendtgørelser, der implementerer elmarkedsdirek-
tivet – Høring over 11 ændringsbekendtgørelser som skal implementere elmarkedsdirek-
tivet, der har været i høring tidligere p˚a ˚aret (ændring af lov om elforsyning)” (2)
https://bl.dk/politik-og-analyser/hoeringssvar/2020/11/09112020-bekendtgoer
elser-der-implementerer-elmarkedsdirektivet/
November
20. november – høringen om delvis implementering af direktiv om fremme af anvendelse
af energi fra vedvarende energikilder. Denne høring, der er koblet sammen med høring (1)
og (2), svarer BL p˚a i høringssvaret: ”Delvis implementering af VE-direktivet – Høring
om ændring af lov om ændring af lov om fremme af vedvarende energi, lov om elforsyn-
ing, biobrændstofloven og forskellige andre love som skal gennemføre dele af direktiv om
fremme af anvendelse af energi fra vedvarende energikilder. Bl.a. implementeres reglerne
om borgerenergifællesskaber i dansk lovgivning.”
https://bl.dk/politik-og-analyser/hoeringssvar/2020/11/17112020-delvis-imp
lementering-af-ve-direktivet/
2021
Den danske lov om elforsyning bliver revideret, og de to EU-direktiver - VE direktivet
og elmarkedsdirektivet bliver implementeret.
Maj
30. maj – Gældende Bekendtgørelse om VE-fællesskaber og borgerenergifællesskaber
https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2021/1069
Juli
X
==PAGE:77==
5. juli – høring over lovforslag om ændring af lov om elforsyning og forskellige andre love.
”Modernisering og fremtidssikring af elforsyningsloven – Lovforslagets overordnede form˚al
er at modernisere og fremtidssikre elforsyningsloven gennem en tilpasning af rammerne
for elproduktion, transmission, netvirksomhed, handel og øvrige elektricitetsaktiviteter.
Klare og fremtidssikrede rammer for elsektoren skal understøtte et energisystem i balance,
der leverer grøn omstilling og fortsat høj forsyningssikkerhed til rimelige forbrugerpriser.”
https://bl.dk/politik-og-analyser/hoeringssvar/2021/8/27082021-moderniseri
ng-og-fremtidssikring-af-elforsyningsloven/
2022
Maj
30. maj – høring over forslag til lov om ændring af lov om elforsyning. ”Ændring af
elforsyningsloven mhp. understøttelse af den grønne omstilling – Lovforslaget bidrager
bl.a. til at styrke muligheden for effektivt at indpasse en øget mængde vedvarende en-
ergi (VE) i elnettet gennem hensigtsmæssig placering af elforbrug og -produktion, og nye
tilladelser til elproduktion baseret p˚a kul udelukkes.” (3)
https://bl.dk/politik-og-analyser/hoeringssvar/2022/7/01072022-%C3%A6ndrin
g-af-elforsyningsloven-mhp-understoettelse-af-den-groenne-omstilling/
30. maj – høring vedr. Kommissionens forslag til ændringer i VE-direktivet, bygnings-
direktivet og EE-direktivet. ”EU-Kommissionens ændringer i direktivet for vedvarende
energi (VE-direktivet), direktivet for bygningers energimæssige ydeevne (bygningsdirek-
tivet) samt direktivet for energieffektivitet (EE-direktivet) – Europa-Kommissionen har
den 18. maj 2022 offentliggjort deres REPowerEU plan, som indeholder en række strate-
gier og tiltag. Herunder er Kommissionen kommet med et forslag til ændringer af hhv.
VE-, EE- og bygningsdirektivet.”
https://bl.dk/politik-og-analyser/hoeringssvar/2022/6/08062022-eu-kommissio
nens-aendringer-i-direktivet-for-vedvarende-energi-ve-direktivet-direktive
t-for-bygningers-energimaessige-ydeevne-bygningsdirektivet-samt-direktive
t-for-energieffektivitet-ee-direktivet/
Juni
1. juni – høring vedr. Meddelelse fra Kommissionen til Parlamentet, R˚adet, Det Eu-
ropæiske økonomiske og sociale udvalg og Regionsudvalget - ”EU Solar Energy Strat-
egy”. ”EU-Kommissionens meddelelse: ”EU Solar Energy Strategy” – støtterammer for
VE-systemer p˚a tagarealer - Med meddelelsen ”EU Solar Energy Strategy” understreger
Kommissionen, at energifattige og udsatte forbrugere i medlemsstater skal sikres adgang
til solenergi, fx gennem almene boliganlæg, energifællesskaber eller finansieringsstøtte
til enkelte installationer.
Derudover skal der etableres robuste støtterammer for VE-
systemer p˚a tagarealer, herunder i kombination med energilagring og varmepumper”
https://bl.dk/politik-og-analyser/hoeringssvar/2022/6/08062022-eu-kommissio
nens-meddelelse-eu-solar-energy-strategy-stoetterammer-for-ve-systemer-paa
-tagarealer/
Juli
XI
==PAGE:78==
1. juli – høring over udkast til lovforslag om ændring af lov om elforsyning af Ener-
gistyrelsen. Denne høring hænger sammen med høring (3) ”Ændring af lov om elforsyning
– præcisering af regler for VE-egenforbrugere og interne net i produktionsleddet - VE-
egetforbrug forventes at spille en central rolle i den grønne omstilling. Med lovændringen
tydeliggøres og præciseres reglerne for VE-egenforbrugere og interne net i produktion-
sleddet.” (4)
https://bl.dk/politik-og-analyser/hoeringssvar/2022/8/15082022-%C3%A6ndrin
g-af-lov-om-elforsyning-praecisering-af-regler-for-ve-egenforbrugere-og-i
nterne-net-i-produktionsleddet/
September
16. september – høring over udkast til lovforslag om ændring af lov om elforsyning vedr.
interne elektricitetsforbindelser. Denne høring hænger sammen med høring (3) og (4).
”Definition af intern elektricitetsforbindelse i elforsyningsloven – Lovforslaget indebærer
bl.a., at begrebet ’interne net’ defineres i elforsyningsloven og i den anledning skifter navn
til ’intern elektricitetsforbindelse’.” (5)
https://bl.dk/politik-og-analyser/hoeringssvar/2022/9/30092022-definition-a
f-intern-elektricitetsforbindelse-i-elforsyningsloven/
Oktober
1.
oktober – høring over bekendtgørelse om interne elektricitetsforbindelser.
Denne
høring hører sammen med (3), (4) og (5). ”Fastsættelse af kriterier for elkundes brug
af intern elektricitetsforbindelse – Hovedform˚alet med bekendtgørelsen er at fastsætte
de kriterier, som skal være opfyldt, for at en elkunde kan bruge en intern elektricitets-
forbindelse. (6)
https://bl.dk/politik-og-analyser/hoeringssvar/2022/11/04112022-fastsaettel
se-af-kriterier-for-elkundes-brug-af-intern-elektricitetsforbindelse/
November
9.
november - høring vedr.
EU-Kommissionens forslag: ”Laying down a framework
to accelerate the deployment of renewable energy”. “Accelerering af VE-udbygning -
EU-Kommissionen ønsker med forslaget ”Laying down a framework to accelerate the
deployment of renewable energy” at strømline de nationale tilladelsesprocedurer for at
fremme og fremskynde udbredelsen af VE-anlæg.”
https://bl.dk/politik-og-analyser/hoeringssvar/2022/11/11112022-accelererin
g-af-ve-udbygning/
2023
April
27. april – Gældende Bekendtgørelse om interne elektricitetsforbindelser
Maj
1.
maj – kommentar fra BL om ændringen af elforsyningsloven.
Denne kommentar
XII
==PAGE:79==
opsummerer den endelige udformning af elforsyningsloven.
Desuden henviser den til
høringssvarene (3), (4), (5) og (6)” 1523 - Ændringer i elforsyningsloven – solceller og
VE-fællesskaber – Den 1. maj 2023 er der indført ændringer i elforsyningsloven og lov om
afgift af elektricitet samt indført en ny bekendtgørelse om interne elektricitetsforbindelser.
Reglerne er relevante for almene boligorganisationer – bl.a. i forhold til etablering af sol-
celleanlæg og indg˚aelse af VE-fællesskaber.”
https://bl.dk/bl-informerer/2023/5/1523-%C3%A6ndringer-i-elforsyningsloven
-solceller-og-ve-faellesskaber/
Juli
1. juli, ændres elforsyningsloven, og der bliver givet et p˚alæg fra lovgiverne om at netsel-
skaberne skal lave en lokal kollektiv tarifering
Oktober
24. oktober – Gældende Bekendtgørelse af lov om elforsyning. Ogs˚a kaldet elforsyn-
ingsloven
https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2023/1248
November
24. november – Gældende Bekendtgørelse af lov om almene boliger m.v. Ogs˚a kaldet
Almenboligloven
https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2023/1343
3. november – Gældende Bekendtgørelse af lov om afgift af elektricitet. Ogs˚a kaldet
el-afgiftsloven
https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2023/1284
2024
Februar
6. februar – Gældende Bekendtgørelse af lov om fremme af vedvarende energi. Ogs˚a
kaldet VE-loven
https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2024/132
XIII
==PAGE:80==
Appendix B
Initial Actor-Network
Figure B.1: Initial Actor Network constructed after 1 month of research
XIV
==PAGE:81==
Appendix C
Empirical date besides the
interviews
Ændringer i elforsyningsloven – solceller og VE-fællesskaber
(BL, 2023)
Ændring af elforsyningsloven
mhp. understøttelse af den grønne omstilling
(BL, 2022a)
Fastsættelse af kriterier for elkundes brug af
intern elektricitetsforbindelse
(BL, 2022d)
Definition af intern elektricitetsforbindelse i elforsyningsloven
(BL, 2022c)
Ændring af lov om elforsyning – præcisering af regler for
VE-egenforbrugere og interne net i produktionsleddet
(BL, 2022b)
Webinar: Hvordan kan vi fremme energifællesskaber i Danmark?
(DaCES, 2023)1
Retail Market Forum hosted by Energinet
May 1st 2024, Fredericia
Naboer afkræves afgift for at dele grøn el
- men minister afviser kritik omstilling
(Hecklen et al., 2024)
Borgere og virksomheder skulle dele strøm
- men i Danmark halter storstilet EU-sats
(M. Jørgensen et al., 2024a)
Bygherre og ingeniør: `Et ord i loven
forhindrer grøn energi i nybyggeri
(Baltser and Olesen, 2023)
P˚a Amager vil de b˚ade lave, gemme og dele
grøn strøm - men danske regler ”spænder ben”
(M. Jørgensen et al., 2024b)
Tænketank: Energifællesskaber er en gevinst for alle el-kunder
(M. Jørgensen et al., 2024c)
L37 Bilag 8: Vedrørende revision af Elforsyningsloven
(Skaksen, 2023)
Høring baseret p˚a aktørdialog den 19. september 2023
(Cerius/Radius, 2023)
Kommentarer til Radius’ oplæg til lokal kollektiv tarifering
(U. Jørgensen, 2024)
Opsamling p˚a aktørinddragelse - Samlede inputs
til Radius’ oplæg om lokal kollektiv afregning
(Energifællesskaber Danmark, 2023)
Table C.1: Analysis data gathered besides the interviews
XV
==PAGE:82==
Appendix D
Coding Examples
D.1
Overarching themes of the coding
Colour
Theme
Light green
Role of energy communities
Light blue
Energy communities in relation to the electricity grid
Black
Introduction of the interviewee
Red
Justice
Purple
Cost reflective
Yellow
Local collective tariff
Grey
Legislation
Pink
Legislative problems for energy communities
Brown
Barriers and issues
Blue
The energy sharing platform
Orange
Miscellaneous
Green
Advice
Table D.1: The colour assigned for every overarching theme used in the initial coding of
the empirical data
XVI
==PAGE:83==
D.2
Examples of detailed coding
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure D.1: Examples of coding. Each colour represents a different overall coding theme
XVII
