==PAGE:1==
Multilayer nanofibrous microparticles
for colon drug delivery
Paraskevi Sofokleous
s223788
Supervisors
Fatemeh Ajalloueian
Gohar Soufi
August 5, 2024
==PAGE:2==
MSc Thesis Project
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my personal appreciation to my supervisors Fatemeh Ajalloueian
and Gohar Soufi for their guidance throughout this research project.
A special thank you to the research assistants Somayeh Azizi and Marzieh Yeganegi for
their invaluable help and assistance in various aspects of the research.
I would also like to acknowledge the support from my family and friends who have been
a constant encouragement and support.
Finally, i would like to extend my gratitude to the IDUN Research Section, where I had
the privilege to conduct my research.
i
==PAGE:3==
MSc Thesis Project
Abstract
Over the past three decades, colon drug delivery has garnered significant attention due
to its therapeutic benefits and advantages, such as superior treatment of local diseases with
reduced off-target effects and improved drug bioavailability. This MSc thesis project focuses
on the fabrication of multilayer nanofibrous microparticles for colon-targeted drug delivery
systems using electrospinning as a fabrication tool. Specifically, metformin is loaded into
pullulan nanofibers as a middle layer, with Eudragit S100 serving as the protective outer
layers.
Characterization methods such as Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), Fourier Trans-
form Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), and Water Contact Angle Test were employed. These
methods demonstrated the smooth and continuous surface of the fibers, confirmed the drug-
loaded electrospun sheets, and revealed the hydrophobic nature of the multilayer sheets.
Analytical techniques, including the µDiss Profiler and the Varioskan LUX Multimode Mi-
croplate Reader, were also utilized.
Release studies indicated that electrospun monolayers had a significantly higher release
(77.54 ± 4.81 %) at a neutral pH of 6.8 compared to an acidic pH of 1.2 (48.98 ± 2.92
%), dissolving almost immediately due to the hydrophilic nature of Pullulan. Multilayer
electrospun sheets (EuS100/Pull/EuS100) demonstrated an even higher release (248.34 ±
57.34%) in neutral pH compared to gastric pH (189.44 ± 14.38%). Additionally, when the
multilayer sheets were immersed first in acidic solution (pH 1.2) and then in neutral solution
(pH 7.4), there was a significant increase in release in the neutral environment (99.76 ±
16.85 % and 115.30 %) compared to the acidic environment (39.06 ± 27.50 % and 68.88 %),
with an immediate increase observed as soon as the pH changed. Release studies for the
microparticles showed minimal release in the acidic environment (4.86 %), followed by an
increase to 8.07 % over 24 hours, and a further increase to 22.87 % over one week. These
results confirm that Eudragit S100 effectively protects the inner pullulan layer in acidic
conditions, ensuring targeted drug release in the colon.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Electrospinning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Princilple of Electrospinning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Parameters affecting Electrospinning process . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Electrospun nanofibers as drug delivery system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Colon Targeted Drug Delivery Systems (CDD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Particulate drug delivery systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Metformin hydrochloride (MF)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.6
Pullulan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.7
Eudragit S100 (ES100) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.8
Aim of the project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Materials and Methods
9
2.1
Materials and Solvents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
Preparation of polymeric solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Electrospinning of nanofibrous polymer sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Electrospinning of nanofibrous Metformin loaded pullulan sheets . . .
10
2.2.2
Electrospinning of nanofibrous Eudragit sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.3
Electrospinning of multilayer polymer sheet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Fabrication of multilayer nanofibrous microparticles . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Characterisation Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.1
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) Characterisation . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.2
Fourier Trasnform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR)
. . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.3
Water Angle Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Analytical Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.1
µDiss Profiler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.2
Varioskan LUX Multimode Microplate Reader . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Results and Discussion
19
3.1
Electrospun sheets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Pullulan Electrospun sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.2
Metformin Hydrochloride (MH) loaded Electrospun sheets
. . . . . .
20
3.1.3
Metformin Hydrochloride (MH) loaded Electrospun sheets with glacial
acid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.4
Eudragit Electrospun sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.5
Multilayer Electrospun Sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.6
Multilayer Electrospun Microparticles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
FTIR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Water Angle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
In Vitro/Drug release studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4.1
MicroDiss Profiler drug release studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4.2
Plate Reader drug release studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
iii
==PAGE:5==
MSc Thesis Project
Contents
4
Conclusion
43
List of Figures
I
List of Tables
III
References
IV
iv
==PAGE:6==
MSc Thesis Project
1
Introduction
1.1
Electrospinning
Fibers have attracted considerable attention in recent years, especially those produced
via electrospinning, a simple and cost-efficient method. Electrospinning is an electrohydro-
dynamic technique, which is based on the principle of how electrostatic forces can produce
fibers out of polymeric solutions or melts [1]. This technique yields ultrafine fibers with func-
tional, physical or chemical properties and dimensions spanning from the microscale down to
several nanometers [2, 3]. As shown in Figure 1, a standard setup consists of a high voltage
power supply (DC or AC), a syringe pump with the syringe where the polymeric solution
is placed and the needle (spinneret), and a grounded metallic collector where the polymeric
fibers are dispensed [4]. Apart from polymers, ceramics and semiconductors can also be used
to create electrospun nanofibers with diverse structures and morphologies, tailored through
specific electrospinning processes [3].
Figure 1: Electrospinning Setup
1.1.1
Princilple of Electrospinning
By applying a substantial electric charge to the polymeric solution through the fine
needle of the syringe, the solution becomes electrically charged and produces electrostatic
forces. This induces surface tension, shaping the drop into a conical form known as the Taylor
cone. Then, nanofibers are formed and placed on the metallic collector by the evaporation
of the solvent from the droplet [5, 6, 1]. As the strength of the electric field is increasing,
the charges at the surface of the polymer are also increasing, and the repulsive electric forces
end to overcome the surface tension of the polymer solution. Thus, bending instabilities are
generated resulting in the fiber stretching due to applied mechanical force. The formed fibers,
have an asymmetrical pattern and depends on the electrostatic repulsion, colloid stability,
the incoming surface ratio and gravity. Furthermore, a zone of charged molecules is created
followed by solidification of the liquid solution and solvent evaporation. At the same time,
the polymer threads proceed on the grounded collector [1].
Page 1 of 43
==PAGE:7==
MSc Thesis Project
1.1
Electrospinning
1.1.2
Parameters affecting Electrospinning process
To ensure a successful experiment, and good "electrospinnability", three distinct cate-
gories of processing parameters must be considered. The parameters influence fiber formation
to ensure continuous, bead-free fibers [3]. These categories include the experimental setup,
ambient conditions, and parameters related to the polymer solution, including the solvent
[1].
For the experimental setup, the operating voltage is crucial to the electrospinning pro-
cess, as the quantity of charges applied to the solution are affected. Higher voltage is capable
of increasing the stretching on the solution droplet and jet elongation, which results in thin
fibers. At the same time and beyond a certain voltage, the fiber diameter is decreasing.
Furthermore, thinner fibers can be produced by gradually increasing the voltage.
This
specifically accelerates the electrospinning jet, resulting in a higher volume of solution being
drawn from the tip of the needle [3]. The distance from the needle tip to the collector is
also important. A longer distance allows adequate flight time and solidification of the fibers.
However, beyond a certain point, the fiber diameter might increase due to the weakening of
the electric field. The solution flow rate, typically measured in ml/hr, is particularly impor-
tant for ensuring that the solution is properly ejected from the needle tip. A high flow rate
can cause dripping, leading to beaded and increased diameter fibers. At the same time, a
higher flow rate will result in inadequate fiber stretching, producing wet fibers or fibers with
larger diameters and bigger pores [1]. Generally, a low flow rate is preferred for maintaining
a continuous solution flow during the process.
Regarding the solution parameters, viscosity stands out as one of the most crucial
factors influencing the structural morphology of the fibers. Specifically, viscosity is directly
proportional to both the concentration and surface tension of the polymeric solution, and it
also depends on the shear rate and temperature. Higher viscosity, results in large particles
and fiber diameter [3] [4]. In general, ensuring the right viscosity for a polymeric solution
can prevent the formation of larger diameter fibers and reduce the risk of polymer spraying
[1]. Another important solution parameter is the polymer concentration, which defines the
spinnability. A high concentration is important for chain entanglement. At the same time,
concentration should not be too high or too low. Molecular weight plays an important role
for the morphological characteristics of the fibers. Particularly, higher molecular weight is
favorable for continuous and bead-free fibers. At the same time, solution conductivity is
significant as it increases the amount of charges carried and reduces the required voltage
for jet eruption to a minimum [1].
The solvent is crucial and varies depending on the
polymer.
Choosing the appropriate solvent depends on the polymer’s solubility and the
solvent’s boiling point. Generally, volatile solvents are more favorable, as they dehydrate
the nanofibers during their transfer from the tip to the collector. Meanwhile, a too volatile
solvent might cause defects or traits [1] [3].
For the ambient conditions, relative humidity significantly impacts the fibers.
High
humidity can disrupt the electrospinning process, leading to non-uniform fibers and affecting
charge distribution.
Additionally, it may reduce surface charge density and alter charge
distribution [1]. Also, lower humidity may cause larger diameter fibers by reduction of the
flying jet path, due to quick solvent evaporation.
Page 2 of 43
==PAGE:8==
MSc Thesis Project
1.2
Electrospun nanofibers as drug delivery system
1.2
Electrospun nanofibers as drug delivery system
In recent decades, nanoscale fibers have gained considerable attention due to their re-
markable functionality and wide range of applications [5]. They provide unique features such
as a microstructure similar to that of an extracellular matrix, a high surface area to volume
ratio, and high porosity with interconnectivity [7, 8]. The applications that nanofibers can
be used are from tissue engineering to wound dressing, and enzyme immobilization [9]. Due
to their functional characteristics, nanofibers have also been employed as drug carriers in
drug delivery systems, demonstrating immediate, sustained, and biphasic controlled release
profiles, as well as enhancement with their bioavailability. It has been shown improvement
in therapeutic effects as well as reduction of the toxicity of conventional dosage forms [10].
Another important point worth mentioning is the high loading capacity, high encapsulation
efficiency, and ability to deliver various therapies. The materials used for this application
varies, including natural and synthetic polymers and a blend of them. At the same time, a
lot of different drugs and active substances can be used like anticancer drugs or antibiotics
and macromolecules like proteins, DNA and RNA [11].
1.3
Colon Targeted Drug Delivery Systems (CDD)
In recent years, colonic drug delivery has gained significant attention due to advance-
ments and pharmaceutical benefits in the field. Targeting drugs to the colon can enhance
the treatment of local colonic diseases such as irritable bowel syndrome, colon cancer, and
inflammatory bowel diseases like Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis [12]. This can be
achieved by optimizing the drug concentration at the target site while simultaneously lim-
iting systemic exposure [13].
Colon drug delivery is also able to provide access to local
therapeutic targets, reduce systemic drug exposure and associated toxicity, and improve
drug bioavailability [13]. The colon offers several advantages in drug delivery systems and
the gastrointestinal tract (GIT), as a part of the delivery for different drug molecules like
proteins and peptides. These advantages include a neutral pH, a longer transit time with
relatively low proteolytic enzyme activity, and a much greater responsiveness to absorption
enhancers [12].
In previous studies of the last decade, multiple approaches had limited success, and were
focused on pro-drugs/gut restricted therapeutics, pH sensitive polymers, timed release deliv-
ery systems and microbially degraded delivery systems. Specifically, the design of prodrugs
and gut-restricted therapeutics requires customized approaches for each drug, leading to
time-consuming regulatory approval processes [13]. Furthermore, many of these approaches
relied on pH and time dependent mechanisms, which had limitations in in-vivo studies [12].
Moreover, it has been shown that enteric coatings show unpredictable release patterns, either
dissolving too soon or remaining untouched. This leads to patients not receiving the correct
amount of drug dosage due to fluctuations in intestinal pH. The timed-release colon delivery
system approach can also exhibit variable release profiles in patients, given the variability in
gastrointestinal transit times associated with the oral route. Specifically, this approach oper-
ates on a trigger mechanism once the system encounters gastrointestinal or low gastric fluids,
initiating the lag phase necessary to reach the colon for release. However, factors such as
Page 3 of 43
==PAGE:9==
MSc Thesis Project
1.3
Colon Targeted Drug Delivery Systems (CDD)
diseases, surgeries, medications, or changes in diet plans can alter patients’ gastrointestinal
transit times, resulting in the failure of the timed delivery approach to the colon.
In general, CCD systems have both advantages and disadvantages. A major drawback
is that in vivo studies show variation in small intestinal transit time, leading to the release
of the bioactive compound in the small intestine or the terminal part of the colon. At the
same time, colonic contents such as dietary residues, intestinal secretions, mucus, and fecal
matter can negatively affect the stability of the drug. Additionally, bacterial enzymes in
the colon may degrade the drug, making it ineffective. On the other hand, CCD systems
offer some advantages, such as preventing drug degradation in acidic environments like the
stomach or by enzymes. Furthermore, delivering a drug to the colon is an effective way to
minimize the required dosage and reduce potential side effects or systemic adverse reactions
[14, 12].
Figure 2: Schematic Illustration of Colon Drug Delivery
In a study conducted by Y. Ding et al. on colon-targeted extended drug delivery, triaxial
electrospinning was used to fabricate nanofibers with a core-shell structure (CSF) utilizing
Eudragit S100 (EuS100), a polymer with pH-dependent solubility. These nanofibers were
loaded with aspirin, featuring an aspirin-loaded EuS100 core and a drug-free EuS100 shell.
For comparison, they also fabricated monolithic composite nanofibers (MCF) with aspirin
dispersed within a EuS100 matrix. The resulting fibers exhibited smooth surfaces and fine
morphology. Release studies indicated that CSFs had a significantly lower release rate of
Page 4 of 43
==PAGE:10==
MSc Thesis Project
1.4
Particulate drug delivery systems
1.3 ± 0.8% in an acidic environment compared to MCFs, which had a release rate of 9.6
± 3.4%. This demonstrates that CSFs are more effective at preventing drug release in the
acidic environment of the stomach. After 6 hours, the cumulative release from CSFs was
94.5 ± 6.5%, while MCFs exhibited a release of 97.6 ± 5.2%, indicating that CSFs provide
a more sustained release under neutral conditions [15].
1.4
Particulate drug delivery systems
Particulate drug delivery systems, which utilize polymeric microparticles or nanopar-
ticles, have been particularly prominent in cancer treatment over the past two decades.
Extensive research has been conducted to ensure their effectiveness and safety, as well as
to optimize their size, surface properties, charge, and composition [16]. They have received
significant attention for their ability to achieve site-specific colonic drug delivery due to their
unique advantages and physical properties [17]. These systems offer numerous advantages,
including achieving higher local drug concentrations, accommodating both hydrophilic and
hydrophobic drug loading, minimizing the risk of dose dumping, and reducing variability in
gastrointestinal transit times and among individuals. Furthermore, they provide versatile
administration routes such as oral, inhalation, or parenteral, and contribute to reduced side
effects [18, 16]. Research has shown that process parameters impact the morphology, particle
size, drug loading, and entrapment efficiency of nanoparticles [17]. Besides their advantages,
nanoparticulate systems have a notable disadvantage. Premature drug leakage, attributed to
their high surface area, can lead to reduced therapeutic efficacy and increased risk of adverse
side effects [17]. They can also face challenges like accumulation in unintended tissues which
might cause toxicity or adverse reactions [16]. Researchers are focusing on enhancing the
specificity of nanoparticle systems for selective targeting of cancer cells, while protecting and
avoiding healthy tissues. Specifically, nanoparticles can target cancer cells and deliver drugs
directly to them, bypassing treatment-resistant mechanisms and overcoming drug resistance
by encapsulating chemotherapy drugs [16].
Some crucial characteristics of nanoparticles
include stability and biocompatibility, which are essential for minimizing toxic effects and
ensuring long-term patient safety [16].
1.5
Metformin hydrochloride (MF)
Metformin hydrochloride (MF) is an antidiabetic agent of the biguanide group and it is
orally administrated. Its chemical structure is shown in Figure 3. It has been shown, that MF
can be also used as an anticancer agent for the treatment of primary and hyperinsulinemia
associated cancers including breast, colon, lung, pancreatic and ovarian cancers [19, 20, 18].
It has been shown, that MF is able to sensitize multidrug resistant cancers including colon
and breast cancer.
Studies have shown that MF combined with Doxorubicin therapy is
able to cure cancer and prevent it from recurring [20]. Metformin also enhances autophagy,
suppresses mitochondrial oxidative respiration, and induces glycolysis. This is evidenced
by increased glucose uptake and lactate production in a p53-dependent manner in HCT116
colon cancer cells. According to the biopharmaceutical classification system, MF is classified
Page 5 of 43
==PAGE:11==
MSc Thesis Project
1.5
Metformin hydrochloride (MF)
as a class III drug, characterized by high solubility but low permeability. Because of this
solubility profile, MF is considered a suitable candidate for controlled oral dosage forms.
Figure 3: Metformin Hydrochloride - Chemical Structure
Hyperglycemia is improved in patients by decreasing glucose production through the
action of metformin hydrochloride, which activates the enzyme adenosine monophosphate-
activated protein kinase (AMPK) in the liver.
This activation inhibits gluconeogenesis,
leading to reduced glucose production and improved insulin sensitivity. Metformin enhances
the formation of the AMPKαβγ heterotrimeric complex, increasing the phosphorylation of
the catalytic α subunit at T172 by stimulating the upstream kinase LKB1 and inhibiting
dephosphorylation by protein phosphatases. In the intestine, high metformin concentrations
increase glucose utilization through glycolysis and lead to excessive lactate production. This
lactate is then converted to glucose in the liver, creating an energy-expending futile cycle
between the intestine and liver. Additionally, metformin alters gut microbiota composition,
which lowers serum lipopolysaccharide (LPS) levels, reduces inflammation, and improves
insulin sensitivity.
Metformin’s effects on mitochondrial respiration are dose-dependent:
suprapharmacological levels inhibit intestinal mitochondrial respiration, while pharmaco-
logical levels enhance mitochondrial respiration and fatty acid oxidation in the liver and
adipose tissue. Finally, metformin contributes to weight reduction by promoting satiety and
increasing energy expenditure [21].
Drug delivery systems were developed to release the drug specifically in the colonic
area, aiming to avoid potential cytotoxicity and organ toxicity associated with oral admin-
istration of MH. Through oral administration, MF is primarily absorbed in the upper small
intestine and has a bioavailability of approximately 50-60%. This limited bioavailability can
be enhanced by utilizing drug delivery systems [18]. Ideal polymers for this system are bioad-
hesive and biodegradable. Polysaccharide-based carriers, such as guar gum and chitosan, are
particularly advantageous due to their ability to bypass the stomach and small intestine’s
physiological environment. Upon reaching the colon, these polymers interact with the bac-
terial environment, facilitating targeted drug delivery. Moreover, developing microparticles
(1-1000 microns) with these polymers has the potential to initiate enzymatic activities in the
microbial flora, which act as a release trigger in the colonic region [20]. The microparticles
could be polysaccharide based, natural polymers like alginate, or synthetic polymer based.
Metformin loaded microparticles as delivery systems are effective to protect the drug against
enzymatic degradation and reduce side effects from the drug [22].
A recent study conducted by P.N. Dave et al. in 2023 investigated the fabrication of pH-
Page 6 of 43
==PAGE:12==
MSc Thesis Project
1.6
Pullulan
sensitive gum ghatti-cl-poly(acrylic acid) hydrogels on graphene oxide (GO) for the controlled
delivery of metformin hydrochloride and sodium diclofenac. The researchers employed a
free-radical polymerization technique to create a pH-sensitive polymeric network within the
hydrogels, aiming to regulate drug release more effectively. This system maintains steady-
state plasma concentrations of the drugs and, due to its enhanced loading capacity, reduces
the frequency of dosing.
The study revealed that drug release of metformin hydrochloride was significantly higher
at pH 9.2 compared to pH 1.2 and pH 7.4, indicating its suitability for colon-targeted
drug delivery systems. Specifically, the pure gum ghatti-cl-poly(acrylic acid)/GO hydro-
gel (GGAAGO-0) exhibited the lowest release at pH 1.2, with a release rate of 3.36 ± 2.2%.
In contrast, the hydrogel containing 1 mg of graphite oxide (GGAAGO-1) demonstrated
the highest release at pH 1.2, reaching 7.17 ± 2.0%. Notably, GGAAGO-1 also showed the
highest release at pH 9.2, at 39.78 ± 1.7%. Meanwhile, GGAAGO-3 (3 mg of graphite oxide)
achieved the highest release at pH 7.4, with a rate of 35.64 ± 1.5% [23].
1.6
Pullulan
Polysaccharides are natural biomaterials that are highly stable, safe, hydrophilic, biodegrad-
able, and biocompatible. They have been widely used in various biomedical applications.
Reasearches have also invasigated the use of polysaccharides for the fabrication of nanopar-
ticles, due to their physiochemical properties and biocompatibility [24].
One such promising polysaccharide is pullulan (Pull), produced through the fermen-
tation of the fungus Aureobasidium pullulans. Its chemical structure is shown in Figure
4. Pull has high molecular weight and it is degraded slowly in the presence of α amylase
and glucoamylase. It can only be digested in the presence of microbiota, and that is the
reason it is considered as a prebiotic. Pull possesses incredible properties, having a high
structural flexibility and being a non-toxic, non-ionic, non-carcinogen, anti-inflammatory,
anti-thrombotic and thermo-stable biomaterial. It is extracellular and linear, and has a low
degree of hydrogen bonding which makes it easily soluble in hot or cold water, and insol-
uble in organic solvents. It is used in a wide range of applications, including as a gelling
agent, coating, and packaging material for food and drugs, in pharmaceutical applications
for targeting delivery, surface modification, nanoparticles, gene carrier, bioimaging, plasma
expander, cancer therapy and tissue engineering. It has been also used in dental care, sizing
agents and paper industry. Lastly, pullulan as a coating has been used in antimicrobial
agents [25, 26, 27].
Page 7 of 43
==PAGE:13==
MSc Thesis Project
1.7
Eudragit S100 (ES100)
Figure 4: Pullulan - Chemical Structure
1.7
Eudragit S100 (ES100)
Eudragit S100 is an anionic copolymer derived from methacrylic acid and methyl methacry-
late.
Its chemical structure is shown in Figure 5.
Due to its pH-responsive properties,
Eudragit S100 has been extensively utilized in biomedical research for oral and colon drug
delivery, and it is one of the most used enteric polymers for colon targeting drugs. It serves
both as a polymeric carrier and a filament-forming matrix [28]. Studies have demonstrated
that Eudragit S100 can release drugs at a pH above 7 [29]. Notably, it exhibits minimal
drug release at the low pH of the stomach and small intestine, while effectively targeting
drug release in the large intestine or colon, where the concentration of proteolytic enzymes
is low [24, 30].
Figure 5: Eudragit S100 - Chemical Structure
1.8
Aim of the project
The aim of this project is to design and develop multilayer nanostructured microparti-
cles for targeted drug delivery to the colon. Pullulan, chosen as the drug carrier for Met-
formin Hydrochloride (MH), forms the inner layer, while Eudragit S100 constitutes the outer
protective layers. The fabrication process involves electrospinning to create these multilayer
structures. Subsequent in vitro release studies will be conducted to evaluate the performance
and efficacy of the produced multilayer sheets and microparticles.
Page 8 of 43
==PAGE:14==
MSc Thesis Project
2
Materials and Methods
Over the past few years, more than 100 types of polymers, both synthetic and natural,
have been used for electrospinning to fabricate nanofibers. The remarkable properties of
polymer nanofibers have established them as an important class of biomaterials [8]. A lot
of polymeric materials have been used, such us natural proteins including collagen, gelatin,
silk, elastin, fibrinogen, chitosan, polysaccharides and alginates; synthetic polymers including
polyesters, polyurethanes, polyglycolide (PGA), poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL), polylactic acid
(PLA) and their copolymers P(LLA-CL) and Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA); as well
as their blends. Biodegradable and biocompatible nanofibers are able to metabolize into
biocompatible degradation products in human body.
2.1
Materials and Solvents
In this MSc thesis project, various polymers, solvents, and a drug were utilized during
the experimental procedures.
Polymers: Pullulan (PULL) with a molecular weight of Mw=200,000 g/mol was pur-
chased from Hayashibara Co., LTD (Okayama, Japan), and Eudragit S100 with a molecular
weight of Mw=125,000 g/mol was purchased from Evonik. Every polymer was stored in
room temperature (25°C).
Solvents: Water was purified using a Milli-QPlus 185 water purification system (Milli-
pore, Bedford, MA) having a resistivity higher than 18MΩcm. Dimethylacetamide (DMAc)
was purchased from TCI Chemicals and Ethanol from VWR Chemicals. Acetic acid glacial
>=99.7% was purchased from Fisher Scientific (Loughborough, UK). Every solvent was
stored in room temperature (25°C).
Drug: Metformin hydrochloride (MH) was purchased from Cayman Chemical Company
and was stored in the freezer at -20°C.
2.1.1
Preparation of polymeric solutions
To prepare the solution, an appropriate solvent was used. The solute was accurately
weighed using a precision analytical balance. The mixture was then stirred overnight at room
temperature on a magnetic stirrer set to 80 rpm until the solute was fully dissolved and the
solution became clear and transparent. For the Pullulan/Metformin hydrochloride solution,
the drug was precisely weighed using the same analytical balance the day after the pullulan
had been left to stir. The weighed drug was then added to the solution approximately 30
minutes before the electrospinning process. Table 1 shows the different percentages of the
polymers, and the types of solvents used in each case.
Page 9 of 43
==PAGE:15==
MSc Thesis Project
2.2
Electrospinning of nanofibrous polymer sheets
No
Polymer
Concentration
(w/v)
Solvent
(v/v)
Drug
(w/w)
1
Pullulan
30 %
Milli-Q water
-
2
Pullulan
30%
Milli-Q water
Metformin
Hydrochloride
5%
3
Pullulan
25%
Milli-Q water/Acetic acid glacial
(95/5)
Metformin
Hydrochloride
10%
4
Eudragit
13%
DMAc/Ethanol
(20/80)
-
Table 1: Polymer percentages, concentrations, solvents and drugs used for polymer solutions
2.2
Electrospinning of nanofibrous polymer sheets
2.2.1
Electrospinning of nanofibrous Metformin loaded pullulan sheets
For the production of nanofibrous Metformin hydrochloride (MH)-loaded pullulan sheets,
a homemade electrospinning setup in the IDUN lab was used, as shown in Figure 6 Prior to
spinning pullulan with MH, a test run using plain 25% (w/v) pullulan solution was conducted
to ensure a smooth and continuous fiber production process.
Figure 6: IDUN homemade electrospinning setup
For the fabrication of the monolayer electrospun sheet of pullulan, the prepared solution
was placed in a 1 mL syringe fitted with a 20G needle, which was then mounted on a syringe
Page 10 of 43
==PAGE:16==
MSc Thesis Project
2.2
Electrospinning of nanofibrous polymer sheets
pump. The parameters for the monolayer pullulan sheet were set to an applied voltage of
12-14 kV, a needle-to-collector distance of 15 cm, and a solution flow rate of 1 mL/hr. The
process was carried out at a room temperature of 20-25 °C and a relative humidity of 40-55%,
which could not be controlled. These parameters were based on previous research studies
For the fabrication of the metformin loaded PULL sheet, the same setup was used as
mentioned for the PULL sheet. The parameters this time were set to an applied voltage of
14,5-16 kV, a needle to collector distance of 13-14 cm, and a solution flow rate of 0.2ml/hr.
The process was carried out at room temperature of 20-25°C and relative humidity of 40-
55%. Within this humidity range, the electrospinning process proceeded smoothly, but above
55%, significant issues arose, impacting the process. As mentioned above, temperature and
humidity could not be controlled.
2.2.2
Electrospinning of nanofibrous Eudragit sheet
For the fabrication of Eudragit S100 sheet, the same homemade electrospinnign setup
was used. The parameters were set to an applied voltage of 12,5-13 kV, a needle to collector
distance of 13 cm, and a solution flow rate of 1ml/hr. The process was carried out at a room
temperature of 20-25 °C and a relative humidity of 40-55%. For the electrospinning of this
polymer, the process was not affected by humidity, even when it increased to up to 70% [15].
2.2.3
Electrospinning of multilayer polymer sheet
The fabrication of a multilayer polymer sheet consists of three layers: the first and
third layers are Eudragit S100, and the middle layer is a metformin-loaded pullulan sheet.
For each layer, the parameters of electrospinning were the same as those mentioned above.
Weight measurements were taken using a precision analytical balance before electrospinning
and between each layer, and the weight was recorded each time. Figure 7 illustrates the
appearance of different multilayer polymer sheets, each consisting of different percentages of
the total weight of Eudragit S100 and Pullulan/MH.
Figure 7: Schematic Illustration of Multilayer Polymer sheet
Page 11 of 43
==PAGE:17==
MSc Thesis Project
2.3
Fabrication of multilayer nanofibrous microparticles
2.3
Fabrication of multilayer nanofibrous microparticles
For the fabrication of the multilayer nanofibrous microparticles, the previous multilayer
(Eudragit/PULL:MH/Eudragit) polymeric sheet is used. The microcutting tools used for
this process were developed on a research from F. Ajalloueian et al, where the process
includes a conventional top-down processing of single-side polished, Si substrates. The final
substrates were diced into square formats of 20 x 20 mm2 or 25 x 25 mm2 [31].
For the production of microparticles, an industrial hot embosser is used (1.5-250 bar),
on a working area.
The first step of the process is the actual cutting, where the sharp
edges of the tool pierces through the multilayer sheet and into the backing material, so
the microparticles are produced.
Then, the microparticles are transferred from the tool
onto a plasticized polyvinylchloride (PVC) foil with a layer of pressure sensitive acrylic-
based adhesive of 10 µm thickness. Furthermore, stacks have a thick aluminium foil and a
polished silicon substrate on which there is a PVC foil are used for the protection of the
lower press plate while making sure of a planar and non-rough surface during the cut and
release. Moreover, a high quality aluminium foil is used as a backing material to minimize
potential deformation of the multilayer nanoparticles, which, later on, at the release cycle,
it was substituted with a thick Teflon sheet, which was used as an anti-stick cushion. Then,
the surface of the tool is covered by the polypropylene foil, so the upper press plate and the
microfabrication tool are protected. [31]. The schematic illustration of the micro-cutting
process is shown in Figure 8. The multilayer sheet of EuS100/Pull:MH/EuS100 used had a
thickness of 170 µm.
Figure 8: Schematic illustration of the (a) Microcutting Process and (b) Transfer step [31]
2.4
Characterisation Methods
Characterization methods are vital for obtaining information about the structural, phys-
ical, and morphological properties of a material. These techniques vary depending on the
material’s type, size, shape, and morphology. Microscopic techniques, in particular, play
a crucial role in observing various haracteristics across different systems, materials, and
nanofibers [32].
For this MSc thesis project, Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) was
used to characterise the morphological and structural properties of the fibers. Furthermore,
the Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was used to identify and compare the
chemical structures and interactions within the different materials, Water angle test to asses
Page 12 of 43
==PAGE:18==
MSc Thesis Project
2.4
Characterisation Methods
the wettability of fibers, and lastly, the µDiss Profiler and the Varioskan LUX Multimode
Microplate Reader for in vitro studies.
2.4.1
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) Characterisation
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) is one of the most popular characterization tech-
niques in both industrial and research sectors, providing high magnification of 1,000,000
and resolution images with a range of 1-10 nm. SEM is able not only to analyze surface
topography, but also it can provide information regarding the chemical composition, crystal
structure and electrical properties [33]. The SEM instruments can be classified to low volt-
age, standard, high-resolution and field emission SEM, which are based on range of energy
and the type of the sample that need to be analyzed.
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) uses a focused electron beam to scan the surface
of a sample.
It generates a wide range of signals, which are then fused and converted
into a visual image. Elastic electron-sample interactions generate back-scattered electrons
(BSE), while inelastic interactions generate secondary electrons (SE). The image formation
and analysis involve these electrons, along with signals from X-rays, Auger electrons, and
cathodoluminescence. The region of primary excitation is determined by the beam electron
energy and the atomic number of the specimen. Figure 9 shows a standard SEM and its
various characteristics [34].
Figure 9: Scanning Electron Microscope [34]
For this MSc thesis project, a TM3030Plus Tabletop Microscope (Hitachi) was employed
for fiber characterization, as shown in Figure 10. This low vacuum Scanning Electron Micro-
scope (SEM) does not require extensive specimen preparation and is user-friendly. One of
its key advantages is the low-vacuum secondary electron detector, which enables secondary
electron observations in a low vacuum environment [35].
Page 13 of 43
==PAGE:19==
MSc Thesis Project
2.4
Characterisation Methods
Figure 10: SEM TM3030Plus Tabletop Microscope at IDUN laboratory
2.4.2
Fourier Trasnform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR)
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) is an analytical technique used to iden-
tify the chemical structure and composition of various materials, including polymers, organic
and inorganic substances, as well as small molecules, molecular complexes, cells or tissues
[36]. Test samples are scanned and analyzed for their chemical composition using infrared
light. Infrared radiation either passes through the sample or is absorbed by it, within a range
of 10,000 to 100 cm−1. The absorbed radiation causes rotational and/or vibrational transi-
tions in the sample molecules. The resulting signal is converted into a spectrum, typically
ranging from 400 to 4000 cm cm−1. This spectrum serves as the molecular fingerprint of
the sample, unique to each chemical structure or molecule, thereby enabling chemical iden-
tification [37]. For this project, FTIR analysis was conducted on various samples, including
Eudragit S100 and MH powders, Pullulan fiber sheets, and two-layer sheets with one side
composed of Pullulan and the other of EuS100. This analysis aimed to identify and compare
the chemical structures and interactions within the different materials.
2.4.3
Water Angle Test
Water angle measurement is a method used to assess the wettability of a solid material,
indicating the degree to which that material can be wetted by a liquid. This surface property
affects the biological response of the material, coating adhesion, and durability. The test
Page 14 of 43
==PAGE:20==
MSc Thesis Project
2.5
Analytical Techniques
involves placing a small droplet, usually a few microliters, of liquid onto the material’s
surface. This technique is quick, economical, and straightforward [38].
For this experiment, the three-layer polymeric sheet (EuS100/PULL:MH /EuS100) was
used to measure the water angle on the surface of Eudragit S100. Videos and pictures were
taken during the process. Figure 11 shows the setup.
Figure 11: Water Angle Measurement, IDUN laboratory
2.5
Analytical Techniques
In drug development studies, in vitro dissolution studies are among the most impor-
tant tools. The data obtained from these studies are crucial for evaluating the dosage form,
composition, volume, and hydrodynamics of the contents in the gastrointestinal lumen. Dis-
solution testing, along with suitable simulated media and hydrodynamics, is important for
determining the performance of biopharmaceutical compounds [39].
2.5.1
µDiss Profiler
The microDiss Profiler (Pion, MA, USA) is a dissolution tester equipped with a fiber
optic in situ UV monitoring system. It is specifically designed to monitor API concentration
in real-time in small volumes, with measurements as frequent as every 5 seconds.
This
method is less time-consuming and labor-intensive compared to traditional techniques [40].
The setup, as shown in Figure 12 consists of a water bath that maintains the vials at 37°C, a
spectrometer, and probes, all connected to a computer for data collection. Each probe sends
UV light through the sample, which is then reflected. The reflected light is collected by the
probes, and the data is used to generate a graph.
Page 15 of 43
==PAGE:21==
MSc Thesis Project
2.5
Analytical Techniques
Figure 12: Microdiss Equipment [41]
MicroDiss Profiler Procedure:
For this experiment, the MicroDiss Profiler in the IDUN
lab is used. The procedure begins with calibration, during which all components of the setup
must be turned on. The MicroDiss Profiler is equipped with 6 probes, and the appropriate
number of probes is selected based on the experiment’s requirements. Initially, the correct
mirrors must be chosen according to the drug being tested. For this experiment, 5 mm
mirrors are selected for Metformin and are attached to the probes.
Each vial is prepared with a cross magnet and filled with 15 mL of deionized (DI) water.
The probes are then positioned near the magnets, and calibration is ready to commence. A
stock solution is prepared by dissolving 15 mg of Metformin Hydrochloride (MH) in 15 mL
of DI water. The concentration of this solution is based on the average amount of the drug
loaded into the samples. As stirring begins, small amounts of the stock solution are added
incrementally, and the concentration is recorded at each step using the software.
Figure 13: Microdiss circular magnet with carbon tape and mesh, placed in a vial.
Once the calibration is complete and saved, the real test can begin. All components must
be clean and prepared. Circular magnets, carbon tapes, and meshes compatible with the
Page 16 of 43
==PAGE:22==
MSc Thesis Project
2.5
Analytical Techniques
nanofibrous samples are placed in the vials, as seen on Figure 13. Each piece of nanofibrous
samples is weighted with an analytical balance and noted. Gastric and neutral solutions,
with pH values of 1.2 and 6.8 respectively, are prepared for the test.
The software is set to collect spectra automatically, and it displays the total duration of
the experiment, which can extend up to several days; in this instance, the maximum duration
was 4 hours. In some experiments, three probes were immersed in the gastric/acidic solution
and the other three probes in the neutral/intestinal solution. In other experiments, all six
probes were initially placed in the acidic/gastric solution, and after 1 hour of testing, the
pH was adjusted to neutral/intestinal by adding NaOH.
2.5.2
Varioskan LUX Multimode Microplate Reader
The varioskan LUX Multimode Microscope Reader (Thermo scientific) is an instrument
designed for researches that offers them a lot of different features, like automatic dynamic
range selection, smart safety controls, integrated gas control and flexible wavelength selec-
tion. It is equipped with detection technologies like Absorbance, Fluorescence intensity, Lu-
minescence, AlphaScreen and Time resolved fluorescence (TRF). The equipment has a tray
holder for a transplarent 96-well microplate (Greiner). The equipment and the microplate
are shown in Figure 14 [42].
Figure 14: Varioskan LUX Multimode Microplate Reader
For the plate reader experiment, two different samples were prepared, as detailed in
Table 2, as well as concentration solutions of the drug, for the curve standard, as shown in
Table 3. For the concentration solutions, firstly a stock solution was prepared.
Page 17 of 43
==PAGE:23==
MSc Thesis Project
2.5
Analytical Techniques
No
Sample
Weight
(mg)
Comment
1
Microparticles
(EuS100/Pull:MH/EuS100)
6.3
25% of weight: Pull:MH
2
3 layer sheet
(EuS100/Pull:MH/EuS100)
6.19
24% of weight: Pull:MH
Table 2: Sample Specifications for release studies (Varioskan LUX Multimode Microplate
Reader)
Each sample was measured and placed in 5 mL Eppendorf tubes. The process began
by adding 2 mL of acidic/gastric solution (pH 1.2) to each tube, followed by incubation
in a 37°C water bath. After 30 minutes, 100 µL samples were taken from each tube and
transferred to separate glass vials. This step was repeated at the 60-minute mark. Each
time, the removed volume was replenished with the same acidic solution.
At 60 minutes (1 hour), the pH of the solution was adjusted to intestinal/neutral (pH
7.4) by adding a predetermined amount of NaOH. Subsequent sampling followed the same
procedure: 100 µL samples were taken at intervals of 30 minutes, 1 hour, 2 hours, 3 hours,
24 hours and 1 week. After each sampling, the removed volume was replaced with PBS.
No
Concentration
1
1mg/mL (Stock Solution)
2
15ug/mL
3
10ug/mL
4
8ug/mL
5
4ug/mL
6
1ug/mL
7
0.8ug/mL
8
0.6ug/mL
Table 3: Concentration Solutions
Page 18 of 43
==PAGE:24==
MSc Thesis Project
3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Electrospun sheets
3.1.1
Pullulan Electrospun sheets
Before fabricating the three-layer sheets of EuS100/PULL /EuS100, the electrospinning
of a 30% w/v pullulan solution was conducted. As shown in Figures 15, 16, and 17, the SEM
images at different magnifications reveal a highly uniform and smooth fiber morphology. The
average fiber diameter was found to be 690 ± 70 nm, with a minimum diameter of 600 nm
and a maximum diameter of 818 nm.
Figure 15: SEM image of 30% w/v Pullu-
lan, x1000 Magnification
Figure 16: SEM image of 30% w/v Pullu-
lan, x2500 Magnification
Figure 17: SEM image of 30% w/v Pullulan, 4000 Magnification
Page 19 of 43
==PAGE:25==
MSc Thesis Project
3.1
Electrospun sheets
3.1.2
Metformin Hydrochloride (MH) loaded Electrospun sheets
For the fabrication of metformin hydrochloride (MH)-loaded electrospun sheets, various
mixing methods were evaluated to determine the optimal conditions.
Initially, Pullulan
and MH were mixed overnight in Milli-Q water. This approach produced a well-mixed and
transparent solution by the following day. However, the electrospinning process encountered
issues; specifically, the formation of droplets at the tip of the needle (Figure 18) led to
solution wastage and a reduced amount of fibers deposited on the target. Additionally, the
resulting sheet on the aluminum foil proved difficult to detach. Several parameters were
adjusted during the electrospinning process, including increasing the voltage up to 16 kV,
decreasing the flow rate to 0.5 mL/hr and decreasing the distance from tip to collector (13 -
16 cm). Despite experimenting with various setup parameters, the polymeric sheets did not
achieve the desired quality.
Figure 18: Formation of droplet at the end of the needle tip
Page 20 of 43
==PAGE:26==
MSc Thesis Project
3.1
Electrospun sheets
Figure 19: SEM image: 30% w/v Pullulan
and 5% w/w MH, Mixed overnight, x2000
Magnification
Figure 20: SEM image: 30% w/v Pullulan
and 5% w/w MH, Mixed overnight, x3000
Magnification
Figure 19 and 20 show the resulting polymeric sheet through SEM images. The fibers are
continuous and thin, with an average diameter of 219 ± 7 nm. Although the fibers themselves
were continuous, the electrospinning process was intermittent, and it was challenging to
separate the fibers from the aluminum sheet.
Using the same approach, Pullulan solutions were prepared and mixed overnight. The
following day, MH was added to Milli-Q water and mixed for approximately 10 minutes.
Subsequently, the Pullulan and MH solutions were combined and mixed for varying durations
of 1, 2, or 3 hours. In each case, the resulting solutions were fully transparent and well-
mixed. The SEM images for the 1-hour mixing period at different magnifications are shown
in Figures 21 and 22.
Although the SEM images show small particles, which could be
droplets, the fibers are homogeneous and continuous, with an average diameter of 222 ± 47
nm.
Figure 21: SEM image: 30% w/v Pullu-
lan and 5% w/w MH, 1 hour mixing, x2000
Magnification
Figure 22: SEM image: 30% w/v Pullu-
lan and 5% w/w MH, 1 hour mixing, x5000
Magnification
Page 21 of 43
==PAGE:27==
MSc Thesis Project
3.1
Electrospun sheets
No
Mixing Time
Average Diameter
(nm)
SD
(nm)
Max Diameter
(nm)
Min Diameter
(nm)
1
Pull & MH
Mixed Overnight
219
7
336
142
2
Pull Mixed Overnight
Pull & MH : 1 hour
222
47
287
153
3
Pull Mixed Overnight
Pull & MH : 2 hours
280
24
323
241
4
Pull Mixed Overnight
Pull & MH : 3 hours
246
59
323
152
Table 4: Average Fiber Diameter, Standard Deviation, Maximum, and Minimum Diameters
for Various Mixing Durations of 30% w/v Pullulan and 5% w/w Metformin Hydrochloride
Solutions
The SEM images of the 2-hour mixing period at different magnifications are shown in
Figures 23 and 24. The average fiber diameter is 280 ± 24 nm. As shown, there are some
signs of drops, due to the dripping of the solution from the needle.
Figure 23: SEM image: 30% w/v Pullulan
and 5% w/w MH, 2 hours mixing, x1200
Magnification
Figure 24: SEM image: 30% w/v Pullulan
and 5% w/w MH, 2 hours mixing, x4000
Magnification
Page 22 of 43
==PAGE:28==
MSc Thesis Project
3.1
Electrospun sheets
Figure 25: SEM image: 30% w/v Pullu-
lan and 5% w/w MH, 3 hour mixing, x2000
Magnification
Figure 26: SEM image: 30% w/v Pullulan
and 5% w/w MH, 3 hours mixing, x2500
Magnification
The SEM images for the 3-hour mixing period at different magnifications are shown
in Figures 25 and 26. The average fiber diameter is 246 ± 59 nm. Although the fibers
appear homogeneous and continuous in the SEM images, some visible spots are likely due
to droplets from the needle tip dripping solution onto the target.
3.1.3
Metformin Hydrochloride (MH) loaded Electrospun sheets with glacial
acid
To avoid droplets from the needle tip falling onto the target, different percentages of
glacial acetic acid were added to the solvent. Specifically, 5% v/v, 10% v/v, and 15% v/v
of acid were added to 95% v/v, 90% v/v, and 85% v/v of Milli-Q water, respectively. The
percentage of Pull is 25% w/v and 10% MH. In each case, Pull was mixed overnight in the
solvent, and MH was added and mixed half an hour before the electrospinning process.
The electrospinning process of 5% and 10% acidic solution was smooth, without any
droplets, and continuous fibers. The electrospinning pattern for this solution appears to be
straight to the center of the target, and it is shown on Figure 29. The flow rate was 0.2
ml/hr, a distance from tip to collector of 13cm and a voltage of 14-16 kV.
On the other hand, electrospinning with a 15% v/v acidic solution did not result in any
droplets throughout the process. However, the solvent did not appear to dry properly on
the target.
The final chosen percentage of glacial acetic acid was 5% v/v to ensure that the pH of the
electrospun fibers did not decrease significantly. The SEM images of different magnifications
are shown in Figures 28 and 27. The average fiber diameter is 154 ± 17 nm, the maximum
diameter is 178 nm and the minimum diameter is 132 nm.
Figure 29 shows the spinning pattern of the MH-loaded Pullulan monolayer sheet, which
is directed toward the center of the target.
Page 23 of 43
==PAGE:29==
MSc Thesis Project
3.1
Electrospun sheets
Figure 27: SEM image: 25% w/v Pullulan,
10% w/w MH, 5% Glacial acetic acid, x4000
Magnification
Figure 28: SEM image: 25% w/v Pullulan,
10% w/w MH, 5% Glacial acetic acid, x3000
Magnification
Figure 29: Electospinning of 25% Pull, 10% MH, 5% Glacial Acetic Acid
3.1.4
Eudragit Electrospun sheets
For the fabrication of Eudragit S100 electrospun sheets, a solution of 13% w/v Eudragit
S100 was prepared using 20% v/v DMAc and 80% v/v ethanol as solvents. This process
produced homogeneous and continuous fibers, which exhibited a consistent spinning pattern
across the conductive aluminum foil target. The voltage used was 12,5 - 13 kV, distance
from tip to collector was 13 cm and flow rate of 1 ml/hr. The average diameter of EuS100
fibers is 495 ± 71 nm, the maximum 587 nm and the minimum 384 nm.
Page 24 of 43
==PAGE:30==
MSc Thesis Project
3.1
Electrospun sheets
Figure 30:
SEM image of 13% Eudragit
electrospun sheet, x3000 Magnification
Figure 31:
SEM image of 13% Eudragit
electrospun sheet, x4000 Magnification
3.1.5
Multilayer Electrospun Sheets
The fabrication of the multilayer electrospun sheet (EuS100/Pull/EuS100) began with
the electrospinning of the Eudragit S100 (EuS100) layers, which were the first and third.
These EuS100 layers serve to protect the middle layer of Pullulan loaded with metformin,
enabling controlled drug release targeted to the small intestine and the colon, as EuS100
does not dissolve in acidic environment.
The second layer of MH-loaded Pullulan did not exhibit the same electrospinning pat-
tern as observed during monolayer electrospinning.
Specifically, as shown in Figure 29,
electrospinning the MH-loaded Pullulan solution directly onto the conductive collector re-
sulted in the fibers being directed toward the center. However, when the same solution was
electrospun onto the first EuS100 layer, the pattern changed. Due to the nature of EuS100,
the Pullulan fibers were distributed all over the target, making it difficult to control the
deposition. Additionally, since all layers have the same color (white), it was challenging to
distinguish the exact spinning spot.
Figure 32: Electospinning of multilayer polymeric sheet
Page 25 of 43
==PAGE:31==
MSc Thesis Project
3.1
Electrospun sheets
One attempted solution was to mark the edges and the center of the target (Figure
32) with a marker and ensure the marks faded during electrospinning. Unfortunately, this
method was insufficient to guarantee complete coverage of the target. As a result, the middle
layer exhibited a non-homogeneous pattern and distribution. It is important to mention that,
in the case of this multilayer sheet, the conductive target has a square shape, which facilitates
the electrospinning process, which was much more effective than the rectangyular target.
The final thickness of the multilayer sheets ranged from 170 to 270 µm, depending on
the amount deposited for each layer. Figures 33, 34, 35 and 36 present SEM images of the
cross-section of a multilayer piece. The layers were manually separated beforehand to allow
the SEM to capture their distinct appearances. As shown in Figures 33 and 34, the left part
consists of EuS100. This layer is more fragile in nature and can be characterized as having
a fluffy appearance. These multilayer electrospun sheets are going to be used later on for
some drug release studies.
Figure 33: SEM image of multilayer elec-
trospun sheet, x800 Magnification
Figure 34: SEM image of multilayer elec-
trospun sheet, x800 Magnification
Figure 35: SEM image of multilayer elec-
trospun sheet, x1000 Magnification
Figure 36: SEM image of multilayer elec-
trospun sheet, x250 Magnification
Page 26 of 43
==PAGE:32==
MSc Thesis Project
3.1
Electrospun sheets
3.1.6
Multilayer Electrospun Microparticles
For the fabrication of the multilayer electrospun microparticles, the multilayer sheets of
EuS100/Pull/EuS100, as mentioned in Section 3.1.5, were used. The resulting microparticles
have a frustrum pyramid shape. The multilayer sheet used for this fabrication had a thickness
of 170 µm. Figures 37, 38, 39 and 40 show the SEM images of the microparticles.
Figure 37: SEM image of multilayer elec-
trospun microparticles
Figure 38: SEM image of multilayer elec-
trospun microparticles
Figure 39: SEM image of multilayer elec-
trospun microparticles
Figure 40: SEM image of multilayer elec-
trospun microparticles
According to research of F.Ajalloueian et al [31], equations 1, 2, 3 and 4 can be used
to calculate the compactness of the multilayer nanostructured microparticles. The volume
for the electrospun sheet is calculated by equation 1, where "Hes" is the is the thickness
or height of the electrospun sheet, and "b" is the length of the base part of the cutting
compartment.
The length of the square in the top part of the particle is calculated by
equation 2, where it is calculated as 27 µm. The volume of frustrum pyramid particle is
Page 27 of 43
==PAGE:33==
MSc Thesis Project
3.2
FTIR
calculated by equation 3 where "Hp" is the depth of cutting tool, and finally, compactness
is calculated by equation 4. The volume of the particle is calculated as 4.9 × 10−4 mm3, the
thickness and the volume of the multilayer electrospun sheet is 170 µm, and 2.83×10−3 mm3
respectively. The compactness calculated comes to 82.7 %.
Ves = Hes · b2
(1)
a = b −2
 Hp
tan θ

(2)
Vp = 1
3Hp
 a2 + ab + b2
(3)
Compactness =

1 −Vp
Ves

· 100
(4)
3.2
FTIR
FTIR analysis was done on MH powders, Pull fiber sheet as well as a two-layer sheet
of EudragitS100 and Pull/MH. The purpose was to confirm the presence of MH on the
electrospun sheet, and the 2 layer sheet, on the side of Pullulan/MH.
As shown in Figures 41 and 42, the identification of metformin hydrochloride is con-
firmed by several characteristic peaks: a peak at 3366 cm−1 corresponding to N-H symmetric
vibrations, a peak at 3150 cm−1 for C-H asymmetric stretching, and bands at 1620 cm−1
and 1500 cm−1 indicating C=N stretching vibrations typical of biguanides. The peak at
1160 cm−1 is attributed to C-N stretching vibrations, and the peak at 950 cm−1 refers to
N-H wagging vibrations for primary and secondary amines. These characteristic peaks agree
with a research that have also investigated metformin hydrochloride by using FTIR. [43].
For Eudragit S100, there are peaks at 1700 cm−1 and 1450 cm−1 corresponding to the
stretching vibrations of the esterified carboxylic group, and are confirmed by a research who
used Eudragit S100 [44].
For Pullulan, there is a broad peak around 3330 cm−1 assigned to O-H stretching, and
a peak around 2900 cm−1 corresponding to C-H stretching. The region between 1200 and
950 cm−1 corresponds to C-O stretching vibrations. Additionally, the peak at 1150 cm−1
indicates the polysaccharide glycosidic bond stretching vibration. These peaks are also seen
on other researches [45].
The distinct peaks observed for Pullulan and Metformin Hydrochloride confirm the
presence of Metformin Hydrochloride within the Pullulan electrospun sheet, indicating its
successful incorporation into the two-layer structure.
Page 28 of 43
==PAGE:34==
MSc Thesis Project
3.3
Water Angle
Figure 41: FTIR spectra of Pullulan nanofibers
Figure 42: FTIR spectra for Metformin Hydrochloride
3.3
Water Angle
The water contact angle test was conducted on the multilayer polymeric sheet consisting
of EuS100/Pull/EuS100 to assess the wettability of the outer surface, which is Eudragit S100.
Figure 43 from the test indicates contact angles of 92.8 ° and 93 ° on each side of the water
droplet. The average contact angle can be considered to describe the overall wettability of
the Eudragit S100 surface.
In general, and as mentioned previously, Eudragit S100 has a fluffy nature and surface,
making it fragile. This characteristic made it challenging to find a smooth and uniform spot
Page 29 of 43
==PAGE:35==
MSc Thesis Project
3.4
In Vitro/Drug release studies
on the sample, leading to a variation between the two contact angle measurements. The
result of 93° indicates that the surface of Eudragit S100 is pH-sensitive, as the Milli-Q water
droplet tends to bead up rather than spread out.
According to the literature, Eudragit
S100 is composed of methacrylic acid and methacrylic acid methyl ester, and its solubility is
dependent on the pH of the environment. Specifically, Eudragit S100 dissolves at pH values
greater than 7 [46].
In a study where they evaluated the hydrophobiity of Eudragit S100 by using contact
angle analysis, they found a contact angle to be 102.2° and 102.1°, which confirms the
hydrophobicity of Eudragit S100 [47].
Figure 43: Water Angle Test on multilayer polymeric sheet (EuS100/Pull:MH/EuS100)
3.4
In Vitro/Drug release studies
The in vitro drug release studies were conducted on three different sample types: mono-
layer sheets of MH-loaded pullulan, multilayer polymeric sheets of EuS100/Pull:MH/EuS100,
and multilayer microparticles of EuS100/Pull:MH/EuS100.
3.4.1
MicroDiss Profiler drug release studies
For the MicroDiss Profiler studies, two different pH solutions were prepared to simulate
the physiological conditions of the gastrointestinal tract: a solution with pH 1.2 to mimic the
gastric environment of the stomach, and a solution with pH 6.8 to represent the intestinal
Page 30 of 43
==PAGE:36==
MSc Thesis Project
3.4
In Vitro/Drug release studies
environment. Initially, MH calibration curves were constructed by adding varying volumes
of the stock solution to 10 mL of deionized water. For some studies, both pH solutions were
used, in separate vials, in order to compare the release in the gastric environment and in the
intestinal environment.
MicroDiss Release Studies for Monolayer in Different pH Solutions
The release results for the monolayer studies are presented in Table 5. Each monolayer’s
release, measured in micrograms (µg), and the corresponding percentage (%) are included,
at different time points up to a total of 120 minutes (2 hours). A total of six monolayers were
examined in this experiment: three were immersed in gastric pH 1.2, and three in neutral pH
6.8, for comparative purposes. The different monolayers are represented by distinct colors in
the table (yellow, blue, and red). As shown, there is an almost immediate release within the
first few minutes (5 min) in both gastric pH and neutral pH, due to the hydrophilic nature of
the Pullulan monolayer, which dissolves almost immediately. After the initial rapid release,
the rate stabilizes with no further significant increase. The maximum release at 120 minutes
is approximately 49% in gastric pH and 78% in neutral pH, which is almost double than the
gastric pH. The corresponding graph is shown in Figure 44.
Gastric pH 1.2
Time
(min)
µg
%
µg
%
µg
%
Average release (%)
5
374.10
48.27
365.39
42.57
423.38
47.02
45.95 ± 2.996 %
15
380.88
49.15
358.98
41.82
422.17
47.8
46.26 ± 3.901 %
30
388.42
50.12
364.70
42.49
423.38
47.93
46.85 ± 3.929 %
60
394.92
50.96
382.64
44.58
429.62
48.64
48.06 ± 3.229 %
90
400.47
51.68
389.97
45.43
432.60
48.98
48.70 ± 3.135 %
120
402.25
51.91
395.46
46.07
432.38
48.95
48.98 ± 2.920 %
Neutral pH 6.8
Time
(min)
µg
%
µg
%
µg
%
Average release (%)
5
537.86
67.95
535.79
66.62
674.07
76.32
70.30 ± 4.29 %
15
546.93
69.09
569.71
70.84
690.40
78.17
72.70 ± 3.93 %
30
549.14
69.37
579.89
72.11
704.20
79.73
73.74 ± 4.38 %
60
557.05
70.37
594.56
73.93
723.30
81.89
75.40 ± 4.82 %
90
567.82
71.73
602.73
74.95
734.40
85.15
77.28 ± 5.72 %
120
574.74
72.61
608.34
75.65
742.57
84.07
77.54 ± 4.81 %
Table 5: Release Data for Monolayer MH loaded Electrospun sheet in different pH solutions
Page 31 of 43
==PAGE:37==
MSc Thesis Project
3.4
In Vitro/Drug release studies
Figure 44: Drug Release graphs of 25% Pull, 12% MH for 1.2 pH and 6.8 pH
MicroDiss Release Studies for Multilayer electrospun sheet in different pH
solutions (EuS100/Pull:MH/EuS100)
The release results for the multilayer (EuS100/Pull:MH/EuS100) studies are presented
in Table 6. As before, each multilayer release is measured in micrograms (µg) with a cor-
responding percentage (%) at different time points up to 120 minutes (2 hours). A total of
four multilayer sheets were examined: two immersed in gastric pH 1.2, and two in neutral
pH 6.8. The different colors in the table represent the different multilayer sheets (yellow and
blue). From the electrospinning process, a whole multilayer sheet was created with a total
of 27% Pullulan/MH.
As shown in the table, the average release percentage (%) appears to be higher than
100%, which theoretically is not possible. This discrepancy is likely due to the lack of control
over the middle layer distribution during the electrospinning process, as both polymers used
were white. Although it was known that the solution covered the entire target (indicated by
the faded marks), the distribution was uneven, resulting in a release above 100%.
Additionally, there is a higher percentage of release in neutral pH. Despite not knowing
the exact amount of the Pull layer, the release is consistently higher in every case, which
agrees with literature stating that Eudragit S100 releases at pH levels close to 7 [48].
Figure 45 shows the average release for both pH 1.2 and pH 6.8 cases. From both the
graph and the table, it is evident that there is an increase in release up to 30 minutes.
Afterward, the release remains almost stable for pH 1.2, while for pH 6.8, it continues to
increase slowly. Specifically, the average release at gastric pH is 189.44 ± 14.38%, while the
average release at neutral pH is 248.34 ± 57.34%. At the 5-minute mark, the initial release
Page 32 of 43
==PAGE:38==
MSc Thesis Project
3.4
In Vitro/Drug release studies
values are comparable, with 83.52% for the gastric pH and 76.78% for the neutral pH. By
120 minutes, the release at gastric pH increases to 175%, whereas the release at neutral pH
rises significantly to 288%.
This data indicates that EuS100 effectively protects the middle layer of MH-loaded Pull
fibers, facilitating a higher release rate in environments with pH levels close to or above 7.
This property is desirable for targeted drug delivery to the colon.
Gastric pH 1.2
Time
(min)
µg
%
µg
%
Average Release (%)
5
188.12
83.52
254.15
112.84
98.18 ± 14.66
15
349.67
155.25
432.45
192.01
173.68 ± 18.33
30
382.99
170.04
452.30
200.82
185.43 ± 15.39
60
388.66
172.56
455.88
202.41
187.48 ± 14.92
90
390.83
173.53
457.37
203.07
188.3 ± 14.77
120
394.29
175.06
459.05
203.82
189.44 ± 14.38
Neutral pH 6.8
Time
(min)
µg
%
µg
%
Average Release (%)
5
172.92
76.78
368.28
163.51
120.15 ± 61.74
15
475.64
211.18
372.64
165.45
188.32 ± 22.85
30
589.44
261.71
388.08
172.30
217.01 ± 63.23
60
640.94
284.57
412.94
183.34
233.96 ± 71.63
90
644.50
286.16
437.41
194.21
240.19 ± 64.27
120
650.71
288.91
467.96
207.77
248.34 ± 57.34
Table 6: Release Data for Multilayer electrospun sheet (EuS100/Pull:MH/Eus100) in differ-
ent pH solutions
Page 33 of 43
==PAGE:39==
MSc Thesis Project
3.4
In Vitro/Drug release studies
Figure 45: Drug Release graphs of multilayer sheet (EuS100/Pull:MH/EuS100) for 1.2 pH
and 6.8 pH
MicroDiss Release Studies for Monolayer in gastric pH 1.2
The release results for a second experiment on the monolayer are shown in Table 7
and Figure 46. The data indicate that the average release is around 47%, which is almost
identical to the previous result of 48% (Table 5), both measured at 60 minutes.
Gastric pH 1.2
Time
(min)
µg
%
µg
%
Average Release (%)
5
415.75
49.89
276.34
38.69
44.29 ± 5.6
15
431.38
51.76
348.19
41.78
46.77 ± 4.99
30
431.47
51.77
352.00
42.24
47.01 ± 4.76
60
435.50
52.26
353.99
42.48
47.37 ± 4.89
Table 7: Release Data for Monolayer electrospun sheet in 1.2 pH
Page 34 of 43
==PAGE:40==
MSc Thesis Project
3.4
In Vitro/Drug release studies
Figure 46: Drug Release graphs of monolayer sheet for 1.2 pH
MicroDiss Release Studies for Multilayer Electrospun Sheets Immersed First
in Gastric pH and Subsequently in Neutral pH (Total of 43% Pull)
For this release study, a three-layer sheet composed of 43% Pull and 57% EuS100 was
used. The experimental approach involved initially immersing the three-layer sheets in a
gastric solution with a pH of 1.2. After 60 minutes, the pH of the solution was adjusted to
7.4. As shown in Table 8, the drug release in µg at 45 and 55 minutes remained relatively
stable for both samples (indicated by yellow and blue). However, at 60 minutes, the release
rate for both samples increased rapidly and continued to rise until 240 minutes (4 hours).
This observation indicates that EuS100 dissolves more effectively in environments with
a pH greater than 7, facilitating drug release in the desired pH environment. The rapid
increase in drug release at the neutral pH is further illustrated in Figure 47, which shows
the average release profile of the samples.
Additionally, the average release percentage for the blue sample exceeds 100%, likely due
to the distribution of Pull during the electrospinning process. While the exact numerical
values may not be perfectly precise, the overall release pattern clearly demonstrates an
increase in drug release at neutral pH.
The release profile of the multilayer sheets (Figure 47) aligns with previous research,
which demonstrates an elevated release upon increasing the pH to 7.4 [48], [49].
Page 35 of 43
==PAGE:41==
MSc Thesis Project
3.4
In Vitro/Drug release studies
Gastric pH 1.2
Time
(min)
µg
%
µg
%
Average Release (%)
20
13.19
4.59
190.89
63.27
33.93 ± 29.29
30
22.59
7.86
197.94
65.61
36.73 ± 28.90
45
32.24
11.22
200.22
66.36
38.79 ± 27.50
55
33.23
11.56
200.81
66.56
39.06 ± 27.50
Neutral pH 7.4
Time
(min)
µg
%
µg
%
Average Release (%)
60
103.16
32.51
280.91
93.33
62.92 ± 30.06
75
106.11
36.93
305.92
101.64
69.28 ± 32.45
100
130.99
45.59
344.64
114.14
79.71 ± 34.02
120
148.16
51.57
346.55
115.5
83.53 ± 32.03
180
192.96
67.16
350.62
116.49
91.82 ± 24.68
240
238.14
82.89
351.04
116.63
99.76 ± 16.85
Table 8: Release Data for Multilayer Electrospun Sheets (EuS100/Pull:MH/Eus100) Im-
mersed First in Gastric pH and Subsequently in Neutral pH (total of 43% Pull)
Figure 47: Drug Release graphs of multilayer sheet (total of 43% Pull), Immersed in Gastric
pH and Neutral pH
Page 36 of 43
==PAGE:42==
MSc Thesis Project
3.4
In Vitro/Drug release studies
MicroDiss Release Studies for Multilayer Electrospun Sheets Immersed First
in Gastric pH and Subsequently in Neutral pH (Total of 24% Pull)
In this study, a three-layer sheet composed of 24% Pull and 76% EuS100 was used. The
experiment involved initially immersing the three-layer sheets in a gastric solution with a
pH of 1.2. After 60 minutes, the pH of the solution was adjusted to a neutral pH of 7.4. The
results of the release in µg, and the corresponding percentage is shown in Table 9
Similar to the previous multilayer sheet, the percentage of drug release exceeds 100%
due to the distribution of Pull during the electrospinning process. Notably, there is a rapid
increase in the release percentage when the pH is adjusted to 7.4, indicating that EuS100,
which constitutes the outer layers of the multilayer sheet, releases more effectively in en-
vironments with a pH greater than 7. This finding confirms the enhanced dissolution and
drug release properties of EuS100 in higher pH environments. The corresponding graph that
shows the rapid release after 60 minutes is shown on Figure 48.
As shown in Table 9 and Figure 48, there is a rapid increase in release when transitioning
from gastric pH to neutral pH. Specifically, the release remained almost stable at gastric pH,
reaching 68.88% at the 60-minute mark. Following the pH adjustment, there was a significant
increase, with the release reaching 115.30%. This result agrees again with previous researches
that show a significant increase at neutral pH.
Gastric pH 1.2
Time
(min)
µg
%
20
190.89
63.09
30
197.94
66.75
45
200.22
68.47
55
200.81
68.88
Neutral pH 7.4
Time
(min)
µg
%
60
280.91
110.30
75
305.92
111.35
100
344.64
112.62
120
346.55
114.50
180
350.62
115.14
240
351.04
115.30
Table 9: Release Data for Multilayer Electrospun Sheets (total of 24% Pull) Immersed First
in Gastric pH and Subsequently in Neutral pH
Page 37 of 43
==PAGE:43==
MSc Thesis Project
3.4
In Vitro/Drug release studies
Figure 48: Drug Release graphs of multilayer sheet (total of 24% Pull), Immersed in Gastric
pH and Neutral pH
SEM Analysis Post-MicroDiss Process
After the MicroDiss process, the multilayer electrospun sheets were dried and analyzed
using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). As shown in Figures 49 and 50, the fibers
remained largely intact despite being transferred in and out of the metallic mesh. The average
fiber diameter of the EuS100, which constitutes the outer layer of the multilayer sheet, was
measured to be 539 ± 34 nm, with a maximum diameter of 581 nm and a minimum diameter
of 497 nm. The average diameter measured for EuS100 before the MicroDiss process was
around 495 nm, with a maximum and minimum of 587 nm and 384 nm, respectively.
The slight increase in fiber diameter might be due to some potential swelling or degra-
dation on the fibers. Despite that, the fibers’ structural appearance and morphology, which
is important for such drug delivery systems and their performance.
There are some minor spots of destroyed fibers, which likely occurred during the han-
dling of the multilayer sheet when it was taken out of the mesh. This minor damage is
expected given the delicate nature of the electrospun fibers.
Page 38 of 43
==PAGE:44==
MSc Thesis Project
3.4
In Vitro/Drug release studies
Figure 49:
SEM image of Multilayer
sheet (EuS100 side), post-Microdiss Pro-
cess x1000 Magnification
Figure 50:
SEM image of Multilayer
sheet (EuS100 side), post-Microdiss Pro-
cess x2500 Magnification
3.4.2
Plate Reader drug release studies
For the Plate Reader drug release studies, both the multilayer microparticles and the
multilayer sheet containing 24% total Pull were utilized. The experiment involved immersing
the samples in a gastric solution with a pH of 1.2, followed by adjusting the pH to a neutral
7.4. The release results, expressed in µg and corresponding percentages, are presented in
Table 10. The associated graphs are depicted in Figure 51.
Multilayer
Microparticles
Multilayer
Sheet (24% Pull)
Gastric pH 1.2
Time
(min)
µg
%
µg
%
30
5.58
3.54
48.98
32.92
60
7.25
4.86
49.25
33.10
Neutral pH 7.4
90
7.66
5.09
65.47
44.03
120
9.01
5.72
67.16
45.16
180
9.28
5.89
88.72
59.67
240
9.82
6.24
181.38
121.98
1440
12.72
8.07
238.66
160.51
1 week
22.83
22.87
-
Table 10: Release Data for Multilayer Microparticles and Sheet (24% Pull)
As shown in Table 10, the release profile of the microparticles is nearly linear up to 180
minutes, achieving a release of 5.89%. There is a further notable increase, reaching 8.07%
Page 39 of 43
==PAGE:45==
MSc Thesis Project
3.4
In Vitro/Drug release studies
at 1440 minutes (24 hours), and a significant increase at the 1-week mark, reaching 22.83%.
Specifically, in one week the release was almost double.
Although the release percentage is low, the stable and gradual increase in release is
desirable for site-specific drug delivery systems. This behavior is attributed to the coating
of microparticles with EuS100. EuS100 contains carboxyl groups that ionize when the pH
changes from acidic to alkaline, facilitating controlled release in targeted environments [17]
[49]. On the other hand, such a slow release profile indicates that these systems can protect
the drug in the stomach and small intestine, ensuring that the release occurs primarily in
the colon [50].
Figure 51: Drug Release graphs of Multilayer Microparticles and sheet (24% Pull)
For the multilayer sheet containing 24% total Pull/MH, the drug release shows a steady
increase up to 180 minutes (3 hours), followed by a rapid escalation, reaching 238% at 24
hours. As previously mentioned, this release exceeding 100% is likely due to the distribution
of the Pull/MH during the electrospinning process. This slow and controlled release profile
indicates that the Pullulan/MH is effectively protected in the acidic environment of the
stomach, allowing for targeted release in the colon. This demonstrates the potential of these
multilayer sheets for site-specific drug delivery to the colon [50].
Page 40 of 43
==PAGE:46==
MSc Thesis Project
3.4
In Vitro/Drug release studies
From the above results, it is notable that in the monolayer release studies, the release
in the neutral environment solution was significantly higher, with an average release of 77.54
± 4.81%, compared to 48.98 ± 2.92% in the acidic environment. In both cases, the release
was almost immediate within the first 5 minutes, attributable to the hydrophilic nature of
Pullulan (Figure 44).
Furthermore, Eudragit S100 has been demonstrated to be an effective polymer for use as
a protective material and outer layer for the metformin-loaded electrospun sheet of Pullulan.
This is supported by the water contact angle measurements of the three-layer polymeric
sheet, which resulted in angles of 92.8° and 93°.
Additionally, FTIR analysis confirmed
the presence of the polymers (Eudragit S100 and Pullulan) as well as the drug, Metformin
Hydrochloride.
The release from the multilayer electrospun sheets in an acidic environment is signif-
icantly lower compared to that in neutral environments (pH 6.8 and 7.4). This is due to
the hydrophobic nature of Eudragit S100, which dissolves in pH environments greater than
7.
Additionally, from the 20-minute mark to the 55-minute mark, where the multilayer
sheets were immersed in the acidic environment, the release increased only slightly. How-
ever, once the solution was neutral, the release increased rapidly, indicating that Eudragit
S100 dissolves in neutral environments, highlighting its pH-dependent properties.
The release data of the multilayer sheets suggest that the initial amount of drug loaded
was higher than the amount observed in the release studies. The expected data would in-
dicate a maximum release exceeding 95%, consistent with findings from other studies. For
instance, a study developing disulfide-bridged nanoparticles as delivery carriers for met-
formin in colorectal cancer demonstrated an effective delivery of the drug into the reductive
environment of the colon, achieving a maximum release of 95.89% [51]. Also, in another
study where they produced microcapsules, they had a release of 95% after nine hours, and
a slow release at the first hour of 15% [52].
The release data of the multilayer sheets containing 43% and 24% total Pullulan/Met-
formin Hydrochloride exhibit similar results. It was expected that the 43% Pullulan/MH
sheet would show a higher release rate. This outcome suggests that the Eudragit S100 coat-
ing primarily controls the release profile, outweighing the influence of the total drug load in
the pullulan layer. Another possible explanation could be the non uniform distribution of
the metformin within the pullulan layer in the specific samples used.
For the multilayer nanofibrous nanoparticles, the pH-dependent properties of Eudragit
S100 are particularly notable. The release of the microparticles at the 1-hour mark is 4.86%,
at the 24-hour mark it is 8.07%, and at the 1-week mark it is 22.87%. These microparticles are
compact and provide enhanced protection against acidic environments due to their shape and
construction. The outer layer of Eudragit S100 effectively shields the inner metformin-loaded
Pullulan layer. Additionally, it is important to note that there is a high possibility that a
significant amount of drug remains encapsulated inside the microparticles which aligns with
the compactness and protective properties of the Eudragit S100 outer layer. Consequently,
the measured release percentages (4.86% at 1 hour, 8.07% at 24 hours, and 22.87% at 1 week)
reflect only a part of the total drug load, with the remaining drug potentially available for
sustained release over an extended period.
In a study conducted by U.D. Shivhare et al., Metformin Hydrochloride-loaded mi-
Page 41 of 43
==PAGE:47==
MSc Thesis Project
3.4
In Vitro/Drug release studies
crocapsules were prepared using various hydrophobic polymers, including Eudragit S100,
ethylcellulose, and cellulose acetate, in different ratios. The microparticles were produced
via the oil in oil emulsion solvent evaporation technique. The results indicated that the most
effective polymer was Eudragit S100, which achieved a 15% release in the first hour and a
95% release after nine hours. These results show that the hydrophobic nature of Eudragit
makes it hard to release quickly, which is desirable in colon drug delivery systems [52].
Comparing this study with this project reveals a notable similarity. In the mentioned
study, the release is slow for the first hour due to the hydrophilicity of Eudragit S100.
Similarly, in this project, Eudragit S100 in the multilayer sheets protects the metformin-
loaded middle layer, ensuring a slow release, particularly in acidic solutions with a pH of 1.2.
As shown in the previous tables and graphs, the release within the first hour is relatively
stable and significantly lower compared to the release observed after 3 to 4 hours in a neutral
environment.
On a different study were they formulated tables by using pH dependent and pH inde-
pended Eudragit polymers, including Eudragit S100, they revealed that Eudragit S100 had
a release of about 70% of metformin in 10 hours, and was only soluble at pH 7 [53]. This
show the hydrophobic properties of Eudragit S100, and the slow release of it.
Page 42 of 43
==PAGE:48==
MSc Thesis Project
4
Conclusion
This study aimed to design and develop multilayer nanostructured microparticles for
targeted drug delivery to the colon. Electrospinning played a pivotal role in the project,
serving as the method to fabricate the multilayer structures. Pullulan was used as the carrier
for Metformin Hydrochloride, while Eudragit S100 was employed as an external protective
polymer due to its pH-dependent properties, making it ideal for colon-targeted drug delivery.
The electrospun fibers exhibited a smooth and continuous morphology, as observed
through Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). Release studies indicated that electrospun
monolayers had a significantly higher release (77.54 ± 4.81%) at a neutral pH of 6.8 compared
to an acidic pH of 1.2 (48.98 ± 2.92%), dissolving almost immediately due to the hydrophilic
nature of Pullulan.
Multilayer electrospun sheets (EuS100/Pull /EuS100) demonstrated an even higher re-
lease (248.34 ± 57.34 %) in neutral pH compared to gastric pH (189.44 ± 14.38 %). Ad-
ditionally, when the multilayer sheets were immersed first in acidic solution (pH 1.2) and
then in neutral solution (pH 7.4), there was a significant increase in release in the neutral
environment (99.76 ± 16.85 % and 115.30 %) compared to the acidic environment (39.06 ±
27.50% and 68.88 %), with an immediate increase observed as soon as the pH changed.
Release studies for the microparticles showed minimal release in the acidic environment
(4.86 %), followed by an increase to 8.07 % over 24 hours, and a further increase to 22.87 %
over one week. This demonstrates that the Eudragit S100 protective layers effectively shield
the inner layer of Pullulan in the stomach’s acidic environment, ensuring the drug is released
in the neutral environment of the colon.
For future research, optimizing the distribution of pullulan within the microparticles
would enhance the accuracy of release studies, providing more precise data on the percent-
age of drug release. Additionally, testing a broader range of polymers as drug carriers and
protective layers in multilayer sheets and microparticles would be beneficial. Specifically,
polysaccharides such as pectin, guar gum, and chitosan should be considered due to their
biocompatibility, biodegradability, and resilience in the acidic stomach environment. Explor-
ing the encapsulation of multiple drugs within microparticles to enable combination therapy
treatments is another promising avenue. Lastly, conducting in vivo efficacy studies using
animal models will be crucial to evaluate the therapeutic effectiveness and potential of these
microparticles in a physiological setting.
Page 43 of 43
==PAGE:49==
List of Figures
1
Electrospinning Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Schematic Illustration of Colon Drug Delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Metformin Hydrochloride - Chemical Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Pullulan - Chemical Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5
Eudragit S100 - Chemical Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6
IDUN homemade electrospinning setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
7
Schematic Illustration of Multilayer Polymer sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
8
Schematic illustration of the (a) Microcutting Process and (b) Transfer step
[31] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
9
Scanning Electron Microscope [34] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
10
SEM TM3030Plus Tabletop Microscope at IDUN laboratory . . . . . . . . .
14
11
Water Angle Measurement, IDUN laboratory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
12
Microdiss Equipment [41]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
13
Microdiss circular magnet with carbon tape and mesh, placed in a vial. . . .
16
14
Varioskan LUX Multimode Microplate Reader . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
15
SEM image of 30% w/v Pullulan, x1000 Magnification
. . . . . . . . . . . .
19
16
SEM image of 30% w/v Pullulan, x2500 Magnification
. . . . . . . . . . . .
19
17
SEM image of 30% w/v Pullulan, 4000 Magnification . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
18
Formation of droplet at the end of the needle tip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
19
SEM image: 30% w/v Pullulan and 5% w/w MH, Mixed overnight, x2000
Magnification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
20
SEM image: 30% w/v Pullulan and 5% w/w MH, Mixed overnight, x3000
Magnification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
21
SEM image: 30% w/v Pullulan and 5% w/w MH, 1 hour mixing, x2000
Magnification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
22
SEM image: 30% w/v Pullulan and 5% w/w MH, 1 hour mixing, x5000
Magnification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
23
SEM image: 30% w/v Pullulan and 5% w/w MH, 2 hours mixing, x1200
Magnification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
24
SEM image: 30% w/v Pullulan and 5% w/w MH, 2 hours mixing, x4000
Magnification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
25
SEM image: 30% w/v Pullulan and 5% w/w MH, 3 hour mixing, x2000
Magnification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
26
SEM image: 30% w/v Pullulan and 5% w/w MH, 3 hours mixing, x2500
Magnification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
27
SEM image: 25% w/v Pullulan, 10% w/w MH, 5% Glacial acetic acid, x4000
Magnification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
28
SEM image: 25% w/v Pullulan, 10% w/w MH, 5% Glacial acetic acid, x3000
Magnification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
29
Electospinning of 25% Pull, 10% MH, 5% Glacial Acetic Acid
. . . . . . . .
24
30
SEM image of 13% Eudragit electrospun sheet, x3000 Magnification . . . . .
25
31
SEM image of 13% Eudragit electrospun sheet, x4000 Magnification . . . . .
25
I
==PAGE:50==
MSc Thesis Project
List of Figures
32
Electospinning of multilayer polymeric sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
33
SEM image of multilayer electrospun sheet, x800 Magnification . . . . . . . .
26
34
SEM image of multilayer electrospun sheet, x800 Magnification . . . . . . . .
26
35
SEM image of multilayer electrospun sheet, x1000 Magnification . . . . . . .
26
36
SEM image of multilayer electrospun sheet, x250 Magnification . . . . . . . .
26
37
SEM image of multilayer electrospun microparticles . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
38
SEM image of multilayer electrospun microparticles . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
39
SEM image of multilayer electrospun microparticles . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
40
SEM image of multilayer electrospun microparticles . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
41
FTIR spectra of Pullulan nanofibers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
42
FTIR spectra for Metformin Hydrochloride . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
43
Water Angle Test on multilayer polymeric sheet (EuS100/Pull:MH/EuS100)
30
44
Drug Release graphs of 25% Pull, 12% MH for 1.2 pH and 6.8 pH . . . . . .
32
45
Drug Release graphs of multilayer sheet (EuS100/Pull:MH/EuS100) for 1.2
pH and 6.8 pH
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
46
Drug Release graphs of monolayer sheet for 1.2 pH
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
47
Drug Release graphs of multilayer sheet (total of 43% Pull), Immersed in
Gastric pH and Neutral pH
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
48
Drug Release graphs of multilayer sheet (total of 24% Pull), Immersed in
Gastric pH and Neutral pH
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
49
SEM image of Multilayer sheet (EuS100 side), post-Microdiss Process x1000
Magnification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
50
SEM image of Multilayer sheet (EuS100 side), post-Microdiss Process x2500
Magnification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
51
Drug Release graphs of Multilayer Microparticles and sheet (24% Pull)
. . .
40
Page II of VIII
==PAGE:51==
MSc Thesis Project
List of Tables
List of Tables
1
Polymer percentages, concentrations, solvents and drugs used for polymer
solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Sample Specifications for release studies (Varioskan LUX Multimode Microplate
Reader)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Concentration Solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Average Fiber Diameter, Standard Deviation, Maximum, and Minimum Di-
ameters for Various Mixing Durations of 30% w/v Pullulan and 5% w/w
Metformin Hydrochloride Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Release Data for Monolayer MH loaded Electrospun sheet in different pH
solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Release Data for Multilayer electrospun sheet (EuS100/Pull:MH/Eus100) in
different pH solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7
Release Data for Monolayer electrospun sheet in 1.2 pH . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
8
Release Data for Multilayer Electrospun Sheets (EuS100/Pull:MH/Eus100)
Immersed First in Gastric pH and Subsequently in Neutral pH (total of 43%
Pull) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
9
Release Data for Multilayer Electrospun Sheets (total of 24% Pull) Immersed
First in Gastric pH and Subsequently in Neutral pH
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
10
Release Data for Multilayer Microparticles and Sheet (24% Pull) . . . . . . .
39
Page III of VIII
==PAGE:52==
MSc Thesis Project
References
References
[1] A. Keirouz, Z. Wang, V. S. Reddy, Z. K. Nagy, P. Vass, M. Buzgo, S. Ramakrishna, and
N. Radacsi, “The history of electrospinning: Past, present, and future developments,”
Advanced Materials Technologies, vol. 8, May 2023.
[2] J. Zhu, H. Ye, D. Deng, J. Li, and Y. Wu, “Electrospun metformin-loaded polycapro-
lactone/chitosan nanofibrous membranes as promoting guided bone regeneration mem-
branes: Preparation and characterization of fibers, drug release, and osteogenic activity
in vitro,” Journal of Biomaterials Applications, vol. 34, p. 1282â1293, Jan. 2020.
[3] Y. Li, J. Zhu, H. Cheng, G. Li, H. Cho, M. Jiang, Q. Gao, and X. Zhang, “Develop-
ments of advanced electrospinning techniques: A critical review,” Advanced Materials
Technologies, vol. 6, July 2021.
[4] M. Nikolaou and T. Krasia-Christoforou, “Electrohydrodynamic methods for the de-
velopment of pulmonary drug delivery systems,” European Journal of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, vol. 113, p. 29â40, Feb. 2018.
[5] A.
Akhgari,
Z.
Heshmati,
H.
Afrasiabi
Garekani,
F.
Sadeghi,
A.
Sabbagh,
B. Sharif Makhmalzadeh, and A. Nokhodchi, “Indomethacin electrospun nanofibers for
colonic drug delivery: In vitro dissolution studies,” Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointer-
faces, vol. 152, p. 29â35, Apr. 2017.
[6] S. Chakraborty, I.-C. Liao, A. Adler, and K. W. Leong, “Electrohydrodynamics: A facile
technique to fabricate drug delivery systems,” Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, vol. 61,
p. 1043â1054, Oct. 2009.
[7] B. Singh, K. Kim, and M.-H. Park, “On-demand drug delivery systems using nanofibers,”
Nanomaterials, vol. 11, p. 3411, Dec. 2021.
[8] D. Kai, S. S. Liow, and X. J. Loh, “Biodegradable polymers for electrospinning: Towards
biomedical applications,” Materials Science and Engineering: C, vol. 45, p. 659â670,
Dec. 2014.
[9] T. PotrÄ, S. Baumgartner, R. RoĹĄkar, O. PlaninĹĄek, Z. LavriÄ, J. Kristl, and
P. Kocbek, “Electrospun polycaprolactone nanofibers as a potential oromucosal delivery
system for poorly water-soluble drugs,” European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
vol. 75, p. 101â113, July 2015.
[10] X. Hu, S. Liu, G. Zhou, Y. Huang, Z. Xie, and X. Jing, “Electrospinning of poly-
meric nanofibers for drug delivery applications,” Journal of Controlled Release, vol. 185,
p. 12â21, July 2014.
[11] E.
J.
Torres-Martinez,
J.
M.
Cornejo
Bravo,
A.
Serrano
Medina,
G.
L.
PĂŠrez GonzĂĄlez, and L. J. Villarreal GĂłmez, “A summary of electrospun nanofibers
as drug delivery system: Drugs loaded and biopolymers used as matrices,” Current Drug
Delivery, vol. 15, p. 1360â1374, Oct. 2018.
Page IV of VIII
==PAGE:53==
MSc Thesis Project
References
[12] M. K. Sarangi, M. E. B. Rao, and V. Parcha, “Smart polymers for colon targeted
drug delivery systems: a review,” International Journal of Polymeric Materials and
Polymeric Biomaterials, vol. 70, p. 1130â1166, July 2020.
[13] L. E. McCoubrey, A. Favaron, A. Awad, M. Orlu, S. Gaisford, and A. W. Basit, “Colonic
drug delivery: Formulating the next generation of colon-targeted therapeutics,” Journal
of Controlled Release, vol. 353, p. 1107â1126, Jan. 2023.
[14] G. Van den Mooter, “Colon drug delivery,” Expert Opinion on Drug Delivery, vol. 3,
p. 111â125, Dec. 2005.
[15] Y. Ding, C. Dou, S. Chang, Z. Xie, D.-G. Yu, Y. Liu, and J. Shao, “Core shell eu-
dragit s100 nanofibers prepared via triaxial electrospinning to provide a colon-targeted
extended drug release,” Polymers, vol. 12, p. 2034, Sept. 2020.
[16] K. Elumalai, S. Srinivasan, and A. Shanmugam, “Review of the efficacy of nanoparticle-
based drug delivery systems for cancer treatment,” Biomedical Technology, vol. 5,
p. 109â122, Mar. 2024.
[17] H. Shahdadi Sardo, F. Saremnejad, S. Bagheri, A. Akhgari, H. Afrasiabi Garekani,
and F. Sadeghi, “A review on 5-aminosalicylic acid colon-targeted oral drug delivery
systems,” International Journal of Pharmaceutics, vol. 558, p. 367â379, Mar. 2019.
[18] M. Cetin and S. Sahin, “Microparticulate and nanoparticulate drug delivery systems for
metformin hydrochloride,” Drug Delivery, vol. 23, p. 2796â2805, Sept. 2015.
[19] K. Arafa, R. N. Shamma, O. N. El-Gazayerly, and I. M. El-Sherbiny, “Facile develop-
ment, characterization, and optimization of new metformin-loaded nanocarrier system
for efficient colon cancer adjunct therapy,” Drug Development and Industrial Pharmacy,
vol. 44, p. 1158â1170, Feb. 2018.
[20] R. K. Kang, N. Mishr, and V. K. Rai, “Guar gum micro-particles for targeted co-
delivery of doxorubicin and metformin hcl for improved specificity and efficacy against
colon cancer: In vitro and in vivo studies,” AAPS PharmSciTech, vol. 21, Jan. 2020.
[21] L. He, “Metformin and systemic metabolism,” Trends in Pharmacological Sciences,
vol. 41, p. 868â881, Nov. 2020.
[22] L. Agüero, D. Zaldivar-Silva, L. PeĂąa, and M. L. Dias, “Alginate microparticles as oral
colon drug delivery device: A review,” Carbohydrate Polymers, vol. 168, p. 32â43, July
2017.
[23] P. N. Dave and P. M. Macwan, “Novel ph-sensitive gum ghatti-cl-poly(acrylic acid) com-
posite hydrogel based on graphene oxide for metformin hydrochloride and sodium di-
clofenac combined drug-delivery systems,” RSC Pharmaceutics, vol. 1, no. 2, p. 357â371,
2024.
Page V of VIII
==PAGE:54==
MSc Thesis Project
References
[24] M. Subudhi, A. Jain, A. Jain, P. Hurkat, S. Shilpi, A. Gulbake, and S. Jain, “Eudragit
s100 coated citrus pectin nanoparticles for colon targeting of 5-fluorouracil,” Materials,
vol. 8, p. 832â849, Feb. 2015.
[25] X. B. Sun, D. Jia, W. M. Kang, B. W. Cheng, and Y. B. Li, “Research on electrospin-
ning process of pullulan nanofibers,” Applied Mechanics and Materials, vol. 268â270,
p. 198â201, Dec. 2012.
[26] L. T. Carvalho, A. J. R. Teixeira, R. M. Moraes, R. F. Barbosa, R. C. Queiroz, D. B.
Tada, D. R. Mulinari, D. S. Rosa, M. I. RĂŠ, and S. F. Medeiros, “Preparation and
characterization of cationic pullulan-based polymers with hydrophilic or amphiphilic
characteristics for drug delivery,” Reactive and Functional Polymers, vol. 181, p. 105441,
Dec. 2022.
[27] A. Hazra, S. Chatterjee, A. Mohanta, P. Paul, and A. Samanta, “A review on fungal pul-
lulan as a natural polymer focusing on targeted therapy for colon cancer and other phar-
maceutical applications,” Polymers for Advanced Technologies, vol. 34, p. 3183â3192,
July 2023.
[28] Y. Ding, C. Dou, S. Chang, Z. Xie, D.-G. Yu, Y. Liu, and J. Shao, “Coreâshell eu-
dragit s100 nanofibers prepared via triaxial electrospinning to provide a colon-targeted
extended drug release,” Polymers, vol. 12, p. 2034, Sept. 2020.
[29] D. Jain, A. K. Panda, and D. K. Majumdar, “Eudragit s100 entrapped insulin micro-
spheres for oral delivery,” AAPS PharmSciTech, vol. 6, p. E100âE107, Mar. 2005.
[30] A. Kumari, A. Jain, P. Hurkat, A. Tiwari, and S. K. Jain, “Eudragit s100 coated
microsponges for colon targeting of prednisolone,” Drug Development and Industrial
Pharmacy, vol. 44, p. 902â913, Jan. 2018.
[31] F. Ajalloueian, L. H. Eklund Thamdrup, C. Mazzoni, R. S. Petersen, S. S. Keller, and
A. Boisen, “High-yield fabrication of monodisperse multilayer nanofibrous microparticles
for advanced oral drug delivery applications,” Heliyon, vol. 10, p. e30844, May 2024.
[32] A. Venkateshaiah, V. V. Padil, M. Nagalakshmaiah, S. Waclawek, M. ÄernĂk, and
R. S. Varma, “Microscopic techniques for the analysis of micro and nanostructures of
biopolymers and their derivatives,” Polymers, vol. 12, p. 512, Feb. 2020.
[33] A. Ali, N. Zhang, and R. M. Santos, “Mineral characterization using scanning electron
microscopy (sem): A review of the fundamentals, advancements, and research direc-
tions,” Applied Sciences, vol. 13, p. 12600, Nov. 2023.
[34] F. Lopez de la Rosa, R. Sanchez-Reolid, J. L. Gomez-Sirvent, R. Morales, and
A. Fernandez-Caballero, “A review on machine and deep learning for semiconductor
defect classification in scanning electron microscope images,” Applied Sciences, vol. 11,
p. 9508, Oct. 2021.
Page VI of VIII
==PAGE:55==
MSc Thesis Project
References
[35] K. I. Masako Nishimura and M. Ajima, “Features and applications of hitachi tabletop
microscope tm3030plus,” Scientific Instrument News, vol. 7, pp. 71–77, Sept. 2016.
[36] C. Berthomieu and R. Hienerwadel, “Fourier transform infrared (ftir) spectroscopy,”
Photosynthesis Research, vol. 101, p. 157â170, June 2009.
[37] Z. H. Jabbar, B. H. Graimed, A. A. Okab, M. A. Issa, S. H. Ammar, H. J. Khadim,
and Y. A. Shafiq, “A review study summarizes the main characterization techniques of
nano-composite photocatalysts and their applications in photodegradation of organic
pollutants,” Environmental Nanotechnology, Monitoring amp; Management, vol. 19,
p. 100765, May 2023.
[38] M. Taylor, A. J. Urquhart, M. Zelzer, M. C. Davies, and M. R. Alexander, “Picoliter
water contact angle measurement on polymers,” Langmuir, vol. 23, p. 6875â6878, May
2007.
[39] M. V. Nikoletta Fotaki, “Biorelevant dissolution methods and their applications in in
vitro- in vivo correlations for oral formulations,” The Open Drug Delivery Journal, vol. 4,
pp. 2–13, 2010.
[40] J. F. Christfort, C. J. M. Polhaus, P. W. Bondegaard, T.-J. Chang, E. T. Hwu, L. Hag-
ner Nielsen, K. ZĂłr, and A. Boisen, “Open source anaerobic and temperature-controlled
in vitro model enabling real-time release studies with live bacteria,” HardwareX, vol. 11,
p. e00275, Apr. 2022.
[41] T. Maric, V. Adamakis, Z. Zhang, C. Milian Guimera, L. H. E. Thamdrup, E. Sta-
mate, M. Ghavami, and A. Boisen, “Microscopic cascading devices for boosting mucus
penetration in oral drug deliveryâmicromotors nesting inside microcontainers,” Small,
vol. 19, Jan. 2023.
[42] T. F. Scientific, Varioskan LUX Multimode Microplate Reader User Manual, 2015. Ver-
sion 1.0.
[43] B. Sabbagh, P. Kumar, Y. Chew, J. Chin, and G. Akowuah, “Determination of met-
formin in fixed-dose combination tablets by atr-ftir spectroscopy,” Chemical Data Col-
lections, vol. 39, p. 100868, June 2022.
[44] S. Guo, G. Wang, T. Wu, F. Bai, J. Xu, and X. Zhang, “Solid dispersion of berberine
hydrochloride and eudragit ® s100: Formulation, physicochemical characterization and
cytotoxicity evaluation,” Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology, vol. 40,
p. 21â27, Aug. 2017.
[45] J. Wu, F. Zhong, Y. Li, C. Shoemaker, and W. Xia, “Preparation and characterization
of pullulanâchitosan and pullulanâcarboxymethyl chitosan blended films,” Food Hydro-
colloids, vol. 30, p. 82â91, Jan. 2013.
Page VII of VIII
==PAGE:56==
MSc Thesis Project
References
[46] M. Amani, A. Rakhshani, S. Maghsoudian, M. Rasoulzadehzali, S. Yoosefi, S. Kei-
hankhadiv, Y. Fatahi, B. Darbasizadeh, S.-M. Ebrahimi, N. M. Ejarestaghi, H. Farhad-
nejad, and H. Motasadizadeh, “ph-sensitive bilayer electrospun nanofibers based on ethyl
cellulose and eudragit s-100 as a dual delivery system for treatment of the burn wounds;
preparation, characterizations, and in-vitro/in-vivo assessment,” International Journal
of Biological Macromolecules, vol. 249, p. 126705, Sept. 2023.
[47] P. P. Rade, P. S. Giram, A. A. Shitole, N. Sharma, and B. Garnaik, “Physicochemical
and in vitro antibacterial evaluation of metronidazole loaded eudragit s-100 nanofibrous
mats for the intestinal drug delivery,” Advanced Fiber Materials, vol. 4, p. 76â88, Aug.
2021.
[48] K. Burgess, H. Li, Y. Abo-zeid, Fatimah, and G. R. Williams, “The effect of molecular
properties on active ingredient release from electrospun eudragit fibers,” Pharmaceutics,
vol. 10, p. 103, July 2018.
[49] M. Subudhi, A. Jain, A. Jain, P. Hurkat, S. Shilpi, A. Gulbake, and S. Jain, “Eudragit
s100 coated citrus pectin nanoparticles for colon targeting of 5-fluorouracil,” Materials,
vol. 8, p. 832â849, Feb. 2015.
[50] C. Curcio, A. S. Greco, S. Rizzo, L. Saitta, T. Musumeci, B. Ruozi, and R. Pignatello,
“Development, optimization and characterization of eudraguard®-based microparticles
for colon delivery,” Pharmaceuticals, vol. 13, p. 131, June 2020.
[51] N. Abbas, A. Rasul, G. Abbas, S. Shah, and M. Hanif, “Targeted delivery of aspirin and
metformin to colorectal cancer using disulfide bridged nanoparticles of thiolated pectin
and thiolated eudragit rl100,” Materials Today Communications, vol. 35, p. 105586,
June 2023.
[52] M. Godbole, “Preparation and evaluation of metformin microcapsule,” Research Journal
of Pharmacy and Technology, vol. 2, pp. 559–562, 03 2009.
[53] M. J. U. Kamlesh Jayantilal W, Rajendra Baliram K, “Formulation and evaluation
of sustained release tablets of metformin hydrochloride by solid dispersion technique
using ph dependent and ph independent eudragit polymers,” Ars Pharmaceutica, vol. 1,
pp. 28–36, June 2012.
Page VIII of VIII
