==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Modular Robotic Lab Automation System for Sam-
ple Handling and Processing
Alan Mansour (s183955)
Nima Jalili (s194825)
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45256352
www.electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
A growing global laboratory automation market has constant innovation that brings new ideas and
methods to the fore. Integration of robotic systems along with computer vision is one such growing
segment in this market as the challenges attached to this technology are gradually diminishing. This
work investigates the current frameworks for automated laboratory systems utilised in the market as
well as proposing its own architecture called Modular Robotic Lab Automation System (MRLAS). The
core of the system is its modularity, which allows for the integration of various devices like robotic arms,
liquid dispensers, and plate readers. This flexibility is achieved through a system model that defines how
these components interact within a unified framework. The physical setup, which includes the layout
and connectivity of the devices, ensuring eﬀicient workflow and minimal human intervention are also
covered. The communication framework utilizes the Robot Operating System 2(ROS 2), facilitating
an easy integration and data exchange between components. The software design section elaborates on
the algorithms and software packages that control the hardware, including motion planning and data
analysis modules.
To create a more autonomous system for the physical setup, computer vision tools are introduced as a
system continuity to enhance the automated system. Volume estimation techniques are introduced and
utilised for detection of liquid level inside a tube. The study examines both traditional and modern
approaches, noting the limitations of older methods like edge detection and the advantages of modern
deep learning techniques. A volume estimating model LabLiquidVision’s dataset is analyzed to find
trends and biases in the model. An experimental setup is created to analyze LabLiquidVision model as
a tool for volume estimation trying different conditions to see how it affects the model. The discussion
concludes noting that the preconfigured drop out rate in the model disturbs the results and compares
the model with and without drop out emphasizing on the need of reduction in variance.
Further more, collision avoidance is addressed as a solution for ensuring safety in environments as
workers inevitably get close for maintenance. Collision algorithms, alongside point cloud generation, is
tested to see its effect on system throughput and effectiveness. The first test is an evaluation of different
path planners is done by having a manipulator use the path planning algorithms to move around a box
using point cloud generated scene. The second test is experimenting on voxel generation performance
by adjusting camera and scene parameters. It concludes that camera resolution has the highest impact
on voxel generation performance.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering at the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU) in collaboration with Molecular Quantum Solutions (MQS) in fulfillment
of the requirements for acquiring a master’s degree in Autonomous Systems Engineering. All research
work and experiments were conducted at DTU Arena for Life Science and Automation (DALSA).
Kongens Lyngby, August 2, 2024
Alan Mansour (s183955)
Nima Jalili (s194825)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
We would like to express our gratitude to Lazaros Nalpantidis, professor of Autonomous Systems at
the Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Technical University of Denmark (DTU), and
Mark Nicholas Jones, CEO of Molecular Quantum Solutions (MQS), for their dedication and invaluable
supervision throughout this project. We extend our heartfelt thanks to Lazaros for his guidance in
preparing us for the thesis work, directing our research efforts, offering constructive feedback, and
supplying us with the necessary equipment. We are equally grateful to Mark for his role in defining the
scope of the project, reflecting on our work, offering constructive feedback, providing helpful resources,
and refining the report. Their support have been essential in the success of this work.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and goals for Lab automation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
System Design
5
2.1
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
System Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Process, Setup, & Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Software Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.6
Operations & Throughput . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
2.7
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
2.8
Extra Material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
3
System Continuity: Volume Estimation
67
3.1
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
3.2
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
3.3
Liquid Level Detector: A Rule-Based Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
3.4
LabLiquidVision
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
3.5
Dataset Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
3.6
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
3.7
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
3.8
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
3.9
Conclusion & Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
4
Collision Avoidance
101
4.1
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
4.2
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
4.3
MoveIt2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
4.4
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
4.5
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
4.6
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
4.7
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
5
Conclusion
122
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
A Additional Analytical Results & Observations
124
A.1 Throughput Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
A.2 Volume Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
B Blueprints: Robot Arm Attachments
128
Bibliography
131
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The introduction section of this thesis will provide a comprehensive overview of laboratory automation,
focusing on its current state and the benefits it offers in enhancing eﬀiciency and reducing errors in
scientific research. This section also presents the problem statement, discussing the challenges and lim-
itations associated with lab automation, particularly the integration of robotic manipulators alongside
its challenges and limitations.
1.1
Motivation and goals for Lab automation
The journey of robotics in the field of laboratory work has been studied intensely and is on the road to
having a big impact on laboratory practices[15]. Laboratory automation is essential in today’s scientific
research landscape.
It enhances eﬀiciency, reduces errors, and streamlines workflows.
Automation
allows scientists to conduct investigations that would have been impractical and time-consuming with
manual processes. It also creates a safer work environment by reducing exposure to harmful substances
and chemicals[59].
Laboratory automation integrates separate hardware and software components together. This inter-
operable technology facilitates the preparation, processing, and analysis of samples, from straightforward
benchtop tools to complex systems that structure entire business processes.
In today’s competitive laboratory landscape, automation is not a luxury but a necessity for ad-
vancement[45]. Laboratories involved in high-performance testing, combinatorial chemistry, automated
clinical and analytical testing, diagnostics, and large biorepository management are experiencing notable
growth in adopting automated processes.
The potential impact of lab automation is evident in its ability to enhance eﬀiciency and effective-
ness. It significantly increases sample throughput, allowing researchers to conduct multiple experiments
concurrently while ensuring the reproducibility and scalability of results[1]. Furthermore, automation
contributes to improved lab safety by minimizing the risk of repetitive strain injuries. Notably, it fa-
cilitates a reduction in environmental footprint by optimizing energy usage and minimizing waste from
experimental failures.
These transformative changes underscore how automation has revolutionized
laboratory operations, making them more sustainable and streamlined.
The robotic manipulators are programmable machines able to handle objects with high precision
and speed. Such manipulators can execute some diﬀicult tasks, keep on working without fatigue, and
exclude human mistakes.
They come especially in handy when managing small fragile samples or
handling large numbers of microplates with consistency and accuracy. Lab automation with robotic
manipulators and robotics devices integrated brings some great benefits but also, on the other hand,
poses some challenges.
Despite their capability to execute diﬀicult tasks, work without exhaustion
for long durations, and eliminate human errors, proper care needs to be taken regarding investment,
implementation, technical expertise, and safety.
The global laboratory automation market is experiencing significant growth, driven by advancements
in technology and increasing demand for high-eﬀiciency laboratory processes. The market is projected
to continue expanding, with notable developments in software integration, miniaturization of systems,
and the incorporation of artificial intelligence, all contributing to the evolving landscape of laboratory
automation[64][42][49]
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Motivation and goals for Lab automation
2
Figure 1.1: Global Laboratory Automation Market (by Product), Share (%), 2022
As seen in Figure 1.1, it is evident that liquid handling dominates the Global Laboratory Automation
Market, accounting for a significant 66.73% of the total market share in 2022[64]. This substantial share
underscores the critical role that liquid handling systems play in modern laboratory settings. These
systems are indispensable for various applications, including sample preparation, reagent dispensing,
and precise liquid transfers, all of which are fundamental to achieving accurate and reproducible results
in scientific research and diagnostics.
Given the pivotal importance of liquid handling in laboratory automation, focusing on advancements
in this area is crucial. The inclusion of robotic arms within the liquid handling process must guaran-
tee eﬀiciency, accuracy, and repeatability. Robotic arms can accomplish tasks both repetitively and
intricately, using a much lower potential for making errors, while still maintaining performance consis-
tently. This robotics-enabled flexibility pushes the boundaries of what is possible in liquid handling
while ultimately driving innovation and improving outcomes.
The global laboratory automation market is assured of substantial growth, driven by technological
advancements and the increasing demand for high-eﬀiciency laboratory processes. According to a de-
tailed market research report by MarketsandMarkets[48], the laboratory automation market is projected
to reach USD 7.1 billion by 2028, growing at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 5.6% from 2019.
Key factors propelling growth include the integration of advanced software solutions, miniaturization
of systems used in laboratories, and the incorporation of AI.
One of the primary drivers of this market expansion is the increasing need for automation in labora-
tories to enhance productivity, accuracy, and eﬀiciency. Such a factor is one of the key driving factors
for the uptake of automation in laboratories in virtually every field, including clinical diagnostics, phar-
maceuticals, biotechnology, etc., where automation is increasingly being used due to its capacity to
produce results at a faster and more accurate level than their human counterparts. The major advances
in the field of robotics and artificial intelligence technologies with great benefits have been able to make
such traditionally based laboratory processes into highly eﬀicient, automated systems.
One of the factors contributing to this market expansion is the growing interest in automation in
laboratories to improve productivity, accuracy, and eﬀiciency. Laboratories in various sectors, including
clinical diagnostics, pharmaceuticals, and biotechnology, are increasingly adopting automated solutions
to streamline workflows and reduce human error. Notable advancements in robotics and AI are gradually
transforming traditional laboratory processes into more eﬀicient, automated systems[64][48][49].
Given these developments, the goal of this thesis is to create a modular liquid handling lab system
incorporating a robotic manipulator to evaluate its potential.
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Literature Review
3
1.2
Literature Review
A recent development topic in automation is the question of modularity in a lab automation system.
An investigation into the advantages and disadvantages was done[45] showing several positives such as
lower long-term costs, improved eﬀiciency, and standardization allowing for easier scalability. Some of
the disadvantages, however, are a high initial cost for the system installation and infrastructure and
a risk of manufacturer dependency as the modular labs can cause a reliance on the vendors creating
them. A total modular laboratory automation (TMLA) approach [53] has been investigated which
saw an improvement in structural and throughput flexibility. A point of increase in modularity is also
the creation of a standard for the integration of laboratory systems. An example of this is SiLa[10]
which aims to create a standard communication protocol for easy communication between laboratory
devices. Due to its promising results, SiLa2[17] is introduced as its upgrade. It uses newer and more
popular concepts including HTTP/2 and “REST-like” communication paradigms. SiLa2 significantly
streamlines the automation and data acquisition of laboratory workflows by providing an open-source,
standardized, and user-friendly middleware framework, which reduces the complexity and cost of inte-
grating diverse laboratory devices. Similar approaches as an effort to make communicating easier with
instruments such as OPC UA[47], PyVisa[33] or RESTful Api’s[12]. They all aim to facilitate commu-
nication and integration between different systems, devices, or applications, particularly in technical
and industrial contexts. While the communication between the system is important, another important
factor is the physical movement of a plate between the different laboratory devices. At the current
state of technology, robotic manipulators in laboratory automation are mostly intended for transport-
ing plates to different laboratory devices[79]. While some laboratories investigate Mobile Manipulators
(MoMa)[32][80][79], others integrate a manipulator into areas such as a modular or standard manufac-
turing environment[51][3]. Pablo J. Alhama Blanco et al. (2018)[3] discuss using simulation approaches
such as Gazebo[41] for demonstration purposes and what technical problems need to be answered from
an industry perspective. Mohamad Mosadeghzad et al. (2019)[51] investigate using the teach pendant
of a universal robot for controlling and designing a simple 2-finger parallel gripper for easy pick and
place functions. Whilst also discussing the potential use of a Robot Operating System (ROS) as a means
to creating a more modular setup due to its inherent modularity. There are several cases of ROS used in
recent times[77][52][20]. Already as early as 2014, ROS was discussed as having significant community
resources, where researchers can shorten the development cycle time, and make efforts for new features
implementation, which will in turn enhance the extensible ability into new applications[63]. Several
papers also discuss using ROS with Universal Robot manipulators[19][31][75][60][52]. While Universal
Robots have their own controller included, it also provides easy integration with ROS for further en-
hancements. However, already now, several ROS distributions have reached their End Of Life (EOL)[44]
meaning that there are no further updates. This is due to ROS2 being introduced. As it is relatively
new, it is not as well-researched as ROS. However, there are already several papers investigating the
use of ROS2 with manipulators[34][6] that look into using manipulators alongside PLC and testing out
different simulation softwares that do not only include Gazebo but also investigate Unity[74] or Isaac
Sim[54]. A comprehensive guide describing the differences between ROS and ROS2 and how to port
ROS packages to ROS2[71]
1.3
Framework
The report is structured into 3 independent modules (see Figure 1.2). Each module has its own focus
and targets a specific topic. The main module is System Design. It is the biggest in size amongst all
modules. It focuses on discussing how a modular lab system can be possibly modelled, structured, and
connected. This is mostly discussed in System Model and Communication sections. In section Process,
Setup, & Structure, a physical setup is introduced on which the proposed system is implemented. It
shows how different components are connected both on the physical and system level. In Operations
& Throughput, a study is made in understanding what factors can affect system throughput based on
closed-loop processes (discussed in Process, Setup, & Structure), proposing algorithms that can handle
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Framework
4
the concurrency aspect when managing different components. Software Design shows how the system is
implemented as a functional prototype on a setup that uses a dispensing device, which dispense liquids
creating mixtures; a measuring device, which can read samples with different mixtures; and a robot
arm that can transfer samples between the devices in a closes-loop fashion.
System Design
System Model
Process, 
Setup, & 
Structure
Communication
Software Design 
Operations & Throughput
System Continuity
Volume Estimation
Collison Avoidance
Rule-Based 
Machine Learning Based 
Figure 1.2: An illustration of how different topics are structured and related to each other
System Continuity: Volume Estimation is the second biggest module. It is based on the need for
predicting liquid volumes in the tubes used by the dispensing device in the setup to ensure process
and workflow continuity. It focuses on studying the different ways to estimate volume, by exploring
two known approaches, namely rule-based and machine learning based. It then focuses on researching
the different factors that can affect volume estimation using a deep learning model (LabLiquidVision),
assessing the impacts by reflecting on model’s behaviour.
Collison Avoidance is the last and the smallest module of all. It conducts a survey about using
MoveIt2, assessing its capability, using the available planners, to generate collision-free path plans
based on 3D point clouds. This module mainly focuses on discussing how this can be relevant for a
system that is used a lab setup, where human-robot collaboration is required.
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2
System Design
Integration of multiple analytical systems is a critical aspect of laboratory automation. By combining
different automated analytical systems into a unified workflow, laboratories can achieve total laboratory
automation (TLA). Through integrating robotic analytical systems in the laboratory environment, the
overall laboratory eﬀiciency is enhanced[24]. Additionally, by introducing a modular approach, it is
possible to make the system more flexible and scalable[61]. A helpful addition to a modular approach
is the Robot Operating System 2 (ROS 2). Due to ROS 2’s inherent modular design, it serves as an
effective method for creating communication between systems[34]. Though, there are a variety of devices
and analytical systems to be chosen from and a decision is hard to make. To implement laboratory
automation effectively, it is essential to evaluate the specific needs and capabilities of the laboratory.
The complications remain with finding a proper framework to unify the robotic systems together as
well as they all have their own form of communication. Several attempts have been done to have a
standardized communication pipeline for devices such as Standardization in Lab Automation 2 (SiLa
2)[17] or Clinical & Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI)[21]. However, it is still a work in progress
and the devices that are compatible are still growing.
Given these issues, integrating automation technologies into existing laboratory setups requires
careful planning and design. It involves adapting the current infrastructure to accommodate new auto-
mated systems, ensuring that all components work harmoniously. This process can lead to significant
improvements in laboratory operations, making them more streamlined and eﬀicient[43].
2.1
Literature Review
2.1.1
The SilA 2 Manager
Building on the advancements in laboratory automation, the integration of standardized frameworks and
software solutions has further streamlined laboratory processes. The SiLA 2 Manager[17] exemplifies the
strides made in this field by addressing the challenges of device interoperability and workflow automation.
This innovative framework leverages the SiLA 2 standard to facilitate rapid device integration, real-time
data collection, and management, thereby bridging the gap between physical laboratory devices and
higher-level software systems. By providing a robust and extendable middleware solution, the SiLA 2
Manager enhances laboratory eﬀiciency, reduces manual intervention, and ensures data integrity, thus
paving the way for more sophisticated and scalable automated workflows in scientific research. This
development highlights the critical role of standardized automation solutions in advancing laboratory
practices and underscores the ongoing evolution towards more interconnected and eﬀicient laboratory
environments.
The SiLA 2 Manager employs a client-server architecture with a Python backend and a TypeScript
frontend, secured by OAuth2, and communicates via HTTP and WebSockets. This architecture supports
service discovery, control, and management, and includes a scripting environment that allows users to
write automation scripts integrating registered services using a Python-based editor. The software also
facilitates workflow creation and scheduling, linking devices to InfluxDB for automated data transfer
and storage. These features collectively reduce the complexity and development times of automation
solutions, making lab automation more accessible and eﬀicient for a broad range of applications in
biotechnology, life sciences, and chemical sciences.
==PAGE:13==
2.2 System Model
6
It concludes the importance of standardized device interfaces for workflow automation. By integrat-
ing an interface as such, it addresses some of the challenges associated with laboratory. While SiLa2 has
a vast list of compatible devices, it has still much room to grow and is continually growing to further
simplify the automation processes of newer and legacy devices.
2.1.2
Towards robotic laboratory automation Plug & Play: The LAPP framework
The paper ”Towards robotic laboratory automation Plug & Play: The LAPP framework”[80] further
explores the advancements in laboratory automation, particularly focusing on the integration of mobile
robotics. The LAPP framework proposes a standardized approach to enable easy device integration
in laboratory environments.
This framework allows manipulators equipped with vision systems to
autonomously discover and interact with laboratory devices using fiducial markers and barcodes.
The LAPP framework emphasizes the importance of industry-wide collaboration and standardiza-
tion to achieve its full potential. By incorporating existing technologies and emerging initiatives, the
framework aims to simplify the integration of automated systems in laboratories, reducing the need for
extensive configuration and programming efforts. The paper proposes an interface system like SiLA
and a vision system installed on the robot to facilitate data extraction and device interaction. The
SiLA standard ensures easy communication between different laboratory devices by defining common
protocols and control commands. The vision system is installed directly ontop of robot to ensure clear
view of the markers and barcodes.
To control the robot’s movements, the paper suggests using a robotic middleware such as the Robot
Operating System (ROS). ROS provides the necessary tools and libraries for robot motion control,
sensor data processing, and task management. It concludes by integrating SiLA, the vision system, and
ROS, the LAPP framework achieves eﬀicient and flexible automation, reducing the need for extensive
manual configuration and enhancing the overall productivity of laboratory operations.
2.1.3
Conclusion
Both the SiLA 2 Manager and the LAPP framework highlight the ongoing evolution of laboratory
automation towards more interconnected and eﬀicient systems. These advancements underscore the
critical role of standardization and innovative software solutions in overcoming the challenges of de-
vice interoperability and workflow automation. As laboratory automation continues to evolve, these
frameworks provide a solid foundation for future developments, ultimately enhancing the eﬀiciency and
effectiveness of scientific research.
Therefore, this chapter introduces a custom modular framework
aimed at standardizing relevant devices and communication protocols, thereby streamlining their inte-
gration and operation. It provides a comprehensive overview of the system’s structure, detailing the
selected devices and their control mechanisms. Additionally, the chapter covers the system model, pro-
cess setup, and communication methods, including a showcase of the custom ROS 2 workspace and the
3D-designed objects that are integral to the system. This structured approach ensures a cohesive and
scalable laboratory automation solution.
2.2
System Model
An ideal solution in the context of lab automation would be a comprehensive system framework designed
to incorporate various laboratory setups in a modular fashion. It constitutes a platform in which various
laboratory devices can be easily connected to each other, combined with additional components that
allow actions even on the physical level to be possible (e.g., preparing solutions, transferring liquid
samples, etc.), and ensure safety of the environment when considering human interaction. The following
and later sections will describe how it is modelled, structured, and implemented as a prototype. This
system is referred to as MRLAS (Modular Robotic Lab Automation System). The aim is to explore
==PAGE:14==
2.2 System Model
7
and assess the feasibility of creating such system, highlighting the challenges and addressing them with
possible solutions.
2.2.1
Modular Robotic System
Any laboratory setup can be modelled as a system of modules. A module is an entity that describes
functional requirements of a laboratory system, defining overall its functions and features. Furthermore,
each module contains a set of components.
A component is a device, software, or any high-level
element involved in the setup. Each component has its own objective. However, this does not prevent
the components from operating on the same resources. As shown in Figure 2.1, lab module contains
dispensing and measuring components.
Although these components provide different services, they
both handle liquids and are likely to operate on the same vessels, which are transported between them.
Moreover, both modules as well as components can depend on each other. These details are abstracted,
since laboratory processes can vary significantly. Nevertheless, this further simplifies the way a system
is modeled, and allows to quickly adjust the system for various processes.
In any case, to achieve
a functional system, a minimum setup requirement, described by critical and indispensable modules
and thereby components, should be defined to model the system. This includes the identification of
dependencies as well. The modelling process can then be automated using this definition. This approach
overall allows to focus more on the end-goal rather on the technicalities involved such as configuring
communication between devices and developing a software system to run the processes. Communication
and software are thus implicit. By abstracting away these elements, automating complex laboratory
processes becomes feasible.
Dispensing 
Component
Measuring 
Component
Lab Module
Safety Module
Vision Component
Robot Arm Component
Manipulation Module
⫶
⫶
⫶
Figure 2.1: Diagram showcasing the modular approach for a laboratory system
2.2.2
Command & Control
Controlling the system can be achieved in different ways. Some laboratory devices can be controlled
directly by interacting with the physical interface. This interface is often in the form of touchscreen
panels or physical buttons. Other devices lack such interface but can be controlled via software provided
by the vendor. They are often referred to as headless devices. This is usually the case when the supplier
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Process, Setup, & Structure
8
company requires the user to have a timed license for using its products. The vendor’s software is usually
installed on a computer, which is directly connected to the device either physically or remotely. It allows
the user to adjust the settings accordingly and send commands to the device using a variety of pre-
configured or customized functions. In many cases, the vendor also provides an API. It can be leveraged
to control and interact with the device programmatically. An API (Application Programming Interface)
is essentially a set of rules and protocols that allow different software applications to communicate with
each other. It defines the functions and endpoints that applications can use to request and exchange
information. The user can call these functions to perform various actions, such as starting a process,
retrieving data, or configuring settings.
An API can be supported in two ways:
• Standalone API: Some APIs are designed to run independently of any specific software appli-
cation. These APIs are typically hosted on a server and can be accessed over the network (e.g.,
RESTful APIs). In this case, the API does not depend on the vendor’s software being actively
running a user’s machine.
• Embedded API: Other APIs are embedded within the vendor’s software. This means that the
API functions are part of the software application, and the software must be running for the API
to be accessible.
If the API is not available, network traﬀic between the software and the device can be captured
and analyzed to study and determine the communication protocol. Based on this analysis, a custom
API can be created that mimics the communication protocol used by the software. Unfortunately, this
approach is neither simple nor straightforward. Moreover, the implementation should not violate any
terms of service or legal restrictions. This may not be easy, and can potentially increase the cost of
developing an appropriate solution.
Another approach is to use serial communication.
If the device supports serial communication
(e.g., RS232, RS485, USB, etc), the user can interact with the device directly through the available
communication interface. This involves sending and receiving raw data through a serial port. The
user, however, needs to understand the specific commands and data formats that the device expects.
What makes serial communication special is that it allows direct interaction with the device through
system calls or basic I/O functions. This can be done without specialized APIs. Still, an API can be
constructed to abstract the low-level details and provide a higher-level interface for interacting with the
serial port. Using such an API can make it easier to manage the communication, handle errors, and
ensure that data is correctly formatted and transmitted. As data is transmitted sequentially, one bit at
a time, over a single channel, this simplifies the process of defining custom protocols for communication
over the serial interface. Special libraries that support the interfaces can facilitate the implementation.
2.3
Process, Setup, & Structure
Robotic systems can manage various tasks in laboratory setups and are often incorporated into ex-
isting workflows. The objectives typically include transferring liquid samples, mixing liquids, stirring,
conducting tests, gathering data, and performing data analysis, etc. Our system is based on a setup
that performs liquid mixing and processing. Mixing liquids to create specific compositions and mea-
suring samples for conducting analysis are crucial processes in pharmaceutical, biopharmaceutical, and
chemical R&D pipelines. These processes combined are essential for developing new products, as they
enable to conduct studies and perform optimisations to ensure quality and safety. The following section
describes a case, arguing for why these processes should be integrated in an automated workflow.
==PAGE:16==
2.3 Process, Setup, & Structure
9
Lab Device
Physical
Software
Server
Server
API
Client
App
Client
API
Figure 2.2: A diagram showcasing how a lab device is generally controlled. There are 3 ways: 1.
physically via a touchscreen panel (if available) and/or buttons; 2. via software provided by vendor; 3.
via a custom app by using APIs or serial communication interface. Purple arrows correspond to serial
communication; green arrows to API based communication; black to internal based communication;
dashed to intermediate steps.
2.3.1
Industrial Case: Formulation Development - Key Process in Drug
Development
Creating balanced compositions is essential for developing drug formulations. The right composition
helps in achieving the desired therapeutic effect[81]. Otherwise, the medication might not work as well,
or at all [36][7]. It may even cause harm, e.g., via increased side effects.
Now, determining the right composition of a drug formulation is far from an easy task [72]. It is part
of formulation development pathway, which is an iterative process based on trial-and-error. Typically,
the formulation development process involves creating and evaluating multiple candidate formulations
through a comprehensive API-material matching process. The goal is to find the best combination of
API and excipients that results in a stable, effective, and safe formulation. API is the active pharmaceu-
tical ingredient substance that provides the therapeutic effect. Excipients on other hand are inactive
substances that enhance the drug’s stability, bioavailability, and manufacturability. After finding some
candidate formulations, they are assessed on their stability and their overall effectiveness in delivering
the API. Then, based on pre-determined product requirements such as API loading, API release rate,
formulation stability, particle size and/or particle charge, the most promising formulations are selected
as lead candidates for preclinical animal studies to further evaluate their safety and eﬀicacy before
moving on to human clinical trials [8]. At any point during development, refinement may be necessary,
potentially requiring the repetition of several steps in the process. In some cases, abandoning the cur-
rent formulation and starting the whole process from scratch might be the only option.
The challenges faced during formulation development often stem from the diﬀiculty in predicting
how the composition or combination of APIs and materials will affect the required chemical and physi-
cal stability, absorption, therapeutic window, among other parameters [2][58].
This is also related to knowing how to properly mix the possible ingredients. Improper mixing can
lead to inconsistent distribution, chemical incompatibility, stability issues, and incorrect proportioning
[11], that can possibly result in discarding a formulation candidate. If the active ingredients are not
evenly distributed, some doses may contain too much (overdosing) or too little (underdosing) of the
active ingredient. Some ingredients may also react with each other in a undesirable way if not mixed
properly. All this can lead to reduced effectiveness or potential toxicity, due to the formation of inactive
or harmful compounds. Improper mixing can also lead to precipitation, making the medication less
effective or even unusable; affect the stability of the medication, causing it to degrade faster and lose
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Process, Setup, & Structure
10
its potency; alter the intended therapeutic effect of the medication.
Furthermore, the mixing of ingredients often requires specific conditions to be met. This means that
ingredients cannot be mixed right away [9]. For example, the order in which ingredients are added is
crucial. Certain components may need to be dissolved or dispersed in a particular sequence to ensure
proper interaction and prevent undesirable reactions. Additionally, the timing of ingredient addition
can affect the stability and consistency of the final mixture. Finding the right balance between speed
and duration is essential to achieve the desired quality without damaging the ingredients. Some in-
gredients may also require specific temperature ranges to mix properly without degrading or reacting
undesirably. For example, higher viscosity liquids require more energy and time to produce homoge-
neous mixtures. Other ingredients may be sensitive to moisture and can aggregate (clump) or degrade
if the humidity is too high. Mixing in this case often takes place in controlled environments, where
humidity levels are carefully monitored.
By utilizing lab measurement devices, it is possible to study formulations with different composi-
tions, gathering evidence on various properties, to optimize them. For example, in terms of absorption,
solubility directly impacts the bioavailability of a drug, which is the extent and rate at which the active
ingredient is absorbed into the bloodstream. Poor solubility can lead to low bioavailability, making the
drug less effective. Solubility measurements are therefore important in determining the composition of
a drug formulation [78]. Another factor that impacts bioavailability is drug release, which refers to the
process by which drug molecules move from their initial position within a drug delivery system to the
outer surface and then to the release medium. Fluorescence intensity measurements, based on fluores-
cence properties of the target drug or a marker it is tagged with, can be used to assess the effectiveness
of drug release [56]. These are just a few parameters among many, each of which can generate numerous
lab tests that take a significant amount of time to execute.
The results obtained from lab measurements are used in data analysis, which, in turn, may lead
to the testing of new formulations.
The data analysis part can be automated using, for example,
statistical or even machine learning-based models [8]. How this is done is beyond the scope of this
report. In our case, what’s important to know is that the two-step process involving mixing ingredients
to create new compositions and performing measurements on these compositions to obtain qualitative
and quantitative results can be iterated by conducting data analysis. This can continue until some
requirements are satisfied. In this way, the main goal is to establish an automated closed-loop workflow
that enhances and accelerates drug development, reducing time costs and saving resources by increasing
throughput and reducing manual intervention.
Creating Compositions
Conducting Tests & 
Acquiring Measurements
Performing Data Analysis
Figure 2.3: Closed-loop process for developing drug fromulations
==PAGE:18==
2.3 Process, Setup, & Structure
11
2.3.2
Two-Step Process: Dispensing & Measuring
The two step process, described in the previous section, is achieved using two devices, namely FOR-
MULATRIX’s MANTIS Liquid Dispenser, and PerkinElmer’s EnVision 2104 Multilabel Plate Reader,
simply referred to as Mantis and EnVision in this report, respectively.
(a) MANTIS Liquid Dispenser1
(b) EnVision 2104 Multilabel Plate Reader2
Figure 2.4: Main lab devices used in the setup to handle dispensing and plate reading
Mantis, shown in Figure 2.4a, is a microfluidic liquid dispenser designed for precise, low-volume
dispensing [29]. It can dispense as low as 100 nL (1 µL) with a coeﬀicient of variation (CV) of less
than 2%, making it accurate. It can also dispense any reagent eﬀiciently and reproducibly regardless
of volume, viscosity, temperature, concentration, making it versatile as well. It uses chips, which are
connected to tubes for dispensing. It dispenses reagents based on patterns, i.e., each chip is used to
fill with certain amount of volume every designated well following a designed pattern. The device itself
can hold up to 6 chips. Extra modules can be attached to it to use more chips.
EnVision, shown in Figure 2.4b, is a microplate reader used for quantitative detection of light-
emitting or light absorbing markers in research and drug discovery applications [57]. It can measure
fast or glow luminescence, fluorescence intensity, fluorescence polarization, high-sensitivity time-resolved
fluorometry, homogeneous time-resolved fluorometry, and absorbance. Plates can be loaded either man-
ually or by using a stacker to which 20 or 50- plate magazines can be attached to. Unlike Mantis, it
supports serial communication.
To control any of the devices, each comes with its own software that needs to be installed on a
computer connected to it.
1https://formulatrix.com/liquid-handling-systems/mantis-liquid-dispenser/
2https://americanlaboratorytrading.com/lab-equipment-products/perkinelmer-envision-multimode-plate-
reader-model-2104-0010-20653/
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Process, Setup, & Structure
12
Mantis Software:
• System Requirements: Windows 10, Windows 7, Windows Vista.
• Usage: Allows to manage dispense workflows; facilitates protocol creation; provides tools for
creating dispense procedures; provides means for code-based control; etc.
It also offers API
service.
EnVision Software:
• System Requirements: Windows 7, Windows Vista
• Usage: Allows to manage measurement workflows; facilitates protocol creation; enables multiple
detection modes; supports data analysis, etc.
2.3.3
Resource Transfer
Both Mantis and EnVision operate on well-plates. Mantis essentially fills these well-plates with liquid
using different reagents; EnVision reads to obtain measurements. To transfer well-plates between the
devices, a robotic arm is used with a gripper attached to it. In our setup, Universal Robots’ UR5e
robotic arm is used; OnRobot’s RG2 gripper is attached to it.
(a) UR5e3
(b) RG24
Figure 2.5: Main manipulator used in the setup to transfer well-plates
UR5e is a 6-degree-of-freedom industrial collaborative robot (cobot) [76]. It is a medium sized robot
with a reach of 850 mm and a payload of 5kg. It can be used in precision-based operations such as
assembly, dispensing, material handling, etc. This makes it suitable for lab-based operations. It can
be controlled by default in two ways: via the robot’s user interface (PolyScope) on its Teach Pendant,
or via scripting (primarily using URScript). There are also more advanced methods that utilize the
robot’s control box, which supports a variety of ports for different types of communication.
RG2 is an electric gripper, designed for UR robots. Due to its long stroke, it can handle objects of
different sizes. The standard fingers can also be extended with custom fingers. All this is more than
enough to a handle well-plates. It can be directly utilized using UR’s interfaces, since its cable attaches
directly onto any UR robot.
3https://www.universal-robots.com/media/1807465/ur5e-rgb-fact-sheet-landscape-a4.pdf
4https://www.universal-robots.com/media/1226143/rg2-datasheet-v14.pdf
==PAGE:20==
2.3 Process, Setup, & Structure
13
2.3.4
Vision for Inspection and Motion
The reagents used by Mantis are stored in tubes attached to the device. These tubes run low from time
to time. Therefore, they also need to be refilled for resuming operations. In order to check whether a
tube is running low, the manipulator every once in a while checks the volumes inside the tubes, reporting
the current volumes. The volumes can also be calculated by knowing how much is being dispensed per
plate form each tube. Yet, by allowing the robot to check, the system can confirm that volumes are
indeed as calculated and the tubes are in place. This method, however, requires to have camera, hence
creating robot’s eye view. In our case, at our disposal were two cameras, namely StereoLabs’ ZED
2 camera and Intel’s RealSense Depth Camera D455, simply referred to as ZED 2 and D455 in this
report, respectively. ZED 2 is used to perform the inspection checks. D455 on other hand is used to
support motion planning. Assuming that the lab environment is utilized by operators, technicians, and
lab workers, obstacles can be introduced during the operations such as tube racks, flask, beakers, or
even human hands, etc. To ensure that the system can operate with these unexpected constraints, it
needs vision. Therefore, D455 is used to enhance the setup with obstacle avoidance feature.
(a) ZED 25
(b) D4556
Figure 2.6: Main cameras used in our setup to support motion planning and perform inspection
ZED 2 and D455 are both designed for depth perception [73][35]. They offer high-resolution depth
and RGB imaging capabilities. They also include an Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) for enhanced
motion tracking and spatial awareness. ZED 2 includes additional sensors like a barometer and magne-
tometer for more comprehensive motion. This can be important for detecting nearby humans and their
motion, which is relevant for the safety aspect of the setup. Both cameras come with robust SDKs that
support multiple programming languages and platforms.
2.3.5
Workflow
The two-step process is achieved by having all these devices work together and coordinate with each
other. This whole workflow is illustrated in the following figure:
The steps in the figure are described as follows:
• 1. Obtain an empty well-plate. It is assumed here that there is a stacker that always supplies
with empty well-plates.
• 1-2. Transfer empty well-plate from the stacker to a liquid dispenser (Mantis).
• 2. Dispense liquid onto the plate based on some specified compositions.
• 2-3. Transfer full well-plates to from the liquid dispenser (Mantis) to a plate reader (EnVision).
• 3. Read the plate according to some loaded protocol.
• 3-4. Transfer plate from the plate reader (EnVision) to a magazine of previously executed well-
plates.
5https://www.intelrealsense.com/depth-camera-d455/
6https://docs.clearpathrobotics.com/docs/ros1noetic/robots/accessories/sensors/cameras/stereolabs_zed_
2/
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Process, Setup, & Structure
14
Figure 2.7: Illustration showing the current setup, which is based on having a dispensing device and
measuring device and a manipulator that transfers samples from one device to another
• 5. Every once in a while, inspect the liquid volumes in the tubes.
It is worth to note that changing and refilling tubes is assumed to be an external process, and ideally
it should not the actual process. Furthermore, the workflow is sequential, i.e., the robot cannot load
the plate reader unless the plate reader has finished processing. Thus, obtaining measurements can be
considered the bottleneck of the process. However, if the liquid dispenser takes longer time to execute
comparing to the plate reader, then this argument no longer holds. This will be discussed more in later
sections.
2.3.6
Schematics
The setup is built based on pre-set requirements. For example, Mantis comes with a software that
needs to be installed on a computer that runs either Windows 10, Windows 10, or Windows 7. The
computer should support USB-A ports to connect with the device. However, EnVision also comes with
a software that needs to be installed on a computer that runs either Windows 7 or Windows Vista. The
computer should also support RS-232 serial ports. Therefore, the requirement is to have a computer that
runs Windows 7 and supports the two type of ports. These software packages are critical; the devices
cannot be utilized without them. They also provide APIs to interact with the devices programmatically.
Now, some software cannot run on Windows 7. For example, ZED 2 SDK requires either Windows 11,
Windows 10, or Ubuntu 22. Therefore, another computer is needed. The task is then to figure out
how to create a system given this setup that controls all devices in a distributed fashion. Moreover,
the setup here can be established differently; ours is just one example. Therefore, the system should
also be generic enough to manage and control any setup. It should also be easy to install. This will
be discussed in the next section. In any case, the way how the setup is structured with all system
components is shown in the following figure:
==PAGE:22==
2.3 Process, Setup, & Structure
15
Computer 2
Windows 7
Lab Device Services
Mantis Software
EnVision Software
Mantis Service Client
EnVision Service Client
Computer 1
Ubuntu 22.04 LTS (Jammy Jellyfish)
System Commander
LabLiquidVision
UR5e Robot Arm
Robot Commander
Manipulation
Control
3D Perception
Motion Planning
Manipulator
Vendor Software
RG2 Gripper
ZED 2 Camera
D455 Camera
Mantis
Liquid Dispenser
EnVision
Multilabel Plate Reader
Ethernet
USB-A
USB-C
Ethernet
RS-232
USB-B
Robot Driver
ROS 2 (Iron Irwini)
Camera Drivers
Figure 2.8: Setup overview with all components involved
Some of the components in the diagram are not introduced; they will be introduced in later sec-
tions. Nevertheless, the purpose here is to show the overall structure and how all components involved
are connected. Computer 1 is the main computer. It controls every aspect of the system. It sends
commands through System Commander to the lab devices via Computer 2 by using the service clients
(Mantis Service Client and EnVision Service Client). It runs Ubuntu 22.04, since it uses ROS 2 to
communicate with the manipulator. It also uses the cameras by utilising their drivers. For ROS 2
integration, Robot Commander, which manages the manipulation aspect of the system, uses ZED 2’s
ROS 2 wrapper, which serves as an interface to camera’s main driver.
The component diagram below also shows what IP addresses Computer 1, Computer 2, Robot Arm
are using:
Computer 1
192.68.0.1
192.68.1.1
Computer 2
192.68.1.2
Robot Arm
192.68.0.2
TCP/IP
TCP/IP
Figure 2.9: Component diagram illustrating configuration details of the network that connects different
devices from the setup
Now, different devices use different port for communication. Ideally, for a laboratory setup, the
computer used should support the same ports. In our case, the following communication ports are
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Process, Setup, & Structure
16
observed: Ethernet, USB-A, USB-B, USB-C, and RS-232 (Serial). They are also the most commonly
used.
Different standard versions also exist, that define the capabilities and performance of connections. For
example, USB 3.1 offers the highest data transfer speed at 10 Gbps, followed by USB 3.0 at 5 Gbps,
and USB 2.0 at 480 Mbps. All USB versions are backward compatible. USB 3.1 device can be used
with a USB 2.0 port, but the data transfer speed will be limited to the maximum speed of the USB 2.0
port. USB 3.1 can also use various connector types, including USB-A, USB-B, and USB-C. Despite this
being considered beyond the scope of this report, it may be deemed critical when data transfer speed
is an important factor, which directly impacts the system’s throughput.
2.3.7
Modularity
From a system model perspective, the setup can be illustrated as in the following figure:
Computing System
Modular Robotic System
Dispensing 
Component
Measuring 
Component
Lab Module
Safety Module
Vision Component
Robot Arm Component
Manipulation Module
⫶
⫶
⫶
AI System
(Cloud Based)
Main Computer
Solubility 
Prediction Model
⫶
Figure 2.10: Diagram showcasing the modular approach for the laboratory
This diagram shows how different components are categorised into modules. The modular robotic
system, as already described in Section 2.2.1, comprises various modules designed to perform specific
laboratory tasks. It is divided into three sub-modules: lab module, manipulation module, and safety
module. The system is not limited to these modules only. If there is a component that adds a new
feature to the system and fits into a unique category, a new module can be added with that component
as its entity. In any case, the lab module contains two components, namely dispensing component and
measuring component. Additional component devices, such as shakers or other plate-handling devices
can also be added to the system. The manipulation module includes a robot arm component. There
can be several identical components, i.e., several robot arm components. The nature of tasks these
components perform is not known. Therefore, the system allows some components, such as robot arm
here, to change its roles and responsibilities. This applies in other modules as well. Furthermore, the
safety module contains vision component. Vision can be achieved using cameras, which is the case in
our setup. However, other technologies are also used for vision-related tasks such as LiDAR, infrared
sensors, etc. This module can also contain other safety components that involve different technologies.
For example, a monitoring system of temperature, humidity, and gas levels can be used. Now, since one
camera is used for inspection in the setup and attached on the robot arm, the system allows therefore for
components in one module to utilize components in another. This is facilitated by the main computer in
the computing system. This module in general ensures safety by providing feedback to during operations
to ensure process continuity. The computing system is used to control the modular robotic system as
==PAGE:24==
2.4 Communication
17
well as other systems, if they exist. It consists of several computers, with one computer being the
main one and the rest being its children. The main computer can utilize other computers by calling the
services they provide. This is reflected in the interaction between Computer 1 and Computer 2 shown in
Figure 2.8. Thus, there is bidirectional communication between the computing system and the modular
robotic system. The AI system here is an example of another system that could be utilized in the setup.
One of its components can be based a cloud-based solution that offers services using advanced machine
learning models and data analytics tools (e.g., solubility prediction models). This can be relevant for
analysing the measurements obtained from the measuring module to decide on future actions. Now,
the the interaction between these components creates a high-level workflow where data flow between
the different parts of the system:
• The modular robotic system performs the physical tasks such as dispensing, measuring, and
handling samples, etc.
• The computing system manages these tasks by processing inputs, executing control commands,
and coordinating the activities of the robotic components.
• The AI system provides advanced analytical capabilities by processing data in the cloud and
sending insights back to the computing system.
This modular and integrated approach ensures a high degree of automation and eﬀiciency in labo-
ratory operations.
2.4
Communication
Implicit communication can significantly enhance eﬀiciency, scalability, and robustness of the system. It
can support system’s modularity, where entities can be easily mapped into modules, which can in turn
be designed, structured, arranged, and appropriately connected, in terms of roles and responsibilities
of each involved entity, identifying dependencies, based on any given set of requirements. By analyzing
how entities can communicate, effective methods for data exchange and synchronization are identified.
This involves exploring common overlay topologies and communication paradigms.
2.4.1
Interaction Models and System Topology
In a typical laboratory setup, operators often require the ability to control various devices from a single
interface. This need arises primarily due to the following reasons:
1. Eﬀiciency and Time Savings: Centralized control reduces the time spent switching between
different devices and interfaces, allowing operators to manage tasks more quickly and eﬀiciently.
2. Improved Accuracy and Consistency: A single control system can ensure that all devices
operate under the same protocols and standards, reducing the risk of errors and inconsistencies.
3. Enhanced Data Management: Centralized systems can simplify data collection and analysis,
making it easier to monitor and record results, which is crucial for maintaining accurate records
and ensuring compliance with regulatory standards.
4. Ease of Training and Use: Training staff to use one integrated system is simpler and more
cost-effective than training them on multiple different systems.
5. Scalability and Flexibility: Centralized control systems can be more easily scaled and adapted
to meet the changing needs of the laboratory, whether that involves adding new devices or updating
existing ones.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Communication
18
Thus, for any system that can satisfy these needs, it should have the following characteristics: cen-
tralized, interoperable, scalable, reliable, customisable, user-friendly. In our case, this depends on how
different modules and components interact with each other.
Now, any simple experiment conducted in a laboratory can be based on a procedure list, given that
everything required is available (e.g., raw materials, equipment, instruments, means of transporting
samples, etc). Now, this list can be translated into a script and executed to run an experiment. This
script would essentially contain a list of utilized commands. These commands are used to launch some
processes that activate the corresponding components in the system. For example, command A invokes
robotic manipulator R to transfer sample S12 to spot SP1. A subsequent command B invokes measuring
device M to analyse the sample. These commands can also be formulated in terms of goals. If some
goals are of higher order, e.g., prepare samples for process P1, they can generate a set of tasks that
are handled by other entities. These tasks can then be mapped to commands supported only by those
entities. For example, prepare samples for process P1, can hypothetically generate two tasks: 1:pick an
empty vessel and place under the filling machine and 2:fill target vessel with liquid. These tasks can be
handled by invoking methods on another machine that controls a set of laboratory devices. Thus, it is
possible to deduce the following:
• Experiment procedures can be translated into a set of tasks that are handled by the available
methods.
• Complex tasks can be split into a number of subtasks that each in turn can be split into a number
of subtasks, etc.
Based on these conclusions, a suitable paradigm for the system is remote invocation.
The key
components in this paradigm are stub and skeleton in the client-server model: the stub acts as a proxy
on the client side, while the skeleton is on the server side, handling the actual method invocation.
Commands are executed as methods by the server. As for hierarchical command passing, hierarchical
overlay topology becomes appealing when considering the overall architecture of system. Everything
can be controlled from the root. It is also extensible allowing more leaves to grow, i.e., more modules
can be easily added.
2.4.1.1
Remote Invocation
There are three main types of communication paradigms:
• Direct communication:
– Interprocess Communication allows processes in a distributed system to communicate
with each other and synchronize their actions. It is achieved by message-passing, sockets,
etc.
– Remote Invocation involves a two-way exchange between communicating entities, resulting
in the execution of a remote operation (procedure or method).
It is the object-oriented
equivalent of Remote Procedure Calls (RPC).
• Indirect Communication involves communication via a third entity, facilitating a high degree
of decoupling between senders and receivers. This is achieved by tuples in tuple spaces, publish-
subscribe model, distributed shared memory (DSM), etc.
==PAGE:26==
2.4 Communication
19
A
E
B
C
D
Figure 2.11: Remote invocation connecting 3 processes. Dashed arrows correspond to remote invoca-
tions; solid arrows to local invocations.
Remote invocation paradigm can be adopted by a centralized distributed system that uses client-
server model for interaction. Remote objects are instantiated and managed by servers, whose methods
are remotely invoked by clients. For example, client’s request to invoke a method of an object is sent
in a message to a server managing the object. The server executes the object’s method after accepting
the request, and the result is sent back to the client in a separate message. Remote method invocations
occur across different processes, whether in the same machine or not, only if access is given to object’s
remote object reference. Moreover, every remote object has a remote interface. It defines the methods
that can be invoked remotely. This ensures encapsulation, because object’s state can then only be
accessed through its own public methods. This mechanism would protect data and maintain control at
different layers of the system by preventing unauthorized access and modification, and ensuring that
any instantiated remote object manages its own state and behavior. However, access synchronization is
not implicit across different processes; thus, concurrent access is not inherently restricted. For instance,
concurrent remote method invocations can lead to simultaneous access to an object. This can lead to
potential conflicts in access. Nevertheless, since an object’s state is only accessible through object’s
methods, they can be implemented with appropriate synchronization mechanism to safeguard against
restricted access. They might use synchronization primitives like condition variables to protect their
instance variables.
In our case, all methods are synchronized, i.e., only one process can execute a
method at a time. If an external process calls the method while it is executing, it shall wait until the
execution is done. To create a cascading effect using a series of invocations across a network, objects
in servers are allowed to invoke methods of remote objects instantiated in other servers. Objects can
be replicated and migrated when needed (for instance, to address fault tolerance and availability). In
Figure 2.11, there are different objects, namely A, B, C, D, and E, residing in 3 different processes. The
objects B and E are remote objects. According to our description above, a remote object reference for
object B must be available to object A, such that object A can invoke the methods of object B. The
same applies to the relationship between objects D and E. It is worth to note that objects A and D are
considered to be local objects. But since they both have a reference to some remote object, they can
directly affect the processes that host them. These objects are referred to as port objects. Moreover,
both objects B and E should have a remote interface to know what methods can be remotely invoked.
This is true for local invocations as well. All objects can receive local invocations (from other objects),
only if their object references are provided. Object C is a local object. In this case, object B must have
a reference to object C for instance.
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Communication
20
2.4.1.2
Hierarchical System Topology
There are 4 common overlay topologies when considering network design: Centralized, Hierarchical,
Decentralized, Hybrid (Centralized + Decentralized). Overlay topologies refer to the logical
structure of a network that is built on top of another network. The nodes in an overlay network are con-
nected by virtual or logical links, which correspond to paths through the underlying physical network.
Overlay networks are by design independent of the underlying physical network. This means an overlay
network can span multiple types of physical connections, ignoring the specifics of each connection. The
virtual links are constructed using services. These services are essentially remote objects that are used
to establish a unified communication structure that is abstracted from the physical layer.
To evaluate overlay topologies, there are 5 aspects that need to be considered:
• Manageability: How easy is it to maintain continuous operation?
• Information Coherence: How reliable is the information being communicated?
• Extensibility: How easy is it to expand the system?
• Fault Tolerance: How effective can it handle failures?
• Censorship: How diﬀicult is it to shut down the system?
The different system topologies offer varying degrees of manageability, information coherence, exten-
sibility, fault tolerance, and resistance to censorship. Centralized systems are easy to manage and have
coherent information due to their singular control point, but they lack extensibility, have a single point
of failure, and are easy to censor. Hierarchical systems introduce a chain of authority which can im-
prove manageability and potentially information coherence through cache consistency, but they remain
vulnerable at the root level. Nevertheless, this is not an issue in small-scaled laboratory setups. Being
able to add more leaves and rebalance when needed also improves extensibility. Decentralized systems,
while diﬀicult to manage and potentially unreliable due to the multitude of owners and peers, excel
in extensibility, fault tolerance through redundancy, and resistance to censorship. The combination of
centralized and decentralized topologies aims to retain the openness and redundancy of decentralized
systems while improving upon information coherence. Yet, the last two are more suitable for other
setups that target independent peers.
Thus, if laboratory devices involved in a setup can be controlled using a custom app using APIs, and
in turn this app is controlled by another root app, the topology of a system, assumed to hierarchical,
can be illustrated as follows:
Figure 2.12: Hierarchical Topology
==PAGE:28==
2.4 Communication
21
Dispensing 
Component
Measuring 
Component
Vision Component
Robot Arm Component
Main Computer
Prediction 
Component
Cloud Computing 
Service
Computer
Figure 2.13: System Topology
The main computer is responsible of running the whole system. The other computer involved is
only responsible of running the lab devices. This is relevant as some devices require installing vendor
software with a valid license on a certain operating system. The APIs are usually embedded within the
vendor’s software. Therefore, if the root computer has an operating system that is incompatible with
the vendor’s software, another computer or VM may be required. Thus, it is worth to note that any
component involved would most likely need a computing resource before using it in the system. Such
resource combined with any other entity is referred to as pseudo-module. These pseudo-modules are
designated with colored polygons in Figure 2.13. The components will be discussed in detail later in
the report.
2.4.2
Device Control: Robot Manipulator
This section explores the methods and technologies used to control the chosen robot manipulator. It
begins by introducing the manipulator and its capabilities and then how manipulation is achieved.
2.4.2.1
Manipulator
There are several ways to communicate with UR5e such as ROS 2 or RTDE. ROS 2 uses Data Distri-
bution Service (DDS) as its communication pipeline for its nodes. Nodes are executed code utilizing
ROS. There are three main ways of communicating with Nodes.
• Publisher/Subscriber
• Service client
• Action client
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Communication
22
The simple publisher/subscriber architecture allows nodes to send or receive data. These individual
communication pipelines are defined as topics. A node can publish a topic, or it can subscribe to one.
The publisher can send topics to multiple subscribers, making it scalable.
The service client is a synchronous method of requesting a call and awaiting the result. This is
particularily useful for actions that require a reply.
The action client is an asynchronous method of requesting a call with constant feedback and can be
preempted.
A manipulator controller is not inherent in ROS 2, therefore, in combination of these three methods,
it is possible to manipulate a robotic arm using the ROS 2 control[66]. ROS 2 control is a framework
designed to create a standardized interface for controlling a variety of robotic hardware. It utilises the
aforementioned communication methods to interact with the UR hardware interface
Figure 2.14: ROS 2 architecture for controlling a Universal Robot manipulator
Figure 2.14 shows how the ros2 controllers communicates with different nodes with the UR hardware.
A simple communication pipeline between the Joint Trajectory Controller and Forward Position
Controller is the Publisher/Subscriber method as a means to send continuous position and trajectory
commands to the UR hardware. The Gripper Controller is customised to control the IO dedicated
for the gripper is a simple discrete action that turns the IO signal on or off. Therefore, a Service client
is used as the communication pipeline is ideal for doing this and awaiting confirmation.
The UR hardware acts the bridge, interpreting and relaying commands from the ROS2 control nodes
to the actual hardware and vice versa, ensuring the hardware’s state is continuously updated Universal
robot has its own inherint controller that is utilized using their Real-Time Data Exchange (RTDE)[65]
communication pipeline. RTDE has three different components to it
• RTDE Receive interface
• RTDE Control interface
• RTDE IO interface
==PAGE:30==
2.5 Software Design
23
RTDE Receive
Interface
RTDE Control
Interface
RTDE IO Interface
RTDE
C++ / Python
application
Figure 2.15: Overall architecture of RTDE
As shown in Figure 2.15, it RTDE Receive sends information indicated by the orange dependency
arrow which is used to receive data the robot. RTDE Control is used for moving the robot and utility
functions indicated by green arrow and RTDE IO controls the inputs and outputs of the robot indicated
by the blue arrow.
By using either a C++ or Python script, it is possible to use this communication pipeline to control
and receive information about the robot manipulator.
2.5
Software Design
The software engineering aspect of system design outlines how the system should be implemented.
Most importantly, it allows for examining the integration of various components, detailing the roles of
individual modules, their interactions, and how they are enabled. This section will therefore discuss
how different system components can be implemented and integrated into a software framework.
2.5.1
Lab Device Service Client
As already discussed in Section 2.2.2, communicating with the devices pragmatically is either achieved
by utilizing the API provided or by interacting directly through the communication interface via serial
communication. In MRLAS, this interaction is facilitated by an instantiated service client object.
Computer
Vendor Software
Service Client
API
«Physical»
Lab Device
«uses»
«communicates»
Figure 2.16: Component diagram illustrating lab device interaction dependencies
The implementation details are encapsulated within the object, ensuring that the user interacts
solely through method calls provided by the object. In case of remote interaction, the methods the user
can use are defined in a remote interface in a remote object. It is worth to note that the APIs can also
be used directly; however, function calls are often asynchronous, in which case the user should handle
==PAGE:31==
2.5 Software Design
24
responses, exceptions, and errors manually. Therefore, a service based approach provides a simpler
interfacing method for laboratory operators. Now, each object is responsible of providing interaction
service with a single device only. This means that each device needs its own service client. To create a
comprehensive framework, these service clients can be organized into a library, making it easy for users
to locate and utilize the necessary services. Such framework can also provide lab automation routines
to enable rapid development of new operations required in different workflows.
2.5.1.1
Mantis Service Client
C
Client
binding: BasicHttpBinding
address: EndpointAddress
Client(ip: string)
ExecuteDispenseList(directory: string, dispenseListFile: string): void
ExecuteWashAll(): void
GetStatusWithTimeOut(timeout: int): void
GetLastDispensedPosition(): void
StopDispense(): void
HomingPosition(): void
ClearError(): void -WaitHardwareBusy(exeTime: int, printPosition: bool): void
CheckServerError(proxy: ILiquidDispenserService): bool
OnUnknownError(errorMessage: string): void
C
BasicHttpBinding
C
EndpointAddress
C
LiquidDispenserServiceClient
LoadDispenseList(dispenseListPath: string): void
GetDispenseListInfo(): DispenseListInfo
GetStatus(): DispenseStatus
Run(): void
WashAll(): void
Stop(): void
HomeArms(): void
ClearError(): void
GetLastDispensedWellName(): string
GetAppErrorMessages(): string[]
GetStatusBlocking(): DispenseStatus
GetStatusBlockingWithTimeout(timeout: int): DispenseStatus
C
DispenseListInfo
EstimatedExecutionTime: long
E
DispenseStatus
READY_TO_DISPENSE
BUSY
Figure 2.17: Class diagram illustrating how Mantis service is structured
Mantis software provides an API that allows the device to interact, communicate, or integrate with other
systems or instruments. It is provided as a set of commands, functions, protocols, and objects using
.NET framework. All API commands are stored as a list in a .chm file, categorized in classes, interfaces,
and enumerations. In order to utilize the API, the Integration Service must be running. This service
acts as a server that manages the API calls and facilitates the communication with the device. Our
service client, once instantiated, directly interacts with it. It sets up the necessary configuration for
HTTP communication using BasicHttpBinding. The configuration includes various parameters such as
timeouts, buffer sizes, message sizes, transfer modes, security settings, etc, ensuring that communication
is reliable and secure. It also specifies the service endpoint with EndpointAddress. The endpoint is
defined as a URL. If the server and client are running on the same machine, to which Mantis is connected,
the server is then hosted on 127.0.0.1 (localhost) and can be accessed using port 7091. The URL
then becomes http://localhost:7091/LiquidDispenser/Mantis. If they are running on different
machines, the IP address of the host machine, where the server is running, should be used instead.
For various operations such as loading dispense lists, washing, getting status, and handling errors,
==PAGE:32==
2.5 Software Design
25
the client creates instances of LiquidDispenserServiceClient within its methods. These operations
are executed by invoking methods on these proxy instances. LiquidDispenserServiceClient acts as
a proxy client that our service client uses to interact with the server (note that the naming here is
somewhat similar; yet, LiquidDispenserServiceClient is strictly provided by the integration service
and has a different purpose than our service client). The client depends on this proxy to send requests
to and receive responses from the server. This dependency relationship indicates that the client relies
on the functionalities provided by LiquidDispenserServiceClient to perform its operations. Error
handling is a crucial aspect of the service client’s functionality. It includes mechanisms to check for
errors returned by the proxy and to handle them, ensuring that any issues encountered during operations
are appropriately managed. This helps in maintaining the robustness and reliability of the interaction
between the server and client.
Most of the Mantis APIs are non-blocking calls, which means that
the program will proceed to the next method without waiting for the current method to finish. To
synchronize, the API execution status is checked whether it is busy after every API call in a method.
Only if not busy, the method finishes its execution. This is achieved by employing busy-waiting, which
involves repeatedly checking, in a loop, if the hardware is busy, and pausing briefly between checks.
The pausing helps in not overloading the processing capacity.
It is called in a separate thread for
not interrupting the communication between the server and client; otherwise, the device may stop its
operations. Alternatively, instead of busy-waiting, an event-based approach can be used, where the
process waits until it is awakened by a message indicating that the API execution is no longer busy. In
any case, checking any possible errors after the latest API call is also done to ensure that the device is
doing what it is supposed to. A class diagram shown in Figure 2.17 lists what methods and attributes
are involved. The service client class is implemented using .NET framework in C#. Upon compiling it,
a .dll file is produced, which is a compiled assembly that contains code and data that can be used by
other programs. It allows to encapsulate code into a reusable library. This file has also interoperability
feature and can be used by different programming languages. In MRLAS, the clr library in Python is
used, a part of the Python.NET package, which allows Python code to interact with the .NET Common
Language Runtime (CLR). This integration provides a powerful tool for leveraging .NET libraries in
Python. It enables Python code to call .NET functions and use .NET libraries as if they were native
Python modules. Python.NET allows CLR namespaces to be treated essentially as Python packages.
The service client can thus is directly used in Python. So, to briefly explain service client functionalities,
it manages the connection details, offers methods that can execute various operations on Mantis, and
handles any errors that may arise during these operations to ensure smooth interaction.
2.5.1.2
EnVision Service Client
The Envision API aims to create a simpler but similar format like for Mantis. However, instead of
creating a c++ program.
A Python program is directly created for easier utilization of a Python
interface.
==PAGE:33==
2.5 Software Design
26
C
Client
system: win32com.client.Dispatch
data: win32com.client.Dispatch
protocol_value: int
__init__(system: str = ”Envision112.WMLR4SystemServer”, data: str = ”Envision112.WMLR4SysDataAdv”)
connect(user: str = ”MLR4Admin”, password: str = ”MLR4Admin”): void
set_protocol_value(value: int): void
get_default_protocol(): str
change_protocol_interface(): void
get_current_state(server: bool = False): int/str
run_assay(chosen_protocol): void
start_default(protocol_value: int = 0, block: bool = True): None
start(block: bool = False): None
choose_protocol(): tuple
save_result(assayID: int = 0): void
_get_status_blocking(): void
Figure 2.18: Class diagram illustrating how EnVision service is structured
This Python API facilitates communication between the device and user using COM (Component
Object Model) technology. COM objects are reusable software components that can interact with each
other regardless of the languages they were written in. Each COM object exposes its functionality
through interfaces, which are contracts that the object adheres to. These interfaces include methods
and properties that the object can perform.
COM objects are registered in the Windows Registry, which acts as a central database for configura-
tion information. This is done when installing the software on the computer. The registry contains Class
Identifiers (CLSIDs) and Programmatic Identifiers (ProgIDs) that map to the COM classes. When a
COM object is instantiated, the system uses the registry to locate the corresponding class and create an
instance of it. This ensures that the correct COM object is created and that its interfaces are available
for use by other components or applications.
The UML diagram of the Envision API (Figure 2.18) showcases the overall functionality of the
class which initialises COM objects and a default value number indicating the protocol number which
needs to be run. In order to communicate with important aspects of the device, two COM objects
are initialised. The first is the system containing Envision112.WMLR4SystemServer that includes an
interface that contains methods and functions to call which controls the physical aspects of the device
such as running a protocol. The second COM object is Envision112.WMLR4SysDataAdv that allows the
user to access online data such as available protocols or saving the results.
The system requires to be connected to using the function. connect(user,password) is utilized to
connect to the data by specifying a username and a password which, when the device is installed, is
usually set to ”MLR4Admin” for both the user and password.
The API allows for different methods of controlling the device allowing for flexibility of the user
and their experience. For a beginner a simple function is available for easy interfacing and separate
functions calling more intricate functions for the experienced user. The properties of the COM objects
instantiated for Envision are asynchronous allowing for multiple multiple calls to be done at once. This
may be disadvantageous in some cases of controlling Envision as the user may need to halt executions
until feedback from a call. To address this issue, functionality of this class is the ability to allow for a
function to be blocking. This utilises the COM object in charge of the system. A status call is made
to check for current state of the device. The state of the device has multiple descriptions for when a
function is running. However, if the device is not running anything and is waiting for a command, the
device state is idle. If the blocking property is set for a function, the system will constantly check to
see if the current state of the device is idle and will only have the function return once it is.
Once Envision plate reader has run a protocol and read the results, it saves the results in its cloud
system. This means that the data is not readily available from the computer inherently. To save the
results on the computer, it has to be done through the software. This API allows the user to access the
result and save it on the computer without having to manually do it through the software.
==PAGE:34==
2.5 Software Design
27
Overall, the class Envision sets up the necessary tools to communicate with the device either directly
through script or a personalised interface.
2.5.2
System Control
Controlling a lab device is achieved by instantiating a service client object and eventually invoking its
methods. The service client is meant to be located on the same machine to which the device is connected.
Thus, any set of devices connected to the same machine can be controlled from a single script using
their service clients. Now, many devices used in laboratories need specific requirements to be satisfied
on the machine in which the software that offers the API is installed, which are related to the operating
system used, processor capabilities, memory size, etc. Therefore, having a purely centralized system,
where communication is not an issue, may not be an option at all. Thus, remote control is often needed.
To control devices remotely, remote invocation paradigm can be used. This is introduced and discussed
in detail in Section 2.4.1.1. Sometimes, using it may even seem unnecessary, when a service client can
interact directly with a device by knowing the IP address of the machine (physical or virtual) on which
the software server that manages the API calls is located as well as the port number this server is
using, assuming it is running on localhost. However, the server can use another IP address other than
localhost, or even be located on a third or fourth machine. In such cases, this approach becomes
problematic, as it requires configuring network settings to ensure that requests are correctly routed to
the appropriate locations. This involves setting up port forwarding, especially if the server is behind a
firewall or on a different subnet. The service client sends the requests as usual to the machine, which
in turn forwards these requests to the server’s IP address on the port number used. This forwarding
mechanism can be set with multiple devices as well. Proper configuration of the network settings would
ensure that the client can still communicate with the server. All this, however, can be simplified by
relying only on public addresses of the entities involved. In this case, a custom server can be created
that manages requests received through machine’s public address. Here, remote invocation naturally
comes to the play. Assuming the requests are simply method calls on service clients, the instantiated
service clients would become basic remote objects on the server side. This interaction is illustrated in
the following sequence diagram:
==PAGE:35==
2.5 Software Design
28
Client
Client
Server
Server
Establish Connection
Server accepts connection
Invoke remote method
Server manages remote object
Synchronous call - Client waits for response
Return result
Client receives result
Figure 2.19: Sequence diagram illustrating client and server exchange messages using remote invoca-
tion in a socket communication based setup
In this interaction, there are two participants, namely client and server (custom). The client estab-
lishes a connection with the server, invokes a remote method, waits for the server to process the request,
and finally receives a result. The synchronous nature of the call ensures that the client waits for the
server’s response before continuing, which is crucial for operations that depend on the result of a re-
mote method. The server on other hand accepts the connection, processes the requests by invoking the
target method, and returns the result. The client closes the connection upon receiving the result. The
connection can be based on socket communication. The pseudocodes in Algorithm 1, 2, and 3 outline
the steps involved in the operation of the client and server, detailing the initialization, interaction, and
method invocation processes.
Algorithm 1 Client Operation
1: Obtain remote object reference
2: Invoke remote method using remote object reference
3: Process result
The remote object reference from the pseudocode contains the IP address of the machine where the
remote object is instantiated, which is essentially manged by the server, as well as the port number the
server uses to receive messages. The reference is used to invoke methods on the remote object. This
involves specifying the method name and the required parameters.
==PAGE:36==
2.5 Software Design
29
Algorithm 2 Remote Method Invocation
1: function InvokeRemoteMethod(method_name, parameters)
2:
Initialize client socket
3:
Connect to server
4:
Send method name and parameters to server
5:
Receive result from server
6:
Close client socket
7:
return result
8: end function
InvokeRemoteMethod, which is a method provided by the remote object reference, sets up a socket
for the client. The client socket connects to the server’s socket using the IP address and port number.
The method name and parameters are then sent over the socket to the server. This tells the server
which method to execute and with what parameters. InvokeRemoteMethod allows the user, to some
extent, to treat the remote object reference as the actual object. In order to strictly follow the design,
the remote object reference may contain abstract methods that correspond to the actual methods on
the remote object, which essentially perform the same operation as in InvokeRemoteMethod. The only
difference is that there is no need to specify the name of the method. In any case, once sent, the process
waits for the server to send back the result of the method invocation. The rest is more-less obvious.
Algorithm 3 Server Operation
1: Initialize server socket on a specific port
2: Create instance of ServiceClient
3: while true do
4:
Accept connection from client
5:
Read method name and parameters from client
6:
Invoke corresponding method on ServiceClient instance
7:
Send result back to client
8: end while
The server sets up a socket to listen for incoming connections on a designated port. This is the entry
point for client connections. An instance of the ServiceClient class is created. The server utilizes the
object created by invoking its methods upon receiving a request from the client. Every time a client
makes a request, it needs to establish a connection. The server enters an infinite loop to continuously
accept and handle client connections. It always waits for a client to connect. Once a connection is
established, it proceeds to reading the message, obtaining the method name and any parameters sent
by the client. The server uses the method name to call the appropriate method on the ServiceClient
instance, passing any parameters received. Finally, the result of the method invocation is sent back to
the client. This completes the request-response cycle for that particular client connection.
Now, all this assumes that there is one service client. If there are several ones, each one of them is
potentially responsible of running a device. It is worth to note that the methods of any service client
are blocking, which means that the program needs to wait before proceeding. Even if another client is
created, and then calls on a remote method that is being executed for another client, the server would
send an error message, explaining that the service client is busy. Taking this information into account,
the operation of the server can be slightly enhanced. This is shown in the pseudocodes descibed in
Algortihm 4 and 5.
==PAGE:37==
2.5 Software Design
30
Algorithm 4 Enhanced Server Operation
1: Initialize server socket on a specific port
2: Create instances of ServiceClient for each device
3: while true do
4:
Accept connection from client
5:
Create new thread to handle client connection
6:
Pass client socket and ServiceClient instances to the thread
7: end while
What is changed here is that for each client connection, the server creates a new thread to handle
the connection and passes the client socket and ServiceClient instances to the thread.
Algorithm 5 Client Handler Thread
1: function HandleClient(client_socket, service_clients)
2:
Read method name and parameters from client
3:
Determine which ServiceClient instance to use
4:
Invoke corresponding method on the selected ServiceClient instance
5:
Send result back to client
6:
Close client socket
7: end function
client_socket is used to read method name and parameters sent by the client. Every time a client
establishes a connection, a new client_socket is created. This is ideal for employing other service clients,
when needed. The HandleClient function runs in a separate thread for each client connection.
2.5.2.1
Thread Pools
To enhance the performance of the server, thread pools can be used. A thread pool is a collection of
pre-initialized threads that stand ready to perform tasks. Instead of creating a new thread for each task,
which can be resource-intensive, a thread pool reuses existing threads to execute tasks. This approach
improves performance and resource management, especially in applications that handle many short-
lived tasks. When a task (e.g., handling a client connection) needs to be performed, it is submitted
to the thread pool. An available thread from the pool picks up the task and executes it. Once the
task is completed, the thread returns to the pool, ready to handle another task. This approach reduces
the overhead of creating and destroying threads. It also improves application performance by reusing
threads.
2.5.2.2
Component Administration and Automation
The task of administering clients and servers may be tedious when setting the communication between
entities. To automate the process of installing these components on different machines, it is enough
to specify what machine will be hosting the service clients. The hosting machine would then need to
have a server installed. The root machine would only contain a client. For a client, the requirement
is to obtain all remote object references. Despite that the information about IP addresses and ports
numbers should be known beforehand, there are ways to make a client to discover them. Assuming
this is possible, a network of clients and servers can be established across different machines. It would
be possible to see from the root what process could be invoked. This gives a possibility for executing
complex tasks. Having this mind, optimizing the overall operations when executing an experiment can
become a new frontier to explore for creating a robust and purely autonomous system.
==PAGE:38==
2.5 Software Design
31
2.5.2.3
Pyro4
Considering that the system should be Python based, remote invocation can also be achieved using
Python Remote Objects (Pyro4).
It is a library that resembles Java’s Remote Method Invocation
(RMI). It allows to invoke a method of a remote object, which is possibly running in a different process
or residing on a different machine, almost as if the object was local, as already described before. It
deals with the following concepts:
• Proxy acts as a substitute for the actual object, which can be located on a remote machine,
similarly as remote object reference. When methods on the proxy are called, it intercepts these
calls and forwards them to the remote object, handling the communication over the network
behind the scenes.
• URI is used to uniquely identify every remote object. It is formed like the following: ”PYRO:”
+ object name + ”@” + hostname + port number.
• Pyro Object is a regular Python object that has been registered with a Pyro daemon, making
it accessible for remote method calls. These objects are written like any other Python object but
are exposed to remote access through Pyro.
• Pyro Daemon is a server-side component that listens for incoming remote method calls and
dispatches them to the appropriate Pyro objects, and returns to the corresponding clients. It
handles the network communication and ensures that the correct methods are invoked on the
registered objects. All Pyro objects are registered in one or more daemons.
• Pyro Name Server acts like a directory service, mapping logical names to Pyro URIs. This
allows clients to look up objects by name rather than needing to know their exact URI. It simplifies
the process of locating and connecting to remote objects.
• Serialization is the process of converting objects into a stream of bytes that can be transmitted
over the network.
Pyro4 supports various serializers like serpent, json, marshal, msgpack,
pickle, cloudpickle, and dill. This process is essential for sending data between clients and
servers.
The structure overall does not differ from what was already considered. A major strength using
this library is by utilizing Pyro Name Server, which allows to find remote objects across network by
using their names only instead of holding addresses for each. This is achieved by registering instantiated
objects with Pyro daemons. Unfortunately, the library forces the user to define decorators on the classes
used for Pyro objects. These decorators are used to make objects accessible for remote method calls as
well as to define methods in a class that can be accessed like attributes. The library also does not bring
any extraordinary features such as automating the installation of Pyro daemons and proxies. Yet, it
still serves as an out-of-box framework leveraging remote invocation.
2.5.3
Robot Commander
Interacting with the manipulator in our setup can be achieved either directly using RTDE protocol,
considering that a UR manipulator is used, or indirectly using ROS 2. In both cases, the end-goal is
to be able to move the well-plates between the devices. ROS 2 may even seem unnecessary due to
many other features it supports that significantly consume compute and memory resources. However,
in different setups, the manipulators used may vary in terms of brand, model, and type; in this case,
in order to interact directly with a manipulator, the provided interface, if it exists, must be utilized.
This principle applies to other devices too. For example, the cameras in the setup, part of the safety
module within the modular robotic system, have their own interfaces used for interaction. Generally,
the provided interfaces are not developed following a specific convention. Consequently, each device
==PAGE:39==
2.5 Software Design
32
might need to be programmed differently to achieve the same goal. The following component diagram
(Figure 2.20) illustrates how this is reflected in our system model:
Manipulator
Computer
«Physical»
Robot Arm
«Physical»
Gripper
Commander Software
Interface 1
Interface 2
Interface 3
«Physical»
Camera
Figure 2.20: Component diagram illustrating manipulator and camera interaction dependencies
Therefore, a necessity arises to have a library that can provide the means of interaction with any
device, perhaps the most commonly used in the industry, that can be utilized in any possible setup.
As an attempt for standardization, many producers provide ROS 2 drivers and wrappers. Relying on
topics, service clients, and action clients for data exchange and task execution, the ways of interaction
can more-less remain the same. The difference comes in specifying the correct configurations. These
configurations can be collected in packages and structured in a way that is convenient to switch from
one setup to another. By adding these components to the previous diagram, as shown in Figure 2.21, a
ROS 2 driver can be used to interact directly with a robotic entity, serving as an interface for the user;
a ROS 2 wrapper can be used with an external driver, providing the means of interaction.
2.5.3.1
MoveIt2 Integration
The Commander Software, shown in Figure 2.21, facilitates manipulation by creating appropriate mo-
tion plans and sending them. It contains sub-components responsible for motion planning, 3D per-
ception, kinematics, and control.
The ROS 2 drivers can be used to send commands to the robot
using ROS 2 topics and services. For example, joint trajectory commands can be published to control
the robot’s movements. For handling advanced manipulation, however, an additional layer is required.
Many manipulator manufactures provide ways of interfacing with their ROS 2 drivers using MoveIt2.
Due to its comprehensive suite of features that support complex motion planning and control, and being
considered as a standardized industry-grade motion planning framework, it is a great candidate to be
part of the commander component. Its main strength lies in providing an out-of-box general framework
that can be used with any robotic arm. This is related to its use of URDF, SRDF, and Config files.
• URDF (Unified Robot Description Format) is an XML format that describes the robot’s
physical configuration, including its joints, links, and sensors. It provides the foundational model
of the robot that MoveIt2 uses for visualization, kinematics, and collision checking.
• SRDF (Semantic Robot Description Format) extends the URDF by adding semantic infor-
mation necessary for motion planning. It includes details like joint groups, default robot config-
urations, collision checking information, end effectors, planning groups, virtual joints, additional
transforms. All these are needed for successfully creating motion plans.
• Config are configuration files generated using the MoveIt Setup Assistant and include various
settings and parameters needed for motion planning, control, and perception. They also include
physical parameters such as maximum velocity and acceleration, etc.
These files help tailor
MoveIt2 to work with specific robots and applications.
==PAGE:40==
2.5 Software Design
33
Manipulator
Computer
«Physical»
Robot Arm
«Physical»
Gripper
Commander Software
ROS 2 Driver
ROS 2 Wrapper
External Driver
Interface 1
Interface 2
Interface 3
Configuration Package
«Physical»
Camera
Figure 2.21: Component diagram illustrating manipulator and camera interaction dependencies with
drivers and wrappers involved in addition to the default interfaces for direct interaction
Furthermore, it provides advanced algorithms for planning collision-free paths for robotic arms,
including tools for solving both forward and inverse kinematics, which are essential for determining the
positions and movements of robot joints. It also utilizes 3D sensor data to perceive the environment,
allowing robots to interact with objects more effectively by forwarding the data into the motion planning
pipeline.
The default motion planning library is OMPL (Open Motion Planning Library). It includes imple-
mentations of many state-of-the-art sampling-based algorithms (this is discussed in detail later in the
report). Other available planners are CHOMP (Covariant Hamiltonian Optimization for Motion Plan-
ning), STOMP (Stochastic Trajectory Optimization for Motion Planning), and Pilz Industrial Motion
Planner. Newer algorithms can be implemented using the provided interfaces. This allows to construct
a library of planners, making it easier for developers to custom-build solutions according to any given
set of requirements.
Now, to utilize MoveIt2 in Commander Software, ROS 2 must be installed. MoveIt2 can be installed
from binaries or built from source. Installing from binaries is straightforward and quick. Binary releases
==PAGE:41==
2.5 Software Design
34
are generally more stable as they are thoroughly tested before being released. They are also easier to
maintain and update, as updates are managed through the package manager.
Unfortunately, they
cannot be customized; thus, the features and configurations provided may be limited.
To fit the
specific needs by modifying the source code, building from source can be a better option. However,
the installation process is more complex and time-consuming. Frequent maintenance is also required to
keep the software up-to-date and to resolve any build issues that may arise.
Figure 2.22 presents a simplified schematic showing how MoveIt2’s is used, highlighting the main
high-level components involved in the workflow.
ros2_control
MoveIt2
User
move_group
Python API
C++ API
moveit_py
MoveItCpp
Appilcation (Python/C++)
move_group_interface
RViz
<<Physical>>
Robot
moveit_core
planning
planners
ompl
pilz-imp
chomp
stomp
Robot Configuration
TF
<<Physical>>
3D Sensor
perception
URDF
SRDF
Config
Actuators
Sensors
robot_state_publisher
interface
Figure 2.22: MoveIt2 ways of interaction
To interact with MoveIt2, there are 3 approaches: directly through Python API, directly through
C+ API, or by using move_group. The MoveIt2 Python API binds a subset of the C++ API. Unfor-
tunately, this means that it does not support all features. Yet, it is suﬀicient for rapid prototyping
and experimentation. It is also appropriate when considering integration within a Python development
environment. moveit_py is used to interact with the API. Developing more advanced applications can
be achieved using C++ API. It bypasses many of the ROS Service/Action layers, leading to much
faster performance. It is thus better suited for advanced applications that require real-time control or
fine-tuned performance. That is not the case in our setup. It also offers more control over the planning
and execution processes, allowing for more detailed customization and optimization. MoveItCpp is used
to interact with the API. move_group on other hand is generally easier to use. It provides a higher-
level abstraction, making it simpler to set up and employ for common tasks. Its core component is
the move_group node. The move_group node serves as an integrative central hub for motion planning
and control. It consolidates various components to offer a unified set of ROS actions and services that
can be used for controlling a robot. [13] Interaction with move_group node is achieved through the
move_group_interface in C++ or the Motion Planning plugin in RViz. As long as the move_group
is configured and launched correctly, the user can interact with it abstracting away all configuration
details from the main script. This in particular is useful for achieving a user-friendly system. To create
a move_group node, a launch file is required that loads robot description, semantic information and
configurations, as well as MoveIt2 configurations related to planning, controller (in case of simulation),
and perception (if a 3D sensor is used for collision avoidance). By launching this file, the move_group
==PAGE:42==
2.5 Software Design
35
node would be available for calls from the user via move_group_interface. Despite that the interface
is available in C++, there exists wrappers that can be used for interaction with move_group in Python.
In a nutshell, any method used would allow to set goals, generate motion plans, and execute them
accordingly. How this is done and how effectively this is achieved will be discussed in detail in later
sections.
2.5.4
Software Packages
Combining the software components of a system into cohesive packages is essential for supporting
modularity, maintainability, and scalability. This approach allows to have a more structured and well-
defined software architecture, making it easier to manage. It also facilitates reusability and reduces
redundancy. Additionally, it simplifies the process of integrating new functionalities and features for
enhancing the system’s overall performance. ROS 2 enforces the natural usage of packages. Packages
in ROS 2 serve as the primary organizational unit, encapsulating code, resources, and dependencies in a
structured manner. By managing dependencies effectively, ROS 2 ensures that all necessary components
are available and correctly configured, contributing in this way to increase system’s reliability.
All
software components, discussed the previous sections, are organised into packages as shown in the
following diagram:
robot_setup
lab_device_service
arm_gripper_config
rg2_description
robotiq_description
ur_description
mantis
envision
operations
robot_commander
robot_py_commander
moveit2
ur_ros2_driver
zed-ros2-wrapper
lab_liquid_vision
Figure 2.23: Package diagram illustrating how system software is structured in ROS 2
This package diagram illustrates the overall software architecture of the system, highlighting the
==PAGE:43==
2.5 Software Design
36
main components and their dependency on each other. The core package here is operations. It is
a hub that facilitates system robot interaction, whether in reality or in simulation. The package con-
tains different launch files, which are used to configure, organise, and initialize nodes that publish or
subscribe to topics, provide or use actions, offer or call services. They are all responsible of creating
the move_group node, used to interact with robots. operations thus depends on moveit2. The inter-
action is achieved either with robot_commander or robot_py_commander. The former supports C++
interfacing; the latter supports Python interfacing. Both of them directly depend on moveit2 too, as
they utilize it directly through the APIs. To be able to interact with the UR manipulator in our setup,
ur_ros2_driver must be running. Therefore, operations depends on it. The same applies to the com-
mander packages. It also depends on zed-ros2-wrapper, as it uses camera topics, created by launching
ZED’s camera services, for perception. To be able to launch the necessary nodes, operations utilizes
the meta-package robot_setup. Its core component is arm_gripper_config package. It contains pa-
rameterized URDF and SRDF files that combine any defined robot arm with any defined gripper. It
currently supports all UR robot arms. It also supports 2 grippers that can be attached to any chosen
UR robot arm, namely OnRobot’s RG2 and Robotiq’s 2F-85. The packages for both grippers were
manually modified to support ROS 2, as they were originally ROS1 packages. Additionally, it contains
all necessary for MoveIt2 config files. These files include configurations for each motion planning library.
They also include data on robot’s physical (e.g., mass, inertia_parameters, joint_limits, etc) and visual
(e.g., collision, meshes, etc) aspects. Apart from MoveIt2, it also contains controller configurations,
specifically for simulation (the controller part is usually managed by ROS drivers that interface with
real robots). The simulation part is managed by operations, which can load a world in Gazebo, spawn
robots based on user requirements specified in the launch files, and manage them. arm_gripper_config
thus serves as a library that can grow by creating descriptions that combine robotic arms and grippers
together. By using arm_gripper_config with MoveIt2, it can help simplifying the process of launching
any robotic arm with any gripper into the planning scene as long as these robots and grippers are
available in the package. The package shows therefore its potential by being versatile and applicable
in any robotic setup. Furthermore, robot_py_commander utilizes service clients, considering they are
Python based. They are collected under lab_device_service package, which is a library of service
clients. Thus, robot_py_commander has the capability of controlling lab devices as well, apart from
controlling robotic arms and grippers. robot_py_commander also utilizes lab_liquid_vision. This
package is part of the safety module used to estimate liquid volume in samples. It is considered as an
add-on package. There can also be other packages that can add new features to the system, thereby
enhancing its capabilities. This package introduces the concept of continuity, making the system more
autonomous. This will be discussed in the next module of this report. So far, the system is assumed to
use ROS 2. The main reason, as already explained, is due to compatibility, but also due the advanced
features different ROS 2 libraries bring such as MoveIt2, which can be used with any robotic system.
Let’s assume the system is based on using interfaces provided to control the robot in our setup instead.
By considering the interaction between system components shown in Figure 2.20 as a basis, the package
diagram can then be simplified, where the commander software only utilizes lab_device_service and
lab_liquid_vision. This is shown in the following figure:
==PAGE:44==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
37
lab_device_service
mantis
envision
lab_liquid_vision
commander
Figure 2.24: Package diagram illustrating how system software is structured without ROS 2
This is still an option. How the samples are transported between devices is simply abstracted away.
However, this would possibly involve utilizing an interface when using a robotic device.
2.6
Operations & Throughput
Achieving a system with high-throughput in lab automation is crucial for several reasons. Such a system
spends significantly less time conducting experiments and analyzing the collected data. This is essential
when time is a critical factor. It potentially increases productivity by handling large volumes of samples
rapidly and probably simultaneously. It also reduces operational costs by optimizing resource utilization
and minimizing waste, bringing economic benefits. All this accelerates research and development, which
can lead to faster commercialization of products.
2.6.1
Industrial Case: High-Throughput Screening (HTS)
High-throughput screening (HTS) is a process that comprises a rapid automated screening of large
compound libraries (chemical and/or biological) for activity against biological targets [55].
Before
HTS, manual methods could only analyze 20 to 50 compounds per week.
As new techniques for
identifying potential targets emerged, it became clear that more eﬀicient and cost-effective technologies
were needed. HTS, which allows large numbers of compounds to be screened simultaneously in small
assays, has become a powerful tool in discovering new medicines [4]. It often targets screening 100.000
or more samples daily. Therefore, it relies on straightforward, automation-compatible assay designs,
robotic-based sample handling, and automated data processing [5]. It is based on 4 requirements [62]:
• Depending on the assay, samples are typically cellular or biochemical. HTS requires these samples
to be prepared in an arrayed format.
• The screening method should be suitable for automation. Thus, all challenges involved in au-
tomating lab-based processes must be taken into account, when designing a setup.
• The robotic setup should support the typical steps involved in a screening processes such as reagent
addition, mixing, incubation, and detection. Only the steps needed can be supported.
• Each step involved should be fairly quick.
==PAGE:45==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
38
HTS based systems have been instrumental in accelerating the drug discovery process. For instance,
they allowed researchers to test thousands of compounds quickly, identifying potential drug candidates
more eﬀiciently. This capability has significantly reduced the time and cost associated with bringing
new drugs to market [18] [37]. During the COVID-19 pandemic, these systems played a critical role
in managing the large volume of tests required [38]. They enabled rapid and accurate testing, which
was essential for timely diagnosis and containment of the virus. This case highlights the importance of
these systems in responding to public health emergencies.
Ultimately, HTS embodies the concept of lab automation, which enables to concentrate on more
complex and value-added tasks, leaving systematic tasks to be handled handled by automation sys-
tems. The adoption of high-throughput systems in lab automation is a strategic imperative for modern
laboratories.
2.6.2
Concurrency
So far, all discussions were based on using one dispensing component and one measuring component.
This is perfect for small experiments that require testing a limited number of samples. Such setup can
still be used for larger experiments; it may just take longer time to finish. However, some experiments
may require testing thousands to millions of samples e.g., when testing for biological activity at various
levels, in a relatively shorter duration of time. Achieving a larger throughput can be done in several
ways. Throughput here is defined by the number of plates that can be processed within a given time.
Either by optimizing the system considering every technological aspect, e.g., chemical, mechanical,
mathematical etc, or by simply increasing the number of devices. The first option is expensive, as it
may require to develop new devices designed to do the processing with higher throughput. The second
option utilizes the currently available devices, but it requires handling the concurrency-related problems
that it brings.
The concurrency aspect of a setup can be modelled and analysed using Petri nets. Petri nets are
a graphical and mathematical modeling tool used to describe and analyze the flow in systems with
multiple independent activities occurring simultaneously. Unlike finite state machines, which have a
single ”current” state dictating the next possible action, Petri nets can model several states that can
evolve independently, changing the overall state of the Petri net.
A Petri net consist of 4 elements: places, transitions, tokens, and arcs.
• Places represented by circles, can hold tokens and represent conditions or states.
• Transitions, represented by rectangles or bars, represent events that can change the state.
• Tokens, represented by dots within places, indicate the presence of a condition or the availability
of a resource.
• Arcs are directed arrows that connect places to transitions (input arcs) and transitions to places
(output arcs). Only arcs can be used to connect different processes.
It works based on the following principles:
• Marking: The distribution of tokens across places is called a marking. It represents the state of
the system at a given time.
• Firing: A transition is enabled if all its input places have the required number of tokens. When
an enabled transition fires, it consumes tokens from its input places and produces tokens in its
output places.
• Concurrency: Multiple transitions can be enabled and fired independently, representing concur-
rent events.
==PAGE:46==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
39
An exmaple of a Petri net, modelling the processes in our setup, is shown in the following figure:
n
Start
Initiate
Ready for 
Retrieving
Ready for 
Dispensing
Retrieve
Dispense
Ready for 
Transferring
Transfer
Read
Ready for 
Reading
Done
Dispensing 
Availability
Dispensing
Capacity
Reading 
Availability
Reading
Capacity
Figure 2.25: Petri net modelling the concurrency of the system (simpler version)
There are 10 places and 5 transitions. There are also 5 tokens at different places in the initial state
of the system. Initiate transition, the first at the top, can fire, by consuming the token in Start, to
produce n tokens, as it has n output arcs. This transition basically initiates the whole process. These
generated tokens represent well-plates, since a well-plate is considered a resource needed to activate the
dispensing and reading processes.
The tokens in Dispensing Availability and Reading Availability represent the number of available
dispensing and reading services, respectively. To fire the Dispense transition, which corresponds to
dispensing liquid into a well-plate, two tokens are required: one is obtained by loading a well-plate to
a dispensing component, the other by having a dispensing component that is ready to be used. Once
both tokens are consumed, the dispensing service will no longer be available, unless the transition
finishes firing, giving a new token back and eventually making the service available again. Thus, the
availability of the dispensing service can be increased by having Dispensing Availability place to hold
multiple tokens simultaneously. If done so, it would either mean that the dispensing component can
handle several dispensing operations simultaneously, or that there are several dispensing components,
each of which can handle at least one operation. The assumption made here is that using either a more
==PAGE:47==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
40
capable device or multiple devices would yield the same result. The same explanation applies when
firing Read transition. A small remark: it is assumed that transferring is not required after the reading
process to avoid redundancy.
The tokens in Dispensing Capacity and Reading Capacity represent the number of resources that can
be manged by dispensing and reading components, respectively. Managing here does not necessarily
mean handling resources simultaneously, but rather acquiring and holding resources. To fire Retrieve
transition, which corresponds to retrieving a well-plate and putting it on a dispensing component, two
tokens are required: one is obtained by acquiring a well-plate, the other by having a free dispensing
component. Once both tokens are consumed, the dispensing component will no longer be accepting any
well-plates, unless Transfer transition finishes firing, giving a new token back and eventually making the
component free by essentially transferring the blocking well-plate to another place. Thus, the capacity
of the dispensing component can be increased by having Dispensing Capacity place to hold multiple
tokens simultaneously. If the number of tokens in Dispensing Capacity is less than the number of tokens
in Dispensing Availability, then probably some dispensing components will not be utilized, assuming of
course several are used.
In general, there can be two processes running in parallel: dispensing and reading. This can happen,
assuming that both components take some time to finish their operations, if a full well-plate was
transferred to the measuring component, and thereafter an empty plate was transferred to the dispensing
component right away. Otherwise, by analysing the Petri net, the workflow is generally sequential.
Now, this Petri net assumes that there is one manipulation component used for transferring well-
plates. This process is not represented, because the other processes take way longer time to handle a
resource; thus, the transferring service would most likely be available at all times. On the other hand,
it manages to show, to some extent, how the decision is made between retrieving an empty well-plate
for dispensing and transferring a full one for reading; it must free up the dispensing component by
transferring a filled well-plate to the measuring component, before using the dispensing component
again. Therefore, the steps it would take are not ambiguous. The ambiguity may arise if there are
multiple devices involved. Thus, to further discuss this, a revised Petri net is shown in Figure ??.
==PAGE:48==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
41
n
Start
Initiate
Ready for 
Retrieving
Ready for 
Dispensing
Retrieve
Dispense
Ready for 
Transferring
Transfer
Read
Ready for 
Reading
Done
Dispensing 
Availability
Dispensing
Capacity
Reading 
Availability
Reading
Capacity
Manipulation 
Availability
Refill
Refilling
Availability
External 
Process
Main 
Processes
Figure 2.26: Petri net modelling the concurrency of the system
To fire Retrieve and Transfer in Figure 2.26, 3 tokens are needed now; the third comes from Ma-
nipulation Availability place. The same logic applies. Note that the place has two output arcs. This
indicates that it has a choice, either to retrieve a plate, or to transfer a plate. Furthermore, there are
now 3 dispensing components and 2 measuring components according to the number of tokens in service
availability. This is an implicit interpretation, as it can also indicate, based on the previous assumption
about service availability, that the number of resources each component can handle simultaneously is
increased. It can indicate, regarding dispensing, for example, that there are 2 dispensing components:
one can handle 2 resources simultaneously, while the other can handle only 1. In any case, by having an
equal number of tokens in Dispensing Availability and Dispensing Capacity, this makes another assump-
tion that each dispensing component would handle one plate at a time, if given the chance. Deciding
which component to use falls within the domain of finding a solution to an optimization problem. With
Peri nets, the matter is to show the availability of different resources and how they are generally utilized.
Now, there can be several scenarios to consider. Dispensing and measuring devices can be equipped
with stackers. Two magazines are typically attached to a stacker: one magazine to load well-plates; the
other to output them. These devices can also load several well-plates at once. Some stackers can have
one magazine for outputting only. The opposite is also possible. Thus, when considering any lab device
that accepts an item, processes it, and eventually releases it, the following device types can possibly
exist:
• Single IO: Single In, Single Out;
==PAGE:49==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
42
• One2One IO: One In, One Out;
• One2Many IO: One In, Many Out;
• Many2One IO:Many In, One Out;
• Many2Many IO: Many In, Many Out;
These types are applicable to devices that can operate on either one resource at a time or many
resources simultaneously. Single IO is similar to One2One IO to some extent, but devices of this
type use one channel only.
In our case, all these details are abstracted away by focusing on the
maximum throughput. If several components are treated as one single component, despite their types,
this component, apart from having enhanced capabilities, would still have a limit on how many services
it can offer simultaneously and on how many resources it can hold. These resources would eventually
require to be released and passed on to free up the component. The only way to do so is by transferring.
In the Petri nets shown, this action always maximizes the capacity. Therefore, as long as this component
is part of a workflow designed to maximize throughput, the different types will not be relevant to model.
These elements describe the main processes. There can also be external processes involved that
affect workflow. For example, different components usually rely on assets. An asset is a type is part
of a component itself. It usually contains a resource. A component can have several assets. It relies
on assets’ resources to maintain its operations. An asset, for example, can be a battery. The battery
contains energy, which is consumed when used by a component. In our case, the dispensing component
has tubes that contain reagents, which are consumed during dispensing, creating mixtures. Thus, these
tubes must be refiled once in a while. The process of refilling makes the dispensing component out of
service. This is illustrated in Figure ?? as well (in the red frame). Dispensing Availability place has two
output arcs, similar to Manipulation Availability, providing a choice to either offer a dispensing service
or block it in case of refilling. Here, it is assumed that one refilling at a time is possible. Multiple tubes
can naturally be refilled together, but this is merely a technical matter in an external process that the
system cannot control.
2.6.3
Scheduling Policy for Resource Allocation
To utilize multiple devices together for achieving a higher throughput, a scheduling policy must be
devised.
This policy is bound by how liveness is guaranteed in the utilization of components.
In
the context of concurrent execution, liveness properties, e.g., eventual resource allocation, ensure that
certain desirable events will eventually happen. These properties often depend on fairness, which can be
defined as constraints imposed on the execution to ensure that all processes get a fair chance to execute.
Without fairness, certain processes might never get the chance to execute; thus, preventing liveness
properties from being satisfied. For instance, a system might guarantee that a resource will eventually
be allocated to a process, but this guarantee holds only if the scheduler is fair. There are two types
of fairness: weak fairness and strong fairness. Weak fairness ensures that if a process is continuously
enabled (i.e., it is always ready to execute), it will eventually be executed. For example, if there is a
process that is always ready to acquire a resource (e.g., a well-plate), weak fairness guarantees that this
process will eventually get the chance to acquire the resource, as long as it remains continuously enabled.
Strong fairness on other hand ensures that if a process is enabled infinitely often (i.e., it becomes ready
to execute an infinite number of times), it will eventually be executed. For example, a process might
at certain times not be ready to execute; it repeatedly becomes ready to acquire a resource but is not
always enabled. In this case, strong fairness guarantees that this process will eventually get the chance
to acquire the resource, even if it is only intermittently enabled.
2.6.4
Utilizing Threading for Concurrent Lab Device Operations
The operation of a device can be considered as a process on its own. It is left idle until receiving a
resource (a well-plate). If device’s assets have depleted their own resources, which occurs only after
==PAGE:50==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
43
utilization, the device will be unable to operate until these resources are replenished. This implies
that the device remains continuously enabled, as there are no other factors that could render it out of
service. Thus, even if a weakly fair scheduler is used, the device would eventually acquire a resource.
However, there is no need to utilize every component, if that’s not required. For example, if 2 dispensing
components allow to achieve a maximum throughput, there is no need to utilize another component
just for achieving fairness. In this case, it ought to be removed. A scheduling policy can thus be based
on ordered availability. With this policy, resources are assigned to the first available component in a
predefined order. This allows to identify unutilized components, especially when developing a new setup
(this will be discussed in later sections). Therefore, all starving processes can be identified and removed.
Components execute their tasks using the assigned resources. All tasks require the same amount of time
to execute and have equal weights; thus, there is no priority involved. The component that completes
its task first is the first to release the resource, which is forwarded to the next component.
Each process runs as a thread. A process is defined inside a thread class. This class has the infras-
tructure needed to implement a scheduling policy, encapsulating in this way the necessary mechanisms
for communication and synchronization.
The policy, on other hand, is implemented on the thread
management side. Communication is achieved by message passing via channels. Considering there are
different device types that support inputting and outputting resources, two channels are used. If several
processes need to coordinate, they can have one shared output channel. This concept is illustrated in
Figure 2.27.
Input
Channel
Output
Channel
Input
Channel
Shared
Output
Channel
Processing Section
Processing Section
Component 2
Component 1
Resource
Figure 2.27: Illustration of how message passing using channels is achieved to pass resources between
components, which is used for scheduling
A component, instantiated from the thread class, accepts resources through its input channel, which
functions as a queue. It processes resources one by one. Once a resource is processed, it is delivered
to the output queue. In Figure 2.27, Component 1 has a shared output channel, whereas Component
==PAGE:51==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
44
2 has its own output channel. The shared output channel helps in achieving an order in release. This
is important in our scheduling policy, which enforces first-release, first-serve to first-available approach.
When Component 2 requires a resource, it will receive the first released by components that use the
shared output channel.
The implementation of this thread class is shown in Algorithm 6.
Algorithm 6 IOLabDevice Operation Algorithm
1: Class Definition:
2:
Define the IOLabDevice class.
3: Initialization:
4:
Initialize the thread.
5:
Set up input and output channels as queues.
6:
Initialize the resource to None.
7:
Create an event to indicate if the thread is free and set it.
8:
Create barriers for synchronization (proceed and claim).
9:
Set the Single IO flag.
10: Run Method:
11:
while True:
12:
Get a resource from the input channel.
13:
if the resource is None:
14:
break
15:
Clear the free event.
16:
Assign the device ID to the resource.
17:
Wait for the proceed barrier.
18:
Call a remote function that runs the device
19:
Put the resource into the output channel.
20:
if Single IO is enabled:
21:
Wait for the claim barrier.
22:
Set the free event.
The class essentially contains channels, events, and barriers.
Events and barriers are used for
synchronization during thread management. When a process receives a resource, it sets the thread’s
availability flag to busy. This is achieved by an event instance, which signals any other process that is
waiting for it. It then proceeds to call a remote function. The proceeding is coordinated with another
process using a barrier to confirm that the process has actually received the resource and is ready to
perform its task. After putting the resource into the output queue, if the process belongs to a Single
IO device (i.e., it requires a resource to be removed before accepting any other resources), it can only
proceed if the resource has been claimed by another process. The coordination is achieved by using
another barrier.
==PAGE:52==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
45
Scheduling
Pol-
icy
Type
Advantages
Disadvantages
First
Come
First
Serve (FCFS)
Non-Preemptive
Simple to implement
Can lead to long waiting
times (convoy effect)
Shortest Job Next
(SJN)
Non-Preemptive
Minimizes average waiting
time
Requires knowledge of job
length
Priority Scheduling
Preemptive/Non-
Preemptive
Prioritizes
important
tasks
Can lead to starvation of
low-priority tasks
Round Robin (RR)
Preemptive
Fair time allocation
Can lead to high context
switching overhead
Multilevel
Queue
Scheduling
Preemptive/Non-
Preemptive
Separates processes based
on priority
Complex
to
implement
and manage
Multilevel
Feed-
back
Queue
Scheduling
Preemptive
Dynamic
adjustment
of
priorities
Complex
to
implement
and manage
Shortest Remaining
Time (SRT)
Preemptive
Minimizes average waiting
time
Requires knowledge of re-
maining job length
Earliest
Deadline
First (EDF)
Preemptive
Optimal for real-time sys-
tems
Requires
knowledge
of
deadlines
Table 2.1: Comparison of Different Scheduling Policies
As for thread management, it is part of the main process, in which the processes of all devices used
are defined as threads using IOLabDevice Operation in 2.1. The scheduling policy is essentially its
backbone. It always passes resources to the first available process. It utilizes shared output channels to
manage resource workflows. The first released resource is the first to be forwarded. When all resources
are managed, it terminates all processes. The thread management is described in Algorithm ??. It is
designed for a setup that utilizes dispensing and measuring components.
==PAGE:53==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
46
Algorithm 7 Thread Management for IOLabDevices
1: Initialization and Starting Threads:
2:
Create and start threads for each dispensing component.
3:
Create and start threads for each measuring component.
4: Main Loop:
5: while True do
6:
Set a flag to indicate whether to continue to the measuring component to False.
7:
for each thread in dispensing component threads do
8:
for each thread in measuring component threads do
9:
if the thread is free (indicated by an event being set) and there are plates available for the
measuring component then
10:
Set the flag to True.
11:
break
12:
end for
13:
if the flag is True then
14:
break
15:
if the thread is free (indicated by an event being set) and there are plates available for the
dispensing component then
16:
Get a plate from the dispensing component queue.
17:
Call the robot arm to pick an empty plate.
18:
Call the robot arm to place the empty plate on the target dispensing device.
19:
Put the plate into the thread’s input queue.
20:
Wait for the thread to proceed (synchronized by proceed barrier).
21:
end if
22:
end for
23:
for each thread in measuring component threads do
24:
if the thread is free (indicated by an event being set) and there are plates available for the
measuring component then
25:
Get a plate from the measuring component queue.
26:
Call the robot arm to pick the filled plate from the dispensing device.
27:
Wait for the corresponding dispensing component thread to finish (synchronized by claim
barrier).
28:
Call the robot arm to place the plate on the target measuring device.
29:
Put the plate into the thread’s input queue.
30:
Wait for the thread to proceed (synchronized by proceed barrier).
31:
end if
32:
end for
33:
if the number of processed plates reaches the required amount then
34:
for each thread in dispensing component threads and each thread in measuring component
threads do
35:
Put a termination signal (None) into the thread’s input queue.
36:
Join the thread.
37:
end for
38:
break
39: end if
40: end while
This policy is non-premptive, meaning once a process starts executing, it runs to completion with-
out being interrupted, making it simpler to implement. It shares the FCFS principle when releasing
resources. Releasing a resource corresponds to putting in a request. In our setup, these requests are han-
dled by picking up well-plates and forwarding them further in the workflow. The first released resource
is the first to be addressed. If this not done, a process that releases a resource may be perpetually denied
==PAGE:54==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
47
access to new resources, rendering a component unutilized. On other hand, when comparing to all other
traditional scheduling polices shown in Table 2.1, it differs in being order-based and availability-driven.
If the first components manage to drive the system, it may not be fair towards the rest. But, in case
of a closed-loop workflow (See Figure 2.3), knowing that all tasks are similar in terms of type, impor-
tance and execution time, any lab automated system would be required to utilize less resources. This
is relevant, considering that using many devices is generally not an option in lab setups. The policy
prioritizes, therefore, to serve the first available processes in a predefined order.
2.6.5
System Eﬀiciency
System eﬀiciency is crucial for maximizing productivity, reducing costs, improving quality, etc. Natu-
rally, there are many parameters involved that determine how eﬀicient a system is. If a system consists
of multiple layers, such as hardware, software, communication, control, etc, each layer typically ad-
dresses different sets of requirements to achieve higher eﬀiciency. Satisfying these requirements would
affect the overall system’s characteristics, either directly or indirectly. In our case, the native parts
of our system fit directly under the control layer, which handle the decision-making processes among
others. The main requirement to satisfy in this layer is to be able optimally utilize the components
involved to achieve a higher throughput. Throughput can be defined as the rate at which the system
completes tasks, such as the number of well-plates processed per hour. Thus, higher throughput leads
to higher eﬀiciency.
2.6.5.1
Throughput Estimation: Mathematically
Throughput can be estimated directly. The estimation is based on the following:
• TD: the time it takes a dispensing component to process one resource,
• TM: the time it takes a measuring component to process one resource,
• TR: the time it takes to retrieve or transfer one resource.
Note that TR covers both retrieving and transferring resources. In other words, the time it takes to
perform any of these operations is considered to be the same. Moreover, when having multiple devices,
TR is the same for any transfer between them. This may not be the case in real operations, as it depends
on how different components are positioned in a setup. By taking specific times for each transfer and
calculating the average transfer time, this average could serve as an alternative. Furthermore, there can
be multiple robot arms operating in a setup. For simplicity, any setup can be divided into blocks. Each
block contains at most one robot arm. The number of lab devices in each block should be manageable
enough for a single robot arm to operate on them all. Thus, throughput can be calculated for each
block separately, and then combined to obtain the total throughput.
Now, system’s throughput ( Θ ) can be calculated by the following formula:
Θ = Total Plates
Total Time
where:
Total Plates is the total number of plates,
Total Time is the sum of all processing and transfer times (h).
Total Time can be defined as follows:
Total Time = Total Plates × (
TD
Dispensing Devices +
TM
Measuring Devices + 4TR)
==PAGE:55==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
48
where:
Dispensing Devices is number of dispensing devices involved,
Measuring Devices is number of measuring devices involved.
TR is multiplied by 4, since there are 4 steps needed to transfer well-plates from start to end:
• 1. Fetching an empty well-plate,
• 2. Transferring an empty well-plate and putting it on a dispensing device,
• 3. Fetching a filled well-plate with mixtures from a dispensing device,
• 4. Transferring a filled well-plate and putting it on a measuring device.
The step that involves transferring a well-plate from a measuring device is assumed to be handled
by an external process. For example, a measuring device can load several magazines with processed
well-plates, and these magazines can be be unloaded by a human operator or another device. Therefore,
for simplicity, this step is excluded.
The previous formula can be generalized to include n different types of components.
Total Time = Total Plates ×
( n
∑
i=1
Ttype
Ntype
+ 2n × TR
)
where:
Ttype is the processing time for a device belonging to a certain type,
Ntype is the number of devices involved belonging to a certain type.
Considering this formula is built for a process that involves sequential handling of resources, (i.e.,
a resource is moved sequentially along different types of components, and processed only once by
each), it assumes that different types of components cannot operate simultaneously. This means that
components belonging to a certain type should finish all their their operations, before moving resources
to another set of components of another type. It also assumes that a set starts operations only when
every component in that set has received a resource.
This essentially means that the robotic arm
cannot operate simultaneously with any other component in the workflow. This issue can be mitigated
by considering only the slowest component in the workflow (the bottleneck) in the calculations. The
bottleneck should ideally consume a significant amount of time compared to other components. If this
condition is met, this strategy can provide a rough estimate of the system’s throughput. However, if
the workflow chain is long, the estimation may deviate significantly from actual throughput due to the
accumulation of short processing times that were neglected. Therefore, the bottleneck strategy works
best when the bottleneck’s processing time is much longer than that of other components, and the
workflow chain is relatively short.
Another issue is that the calculations assume all components will eventually be used in the process.
This may not be the case if the operations are relatively fast or there is variability in processing times.
For instance, if the dispensing and measuring times are short or are different from time to time, some
components might remain idle while others complete their tasks. This can lead to underutilization of
components and an inaccurate estimation of throughput.
Therefore, while it is possible to mathematically estimate system’s performance, in terms of through-
put, the estimation may not be accurate due the concurrent nature of operations. It’s also important
to consider the dynamic nature of operations when estimating throughput.
==PAGE:56==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
49
2.6.5.2
Throughput Estimation: Via Simulation
Accurate estimation of system’s performance can be done via simulation. In our setup, this is done by
utilizing the existing infrastructure of the system. It can be achieved in 2 possible ways: By running the
workflow in Gazebo simulation, or by conducting a real-time event-based simulation. In the first case,
all delays, which are part of the system’s general performance, are implicitly included. Gazebo provides
a high-fidelity simulation environment that closely mimics real-world conditions, allowing for accurate
testing and validation. Therefore, this means that every aspect of the system, on different layers, can
potentially be simulated, enabling more accurate performance estimation. The problem here is that
different devices should be accurately modelled in Gazebo. Moreover, longer real-world processes are
tedious to simulate, especially when considering rapid development. Therefore, this approach was not
selected. In the second case, system’s operations can be modelled as a sequence of events in time. Each
event occurs at a specific time and marks a change in the system’s state. State variables thus capture
the essential properties of the system at any given time. In our case, this approach was used to evaluate
how the system behaves in terms of utilization of components and resource allocation, which allowed in
turn to estimate throughput. All operations related to every component in the system were manually
introduced as delays in time. Despite the simulation was not configured to be purely event-based, since
it relies on time-based delays, the events are established based on variable changes, such as availability,
position, capacity, condition, etc. All operation times are scaled down to simulate longer real-world
processes in a shorter period, while maintaining the correct sequence and dependencies.
Both algorithms from the previous section, Algorithm 7 and Algorithm 6, were utilized to conduct
the simulation. To make them suitable for a real-time event-based simulation, a few modifications were
required. These modifications are illustrated in the modified algorithms, Algorithm 8 and Algorithm
10. The structure of thread management algorithm is kept the same. Only the robot calls are replaced
with a simulated call that delays the process. The function called is shown in 9. This function relies
on a matrix that contains robot arm operation times. The matrix keeps track of the time it takes for
the robot arm to perform a pick-and-place operation between each possible pair of devices in the setup.
This ensures that, regardless of where the devices are positioned, their positions are accounted for in
the simulation. This approach effectively addresses the dynamic nature of operations concerning device
placement. The operation time matrix is created by following these steps:
• 1. Build an appropriate virtual setup in Gazebo,
• 2. Spawn a robot arm into the simulation environment, where the setup is,
• 3. Utilize a deterministic planner to perform a pick-and-place operation between each possible
pair of devices in the setup, and store the time taken for each pair in a matrix (this step is
automated).
The last step requires using a deterministic planner. Deterministic planners are used to produce
predictable and repeatable motion plans. Unlike probabilistic planners, which use random sampling to
explore possible paths, these planners follow a predefined sequence of steps to ensure consistent results.
They are definitely suitable for lab automation scenarios that require that often require consistent and
repeatable results. Fortunately, this enables us to use the matrix in the way described, as the operation
times are unlikely to change in this case.
==PAGE:57==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
50
Algorithm 8 Thread Management for IOLabDevices
1: Initialization and Starting Threads:
2:
Create and start threads for each dispensing component.
3:
Create and start threads for each measuring component.
4: Main Loop:
5: while True do
6:
Set a flag to indicate whether to continue to the measuring component to False.
7:
for each thread in dispensing component threads do
8:
for each thread in measuring component threads do
9:
if the thread is free (indicated by an event being set) and there are plates available for the
measuring component then
10:
Set the flag to True.
11:
break
12:
end for
13:
if the flag is True then
14:
break
15:
if the thread is free (indicated by an event being set) and there are plates available for the
dispensing component then
16:
Get a plate from the dispensing component queue.
17:
Call PickOrPlace, passing the position of the stacker component, and change the current
position of the arm.
18:
Call PickOrPlace, passing the position of the target dispensing component, and change
the current position of the arm.
19:
Put the plate into the thread’s input queue.
20:
Wait for the thread to proceed (synchronized by proceed barrier).
21:
end if
22:
end for
23:
for each thread in measuring component threads do
24:
if the thread is free (indicated by an event being set) and there are plates available for the
measuring component then
25:
Get a plate from the measuring component queue.
26:
Call PickOrPlace, passing the position of the dispensing component that holds the plate,
and change the current position of the arm.
27:
Wait for the corresponding dispensing component thread to finish (synchronized by claim
barrier).
28:
Call PickOrPlace, passing the position of the measuring component, and change the cur-
rent position of the arm.
29:
Put the plate into the thread’s input queue.
30:
Wait for the thread to proceed (synchronized by proceed barrier).
31:
end if
32:
end for
33:
if the number of processed plates reaches the required amount then
34:
for each thread in dispensing component threads and each thread in measuring component
threads do
35:
Put a termination signal (None) into the thread’s input queue.
36:
Join the thread.
37:
end for
38:
break
39: end if
40: end while
==PAGE:58==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
51
Algorithm 9 A delay function to simulate pick-and-place operations
1: PickOrPlace(current_position, new_position, operation_times)
2:
Input:
3:
current_position is the current position of the arm
4:
new_position is the new position to move the arm to
5:
operation_times is a matrix of operation times between positions
6:
Output:
7:
new_positionn
8:
9:
if current_position ̸= new_position then
10:
Sleep for operation_times[current_position][new_position]
11:
else
12:
Pass
13:
end if
14:
15:
return new_position
As for IOLabDevice operation, the remote invocation is replaced with a delay simulating an execution
of a remote function. Furthermore, since assets are no longer managed by a device, they are introduced
in the operations as variables that change after every execution.
Algorithm 10 Simulation-Based IOLabDevice Operation Algorithm
1: Class Definition:
2:
Define the IOLabDevice class.
3: Initialization:
4:
Initialize the thread.
5:
Set up input and output channels as queues.
6:
Set the operation time.
7:
Initialize the resource to None.
8:
Create an event to indicate if the thread is free and set it.
9:
Create barriers for synchronization (proceed and claim).
10:
Set the single I/O flag.
11:
Assign assets.
12: Run Method:
13:
while True:
14:
Get a resource from the input channel.
15:
if the resource is None:
16:
break
17:
Clear the free event.
18:
Assign the device ID to the resource.
19:
Wait for the proceed barrier.
20:
Sleep for the operation time.
21:
if there are assets:
22:
for each asset in assets:
23:
Consume the asset.
24:
Put the resource into the output channel.
25:
if single I/O is enabled:
26:
Wait for the claim barrier.
27:
Set the free event.
==PAGE:59==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
52
2.6.5.3
Workflow Simulation & Analysis of Results
To see how the system behaves when running the workflow in simulation, it must first be configured
with the required parameters. The parameters used are shown in Table 2.2.
Parameter
Value
Mantis Execution Time
11.26 min
EnVision Execution Time
4.46 min
UR5e Execution Time
Varies (Between 2-10 sec)
Number of Mantis Devices
1-6
Number of EnVision Devices
1-2
Number of 384 Well-Plates
100
Number of Tubes per Mantis
3
Tube Capacity
50 ml
Reload Time
5-10 min; 30-60; 60-120
Reload Threshold
10 ml
Total Volume per Well-Plate
38.4 ml
Chip Change
20 sec
Scaling Factor
1/600
Throttling
0-5 min; 5-10 min
Table 2.2: Simulation Parameters
Most of the values are obtained from the real setup.
For example, device execution times are
determined empirically by running the devices using the default protocols. The property values for
well-plates and tubes are obtained from the description provided by the vendor.
Some values are
obtained by experimenting with different possible configurations, such as the number of devices in a
block containing one robot arm. These devices are virtually created in Gazebo and distributed in a
way that allows the robot arm to reach them all. The execution times for the robot arm, as already
explained in the previous section, are determined using Gazebo. Other values are random, which are
used to test the system, such as reload time and throttling.
Now, our setup utilizes Mantis, which uses tubes filled with reagents to dispense liquid on well-plates.
These tubes are regarded as assets. Whenever Mantis performs an execution in simulation, it uses these
tubes, which in turn consume the available liquid. There are in total 3 tubes per Mantis. Since the
total volume a 384 well-plate can hold is 38.4 ml, according to the specification in the table above, the
simulation generates consumption quotas. They are basically percentages that determine how much
volume from each tube should be used. The percentages are created by drawing samples from a uniform
distribution. When the volume inside a tube reaches 10 ml limit, refilling is called. This process makes
this Mantis out of service for about 5-10 minutes by default. Refilling can also take longer than this
duration.
In the first experiment, 6 Mantis devices and 2 EnVision devices were used. The results are shown
in Figure 2.28.
==PAGE:60==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
53
Figure 2.28: Metric measurements from workflow execution using 100 well-plates, 6 Mantis devices,
and 2 EnVision devices
This figure contains 4 plots. Top-left plot shows the total number of executions for each device
after running the workflow with 100 plates. It is evident that all Mantis devices were utilized more
or less equally. As for EnVision devices, the first one, Envision_1, was utilized more than the second,
Envision_2. This is supported by top-right and bottom-left plots. Top-right plot shows the total idle
time for each device. Envision_2 was the most idle device, meaning it waited the most without being
assigned any resources. Bottom-left plot shows the progression of executions against time. This reflects
how resources are allocated using the implemented scheduling policy. Despite the system managed
to fairly utilize all Mantis devices, it was slightly unfair towards EnVision devices.
There can be
two reasons: since the scheduling policy prioritizes the first available process, Envision_1 was possibly
frequently available, considering the number of devices involved and their execution times; Envision_1’s
availability was accelerated by some delays. In the first case, device’s availability cannot be controlled
directly, unless the number of devices is changed and their execution times are redefined in an optimal
way. This may require to perform optimizations. To avoid this, revising the scheduling policy can be a
more practical option. In the second case, the delays that can probably cause the acceleration, making
a device continuously available, are maybe related to tube liquid refilling. Bottom-right plot shows the
total number of tube reloadings for each Mantis (the colors do not play any role here other than for
easier visualisation; all tubes are utilized equally). The number of times each tube was reloaded is more
or less equal. This makes sense, as all tasks in the workflow have equal weights, and all Mantis devices
were utilized, and each one had the same usage time. The specific times when these reloadings happened
are shown in the bottom-left plot, indicated by stars. In any case, to test the theory suggested in the
second case, another experiment was conducted, but this time with no tube reloading. The results are
shown in Figure 2.29.
==PAGE:61==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
54
Figure 2.29: Metric measurements from workflow execution, when there is no tube reloading, using
100 well-plates, 6 Mantis devices, and 2 EnVision devices
This experiment shows that executions become smoother. It also shows that resource allocation is
affected by delays introduced by external processes. The execution times of Envision_1 and Envision_2
are now equal, despite Envision_2 was more idle than Envision_1.
Therefore, the system can be
sensitive to external processes.
This is also supported by other experiments conducted, where the
reloading time was increased to 30-60 min and 60-120 min. The results are shown in the Appendix in
Figures A.4 and A.5. Resource allocation to Mantis devices remained consistent even when the reload
time increased. This is probably because the reloading patterns are the same for all devices. To disturb
any patterns involved, another experiment was conducted, in which 0-5 min throttling was introduced.
The results are shown in Figure 2.30.
==PAGE:62==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
55
Figure 2.30: Metric measurements from workflow execution, with up to 5 min throttling, using 100
well-plates, 6 Mantis devices, and 2 EnVision devices
Throttling can be caused by several factors. To name just a few: if obstacles are introduced fre-
quently, the system may not be able to generate motion plans for the robot arm, which may lead to
process suspension; devices may throttle their operations to prevent overheating; maintenance checks
may be required from time to time. Throttling can lead to longer experiment times and reduced through-
put. Looking at the results in Figure 2.30, the first thing one can notice is the gradual usage pattern
of Mantis devices. Mantis_1 is utilized the most for dispensing, followed by Mantis_2, and so on. The
gradual pattern is explained by how the scheduling policy prioritises process. Yet, the results here con-
firm that irregularities in execution patterns can lead to unfair resource allocation; hence, resulting in
a lower throughput. Note how the workflow was executed taking significantly more time comparing to
the previous experiments. Another experiment was conducted with 5-10 min throttling instead, where
the impact was greater. The results are shown in the Appendix in Figure A.6.
So far, EnVision devices are assumed to be single in, single out devices, i.e., they do not utilize
stackers and accept one resource at a time. Figure 2.31 shows results from another experiment, in
which stackers with 20-plate magazines were used.
==PAGE:63==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
56
Figure 2.31: Comparison between default and prioritized allocation to EnVision devices that use
stackers with 20-plate magazines
In this case, EnVision_1 is naturally allocated more resources as it can always accept more, even
when busy with another task. Moreover, the results show that prioritizing EnVision_1 does not lead
to any significant deviation.
This is probably because the scheduling policy prioritizes, by default,
the first available process anyways, before going to the next available.
Since Mantis devices take
significantly longer time to complete their tasks, the rate at which EnVision devices accept resources
is low. Furthermore, since Mantis devices start processing one at a time, they would probably finish
their tasks consecutively and not simultaneously, assuming they all take the same amount of time to
finish.
This means that the first prioritized can be potentially skipped, since the scheduler checks
both availability of device and resource at the same time.
Therefore, the scheduling policy should
probably consider prioritizing processes based on the number of utilizations. If that does not lead to
any significant increase in throughput, the system should rely on the devices that get utilized the most.
Other devices that get utilized the least should be removed.
Now, to see how the number of devices affect throughput, a number of experiments were conducted,
which are based on trying and exploring all possible pairings and configurations. The results are shown
in Figures 2.32 and 2.33. The total time, obtained from experiments, was used to calculate throughput.
==PAGE:64==
2.6 Operations & Throughput
57
Figure 2.32: Impact of Mantis and EnVision device combinations on total time
Figure 2.33: Impact of Mantis and EnVision device combinations on throughput
From the throughput results, it is evident that the more devices are used, the more resources can be
processed. When 6 Mantis and 2 EnVision devices are used, the throughput is around 16 plates/hour.
There seems to be some linear trend, especially when 2 EnVision devices are used. Assuming that
increasing the number of devices would eventually produce a linear trend in terms of throughput increase,
this trend may not hold forever. Instead, it may stabilize at a certain point, where the rate of increase
(slope) approaches zero. This can be seen when only 1 EnVision device is used. Whether the linear trend
==PAGE:65==
2.7 Conclusion
58
can be turned into an exponential trend is left unexplored. Perhaps such a result could be achieved by
developing new scheduling policies or by trying different devices with certain capabilities.
Comparing generally the throughput calculations obtained from experiments that address different
scenarios can give an overall image illustrating what has the most impact on these calculations.
Figure 2.34: Throughput comparison results based on workflow execution in different scenarios using
the maximum number of devices
According to Figure 2.34, using an average robot execution time would not result in significant
deviation compared to using the operations time matrix. This matters, as it can potentially lead to
simplifying the simulations.
Long tube reloadings can significantly reduce system’s throughput.
If
tube reloading can be removed entirely from the workflow by using solutions that, for example, allow
dispensing devices to use reagents for the entire duration, throughput can eventually increase. The same
logic applies to throttling as well. Throttling can be controlled by optimising the system components
and enforcing protocols around the setup. This would help in reducing the throttling to the minimum
or even removing it. The predicted throughput based on Section 2.6.5.1 formulas is not far from the
actual throughput. However, for accurate throughput estimation, the mathematical method should be
avoided, unless another method is devised that could account for concurrency, ways of scheduling, and
generally the dynamic nature of operations.
2.7
Conclusion
What does this chapter adresss
How is the literature review relevant
whats the research
whats the system setup
what are the relevant results
how do the results relate to the goal of the chapter
==PAGE:66==
2.8 Extra Material
59
2.8
Extra Material
2.8.1
Dispense List Generation
Mantis utilizes a specifically formatted file known as a dispense list. This dispense list can be manually
created using the software interface. Additionally, FORMULATRIX provides detailed instructions on
how to format a file correctly, enabling Mantis to read it
Figure 2.35: The format in which the dispense list has to be for Forumaltrix Mantis to run it. Arrow
indicates tabular space while dot indicates a standard space7
Figure 2.35 shows the specific formatting required. The format cannot deviate from this as otherwise
it will fail. A more detailed description is shown in the on Table 2.3
Mantis_utils
Figure 2.36: Workflow diagram showcasing the utilisation of mantis_utils
7https://help.formulatrix.com/mantis/4.7/Content/Administrative_Tasks/Direct_Generation_of_Dispense_
List_Files.htm
==PAGE:67==
2.8 Extra Material
60
No.
Variable
Description
1
Version
Version of dispense list parser within the MANTIS software. Each
MANTIS software version comes with a parser version. The cur-
rent dispense list parser is compatible with the previous versions,
but we recommend upgrading the software to accommodate the
parser to read the dispense list accurately.
2
Plate Type Name
The name of the plate to be used in the dispense.
3
Delays
Defines the delay settings assigned in the dispense. Each delay
setting is separated by a tab, and multiple delays within a single
dispense are appended to this line. See the dispense list file format
sample.
4
Number of Plates
Specifies the number of plates to be dispensed. It’s typically used
for running a multi-plate dispense with a single dispense list.
5
Delay Between Wells Per Reagent
Number of reagents to be dispensed followed by the delay time
between wells for each reagent.
6
Reagent Location on Dispense List
Defines the reagent’s position in the dispense list.
7
Reagent Name and Viscosity
Name of the reagent and its viscosity to be used in the dispense.
8
Dispense Location
Specifies the dispense location followed by its index.
9
Well Designer
Defines the dispense volume in each well.
Table 2.3: Description of Variables in MANTIS Dispense List
A separate Python script named mantis_utils adds additional functionality to the Mantis API. This
script offers automation solutions for creating a dispense list based on the wishes of the user. It offers
two main functions
• questions(): Interface module for available options
• generate_displist(): Generates a correctly formatted dispense list for Mantis to interpret
Figure 2.36, shows how mantis_utils receives a matrix of composition, it then in turn converts the
matrix into a format that is readable by the Formulatrix Mantis system.
The script is currently designed around three available plate types suitable for Mantis
1. 384 ProxiPlate - 384 plus white
2. 96-Micronic on Perspex
3. Tube Rack-24-Plate
Figure 2.37 showcases the different sizes of the plates that are available with the current script. While
the 384 ProxiPlate - 384 plus white and 96-Micronic on Perspex shown in Figure 2.37c and Figure 2.37b
can be processes by the plate reader, the Tube Rack-24-Plate shown in Figure 2.37a cannot as the plate
reader is not designed to read tubes. Each plate type has its own dimensions that need to be taken into
account when generating a dispense list for them. Each well needs a description of how much liquid
necessary for Mantis to pour, therefore matrices are created that fit the size of the plate.
Figure 2.38 shows on the left side the initial list of compositions. The columns represent the liquids
chosen to dispense. It is important that the liquids chosen are calibrated on the software before intro-
ducing them. This script will do a preliminary search inside the mantis system to check if the liquids
are ready for use. In this case, the example is translating a list of 24 compositions using 3 different
liquids. This is designed for the Tube Rack-24-Plate. Each column represents a liquid and each row is a
percentage totalling up to 100 indicating how much of each liquid is required in a well. Since the initial
list works on a percentage basis, maximum volume in microliters for the wells need to be specified. In
the case of this example, a maximum volume of 50 microliters is used. Using this information, the list
==PAGE:68==
2.8 Extra Material
61
D
C
B
A
1
2
3
4
5
6
(a) Tube Rack-24-Plate size: 4x6
(b)
96-well-plate
size:
8x12
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:96-
Well_plate.svg.
(c)
384-well-plate
size:
16x24
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:384-
well_plate.svg
Figure 2.37: All three currently supported plate types
of compositions is translated into the format showcased to the left of Figure 2.38. The main part is the
matrices indicating how many microliters are dispensed in each well for each liquid. It creates a 4x6
matrix for every liquid by multiplying the percentage of by the desired maximum liquid volume. Over-
all three main parameters are needed to create this dispense list: Plate type, Initial composition
list and Maximum liquid volume. If unsure about these values, the function questions() helps
clarifying parameters to adjust for the current needs. It provides a comprehensive survey to find out the
desired plate type, max volume intended for each well and a matrix containing a list of compositions.
2.8.2
Attachment Designs
During the process of fitting the equipment to the lab, three components were 3D modeled and printed.
This section provides a walk-through on these components, explaining design choices in the iterations
involved, if any.
2.8.2.1
Finger Extensions
During the testing phase, it was evident that the lack of dexterity of the already attached gripper was
not suﬀicient for handling plates alongside Mantis and EnVision. The frame is designed in such a way
that there is an expansion outwards from the sides. When the gripper closes, this expansion reduces.
The expansion is completely reduced only when the gripper fingers touch each other. However, this
cannot happen when an object is picked. Thus, when handling plates by trying to place them on top of
==PAGE:69==
2.8 Extra Material
62
Water  Acid  Base
1:
0.30   0.30   0.40
2:
0.10   0.50   0.40
3:
0.20   0.40   0.40
4:
0.15   0.35   0.50
..
…
…
 ...
24:  0.40  0.30  0.20
[ Version ]
Tube Rack-24-Plate.pd.txt (Plate type)
0 (delays)
1 (number of plates)
3 0 0 0 (Number of reagents and delays between 
them)
0 (composition number)
Water 1 cP (reagent name and its viscosity)
Well 1 (well location)
15.0 5.0 10.0 7.5 12.5 17.5 
2.5 15.0 9.0 14.0 6.0 19.0 
11.5 16.5 4.0 13.0 7.5 16.0 
9.5 13.5 11.0 7.0 15.5 20.0
1
Acid 1 cP
Well 1
15.0 25.0 20.0 17.5 12.5 12.5 
22.5 10.0 16.0 11.0 14.0 11.0
13.5 8.5 21.0 17.0 12.5 9.0 
15.5 16.5 14.5 18.0 14.5 15.0
2
Base 1 cP
Well 1
20.0 20.0 20.0 25.0 25.0 20.0
25.0 25.0 25.0 30.0 20.0 25.0
25.0 25.0 25.0 20.0 30.0 25.0
25.0 20.0 30.0 20.0 25.0 10.0
Figure 2.38: A visual representation of an example case in how the initial matrix of compositions is
translated into a structure Mantis understands
Mantis or EnVision, the expansion outwards would block the gripper from reaching down to its proper
position.
To fix this issue, finger extensions were designed to increase the flexibility of movement in narrow
spaces. Vertically, the reach is extended by X cm to allow for the end-effector of UR5e to reach areas
previously blocked by the wide span of the gripper.
2.8.2.2
Design 1
Figure 2.39: Finger Extension: Design 1
The goal of the first design is proof of concept. For the end point of the gripper, rib marks were created
to introduce better friction for gripping of plates. Initially, the goal was also to include a bottle opening
mechanism to the gripper. To do so, a half circle with rib marks inside is designed horizontally through
the gripper to mimic a circular encasement of the cap of the bottle tightly gripping it. The 3D model
==PAGE:70==
2.8 Extra Material
63
in Figure 2.39, shows the positioning and structure of the design and the use of Ø4 screw holes at the
bottom to allow for installment on the gripper.
Issues with this design were evident as the material used was too flexible leading to the elongated
part bends when the gripper tries to hold tightly around a plate. This introduces several random factors
leading to inaccurate plate placement.
2.8.2.3
Design 2
Figure 2.40: Finger Extension: Design 2 - Front Side
Figure 2.41: Finger Extension: Design 2 - Back Side
To prevent bending of the weak plastic. A second design was created with screw holes on the back of it
to allow reinforcement. Two strong steel plates were designed to fit behind the extensions with screw
holes aligning to allow installment and connection of the two materials. The main gripper finger came
with its own rubber tips. Instead of rib marks, a feature was added that would allow these rubber tips
to be installed by sliding onto the tip of the extensions. As seen in Figure 2.41, 4 additional screw holes
with closed-end were added to the back.
While the metal reinforcement proved effective in preventing some extensions of bending, there was
still room for improvement.
2.8.2.4
Design 3
Figure 2.42: Finger Extension: Design 3
To avoid dependency on metal sheets, a third design was created with a thicker base. The fill percentage
was increased to 90% and the width of it as well. With this design, it is possible to avoid the metal
==PAGE:71==
2.8 Extra Material
64
sheets while still yielding the same results. Figure 2.42 shows the thicker base that was created to
prevent wiggles.
With the help of DTU’s manufacturing department, the third design was created using metal for
extra strength. A blueprint of the final design can be found in the Appendix in Figure B.1.
2.8.2.5
Camera mount
For volume estimation, the camera is supposed to be mounted on top of the end-effector. To achieve
this, a mount was 3D modeled and printed to create a viable position for the camera to be installed.
2.8.2.6
Design 1
Figure 2.43: End-Effector’s Camera Mount: Design 1
For easy installing, the mount wraps around the gripper with screws tightening the grip. This makes it
easy to remove or install the mount with only two screws that need to be tightened. While the idea was
good, the initial design caused wobbling when moving the robot manipulator. The points in which the
screws would be tightened were also weak and would crack when encountering too much force. Figure
2.43 shows the two separate bodies and how they connect through the bottom using two screws. The
two pillars on the top is where the camera is situated.
==PAGE:72==
2.8 Extra Material
65
2.8.2.7
Design 2
Figure 2.44: End-Effector’s Camera Mount: Design 2
The final design incorporates an arch going from where the camera is mounted to the base of the design
creating a stronger connection and less wobbling. To avoid cracking, a thicker and wider design was
created around the weak points, allowing stronger force to be used without cracks occurring. Figure
2.44 shows the areas of improvement and how the arch is connected to the main base of the design. A
blueprint of final design can be found in the Appendix in Figure B.2.
2.8.2.8
Tripod Piece
A connecting piece was created between the tripod and the camera. This piece is an essential part to
install the camera on the tripod as it connects the top part of the tripod with the bottom of a camera.
2.8.2.9
Design
Figure 2.45: Front side
Figure 2.46: Back side
Figure 2.47: Final design view
To create the fit, a trapezoidal prism object was created. This ensured the object fits inside the tripod
without any room for movement. As seen on Figure 2.46, a screw hole through the middle of the object
==PAGE:73==
2.8 Extra Material
66
allows for a screw to go through from bottom up. The empty space around the screw hole is to allow
the screw head to be fully screwed in without interfering with the bottom of the tripod. A blueprint of
final design can be found in the Appendix in Figure B.3.
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 3
System Continuity: Volume
Estimation
Computer vision has transformed many areas by empowering machines to have vision and understanding
of visual content. However, it faces several significant challenges that can hinder its widespread adoption
and effectiveness[25]. One of the issues is the variability in data quality, such as differences in lighting,
angles, and sample appearances, and more, which can impact the consistency and accuracy of the image
analysis.
Computer vision methods can be based on using two separated approaches, namely rule- and machine
learning based. The former employs deterministic methods, which produce consistent and predictable
results, to detect features in images such as edges, shapes, textures, etc. While they may be powerful
for simple tasks, they are better at handling specific tasks, rather than general.
In contrast, machine learning based approach leverages advanced machine learning techniques, par-
ticularly deep learning, to automatically learn features, by training on large amounts of data, and pre-
dicting them. Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), in particular Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs),
have revolutionized computer vision[26][39], as they can capture intricate patterns and nuances which
otherwise would not have been captured by the rule-based methods. Though, one of the challenges
that comes with this approach is the availability of high-quality data. Getting high-quality and repre-
sentative data can be diﬀicult. Moreover, large amounts of data are also required to introduce more
features and patterns to learn from. However, even when these conditions are satisfied, the approach
is in general not deterministic, which means that the results produced may not be accurate enough.
Experimental chemical laboratories consists largely of the handling of materials in vessels involving
moving and mixing liquids, dissolving or precipitating solids, or extraction and distillation. As such,
inspection of vessels can play an important role in maintenance. Computer Vision offers mechanisms
for such inspection of vessels in both rule- and machine learning based approaches Recent research in
volume estimation using computer vision have led to promising results.
A rule-based approach to the volume estimation problem is to use edge detection for finding water
level [28].
In addition, recent advances in deep learning have further improved the capabilities of
computer vision systems[22][68]. CNNs, for example, have demonstrated exceptional performance in
tasks such as object detection, segmentation, and volume estimation. These techniques can be adapted
to analyze visual data from laboratory containers, providing precise volume measurements.
3.1
Literature review
3.1.1
Vision-based Liquid Level Detection in Amber Glass Bottles using OpenCV
The paper[28] primarily aims to address the issue of ensuring consistent liquid fill levels in amber glass
bottles used in various industries, particularly in the pharmaceutical industry. Traditional inspection
methods are labor-intensive and subjective, so the paper proposes an automated, vision-based system
using Python and OpenCV for image processing. By finding the line that borders between liquid and
emptiness of a tube, it is possible to estimate three different scenarios; over-filled, under-filled or within
volume target
==PAGE:75==
3.1 Literature review
68
The methods employed in this study involve several key steps to ensure accurate liquid level detection.
First, images of the amber glass bottles are captured using a high-resolution camera. These images are
then converted to grayscale to simplify the processing. A Gaussian blur is applied to the grayscale
images to reduce noise and enhance the edge detection process.
The core technique used for edge
detection is the Canny edge detection method, which is known for its accuracy in identifying edges in
an image.
Once the edges are detected, the next step involves identifying the region of interest (ROI) in the
image, which is the area where the liquid level is to be measured. The system then determines the
vertical distance between the liquid surface and the top boundary of the ROI. This measurement is
used to classify the fill levels into three categories: over-filled, within target, and under-filled. The
classification is based on predefined thresholds that determine whether the liquid level falls within
acceptable limits.
The paper concludes that the proposed system successfully detects over-filled, under-filled, and
correctly filled bottles. However, it acknowledges that further development is required to adapt this
system for real-time use in fast-paced manufacturing environments. The study also suggests enhance-
ments such as detecting other errors like bubbles and misplacement of bottle caps to improve the overall
effectiveness of the quality control process.
3.1.2
Artificial intelligence to estimate wine volume from single-view images
The paper[22] aims to develop a method to accurately determine the volume of wine in various glass
containers from a single image.
This CNN based approach determines red wine volume in a glass
container from single-view RGB images.
The researchers used a deep learning model trained on the WineGut_BrainUp dataset, which in-
cludes 24,305 images of wine glasses in different conditions. They applied a regression CNN to predict
the wine volume without needing a reference object in the image. The model was trained with diverse
images, considering different glass types, volumes, backgrounds, angles, and lighting conditions.
The training process involved several key steps. First, images were taken of nine types of glasses
filled with eleven different volumes of wine, ranging from 50 mL to 300 mL. These images were captured
under various conditions, including different distances (close, medium, far), angles (upper, central,
lower), and lighting settings (flash, no flash). To enhance the model’s robustness, data augmentation
techniques were applied, including resizing, cropping, and altering the brightness of the images. The
CNN architecture used was based on the Xception neural network, known for its eﬀiciency and high
performance in image classification tasks.
The model was adapted for regression tasks to predict
continuous wine volumes.
The study concludes that the proposed model can effectively estimate the volume of wine in a glass
with a mean absolute error of less than 10 mL. This method surpasses traditional Food Frequency
Questionnaires (FFQs) by providing more accurate and automatic volume measurements.
3.1.3
Vision-based Robot Manipulation of Transparent Liquid Containers in a
Laboratory Setting
While the previous paper introduces a fundamental approach of detecting volume, this paper[68] ad-
dresses a more relevant method of volume estimation in the field of computer vision in a laboratory
setting. The paper addresses the challenge of automating laboratory processes involving small volumes
of liquids. These tasks are typically performed manually due to high initial costs and protocol variabil-
ity. The goal is to develop a flexible and cost-effective vision-based system for liquid volume estimation
and a simulation-driven pouring method designed for containers with small openings, demonstrated
using a UR5 robotic arm.
The proposed system consists of a two-step CNN approach. The first CNN processes RGB images
to predict the segmentation and depth of both the container and the liquid inside. This step leverages
existing datasets like TransProteus and Vector-LabPics. The second CNN estimates the liquid volume
==PAGE:76==
3.2 Motivation
69
based on these intermediate predictions. Additionally, a novel pouring strategy for small openings is
developed, where the robot rotates around a fixed liquid exit point to minimize spillage. This method
is particularly useful for cell culture flasks and other laboratory containers with small openings.
The vision model’s performance is evaluated using various metrics. The segmentation and depth
estimation network (SDE) achieves a mean Intersection over Union (IoU) of 0.92 and a scale-invariant
log RMSE of 0.031 on the test subset. The LVE network, trained on the LabLiquidVolume dataset,
achieves the best performance when using segmented depth maps and vessel volume, with an RMSE of
17.83 mL and an R2 score of 0.99.
The study concludes that the proposed system effectively estimates liquid volumes and performs
accurate pouring tasks in laboratory settings. The integration of the vision-based volume estimation
with the UR5 robotic arm demonstrates the potential for flexible automation in small-scale laboratory
experiments. However, the system’s precision needs improvement for broader applications. The pa-
per provides open-source code and a new dataset, LabLiquidVolume, to support further research and
development in this area.
3.1.4
Conclusion
The integration of computer vision into laboratory environments offers promising solutions. By leverag-
ing advanced image processing and machine learning techniques, computer vision systems can accurately
estimate the volume of liquid in containers, thereby automating a critical aspect of laboratory manage-
ment. This can lead to improved accuracy, reduced human error, and increased operational eﬀiciency.
Despite these advances, challenges remain. Variations in lighting, container shapes, and liquid trans-
parency can affect the accuracy of volume estimation. Therefore, ongoing research and development
are essential to address these issues and fully realize the potential of computer vision in laboratory
environments .
3.2
Motivation
This chapter provides a method to detect liquid level using rule-based approach computer vision. The
approach explores computer vision methods to create a strong horizontal line between the liquid and
emptiness, this will also serve as the first approach for volume estimation. The purpose of this method
is to provide a proof-of-concept and lay the groundwork for more advanced rule-based techniques. The
other method is to estimate volume of vessels using machine learning-based approach utilising the model
LabLiquidVision[23].
As mentioned in Process, Setup, & Structure in Section 2.3, FORMULATRIX MANTIS (Mantis)
is used for liquid dispensing. This robot comes with placeholders for tubes in which it can dispense
liquid from. However, the tubes designed to be held are relatively small and can run out of liquid
within a couple of runs. Consequently, it is crucial to continuously monitor liquid levels inside the
tubes to determine when a refill is necessary. While a rule-based approach can be relevant due to its
deterministic nature and simplicity, its limitations, such as the inability to adapt to variations and
complexities in the data. These limitations are explored to see its effectiveness for volume estimation.
Machine learning, particularly deep learning, can automatically learn and adapt to intricate patterns
and dynamic factors, which is essential for accurate volume estimation. However, it remains important
to assess how this approach handles dynamic factors like varying environmental conditions. Hence, the
question that this chapter aims to answer is Which of the tested combinations yields the best
results in terms of volume estimation
3.3
Liquid Level Detector: A Rule-Based Approach
To ensure the continuity of the workflow in a closed-loop processes presented in the previous chapter,
Chapter 2: System Design, the system, which is managing the workflow, requires a detection method
==PAGE:77==
3.3 Liquid Level Detector: A Rule-Based Approach
70
for continuously checking the volumes of reagents inside tubes, which are used to create mixtures by a
dispensing device. Our first approach was based on using OpenCV’s image processing methods to create
a liquid level detector, following a similar approach proposed in Vision-based Liquid Level Detection
in Amber Glass Bottles using OpenCV[28]. While this paper considers a method to detect whether
liquid levels in amber bottles are above, below, or within the target range, our main focus here is
directed primarily on detecting the liquid level in transparent vessels. Detecting liquid levels can yield
information about the remaining volume inside a vessel, given its size and dimensions. Using this can
allow the system to send alert signals when tube refilling is needed.
Algorithm 11 Liquid Level Detector
1: PickOrPlace(cropped_image)
2:
Input: Cropped image of a vessel
3:
Output: Processed image with detected line at liquid level
4:
5:
Read the image
6:
Convert to grayscale
7:
Apply Gaussian blur
8:
Compute the gradient along the y direction using Sobel operator
9:
Normalize to the range [0, 255]
10:
Detect edges using Canny edge detector
11:
Detect lines using Hough Line Transform and store them in lines
12:
if lines is not None then
13:
for each line in lines do
14:
Extract rho and theta from line
15:
Compute line endpoints (x1, y1) and (x2, y2)
16:
Compute the inclination angle alpha
17:
if abs(alpha) < 1 degrees then
18:
Append line position
19:
end if
20:
end for
21:
Find the longest line
22:
Draw line on the image
23:
else
24:
return None
25:
end if
26:
27:
return Longest line
The steps involved in the liquid level detector algorithm (Algorithm 11) are described as follows:
• 1. Obtain a cropped image that contains a vessel with liquid. The cropping should be tight,
considering that the liquid level is assumed to be the longest horizontal edge in the image.
• 2. Convert to grayscale to simplify processing, as color information is not needed for edge
detection.
• 3. Apply Gaussian Blur to reduce noise and smooth the image, which helps in better edge
detection.
• 4. Compute the gradient along the y direction of the blurred image using the Sobel opera-
tor. The operator emphasizes changes in intensity along the vertical axis, which corresponds to
horizontal edges in the image. This is useful as it helps making liquid level faster more prominent.
==PAGE:78==
3.3 Liquid Level Detector: A Rule-Based Approach
71
• 5. Normalize the gradient image to the range [0, 255] to standardize the pixel values, making it
easier to process.
• 6. Detect edges using the Canny edge detector to find edges in the normalized image. This step
is crucial for identifying the boundaries of the liquid in the vessel.
• 7. Detect the lines in the edge-detected image using the Hough Line Transform. Only horizontal
lines are selected. The longest is filtered out. This line is assumed to represent the liquid level.
These steps are also illustrated with a sample image in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Steps involved in Liquid Level Detector in Algorithm 11 on sample image
It is clear from the example that this method has some potential. It was able to detect liquid level
in a transparent liquid. Transparent liquids are typically hard to work with because they do not have
clear edges, lack of distinct, and variable appearance. However, the algorithm assumes that the longest
horizontal line detected is the level of the liquid. This is acceptable if the cropped image contains only
the vessel, with no surroundings included. Additionally, obtaining such image is possible by knowing
the exact position of of the vessel. A problem can arise when there are other edges long enough to be
considered as liquid levels. For example, some liquid mixtures contain immiscible liquids, which typically
form distinct boundaries. Another example is when edges behind the target vessel, which can be visible
through a transparent liquid, are detected.
This scenario is actually included in the sample image
shown in Figure 3.1. Fortunately, the green edge in the background was ignored. Yet, the algorithm
does not address this issue, which can potentially occur in different sample images. After running the
algorithm on various other images, it proved to be unreliable. Sometimes, it failed to detect any edges,
while in other cases, it estimated the line in incorrect locations. The reason is related to the manual
configuration of Canny edge detector and Hough Line Transform. In case of the former, two thresholds
need to be defined: lower threshold and upper threshold. Any edge with a gradient intensity below the
lower threshold is considered non-edge. Any edge with a gradient intensity above the upper threshold
is considered a strong edge. Edges with gradient intensities between the lower and upper thresholds are
considered edges only if they are connected to strong edges. These two thresholds can change based
on many factors, e.g., lighting, reflections, contrast, brightness, shadows, etc. Figure 3.2 illustrates an
example where the upper threshold needed to be reduced to achieve better edge detection. The image
was captured under different lighting conditions using a different color for liquid (blue). As for the
latter, the minimum number of intersections (votes), which are used to detect a line, should be defined.
A higher threshold means that only lines with more votes will be detected, which usually corresponds
to more prominent lines. This can be affected by many factors as well, e.g., image resolution, edge
==PAGE:79==
3.4 LabLiquidVision
72
density, noise level, etc. This step depends on edge detection; therefore, all factors that impact Canny
are also relevant. Thus, dynamic adjusting is required for achieving robustness.
This discussion shows the diﬀiculties involved when considering a rule-based computer vision meth-
ods. They require accurate considerations of multiple parameters that can affect the computations.
Nevertheless, perfecting these methods is possible, but the cost to develop them is high. As part of
researching the ways to estimate the remaining volume in liquid vessels, our motive here was to try out
a light-weight method and assess its potential, laying the groundwork for more advanced rule-based
techniques in future research.
Figure 3.2: An example showing a sample image that required manual adjustment of Canny’s thresh-
olds to improve edge detection (to the right is the improved version in which a clear horizontal edge
became visible)
3.4
LabLiquidVision
LabLiquidVision is a deep learning-based solution, which can estimate volume in transparent liquid
vessels using raw images from a camera without requiring any pre-processing or knowledge about the
vessels.
It involves a two-step process using CNNs. In the first step, the first CNN process a single RGB
image of a transparent vessel filled with liquid. This network predicts two important features: segmen-
tation, which identifies and outlines the vessel and the liquid inside it, a depth, which determines the
spatial dimensions of both the container and the liquid. For training this initial CNN, LabLiquidVision
utilizes existing datasets such as TransProteus[27] and Vector-LabPics[26], which are designed for tasks
involving transparent containers.
In the second step, the outputs from the first CNN, segmentation and depth predictions, are passed
to a second CNN. This network processes these intermediate predictions to estimate the volume of the
liquid in the vessel. To train this second CNN, a new dataset called LabLiquidVolume is created. This
data set contains 5,451 RGB images of transparent laboratory vessels, each image manually labeled
with the actual liquid volume.
==PAGE:80==
3.5 Dataset Analysis
73
The advantage of this two-step architecture is that it allows the newly introduced dataset for the
second step to be relatively small. The masks and depth data given from the first CNN effectively
helps the second CNN in predicting volumes as it provides extra information about an image. This
approach improves the overall accuracy of liquid volume estimation by refining the predictions through
two stages, leveraging different datasets and CNNs for improved final predictions.
Figure 3.3: Showcasing how it takes a single input RGB image, predicts the vessel depth with its
contents using the first CNN segmentation and depth. The second step is then using the second CNN
to predict
This chapter will go through testing LabLiquidVision to evaluate its strengths and weaknesses, hence
providing insight into whether it is robust and reliable in different settings.
3.5
Dataset Analysis
Any deep learning-based method is essentially trained, validated, and tested on some dataset before
it is deployed. Before assessing the model’s performance, analyzing the dataset is a necessary step to
conduct. It serves two purposes: to provide insight into how the model would behave and to act as
reference material for explaining certain observed behaviors. Since LabLiquidVision is designed for use
in laboratory setups, which often do not vary significantly, such a model should be able to generalize
across various setup settings. If this is not the case, it should ideally be retrained and assessed on its
generalization capabilities. This can happen if there is a strong correlation between the dataset and the
model’s predictions; in this case, the model likely exhibits some traits of bias. This section will provide
insight into the dataset LabLiquidVision was trained on, which will be helpful for understanding its
behavior later on.
==PAGE:81==
3.5 Dataset Analysis
74
Figure 3.4: Frequency of liquid vessel usage in dataset images
Now, the bar plot in Figure 3.4 provides an overview of the different types of liquid vessels used in
the dataset. The dataset, apart from description files, consists of images calculated to be 55951samples,
each containing a vessel with liquid. These vessels vary, and the bar chart displays all the different types
of vessels along the x-axis, such as ‘Cell Flask 160mL,’ ‘Duran 100mL,’ and ‘Gibco 500mL.’ The y-axis
shows the number of times each specific vessel is used in the images. Clearly, ”Cell Flask 400mL”, ”Gibco
500mL”, and ”Duran 500mL” are the most frequently used vessels, close to 700 times each. In contrast,
”Tube 15mL” is the least used. It also has the smallest capacity among all the vessels. ”Tube_50mL”
has the second lowest capacity. An interesting note is that 2 out of the 12 vessels used in the dataset
are tubes. This may indicate a bias towards flasks and bottles, which can contain significantly more
volume, leading probably to inaccuracies towards prediction of low volumes and generally volumes in
tubes.
1There seems to be a misalignment in what the calculated number of imagines are to the oﬀicially stated amount.
This can may be due to mistype or new additions to the dataset
==PAGE:82==
3.5 Dataset Analysis
75
Figure 3.5: Frequency of liquid vessel usage by liquid type in dataset images
The liquid inside each vessel in every image was of a different color, namely blue, green, and red.
Looking at the overall distribution of colors in Figure 3.5, there seems to be a tendency towards
using red liquids. Note that blue was not used at all in ”Duran_100mL”, ”StorageBottle_250mL”,
”StorageBottle_500mL”, and ”Tube_15mL”. Blue colored liquids are generally used the least. This
can lead to two scenarios: the model is more eﬀicient at predicting volumes of red and green liquids,
or, by flipping the perspective, at predicting what is not red and green. This latter concept is related
to negative learning or negative sampling, where the model learns to recognize what something is by
understanding what it is not. In total, 56.7% (3173) of all the vessels used contained red liquid, followed
by green at 31.5% (1760), and blue at 11.8 (662). This is also shown in Figure 3.6.
(a) Frequency diagram for colors
(b) Percentage distribution for colors
Figure 3.6: Overall distribution of liquid color used
The focus can shift now towards volumes in different vessels. Figure 3.7 shows a detailed view of
the distribution of liquid volumes across various vessels.
==PAGE:83==
3.5 Dataset Analysis
76
Figure 3.7: Variability in Vessel Volumes (box plot)
This box plot shows significant variability in volumes, particularly in vessels like ”Cell_Flask_400mL”,
Durna_500mL”, ”Gibco 500mL”, and ”StorageBottle_250mL”, where the range is quite extensive. It
is worth noting that some vessels seem to have contained more volume than their actual capacity. Most
of these cases extend to the largest values within 1.5 times the IQR from the Q3 quartile. Since there
are no outliers, this means that up to 25% of the data samples are based on having more volume than
the actual capacity, which is an interesting fact.
Figure 3.8: Variability in Vessel Volumes (violin plot)
Complementing the box plot, Figure 3.8 shows the probability density of the data for each vessel.
==PAGE:84==
3.5 Dataset Analysis
77
The width of each ”violin” shape at various points reflects the density of the data, providing a visual
representation of where most data points are concentrated. While there are slight skews in the density,
it seems that the dataset has provided a wide range of liquid volumes for each vessel, ensuring an equal
distribution of volumes. Yet, the dataset overall does not concentrate on low volumes. The mean of
volume means from each vessel is 157.9 mL. This can be relevant when the model is used to predict
volumes in small vessels.
Another interesting parameter to investigate is the distance from camera to the liquid vessels. This
parameter is not directly obtained from the description files provided with the dataset. This may also
indicate that it was not specifically controlled. The dataset comes with a disparity map for each sample
(most of them at least). To obtain the distance, the focal length (in pixels) and baseline of the camera
(Intel RealSense Depth Camera D415) were used to compute depth maps. Using vessel masks, each
depth map was masked, and then the mean of the remaining depth points was taken. The nearest point
in this mask corresponds to an estimated distance from camera’s sensor to the nearest point on vessel’s
surface. This is illustrated in Figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: An example showing the depth point collected from a sample image
According to Figure 3.10, most of the images are taken from a distance of 0.20 meters. The distances
range from 0.15 to 0.28 meters. The variations almost follow a normal distribution. Distance can play a
significant role, as previously shown. Lighting, shadows, reflections, focus, sharpness, and image quality
can all change when the distance varies. While these factors were not addressed during the dataset
collection, they can contribute to model biases towards specific scenarios. In any case, this confirms
that the dataset overall does not account for distance, partly because the variations occur within a
small range.
==PAGE:85==
3.5 Dataset Analysis
78
Figure 3.10: Distribution of distances to the liquid vessels
As for lighting conditions, all images were converted from RGB to HSV format. The Value compo-
nent in HSV represents the brightness of the image, which directly correlates with the lighting conditions.
Higher values indicate brighter images, while lower values indicate darker images.
Figure 3.11: Distribution of brightness reflecting the light settings in the images
Figure 3.11 shows the distribution of the Value component values. The presence of two peaks in the
distribution suggests a bimodal distribution. This could mean that the images fall into two categories:
one set of images is generally brighter, and another set is generally darker. Higher V component values
correspond to brighter colors, while lower values correspond to darker colors. Thus, such a distribution
might reflect different lighting conditions under which the images were taken. This might introduce
bias if the model is more sensitive to one of the peaks.
==PAGE:86==
3.6 Experimental Setup
79
3.6
Experimental Setup
To create the experimental setup several components are needed. A camera is needed for taking sin-
gle RGB images, tubes for storing liquid, food coloring for liquid color transformation, and a robot
manipulator. The components involved are stated in the following list:
• Camera: Intel RealSense Depth Camera D455
• Tubes: Simple 50 mL cylinder tubes
• Food Coloring: 3 food color additives: red, blue and green
• Robot Manipulator: UR5e robot arm
• Tube holder: Mantis Liquid Dispenser, which provides up to 6 holders for 50 mL cylinder tubes
2.
This question is answered by creating a lab setup with the camera attached to the end effector of
the manipulator. The manipulator is in the middle of the table with the Mantis positioned in front
above the table height. A tube is placed in one of the 6 placeholders of the Mantis. The purpose of
this setup is to be able to have flexibility for the manipulator to have the flexibility to move to three
different angles in an automated fashion.
For this experiment, there are 6 independent variables:
• Volume
• Angle
• Lighting
• Context
• Color
• Distance
These independent variables are also the experimental conditions, as each is experimented on to find
the optimal setting.
Three volumes (15ml, 25ml, and 35ml) were used to represent low, medium, and high levels. Thus,
volume parameter helps determine if there are any inaccuracies due to liquid volume.
Most of the samples used to train the model show a certain trend; there is a tendency to view the
flasks from top to bottom. For this, the angle parameter allows for a diversification of view varying
from bottom up, straight on, and top down.
While in most laboratory cases, room lighting can be very controlled, it is also important to explore
the model’s performance under different lighting conditions.
Therefore, the lighting parameter is
introduced to test two scenarios: lights turned on and lights turned off.”
For Context we introduce two scenarios. In the first scenario, the tubes are positioned closely
together on the Mantis system. To focus on individual tubes and exclude neighboring ones, a parameter
is needed to ensure that the image is tightly cropped around a single tube, effectively isolating it from
adjacent tubes.
The second scenario aims to replicate LabLiquidVision’s typical cases, where images include a more
expansive view with a single flask in a broad, empty area. Here, a parameter is needed to provide a
wider field of view, capturing the flask within a larger, unobstructed background
Figure 3.12 shows the difference between the two parameters. Context0 as seen on Figure 3.12a
aims to be used as a parameter for the first scenario where the picture needs to be cropped tightly to
2For the purpose of keeping experimentation close to our real setup, Mantis is used as a holder for the tubes.
==PAGE:87==
3.6 Experimental Setup
80
(a) An example of
a sample without
context (context0)
variable
(b) An example of a sample with
context (context1) variable
Figure 3.12: Comparison of samples with and without context variables
the tube. Context1 as seen on Figure 3.12b allows for a wider range of the image to be captured as well
as a monotone background simulating closer to what LabLiquidVision dataset includes.
Color represents blue, red and green to explore effects of liquid color on model’s performance.
The model did not consider the distance at which the images were taken nor its potential impact
on predictions. To account for this, a new parameter is introduced, called distance, which captures
the variations in distance. Distancing is in the experiment is approached in a unique way. The theory
is that if an image is taken at a certain distance and cropped to fit the area around the tube, the only
difference between two images taken at different distances but cropped to the same area around the
tube is the resolution. As a camera moves closer to the tube, the resolution of the target area increases.
Hence, more pixels represent the tube’s surface, edges, and any fine features. At greater distances, the
tube occupies fewer pixels, resulting in a lower resolution of the target area. Fine details may become
less discernible. Therefore, instead of physically moving the camera, an image is taken and resized using
3 resolution factors representing three distances: 1 (rendering essentially the original image), 2/3, and
1/3. This approach allows for quicker experimentation while adjusting for varying distances. These
factors are inversely proportional to the distance. In fact, by halving the resolution, i.e., reducing the
height and width of an image by half, the distance doubles. The concept is shown in Figure 3.13.
When the distance doubles, the frame containing the tube captures more of the surroundings; how-
ever, the window focusing on the tube itself reduces in size relative to the size of the image. As shown
in Figure 3.13, for simplicity, if the camera was initially at E and then moved to A, two sides of two
windows can be created, namely BC and DE. These two sides correspond to the bases of two similar
right-angle triangles, △ABC and △AED, respectively. By using similarity ratio, h′ = h
2 can be ob-
tained, where h corresponds to the height of the original image, and h′ corresponds to the height of the
image when the distance is doubled. The same interpretation applies to the width of an image.
Controlled variables are variables that are held constant throughout the experimentation process.
For controlled variables:
• 50 mL tube is used for all experimental conditions
• Camera settings
==PAGE:88==
3.7 Methodology
81
B
C
D
E
h
w
𝑑!"#$
ℎ/2
ℎ!/2 = 𝑑"#$%&#" 
𝑑&#'( 
⇒ℎ' 𝑑&#'(
𝑑"#$%&#"
= ℎ!
𝑑%"&'!"%
ℎ!
2
ℎ
2
𝑑"#$%&#"= 2𝑑&#'( →ℎ' 𝑑&#'(
2𝑑&#'(
= ℎ! ⇒ℎ
2 = ℎ′
Figure 3.13: Illustration showing the relationship between resolution reduction and distance to object
3.7
Methodology
This section introduces the hierarchy of variable adjustments to ensure an eﬀicient management of
variables. The process of experimentation can be split into two parts, automated and manual. The role
of each part is explained. Additionally, the LabLiquidVision model and its crucial preconfigurations,
along with the feature importance algorithm necessary for the data analysis, are also explained
3.7.1
Hierarchy
For the experiment to run smoothly, a hierarchy of process needs to be set to establish order in the
management of variables. This idea is represented in Figure 3.14, showing the order of which variables
were changed from Distance being the first and Context the last. The two fully automated processes,
Angle and Distance, are positioned at the beginning of the hierarchy because their automation allows
for quick and easy transitions. Distance is purely happening computationally, therefore, it is the easiest
to have as the first variable changing next to Angle. For the manual processes, the order in which the
variables are chosen is to minimise time required for adjustments. It was found to be easier to change
the volume of a tube (going from 35 to 25 to 15 mL) with the same color than to change color for
each set of volume. Color and Lighting are interchangeable in terms of time required for adjustments.
Finally, Context added at last as it was a last minute addition to the experimental setup.
==PAGE:89==
3.7 Methodology
82
Context
Lighting
Color
Volume
Angle
Distance
Figure 3.14: Visual representation of the hierarchy of the parameters, brown color showcasing variables
that were manually changed and black being automatically changed through the algorithm
3.7.1.1
Automated part
The automated part influences two variables, namely Angle, and Distance. When running the experi-
ment, these two variables are changed accordingly in a structured manner.
Figure 3.15 shows the step by step procedure of how experimentation is conducted covering the
automated part. This procedure is programmed in a script that moves the robot arm to a certain angle,
takes an image using the camera mounted on the end-effector, splits it to three different resolutions,
and predicts the volume using LabLiquidVision. The process is described in the following algorithm:
Algorithm 12 Automatic Collection of Volume Predictions
1: N ←number of experiments
2: for angle in angles do
3:
Move the robot arm into the angle position
4:
for i = 1 to N do
5:
Take an image
6:
Process the image
▷Crops the image and splits into three resolutions
7:
for each processed image do
8:
Estimate volume using LabLiquidVision
9:
Save the predicted volume in a CSV file
10:
end for
11:
end for
12: end for
==PAGE:90==
3.7 Methodology
83
1
2/3
1/3
angle0
Lab
Liquid
Vision
angle1
angle2
Context0
Figure 3.15: Visual showcase of experimentation procedure
As seen in Algorithm 12, it starts at an angle for which the robot manipulator with the camera
attached to it moves to the desired position.
A variation in the order of straight onto the tubes
(angle0), top-down (angle1) and then bottom-up (angle2) view is created. The next process can then
happen any given N amount of time. This depends on how many repetitions of a setting is needed. It
is a value decided by the user and can be determined by how many number of experiments is needed.
In this case, 10 experiments are done to account for any variability happening in the model. The image
is then processed. The first step of the processing is cropping the image accordingly to the angle. Once
that is done, it then splits the image up to three images with the different resolutions. For the three
images, LabLiquidVision is then applied to predict volume and the value is stored in a CSV file.
It is important to note that the angle is a manually created coordinate of x, y, z according to where
Mantis is placed. The angle positions are assigned to ensure the tube is isolated in the frame during
cropping. Therefore, the script is not general for all cases and the coordinates have to be adjusted for
other cases.
3.7.1.2
Manual Variables
The manual part affects four variables: Lighting, Color, Volume, and Context. The process involves the
following steps:
1. Volume Variation: The volume is varied across 35 mL, 25 mL, and 15 mL. For each volume,
the automated script is run.
2. Color Variation: After testing with one volume, the liquid color is changed (e.g., blue to red to
green), and volume tests are repeated.
3. Lighting Variation: Once all volume and color tests are completed, the lighting is changed, and
the entire set of tests is repeated.
4. Context variation: A monotone background is created by manually placing paper behind the
tube. The entire set of tests is then repeated with this new context.
==PAGE:91==
3.7 Methodology
84
3.7.2
Feature Importance
Feature importance was calculated using Random Forest Regression. Its feature importance evaluation
uses Mean Decrease in Impurity (MDI) approach. MDI provides a measure of how much each feature
contributes to reducing the prediction error. The MDI method quantifies feature importance by sum-
ming the reductions in impurity that occur when a feature is used for splitting, averaged over all trees
in the forest
Figure 3.16: Diagram showing the functions of MDI
Figure 3.16 illustrates process of determining feature importance using the MDI in a Random Forest.
The steps are to build several decision trees, and each tree is represented by branches starting from
the Random Forest node. For each tree, there are two nodes for Impurity Before Split and Impurity
After Split that describe data impurity before and after splitting with some feature, respectively. The
difference in these impurity levels is calculated for each node, representing the reduction in impurity
due to the feature. This impurity reduction is then weighted by the number of samples in the node, as
denoted in the part Calculate Impurity Reduction. These reductions are aggregated across all nodes and
trees to compute the total contribution of each feature. These individual feature contributions are then
averaged and scaled as part of the final result to get a unified MDI score, which reflects the importance
of the features in making predictions.
This algorithm is used when the data is loaded using Pandas. Random Forest regression is initialise
and fitted to the data which has the functionality to apply MDI on the data.
3.7.3
Dropout
Once the optimal setting has been found. A final analysis will be performed with slight adjustment to
the model. The model came preconfigured with a dropout of 0.2 applied in its predictions. Dropout
is a regularization technique that randomly deactivates neurons during training to prevent overfitting.
Due to this, it is improper to use it during inference as it leads to randomness in the models predictions
causing inconsistent and inexplicable trends. Hence, it is important to also analyse the model without
==PAGE:92==
3.7 Methodology
85
drop out to reflect model’s true performance. A final measurement session is done removing this dropout
from the model with the optimal setting. A process of 100 images is taken for liquid volume ranging
between 10-45 mL with a jump of 5 mL each time. A final analysis of the model without drop out is
done and compared to the model with dropout later in Subsection 3.8.3
==PAGE:93==
3.8 Results
86
3.8
Results
For testing LabLiquidVision straight out-of-box a total of 4320 data points were provided for data
analysis
context
lighting
angle
distance
15ml
25ml
35ml
avrg(15)
avrg(25)
avrg(35)
context0
lighting0
angle0
1
19
22
37
15
19,9
36,6
context0
lighting0
angle0
1
19
20
36
context0
lighting0
angle0
1
15
23
38
context0
lighting0
angle0
1
12
16
38
context0
lighting0
angle0
1
15
15
35
context0
lighting0
angle0
1
16
17
38
context0
lighting0
angle0
1
17
23
38
context0
lighting0
angle0
1
14
20
33
context0
lighting0
angle0
1
10
24
36
context0
lighting0
angle0
1
13
19
37
context0
lighting0
angle0
2/3
15
22
37
13,8
23
33
context0
lighting0
angle0
2/3
12
25
35
context0
lighting0
angle0
2/3
15
28
33
context0
lighting0
angle0
2/3
14
22
32
context0
lighting0
angle0
2/3
13
25
35
context0
lighting0
angle0
2/3
18
25
32
context0
lighting0
angle0
2/3
13
22
32
context0
lighting0
angle0
2/3
14
17
33
context0
lighting0
angle0
2/3
13
25
35
context0
lighting0
angle0
2/3
11
19
26
context0
lighting0
angle0
1/3
20
28
20
24,3
29,4
23,9
context0
lighting0
angle0
1/3
23
44
26
context0
lighting0
angle0
1/3
25
42
37
context0
lighting0
angle0
1/3
19
19
20
context0
lighting0
angle0
1/3
33
23
23
context0
lighting0
angle0
1/3
20
30
26
context0
lighting0
angle0
1/3
22
40
28
context0
lighting0
angle0
1/3
29
27
18
context0
lighting0
angle0
1/3
29
21
19
context0
lighting0
angle0
1/3
23
20
22
Figure 3.17: Visual snippet of experimentation data with the blue color indicating liquid color
Figure 3.17 shows how the data was setup by showing a set of experimentation data for the color
blue. Avrg(mL) indicates the average prediction value for each distance. looking at Figure 3.18, it is
clear that there are some variability in its predicted volumes. The histograms showcasing the frequency
of each predicted volume shows a wide range mainly for 35 mL but also for 15 and 25 mL.
==PAGE:94==
3.8 Results
87
Figure 3.18: Histograms showing the distribution of predicted values for each volume
3.8.1
Distance Impact
A part of the variability can be explained by inaccurate prediction of volume due to resolution. During
the experimentation, it was observed that the third distance (1/3) did not have suﬀicient resolution for
the segmentation and depth prediction model to create the desired output. Therefore, as a side effect,
the volume estimate would be returned as a less accurate value.
Figure 3.19: An example of effective segmentation
Figure 3.20: An example of poor segmentation
Figure 3.19 shows how the segmentation and depth predictions are supposed to look like in an
ideal situation. The model correctly identifies the part with liquid and segments accordingly. However,
==PAGE:95==
3.8 Results
88
in Figure 3.20, it is clear that the model struggles to accurately outline and segment the tube due
to the limited number of pixels available to represent it.
This is a clear indication that the third
resolution includes faulty predictions (the trend of inaccuracy is also evident for distance 1/3 on Figure
3.17). However, a pure visual observation is not enough to confirm this. Therefore, in order to verify
the inaccuracy, calculations for an accuracy and precision for the predicted volumes were done and
visualised.
The precision (Figure 3.21a) of the predicted value was calculated by doing the standard deviation
between the average value and the expected value. Similarly, the accuracy (3.21b) is measured by taking
the mean absolute error of the predicted volumes. The goal of this analysis is to visualize the accuracy
of the data points for each liquid volume (measured in mL). A calculation of the overall accuracy for
each distance is made by summing the accuracy metrics across all liquid volumes on a distance. As
shown in Figure 3.21, it is evident that the distance factor of 1 demonstrates the highest overall accuracy.
Conversely, the analysis reveals that the distance factor of 1/3 has the highest level of inaccuracy when
summing the errors for all three liquid volumes.
(a) Accuracy of each distance with liquid volume taken into
account
(b) Precision of each distance with liquid volume taken into
account
Figure 3.21: Distribution of predictions for each liquid volume taking distance into account
When looking at precision, it seems that the precision of the predicted value for every distance are
relatively the same, though 35 mL still indicating the highest variance. It shows that the first and
second distance factors (1 and 2/3) have comparable accuracy levels, though both exhibit high variance.
In contrast, the third distance factor (1/3) demonstrates lower accuracy, yet it also has a high variance,
slightly higher than the other two. The high variance across all three distances, particularly with the
distance factor of 1/3 having the highest, suggests a similar level of precision.
Studying the three graphs presented in Figure 3.22, it is clear that the extreme values increase as
distance factor decreases. The graphs represent every point for each color in their respective distance
factor. The darker colors means a stacking of the points indicating that many points are gathered
around. This could be interpreted as where the majority of points are and deducted as the somewhat
median. Looking at Figure 3.22a, distance factor 1 shows to not have many extremes compared to 2/3
and 1/3. The values lie mostly close to 15 with some extremes in the range of 5-20. Looking at the two
other factors a massive jump in extremes happen. While distance factor 2/3’s clustered area mostly lies
at 15, distance factor 1/3’s clusters are situated further up indicating an inaccuracy. However, distance
factor 1 seems to become less precise as the liquid volume increases. In figure 3.22c, the results of
distance factor 1 shows a similar variance in predictions to that of distance factor 2/3 and 1/3 when
volume is increased to 35 mL. It is important to note that these graphs are measured with straight
angle only and there may be a reason for the jump in variance for 35 mL which is explained later in
this section.
==PAGE:96==
3.8 Results
89
(a) Prediction distribution for 15 mL.
(b) Prediction distribution for 25 mL.
(c) Prediction distribution for 35 mL.
Figure 3.22: Distribution of predictions for each liquid volume taking distance into account
By creating histograms with the original behind it showing the distribution without distance factor
1/3 as shown in Figure 3.23 indicates the distributions as tighter, with less spread and variability,
especially in the lower volume ranges. The histograms are more centered, suggesting more consistent
predictions. However, there still seems to be a tendency of overestimating for the lower volume with
some predicted values going up to 50 mL, while underestimating occurring for 35 mL as there seems to
be a high frequency of predicted volumes ranging between 10-30 mL.
The diﬀiculty in predicting volume at a distance factor of 1/3 of the intended range could be due
to the average distance used in the model’s training data. The model has primarily been trained on
distances close to 20 cm, ranging roughly from 10-30 cm. As a result, it may struggle with inconsistencies
when very few pixels represent the volume, as it has not been trained on data at such a far distance.
The Model seen in Figure 3.20 does not produce a segmentation and depth of the image leading to
information loss. Additionally, the results presented in the graphs show high variety in and inaccuracy
when distance 1/3 is included. It was concluded that the distance factor of 1/3 will be excluded from
the data analysis, as the model is unable to segment and create depth with this factor, thereby missing
half of its intended functionality.
==PAGE:97==
3.8 Results
90
Figure 3.23: Histograms showing the distribution of predicted values for each volume when discounting
distance factor 1/3
3.8.2
Feature importance
Now that the data is filtered, it is important to find out what parameters or features are important by
applying a feature importance algorithm, MDI within Random Forest regression. This is to find out
which features are relevant and have an impact on the result the most compared to the others.
==PAGE:98==
3.8 Results
91
Figure 3.24: Feature importance for every parameter in each liquid volume
As shown in Figure 3.24, it can be observed that when summing the relative importance of all features
across volumes, angle appears as the most important feature with the highest relative importance. This
seems to give the hint that the relative position or orientation of the tube has a direct bearing on the
prediction. While angle is among the top features with importance, the order of the other features
differs depending on the liquid volume. For 15 mL, lighting is amongst most important features, while
distance and context follow. With this, one can deduce that for the lower volume of prediction, lighting
conditions are also very important. With smaller amounts of liquid in the tube, distinguishing the
liquid from the tube becomes challenging due to the reduced liquid area. Hence, lighting might play
a big role in this as lighting enhances the distinction between the liquid and the tube. For the 25
mL, the relative importance of context increased to be the second-most-important feature, followed
by distance. For the 25 mL predictions, lighting does not play an important role, unlike in the case
of predictions with 15 mL. So, this means that for the mid-range volume, more importance is given
==PAGE:99==
3.8 Results
92
to environmental or situational context, comparatively. Same logic can be applied for 35 mL as it
technically could be considered mid-range on a 55 mL tube. The analysis of the model’s dataset reveals
that the median volume for most vessels was approximately half full. Consequently, the model may
be biased towards conditions resembling this typical dataset setting. Therefore, context, which aims
to replicate the conditions of LabLiquidVision’s dataset, plays a more significant role in influencing
predictions than the other features. As for 35 mL, context and distance seem to be amongst angle as a
high relative importance. This indicates importance of considering context, angle and distance for 35
mL while lighting and color do not play as big of a role.
Color consistently shows the least importance among the features across all three volumes. This
suggests that the color of the liquid has minimal impact on the prediction compared to other factors
like angle, context, and distance. Blue being the best performing is unexpected considering the models
bias for red as it was the most frequently used color while blue is used the least. As mentioned in the
dataset analysis in Section 3.5, it is possible that the model has learned to recognize blue by learning
what is not blue, confirming a negative learning concept.
Due to angle being amongst the highest rated feature consistently across all volumes, it is the first
one that is looked into to find what the optimal angle is.
In order to study the influence of the angle on the prediction accuracy, for each liquid volume, the
prediction errors of each angle are compared by taking the absolute error between the measured and
the predicted angles for each individual measurement. The angles are compared in order to evaluate the
results in terms of accuracy and precision for the different angles. For each liquid volume, three different
angles are used for the prediction. By evaluating the accuracy and precision for different angles, the
approach aims to identify which parameters most significantly influence prediction accuracy.
(a) Accuracy of each angle with liquid volume taken into
account
(b) Precision of each angle with liquid volume taken into
account
Figure 3.25: Distribution of predictions for each liquid angle taking distance into account
Figure 3.25a illustrates that the straight angle exhibits the highest accuracy, significantly outper-
forming the bottom-up and top-down angles, which have closer accuracy values but top-down still
performing better. Similarly, Figure 3.25b indicates that the straight angle has the lowest precision
error, with the bottom-up and top-down angles showing comparable precision errors. It is noteworthy
that the summation of errors for each volume increases in both figures as the liquid volume rises. This
indicates a preference in the model towards straight angled and lower liquid volumes but still maintain-
ing a low error when predicting the volume for 25 mL. The consistency in which straight angle does
better can be explained by the dataset LabLiquidVision is trained on. The Dataset in which LabLiq-
uidVision model is trained on, is mainly done from top down view and somewhat straight angle so that
all the surface of the liquid is visible. This leads to a bias towards the experiments done with straight
==PAGE:100==
3.8 Results
93
and top down as both angles mostly show the liquid surface. A sample of 20 images included in the
dataset is also shown and confirms this statement as well shown in Figure 3.26.
Figure 3.26: Examples of the orientation and angle of the images taken for LabLiquidVision dataset[67]
However, seeing as the top down angle performed almost as poorly as bottom up is unexpected.
This can be due to the impact of dropout and its inconsistent activation of neurons. The randomness
could disproportionately impact the neurons that are crucial for interpreting top down views, leading
to a higher error in its predictions.
With the straight angle identified as the better configuration, the next step involves investigating
whether the observed increase in error with larger liquid volumes is a general trend.
==PAGE:101==
3.8 Results
94
(a) Accuracy of each liquid volume
(b) Precision of liquid volume
Figure 3.27: Distribution of predictions for each liquid volume with only angle0
While for accuracy of each liquid volume (Figure 3.27a), the volume 15 mL performs the best, 25
mL comes a close second in performance with only an increase in error of about 1 mL. However, it
seems that there is a jump from 25 mL to 35 mL where the error almost doubles. Similar trend can
be seen for precision (Figure 3.27b) but the difference in error for each volume is more consistent.
When the tube is nearly full, the model may struggle to distinguish between the liquid and the tube
itself. Additionally, if the angle is straight-on, the surface of the liquid might not be visible, further
complicating the distinction. This diﬀiculty can explain the higher accuracy for 15 mL and 25 mL
volumes, as these lower volumes provide a clearer differentiation between the liquid and the vessel,
leading to more accurate predictions.
With this information, with the better performing angle its
volume, the next step is to find out which context is the better performing as this is rated high on the
feature importance as well.
Next, a histogram of the two contexts are visualised with their accuracy and precision error. To
remind, context0 is when the image is cropped close to the tube therefore, being no context allowed for
the volume prediction model. Context1 is cropped in a wider range allowing for more space around the
tube and a monotone background was used to make it more similar to LabLiquidVision setting.
(a) Accuracy of each context
(b) Precision of each context
Figure 3.28: Distribution of predictions for each context with only angle0 and 15 mL
==PAGE:102==
3.8 Results
95
As seen on the Figures in Figure 3.28, the accuracy of them are similar to a close margin while the
precision error of context1 seems to be lower, making it the better performing parameter to continue
with. This can be explained as the model has a bias towards the setting on the dataset in which its
trained on. The next highest ranking feature to look at is lighting. This analysis will be of lighting
with the better performing angle, distance and context to find out in these settings, what the better
performing lighting is.
(a) Accuracy of each lighting
(b) Precision of each lighting
Figure 3.29: Distribution of predictions for each lighting given angle0 and context0
Figure 3.29 consistently shows that lighting0 (lights off) performs worse than lighting1 (lights on)
but only by a small margin. The dataset analysis revealed two separate trends of brightness being
used. One having a brightness level of 0.50 corresponding to a well-lit room and one at between 0.40
and 0.45 corresponding to a less lit room.
Additionally, lighting was diﬀicult to control as area of
experimentation is a sun-lit room. Therefore, some test cases may have resulted in similar brightness
levels because sunlight could not be blocked.
Nonetheless, since the tests conducted with artificial
lighting on yielded better results, this lighting condition will be used moving forward.
As a continuation to find the better performing color, an analysis will be done of color with the
chose angle, distance, context and lighting to find out in these settings, what the optimal color is.
(a) Accuracy of each color
(b) Precision of each color
Figure 3.30: Distribution of predictions for each color with angle0, context0 and ligthing0
==PAGE:103==
3.8 Results
96
Upon analysing the graphs in Figure 3.30, it is clear that the blue color has the least accuracy and
precision error making it the better performing, while green has the worse. This consistent trend across
both accuracy and precision metrics underscores the reliability of the blue liquid sample compared to
the other colors.
However, it is important to know that the preconfigured model includes a dropout of 0.2.
3.8.3
Comparison - Exploring Effects of Dropout
Once the best performing setup after comparing the tested combinations has been found, the final
measurements given no drop out is delved into.
Figure 3.31: Prediction Distribution of all volumes where x axis is the predicted values and y axis is
the frequency
Figure 3.31, shows a smaller variance from the expected value compared to the model with drop out.
Some volumes present a higher variability than others. This is also seen when showcased in a boxplot
or violin plot as shown in Figure 3.32.
==PAGE:104==
3.8 Results
97
(a) Boxplot without dropout
(b) Error plot without dropout
Figure 3.32: Boxplot and violin plot to showcase distribution
The violin plot (Figure 3.32b) represents the shape and spread of the predicted volumes for each
specified volume, ranging from 5 mL to 45 mL. For volumes 15, 20, 25, 30 and 35 mL, it seems to follow
a nice trend between predicted value and actual value. On the other hand, the extreme volumes on both
sides like 5, 10, 40 and 45 mL exhibit wider and inaccurate distributions, indicating higher variability.
The 40 mL volume, in particular, has a significantly spread-out distribution, pointing to substantial
variability in predictions. The central tendency and variability are also highlighted by the white dots
representing the median and the thick black bars representing the interquartile range (IQR), showing
where the middle 50% of the data lies. For instance, the median for the middle values are close to their
respective volumes, and 40 mL shows a more spread-out IQR. Similarly, the box plot (Figure 3.32a)
highlights the outliers in a more visible way. Between 15-40 mL shows better accuracy with its median
being close to actual value. However, there are extreme outliers that are present. While the accuracy
of the extremes are low, they do not show high variance. 5, 10 and 45 mL are volumes amongst the
lowest variance.
This trend suggests that the model’s accuracy is not uniform across the volume range, performing
better for mid-range volumes (15 mL to 35 mL) but struggling with the extremes (5 mL, 10 mL, and
45 mL). It performing better on the mid ranges aligns well with the information given from the dataset.
According to LabLiquidVision, 357 samples were done with a 50 mL Tube which is almost the same
size as the one done in these experiments. Of those 357 samples, the average liquid volume lays at 31
mL which is about 56% of the total volume. While the average liquid volume for this case lays at 56%,
it is not the only vessel with this distribution. The average fill volume for all the flasks and tubes used
for training lays at 48%. This indicates that the model is biased towards the volumes laying around
the mid-range of liquid.
To further look into this idea, Figure 3.33 shows a a clear indication that for the middle values, the
error is closer to 0 compared to the extremes.
The scatter plot of errors for each mL (Figure 3.33), overlaid with the average error line (in red),
provides a detailed view of the prediction error across different volumes ranging from 5 mL to 45 mL.
Each color-coded cluster of points represents the prediction errors for a specific volume, and the red
line represents the average error for each volume.
There is a noticeable trend where lower values tend to exhibit positive errors, while higher values
show negative errors. While the extremes demonstrate these positive or negative errors, the middle
range appears to hover around zero.
This again can potentially be explained through the dataset
analysis showcasing a bias towards half filled vessels.
Another explanation is that when the liquid
volume is reduced to very small amounts, such as 5 mL, the model may struggle to accurately identify
the water, leading to inaccurate measurements. Similarly, at higher volumes, such as 45 mL, the tube is
nearly full, making it diﬀicult for the model to determine the liquid’s boundary within the tube, which
also results in measurement inaccuracies.
To take a quick look of a comparing dropout and no dropout with only 15, 25 and 35 mL (Figure
3.34) there is a clear high variance shown in the model with dropout.
==PAGE:105==
3.8 Results
98
Figure 3.33: Graph showcasing the distribution of error and variance with a red line indicating average
error for each volume
(a) Boxplot with dropout
(b) Error plot with dropout
Figure 3.34: Boxplot and error shown for model with dropout
In Figure 3.34a, the box plots of liquid volumes for 15 mL, 25 mL, and 35 mL indicate a significant
variation in the IQR compared to the no dropout data, suggesting a higher variance in predicted values.
The IQRs for each volume are notably higher, indicating that the spread of the middle 50% of the
data points is wider. This implies greater variability in the predictions. However, it is also noteworthy
that the medians for each volume are closer to the actual values, suggesting that despite the increased
variability, the central tendency of the predictions aligns more closely with the true values. The presence
of outliers, especially in the 15 mL and 25 mL volumes, further highlights the increased variance in the
data.
Similarly, a greater variance can be seen in the error graph in Figure 3.34b by the variance in the
prediction errors, with errors ranging widely from positive to negative values. The average error line
==PAGE:106==
3.9 Conclusion & Evaluation
99
shows a downwards trend indicating a overestimation for lower values and underestimation for the
higher ones.
3.9
Conclusion & Evaluation
This chapter addresses the automation of liquid volume estimation in a laboratory setup through com-
puter vision and machine learning methodologies. The methodologies deal with developing a system
for the continuous monitoring of the level of fluids in containers, such as flasks and tubes, used in
automated laboratory processes. The importance of the monitoring is to avoid causing disturbances
to the robotic dispensing system as a result of liquid depletion. The relevant literature review goes
more in depth with the state-of-the-art different processes done for volume estimation using computer
vision such as OpenCV and AI techniques. A baseline approach is first considered using OpenCV to
find the boundary where the liquid meets the empty space in the containers. The method, though
working in some cases, handles the simpler cases mainly. A more sophisticated research is done on
LabLiquidVision. This two-step CNN consist of:
• A segmentation and depth estimation phase of containers is done through the use of an initial
CNN for processing input RGB container images.
• A subsequent volume estimation stage made by another CNN takes this volume representation
and converts the segmentation and depth information into a measurement of liquid. Such model
is trained on a custom-developed dataset, LabLiquidVolume, which contains images with labeled
liquid levels so that the model attains higher accuracy and dependability.
An extensive analysis of the LabLiquidVision dataset was conducted to identify trends. This section
visualizes the frequency of various vessel types and their distribution by liquid color, revealing a balanced
volume distribution with a preference for red liquids. Additionally, the analysis included assessing the
distance at which images were taken by examining the depth images, as well as evaluating the lighting
conditions by analyzing the HSV values of the images.
To test the performance of LabLiquidVision, an experimental setup containing both hardware and
procedural elements:
• D455 realsense camera mounted on a UR5e robotic arm.
• Experimentation with cylinder tubes containing 50 mL of each of the liquids described to test the
system in such varying conditions as volume measurement, camera angle, lighting, and distance
from the subject. Methodology:
The automated and manual procedures for the experiments are further detailed in the methodology
section. Automated functions, for example, can script the controls to manipulate the robotic arm and
process images at different angles and resolutions. Manual processes include the evaluation of different
volumes, liquid colors, and lighting setups to ensure comprehensive results for the assessment of the
system’s performance in diverse scenarios.
Out of the box, the model’s performance was influenced significantly by the distance. By lowering
the resolution, the variability of the prediction increases. This is evident from the higher number of
extreme values observed in the lower-resolution images. The increased noise and reduced detail in these
images contribute to inaccuracies in volume estimation. Additionally, there was a notable trend of
increasing prediction errors as the volume increased. The model tended to overestimate lower volumes
and underestimate higher volumes, indicating a systematic bias.
To ensure a fair comparison, data filtering was done to remove extreme outliers. Comprehensive
data analysis was done to show distance factor 1/3 did not give proper segmentation of liquid and
empty area of the tube, leading to its exclusion from the measurements.
==PAGE:107==
3.9 Conclusion & Evaluation
100
The feature importance analysis reveals that the angle at which the image is captured emerged
as one of the most critical factors for all three volumes affecting prediction accuracy. This shows the
importance of considering the relative position or orientation of the tube for accurate volume estimation.
The straight-on angle consistently provided the best accuracy and precision, while bottom-up and top-
down resulted in similar performance.
The importance of other features, such as distance, lighting, and context, varied with the volume
being estimated. For lower volumes (15 mL), lighting is significant, while for high-range volumes (35
mL), context became more important. This highlights the need to adapt experimental conditions based
on the specific volume being measured.
However, it is highlighted that due to the model’s preconfigured state including a dropout of (0.2),
20% of random neurons are deactivated leading to randomness. As such, it is diﬀicult to provide a trend
and understanding of the data as another set of experiments might lead to different results. Therefore,
it is important to compare the model with and without dropout.
Doing so, it was observed that the model with dropout exhibited higher variance in predictions.
While dropout helps in preventing overfitting during training, it may introduce variability in the pre-
diction phase. The model without dropout, although showing less variance, demonstrated a trend of
overestimating lower volumes and underestimating higher volumes similar to the model with dropout.
Overall, While the dropout’s median lays closer to the actual predicted value indicating better accu-
racy, its variances are high with extremes going over big margins. The data analysis indicates the best
yielding results based on the tested combinations to be angle0, 15 mL volume, context1, lighting1, and
blue liquid color. This conclusion was reached after calculating accuracy and prediction performance
for each parameter, progressively refining the results by adjusting each parameter sequentially, starting
with the angle. No dropout, while less accurate, leads to higher precision with its lower variance. Simi-
larities can be found when testing different fill volumes as both tend to lose accuracy and precision when
closing their max volume. Precision in predicting volumes, while not necessarily hitting the exact values,
is easier to calibrate due to its lower variance compared to higher accuracy models with greater variance.
Therefore, the optimal, which is also the standard for most model uses, is to remove the dropout from
prediction as proceed without. This approach balances the trade-off between accuracy and precision,
offering more consistent and reliable results in practical applications. Dropout introduces randomness
and prevents the model from being deterministic, which is also seen in how variance increases when
dropout is enabled versus not.
The goal of this module was to analyze and identify a reliable method for estimating liquid volume
in a tube to determine if it is running low. Although the results from LabLiquidVision exhibit some
variance and inaccuracies, the system effectively addresses the overall problem. The research focuses
not on finding the optimal settings, but rather the most reliable settings among the tested combinations,
and it successfully achieves this objective.
==PAGE:108==
CHAPTER 4
Collision Avoidance
Collision avoidance for robotic manipulators is a topic that has been exposed to research and develop-
ment for decades[69][14][50]. It is crucial in many areas such as production, transportation, warehouse
logistics, healthcare, laboratory automation, indoor service, and more. Its main application is to pre-
vent robots from colliding with obstacles in their environment. The most challenging aspect in collision
avoidance is when considering dynamic environments where conditions change rapidly[40].
In such
environments, decisions must be made on-the-fly based on real-time data often obtained from sen-
sors. Robots in this case should continuously monitor their environment and adjust their operations
in real-time to avoid obstacles. This, however, requires eﬀicient ways to process data for making rapid
adjustments, which is not any easy task. In some cases, these dynamic environments can be avoided.
For example, in lab automation, static environments can be created by enforcing protocols. It is possible
because lab environments are often regulated and controlled. This allows robots to plan in advance
using known information about the environment. However, enforcing protocols requires to automate
every aspect involved in some process, to avoid as much human interaction as possible. This can be
costly and, in some cases, not even feasible with the current technologies. Since mainly manipulators
are used in lab automation, collision avoidance can enable human-robot collaboration when conducting
lab related work, simplifying and accelerating workflows. As shown in the first chapter about System
Design in Section 2.3, closed-loop processes can be managed by a robot system; maintaining the process,
however, can done by lab operators. Maintenance can involve, for example, refilling of liquid reagents
(to ensure the system continues creating mixtures), replacing components, emptying containers, etc.
All this requires the robotic systems to be safe, eﬀicient, and smart. These factors are impacted by,
for example, how well collision avoidance is achieved, especially when using manipulators. Collision
avoidance techniques are often integrated into path planners. Many of the state-of-the-art planners
are supported by MoveIt, which is currently considered as a standardized industry-grade robotic ma-
nipulation framework. Being part of ROS ecosystem, it integrates motion planning, 3D perception,
kinematics, control, and navigation all in one; thus, it provides all the means necessary for performing
collision-free path planning and plan execution [16]. Various planners in MoveIt have also been rigor-
ously tested for performance [30]. Yet, for path planners to generate collision-free path plans, they rely
on accurate knowledge about the environment. This can involve using sensors such as cameras, LiDAR,
and ultrasonic-based to gather as much detailed information as possible about the environment. These
sensors are typically used for generating 3D point clouds to acquire spatial information about objects,
which are potentially obstacles unless considered otherwise, in space. Gathering information can also
be a bottleneck. If there are rapid changes in the environment, a delay can cause the system to fail at
being safe. This may therefore require using more capable hardware to reduce the delay.
==PAGE:109==
4.1 Literature Review
102
4.1
Literature Review
4.1.1
Development of an Autonomous Mobile Manipulator for Pick and Place
Operation Using 3D Point Cloud
4.1.2
Real-Time and Eﬀicient Collision Avoidance Planning Approach for Safe
Human-Robot Interaction
This paper [46] proposes a robust and eﬀicient collision avoidance planning method that generates a
collision-free trajectory in real-time by leveraging the complementary strengths of the potential field
and optimization. The primary objective is to enhance safety in human-robot interaction by ensuring
that robots can avoid collisions with dynamic obstacles in a shared workspace.
The method starts with a new repulsive force generation technique that quickly generates collision
avoidance actions, even if obstacles are moving faster than the robot. This ensures that the robot can
react promptly to dynamic changes in the environment. An optimization method based on quadratic
programming is designed to minimize the deviation of the post-optimized trajectory from the reference
trajectory. This method fuses whole-body collision avoidance constraints and reduces the dimensionality
of constraints to ensure eﬀicient computation. The framework includes obstacle perception, collision
avoidance planning, and multi-task optimization. This comprehensive approach ensures that the robot
can continuously perceive its environment, plan safe trajectories, and optimize its movements in real-
time.
The authors of this paper also discuss various distance calculation methods, including geometric
model methods, convex hull methods, the Euclidean signed distance field method, and tracking-based
methods, as distance information plays an important role in the collision avoidance tasks of fixed-base
robots, measuring the proximity between obstacles and robots. Specifically, the current work adopts
a tracking-based method, utilizing the KNN search algorithm to cluster obstacles in the preprocessed
point clouds to find the closest point to the robot. The method then uses Kalman filtering to estimate
the positions of the obstacles, generating repulsion force based on the position and velocity information
of the closest point.
However, the paper also notes that maintaining all voxel grids at every time
step, whether occupied by obstacles or not, can be time-consuming and computationally intensive.
Additionally, tracking-based methods typically work well in scenarios with limited workspace size, which
can be a constraint in more extensive environments.
The proposed method was validated through detailed simulation comparison experiments and real-
world comparison experiments.
The results demonstrated that the method could generate shorter
collision-free trajectories in less time with a higher success rate compared to existing state-of-the-art
collision avoidance planners and advanced trajectory optimization methods.
As the method ensures real-time generation of collision-free trajectories, enhancing the overall safety
and eﬀiciency of robots operating in dynamic environments, it shows significant promise in improving
safety in human-robot interaction.
4.1.3
Comparison of RGB-D sensors for 3D reconstruction
This paper [70] focuses on the performance evaluation of different RGB-D sensors in capturing 3D data
for reconstruction tasks. The main objective is to provide a comprehensive analysis of how detailed and
accurate 3D models can be obtained with these sensors, which is an important issue for applications
in the medical, architectural, and robotic fields. The evaluation involves ten different RGB-D sensors,
including well-known models such as Microsoft’s Kinect V1 and V2, ASUS’s Xtion, and various Intel
RealSense models (D435, F200, R200, SR300, ZR300). Tests were carried out in a controlled indoor
environment with a COMAU e.DO robotic arm to ensure an equal path of motion and consistent
conditions for each sensor during data acquisition. This robotic arm was chosen for its high precision
==PAGE:110==
4.2 Motivation
103
and ability to repeat the same movement independently from one test run to another, neutralizing all
the variables of manual handling involved in the process.
The authors, for the purposes of data collection, employed a modified version of RTAB-map, an
open-source tool developed for real-time appearance-based mapping. The tool was modified to handle
all ten sensors, including previously unsupported ones like the Astra Pro. Data capture was carried out
by recording 30 Hz RGB-D information while the robotic arm traced three different paths: a simple 360°
rotation around the room, a wavy 360° path with vertical oscillations, and a more complex five-point
star-shaped path. These paths were designed to test the sensors’ ability to manage various textures,
depths, and object proximities.
In this process, data collected by each sensor was processed into 3D point clouds, which constituted
the main database for analyzing sensor performance. Quantitative analysis featured the collected point
clouds, with the number of points in each cloud indicating the density and detail in the 3D reconstruction.
The Euclidean distance error between the ground truth trajectory and the trajectory estimated from the
sensor data was measured to determine the sensors’ ability to accurately capture spatial relationships
and object positions. Qualitative analysis involved a detailed manual visual inspection of the point
clouds generated to assess the completeness and accuracy of the 3D models.
The paper concluded by evaluating the fine details of the sensors, different textures, and a number
of challenges, including reflections and occlusions. It also reported the consistency of sensor data over
different paths, divergences, or misalignments in reconstructed trajectories. One study demonstrated
that the performance between different RGB-D sensors varied considerably. While most managed to
generate full 3D reconstructions, older ones still suffered with range and quality of data. Sensors like
the Astra Pro and the Kinect V2 performed very well and delivered fine, precise 3D models. Essentially,
the choice of a sensor should be centered around the application’s stipulated requirements based on
factors such as accuracy, range, and environmental conditions.
4.1.4
Conclusion
Ensuring safe and eﬀicient collision avoidance in human-robot collaboration is both crucial and challeng-
ing. Real-time trajectory planning and the computational demands of maintaining accurate calculations
about the environment are significant hurdles. Additionally, the variability in sensor performance is
critical for precise 3D reconstructions in dynamic environments. These challenges highlight the need for
continuous advancements in collision avoidance algorithms and sensor technologies. Addressing these
issues is vital for the successful integration of robots into environments where they work closely with
humans to enhance both productivity and safety.
4.2
Motivation
This chapter presents a study on different manipulator planners using MoveIt2, testing their capabilities
with point cloud-generated obstacles, as well as an investigation into the voxel generation performance
and the various factors that impact it.
This chapter aims to investigate MoveIt2 due to its critical role in robotic motion planning and
manipulation. MoveIt2 is a widely-used framework in ROS2 that provides advanced capabilities for
motion planning, 3D perception, kinematics, control, and navigation. By studying different manipulator
planners within MoveIt2 on a real-setup involving point cloud-generated obstacles, their effectiveness
in avoiding obstacles can be evaluated. This can give an insight about how optimal and safe different
produced trajectories are.
Additionally, as mentioned in the first chapter about System Design in
Section 2.6, achieving high-throughput in lab automation is important. A system can be throttled by
delays. While these delays can be caused by many factors, sample transferring delays are one of them.
Transferring can potentially be affected by obstacles. Therefore, the planning generation should be fast,
ideally producing optimal solutions
Additionally, understanding the factors that affect voxel generation performance is essential for
optimizing the accuracy and eﬀiciency of robotic operations. A voxel is essentailly an obstacle unit
==PAGE:111==
4.3 MoveIt2
104
block in MoveIt2’s planning scene. Whenever an obstacle is detected, it is transformed into voxels.
While a planner can be effective at producing optimal path plans, it requires rapid information update
about the positioning obstacles inside the environment. While in simulation, the point clouds, required
for voxel generation, are usually perfect with an accurate, noiseless reflection of the surroundings, in the
real world, there is always noise introduced into the point cloud and it is often delayed, being of great
influence on the path planner’s performance. These imperfections introduce challenges in the means of
inaccurate obstacle detection and increased uncertainty in obstacle avoidance.
4.3
MoveIt2
Figure 4.1: An extra layer added to the previous graph showing how Moveit2 path planner interacts
with ROS 2 control
Figure 4.1 illustrates the integration of MoveIt2 and ROS2_control with the UR5e hardware in-
terface for controlling a robotic arm. There are two main components of MoveIt2 when it comes to
communicating with the UR hardware
• Path Planner: This module is responsible for planning the trajectories that the robotic arm will
follow. It computes paths that avoid obstacles and ensures the end-effector reaches the desired
positions.
• Planning Scene Monitor: This component handles real-time adjustments and corrections to
the environment including handling collision objects.
The Trajectory Command generated by the Path Planner is sent to the Joint Trajectory Controller,
which manages the execution of these trajectories. This controller ensures that the robotic arm moves
according to the planned path, taking into account the kinematic constraints of the robot.
The planning scene monitor is a standard ROS2 component responsible for maintaining, updating,
and publishing the state of the Planning Scene using different sources of information, including the
robot state and the occupancy map. The occupancy map, a data structure representing the environ-
ment’s spatial layout, is a critical element for the Planning Scene Monitor, alongside joint state data.
These components enable the Planning Scene Monitor to accurately update the Planning Scene. The
==PAGE:112==
4.3 MoveIt2
105
PlanningScene object in ROS is used to store the representation of both the robot’s surrounding en-
vironment and the robot’s own state. This information is important for performing collision checking
and computing motion plans.
MoveIt2 integrates with RViz2 for real-time visualization of the planned and actual paths of the
robotic arm. This integration allows operators to monitor the robot’s actions, see planned trajectories,
and verify that the arm follows the correct path. It is an essential tool for debugging and ensuring that
the system operates as intended.
4.3.1
Path planner
As mentioned in subsection 2.5.3.1, The default motion planning library is OMPL (Open Motion Plan-
ning Library). It includes implementations of many state-of-the-art sampling-based algorithm. However,
the OMPL motion planning library includes a various number of planners with each their own advan-
tages and disadvantages that can be utilised. Planners may also include variants of themselves that
offers an improvement in an aspect of them. The core idea behind creating variants is to leverage the
foundational strengths of the original planner while improving certain aspects, such as eﬀiciency, path
quality, adaptability, or scalability. When choosing a path planner, several considerations need to be
thought about
• Computational Eﬀiciency: Planners vary in terms of computational cost and memory usage.
Some are more suitable for real-time applications, while others may be more computationally
intensive.
• Path Quality: The quality of the resulting paths can vary significantly between planners. Some
prioritize finding a path quickly, while others focus on finding an optimal path.
• Environment Suitability: Different planners are better suited to different types of environ-
ments, such as those with narrow passages, high-dimensional spaces, or dynamic obstacles.
In motion planning, a trade-off often exists between computational eﬀiciency and path quality.
For instance, the Rapidly-exploring Random Tree (RRT) algorithm prioritizes finding feasible paths
swiftly, which is advantageous in real-time applications. However, this comes at the expense of path
optimality, as RRT does not inherently seek the shortest or smoothest path. To address this limitation,
the RRTstar algorithm was developed as a variant of RRT, introducing the property of asymptotic
optimality. RRTstar iteratively refines the path towards an optimal solution as computation progresses,
which theoretically guarantees convergence to the optimal path over time. However, this enhancement
in path quality requires increased computational resources, as the algorithm performs additional checks
and re-wiring to minimize path costs. Consequently, RRTstar is more computationally intensive than
the original RRT, highlighting a fundamental trade-off: achieving better path quality necessitates a
greater computational effort, thereby reducing eﬀiciency. A final consideration is environment suitability.
Planners can have diﬀiculty navigating through narrow or clustered areas. Therefore, it is necessary
to have algorithms that can navigate through this.
RRTConnect is offered as solution as it does
bidirectional search, with two trees growing towards each other, which helps in eﬀiciently finding paths
through narrow passages or constrained spaces where a single tree might struggle. RRT is only one of
the many planners available through OMPL. In other words, a motion planner is selected based on its
computational eﬀiciency, quality of the paths it generates, and appropriateness for specific environments.
While some planners, such as RRT, will trade path quality for speed, more sophisticated versions, such
as RRTstar, enhance quality at the expense of computational demand. This demonstrates the inherent
trade-offs in motion planning.
4.3.2
Point Cloud
A point cloud is a collection of data points defined in a three-dimensional space, representing the external
surface of an object or scene. Each point in the cloud has a set of coordinates (x, y, z) that describe its
==PAGE:113==
4.4 Experimental Setup
106
position in space, and can also contain additional information such as color or intensity. Point clouds
are commonly used in 3D scanning and modeling, computer vision, and robotics to represent physical
objects or environments. RGB-D cameras often come with am inherent method to create these point
clouds as well as ROS wrappers for easy integration with ROS
Figure 4.2: Diagram showing the relationship between a camera ros2 wrapper and MoveIt2
Figure 4.2 illustrates the flow and processing of point cloud data in a robotic system using ROS 2 and
MoveIt2. The system consists of three main components The camera captures the 3D environment and
generates a point cloud. A ROS 2 Wrapper is used to interface the camera with the ROS 2 ecosystem,
converting the camera’s output into a point cloud data format that ROS 2 can handle. However, the
point cloud that it sends to the occupancy map is in the world frame associated with the camera which
does not necessarily align with the world frame of the robot. It needs to be adjusted so that the point
cloud aligns with the world frame which is the role of point cloud transformer. Point Cloud transformer
is a necessary module created separately to transform the frame of the point cloud given from the
camera to the world frame aligned with a robot. The transformed point cloud is then sent to RViz2 for
easy visualisation of the point cloud.
4.4
Experimental Setup
Two separate experimentations were setup for collision avoidance. One where different planners are
tested against a point cloud generated scene. While the other is testing point cloud generation perfor-
mance by tweaking certain parameters.
4.4.1
Testing Planners against Generated Point Cloud
For the experiment, an RGB-D camera is essential to generate point clouds, providing detailed depth
and color information of the environment. A robotic manipulator is also required to test the path
==PAGE:114==
4.4 Experimental Setup
107
planning algorithms effectively. Additionally, a box will be used as an obstacle within the workspace,
enabling the manipulator to perform tasks such as navigating around the box. These are the following
items used:
• Camera: ZED2 Camera is used for RGB-D
• Manipulator: UR5e universal robot manipulator is used for the purpose of testing planners
• Box: The empty ZED2 camera box is used as an obstacle.
The ZED2 camera is placed ontop of a table using a tripod facing downwards at an angle to capture
a table area. The Box is the put infront of the manipulator so that it is detectable by the camera as
well as in range for the manipulator to move around it.
The planners being tested serve both as the independent variables and define the experimental condi-
tions in this study. Each planner represents a different condition under which the robotic manipulator’s
performance is evaluated. The planners used are the following:
• LBKPIECE
• KPIECE
• BKPIECE
• PDST
• ProjEST
• STRIDE
• SBL
• SPARStwo
• SPARS
• RRTstar
• RRT
• RRTConnect
• PRMstar
• PRM
• LazyPRMstar
• FMT
• EST
• BiTRRT
• BiEST
• BFMT
• STOMP
The dependent variables which are the variables which are outcomes of outcomes that is measured
in response to the changes in the independent variables are the following:
• Execution count
• Number of steps
• Execution times
• Manipulator trajectory
Controlled Variables:
• Position of the obstacle (box)
• Camera settings
• Manipulator start and end position
==PAGE:115==
4.5 Methodology
108
4.4.2
Testing voxel generation performance
The generation of voxels requires heavy computational power and is not immediate. There is often a
delay between the point cloud generation and the voxel generation The purpose of this experimentation
is to measure the time it takes for voxels to be created in the point cloud once a new object has been
created. While a RGB-D camera is necessary for the voxels to be created , the manipulator is not a
necessary component as the only measurement which is done is the time which the point clouds are
generated when a new object is introduced. Therefore, the setup can be constructed as such:
Items
• Camera: ZED2 Camera
Similar to the first experiment setup, the camera is placed on the same position allowing for objects
to be moved infront of the table for the camera to detect. The goal is to
Independent/Experimental conditions
• Camera Resolution: Adjusting camera resolutions are tested to see how it affects performance
• Octomap: This is the resolution of the voxels controlling the size of the voxels created
• Max Range (meters): Adjusting max range of which the voxel creation happens
Dependent Variables
• Time taken until voxels are generated when new object is introduced
4.5
Methodology
The processes for the experiments are handled differently depending on the experimentation.
This
section introduces the different approaches for the two experimental setups included for this chapter.
4.5.1
Testing Planners against Generated Point Cloud
The primary objective of this experimentation is to evaluate the system’s ability to autonomously detect
obstacles and navigate from the left side to the right side of a designated box using collision avoidance
algorithms integrated within MoveIt2. The procedure for this requires manual work as the script is
meant to record the dependent variables for data analysis.
Algorithm 13 Utilized algorithm for testing planners
1: Initialize system components and variables
2: Define start position & target position
3: Define motion planner
4: Plan trajectory to target
5: Begin execution trajectory
6:
Record trajectory steps
7:
Record time taken for trajectory execution
8: End execution of trajectory
9: Save joint movements for visualization
Algorithm 13, describes the process in which the initial and target positions are defined, giving
a place to start and a point to reach with the robotic manipulator. The positions are defined such
that the manipulator moves from the left side to the right side of a designated box.
The process
begins with a definition of the initial and goal poses, the entry, and target locations for the robot in
the test environment. Following this, a specific motion planning algorithm, such as RRT, is selected
==PAGE:116==
4.5 Methodology
109
and configured for trajectory planning. The system records the trajectory steps along with the time
to execute each segment of the trajectory continuously during the execution of the planned trajectory.
Joint movements and associated data are saved after the completion of the trajectory execution. This
information is used for both visualization and analysis for any insights into manipulator movements
and the effectiveness of the motion planning strategy.
A separate script is created for visualising the trajectory of the manipulator. This is done by using
forward kinematics to calculate where the end-effector is situated using the information of the joint
states.
4.5.2
Testing Voxel Generation Performance
The primary objective of this experimentation is to detect voxel generation performance by introducing
a new object to the point cloud scene. Information about any voxels is a topic that is published from
Point Cloud Transformer. The Point Cloud Transformer publishes a topic containing details about
voxels, including their xyz coordinates. An algorithm has been developed to subscribe to this topic and
monitor changes in voxel generation across the scene.
Algorithm 14 Voxel Generation Detection Algorithm with Timer
1: Define region of interest (ROI) in the scene
2: Set noise tolerance threshold
3: Initialize timer and set it to zero
4: Begin voxel monitoring
5: while system is active do
6:
Start thread to listen for space bar press
7:
if space bar pressed then
8:
Start timer
9:
end if
10:
Listen for new voxel data
11:
Calculate difference between current and previous voxel data
12:
if difference exceeds tolerance threshold within ROI then
13:
Record change in voxel generation
14:
if Timer started then
15:
Stop timer
16:
Record time taken for voxel generation
17:
end if
18:
end if
19: end while
20: End voxel monitoring
Due to inherent noise, voxels are constantly been removed and generated. To take this into account,
a tolerance threshold was set to prevent the algorithm from detecting too small of a change. This
is seen in Algorithm 14, where a noise tolerance threshold is set. Given that the introduction of a
new object is controlled and its location is predetermined, the region of interest can be restricted to a
specific area. It reduces the external noise generated from other regions and processes only the region
of interest, where the object would be placed, hence it tends to enhance the accuracy and relevancy of
the voxel formation detection in the experiment. A separate thread is created to listen to when space
bar is pressed. For the purpose of experimentation, a hand is placed in ROI to measure how long it
takes for the voxels to be created. For this, when a hand is placed, space bar is pressed. The algorithm
detects this while continuously listening to voxels and starts a timer. Once new voxels are detected,
if the timer was started, it stops, and the elapsed time is recorded. This time measurement captures
the interval between the space bar press (hand insertion into the ROI) and the detection of significant
voxel changes above the noise threshold.
==PAGE:117==
4.6 Results
110
This experiment is prone to human error as the timing between pressing space and putting the hand
in ROI can vary. However, the goal of the experiment is not to test accuracy, but which independent
feature have the most impact on time taken to generate voxels, hence seconds of error is negligible.
The impact a feature is measured on is by creating an impact score.
Impact Scoref =
(Average Timev −Min Average Timef
Min Average Timef
)
× 100
This formula calculates the impact score for each feature by comparing the average time of a specific
variable within the feature to the minimum average time observed in that feature. It quantifies how
much the average time for a particular variable increases relative to the feature’s baseline, expressed as
a percentage
4.6
Results
4.6.1
Testing Planners against Generated Point Cloud
When using different planners to generate collision-free path plans, different results were obtained.
Considering that a limit of 200 seconds was imposed on the planning time, a few solutions were eventually
discarded. Since most of the planners use random sampling to explore the state space for finding a
solution (except STOMP), different paths were naturally produced. Some paths are nearly optimal.
An optimal solution is typically assumed to have the lowest possible number of steps. However, some
paths are far from optimal. It is important to consider this when employing some of these planners for
certain applications (e.g., in lab automation where samples need to be transferred in time). Figure 4.3
shows the shortest path plans among others produced by the different planners.
Figure 4.3: Shortest path plan trajectories produced by the different planners using MoveIt2 in a lab
setup with 1 box
==PAGE:118==
4.6 Results
111
The plots are separated into two to clearly see the trajectories. LBKPIECE performed the poorest
compared to all the others. The smoothest trajectories were produced by STOMP, BFMT, BiTRRT,
FMT, PRM, SPARStwo, PDST, BKPIECE. The paths generated by these planners took a route around
the box. Figure 4.4 on the other hand shows longest path plans among others produced by the different
planners.
Some of these path plans are not realistic.
They involve many rotations, movements to
random areas, and revisits, resulting in unnecessary mechanical work. Despite many of these planners
are probabilistically complete, the paths generated need to be smoothed or optimized in post-planning
to ensure they are suitable for practical use. STOMP and BiTRRT maintained their eﬀiciency, even in
their longest plans. This is also shown in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.4: Longest path plan trajectories produced by the different planners using MoveIt2 in a lab
setup with 1 box
In Figure 4.5, all execution steps in every trial are visualized in a box plot to show the variations in
the generated path plans.
==PAGE:119==
4.6 Results
112
Figure 4.5: Variability in the number of steps in every generated path plan by the different planners
(box plot)
STOMP, BFMT, BiTRRT, FMT, LazyPRMstar, RRT, PDST produced the least number of varia-
tions in terms of the number of steps in their generated path plans. On the other hand, EST, STRIDE,
LBKPIECE produced the the largest number of variations. Some planners also produced anomalies,
such as FMT, SBL, ProjEST, BKPiece. Furthermore, despite RRTstar was able to produce one data
point (the planning time exceeded the limit), the number of steps involved in its plan is relatively small.
STOMP performed the best. Since it uses stochastic optimization techniques rather than random sam-
pling, the results it produced were consistent and repeatable. Moreover, it involves creating randomized
noisy trajectories to explore the area around an initial (potentially infeasible) reference trajectory, aim-
ing to generate a new, lower-cost trajectory. This makes it suitable for local path finding. It may not
behave as well, if an optimal path that exists is complex. Nevertheless, it performs well in small tasks.
This makes it ideal in small setups, where long paths are not considered. Among the probabilistic based
planners, BiTRRT performed the best. Using bidirectional search, growing two trees simultaneously,
one from the start state and one from the goal state, this approach seems to allow to faster convergence
compared to unidirectional methods, such as RRT and EST. It also incorporates cost-based filtering to
avoid exploring high-cost regions unnecessarily, improving eﬀiciency, as observed from in figures above.
Despite LBKPIECE uses bidirectional search to, it seems to over-complicate its solutions.
==PAGE:120==
4.6 Results
113
Figure 4.6: Variability in the planner execution times for every generated path plan by the different
planners (box plot)
Figure 4.6 shows execution times variations. Clearly, both LBKPIECE and SBL took a long time
to find solutions. The worst case was experienced by LBKPIECE; path plan generation took around
100 seconds. These are excluded and the rest are shown in Figure 4.7 to highlight other variations.
Note that multiple planners were already excluded from this plot, such as LazyPRMstar, PRMstar,
RRT, RRTstar, SPARS, SPARStwo. RRT was able to produce two samples, one took 188 seconds,
the other took 55 seconds. RRTstar on the other hand, as mentioned before, was able to produce one
sample, which took 200 seconds, hitting the limit. These times are way too long to be considered in
the analysis. While RRTstar was able to produce a nearly optimal solution, it was computationally
heavy. As for the rest, they require a termination condition, such as a time limit or a maximum number.
These planners use by default path length optimization objective. They continue to build and refine the
roadmap, ensuring asymptotic optimality, until a termination condition is met, which means they can
theoretically run indefinitely to keep improving the solution. Nevertheless, they all required at least 1
second to find a solution. Based on the results from previous figures, their performance was generally
good, despite being sometimes given 200 seconds to process. Other termination conditions can also be
defined such as cost convergence (based on optimization objective), or first solution found.
==PAGE:121==
4.6 Results
114
Figure 4.7: Variability in the planner execution times for every generated path plan by the different
planners - Filtered (box plot)
Now, in Figure 4.7, most of the planners did not spend much time in finding solutions.
While
BKPIECE took between 6 to 12 seconds, the rest took up to 3 seconds. This can be important in
scenarios where fast response is required to ensure safety of operations.
Many probabilistic based
planners prioritize quickly finding a solution path over ensuring high path quality. After a feasible path
is found, it undergoes post-processing to be smoothed and shortened, making it closer to optimal. This
explains why these planners spend less time in finding a solution. It was also observed in Figure 4.3
and 4.4 how different the trajectories can be.
==PAGE:122==
4.6 Results
115
Figure 4.8: Frequency of path plan executions
Figure 4.8 shows the number of times needed to produce 10 sample measurements (the dotted line
indicates the target number of successful executions). Most of the planners failed several times before
succeeding once. For example, SBL failed 14 times while trying to produce 10 path plans. It reached
a total of 24 counts of execution. STOMP on the other hand did not fail at all. Despite BiTRRT
performance was generally good, it failed many times. Its success rate was calculated to be 47.7%. The
success rates for all planners are shown in Figure 4.9. Interestingly, LBKPIECE’s success rate is high,
despite producing long and mechanically heavy path plans.
==PAGE:123==
4.6 Results
116
Figure 4.9: Executions success rate per planner
Overall, it is evident from this survey analysis that probabilistic planners would perform better
with post processing techniques, which can involve path shortening and smoothing. These techniques,
however, do not guarantee optimally and can increase the total processing time. The planners are
generally fast, but produce path plans with long steps, which mostly include unnecessary work. Even
with this simple scenario that involved one obstacle, many planners struggled. Some were discarded,
others were not included at all due long processing times. The eﬀiciency and effectiveness of these
planners can heavily depend on the sampling strategy used. Therefore, optimization techniques can be
used to guide the search.
4.6.2
Testing Voxel Generation Performance
To present the impact scores in the most straightforward and understandable manner, the average
impact score for the feature is measured and displayed side by side.
==PAGE:124==
4.6 Results
117
Figure 4.10: The impact score of each Feature involved
Figure 4.10 shows a clear significant change for resolution as the impact score goes over 500%.
Although Octomap’s impact score is slightly higher than that of Max Range, it is still considerably
lower than Resolution, highlighting the dominant effect of resolution changes on voxel generation time.
The relatively minor impact of Octomap and Max Range indicates that adjustments in these features
have a much smaller effect on the overall processing time compared to changes in resolution. This may
indicate that variations in Octomap and Max Range do not impose as substantial a computational
burden as changes in Resolution.
While the overall impact score of feature is important for easy
understanding of the impact, a more detailed study can be done for each variable inside the features to
study the trends.
==PAGE:125==
4.6 Results
118
Figure 4.11: The impact score of each variable in a feature involved
Figure 4.10 shows the percentage increase compared to minimum time (baseline) as impact score.
In this case, the minimum value for each feature is VGA, 0.07 for Octomap and 0.7 for Max Range. It
is also noticeable that there does not seem to be a trend of impact increasing or decreasing as Octomap
resolution or Max range increases in value.
For example, Octomap resolution 0.03 has the highest
impact while 0.07 has the lowest. This may be due to the impact being so low that the seconds human
errors introduce to the experiment impact the results by a high degree. This lack of consistency may
be due to the relatively minor effect these features have on the overall voxel generation time. These
observations suggest that the effect of Octomap resolution and Max Range on voxel generation time
is minimal.
The fact that such small fluctuations, potentially caused by a small error, can have a
noticeable effect on the results indicates that these features do not substantially impact the overall
processing time.
Figure 4.11 also shows that going from VGA to 2K increases the value by over 1000%. The other two
features are relatively insignificant when it comes to the performance change. While change in Octomap
and Max Range might still computationally affect the performance, the increase seen computational
heaviness of increasing the resolution far out does them. This substantial difference in impact scores
can be attributed to the exponential increase in pixel count with higher resolutions.
For instance,
VGA resolution, with 640x480 pixels, totals 307,200 pixels. In contrast, 2K resolution, with 2048x1080
pixels, totals 2,211,840 pixels which is a significant increase. This increase in pixel count leads to a
corresponding rise in the number of voxels to be processed, hence, it takes a significant increase in
processing power and time. Due to this, the generation of the voxels took more time, dominating the
effect of the change in parameters of Octomap and Max Range.
To understand the rate of change in impact score for resolution better, a study for change in pixels
between each resolution is needed with a starting point at VGA.
• 720P (1280x720): 921,600 pixels: Rate of change from VGA to 720P: 200%
• 1080P (1920x1080): 2,073,600 pixels: Rate of change from 720P to 1080P: 125%
• 2K (2048x1080): 2,211,840 pixels: Rate of change from 1080P to 2K: 6.67%
This indicates that while the impact score did not change much between VGA and 720P, the rate
of change in resolution is still the highest being 200%. The rate of change in pixels from 720P to 1080P
==PAGE:126==
4.6 Results
119
is 75% less than from VGA to 720P yet it still has highest change in impact score. 1080P to 2K shows
the lowest rate of change in pixels but a similar change in impact score of VGA to 720P.
Several reasons can be connected to this. Starting with VGA to 720P, while the rate of change is
higher, the absolute change in pixels describing the scene is still relatively low. Therefore, the impact
of this change is not much. In contrast, while 720P to 1080P technically has a lower rate of change
than from VGA to 720P, the amount of pixels describing the scene increased by over a million. This
substantial rise in pixel count puts a greater strain on the system’s processing power, leading to a
notable jump in the impact score. Consequently, the rate of change in pixels from 1080P to 2K is 6.67%
causing it to have a lower impact score.
While the two previous figures show the relative impact of a feature, it does not give a detailed
description of how many seconds it took for each of the voxels to be created.
Figure 4.12: Non separated box plots of each feature
These box plots in Figure 4.12 show the distribution of voxel generation time across the three
different features. The point of this figure is to still highlight the variation in time caused by resolution
compared to the other two. While this figure is good for an overview of how big of an impact resolution
has, it is hard to see the detail in variation for Octomap and Max Range.
==PAGE:127==
4.7 Conclusion
120
Figure 4.13: Separated box plots of each feature
Figure compares the distribution of Voxel Generation Times for the three features. The Resolution
feature has seen the most spread in the data with the values ranging from about 3 to 63 seconds, hence
a lot of variability with respect to the chosen resolution setting. The Octomap feature presents values
that are slightly more moderate but still vary greatly. The values range from around 12 to 22 seconds,
so this factor has a relatively little influence on the Voxel Generation Time compared to Resolution.
The feature of Max Range presents a minimal variability in its times, as they are collected around 12.5
to 15.5 seconds, and presumably have the least effect upon the process of voxel generation.
4.7
Conclusion
This chapter addresses a safety aspect of the system through collision avoidance and scene generating
algorithms. The integration of advanced sensors, such as RGB-D cameras, and sophisticated motion
planning algorithms, like those supported by MoveIt2, has enabled autonomous systems to perform
complex tasks with high precision and safety. The relevant literature review studies the state-of-the-art
collision avoidance algorithms used as well as a deep study in RBG-D cameras and their performances
in point cloud generation. Two experimental setups are created with different objectives:
1. Testing Planners Against Generated Point Clouds:
• Objective: Evaluate the performance of various motion planners in navigating around an
obstacle represented by point clouds.
2. Testing Voxel Generation Performance:
• Measure the time taken for voxel generation in point clouds upon the introduc-
tion of a new object.
From here, the chapter is separated into to entities, one focusing on testing planners and one of
testing voxel generation. Moveit2 was successfully utilized to connect path planning algorithms and
planning scenes to create a connected system where a manipulator can detect obstacles using point
cloud. A visual representation of the trajectory the manipulator was made by calculating the forward
kinematics the joints.
This visual representation effectively shows every planner’s path in moving
around the box.
When testing planners, it was found that planners such as STOMP consistently
created eﬀicient paths around the box by having a lower number of steps as well as having the highest
success rate at a 100%. This makes the planner ideal for scenarios requiring consistency and repeatable
results. While BiTRRT had good performance too, its success rate was significantly lower which was
==PAGE:128==
4.7 Conclusion
121
calculated to be 47.7%. The analysis suggests that while various planners can find collision-free paths,
their practical usability depends on factors like path quality, execution time, success rate, and the need
for post-processing.
The additional test about point cloud generation is done by measuring the time it takes for voxels
being created around a new object introduced to the scene. An algorithm is created to listen to when
new voxels are created as a new object is introduced to the scene. An impact score was calculated based
on the percentage change a feature had on the overall time taken for the voxels to be generated. The
research shows that resolution has the highest impact on voxel generation time as the pixels increase
between VGA and 2K is significant, thus leading to a significant increase in need processing power.
Resolution varied in its voxel generation from under 5 seconds to over 60 seconds showing how much
of an impact it has when changing resolution. Octomap and Max range are vary in seconds as well,
however, no trends were found with octomap resolution or Max Range.
This could be due to the
inherent human error involved in the experimentation of placing introducing a new object to the scene
and timing it correctly. This lack of consistency may be due to the relatively minor effect these features
have on the overall voxel generation time. The observation that minor fluctuations, possibly due to
small errors, can noticeably affect the results suggests that these features do not significantly impact
the overall processing time.
==PAGE:129==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
This work proposes a comprehensive system framework designed to incorporate various laboratory se-
tups in a modular fashion. A Modular Robotic Laboratory Automation System (MRLAS) is a modular
framework that connects multiple laboratory devices with additional components for extended function-
alities.
First, the modular system is introduced where the control of the system is explained. Then the main
objective of the system is based on a common laboratory process which is mixing liquids and analyzing
them. The framework setup is detailed, including the workflow and schematics of system connectivity.
In-depth, communication aspects are discussed, highlighting the need for a unified interface to interact
with various devices, using remote invocation paradigm.
An evaluation of the hierarchical system
topology clarifies the framework’s structure. The communication between devices, such as the Universal
Robot, Mantis, and EnVision, is elaborated, showing how they are all managed through a central control
system. Additionally, a detailed description of the ROS 2 workspace outlines how different components
are integrated. Finally, a throughput estimation through simulation reveals that external processes
such as refilling tubes can significantly impact throughput, stabilizing when using six Mantis devices
and two Envision Plate readers. Extra material is included such as a tool to automate the process of
generating a dispense list for the Mantis to use as well as 3D models of attachments required for the
setup to function.
While the system aims to be fully autonomous, there are still parts of it that require human inter-
vention. One such thing is the monitoring of liquid levels in tubes holding the liquids for the Mantis.
This thesis therefore aims to enhance the autonomous system by creating a system continuity with a
focus on volume estimation.
The first approach for volume estimation is using OpenCV’s image processing methods to create
a liquid-level detector. While it works as a good lightweight method to set the groundwork, a more
advanced approach is used by utilizing a deep-learning-based solution.
LabLiquidVision is a deep-
learning-based model that can estimate volumes from singular RGB images. The dataset on which the
model is trained on is analyzed extensively, finding trends such as the predominance of red liquids or
finding the distance in which the most images are taken from to be at around 20 cm.
An analysis was conducted to investigate what the best yielding results based on the tested combi-
nations are. The results indicate that the best yielding results based on the tested combinations are
angle0, 15 mL volume, context1, lighting1, and blue liquid color. However, it is important to note that
the model came preconfigured with a dropout rate of 20%. As such, it was diﬀicult to provide a trend
and understanding of the data as another set of experiments might lead to different results. The model
was compared with and without enabling dropout. The analysis of the model, when the dropout was
deactivated, showed the predictions of volumes to have less variance compared to when dropout was
activated. Regardless of the accuracy, it still managed to convey the overall objective of deducing low
volume estimations as a goal for system continuity.
Another aspect of the system is to ensure the security of lab workers working around the system
or when the tube filled with a composition inevitably runs out of liquid and a worker needs to refill
it. As a means of making the system more autonomous, collision-avoiding algorithms are utilized. Two
experimental setups were created. The first setup tests OMPL planners by navigating around a box
within a point cloud-generated scene. When testing planners, it was observed that planners such as
STOMP consistently created eﬀicient paths around the box by having a lower number of steps as well
as having the highest success rate at a 100%. This makes the planner ideal for scenarios requiring
==PAGE:130==
5 Conclusion
123
consistency and repeatable results. While BiTRRT had good performance too, its success rate was
significantly lower which was calculated to be 47.7%. The analysis suggests that while various planners
can find collision-free paths, their practical usability depends on factors like path quality, execution
time, success rate, and the need for post-processing.
The second setup evaluates voxel generation performance by adjusting camera and scene parameters.
An impact score was calculated for each feature to deduce how much a feature impacts the voxel
generation performance. The results showed a high impact score for resolution with an impact score of
over 1000% compared to octomap or max range that layed below 50%.
Overall, the proposed framework MRLAS demonstrates easy integration by incorporating system
continuity features such as volume estimation and collision avoidance. These enhancements significantly
improve the autonomy of the system by automating processes that previously required manual inter-
vention. The ease of integration presents promising potential as the modular approach allows for the
addition of more functions, further increasing the system’s flexibility and capabilities. This modularity
ensures that the framework can adapt to various laboratory tasks, thereby enhancing eﬀiciency and
scalability in automated sample handling and processing.
==PAGE:131==
APPENDIX A
Additional Analytical
Results & Observations
A.1
Throughput Estimation
The following plots show how the total execution time and by increasing the number of Mantis devices.
The total idle time for EnVision also decreases:
Figure A.1: Metric measurements from workflow execution using 100 well-plates, 1 Mantis devices,
and 1 EnVision devices
==PAGE:132==
A.1 Throughput Estimation
125
Figure A.2: Metric measurements from workflow execution using 100 well-plates, 2 Mantis devices,
and 1 EnVision devices
Figure A.3: Metric measurements from workflow execution using 100 well-plates, 3 Mantis devices,
and 1 EnVision devices
The following two plots show that if the tube reloading process takes longer time, it would not
impact the fairness of resource allocation to Mantis devices, but it would have consequences later when
allocating resources to EnVision devices:
==PAGE:133==
A.1 Throughput Estimation
126
Figure A.4: Metric measurements from workflow execution, in which tube reloading takes from 30 to
60 min, using 100 well-plates, 3 Mantis devices, and 1 EnVision devices
Figure A.5: Metric measurements from workflow execution, in which tube reloading takes from 60 to
120 min, using 100 well-plates, 3 Mantis devices, and 1 EnVision devices
The total execution time naturally increases in this case. The idle times for both EnVision devices
also increase.
The following plot shows the general performance when 5 to 10 min throttling is introduced:
==PAGE:134==
A.2 Volume Estimation
127
Figure A.6: Metric measurements from workflow execution, with 5 to 10 min throttling, using 100
well-plates, 6 Mantis devices, and 2 EnVision devices
A.2
Volume Estimation
Figure A.7: Graph showcasing the distribution of volumes that was trained for the model[67]
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIX B
Blueprints: Robot Arm
Attachments
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
A
B
C
D
E
F
Dept.
Technical reference
Created by
Approved by
Document type
Document status
Title
DWG No.
Rev.
Date of issue
Sheet
16/05/2024
1/1
finger extension with gripper
Nima Jalili
DALSA
17
124
7
6
1.8
7
3.4
86.92
20
98.39
 Ø4 x 17
18
101.22
117.36
10
20
4.2
11.6
5.8
radius
Alle tolerancer = +/- 0.05
Rundingen
skal ikke
laves
1.8
Figure B.1: Blueprint for the gripper
==PAGE:136==
B Blueprints: Robot Arm Attachments
129
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
A
B
C
D
E
F
Dept.
Technical reference
Created by
Approved by
Document type
Document status
Title
DWG No.
Rev.
Date of issue
Sheet
1/1
d455 mount final
2x Ø7 x 80°
M4x0.7 6H x 10/10
 Ø8 x 80°
M4x0.7 6H x 5/5
124
56.51
63
R40
R3
R30
R3
R3
R40
R30
R3
74.05
55.2
54.94
53.91
52.87
50
33.45
Figure B.2: Blueprint for the camera mount
==PAGE:137==
B Blueprints: Robot Arm Attachments
130
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
A
B
C
D
E
F
Dept.
Technical reference
Created by
Approved by
Document type
Document status
Title
DWG No.
Rev.
Date of issue
Sheet
1/1
Tripod mount
52
33
8
 Ø7.5 x 7
R10
44
Figure B.3: Blueprint for the tripod mount
==PAGE:138==
Bibliography
[1]
A Guide to Modular Laboratory Automation: How to Get Started. en. October 2022. url: https:
//howtorobot.com/expert-insight/modular-laboratory-automation (visited on 8 March
2024).
[2]
Shanta Afrin and Vikas Gupta. “Pharmaceutical Formulation.” In: StatPearls. Treasure Island
(FL): StatPearls Publishing, 2024. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK562239/
(visited on 21 July 2024).
[3]
Pablo J Alhama Blanco, Fares J Abu-Dakka, and Mohamed Abderrahim. “Practical use of robot
manipulators as intelligent manufacturing systems.” In: Sensors 18.9 (2018), page 2877.
[4]
Stephanie Kay Ashenden. “Chapter 1 - Introduction to drug discovery.” In: The Era of Artificial
Intelligence, Machine Learning, and Data Science in the Pharmaceutical Industry. Edited by
Stephanie Kay Ashenden. Academic Press, 2021, pages 1–13. isbn: 978-0-12-820045-2. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-820045-2.00002-7. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/B9780128200452000027.
[5]
M. S. Attene-Ramos, C. P. Austin, and M. Xia. “High Throughput Screening.” eng. In: Encyclo-
pedia of Toxicology: Third Edition (2014), pages 916–917. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-386454-
3.00209-8.
[6]
Florent P Audonnet, Andrew Hamilton, and Gerardo Aragon-Camarasa. “A systematic compari-
son of simulation software for robotic arm manipulation using ros2.” In: 2022 22nd International
Conference on Control, Automation and Systems (ICCAS). IEEE. 2022, pages 755–762.
[7]
Michael E. Aulton and Kevin M.G. Taylor. Aulton’s pharmaceutics : the design and manufacture
of medicines. eng. Elsevier, 2013, xiii, 894 s. : ill. isbn: 0702042900, 0702042919, 0702053937,
9780702042904, 9780702042911, 9780702053931.
[8]
Pauric Bannigan et al. “Machine learning directed drug formulation development.” In: Advanced
Drug Delivery Reviews 175 (1 August 2021), page 113806. issn: 0169-409X. doi: 10 . 1016 /
j.addr.2021.05.016. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0169409X21001800 (visited on 21 July 2024).
[9]
Kailash Bansal and Anil B. Jindal. “Mixing.” In: Pharmaceutical Process Engineering and Scale-up
Principles. Edited by Anil B. Jindal. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2023, pages 25–39. isbn:
978-3-031-31380-6. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-31380-6_2. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-031-31380-6_2 (visited on 21 July 2024).
[10]
Henning Bär, Remo Hochstrasser, and Bernd Papenfuß. “SiLA: Basic standards for rapid inte-
gration in laboratory automation.” In: Journal of laboratory automation 17.2 (2012), pages 86–
95.
[11]
John Bentley et al. Mixing medicines: how to ensure patient safety. The Pharmaceutical Journal.
14 April 2015. url: https://pharmaceutical-journal.com/article/ld/mixing-medicines-
how-to-ensure-patient-safety.
[12]
Matthias Biehl. RESTful Api Design. Volume 3. API-University Press, 2016.
==PAGE:139==
Bibliography
132
[13]
Andrea Bonci et al. “Robot Operating System 2 (ROS2)-Based Frameworks for Increasing Robot
Autonomy: A Survey.” In: Applied Sciences 13.23 (January 2023). Number: 23 Publisher: Multidis-
ciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, page 12796. issn: 2076-3417. doi: 10.3390/app132312796.
url: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/13/23/12796.
[14]
Paul Bosscher and Daniel Hedman. “Real-time collision avoidance algorithm for robotic manipu-
lators.” In: Industrial Robot: An International Journal 38.2 (2011), pages 186–197.
[15]
James Boyd. “Robotic laboratory automation.” In: Science 295.5554 (2002), pages 517–518.
[16]
Thadeu Brito et al. “Collision avoidance system with obstacles and humans to collaborative robots
arms based on RGB-D data.” In: Robot 2019: Fourth Iberian Robotics Conference: Advances in
Robotics, Volume 1. Springer. 2020, pages 331–342.
[17]
Lukas Bromig et al. “The SiLA 2 Manager for rapid device integration and workflow automation.”
In: SoftwareX 17 (2022), page 100991.
[18]
Rita Cardoso et al. “From Bench to Bedside: Transforming R&D Labs through Automation.” In:
(2024). Representing views from McKinsey’s Life Sciences Practice. url: https://www.mckinsey.
com/industries/life-sciences/our-insights/from-bench-to-bedside-transforming-r-
and-d-labs-through-automation.
[19]
M. Chacin, T. Kikawada, and R. Pillat. “ROS made easy: Integrating Matlab and Simulink with
ROS using Robotics System Toolbox.” In: Journal of the Robotics Society of Japan 35.4 (2017),
pages 303–306.
[20]
D Chikurtev et al. “Control of robotic arm manipulator using ros.” In: Bulgarian Academy of
Sciences-Problems of Engineering Cybernetics and Robotics 69 (2018), pages 52–61.
[21]
Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. 2024.
url: https://clsi.org/.
[22]
Miriam Cobo et al. “Artificial intelligence to estimate wine volume from single-view images.” In:
Heliyon 8.9 (2022).
[23]
Dani. DaniSchober/LabLiquidVision. C. May 2024. url: https://github.com/DaniSchober/
LabLiquidVision.
[24]
Bakan Ebubekir, Ozturk Nurinnisa, and Kilic-Baygutalp Nurcan. “Automation in the clinical
laboratory: integration of several analytical and intralaboratory pre-and post-analytical systems.”
In: Turkish Journal of Biochemistry 42.1 (2017), pages 1–13.
[25]
Sagi Eppel and Tal Kachman. “Computer vision-based recognition of liquid surfaces and phase
boundaries in transparent vessels, with emphasis on chemistry applications.” In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1404.7174 (2014).
[26]
Sagi Eppel et al. “Computer vision for recognition of materials and vessels in chemistry lab settings
and the vector-labpics data set.” In: ACS central science 6.10 (2020), pages 1743–1752.
[27]
Sagi Eppel et al. “Predicting 3D shapes, masks, and properties of materials, liquids, and ob-
jects inside transparent containers, using the TransProteus CGI dataset.” In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.07577 (2021).
[28]
Mikhael Anthony A. Felipe et al. “Vision-based Liquid Level Detection in Amber Glass Bottles
using OpenCV.” en. In: 2019 7th International Conference on Robot Intelligence Technology and
Applications (RiTA). Daejeon, Korea (South): IEEE, November 2019, pages 148–152. isbn: 978-
1-72813-118-4. doi: 10.1109/RITAPP.2019.8932807. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/8932807/.
[29]
FORMULATRIX. MANTIS Liquid Dispenser Manual. url: https : / / www . sopachem . com /
biobanking/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/Mantis-User-Guide.pdf.
[30]
Inês Pinto Frutuoso. “Smart collision avoidance system for a dual-arm manipulator.” In: (2018).
==PAGE:140==
Bibliography
133
[31]
M. Galli et al. “Learning robotics with ROS and Matlab using real robotic platforms.” In: 10th
annual International Conference of Education Research and Innovation. 2017.
[32]
Nooshin Ghodsian et al. “Toward designing an integration architecture for a mobile manipulator
in production systems: Industry 4.0.” In: Procedia CIRP 109 (2022), pages 443–448.
[33]
Hernán E Grecco et al. “PyVISA: the Python instrumentation package.” In: Journal of Open
Source Software 8.84 (2023), page 5304.
[34]
Jiazhen He et al. “A ros2-based framework for industrial automation systems.” In: 2022 2nd
International Conference on Computer, Control and Robotics (ICCCR). IEEE. 2022, pages 98–
102.
[35]
Intel. D400 Series Datasheet. url: https://www.intelrealsense.com/wp-content/uploads/
2020/06/Intel-RealSense-D400-Series-Datasheet-June-2020.pdf.
[36]
Feroz Jameel et al. “Chapter 12: Strategies in the Development of Formulations for Antibody-
Based Therapeutics.” eng. In: Aaps Advances in the Pharmaceutical Sciences Series 35 (2020),
pages 265–297. issn: 2210738x, 22107371. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-31415-6_12.
[37]
William P. Janzen. “High throughput screening.” eng. In: Molecular Biomethods Handbook: Second
Edition (2008), pages 1097–1118. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60327-375-6_60.
[38]
Nestor Jonguitud-Borrego et al. “High—throughput and automated screening for COVID-19.”
In: Frontiers in Medical Technology 4 (15 September 2022). Publisher: Frontiers. issn: 2673-3129.
doi: 10.3389/fmedt.2022.969203. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/medical-
technology/articles/10.3389/fmedt.2022.969203/full (visited on 24 July 2024).
[39]
Abdullah Ayub Khan, Asif Ali Laghari, and Shafique Ahmed Awan. “Machine learning in com-
puter vision: a review.” In: EAI Endorsed Transactions on Scalable Information Systems 8.32
(2021), e4–e4.
[40]
Oussama Khatib et al. “Robots in human environments: Basic autonomous capabilities.” In: The
International Journal of Robotics Research 18.7 (1999), pages 684–696.
[41]
Nathan Koenig and Andrew Howard. “Design and use paradigms for gazebo, an open-source multi-
robot simulator.” In: 2004 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems
(IROS)(IEEE Cat. No. 04CH37566). Volume 3. Ieee. 2004, pages 2149–2154.
[42]
Fanwei Kong et al. “Automatic liquid handling for life science: a critical review of the current
state of the art.” In: Journal of laboratory automation 17.3 (2012), pages 169–185.
[43]
LabManager. “Accommodating Automation Technologies in an Existing Lab.” In: LabManager
(2024). url: https://www.labmanager.com/accommodating-automation-technologies-in-
an-existing-lab-31854.
[44]
End of Life Date. ROS End of Life Dates. 2024. url: https://endoflife.date/ros.
[45]
Giuseppe Lippi and Giorgio Da Rin. “Advantages and limitations of total laboratory automation:
a personal overview.” en. In: Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine (CCLM) 57.6 (June
2019). Publisher: De Gruyter, pages 802–811. issn: 1437-4331. doi: 10.1515/cclm-2018-1323.
url: https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.1515/cclm-2018-1323/html?lang=en
(visited on 8 March 2024).
[46]
Hongyan Liu et al. “Real-Time and Eﬀicient Collision Avoidance Planning Approach for Safe
Human-Robot Interaction.” eng. In: Journal of Intelligent and Robotic Systems: Theory and Ap-
plications 105.4 (2022), page 93. issn: 15730409, 09210296. doi: 10.1007/s10846-022-01687-0.
[47]
Wolfgang Mahnke, Stefan-Helmut Leitner, and Matthias Damm. OPC unified architecture. Springer
Science & Business Media, 2009.
[48]
MarketsandMarkets. Laboratory Automation Market by Product, Application - Global Forecast to
2024. MarketsandMarkets, 2024. url: https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/
lab-automation-market-1158.html.
==PAGE:141==
Bibliography
134
[49]
Rodney S Markin and Scott A Whalen. “Laboratory automation: trajectory, technology, and
tactics.” In: Clinical chemistry 46.5 (2000), pages 764–771.
[50]
Mustafa Mohammed, Heejin Jeong, and Jae Yeol Lee. “Human-robot collision avoidance scheme
for industrial settings based on injury classification.” In: Companion of the 2021 ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction. 2021, pages 549–551.
[51]
Mohamad Mosadeghzad et al. “Towards enhancing modular production systems by integrating a
collaborative robotic manipulator.” In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics and
Automation (ICMA). IEEE. 2019, pages 1750–1755.
[52]
Longtao Mu, Yunfei Zhou, and Tiebiao Zhao. “Cartesian space robot manipulator clamping move-
ment in ROS simulation and experiment.” In: Applied Mathematics and Nonlinear Sciences 6.2
(2021), pages 43–52.
[53]
Peyman Najmabadi, Andrew A Goldenberg, and Andrew Emili. “Hardware flexibility of labora-
tory automation systems: analysis and new flexible automation architectures.” In: JALA: Journal
of the Association for Laboratory Automation 11.4 (2006), pages 203–216.
[54]
NVIDIA. NVIDIA Isaac Sim. 2021. url: https://developer.nvidia.com/isaac-sim.
[55]
Himanshu Ojha et al. “Chapter 7 - Chem-bioinformatic approach for drug discovery: in-silico
screening of potential antimalarial compounds.” In: Chemoinformatics and Bioinformatics in the
Pharmaceutical Sciences. Edited by Navneet Sharma et al. Academic Press, 1 January 2021,
pages 207–243. isbn: 978-0-12-821748-1. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-821748-1.00005-1. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128217481000051 (visited on
24 July 2024).
[56]
Sun Min Park et al. “Formulation Optimization and In Vivo Proof-of-Concept Study of Ther-
mosensitive Liposomes Balanced by Phospholipid, Elastin-Like Polypeptide, and Cholesterol.” In:
PLOS ONE 9.7 (28 July 2014). Publisher: Public Library of Science, e103116. issn: 1932-6203.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103116. url: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?
id=10.1371/journal.pone.0103116 (visited on 30 July 2024).
[57]
PerkinElmer. EnVision 2104 Multilabel Plate Reader Manual. url: https://wcac.yale.edu/
sites/default/files/files/Manuals/Envision2104%20instrument%20manual.pdf.
[58]
Ascendia Pharma. Drug Formulation Development: Quick Reference Guide | Ascendia. url: https:
//ascendiapharma.com/newsroom/2022/06/27/drug-formulation-development (visited on
21 July 2024).
[59]
Ben Pilkington. Why Do We Need Lab Automation? en. Section: Robotics Article. August 2022.
url: https://www.azorobotics.com/Article.aspx?ArticleID=542 (visited on 8 March 2024).
[60]
M. Pollák et al. “Measurement of unidirectional pose accuracy and repeatability of the collabora-
tive robot UR5.” In: Advances in Mechanical Engineering 12.12 (2020), pages 1–21.
[61]
Martin J Pollard. “Automation strategies: A modular approach.” In: (1997).
[62]
Tobias Pusterla. “High-throughput screening (HTS).” In: BMG LABTECH Blog (2019). url:
https://www.bmglabtech.com/en/blog/high-throughput-screening/.
[63]
Wei Qian et al. “Manipulation task simulation using ROS and Gazebo.” In: 2014 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO 2014). IEEE. 2014, pages 2594–2598.
[64]
BIS Research. Laboratory Automation Market Growth, Trends, and Future Forecast 2023-2033.
2023. url: https://bisresearch.com/industry-report/laboratory-automation-market.
html.
[65]
Universal Robots. Real-Time Data Exchange (RTDE) Guide. 2024. url: https://www.universal-
robots.com/articles/ur/interface- communication/real- time- data- exchange- rtde-
guide/.
[66]
ROS 2 Control Documentation. https://control.ros.org/rolling/doc/ros2_control/doc/
index.html. 2024.
==PAGE:142==
Bibliography
135
[67]
Daniel Schober. “Computer vision-based detection and robotic handling of liquids for use in cell
culture automation.” und. 2023.
[68]
Daniel Schober et al. “Vision-based robot manipulation of transparent liquid containers in a
laboratory setting.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16529 (2024).
[69]
Homayoun Seraji and Bruce Bon. “Real-time collision avoidance for position-controlled manipu-
lators.” In: IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation 15.4 (1999), pages 670–677.
[70]
José Gomes da Silva Neto et al. “Comparison of RGB-D sensors for 3D reconstruction.” In: 2020
22nd Symposium on Virtual and Augmented Reality (SVR). IEEE. 2020, pages 252–261.
[71]
James Starkman. “The robot operating system in transition: experiments and tutorials.” Master’s
thesis. Case Western Reserve University, 2018.
[72]
Tomoko Steen. Current Trends in Monoclonal Antibody Development and Manufacturing. Vol-
ume 11. SPRINGER, 2010. isbn: 9786612830761.
[73]
StereoLabs. ZED 2 Datasheet. url: https://www.generationrobots.com/media/zed2-camera-
datasheet.pdf.
[74]
Unity Technologies. Unity. 2024. url: https://unity.com/.
[75]
M. Trehan, A. Gupta, and S. Jung. “Implementation of joint control of a 6-DOF manipulator in
ROS: KOBOKER for robotics education.” In: 19th International Conference on Control Automa-
tion and Systems. 2019.
[76]
Universal Robots. UR5e Datasheet. url: https://www.universal-robots.com/media/1807465/
ur5e-rgb-fact-sheet-landscape-a4.pdf.
[77]
Andres Vivas and José María Sabater. “Ur5 robot manipulation using matlab/simulink and ros.”
In: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation (ICMA). IEEE. 2021,
pages 338–343.
[78]
Barry Whyte. Drug solubility: why testing early matters in drug discovery | BMG LABTECH.
6 April 2023. url: https://www.bmglabtech.com/en/blog/drug-solubility-why-testing-
early-matters-in-drug-discovery/ (visited on 21 July 2024).
[79]
Ádám Wolf et al. “Towards robotic laboratory automation Plug & Play: Survey and concept
proposal on teaching-free robot integration with the LAPP digital twin.” In: SLAS Discovery
(2023).
[80]
Ádám Wolf et al. “Towards robotic laboratory automation Plug & Play: The “LAPP” framework.”
In: SLAS technology 27.1 (2022), pages 18–25.
[81]
Shu-Feng Zhou and Wei-Zhu Zhong. “Drug Design and Discovery: Principles and Applications.” In:
Molecules : A Journal of Synthetic Chemistry and Natural Product Chemistry 22.2 (13 February
2017), page 279. issn: 1420-3049. doi: 10.3390/molecules22020279. url: https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6155886/ (visited on 21 July 2024).
