==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Exploring Microbial Diversity in Metagenomics
M.Sc. Thesis
M.Sc. Bioinformatics and Systems Biology
August 1, 2024
Author
Swati Tak Nielsen
s220868
Supervisor
Christian Brinch
DTU National Food Institute
Research Group for Genomic Epidemiology
==PAGE:2==
Preface and Acknowledgments
This publication is a project report submitted by Swati Tak Nielsen on 1st
of August 2024 as part of her master thesis, equivalent to 30 ECTS credits,
carried out in partial fulfillment of the degree of Master of Science Engineering
in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology.
The project was conducted from March 1, 2024 to August 1, 2024 at the Techni-
cal University of Denmark. The project mainly involved applying bioinformatic
tools and information-theoretic metrics on genomic data generated synthetically
as well as sourced from pre-sequenced and pre-processed samples from a sewage
plant in Copenhagen.
I would like to thank my thesis supervisor Christian Brinch for taking me
in on this project and for providing helpful recommendations, guidance and
prompt responses to queries during the course of the thesis project.
I am
also grateful to the members at the DTU National Food Institute who
provided their feedback and suggestions for improvements during the course of
this project.
Special thanks go to my spouse, and to my Danish and Indian families, who
have been my greatest support and source of motivation through the entire
duration of my master studies.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Microbial diversity is a fundamental aspect of life on Earth, shaping the struc-
ture and function of ecosystems, influencing human health, and offering vast
potential for biotechnological innovation. By studying and preserving microbial
diversity, we can gain deeper insights into the complexity of life and develop
solutions to address pressing environmental and societal challenges.
Shannon’s entropy is a widely used ecological metric for estimating taxa rich-
ness (number of different taxa) and evenness (distribution or spread of different
taxa) in microbial diversity studies. However, conventional methods of calculat-
ing Shannon’s entropy may not be suitable, considering that the count data for
microbial communities is compositional in nature. Compositional data refers to
situations where the elements represent parts of a whole and may not encompass
all possible microbial taxa present in the sampled environment. When entropy
is calculated for such data using conventional methods that disregard the com-
positions and their underlying distributions and variability, it fails to provide
an accurate representation of taxa richness and diversity. A novel Bayesian
method of calculating entropy provided by Piga et al. (2023), in contrast, ap-
pears more promising as it takes into account the the most likely estimates
of taxa variability given the commonly observed statistical distribution for dis-
crete count data with sparsity such as microbiome abundances. One of the main
goals of this thesis project were to apply a few Bayesian and modified Maxi-
mum Likelihood (MLE) based estimators of entropy, which are considered to
be improved versions of Claude Shannon’s method from 1948. The project also
aimed at conducting comparative analyses of these entropy estimators, along
with Shannon’s method, using synthetically generated genomic data in order to
identify the estimator that provides the best entropy approximation compared
to the predetermined true entropy of the data. Finally, based on the results,
the aim was also to use the best estimator for determining the entropy-based
diversity levels of a presequenced set of genomic data obtained from a real
sewage environment in Copenhagen.
==PAGE:4==
Resumé
Mikrobiel mangfoldighed er et grundlæggende aspekt af livet på Jorden, der
former strukturen og funktionen af økosystemer, påvirker menneskers sundhed
og tilbyder et stort potentiale for bioteknologisk innovation. Ved at studere og
bevare mikrobiel mangfoldighed kan vi få dybere indsigt i livets kompleksitet
og udvikle løsninger til at løse presserende miljømæssige og samfundsmæssige
udfordringer.
Shannons entropi er en meget brugt økologisk metrik til at estimere artsrigdom
(antal forskellige arter) og jævnhed (fordeling eller spredning af forskellige arter)
i mikrobiel mangfoldighedsundersøgelser. Konventionelle metoder til beregning
af Shannons entropi er dog muligvis ikke egnede, i betragtning af at opætllings-
data for mikrobielle biomer er sammensat af natur. Sammensætningsdata refer-
erer til situationer, hvor elementerne repræsenterer dele af en helhed og muligvis
ikke omfatter alle mulige mikrobielle arter, der er til stede i prøvemiljøet. Når
entropi beregnes for sådanne data ved hjælp af konventionelle metoder, der ser
bort fra sammensætningerne og deres underliggende fordelinger og variabilitet,
formår det ikke at give en nøjagtig repræsentation af artsrigdom og diversitet.
En ny Bayesiansk metode til beregning af entropi leveret af Piga et al. (2023)
virker derimod mere lovende, da den tager højde for de mest sandsynlige es-
timater af artsvariation givet den almindeligt observerede statistiske fordeling
for diskrete tælledata med sparsitet såsom mikrobiom-overflod. Et af hovedmå-
lene med dette specialeprojekt var at anvende nogle få Bayesianske og modifi-
cerede Maximum Likelihood (MLE) baserede estimatorer af entropi, som anses
for at være forbedrede versioner af Claude Shannons metode fra 1948. Pro-
jektet havde også til formål at udføre komparative analyser af disse entropi
estimatorer, sammen med Shannons metode, ved hjælp af syntetisk genererede
genomiske data for at identificere den estimator, der giver den bedste entropi
tilnærmelse sammenlignet med den forudbestemte sande entropi af dataene.
Endelig, baseret på resultaterne, var målet også at bruge den bedste estimator
til at bestemme de entropi-baserede diversitetsniveauer af et forudsekventeret
sæt genomiske data opnået fra et ægte spildevandsmiljø i København.
==PAGE:5==
Disclaimer on the use of artificial intelligence
This is to bring to the readers’ and examiners’ attention that the text written in this thesis
report has been a result of the understanding and knowledge gained from the reading of
scientific papers and textbooks that were obtained through the DTU Findit service by the
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and other online information publicly available
on the website of NCBI, Wikipedia, and other similar resources. No artificial intelligence
(AI) was used specifically for writing this thesis report.
The use of AI in the project was limited to only the (1) improvement of programming
scripts and solving technical errors specifically related to Latex and Python, (2) assis-
tance with the comprehension of certain diﬀicult-to-understand concepts, and lastly (3)
generation of a couple of images that were otherwise diﬀicult to be created from scratch
or did not have appropriate references in any other publications. During the course of the
project, it was the understanding that DTU allows usage of AI tools for content research,
generic image generation, comprehension-oriented queries, and technical error resolution,
and the three listed tasks that AI was used for during this project were therefore under-
stood to be in compliance with the rules set forth by DTU for such projects.
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
ALR
Additive Log Ratio
CGE
Center for Genomic Epidemiology
CLR
Centered log-ratio
GCF
RefSeq Genome Assembly
KMA
K-mer alignment method
LCA
Lowest common ancestor
MLE
Maximum likelihood estimation
MoM
Method of Moments
NSB
Nemenman-Shafee-Bialik
OTU
Operational taxonomic unit
PCoA
Principal Coordinate Analysis
RTL
Root to leaf
16S rRNA
16S ribosomal ribonucleic acid
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1 | Introduction
9
1.1 Microbiomes and Metagenomics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2 Biodiversity in Microbiomes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3 Sewage Microbiome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.5 Purpose and Scope of this Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.6 Research Objectives for this Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2 | Background
16
2.1 Microbiome Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2 Microbial Diversity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3 Compositional Nature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.5 Centered Log Ratio Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.6 Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.7 Common Measures of Microbial Diversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.7.1 The Chao1 method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.7.2 Shannon’s Entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.7.3 Effective Richness or Hill Numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3 | Findings from the Literature
33
3.1 Limitations Around Shannon’s Entropy Estimation . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2 Improved Methods of Entropy Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3 Modified Maximum Likelihood-Based Methods . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.1 Chao-Shen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.2 Hausser-Strimmer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.4 Bayesian Framework-Based Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.4.1 Wolpert-Wolf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4.2 Nemenman, Shafee, and Bialek . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4.3 Piga, Font-Pomarol, Sales-Pardo, and Guimerà . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.5 Quick Comparison of Entropy Estimators . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.5.1 EntropyEstimators: a web app . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4 | Workflow and Genomic Data
45
4.1 Project Workflow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2 Synthetic Data: Reads from Complete Bacterial Genomes . . . . .
47
6
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
4.3 Sewage Data: Pre-Sequenced FASTQ Samples from Renseanlæg
Avedøre
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5 | Bioinformatic Tools and Resources
50
5.1 K-mer Alignment Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.1.1 Output Files from a KMA Run . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.1.2 Depth variance and variance towers in mapstat output . . . . . . .
52
5.2 Kraken2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2.1 Estimating Abundances from Kraken2 Output using Bracken . . . .
56
5.3 Bacterial Databases Used for Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6 | Results for Synthetic Samples
58
6.1 Distributions Targeted Versus Obtained . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.2 Observed Richness After Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.3 Chao1 Estimates of Richness After Mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.4 Species Accumulation and Sampling Effort Analysis After Mapping
62
6.5 Relative Abundances for Mapped Counts . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.6 Post-Mapping Change in Species Variances and Concentration Pa-
rameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.7 Entropies For Abundance Data Using the Six Estimators
. . . . .
73
6.8 Alignment Versus Mapped Counts: Alpha, Chao1 Index, and En-
tropies Based on Alignment Counts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7 | Results for Sewage Samples
79
7.1 Part I: Comparative Analyses Based on KMA and Kraken2 Hits
.
79
7.1.1 Observed Richness, Chao1 Index and Concentration Parameters . . .
79
7.1.2 Taxa Accumulation and Sampling Effort Analysis . . . . . . . . . .
80
7.1.3 Distribution of Abundant and Rare Taxa . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7.1.4 Distribution of Concentration Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
7.1.5 Entropy and Effective Richness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
7.1.6 Difference between Individual Sample Entropy and Average Entropy
for All Samples Estimated Using Each Method . . . . . . . . . . .
86
7.1.7 PCoA Clustering Based Homogeneity Testing of Sewage Samples . .
86
7.1.8 Relation between Entropy Estimates and Average of Pairwise Eu-
clidean Distances Among Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
7.1.9 Signal-to-Noise Ratio Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
7
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
7.2 Part II: Comparative Analyses Based on KMA Hits Without Vari-
ance Towers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
7.2.1 Distribution of Taxa and Concentration Parameters After Removing
Variance Towers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
7.2.2 Entropies and Effective Richness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
7.2.3 Difference between Entropies and Respective Average Entropy from
Each Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
7.2.4 Re-testing Homogeneity of Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
7.3 Best Estimate of Richness in Sewage Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
8 | Key Findings and Conclusion
102
8.1 Summary of Key Findings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
8.2 Future Directions for Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
References
105
Glossary
111
Appendices
115
8
==PAGE:10==
1 | INTRODUCTION
1 | Introduction
1.1 Microbiomes and Metagenomics
A microbiome refers to a collective community of microorganisms coexisting
within a specific environment or habitat. Such an environment or habitat can
range from larger areas and regions like soils, rivers, marine sediments, and
tropical rainforests to smaller localised ones like a specific plant rhizosphere,
human gut, municipal sewage, or kitchen waste bins.
Most of such micro-
biomes comprise diverse unicellular microorganisms such as bacteria, archaea,
protists, fungi, and viruses, described as the “microbiota”, as well as a few
multicellular organisms such as helminths. Within these microbiomes, the mi-
crobiota can assume various roles, ranging from commensal and symbiotic to
potentially pathogenic, influencing the ecosystem dynamics and overall health
of the habitat. The composition of such microbiomes has been a topic of great
curiosity and also the main research subject in the field of metagenomics, which
is the study of the structure and function of entire nucleotide sequences isolated
and analysed from all the organisms in a bulk sample taken from microbiomes.
Metagenomics has been one of the fastest growing fields of microbiology over the
past two decades, and it is still growing consistently with a steep evolutionary
curve owing to the ever-evolving technologies and methods that are being used
in this field.
Until the 1990s, it was just 16S rRNA gene sequencing that
was being applied to get insights into the incredible diversity of organisms in
environmental systems. However, analysing just a few genes was not enough
and with the increasing curiosity and research needs, finding more and more
about the total genetic and ecological diversity of a given environment led to
the evolving field of metagenomics.[41]
Habitat-specific metagenomic studies during the 2000s provided us with aston-
ishing insights into the existence as well as functional potential and adaptations
of microbial communities in many different environments and ecosystems, which
are now popularly called the “microbiomes”. Considering the high sequencing
costs, metagenomic studies of such microbiomes was still limited. However,
2010 onwards, the constantly reducing sequencing costs as well as the ease
of usage with technologies like Illumina MiSeq (2011) and Oxford Nanopore’s
MinION (2015), metagenomics has become more accessible to scientists and
9
==PAGE:11==
1 | INTRODUCTION
Genetic 
material 
extraction
DNA 
sequencing 
and assembly
Gene 
prediction and 
annotation
Data ready for 
diversity 
analyses
Comparison 
with existing 
metagenomic
databases
Gene binning
Sequence 
ﬁltration
Acquire 
environmental 
samples
DNA sequencing
Bioinformatics
Figure 1 :
A typical metagenomics workflow for microbiome studies. Flowchart inspired
by Lange et al. (2019) [26]
has thus also contributed significantly to solving many research questions and
mysteries.[15] The latest technologies used for metagenomics are much more
cost-effective and comprehensive. Modern metagenomics has thus paved the
way for understanding ecological as well as genetic diversity — the variety,
abundance, and distribution — of microbial taxa in many different environ-
ments. Illustrated in Figure 1 is a typical metagenomic workflow for microbiome
studies. It involves sample collection from a microbiome source of interest, fol-
lowed by dna isolation, sequencing of reads, alignment and mapping to reference
genomes, followed by downstream bioinformatic analyses for further investiga-
tions like taxonomic profiling, antimicrobial resistance gene predictions, as well
as abundance profiling.
1.2 Biodiversity in Microbiomes
Ecologically and genetically diverse microbes play crucial roles in organic mat-
ter breakdown and decomposition, nutrient cycling, bioremediation, food pro-
duction, biogeochemical processes, and the overall ecosystem functioning of
10
==PAGE:12==
1 | INTRODUCTION
natural environments like soils, rivers, and marine sediments, thereby influenc-
ing overall ecosystem productivity and health.[18] Within microbiomes such as
the human gut, sewage water in municipalities, or wet waste bins in kitchens,
microbial diversity directly impacts human health, waste treatment processes,
and environmental quality.
The human gut microbiome, in particular, has been extensively studied for its
role in various physiological processes, including digestion, metabolism, as well
as its influence on host health, immune function, and disease susceptibility. Mi-
crobiome diversity acts as a critical gauge of gut resilience, indicating potential
environmental disruptions and health issues, spanning from obesity to mental
disorders.[7, 35, 42] In sewage surveillance for public health and environmental
upkeep, microbiome studies aid in identifying pathogens, assessing sanitation,
and guiding wastewater treatment.[27]
Figure 2 :
Biodiversity across different microbiomes. Image sourced from Banerjee et al.
(2023) [7]
11
==PAGE:13==
1 | INTRODUCTION
Understanding microbial diversity is thus essential for addressing key scien-
tific questions related to ecology, evolution, and biotechnology, as well as for
improved human, animal and plant health. The study of microbial diversity
significantly aids in environmental monitoring, conservation efforts, and the
sustainable management of natural resources. By understanding the microbial
communities present in various ecosystems, researchers can assess ecosystem
health, predict responses to environmental changes, and inform conservation
strategies aimed at preserving biodiversity and ecosystem services.
1.3 Sewage Microbiome
A sewage microbiome is highly complex in nature, for it is an outlet for wastes
from humans, animals as well as plants. Untreated sewage always comes with
pathogens and can be a huge threat to public health. Sewage is therefore usually
received and treated by wastewater treatment plants in most of the countries
and regions around the globe.
Figure 3 :
Untreated sewage, a highly complex microbiome as it contains a wide variety
of wastes from humans, animals, and plants. Image created using DALL-E.
Influent sewage bacterial profile often reflect the human gut microbiome. How-
ever, it can also comprise microbial taxa that form plant and animal microbiota
groups, which overall makes sewage a highly complex environment. Many of
these taxa are saprohytic in nature and play an important role in decomposition
of organic matter. Sewage surveillance of not only provides an understanding of
microbial communities found in sewage, but is also crucial to assess the risks as-
sociated with antimicrobial resistance pathogens, spread of infectious diseases,
as well as overall health of a community. For instance, in the US, local wastew-
12
==PAGE:14==
1 | INTRODUCTION
ater surveillance has revealed evidence of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus
type 2 in local counties, as well as in New York City, representing community
transmission.[36] Additionally, during the Covid-19 pandemic, sewage surveil-
lance for novel species or strains was a critical mode of fight against the spread.
Knowledge of the composition of microbiomes in environments like sewage is
thus all the more critical so as to monitor changes over time or in response to
interventions, as well as to identify correlations between microbiome composi-
tions and health outcomes.
1.5 Purpose and Scope of this Project
In metagenomic studies, scientists use various methods to understand the di-
versity of microbes in ecosystems like sewage and human gut. They use mea-
sures such as richness and evenness to grasp how different microbial species
or even lower levels like different strains of the same species interact within a
microbiome. Metrics such as Pielou’s, Simpson’s, and Shannon diversity in-
dices, along with techniques like rarefaction analysis and beta diversity indices,
provide a comprehensive view of microbial diversity. These methods help re-
searchers see not only how many different taxa are present but also how evenly
they are distributed. Additionally, researchers analyse phylogenetic and func-
tional diversity to gain deeper insights into the evolutionary and co-occurrence
aspects of microbiota for scientific decision-making. Shannon’s entropy is es-
pecially valuable as a diversity measure because it considers both richness and
evenness, providing nuanced understanding of a microbiome complexity. And
so is Chao1 index which is one of the most popular measures used by metage-
nomics researchers.
Using Shannon’s entropy and its exponential value (Hill numbers or effective
richness), one can determine the number of different operational taxnomoic
units (OTUs), be it at strain, species, genus or higher taxonomic levels, are
present in a sample. It allows researchers to compare microbial diversity in dif-
ferent ecosystems or samples, helping them evaluate how environmental changes
impact microbial communities. There are many different methods of estimat-
ing entropy as a measure of genomic diversity. Many of these methods follow
MLE or Bayesian frameworks. However, it is not yet fully understood which
methods provide the entropy estimates that would correctly match the true
entropy based on the actual richness and evenness of a microbiome commu-
13
==PAGE:15==
1 | INTRODUCTION
nity. This is because most methods either do not consider the compositional
nature of microbiome abundance data or end up disregarding the presence of
rare taxa, thereby providing not-so-accurate figures. Additionally, there is a
diverse range of bioinformatic tools that are used for processing metagenomic
data to get these figures and each of those tools work in more than one different
ways, adding further to the uncertainty around getting a reasonable estimate of
entropy. Achieving complete certainty about the true taxa richness and even-
ness in a microbiome is challenging as it is, due to the limitations of current
methodologies and the complex nature of microbial communities. These limi-
tations and uncertainities had thus led to the problem statement for this thesis
project as follows:
How can entropy, as a measure of diversity in microbiome samples, be ac-
curately determined using different metagenomic and information-theoretic
methodologies?
And accordingly, the high-level purpose and scope of this project are to:
• Evaluate how various entropy estimators influence our perception of mi-
crobial diversity
• Determine if Bayesian entropy estimators offer greater accuracy compared
to the original but naive entropy estimator given by Shannon as well as a
few modified MLE-based estimators
• Investigate the roles of data distribution and database selection on the
estimates of entropy and effective richness
• Explore strategies that can be applied to accurately identify the true en-
tropy as a measure of diversity for a microbiome community
1.6 Research Objectives for this Project
In accordance with the problem, purpose and scope, the following low-level re-
search to-do’s were defined so as to eﬀiciently steer the direction of this project.
• Review existing literature on metagenomics, microbiome analyses, entropy
estimations, and related topics to establish a foundation for the thesis
project
• Generate synthetic DNA reads with different underlying variability and
14
==PAGE:16==
1 | INTRODUCTION
distributions to simulate microbial communities from Danish sewage, de-
velop abundance profiles, and estimate species-level diversity in the form
of entropy estimates
• Map all the sets of synthetic reads to one or more bacterial databases
using K-mer Alignment Method (KMA) to obtain abundance counts and
estimate entropy for each set of counts using methods given by Chao-Shen,
Hausser-Strimmer, Nemenman-Shafee-Bialik, and Piga et al., as well as the
original Shannon’s entropy estimation method
• Perform a comparative study to identify the most suitable entropy estima-
tor for effectively assessing microbial diversity in synthetic sample mixes
• Speculate the effectiveness of the popular estimator, Chao1, in assessing
true diversity levels
• Analyse, map, and quantify reads from real sewage samples from Denmark
to create abundance profiles and estimate taxon-level diversity measures in
a manner that is followed similarly for the synthetic data
• Validate mapping results using an additional mapping tool like Kraken2
and compare the entropy estimates based on Kraken2 mapped counts with
the results obtained using KMA mapped counts
• Speculate the impact of variability possibly caused due to variations in
sequencing depth, technical artefacts and other factors, on the entropy
estimates and thus the perception of microbiome diversity
• Reach conclusions on the best estimator of entropy and use it to assess
diversity of the real sewage samples, thereby sharing a measure for effective
richness that is considered the best estimate for these samples
15
==PAGE:17==
2 | BACKGROUND
2 | Background
2.1 Microbiome Data
Microbiome data is typically generated using either 16S rRNA gene sequencing
or shotgun metagenomic sequencing as a FASTQ file. FASTQ is a text-based
format used for storing nucleotide sequences (DNA and RNA) along with their
corresponding quality scores. Each entry in a FASTQ file includes a sequence
identifier, the raw sequence, a plus sign, and a quality score line that corre-
sponds to the sequence. After a microbiome sample is sequenced to obtain
FASTQ reads (or raw reads), there are various methods of generating micro-
biome abundance data from it, so as to have a set of analysable figures. One of
those methods is to map the FASTQ reads to existing standard or customised
databases that comprise reference sequences or complete genomes and plasmids
of bacterial species.[47] Most often, these databases are made up of reference se-
quences that are present in the NCBI databases which are updated frequently
with every new species discovered and sequenced by verified researchers and
scientific contributors.
With the availability of different bioinformatic tools for mapping and alignment
of raw reads to reference sequences, it has been possible to obtain output of these
tools with many different metrics such as mapped counts, alignment counts, and
variance in the coverage of each reference sequences by raw reads.
Counts (or the aggregated number of “hits” for each taxon as assessed by a
mapping or alignment tool) and metrics from mapping and alignment outputs
can be extracted and processed further to create abundance tables or OTU
tables, which form the primary data structure in microbiome studies.[47] OTU
tables can be structured according to the needs of a research and study, that is,
they can either be structured as feature-by-sample tables or sample-by-feature
tables, in which features refer to the OTUs that are most often either strains,
species, or genus of the microbiota.
In Table 1, vertical columns represent different taxa and horizontal rows rep-
resent different samples. Here observed richness is the total number of unique
columns and abundances are the observation values for each taxa in each sam-
ple, with the total abundance for a taxon being the sum of all observations in
16
==PAGE:18==
2 | BACKGROUND
Table 1 :
An example of a refined OTU table
Sample
Clostridium
Acinetobacter
Enterococcus
Shigella
Eggerthella
Salmonella
Sample 1
88
8033
2735
307
682
421
Sample 2
140
9723
2541
554
742
457
Sample 3
148
14272
5004
706
1401
699
Sample 4
178
20998
2848
1030
988
933
Sample 5
167
13097
1684
567
892
530
Sample 6
269
20967
2423
1311
1299
1151
its corresponding column, that is, the column-wise aggregated counts.
2.2 Microbial Diversity
By analysing such OTU data, the diversity levels of a microbiome can be
interpreted and insights for research-based decisions can be made.
As per
the Encylopedia of Biodiversity (Second edition, 2001), microbial diversity
is defined as the range of different kinds of unicellular organisms, bacteria,
archaea, protists, and fungi, which might be present in an environment. So
the term diversity does not just refer to the number of different taxa or OTUs,
it is a combination of both richness and abundance of the taxa present. A
high-diversity environment is characterised by many different types of taxa
with their respective abundances evenly distributed, meaning no single taxa is
dominating — allowing for a more balanced and stable ecosystem
Richness and Abundance
Richness refers to the total number of different microbial OTUs or taxa present
in a sample or environment. It simply indicates the variety of taxa present
within a community. However, it is different from abundance which is the total
number of individuals of a taxon present in the community.
Richness does
not take into account the abundances or relative abundances (distributions)
for OTUs. Abundance is a measure of the total population size of each taxon
within a given biological sample, phyiscal area or ecosystem, while richness is
an informal measure of uniquely defined taxa in that population.
One way of measuring total abundance for a taxon is as the observed abundance
denoted by 𝐴, which simply sums up the total number of individuals for each
unique taxon (that is, genus, species or strains) observed in an OTU table or
17
==PAGE:19==
2 | BACKGROUND
dataset:
𝐴𝑘=
𝑆
∑
𝑠=1
𝑁𝑘𝑠
(1)
where:
• 𝐴𝑘is the total number of individuals of 𝑘-th taxon (where 𝑘= 1, 2, 3, ...𝐾,
with 𝐾being the total number of unique taxa or richness in the data)
across all samples
• 𝑠represents the number of samples ranging from 𝑠= 1, 2, 3... up to 𝑆, the
total number of samples
• 𝑁𝑘𝑠represents the abundance (counts) of individuals from the k-th taxon
in a sample
Relative abundance
Relative abundance helps quantify how evenly distributed individuals are
among the various OTUs present in an ecosystem or habitat. It is calculated
by dividing the number of individuals of a specific taxon by the total number of
individuals of all taxa in the community. Mathematically, relative abundance
can be stated as follows:
𝑝𝑘𝑠= 𝑁𝑘𝑠
𝑁
(2)
where N is the sum total of all abundance counts across all samples for all taxa:
𝑁=
𝐾
∑
𝑘=1
𝑆
∑
𝑠=1
𝑁𝑘𝑠
(3)
Evenness
High evenness indicates that the abundance of different taxa, for instance
species, is relatively balanced, with no one species dominating the commu-
nity, while low evenness suggests that one or a few species are significantly
more abundant than others. It complements other basic measures in providing
a more comprehensive understanding of community structure and diversity.
In Figure 4, each shape represents an individual and the color and nature of
the shape represents a different type of organism. Four different samples from
the same environment are shown as the four circles but with different richness
and evenness. While their respetive richness horizontally is the same (2 for the
18
==PAGE:20==
2 | BACKGROUND
bottom ones and 3 for the top ones), their distribution vary across all 4 samples
and thus relative abundances can help differentiate between them. A microbial
community is described as even, when no one organism is dominant. [6]
Figure 4 :
Richness and Evenness of Four Different Samples. Image has been inspired by
El-Ashram (2017).[6]
Figure 5
2.3 Compositional Nature
Microbiome abundance data is inherently compositional, [47] which means the
sum total of all component (parts or observations) values sum up to a constant
value — which is merely a byproduct of the sampling process and is also highly
dependent on the DNA library preparation steps.
The raw counts for each
part are highly dependent on random properties, such as sample size, sample
storage conditions, DNA extraction eﬀicacy and sequencing depth. Variations
in library sizes due to technical inconsistencies or differences in experimental
procedures directly affect the number of reads and, consequently, the resulting
abundance counts.
This implies that some components may appear in the
observed counts for certain samples but not for others. Additionally, there may
be components present in nature that do not appear in the abundance data
because their corresponding fragments were not sequenced due to experimental
or procedural variations or limitations. What is more important to consider is
the ratio between the parts and not the absolute magnitude of each part.[10]
In other words, it’s the relative abundance, also called evenness, or normalised
counts that matter when analysing microbiome data, not the raw abundance
19
==PAGE:21==
2 | BACKGROUND
counts or richness. The compositional nature of microbiome data thus makes
it proportional, meaning that the distances between component values are
meaningful only in a proportional context. [47]
Figure 6 :
Comparison of absolute abundances (count of individuals for each OTU type on
the left pane) and relative abundances (percentage or proportion for each OTU category
on the right pane) in two ecosystems. Image inspired by Lin et al. [28]
In Figure 6, the absolute abundance shows the total number of each OTU
present in each ecosystem. An increase in the absolute number of one taxon,
let’s say species, affects the relative proportions of all species, not just the one
that increased. Even if the count for one of the OTU type increases, what
matters more in compositional data is how this change affects the proportions
of all the OTUs to have a meaningful insight into the ecosystems’ characteristics
or functioning.
2.4 Limitations
Microbiome data presents numerous limitations and complexities. Besides the
lesser-known fact about how it is the relative abundance that must be used for
analyses, such data also often has various challenges such as high dimension-
ality, sparsity with excess zeros, overdispersion, skewed distributions, sample
heterogeneity, etc. Additionally, it is supposed to comprise only non-negative
components which become meaningful only when expressed as proportions or
relative abundances.
This requires microbiome abundance compositions to
20
==PAGE:22==
2 | BACKGROUND
sum to a fixed number or constant across samples (that is, exhibit “closure”
property) — most often which is kept either 1 in case of proportions or
100 in case of percentages but it can be any fixed value.[10] Overall, these
tricky attributes of microbiome data make both conventional parametric and
non-parametric models unsuitable for its analysis. [31, 32, 47]
Sparsity or zero-inflation:
Sparsity or zero-inflation is a common challenge encountered in metagenomic
data analysis, characterised by a high proportion of zero counts or very low
abundance levels specifically across low level microbial taxa, such as species
or strains, within samples.[46] These are the situations where the excess of
zero counts cannot be explained solely by random chance or genuine absence
of events. It suggests the presence of additional factors contributing to the
inflation of zero counts.
Zeros may stem from either a genuine biological absence of certain taxa in a
few of the samples from the same sequencing run, or technical limitations in
sequencing technologies such as biased sequencing toward GC-rich contents,
or artifacts introduced during sample collection and processing causing vari-
ations in the sequencing depth across samples, for example, inconsistency in
the normalisation procedure of libraries, cross-contamination, poor adapter
ligation to certain fragments. Samples with lower sequencing depths thus tend
to exhibit more zero counts because of reduced sensitivity in the detection of
low-abundance taxa, even if those taxa are present in the other samples as well
as the environment under study.
Overdispersion:
Overdispersion refers to a situation in count data wherein for each taxa the
variance across samples is much larger than its mean. [47] It leads to observed
variability in abundance counts within samples being much higher than what
would be expected under a theoretical distribution such as Poisson, which as-
sumes that the mean and the variance are equal. Therefore, it is often advisable
to have data standardised to have a consistent variance before applying statis-
tical techniques. But when ignored, overdispersion can lead to inflated variance
estimates and potentially biased inferences. In metagenomic studies, overdis-
21
==PAGE:23==
2 | BACKGROUND
0
10
20
30
40
50
Sparsity or Zero−inflation
Microbial OTU
Abundance
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
a
b
c
d
e
0
20
40
60
80
Overdispersion
Microbial OTU
Abundance
Var: 105.2
Var: 50.1
Var: 27.9
Var: 24.7
Var: 9.8
Mean: 20.6
Mean: 14
Mean: 9.9
Mean: 9
Mean: 5
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0
50
100
150
Microbial Abundance
Density
Skewed Distribution of Microbial Abundance
Figure 7 :
Sparsity, overdispersion and skewness in microbiome data
22
==PAGE:24==
2 | BACKGROUND
persion can arise due to biological heterogeneity within microbial populations
as well as artefacts caused by variability or bias in data generation processes,
and inconsistent sampling procedures. Overdispersion complicates statistical
analyses by violating assumptions of standard count distributions and may
require specialised modeling approaches, depending on the characteristics of
the abundance data under study to accurately account for its excess variability.
Skewed distributions:
Skewed distributions in microbiome data are actually a direct consequence of
excessive zeros and overdispersion.
Disproportionate representation of taxa
with varying abundance levels causes long tails and non-uniform spread of
taxa abundance across samples. [46] This often manifests as asymmetry and
non-normality when such data is visualised through plots like histograms or
boxplots. Skewed distributions thus also impact the accuracy of statistical esti-
mates and tests, necessitating the use of specialised analytical methods capable
of handling non-standard and non-normal distributional properties. Addressing
sparsity and zero-inflation is crucial for accurate analysis of metagenomic data,
as these conditions distort abundance distributions and impact downstream
statistical analyses and inferences. Many statistical methods such as logistic
regression and generalised linear modeling are sensitive to the presence of zeroes
in the data, further underlining the importance of mitigating these effects for
robust data analysis. [47]
2.5 Centered Log Ratio Transformation
Compositional data, such as species counts in samples, are inherently con-
strained because the counts are parts of a whole (e.g., the total count of all
species in a sample). This constraint can introduce spurious correlations and
other statistical artefacts when using standard statistical methods. The CLR
transformation helps mitigate these issues by transforming the data to a log-
ratio scale, which is more appropriate for compositional data.[10]
Although there are several techniques that are used by researcher for such
transformation and normalisation steps, CLR is preferred in this project be-
cause it provides a straightforward approach that is symmetrical in treating
all components equally relative to the geometric mean.
This makes it par-
23
==PAGE:25==
2 | BACKGROUND
ticularly useful for exploratory data analysis and visualisation, as it does not
prioritise any specific component over others. For instance, unlike the Addi-
tive Log Ratio (ALR) transformation which depends on the choice of a single
reference component and can introduce asymmetry, the CLR transformation
maintains the balance among all components and also retains the data’s un-
derlying properties. [10] Additionally, CLR-transformed data also facilitates
the use of standard statistical and multivariate techniques, which are otherwise
diﬀicult to do so owing to. the nature of the microbiome compositional data.
[47]
clr(x) = [log ( 𝑥1
𝑔(x)) , log ( 𝑥2
𝑔(x)) , … , log ( 𝑥𝐷
𝑔(x))]
(4)
where 𝑥represents the abundance counts for ain a D-part compositional set of
abundance counts, with species categories ranging from 𝑥1 to 𝑥𝐷.
𝑔(𝑥) is the geometric mean for each species category and is estimated by:
𝑔(x) = (
𝐷
∏
𝑖=1
𝑥𝑖)
1
𝐷
(5)
The geometric mean of the relative abundances of all species categories acts
as a baseline for comparison in this transformation. It represents the central
tendency of the composition. Using the geometric mean also ensures the sum
of the CLR values is always zero and so the CLR values are already relative to
the geometric mean value.[10]
2.6 Modeling
Metagenomic data, being count data, relies on discrete probability distributions
to model the distribution of microbial taxa or species within samples. And
considering the high dimensionality, sparsity, overdispersion and skewness often
observed in such datasets, there are only a handful of discrete distributions
that can be used to model them effectively. As part of this thesis project, a
mixture model distribution type called Dirichlet-Multinomial was discussed and
deployed. [47]
24
==PAGE:26==
2 | BACKGROUND
Dirichlet-Multinomial Distribution:
The Dirichlet-Multinomial distribution is a compound probability distribution
that originates from a combination of the Dirichlet and the Multinomial distri-
butions. The combination of these two distributions is particularly useful for
modeling microbiome discrete count data that is overdispersed and has varying
abundances of taxa across samples in a composition. [20] To understand how
the combination works for microbiome compositional data, it is advisable to
first look at the two component models separately as given in Table 2.
Table 2 :
Dirichlet and Multinomial distributions: respective attributes that make them
suitable for a combined modeling of microbiome data [20]
Multinomial Distribution
Dirichlet Distribution
Used for discrete data, like counts for
each unique taxa
Used for continuous data, for example
taxa proportions in a composition
Extends the binomial distribution from
two discrete outcomes to multiple
discrete outcomes
Extends the beta distribution from two
continuous outcomes to multiple
continuous outcomes
Models the probabilities of observing a
specific set of counts for each taxa in a
sample
Models the probabilities of observing
each unique taxa, let’s say species,
across samples in a compositional
dataset
Suitable for describing read counts in
microbiome data where each count
represents the number of observations
for each species
Provides a distribution over possible
vectors of species proportions, useful
for modeling variability in species
composition across samples
Parameters represent the probability of
each outcome
Parameters represent prior counts or
strengths of belief about the
proportions of each category
If there are 3 equally abundant species
with their respective counts as (2, 2, 2)
out of 6 total observations in a sample,
then their respective probability
parameters, assuming equal likelihood
for each species, will be [1
3, 1
3, 1
3]
Given prior knowledge of species
proportions, the Dirichlet distribution
updates this knowledge after observing
new data. For example, if the prior was
𝛼= (1, 4, 1), then the updated values
based on observed counts (2, 2, 2) will
be 𝛼′ = (1 + 2, 4 + 2, 1 + 2) = (3, 6, 3)
In Figure 8, the left plot illustrates the multinomial distribution of read counts
for three species within a single sample, showcasing the discrete counts of each
species given their relative abundances. The right plot displays the Dirichlet
distribution of species proportions across multiple samples where each dark blue
point denotes a sample, highlighting the between-sample variability in species
proportions. The Dirichlet distribution captures the continuous proportions of
25
==PAGE:27==
2 | BACKGROUND
0
25
50
75
100
1
2
3
Species
Read counts
Multinomial distribution of read counts
20
40
60
80
100
20
40
60
80
100
20
40
60
80
100
Sp2
Sp1
Sp3
Dirichlet distribution of species proportions
Figure 8 :
Multinomial and Dirichlet distributions as illustrated for three different species.
species in the community, while the multinomial distribution models the dis-
crete counts of species observed in each sample, reflecting the inherent random-
ness and variability in the sequencing process. When combined, Multinomial
and Dirichlet distributions work as a powerful tool in microbiome data analysis.
The variability in microbiome OTU count data is generally greater than what
would be predicted by using the variance of the multinomial distribution. [40]
Therefore, to account for the overdispersion in the data, it was suggested by
Holmes et al.
(2012) to treat the multinomial parameters (probabilities of
observing each species) as a random vector that follows a Dirichlet distribu-
tion.[23] So when the Multinomial and Dirichlet distributions are combined for
modeling microbiome abundance count data, the Dirichlet distribution serves
as the conjugate prior distribution for the species probabilities. This allows for
a straightforward Bayesian update of the prior beliefs about species proportions
with the observed counts, resulting in a posterior Dirichlet distribution. [10]
The Bayesian framework in this regard has been explained further in section
3.4.
Dirichlet distribution and the concentration parameter:
Considering that the Beta distribution is a special case of the Dirichlet distri-
bution, it is easier to understand the latter by means of the discussion about
the former. Here’s how. Draws (or species) from a standard beta distribu-
tion have a probability value between 0 and 1, with p as the frequency of the
draw belonging to the reference category and 1 – p as the frequency of it be-
longing to the alternative category. These frequencies should sum up to 1 as
26
==PAGE:28==
2 | BACKGROUND
these are essentially probabilities. Additionally, the beta distribution has an
intensity parameter (or concentration parameter) 𝛼which affects the variation
among the draws. [20] Similar to the Beta distribution, the Dirichlet distribu-
tion uses concentration parameters as well. For a composition with multiple
species (parts or categories), there are corresponding concentration parameter
components which can be stated as 𝛼1, 𝛼2, 𝛼3, ..., 𝛼𝑘for each of the k categories
of species. These parameter components influence the shape of the species-wise
distribution or the species variation in such a way that for a given species, a
larger value of 𝛼would mean low variation in its relative abundances across
samples. [20] When summed up together, the components are depicted mathe-
matically as 𝛼0. The estimation of 𝛼𝑘for each category 𝑘using the Method of
Moments (MoM) [17] can be carried out by applying:
𝛼𝑘=
̄𝑝𝑘(
̄𝑝𝑘(1 −
̄𝑝𝑘)
𝑠2
𝑘
−1)
(6)
where:
•
̄𝑝𝑘is the mean of the proportions for category 𝑘or simply put, the column
mean of the normalised counts for a species category 𝑘
• 𝑠2
𝑘is the variance of the proportions for category 𝑘
Effect of concentration parameter on taxa variability:
The concentration parameter components can take any positive value greater
than zero and are always positive values. When these values are the same for
all species in the composition, it meas that all the species are assumed to have
an equal prior probability, that equal likelihood of being observed, and it is
called a symmetric Dirichlet prior. However, when the concentration parame-
ter components are different for each species, the prior is called Asymmetric
Dirichlet prior. And asymmetric prior thus allows for incorporation of relative
abundances of species that might already be known based on either previous
research or understanding of the environment under study. The concentration
parameter can be set so as to either get a densely uniform, uniform or sparse
symmetric Dirichlet distributions.
27
==PAGE:29==
2 | BACKGROUND
Table 3 :
Comparison of Symmetric and Asymmetric Dirichlet Priors [10]
Symmetric Dirichlet Prior
Asymmetric Dirichlet Prior
All concentration parameters 𝛼𝑖are
equal.
Concentration parameters 𝛼𝑖are
different for each species.
Assumes equal prior probability for all
species.
Allows incorporation of prior knowledge
about the relative abundances of
species.
Useful when no prior information is
available or when we want to treat all
species equally initially.
Useful when there is prior knowledge or
belief about the relative abundances of
different species.
Example: 𝛼= (5, 5, 5) for 3 species,
indicating equal belief in the abundance
of each species.
Example: 𝛼= (5, 3, 2) for 3 species,
indicating a belief that the first species
is more abundant than the second,
which is more abundant than the third.
The posterior parameters will be
𝛼′ = (5 + 𝑥1, 5 + 𝑥2, 5 + 𝑥3), where 𝑥𝑖
are the observed counts.
The posterior parameters will be
𝛼′ = (5 + 𝑥1, 3 + 𝑥2, 2 + 𝑥3), where 𝑥𝑖
are the observed counts and 𝛼𝑖are the
prior parameters.
Reflects an initial equal likelihood for
all species, updated by observed data.
Reflects prior knowledge or belief about
species abundances, updated by
observed data.
Table 4 :
Description of Dirichlet Distributions Based on Concentration Parameter
Concentration
parameter
Distribution characteristics
Uniform (𝛼= 1)
Leads to a uniform distribution over the probability simplex,
where all possible combinations of species proportions are
equally likely
Dense, uniform
(𝛼= 10)
Leads to a more concentrated distribution around the center
of the probability vector space (or simplex), where all species
have similar proportions, but with less variability than the
uniform case
Sparse (𝛼< 1)
Leads to a distribution that favors sparsity, where the
probability mass is concentrated towards the corners of the
probability simplex, indicating a higher prevalence or
relative abundance of one or a few species than the others
28
==PAGE:30==
2 | BACKGROUND
Understanding these distributions and their parameters is crucial for micro-
biome data analysis. Specifically, the understanding of the variations of species
within samples and their relative abundances across different ecosystems
significantly impact decision-making regarding the health and functionality
of those ecosystems. For instance, when determining a treatment plan for a
patient with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) or dysbiosis, it is essential to
consider factors indicating an unhealthy level of gut microbiome diversity.[24]
These factors can include imbalances in beneficial and harmful bacteria pro-
portions, the presence of key microbial species, and overall microbial richness
and evenness.
A detailed analysis of these variations can provide valuable
insights into the underlying causes of the patient’s condition and guide the
development of effective treatment strategies.[24]
Figure 9 :
Illustrative examples of how the species-specific distributions change with the change
in the value of 𝛼for three different species, Species A, B and C, across 200 sample observations.
Each blue point in a ternary plot here represents a sample of observed counts.
B
A
C
Uniform symmetric 
 alpha = (1, 1, 1)
B
A
C
Dense symmetric 
 alpha = (5, 5, 5)
B
A
C
Dense asymmetric 
 alpha = (3, 8, 10)
B
A
C
Sparse 
 alpha = (0.009, 0.01, 0.8)
29
==PAGE:31==
2 | BACKGROUND
For instance, studies have shown that gut dysbiosis, characterised by reduced
bacterial diversity and altered microbial community composition, is associated
with IBD.[24] This imbalance often includes a decrease in beneficial bacteria
and an increase in pathogenic bacteria.
Analysing these shifts in microbial
communities can help identify diagnostic biomarkers and tailor personalised
treatment approaches for IBD patients. Longitudinal studies indicate that the
extent of dysbiosis is associated with disease severity and response to treatment,
further underlining the importance of microbiome composition in managing
IBD effectively.[38]
2.7 Common Measures of Microbial Diversity
Quantifying diversity or abundance is essential for understanding the structure,
dynamics, and functioning of ecosystems or communities. While estimating the
diversity of macroorganisms is relatively straightforward, assessing the diver-
sity of microorganisms presents a unique challenge due to their minuscule sizes,
inability to be cultured in the laboratory,[39] and ubiquitous presence across a
wide range of extreme and non-extreme environments on Earth, and potentially
beyond, awaiting discovery. Microbial diversity cannot simply be assessed mor-
phologically because of such challenges. However, there are still a variety of
ways, or indices, such as Simpson’s index, Chao1, Shannon’s index, and Pielou’s
index, that have been devised by researchers and scientists for the abundance
quantification of microbial biodiversity. These indices do play an crucial role
in assessing diversity, but it is not quite clear which index can perform the best
and thus should be prioritised specifically for microbiome studies. [19]
Among a myriad of options, a few specific indices stand out as particularly
useful for characterising microbial diversity in alignment with the objectives
of this thesis project. And the next few subsections explain those indices and
their significance in microbiome diversity analyses.
2.7.1 The Chao1 method
One of the most popular ways of measuring effective microbiome diversity (in
terms of number of unique OTUs or richness, also called as alpha diversity)
is through the Chao1 method, which estimates the total number of OTUs
including the ones that may be rare and have not been detected in a sample.
30
==PAGE:32==
2 | BACKGROUND
Developed by Anne Chao in 1984, it is commonly used to account for unob-
served or rare species in ecological studies.[13] The Chao1 estimator [12, 13]
can be stated mathematically as follows:
𝐾𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑜1 = 𝐾𝑜𝑏𝑠+ 𝐹1(𝐹1 −1)
2(𝐹2 + 1)
(7)
where:
• 𝐾𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑜1 is the estimated total number of species.
• 𝐾𝑜𝑏𝑠is the observed species richness (number of unique taxa observed in
the sample).
• 𝐹1 is the number of species represented by only a single individual in the
sample (singletons).
• 𝐹2 is the number of species represented by only a single individual in the
sample (doubletons).
This formula accounts for the potential presence of undetected rare species and
provides a more accurate estimate of species richness in a community. The
Chao1 estimator was updated further in 2003 by Chao and Shen using the
maximum likehood framework and it has been described in section 2.4.
2.7.2 Shannon’s Entropy
Considering that species richness on its own does not say much about microbial
diversity because metagenomic samples vary tremendously in the proporations
of microbes present in them irrespective of whether the samples are taken from
different environments or the same. Shannon’s entropy (also called Shannon’s
index) solves this issue by combining both the richness and the distribution (or
evenness) of each species.
Entropy is a concept that originated from the studies of physical systems by
Claude Shannon in 1948 and gained prominence with the advent of information
theory, which was used during World War II. When applied in fields like ecology
and metagenomics, it quantifies the uncertainty or randomness in predicting the
identity of a randomly chosen individual within an ecological or microbiome
community. Essentially, it is the uncertainty associated with the distribution
of a system and can be stated again as below:
31
==PAGE:33==
2 | BACKGROUND
𝐻= −
𝐾
∑
𝑘=1
𝜋𝑘⋅log(𝜋𝑘)
(8)
where
𝜋𝑘= 𝑛𝑘
𝑁=
𝑛𝑘
∑
𝐾
𝑘=1 𝑛𝑘
(9)
The probabilities 𝜋𝑘are the observed frequencies of each value of the random
variable, and the formula employs maximum likelihood estimation that is it
maximises the likelihood of observing those frequencies given the distribution
of the variable (in this case, the abundance of each taxa). A higher entropy value
indicates greater species diversity of organisms within a specific environment
or community.
2.7.3 Effective Richness or Hill Numbers
The effective number of species or Hill numbers refer to the number of equally
abundant taxa needed to obtain the same mean proportional taxa abundance
or same level of entropy as that observed in the dataset of interest (where all
taxa may not be equally abundant). It can also be seen as the effective richness
as it indicates the number of taxa whose even distribution would lead to the
same diverisity as compared to the community under observation where the
taxa abundances are unevenly distributed. It can be stated as:
𝑁𝑒= 𝑒𝐻
(10)
This metric can be applied to validate the accuracy of diversity calculations,
such as in synthetic metagenomic datasets, where the true number of taxa
is known. By comparing the effective richness derived from entropy with the
observed richness, it helps validate the method of calculating entropy and assess
the accuracy of diversity estimations.
As discussed in previous sections, metagenomic data analysis presents numer-
ous challenges because abundance or count data retrived in metagenomics is
often quite diﬀicult to analyse due to sparsity (excessive zeroes or zero infla-
tion), overdisperson, and skewed distributions. Nevertheless, with appropriate
modeling of its distribution and accurate estimation of entropy, it is hoped
32
==PAGE:34==
3 | FINDINGS FROM THE LITERATURE
these challenges can be effectively addressed.
3 | Findings from the Literature
3.1 Limitations Around Shannon’s Entropy Estimation
Shannon’s entropy is a popular diversity measure ever since it was adopted in
ecological studies in 1953, just a few years after it was introduced, and also in
population genetics in 1975. [25] It is popular mainly because of its ability to
account for relative abundances of species, providing more than just the number
of species. Two samples with exact same number of species can be differentiated
further using Shannon’s entropy in terms of finding which sample is dominated
by one or more species and which might not, that is which show high diversity
and which does not. For example, a sample with entropy value of 2.5 indicates
higher evenness and richness compared to a sample with an entropy value of
0.5. However, Shannon’s entropy (henceforth, naive entropy) actually has a few
limitations that can create issues when applying it in microbiome studies.[25]
Higher entropy indicates a combination of both higher richness and higher
evenness. Despite being a good indicator of diversity, naive entropy can be
biased when it comes to analysing real microbiome data which is not-so-often
evenly distributed.
Table 5 :
Abundance counts and entropy values for two different samples. Entropy values
vary due to variation in evenness.
Sample
Abundance counts for 10 species
Entropy
Sample A: with even
distribution
{10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10}
2.30
Sample B: with one or more
dominant species
{90, 2, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1}
0.54
Biased due to maximum likelihood framework:
Naive entropy is rooted in maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) framework.
The MLE works on a notion that is, given the observed data and an assumed
distribution model for it, certain values of model parameters such as mean
and standard deviation in case of an assumed normal distribution make the ob-
served data most likely, and those values of the parameters are called maximum
33
==PAGE:35==
3 | FINDINGS FROM THE LITERATURE
likelihood estimates. And the aim of MLE method is to find those maximum
likelihood estimates by using the observed data and the assumed distribution.
In case of microbiome compositional data, a multinomial distribution is often
assumed whose primary parameters are the probabilities of its 𝑘taxa categories
and the overall total number of counts 𝑁. MLE with a multinomial distribution
assumption treats the observed frequencies 𝜋𝑘of each taxa categories, given
by
𝑛𝑘
𝑁, as their respective true probabilities of occurrence and also as their
maximum likelihood estimates. It has been established that the MLE estimates
for multinomial distribution are simply given by the observed frequencies of the
data points.[33, 4] In the context of naive entropy for microbiome compositional
data, observed frequencies are used as the taxa probabilities to estimate the
information content in line with the possible outcomes for the respective taxa.
And thus the occurrence probabilities for each taxon 𝜋𝑘represent the maximum
likelihood estimates based on the observed counts for each taxon in each sample.
Therefore, one can say that naive entropy is fundamentaly based on maximum
likelihood estimation framework.
However, there are a few issues with that. First, the MLE framework when
used with entropy automatically assumes a plain multinomial distribution for
the microbiome data, which has been established to be better explained by a
mixture model like Dirichlet-Multinomial as discussed in one of the previous
sections. Second, when observed frequencies are used as true probabilities of
occurrence, it is actually being ignored that not all taxa in a microbiome data
have equal probabilities of being detected. This is because of the rare taxa
that almost always have a lower likelihood of being caught in the raw samples
as compared to the abundant ones. Without appropriate weighting for these
probabilities, the naive entropy estimates tend to be biased, overrepresenting
abundant taxa and underrepresenting rare taxa.
Sensitivity to sample size:
Naive entropy is also sensitive to the sample size. This is mainly because a small
sample size is relatively less likely to have taxa that are rare in the environment.
Therefore, small sample sizes can also lead to furthemore biased estimates,
often underestimating the true richness and diversity. This can especially be
a cause of concern when studying environments where rare species are highly
critical to the ecosystem functionality. For instance, in human gut, the usually
34
==PAGE:36==
3 | FINDINGS FROM THE LITERATURE
dominant presence of Firmicutes, which is considered bad gut bacteria due
to their association with poor fat metabolism, obesity and Type 1 diabetes
risk, [48] might be evident through just a few samples. However, a rare and
important species such as Akkermansia muciniphila, which is crucial for the
regulation of homeostasis in intestines and maintaining gut barrier integrity, [1]
might be present in just one of the few samples, or none of them at all if there
is low sampling effort, due to its rarity and that would provide biased estimates
of diversity due to the inherent bias in the data itself.
As can be observed in the example in Table 5, true richness is 10, however it
turns out to be 2 for Sample B based on the naive entropy estimation, which
does not account for the rare taxa as can be seen in the corresponding effective
richness estimate.
Naive entropy for Sample B, H = 0.54 bits
Effective richness, exp(H) = 1.716007 => 2 species
Rare taxa go unaccounted for
with naive entropy estimates
0
20
40
60
Sp_1
Sp_2
Sp_3
Sp_4
Sp_5
Sp_6
Sp_7
Sp_8
Sp_9
Sp_10
Species
Frequency
Frequency
High frequency
Low frequency
Frequencies for abundant and rare species
Figure 10
3.2 Improved Methods of Entropy Estimation
After the first introduction of information theory by Claude in 1948, the con-
cept of entropy was well received in many fields and was discovered to have
35
==PAGE:37==
3 | FINDINGS FROM THE LITERATURE
the potential of upgrade to make it more effective and accurate with regard
to estimation capability. There have been many alternative estimators that
researchers have come up with over the years. Various frameworks have been
applied to the naive entropy to come up with different versions of entropy esti-
mators, a few of which were still based on the maximum likelihood framework
but were slightly modified further and a few others were based on the Bayesian
framework. Specifically, if naive entropy calculation is adapted to account for
missing species or taxa, it can have several potential applications in metage-
nomics and microecology – ranging from improved diversity estimations and
comparative studies across environments, to monitoring changes in biodiver-
sity over time and in response to environmental perturbations. Microecological
inferences become more accurate and refined with such an adaptation.
In the next two sections, a chosen set of modified MLE-based and Bayesian
framework-based estimators of entropy have been discussed in brief. In line
with one of the objectives of this project, these chosen estimators were also
applied on the data under study for a comparative analysis. Specifically, the
Bayesian method given most recently in 2024 by Angelo Piga et al. has been
compared with two other kinds of estimators: Modified MLE-based estimators
(Chao-Shen and Hausser-Strimmer) and other Bayesian estimators (Wolpert-
Wolf and NSB) that came before Piga’s method. The mathmetical notations
and descriptions for the Wolpert-Wolf and NSB estimators were taken from
Arora et al.[5] whose 2022 paper describes the application of these entropy
estimators on linguistics distributions, mainly including Dirichlet distribution.
For brevity and objectivity in line with this thesis project, the mathematical
derivations and proofs for these estimators were not delved into.
3.3 Modified Maximum Likelihood-Based Methods
As discussed in the section on limitations around naive entropy, a straight-
forward MLE framework does not do well because of its biased results. This
problem with regard to the naive entropy estimation was noticed by several
researchers and as a result, quite a few improved versions of entropy estima-
tors came into existence after the initiation of the concept by Claude. Some of
those estimators used modifications that reduced the bias caused due to MLE
and thus in this subsection they have been referred to as Modified-MLE based
methods. The following text explains two of those improved modified-MLE
36
==PAGE:38==
3 | FINDINGS FROM THE LITERATURE
estimators in brief.
3.3.1 Chao-Shen
The Chao-Shen estimator (2003) is an upgrade from the Chao1 estimator that
was given by Anne Chao in 1984 and is actually also a modification of the one
given by Horvitz and Thompson (HT) in 1952, which was a general method
of building estimators that use importance weighting to estimate a random
variable function along with coverage correction proposed by Good in 1953.[14]
The Chao-Shen method uses the maximum likehood estimation (MLE) of taxa
probability and multiplies it by sample coverage estimate for the total number
of taxa categories observed once (singletons denoted as 𝑓1) or twice (doubletons
denoted as 𝑓2) across all observations in the data. Using so, the overall sample
coverage 𝐶could be estimated as:
𝐶= 1 −𝑓1
𝑁
Here, 𝑓1 is the sum of all instances where 𝑛𝑘= 1 across samples and N is
the sum total of all counts in the data.
In situations where 𝑓1 = 𝑁, that
is when all taxa appear only once across all samples (a rarely rare situation
when all observations in all samples are just 1’s which actually never happens
in microbiome data), 𝑓1 is set equal to 𝑁−1 so as to make sure the entropy
value is not zero.
Once the coverage is available, the MLE probability 𝜋𝑘calculated as 𝑛𝑘
𝑁can
then be multiplied with 𝐶to get the weighted estimate for each taxa category.
As a result, the final CS estimator based on singletons could then be computed
as follows:
𝐻CS = −
𝐾
∑
𝑘=1
𝐶⋅𝜋𝑘⋅log (𝐶⋅𝜋𝑘)
1 −(1 −𝐶⋅𝜋𝑘)𝑁
(11)
This formula was illustrated by referring to the entropy.ChaoShen() function
given in the entropy package in R.
3.3.2 Hausser-Strimmer
The Hausser-Strimmer estimator, developed by Jean Hausser and Korbinian
Strimmer in 2009, is yet another modified maximum likelihood-based approach
37
==PAGE:39==
3 | FINDINGS FROM THE LITERATURE
to estimate entropy. It involves a technique called James-Stein-type shrinkage
which helps regularise the estimation process, making it more effective statisti-
cally and computationally. Particularly in cases where there is limited data or
high variability in the observed frequencies, the regularisation approach signif-
icantly improves the performance of the estimation.[22] For example, if there
are two models to estimate something, where one model is complex and can
capture a lot of details but has high variability (meaning it can give quite dif-
ferent answers each time). The other model is simpler, giving less varied results
but potentially with more bias (meaning it might consistently overestimate or
underestimate). Shrinkage combines these models, taking a weighted average
where the weight is determined by a parameter called 𝜆. The shrinkage esti-
mator for each taxon category k is given by a combination of the maximum
likelihood estimator 𝜃and a shrinkage target:
𝜃𝑆ℎ𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑘,𝑘= 𝜆𝑡𝑘+ (1 −𝜆)𝜃𝑀𝐿,𝑘
(12)
where the maximum likelihood estimate 𝜃𝑀𝐿,𝑘= 𝑛𝑘
𝑁, with 𝑁= ∑
𝐾
𝑘=1 𝑛𝑘; 𝜆is
the shrinkage intensity, and 𝑡𝑘is the shrinkage target computed as
1
𝐾(often
the uniform distribution as it is convenient). [22]
The HS estimator can be stated as follows:
𝐻HS = −
𝐾
∑
𝑘=1
𝜃Shrink,𝑘log(𝜃Shrink,𝑘)
(13)
The shrinkage intensity 𝜆(shrinkage intensity) can be obtained using:
𝜆=
1 −∑
𝐾
𝑘=1(𝑛𝑘
𝑁)2
(𝑁−1) ∑
𝐾
𝑘=1 𝑡𝑘−(𝑛𝑘
𝑁)2
(14)
The value of 𝜆ranges between 0 and 1 where 0 indicates no shrinkage and 1
indicates full shrinkage.
It is interesting to note that when the shrinkge target 𝑡𝑘is estimated using
Dirichlet distributions’ concentration parameters 𝑎𝑘
𝐴, where 𝑎𝑘is the concen-
tration parameter for the k-th taxon and 𝐴= ∑
𝐾
𝑘=1 𝑎𝑘it becomes a Bayesian
estimator of the shrinkage, thereby leading to 𝜃𝑆ℎ𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑘,𝑘= 𝜃𝐵𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑠,𝑘.[22]
38
==PAGE:40==
3 | FINDINGS FROM THE LITERATURE
3.4 Bayesian Framework-Based Methods
In case of a Bayesian entropy estimation, a prior distribution of the microbial
communities is assumed on the basis of prior knowledge of the community or a
predetermined prior, for example when synthetic abundance data is generated
using a specific underlying Dirichlet distribution, its concentration parameter
𝛼may serve as the prior.
Figure 11 :
Bayesian estimation of entropy with a Dirichlet prior.
Image inspired by
Archer et al. (2013). [2]
This way a predetermined prior distribution is used along with the observed
abundance data to estimate a posterior distribution where the expected value
or the weighted average is the entropy. When supported with a suitable prior
distribution depending on a symmetric concentration parameter 𝛼, the Bayesian
least squares estimator of entropy [3, 34] for a microbiome abundance dataset
can be stated as follows:
̂
𝐻(𝑛) = 𝔼[𝐻|𝑛, 𝛼] = ∫𝐻(𝜋) 𝑝(𝐻|𝜋) 𝑝(𝜋|𝑛, 𝛼) 𝑑𝜋
(15)
where:
• 𝑛denotes the vector of observed counts, with 𝑛𝑘being the count for the
𝑘-th taxa category
• 𝜋represents the probability distribution over the 𝐾possible categories of
taxa
39
==PAGE:41==
3 | FINDINGS FROM THE LITERATURE
• 𝛼is the symmetric concentration parameter of the Dirichlet prior distribu-
tion
• 𝐻(𝜋) is the entropy as a function of the probability distribution 𝜋
• 𝑝(𝐻|𝜋) is the probability distribution of the entropy 𝐻given the proba-
bility distribution 𝜋
• 𝑝(𝜋|𝑛, 𝛼) is the posterior distribution of 𝜋given the observed abundance
counts 𝑛and the concentration parameter 𝛼
• Finally,
̂
𝐻(𝑛) represents the expected or average value of entropy for the
observed abundance data estimated as the integrand taken over all possible
values of 𝜋, integrating the product of the entropy function 𝐻(𝜋), the
conditional probability of 𝐻given 𝜋, and the posterior distribution of 𝜋
given the observed data 𝑛and parameter 𝛼
It has been speculated for this project if entropy estimators based the Bayesian
framework would provide better estimates compared to those based on
modified-MLE frameworks considering that the Bayesian framework takes into
account the underlying distributions by means of the prior. In the next few
subsections are brief descriptions of three Bayesian-framework based estimators
of entropy, including the most recent one given by Piga et al. in 2023, which
have been used in this project.
3.4.1 Wolpert-Wolf
David Wolpert and David Wolf were the very first ones who applied the
Bayesian approach to entropy estimation. In line with their paper published in
1995, the method involved specifying a model relating the known observations
to the unknown quantity, then computing the posterior distribution over the
entropy given the observations. [43] The Wolpert-Wolf estimator uses a Dirich-
let prior with concentration parameter 𝛼and a uniform base distribution. In
line with its simplified form as given in the 2022 paper by Arora et al. [5], the
Wolpert-Wolf entropy estimator for microbiome abundance data can be stated
as follows:
𝐻WW(𝐷|𝛼) = 𝜓(
̃
𝐴+ 1) −
𝐾
∑
𝑘=1
̃𝛼𝑘
̃
𝐴
𝜓( ̃𝛼𝑘+ 1)
(16)
40
==PAGE:42==
3 | FINDINGS FROM THE LITERATURE
where 𝐻𝑊𝑊is the estimated entropy, 𝑘is the number of unique species observed
in each sample and follows k=1, 2, 3 ... K ;
̃𝛼𝑘= 𝑛𝑘+ 𝛼𝑘for the counts 𝑛𝑘of
the k-th taxa category;
̃
𝐴= (∑
𝑘
𝑖=1
̃𝛼𝑘); and 𝜓is the digamma function. [5]
As per Arora et al., this estimator is quite dependent on the choice of con-
centration parameter 𝛼. For a large 𝐾, the resulting estimate of entropy is
almost completely determined by the value of 𝛼, which renders this estimator
slighlty less reliable for samples with a large number of OTUs or species classes.
This observation was first made by Nemenman et al. (2002) and it led to the
development of an improved entropy estimation method as described in next.
When applying the Wolpert-Wolf method for comparison of entropy estimates
in this project, the value of 𝛼𝑘were estimated using the Method of Moments
given in Eq. (6) by means of the compute_MoM_alpha() function written
in R. As a single value of 𝛼irrespective of the number of taxa categories, the
median of all 𝛼values resulting from the custom function was used. This is
because the median value will not be influenced much by extreme values of 𝛼
so as to work as a somewhat symmetric concentration parameter value for this
method.
Note: The digamma function helps to estimate the average rate of occur-
rence of events in a dataset. It’s used to fine-tune the calculation of entropy
by considering how the data’s spread changes. Considering the mathematical
complexity of certain elements like the digamma and trigamma functions, R
packages like pracma and gsl were used in this project to apply them in calcu-
lations, that is for Wolpert-Wolf, NSB and Piga estimations. This was in line
with the main aim of this project to compare these estimators and therefore
such mathematical functions were not studied in detail.
3.4.2 Nemenman, Shafee, and Bialek
The NSB method given by Nemenman et al.
focuses on the concentration
parameter 𝛼, which affects how the data is distributed. Finding one perfect
value for all components of a symmetric 𝛼can be tough, especially with scarce
and sparse data. The NSB method deals with this challenge by proposing a
special way to set up the prior distribution for 𝛼itself. It focuses on constructing
a prior distribution over the parameter 𝛼to achieve a flat prior over entropies.
They do that enforcing a Dirichlet prior that is symmetric. That is, by setting
41
==PAGE:43==
3 | FINDINGS FROM THE LITERATURE
each component of the prior, parameter vector 𝛼, to the same value by using
the hyperprior. Choosing such a hyperprior does away with the impact of fixed
and different 𝛼values, thereby resulting in a near-uniform distribution over
entropy.[5]
In line with the NSB method, the hyperprior can be stated as follows:
𝑝𝑁𝑆𝐵(𝛼) = 𝐾𝜓1(𝐾𝛼+ 1) −𝜓1(𝛼+ 1)
log 𝐾
(17)
Here, 𝜓1 is the trigamma function, which helps to measure the variability in
the rates of occurrence of events in a dataset. It helps account for the variance
in the data’s distribution.
The hyperprior 𝑝𝑁𝑆𝐵is applied on an infinite mixture of Dirichlet priors that
is several 𝛼’s ranging from 0 to infinity.
The NSB entropy estimator is then estimated essentially as the posterior mean
of the Wolpert-Wolf estimator under 𝑝𝑁𝑆𝐵, which can be stated as follows:
𝐻𝑁𝑆𝐵= ∫
∞
0
𝐻𝑊𝑊(𝐷|𝛼⋅1)𝑝𝑁𝑆𝐵(𝛼)𝑑𝛼
(18)
Here, 𝛼⋅1 refers to enforcing of 𝛼to be set to the same value across its com-
ponents for all taxa categories by using the hyperprior.
Considering that microbiome abundance data often comes with sparsity, the
NSB method provides a way to handle the dependence of entropy estimation
on the varied 𝛼values for each taxa category. Thus, this method is useful even
for data that has a small number of samples where 𝛼estimation is unreliable
due to small number of observations.
3.4.3 Piga, Font-Pomarol, Sales-Pardo, and Guimerà
Piga et al. has provided one of the most recent Bayesian framework based
method, referred to as “Piga’s method” or “Piga entropy” in the report, for
entropy estimation, which also employs a hierarhical Bayesian approach by
assigning a hyperprior over Dirichlet prior. However, instead of enforcing the
same values for all components of the prior 𝛼like NSB did, this method uses
the hierarhical framework to find the most likely value of the symmetric prior
42
==PAGE:44==
3 | FINDINGS FROM THE LITERATURE
given the observed data. This most likely value of the prior is termed as alpha
star, 𝛼∗. The highest value for the probability of 𝛼given the observed couts 𝑛
can be stated as:
𝑝(𝛼∗|𝑛𝑘) = arg max
𝛼
𝑝(𝑛𝑘|𝛼) ⋅𝑝(𝛼)
𝑝(𝑛)
(19)
The likelihood term in the equation above 𝑝(𝛼) is the hyperprior for 𝛼∗. The
Piga estimator from the latest literature by Piga et al. [34] using 𝛼∗can be
stated as follows:
𝐻𝑃𝑖𝑔𝑎= 𝜓(𝑁+ 𝐾𝛼∗+ 1) −
𝐾
∑
𝑘=1
𝑛𝑘+ 𝛼∗
𝑁+ 𝐾𝛼∗𝜓(𝑛𝑘+ 𝛼∗+ 1)
(20)
Estimating the most likely value of the prior using the hyperprior involves
finding the maximum probability of 𝛼given the observed data. This is done by
evaluating the derivative of the probability function with respect to 𝛼across
a range of 𝛼values, and identifying the point where the derivative is zero,
indicating a transition from positive to negative. However, the details of those
estimations are not covered to be in line with the main objectives of the project
and to ensure brevity. The Python code for the estimation of 𝛼∗referenced
in the 2023 paper by Piga et al. was taken as is to be used in this project.
Additionally, Piga et al.
provided an improved way of estimating the NSB
hyperprior as well, which is more computationally eﬀicient than the original
NSB method of estimating the hyperprior. This Dirichlet prior provided using
the improved NSB hyperprior estimation was termed as alpha star NSB, 𝛼∗
𝑁𝑆𝐵.
However, to have a simplified comparison of all entropy estimator performances
in this project, Piga’s method was applied with using only 𝛼∗.
3.5 Quick Comparison of Entropy Estimators
Here’s a quick comparison of naive entropy with modified MLE-based estima-
tors and Bayesian estimators.
An initial comparison of all the chosen estimators in Figure 12 provides some
initial insights into how naive entropy is always underestimating the true en-
tropy, which for 100 taxa is approximately 4.61 as calculated on a natural
logarithmic. It is worth noting how both Chao-Shen and Hausser-Strimmer
estimates are much better than the naive estimate.
Although the Wolpert-
43
==PAGE:45==
3 | FINDINGS FROM THE LITERATURE
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Samples
Entropy values
Method
Naive.entropy
Chao.Shen
Hausser.Strimmer
Wolpert.Wolf
NSB
Piga
True Entropy
True entropy = 3.688879 (as natural log of the number of taxa, that is 40)
Comparison of Entropy Estimators
Figure 12 :
A quick comparison of naive entropy estimator with modified-MLE based
estimators and Bayesian estimators, as applied on a simulated count dataset of 10 samples
with a fixed number of 40 taxa in each sample.
Wolf, NSB are Piga estimators seem to be underestimating as well, this is just
a basic comparison on a small dataset and there are various other factors like
concentration parameters that are at play when using all of these estimators
on a larger scale for abundances derived from genomic data, which has been
illustrated in detail later in the report.
3.5.1 EntropyEstimators: a web app
Further inspection of how these estimators behave when certain parameters
are changed can be done by using the EntropyEstimators web app which is
available at: https://aswatib.shinyapps.io/EntropyEstimators/.
Note: The web app was not a part of the research objectives of the thesis
project, but has been added to the contents as an additional element. The
app is in a preliminary stage and thus would undergo a few more changes with
regard to data generation and other aspects.
44
==PAGE:46==
4 | WORKFLOW AND GENOMIC DATA
4 | Workflow and Genomic Data
4.1 Project Workflow
The overall workflow of this thesis project comprised several steps, ranging from
synthetic sample reads generation (high-quality singletons) and procurement
of sewage sample reads (both paired and singletons) to alignment, mapping,
abundance quantification, and finally estimation of entropy using different es-
timators followed by effective richness calculation.
The following is a brief description of all the steps taken during the project.
1. Technical setup: installation of Conda, Python, R and RStudio, and map-
ping tools including KMA, Kraken2 and Bracken
2. Data sourcing
a. Synthetic reads: four sets of 20 FASTQ files (20 samples) generated
with pre-assigned distributions using Python
b. Sewage reads: pre-sequenced FASTQ single- and paired-end reads
from a Danish municipality sewage, sourced from Brinch et al. (2020)
3. Mapping
a.
Synthetic reads: mapped using KMA to two databases - first to
a database made with the original complete and annotated genomes of 40
bacterial species (the genomes that the synthetic reads itself were generated
from) and second to the Bacterial ATG database from Kmer Finder tool
[16, 21]
a. Sewage reads: mapped using KMA and Kraken2, respectively, to
the Bacterial ATG database and NCBI’s bacterial and plasmid libraries
4. Abundance quantification: quantification of the aggregated mapped hits
to create abundance tables
5. Entropy estimation: using abundances from each sample to estimate en-
tropy using six different estimators based on maximum likelihood as well
as Bayesian frameworks
6. Identification of most eﬀicient estimator: Calculation of entropy and ef-
fective richness based on the six estimators to identify the estimator that
45
==PAGE:47==
4 | WORKFLOW AND GENOMIC DATA
Figure 13 :
Overall project workflow
46
==PAGE:48==
4 | WORKFLOW AND GENOMIC DATA
best approximates the true entropy as a measure of richness and diversity
in synthetic samples
7. Diversity measure for sewage samples: Statistically validated estimation
of the best approximation of entropy and effective richness for sewage data
4.2 Synthetic Data: Reads from Complete Bacterial Genomes
In order to have datasets where the number of microbial species and underlying
distributions are fully known or predetermined so as to be able to validate the
results of entropy using effective richness after the read alignment and mapping
process, synthetic reads with preassigned target distributions were generated
using Python (version 3.11.9) scripts described in the Appendix. As part of
this process, original genomes (that is, GCF fasta files from NCBI’s RefSeq
database) of 40 bacterial species, which were presumed to be often found
in Scandinavian environments, were downloaded from NCBI’s website. The
complete genomes were then used to extract reads of random read lengths
but with an assigned concentration parameter and distribution type. To keep
it simple, all reads were generated in fastq format with sequence identifiers
mapping back to the original genomes they were extracted from and quality
scores were kept the same at 40 (denoted by “I” as per the Phred scale) for
all nucleotides across all the synthetic reads.
The Python scripts used for
reads generation can be found on the project’s Github repository. Figure 14
illustrates the different distributions and concentration parameters that were
targeted for the synthetic samples corresponding to the four different sets.
Targeted Dirichlet parameters
The aim was to generate four sets of synthetic reads with the respective
concentration parameters of 10, 1, 0.5 and 0.01, using the 40 genomes and a
sample size of 30 for each of the four sets. The concentration parameters were
assigned with symmetric Dirichlet distribution, so for each of the 40 species in
a specific set, the 𝛼value for the same within that set. To generate the reads,
the read lengths and the number of reads from each genome in a set were also
kept fixed at 200 nucleotides and 1000 reads per genome, respectively. This
was done to ensure minimal technical artefacts during the read generation pro-
cess, so as to ensure that correct targeted values of 𝛼were achieved for each set.
47
==PAGE:49==
4 | WORKFLOW AND GENOMIC DATA
0.018
0.022
0.026
0.030
Dirichlet alpha=10
Species categories (i)
Proportions (p_i)
1
3
5
7
9
12
15
18
21
24
27
30
33
36
39
0.010
0.020
0.030
0.040
Dirichlet alpha=1
Species categories (i)
Proportions (p_i)
1
3
5
7
9
12
15
18
21
24
27
30
33
36
39
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Sparse Dirichlet alpha=0.5
Species categories (i)
Proportions (p_i)
1
3
5
7
9
12
15
18
21
24
27
30
33
36
39
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Sparse Dirichlet alpha=0.01
Species categories (i)
Proportions (p_i)
1
3
5
7
9
12
15
18
21
24
27
30
33
36
39
Figure 14 :
Targeted distributions with respective concentration parameters for synthetic
reads generation as illustrated for one of the samples in a multidimensional compositional
data.
• Set A. Dirichlet distribution with symmetric targeted 𝛼= 10
The data with this particular concentration parameter is highly dense and
centered around the mean, with negligible variability in species distribution
across samples. All samples in the set represent all taxa with the same
amount of observed frequencies and thus high level of evenness.
• Set B. Dirichlet distribution with targeted 𝛼= 1
This distribution represents a scenario of high diversity and uniformity
among the microbial species. In the abundance tables, you would expect
to see a relatively even distribution of reads across the different taxa or
species. The counts for each taxon may vary, but there should not be any
significant skewness towards particular taxa.
• Set C. Dirichlet distribution with 𝛼= 0.5
With a lower concentration parameter, this distribution shows high
variability and represents a scenario of low diversity. Both richness and
evenness are reduced, resulting in sparse data.
48
==PAGE:50==
4 | WORKFLOW AND GENOMIC DATA
• Set D. Dirichlet distribution with 𝛼= 0.01
This set is characterised by an extremely low concentration parameter,
leading to high variability. The data is highly sparse with extremely low
diversity in terms of both richness and evenness.
4.3 Sewage Data: Pre-Sequenced FASTQ Samples from Renseanlæg Avedøre
The sewage data used in the project comprised of DNA reads from 18 samples
of untreated sewage from the Copenhagen sewage plant (Renseanlæg Avedøre)
obtained in 2019. The samples were originally sourced and sequenced by Brinch
et al. (2020). For library preparation, the team had used the Illumina Nextera
XT DNA library preparation kit. The sequencing was done using Illumina’s
NextSeq platform with an average sequencing depth of 2.3 × 107 reads. The
DNA reads were in the FASTQ format, which is a text based format that is
used for storing genomics sequences (DNA or RNA) along with their respec-
tive identifiers and quality scores. The reads were preprocessed with adapter
trimming already done at a quality threshold of 20 and minimum length of 50
base pairs.[11] Each of the 18 samples had 3 sets of FASTQ files – one each for
forward and reverse paired-end reads, and one for singletons.
Shotgun sequencing with 
Illumina NextSeq
Sequenced reads in 
FASTQ format
Reads preprocessing for quality 
and base pairs length
Untreated sewage
Sample collection
DNA extraction and 
purification 
DNA library preparation with 
Illumina Nextera XT kit
Figure 15 :
Metagenomics workflow for sewage samples. Image created using icons from
BioRender.
49
==PAGE:51==
5 | BIOINFORMATIC TOOLS AND RESOURCES
5 | Bioinformatic Tools and Resources
Mapping of genomic sequences from microbiome samples allows us to under-
stand how similar these sequences are to one another as well as to complete
genomes (templates) of microbial species in a database of interest, which can
then be quantified as species richness and abundance for any microbiome com-
munity under study. For novel microbial species that may not have been dis-
covered before in an environment, their corresponding reads can map to a
homologous common ancestor in the databases as well as within the samples,
which helps in determining the possible origins, evolutionary connections, and
co-occurrences of such species.[8]
To carry out this project, Unix-based tools including Conda were used on a
cluster network. Programming languages used Python and R, and scripting
was done using Bash for certain automation-driven tasks such as applying KMA
on all sets of data in one go using for loops. Mapping tools used were KMA
and Kraken2; additionally Bracken was used for abundance quantification from
Kraken2 results. As mentioned in the brief workflow description, databases
termed as BacOriginal, BacATG, and NCBI’s bacterial and plasmid libraries
were used for the mapping steps.
The following subsections provide a detailed account of all the bioinformatic
tools used in this project.
5.1 K-mer Alignment Method
The K-mer Alignment Method (KMA) is a Unix-based bioinformatic tool that
provides rapid alignment and mapping of raw reads against a database. The
tool applies k-mer seeding to speed up mapping and the Needleman-Wunsch
algorithm to align extensions from those k-mer seeds. Although such an ap-
plication can lead to situations of same reads mapping to multiple templates,
KMA resolves them by applying a sorting-by-score method called the ConClave
scoring scheme. This ensures that templates are selected accurately for precise
mapping and with least number of false positives. [16]
A KMA run basically comprises of two main steps: 1. database indexing and
2. mapping and alignment. For database creation, original genome sequences
are used in FASTA format and indexed using the kma index program. A KMA
50
==PAGE:52==
5 | BIOINFORMATIC TOOLS AND RESOURCES
mapping run, initiated by the kma program, begins with the trimming of reads
for creation of k-mers.
Then, it looks up matches between query reads k-
mers and database k-mers. Next, it extends the matching k-mer seeds and
identifies regions of mismatches. Once the mismatches are identified, it applies
Needleman-Wunsch algorithm to align regions of mismatching k-mers. This is
followed by ConClave scoring to choose the one best-aligning template for each
query read sequence. [16]
The kma program by default produces four different files, including a result
file (*.res), a fragment file (*.frag.gz), a consensus file (*.fsa), and a consensus
alignment file (*.aln). Additionally, a mapstat file with extended features can
be generated based on user requirements.
A
T
A
T
T
G
G
G
A
C
A
T
A
T
T
G
G
A
C
T
A
T
T
T
A
T
T
T
G
G
G
A
T
A
T
T
G
G
G
A
C
A
T
A
T
T
G
G
A
C
T
A
T
T
T
A
T
T
T
G
G
G
A
T
A
T
T
T
C
A
T
G
A
T
A
T
T
T
A
T
T
T
A
T
T
1. Computation of all possible mappings
2. Conclave sorting based on template scores
Mapped reads
–  Ref Seq 1: True positive
–  Ref Seq 2: False positive
Score = 3 
possible 
mappings
Score = 5 
possible 
mappings
Reference 1 is the most likely match
Figure 16 :
KMA mapping process with ConClave sorting. Image inspired by Marcelino
et al. (2020) [30]
5.1.1 Output Files from a KMA Run
Below is a description of what each of these five file types entail.
1. Result: tab-limited statistics for each aligned template in the database,
with fields including template identity, query read identity, and ConClave
scores, from among a few more metrics.
2. Fragment:
information about each specific query sequence with tab-
51
==PAGE:53==
5 | BIOINFORMATIC TOOLS AND RESOURCES
delimited fields: query sequence, number of equally well mapping tem-
plates, alignment score, start coordinates of alignment, end coordinates of
alignment, template, and query sequence name
3. Consensus fasta: contains the consensus sequence representing the most
common nucleotides at each position across the aligned reads, highlighting
the most conserved genomic regions.
4. Consensus alignment: contains the alignments of reads to the reference
templates, showing how each read contributes to the consensus sequence
5. Mapstat: extended features about the mapping with information on the
counts of mapped and aligned reads. Further explanation of the mapstat
metrics can be found in the Appendix section.
5.1.2 Depth variance and variance towers in mapstat output
In KMA method, depth refers to the coverage of the template, commonly re-
ferred to as X-coverage, coverage, or abundance. It indicates how many times
each position in the template sequence is covered by the reads.[16]
Depth variance quantifies the variability or inconsistency in the number of
reads mapping to different positions along the template sequence. It is calcu-
lated as the statistical variance of the depth values across all positions of the
template.[16]
In a mapstat output file, the depthVariance metric represents variability or
inconsistency in the number of reads mapping to different positions along the
template sequence. It reflects how reads are distributed across the reference
sequence during the mapping process. This metric helps understand how evenly
or unevenly the sample reads are distributed across the template sequence. It
essentially indicates how consistent or inconsistent the read coverage is along
the entire length of the template.
The variance in depth values across the template increases because some regions
are highly covered while others are scarcely covered, resulting in significant
fluctuations in read coverage.
The variance towers in depthVariance, that is, the values that are higher than
1.5 times of the upper interquartile range of the depthVariance metric, add
significant fluctuations in read coverage along different positions of the tem-
52
==PAGE:54==
5 | BIOINFORMATIC TOOLS AND RESOURCES
plate. These fluctuations can arise because of many different factors, such as
biological or genomic features such as homology among different reads that are
mapping overly to the same template, and high GC content in both reads and
templates; sequencing biases resulting from uneven fragment sizes due to differ-
ent fragmentation methods, variability in adapter ligation, cross-contamination
during library preparation, or inconsistent dilution of prepared libraries for nor-
malisation. [9]
In this project, metrics from the mapstat files were mainly used for entropy
and effective richness estimations. To this end, values from the fragmentCount
and fragmentCountAln columns were retrived to prepare abundance tables for
sewage samples as well as for the four sets of synthetic samples. Additionally,
depthVariance metric was used to identify mappings with very high variance (la-
belled as ’variance towers’), so as to subset the counts based on depth variance
that exceeds the upper IQR threshhold for the depthVariance metric. This sub-
setting was done to mainly analyse any differences in entropy estimates before
and after removing the variance towers.
5.2 Kraken2
Kraken2 is an improved version of Kraken, which is an ultrafast, high-accuracy
mapping and taxonomy classification tool. Kraken works by using exact k-mer
matches for speedy classification of metagenomic reads to a standard RefSeq
database that contains complete genomes from bacterial, archaeal, viral as well
as human genome, or to a custom database that can be made by download-
ing specific sets of genomic libraries and reference sequences from NCBI. The
default k-mer size for a Kraken 1 database is 𝑘= 31, but this value can be
modified as per project and user requirements.
Kraken 1 works by first creating a k-mer database using complete genomes or
reference sequences and their corresponding taxonomic information and then
matches the k-mers from each query read sequence against the database k-
mers, assigning it to a taxon using the lowest common ancestor (LCAs) of the
database genomes. A lowest common ancestor for multiple genomes can be
the conserved regions of DNA that are common among those genomes. The
assignment of a taxon using these LCAs allows the algorithm to form a pruned
subtree of the general taxonomy used for classification by NCBI. In such a
53
==PAGE:55==
5 | BIOINFORMATIC TOOLS AND RESOURCES
0
200
400
600
800
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
Depth Variance in KMA's Mapstat Results
Based on one of the mapped reads results, with a total of 63 outlier values
Template or reference sequences (refSequence column in mapstat)
Depth Variance (depthVariance column in mapstat)
Outlier
Normal
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
Reference Sequences
Depth Variance
Extreme values in depthVariance column have been termed as Variance towers
Boxplot of Depth Variance in KMA's Mapstat Results
Figure 17 :
Illustration of depth variance in KMA’s mapstat results.
The outliers or
extreme values denoted by red points were termed as the Variance Towers. Outliers were
identified as the values that are above 1.5 times the upper interquartile range (IQR) of the
depthVariance metric.
54
==PAGE:56==
5 | BIOINFORMATIC TOOLS AND RESOURCES
Figure 18 :
Kraken sequence classification algorithm. Image sourced from Wood et al.
(2014) [45]
classification subtree, every node is then assigned a weightage that is equal to
the number of read sequence k-mers that map to the subtree node’s LCA and
thus to the taxon. For each read sequence k-mer, multiple root-to-leaf (RTLs)
paths get created in this process, and each of these RTL paths are given a score
that is equal to the sum of all the node weights in the path. The taxon that is
finally assigned to each read sequence k-mer is leaf of the RTL path that has
the highest score. The k-mer-LCA pairs in Kraken 1 are indexed by the use of
lexicographically-ordered minimizers.
Minimizers are basically the alphabetically ordered l-mers that are the subse-
quences of k-mers with l being either equal to or shorter that k. This process
allows for a fast and direct search and match of k-mer against the database.
However, it also makes the Kraken 1 process quite memory-intensive due to
the k-mer database size owing to the storage of several minimizers as well as
genome k-mers. [45]
Kraken 2 works pretty much in the same way as Kraken 1; however, it has a few
additional features that make it faster and much more eﬀicient than Kraken 1.
For one, Kraken2 does not save all the database k-mers or genome k-mers; it
only saves the l-mers or the minimizers. This reduces the storage by 85 percent
compared to Kraken 1 database storage. Additionally, Kraken 2 uses a compact
hash table to map minimizers to the LCAs, which further reduces the memory
55
==PAGE:57==
5 | BIOINFORMATIC TOOLS AND RESOURCES
usage at the cost of some specificity and accuracy that is affordable given the
speed and eﬀiciency Kraken 2 delivers for metagenomic processing. To further
add to the advantages, Kraken 2 allows only distinct minimizers from a read
sequence to trigger access to its corresponding hash table of mapped LCAs,
which accelerates the mapping process. [44] Kraken 2 has default k-mer size of
𝑘= 35.
In this project, a custom Kraken2 database was made using the bacterial and
plasmid libraries to map the sewage sample reads. After obtaining mapped
hits from the Kraken2 run, abundance counts were retrieved using another
tool called Bracken, which is a species-level sequence abundance estimation
algorithm. [44]
Figure 19 :
Kraken database structure. Image sourced from Wood et al. (2014) [45]
5.2.1 Estimating Abundances from Kraken2 Output using Bracken
Bayesian re-estimation of abundance after classification with Kraken or Bracken
is a method that computes abundance at an OTU level (species, genus or above)
using the taxonomic assignments made by Kraken, along with the information
about the genomes.
Bracken can probabilistically redistribute reads in the
taxonomic classifiation produced by Kraken.
Although Kraken and Kraken 2 classify reads to the best matching taxonomical
locations, they both do not estimate abundance counts for species. Therefore,
in this project, Bracken was used to derive probabilities from the Kraken 2
database to get information on how much each genome is identical to every
56
==PAGE:58==
5 | BIOINFORMATIC TOOLS AND RESOURCES
other genome in the database.
This information in combination with taxo-
nomic assignment for each sample at species, genus or above levels, was then
used by Bracken to generate abundance counts for both Kraken 2 based assign-
ment as well for Bracken based re-distribution. For the purpose of comparative
analyses, only Kraken 2 based abundance counts were used. Bracken is capable
of producing accurate species and genus level abundance estimates even when
the samples have multiple near-identical species (or strains of the same species).
[29]
5.3 Bacterial Databases Used for Mapping
To faciliate mapping and alignment of raw reads generated in silico as well as
from the untreated sewage samples, followed by abundance estimations, three
different databases were used in this project. The synthetic raw reads were
mapped and aligned using KMA with two separate databases: BacOriginal
and BacATG. The database names are simply neologisms created on the basis
of the source of their respective reference templates and for brevity in this
report.
BacOriginal is an indexed database made using the original 40 genomes that
were also used to generate the synthetic raw raw reads. The genomes were
simply indexed to make a database by applying kma index from KMA’s suite
of programmes.
BacATG is actually an existing database sourced from the CGE’s KmerFinder
tool.[16]. This is a unique sparse database that comprises annotated complete
genomes from NCBI, but without any plasmid sequences. It is a sparse database
because for each reference template, it has k-mer identifiers that specifically
have the “ATG” start codon as a prefix — that is, the identifiers start with
an ATG sequence taken from its corresponding reference template or genome.
Considering that bacterial genomic data often has high instances of conserved
sequences common among different taxa, using a sparse database such as Ba-
cATG allows for a huge reduction in the overmapping of query reads’ k-mers to
the database k-mers and thus lowers the variances and biases that are often ob-
served in mapping results. A database with a specific prefix for kmer identifiers
can be made using the Sparse option with the kma index programme.[16]
For the sewage raw reads, the first round of mapping was done using KMA and
57
==PAGE:59==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
Table 6 :
Three bacterial databases used for mapping of synthetic and real sewage reads
Databases
Size and contents
Query reads
Mapping tool
BacOriginal
40 bacterial species,
complete genomes
Synthetic
KMA
BacATG
26,185 bacterial
species, complete
genomes (Bacterial
ATG database)
Synthetic and
Sewage
KMA
NCBI’s Bacterial
and Plasmid
Libraries
14,980 bacterial
genomes and
plasmids
Sewage
Kraken 2
the BacATG database. And then a second round was conducted to validate
and compare the results, by using Kraken2 with NCBI’s bacterial and plasmid
libraries.
Note: Please note that this report presents results as comparative outcomes
from various analyses.
For database-specific comparisons, the names of the
databases have been used for reference. Similarly, for comparisons based on
mapping tools, the names of those tools have been referenced accordingly.
For example, for a comparison between the richness obtained from abundances
mapped to the BacATG and BcOriginal databases, the results have been re-
ferred to as “BacATG hits” or “BacOriginal hits.” Likewise, for comparisons of
abundances resulting from the mapping outcomes of KMA and Kraken2, the re-
sults have been referred to as “KMA hits” or “KMA-based hits” and “Kraken2
hits” or “Kraken2-based hits.” Also note that at certain instances, terms “taxa”
and “species” have been used interchangeably.
6 | Results for Synthetic Samples
6.1 Distributions Targeted Versus Obtained
As shared in the Workflow and Genomic Data section, during the synthetic
data generation process, attributes like read lengths and number of reads per
genomes were set at fixed values of 200 nucleotides and 1000 reads, respectively,
to reduce technical artefacts to the minimum. However, considering that each
of the 40 genomes were not of the same size, with the biggest genome being 8.37
mega base pairs (Mbp) for Burkholderia cepacia and smallest being 0.58 Mbp
58
==PAGE:60==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
Species
Normalized counts
Arranged in desceding order of species−wise variances across samples
Targeted alpha = 10
Mean of estimated alpha = 8.17
Distribution of normalized species counts from the raw unmapped synthetic reads
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
Species
Normalized counts
Targeted alpha = 1
Mean of estimated alpha = 1.16
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
Species
Normalized counts
Targeted alpha = 0.5
Mean of estimated alpha = 0.69
−2
0
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
Species
Normalized counts
Targeted alpha = 0.01
Mean of estimated alpha = 0.039
Figure 20 :
Distribution of synthetic raw reads after being generated as FASTQ files. The raw reads counts were normalised using CLR transformation
for this figure. It is evident from the boxplpots that the targeted symmetric distributions were not quite achieved during data generation but they
were still quite close to the targeted values and therefore a suitable comparison of results for all four sets was still meaningful.
59
==PAGE:61==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
for Mycoplasmoides genitalium, some amount of variation was still observed
in the generated raw reads.
This variation manifested mainly in the form
of asymmetrical concentration parameters across species, despite the efforts
toward obtaining symmetric distributions. Therefore, the mean values of 𝛼for
each set were given priority over individual values as a guiding track for the
distributions used for the project results. At this point, investigating into the
precise cause of these variations and ways to reduce them further was beyond
the scope of this project. This, however, can be a prospect for related research
work in future.
Alpha estimations after the data generation steps actually served as a valida-
tion metric for the targeted accuracy of the generated reads. The customised
function compute_MoM_alpha() was used in R to estimate 𝛼values for each taxa
category using the method of moments given in Eq. (6). Table 7 provides the
estimated mean 𝛼values obtained for each of the four sets.
Illustrated in Figure 20, the variation (unequal sizes of boxplots) and outliers
(extreme values denoted by red points) are further visual indicators of the tech-
nical artefacts that occurred during the reads generation process. Read counts
obtained per species for each sample, which were calculated simultaneously dur-
ing the reads generation process, were normalised using a CLR transformation
in order to create these boxplots.
Table 7 :
Concentration parameters estimated for synthetic raw reads before mapping,
calculated using the method of moments as given in Eq.(6)
Dataset with Targeted 𝛼
Mean 𝛼From Generated Reads
Set A: Dirichlet, 𝛼=10
8.17
Set B: Dirichlet, 𝛼=1
1.16
Set C: Sparse Dirichlet, 𝛼=0.5
0.69
Set D: Sparse Dirichlet, 𝛼=0.01
0.04
Note: Please note that although the obtained concentration parameters after
reads generation were not precisely the same as targeted values, for easy refer-
ence of the four sets in comparative analyses, targeted 𝛼values instead of the
estimated 𝛼values have been mentioned. For instance, for Set A, it is referred
to as either “Set A: Targeted 𝛼=10” in in-line text and tables or as “Set A:
60
==PAGE:62==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
targeted alpha=10” in figures.
6.2 Observed Richness After Mapping
In Table 8, the mapped results can be compared further with regard to the
number of observed species, which in this case is the total number of unique
species hit during the KMA mapping process. These observed richness figures
in the table are essentially the number of taxa categories (the number of
columns) in the abundance tables obtained after the mapping process.
Observed Richness
Dataset with Targeted 𝛼
BacOriginal Hits
BacATG Hits
Set A: Dirichlet, 𝛼=10
39
66
Set B: Dirichlet, 𝛼=1
39
68
Set C: SparseDirichlet, 𝛼=0.5
39
65
Set D: SparseDirichlet, 𝛼=0.01
33
35
Table 8 :
Observed richness for each set based on the database used for mapping; com-
paring with the true richness of 40 bacterial species.
These observed richness obtained for the BacOriginal hits are slightly lower
than the true richness of 40 bacterial species that were orignally present in the
synthetic reads. In case of BacATG hits, the observed richness has gone further
higher — in some cases even reaching more than double the true richness. This
indicates that the size of the database used for mapping leads to a bias in the
observed richness for the number of taxa that might actually be present in the
raw reads.
6.3 Chao1 Estimates of Richness After Mapping
To get an initial understanding of the estimated richness from abundance
counts, the popular Chao1 estimator was applied using the chao1() function
from the fossil package in R. And it turns out to be consistently overestimating
the true richness (40 bacterial species) for all four sets when mapped to the
relatively large BacATG database (Table 9). These values hint at the possible
overmapping issues being at play when using databases that are large and have
many more reference templates as compared to the number of genomes that the
61
==PAGE:63==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
raw reads come from. And these figures also suggest that the popular Chao1
estimator is actually not providing reasonable approximations of richness levels.
In research studies where real data from microbiomes is used, reads are typi-
cally mapped to large databases and as it turns out, using Chao1 for richness
estimations is not the best approach for such studies.
At this point, it was also speculated if the sampling effort with regard to the
mapping process were apt as per the expected results. And to ensure that, a
species accumulation analysis was conducted.
Chao1 Estimates
Dataset with Targeted 𝛼
BacOriginal Hits
BacATG Hits
Set A: Dirichlet, 𝛼=10
39
366
Set B: Dirichlet, 𝛼=1
39
380
Set C: Sparse Dirichlet, 𝛼=0.5
39
197
Set D: Sparse Dirichlet, 𝛼=0.01
33
38
Table 9 :
Chao1 estimates of richness after mapping being compared to the true richness
of 40 bacterial species
6.4 Species Accumulation and Sampling Effort Analysis After Mapping
A species accumulation analysis allows to understand the difference in the
requisite sampling efforts for a microbiome dataset. It helps assess the rate
at which new taxa are discovered by plotting observed richness values as a
function of sampling effort. When the curve in the accumulation plot flattens
out, it indicates that the sampling effort has been suﬀicient to discover most
of the taxa present in the dataset. A steeply rising curve on the other hand
with no visible signs of flattening or reaching equilibrium suggests that more
samples are required to discover additional taxa. This analysis helps determine
whether the current sampling effort is adequate or if further sampling is needed
to capture the true alpha diversity (richness) within the microbiome data
under study. In this section, the species accumulation plots help understand
the differences in the requisite sampling efforts for all four synthetic sets as
shown in Figures 21 and 22. The pre-defined taxa richness (or true richness
of 40 species) clearly helps in obtaining relatively deterministic results here by
comparing the curves obtained with the red dashed abline denoting the true
62
==PAGE:64==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
richness.
Key insights for BacOriginal-mapped species accumulation
When mapped to BacOriginal, all the sets, except set D, reached equilibrium
forming a plateau even before the subsamples reached 40 species on the y axis as
shown in Figure 21. Equilibrium achived at a mere sampling effort of less than
5 samples for three of the four sets, with just a single sample being suﬀicient
for Set A. This specifically hints at the high concentration parameter of 10
contributing to low variability and high density of taxa counts across samples.
The curves for Sets B and C rise quite steepily initially and then reach a plateau,
which means that most species that were present in the simulated enviornment
under study have been observed in their samples and further sampling effort is
not required at all. However, for set D, the curve is quite different.
Set D has a sparse Dirichlet distribution and concentration parameter of 0.01,
and it specifically shows this rather interesting pattern here where it seems to
be not too far away from flattening out. This means that for this particular
case the the true number of taxa could be attained with a bit more increase in
the sampling effort. However, considering the prior knowledge of true richness
(which is 40), Set D seems to be acting in accordance with its underlying
concentration parameter 𝛼= 0.01 which further underlines the impact it has on
the variability in taxa counts and in turn on the estimation of requisite sampling
effort. This futher emphasises that fact that it is not just the richness counts
but also the underlying distributions and respective concentration parameters
for each taxa category that are critical for an effective analysis of microbiome
abundance data. And in almost all cases of microbiome data from environment
studies, the true taxa richness and the true underlying distributions and spread
before mapping are absolutely unknown — a mystery that can probably be
solved if one applies approriate methods to estimate these values. The situation
in Set D where the curve continues to rise without reaching equilibrium also
seems a bit more typical of actual microbiome samples that are taken from
environments like sewage and can have any possible number of species, which
when mapped to a certain database can either show results similar to the plot
for Set D or the curve would simply keep rising up with indeterministic bounds
63
==PAGE:65==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
38
39
40
41
42
Set A
Dirichlet, targeted alpha=10
Sampling Effort
Estimated Richness
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
Set B
Dirichlet, targeted alpha=1
Sampling Effort
Estimated Richness
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
32
34
36
38
40
42
Set C
Sparse Dirichlet, targeted alpha=0.5
Sampling Effort
Estimated Richness
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
0
10
20
30
40
Set D
Sparse Dirichlet, targeted alpha=0.01
Sampling Effort
Estimated Richness
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
Figure 21 :
Species accumulation curves for synthetic reads mapped to BacOriginal. The
red, horizontal dashed lines indicate the true richness of 40 different bacterial species.
Reaching a plateau or flattening of the curve indicates suﬀicient amount of sampling effort,
or the minimum number of samples required to discover all the species (or OTUs) present
in the studied environment. A steep and continuously rising curve indicates the need for
increasing the sampling effort.
for the requisite sampling effort.
Key insights for BacATG-mapped species accumulation
For the BacATG hits, all the accumulation curves seem to lack any signs of
flattening out despite crossing the true richness (indicated by red, horizontal
dashed line) on the y axis, as can be observed in Set A, B and C in Figure
22, with Set D being very close to the true richness abline. It is presumed
that the reason behind such a pattern could be the larger size of BacATG
compared to BacOriginal, as there are more reference templates available for
the reads to get mapped to and thus the abundance counts are quite higher in
the case of BacATG mapping. This may also mean that portions of reads are
getting mapped to multiple different reference templates in the database, which
64
==PAGE:66==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
30
40
50
60
70
Set A
Dirichlet, targeted alpha=10
Sampling Effort
Estimated Richness
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
30
40
50
60
70
Set B
Dirichlet, targeted alpha=1
Sampling Effort
Estimated Richness
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
30
40
50
60
70
Set C
Sparse Dirichlet, targeted alpha=0.5
Sampling Effort
Estimated Richness
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
0
10
20
30
40
50
Set D
Sparse Dirichlet, targeted alpha=0.01
Sampling Effort
Estimated Richness
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
Figure 22 :
Species accumulation curves for synthetic reads mapped to the Bacterial ATG
database (BacATG). The larger size of BacATG that the same set of synthetic reads were
mapped to and multiple mapping to conserved genomic regions could be the reason behind
the continuously rising curves and an uncertain bound for sampling effort despite crossing
the true species richness of 40.
is possible when conserved genomic regions among species and strains are at
play. This may also mean that the sampling effort in species accumulation is
just a product of mapping database sizes. That is, if the database size is much
larger than the compositions of query reads, the curve will typically keep rising
without reaching any forseeable equilibrium.
The species accumulation analysis for all the sets was conducted using the
specaccum() function from the vegan package in R, with 1000 permutations
and the “random” method. The random method was applied to calculate the
species accumulation curve by repeatedly picking random groups of samples
from the abundance datasets, in order to account for the variability in species
discovery that may occur due to the order in which samples are collected.
65
==PAGE:67==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
Figure 23
Escherichia coli
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Shigella flexneri
Salmonella enterica
Helicobacter hepaticus
Bacillus subtilis
Campylobacter jejuni
Staphylococcus aureus
Cereibacter sphaeroides
Mycoplasmoides genitalium
Clostridium botulinum
Proteus mirabilis
Shewanella oneidensis
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Listeria monocytogenes
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Yersinia pestis
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Lactobacillus acidophilus
Haemophilus influenzae
Nostocoides japonicum
Legionella pneumophila
Moraxella catarrhalis
Bacillus cereus
Mycobacterium leprae
Bordetella pertussis
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Vibrio cholerae
Acinetobacter baumannii
Burkholderia cepacia
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Bacteroides fragilis
Helicobacter pylori
Clostridium perfringens
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Streptococcus pyogenes
Helicobacter mustelae
Nocardia asteroides
Enterobacter cloacae
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Samples
Species
Mapping database: BacOriginal
Heatmaps for the mapped reads' proportions in Set A (targeted alpha=10)
Escherichia coli
Proteus mirabilis
Nocardia asteroides
Shigella flexneri
Campylobacter jejuni
Clostridium botulinum
Vibrio cholerae
Bacillus cereus
Helicobacter pylori
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Mycoplasma genitalium
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Enterobacter cloacae
Bacteroides sp
Moraxella catarrhalis
Mycobacterium haemophilum
Haemophilus influenzae
Yersinia pestis
Acinetobacter baumannii
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Shewanella oneidensis
Streptococcus pyogenes
Listeria monocytogenes
Bacillus subtilis
Streptomyces sp
Serinicoccus profundi
Staphylococcus aureus
Clostridium perfringens
Burkholderia cepacia
Rhodobacter sphaeroides
Lactobacillus acidophilus
Legionella pneumophila
Salmonella enterica
Mycobacterium lepromatosis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Bordetella pertussis
Helicobacter mustelae
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Streptomyces fulvissimus
Helicobacter cinaedi
Ornithinimicrobium sp
Shewanella sp
Cellulomonas sp
Mycobacterium stomatepiae
Phycicoccus endophyticus
Mycobacterium heidelbergense
Mycobacterium conspicuum
Janibacter melonis
Streptomyces harbinensis
Bacteroides fragilis
Escherichia sp
Ornithinimicrobium flavum
Microbacterium oxydans
Ruania sp
Mycolicibacter hiberniae
Mycobacterium fortuitum
Helicobacter sp
Serinicoccus sp
Aeromicrobium erythreum
Mycobacterium colombiense
Mycobacterium spongiae
Dermacoccus nishinomiyaensis
Serinicoccus marinus
Nocardioides sp
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Samples
Mapping database: BacATG
• With a high 𝛼of 10, taxa are expected to have negligible variability across samples, which is evident in the left heatmap for BacOriginal mapped counts.
• The left heatmap therefore shows evenly distributed colors with no specific high intensities.
• In BacATG heatmap (right), high color intensities in some cells indicate overmapping of multiple reads to certain templates.
• For example, Serinicoccus species is mapped significantly in BacATG but it is absent in BacOriginal and also in the synthetic raw reads.
66
==PAGE:68==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
Figure 24
Escherichia coli
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Shigella flexneri
Salmonella enterica
Helicobacter hepaticus
Bacillus subtilis
Campylobacter jejuni
Staphylococcus aureus
Cereibacter sphaeroides
Mycoplasmoides genitalium
Clostridium botulinum
Proteus mirabilis
Shewanella oneidensis
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Listeria monocytogenes
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Yersinia pestis
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Lactobacillus acidophilus
Haemophilus influenzae
Nostocoides japonicum
Legionella pneumophila
Moraxella catarrhalis
Bacillus cereus
Mycobacterium leprae
Bordetella pertussis
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Vibrio cholerae
Acinetobacter baumannii
Burkholderia cepacia
Bacteroides fragilis
Helicobacter pylori
Clostridium perfringens
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Streptococcus pyogenes
Helicobacter mustelae
Nocardia asteroides
Enterobacter cloacae
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Samples
Species
Mapping database: BacOriginal
Heatmaps for the mapped reads' proportions in Set B (targeted alpha=1)
Escherichia coli
Listeria monocytogenes
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Proteus mirabilis
Bordetella pertussis
Nocardia asteroides
Clostridium botulinum
Campylobacter jejuni
Vibrio cholerae
Bacillus cereus
Helicobacter pylori
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Mycoplasma genitalium
Shigella flexneri
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Salmonella enterica
Bacteroides sp
Bacillus subtilis
Moraxella catarrhalis
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Haemophilus influenzae
Acinetobacter baumannii
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Shewanella oneidensis
Streptococcus pyogenes
Staphylococcus aureus
Yersinia pestis
Clostridium perfringens
Burkholderia cepacia
Shewanella xiamenensis
Nakamurella multipartita
Rhodobacter sphaeroides
Lactobacillus acidophilus
Legionella pneumophila
Mycobacterium lepromatosis
Helicobacter mustelae
Mycobacterium paraterrae
Mycobacterium shigaense
Mycobacterium noviomagense
Enterobacter cloacae
Mycobacterium lacus
Helicobacter himalayensis
Mycobacterium haemophilum
Mycobacterium mantenii
Helicobacter cinaedi
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Mycobacterium paraseoulense
Phycicoccus endophyticus
Streptomyces gardneri
Dermacoccus sp
Nocardioides sp
Mycobacterium heidelbergense
Shigella dysenteriae
Janibacter melonis
Bacteroides fragilis
Mycobacterium seoulense
Cellulomonas gilvus
Shigella boydii
Propioniciclava sp
Luteipulveratus mongoliensis
Campylobacter sp
Nocardioides aromaticivorans
Georgenia sp
Mycobacterium paragordonae
Janibacter indicus
Nocardia cyriacigeorgica
Mycobacterium shinjukuense
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Samples
Mapping database: BacATG
• An 𝛼of 1 means the taxa should be uniformly distributed across all samples but with some variability as evident in the BacOriginal heatmap (left).
• The left heatmap shows colors a bit more intense compared to the BacOriginal heatmap for Set A, but still without overly high intensities for any particular
taxa.
• In the right heatmap for BacATG hits, there is still strong color intensities in quite a few cells, indicating yet again the overmapping of multiple reads to
certain templates.
67
==PAGE:69==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
Figure 25
Escherichia coli
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Shigella flexneri
Salmonella enterica
Helicobacter hepaticus
Bacillus subtilis
Campylobacter jejuni
Staphylococcus aureus
Mycoplasmoides genitalium
Clostridium botulinum
Proteus mirabilis
Shewanella oneidensis
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Listeria monocytogenes
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Yersinia pestis
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Lactobacillus acidophilus
Haemophilus influenzae
Legionella pneumophila
Moraxella catarrhalis
Mycobacterium leprae
Bordetella pertussis
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Vibrio cholerae
Acinetobacter baumannii
Burkholderia cepacia
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Bacteroides fragilis
Helicobacter pylori
Clostridium perfringens
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Streptococcus pyogenes
Helicobacter mustelae
Nocardia asteroides
Enterobacter cloacae
Cereibacter sphaeroides
Nostocoides japonicum
Bacillus cereus
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Samples
Species
Mapping database: BacOriginal
Heatmaps for the mapped reads' proportions in Set C (targeted alpha=0.5)
Escherichia coli
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Proteus mirabilis
Salmonella enterica
Bordetella pertussis
Nocardia asteroides
Shigella flexneri
Streptococcus pyogenes
Vibrio cholerae
Helicobacter pylori
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Listeria monocytogenes
Mycoplasma genitalium
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Enterobacter cloacae
Mycobacterium lentiflavum
Bacteroides sp
Moraxella catarrhalis
Mycobacterium haemophilum
Haemophilus influenzae
Acinetobacter baumannii
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Campylobacter jejuni
Shewanella oneidensis
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Staphylococcus aureus
Yersinia pestis
Clostridium botulinum
Clostridium perfringens
Burkholderia cepacia
Lactobacillus acidophilus
Legionella pneumophila
Mycobacterium lepromatosis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Bacillus subtilis
Helicobacter mustelae
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Helicobacter cholecystus
Bacillus cereus
Phycicoccus endophyticus
Brevibacterium casei
Rhodobacter sphaeroides
Dermacoccus nishinomiyaensis
Nocardioides marinisabuli
Cellulosimicrobium cellulans
Streptomyces ferrugineus
Helicobacter cinaedi
Mycobacterium paraseoulense
Mycobacterium basiliense
Shigella boydii
Mycobacterium shigaense
Mycobacterium ulcerans
Bacteroides fragilis
Mycobacterium kansasii
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis
Mycobacteroides salmoniphilum
Streptomyces sp
Mycobacterium avium
Burkholderia gladioli
Shigella sonnei
Dactylosporangium vinaceum
Nocardioides ungokensis
Streptomyces californicus
Serinicoccus profundi
Campylobacter sp
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Samples
Mapping database: BacATG
• An 𝛼of 0.5 means the distribution is sparse, with relatively high variability in species counts across samples.
• The heatmaps still show similar patterns in terms of peaked counts on the right and relatively symmetrical spread on the left.
68
==PAGE:70==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
Figure 26
Mycoplasmoides genitalium
Clostridium botulinum
Haemophilus influenzae
Nostocoides japonicum
Nocardia asteroides
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Shigella flexneri
Burkholderia cepacia
Legionella pneumophila
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Shewanella oneidensis
Yersinia pestis
Acinetobacter baumannii
Enterobacter cloacae
Salmonella enterica
Proteus mirabilis
Bacteroides fragilis
Bacillus subtilis
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Staphylococcus aureus
Listeria monocytogenes
Bordetella pertussis
Vibrio cholerae
Moraxella catarrhalis
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Clostridium perfringens
Helicobacter mustelae
Escherichia coli
Helicobacter hepaticus
Streptococcus pyogenes
Lactobacillus acidophilus
Helicobacter pylori
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Samples
Species
Mapping database: BacOriginal
Heatmaps for the mapped reads' proportions in Set D (targeted alpha=0.01)
Nocardia asteroides
Mycoplasma genitalium
Haemophilus influenzae
Clostridium botulinum
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Shigella flexneri
Burkholderia cepacia
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Neisseria meningitidis
Legionella pneumophila
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Shewanella oneidensis
Yersinia pestis
Acinetobacter baumannii
Enterobacter cloacae
Proteus mirabilis
Bacteroides fragilis
Salmonella enterica
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Bacillus subtilis
Vibrio cholerae
Bordetella pertussis
Staphylococcus aureus
Listeria monocytogenes
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Moraxella catarrhalis
Clostridium perfringens
Helicobacter mustelae
Escherichia coli
Helicobacter cholecystus
Streptococcus pyogenes
Helicobacter pylori
Bacteroides sp
Lactobacillus acidophilus
Shigella dysenteriae
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Samples
Mapping database: BacATG
• An 𝛼of 0.01 mean high level of sparsity, with one or two species dominating across all samples.
• This shows high amount of variances in species counts across samples for both the heatmaps because the variances were high already before mapping and
a large database here seems to have added further to those variances.
69
==PAGE:71==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
6.5 Relative Abundances for Mapped Counts
To further analyse the KMA mapping results obtained by using the two dif-
ferent databases, abundances for each synthetic set were compared by means
of heatmaps. Illustrated in Figures 23 to 26 are the relative abundances (pro-
portions) of the abundance counts obtained from the mapping of samples in all
four sets.
The heatmaps on the right in each figure from 23 to 26 show way too differ-
entially concentrated relative abundances compared to the heatmaps on the
left. If each sample is looked at separately in the heat map, it is noticeable
that they differ in terms of variability among species. For instance, in case
of BacOriginal database hits for Sets A and B, samples seem to be relatively
more uniformly distributed and that in a way matches with the high (𝛼=10)
and uniform (alpa=1) concentration parameters used in the respective sets for
all species.[10] It can also be observed that with decreasing value of targeted 𝛼,
the variability in the mapped species hits and thus the relative abundances in-
creases. This trend is consistent whether only the sets mapped to BacOriginal
are compared with each other, or if they are compared with their corresponding
relative abundances from BacATG mapping.
The increase in variability when comparing relative abundances from the BacO-
riginal and BacATG hits can be attributed again to the larger size of BacATG
database. This is because the reads would likely map to a higher number of
templates if there are relatively more templates available to be mapped to -
possibly because of the presence of conserved and GC-rich regions.
6.6 Post-Mapping Change in Species Variances and Concentration Parameters
The distribution of abundances were delved deeper into by means of Figure 27,
where boxplots for the CLR-transformed abundances and the across-sample
species variations have been illustrated.
These across-sample species variations actually refer to the variances in CLR-
transformed relative abundances for each species across samples. The red points
in the plots indicate the samples that contribute the most to those variances
because of certain extreme abundance values. For brevity and easy recall, let’s
call these red points the “Outlying samples”.
70
==PAGE:72==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
In the boxplots on the bottom, almost every species has at least one or two
samples that are outlying. Considering that for Set C, a targeted sparse Dirich-
let prior of 0.5 was used for all species categories, the huge difference in the
variations in the boxplots based on the BacATG hits clearly conveys how the
database composition and size show a completely different picture of the micro-
biome compositions compared to what might actually be the case in raw samples
from the studied environment.
Dataset with Targeted 𝛼
Mean 𝛼
Before
Mapping
Mean 𝛼
After
Mapping
Inference
Based on BacOriginal Hits
Set A: Dirichlet, 𝛼=10
8.17
8.10
Slight decrease
Set B: Dirichlet, 𝛼=1
1.16
1.20
Slight increase
Set C: Sparse Dirichlet, 𝛼=0.5
0.69
0.69
Consistent
Set D: Sparse Dirichlet,
𝛼=0.01
0.04
0.04
Consistent
Based on BacATG Hits
Set A: Dirichlet, 𝛼=10
8.17
4.49
Significant
decrease
Set B: Dirichlet, 𝛼=1
1.16
0.69
Significant
decrease
Set C: Sparse Dirichlet, 𝛼=0.5
0.69
0.43
Significant
decrease
Set D: Sparse Dirichlet,
𝛼=0.01
0.04
0.04
Consistent
Table 10 :
Alpha values before and after mapping calculated using MoM. The decrease in
alpha values post-mapping indicates increased variation in taxa compositions.
This insight also hints at a need for the optimisation of metagenomic and bioin-
formatics methods that are deployed for microbiome studies. Similar results for
the three other datasets (Sets A, B and D) can be accessed in the Appendix.
To further assess numerically how much the underlying concentration parame-
ters might have changed, it was useful to estimate them for the corresponding
abundance count datasets as has been illustrated in Table 10. Here again, the
table mentions only the mean estimates of 𝛼for all species categories to ensure
brevity.
71
==PAGE:73==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
−2
0
2
Bacillus subtilis
Clostridium perfringens
Bacteroides fragilis
Moraxella catarrhalis
Campylobacter jejuni
Salmonella enterica
Staphylococcus aureus
Escherichia coli
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Haemophilus influenzae
Helicobacter pylori
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Vibrio cholerae
Lactobacillus acidophilus
Shigella flexneri
Mycobacterium leprae
Bordetella pertussis
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Acinetobacter baumannii
Nostocoides japonicum
Enterobacter cloacae
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Helicobacter mustelae
Burkholderia cepacia
Listeria monocytogenes
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Streptococcus pyogenes
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Yersinia pestis
Legionella pneumophila
Bacillus cereus
Mycoplasmoides genitalium
Cereibacter sphaeroides
Shewanella oneidensis
Helicobacter hepaticus
Clostridium botulinum
Nocardia asteroides
Proteus mirabilis
Species
CLR Abundance
Arranged by descending species−wise variances across samples
Set C Sparse Dirichlet, targeted alpha=0.5
Based on BacOriginal hits
Distribution of CLR−Transformed Abundances After Mapping
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
Clostridium perfringens
Bacillus subtilis
Salmonella enterica
Moraxella catarrhalis
Staphylococcus aureus
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Bacteroides sp
Haemophilus influenzae
Campylobacter jejuni
Helicobacter pylori
Bordetella pertussis
Vibrio cholerae
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Lactobacillus acidophilus
Acinetobacter baumannii
Helicobacter mustelae
Enterobacter cloacae
Shigella flexneri
Burkholderia cepacia
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Listeria monocytogenes
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Legionella pneumophila
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Escherichia coli
Streptococcus pyogenes
Bacillus cereus
Mycoplasma genitalium
Mycobacterium lepromatosis
Shewanella oneidensis
Rhodobacter sphaeroides
Helicobacter cinaedi
Nocardia asteroides
Clostridium botulinum
Yersinia pestis
Mycobacterium haemophilum
Proteus mirabilis
Dermacoccus nishinomiyaensis
Mycobacterium paraseoulense
Streptomyces sp
Campylobacter sp
Streptomyces californicus
Mycobacterium lentiflavum
Serinicoccus profundi
Mycobacterium ulcerans
Bacteroides fragilis
Mycobacterium kansasii
Mycobacterium basiliense
Shigella boydii
Mycobacterium shigaense
Mycobacterium avium
Burkholderia gladioli
Nocardioides marinisabuli
Cellulosimicrobium cellulans
Streptomyces ferrugineus
Dactylosporangium vinaceum
Nocardioides ungokensis
Mycobacteroides salmoniphilum
Helicobacter cholecystus
Phycicoccus endophyticus
Brevibacterium casei
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis
Shigella sonnei
Species
CLR Abundance
Based on BacATG hits
Figure 27 :
Red points indicate the samples that contribute the most to the variances in these species due to extreme values of species
abundances in those samples.
72
==PAGE:74==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
6.7 Entropies For Abundance Data Using the Six Estimators
The entropy values for all the synthetic sets were calculated for each sample
and then an average of entropy values across samples was calculated. It was
possible to also aggregate the counts at species level and then estimate entropies
for a single observation of summed up counts; however, here the objective was
to get a detailed insight into the behaviour of the entropy estimators. And a
set of 18 samples is not a fixed number that is typically used in real research
studies, the sample numbers can be as low as it goes where sample collection is
extremely diﬀicult. Therefore, individual sample entropy values were estimated
and then their respective mean values were used for comparisons.
For all the four sets of data, the mean entropy estimates obtained using the six
entropy estimators have been illustrated in Tables 11 and 12. These entropy
values can be compared with the true entropy value of 3.69, estimated as the
natural logarithm of the number of species originally present in the raw reads,
which is 40. Additionally, as has been explained in section 5.2, how the presence
of high depth variance or variance towers occur due to sequencing biases and
many other factors, the mapped counts data was subset based on the instances
of Variance Towers and entropy values were estimated for those subsets as well.
The two tables also list those average entropy values obtained after removing
the variance towers under the “Without Variance Towers” columns.
Table 11 :
Average entropy values for BacOriginal hits before and after removing variance
towers across all samples in the four different sets.
With Variance Towers
Without Variance Towers
Method
Set A
Set B
Set C
Set D
Set A
Set B
Set C
Set D
Naive entropy
3.58
3.24
3.01
0.48
3.53
3.21
2.98
0.43
Chao-Shen
3.58
3.25
3.02
0.48
3.53
3.22
3.00
0.43
Hausser-Strimmer
3.62
3.28
3.05
0.48
3.58
3.27
3.04
0.43
Wolpert-Wolf
3.60
3.26
3.04
0.48
3.58
3.25
3.03
0.44
NSB
3.57
3.24
3.02
0.58
3.52
3.21
3.00
0.56
Piga
3.60
3.27
3.07
0.76
3.57
3.27
3.08
0.93
Looking closely at the values in Table 11 for BacOriginal hits, it seems all
of the methods actually underestimate the true entropy to some extent.
Although, estimations from the Hausser-Strimmer and Piga estimators come
73
==PAGE:75==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
closest to the true value for Sets A and B. All of the estimators fail to
estimate a reasonable value for Set D, which is the set with the lowest 𝛼and
thus evidently the highest amount of variability of species-wise abundances
across samples. This is an indication of how the underlying species concen-
trations across samples, or intrinsic sample variations, are also at play when
entropy is being calculated, and a concentration parameter of 0.01 is not work-
ing too well for getting the correct estimations, irrespective of the method used.
Table 12 :
Average entropy values for BacATG hits before and after removing variance
towers across all samples in the four different sets.
With Variance Towers
Without Variance Towers
Method
Set A
Set B
Set C
Set D
Set A
Set B
Set C
Set D
Naive entropy
3.54
3.20
2.96
0.47
3.48
3.17
2.93
0.61
Chao-Shen
3.54
3.21
2.98
0.47
3.49
3.18
2.95
0.68
Hausser-Strimmer
3.66
3.28
3.03
0.47
3.61
3.28
3.03
0.87
Wolpert-Wolf
3.86
3.29
3.04
0.48
3.75
3.30
3.02
0.71
NSB
3.56
3.24
3.02
0.58
3.51
3.22
3.00
1.13
Piga
3.73
3.45
3.23
0.78
3.71
3.52
3.33
2.97
When the counts from BacATG hits were used for entropy estimation as given
in Table 12, the Piga method provides the best approximation or the best value
in terms of proximity to the true entropy of 3.69 and also the effective richness
which turns out to be around 41 specifically for Set A, with and without variance
towers. Wolper-Wolf method also provides a good approximation of the true
entropy for Set A without variance towers. Additionally, Piga et al.’s method is
the only one among the six estimators that has consistently provided improved
entropy values for sets B, C and D after removing the variance towers.
Overall, it can be stated that the entropy estimates seem to have improved after
variance tower removal as per Table 12, specifically with Piga et al.’s method.
In real case studies, the situations would be similar to when an unknown com-
positional data - most often like Set C and Set D, with sparse distributions
- is mapped to a large database, and thus it is advisable to remove instances
of high variability, for instance the extraordinarily high depthVariance values
from KMA results. These results can be further evaluated visually in Figure
28, where the orange dashed abline represents the true entropy value.
74
==PAGE:76==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
BacATG
BacOriginal
Chao
Shen
Hausser
Strimmer
Naive
entropy
NSB
Piga
Wolpert
Wolf
Chao
Shen
Hausser
Strimmer
Naive
entropy
NSB
Piga
Wolpert
Wolf
1
2
3
4
Method
Average Entropy values
True entropy = 3.688879 (as natural log of the number of taxa, that is 40, present in each sample)
Before removing the variance towers
Average Entropy Values by Method
BacATG
BacOriginal
Chao
Shen
Hausser
Strimmer
Naive
entropy
NSB
Piga
Wolpert
Wolf
Chao
Shen
Hausser
Strimmer
Naive
entropy
NSB
Piga
Wolpert
Wolf
1
2
3
Method
Average Entropy values
Set
A
B
C
D
After removing the variance towers
Figure 28 :
Average entropy values before and after removing variance towers. The orange
dashed abline represents the true entropy. Different shapes and colors in the rest of curves
represent the four mapped count datasets, Set A, B, C and D, used for entropy calculations.
6.8 Alignment Versus Mapped Counts: Alpha, Chao1 Index, and Entropies
Based on Alignment Counts
Until now, the abundance counts that were being employed for diversity met-
rics included only the counts obtained from DNA fragments from sample data
mapped to the reference templates.
However, it was speculated that when
aligned fragment counts (fragmentCountAln) are used instead of mapped frag-
ment counts (fragmentCount), whether the results might be more accurate and
thus different. To verify if this point could be of consideration for improved
diversity approximations, mean alpha, Chao1 alpha diversity, and entropy met-
rics were estimated again for the aligned fragment counts and then the resulting
values were compared with the ones obtained earlier using the mapped fragment
counts.
75
==PAGE:77==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
Accordingly, the alignment counts-based Chao1 estimates and mean alpha val-
ues for all the sets for BacOriginal and BacATG hits are illustrated in Table
13.
Compared to the mapping based estimates given in Table 10, it seems
alignment counts do not provide any significantly different values for mean
alpha.
However, the Chao1 estimates actually get poorer values in case of
alignment counts (comparison with Table 9). Also, considering that Chao1 es-
timates based mapping hits were original quite close to the true richness of 40,
an after-variance-towers estimation was not necessary for that round. But for
the alignment based results, Chao1 estimator seems to have improved a bit for
Set D after removing the variance towers, though it is still quite far from the
accurate figure.
With Variance Towers
Without Variance Towers
Dataset
Chao1
Estimate
Mean 𝛼
Chao1
Estimate
Mean 𝛼
For BacOriginal Hits
Set A
20
8.10
20
1.94
Set B
20
1.20
20
0.60
Set C
20
0.70
20
0.38
Set D
20
0.04
18
0.03
For BacATG Hits
Set A
20
4.50
20
0.67
Set B
20
0.69
20
0.27
Set C
20
0.43
20
0.23
Set D
20
0.04
30
0.03
Table 13 :
Alignment counts-based Chao1 estimate and 𝛼for all the datasets as mapped
to the two different databases
The entropy estimates based on alignment counts are illustrated in Tables 14
and 15 and Figure 29, It seems the estimates have indeed improved a lot but
only for Set D, both before and after variance tower removal. And for the rest
of the sets, the estimates have actually gone lower and further away from the
true entropy value of 3.69. For the Piga method used for BacATG hits, the
estimates have gone higher than the true entropy in a few specific case (Set A
and B with variance towers), overestimating the richness values. Set B seems to
have got the closest approximation of 3.66 when the Piga method was used after
variance tower removal. Additionally, Hausser-Strimmer’s method provided the
76
==PAGE:78==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
same approximation when used for Set A with variance towers.
Using the alignment hits did not provide accurate results from Chao1 esti-
mates, but do seem to have changed the entropy estimates for a few instances
– but those results are not consistent and are also not significantly different
from the entropy estimates obtained using mapped hits. In conclusion, it can
be stated that using alignment counts over mapped counts might not provide
significantly more accurate results.
Therefore, for the rest of the analyses
in this report, mapped hits were used without any further comparison with
alignment hits.
BacATG
BacOriginal
Chao
Shen
Hausser
Strimmer
Naive
entropy
NSB
Piga
Wolpert
Wolf
Chao
Shen
Hausser
Strimmer
Naive
entropy
NSB
Piga
Wolpert
Wolf
1
2
3
4
Method
Average Entropy values
Before removing the variance towers
Average Entropy Values By Method Using Alignment Counts
BacATG
BacOriginal
Chao
Shen
Hausser
Strimmer
Naive
entropy
NSB
Piga
Wolpert
Wolf
Chao
Shen
Hausser
Strimmer
Naive
entropy
NSB
Piga
Wolpert
Wolf
1
2
3
4
Method
Average Entropy values
Set
A
B
C
D
After removing the variance towers
Figure 29
77
==PAGE:79==
6 | RESULTS FOR SYNTHETIC SAMPLES
Table 14 :
Average entropy values estimated using alignment counts for BacOriginal sets
before and after removing variance towers.
With Variance Towers
Without Variance Towers
Method
Set A
Set B
Set C
Set D
Set A
Set B
Set C
Set D
Naive entropy
3.58
2.89
3.24
2.67
3.01
2.49
0.48
0.38
Chao-Shen
3.58
2.89
3.25
2.70
3.02
2.56
0.48
0.44
Hausser-Strimmer
3.62
3.04
3.28
2.89
3.05
2.78
0.48
0.56
Wolpert-Wolf
3.60
3.05
3.26
2.82
3.04
2.66
0.48
0.54
NSB
3.57
2.92
3.24
2.75
3.02
2.62
0.58
1.15
Piga
3.60
3.17
3.27
3.62
3.07
3.66
0.76
3.20
Table 15 :
Average entropy values based on alignment counts for BacATG sets before and
after removing variance towers.
With Variance Towers
Without Variance Towers
Method
Set A
Set B
Set C
Set D
Set A
Set B
Set C
Set D
Naive entropy
3.53
2.66
3.20
2.52
2.96
2.45
0.47
0.45
Chao-Shen
3.54
2.68
3.21
2.61
2.98
2.59
0.47
0.72
Hausser-Strimmer
3.66
2.90
3.28
2.91
3.03
2.96
0.47
2.07
Wolpert-Wolf
3.86
2.70
3.29
2.70
3.04
2.74
0.48
0.83
NSB
3.56
2.81
3.24
2.76
3.02
2.73
0.58
1.51
Piga
3.73
4.14
3.45
4.22
3.23
4.17
0.78
3.04
78
==PAGE:80==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
7 | Results for Sewage Samples
The mapping of reads from the Danish sewage samples were done in two dif-
ferent ways. First by using KMA, reads were mapped to KmerFinder’s large
Bacterial ATG database (BacATG) and then by using Kraken2 with NCBI’s
bacterial and plasmid libraries. The respective sizes of the two databases for
KMA and Kraken2 mapping processes were: 26,185 unique reference templates
for BacATG and 14,980 unique reference templates for NCBI’s bacterial and
plasmid libraries. The second round of mapping with Kraken2 was conducted
as more of a way to validate the results of KMA mapping, and also to have a
comparative analysis for the sewage samples.
In line with these results obtained from these two mapping methods as well
as the strategy of removing variance towers from KMA results as discussed
in the section 6 “Results for Synthetic Samples”, it was decided to present the
results for sewage samples in two parts: First as comparative analyses for KMA
and Kraken2 hits and second as comparative analyses for KMA hits with and
without variance towers.
7.1 Part I: Comparative Analyses Based on KMA and Kraken2 Hits
7.1.1 Observed Richness, Chao1 Index and Concentration Parameters
To begin with, the basic metrics relevant to diversity measures in this particular
project - observed richness, Chao1 index, and mean concentration parameter
𝛼were estimated. Table 16 provides a snapshot of all these estimates for the
sewage mapped results obtained from both KMA and Kraken2.
Mapping Tool and
Database
Observed
Richness
Chao1 index
Median 𝛼
KMA with BacATG
database
3792
3800
7.43
Kraken2 with NCBI’s
Bacterial and Plasmid
Libraries
9909
9909
15.88
Table 16 :
Observed richness, Chao1 index and estimated 𝛼values for sewage samples
based on KMA and Kraken2 mapped hits
As per these initial results, it seems Kraken2 provide significantly more variable
79
==PAGE:81==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
results than KMA for the sewage data, with a heighted observed richness as
well as overly dense distributions with a median 𝛼of 15.88. The median value
was used in this case to get a relatively robust estimate of 𝛼owing to the
presence of too many extreme figures. Furthermore, Chao1 index seems to be
providing higher values than the observed richness in case of KMA. However,
unlike synthetic data, it is not possible to verify if these estimates accurately
approximate the true richness.
7.1.2 Taxa Accumulation and Sampling Effort Analysis
A comparative species accumulation conducted for the mapped hits retrieved
from both KMA and Kraken2 mappings has been illustrated in Figure 30. In the
two plots, x-axis represents the sampling effort, that is the number of samples
that are required to discover all possible taxa present in the data, which is 18
samples in total considering this is based on pre-sequenced data from another
study.
Potential stabilization point
after 16 samples
3500
3600
3700
3800
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Sampling Effort
Estimated Richness
Mapped to BacATG database using KMA
Potential stabilization point
but still not quite there
8500
9000
9500
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Sampling Effort
Estimated Richness
Mapped to NCBI's Bacterial and Plasmid Libraries using Kraken2
Figure 30 :
Comparative analysis of species accumulation of KMA and Kraken2 mapped
hits for sewage samples
80
==PAGE:82==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
The y-axis denotes the estimated richness for randomly selected set of samples
increasing from one sample to go up to 18 samples. Both plots show a rapid
increase in species richness with the initial increase in sampling effort; however
it seems only the curve for KMA hits is about to flatten out but has not
yet still. Essentially, both the plots indicate that the sampling effort was not
enough to discover all possible taxa present in the environment under study.
The shaded regions around each curve represent the variability in the taxa
richness estimates.
The shaded area around the Kraken2 curve indicates a
broader range of variability compared to the narrower shaded area around the
KMA curve. This suggests that KMA provides more consistent taxa richness
estimates across different sampling efforts compared to Kraken2 — as can be
similarly noticed further in the next section for the distribution of taxa across
samples.
7.1.3 Distribution of Abundant and Rare Taxa
As the dimensions of the results from KMA and Kraken2 were quite large, to
facilitate a comparison of their abundance and distribution of taxa across the
18 samples, barplots using the barplot.acomp() function from the compositions
package were created in R. The two bar charts are based on the relative abun-
dances of different taxa present in the respective mapping results. The dark
blue shades indicate taxa that have high abundances and lighter shades (light
blue) represent taxa with low abundances.
In the KMA chart, the proportions for high-abundance taxa (dark blue regions)
are smaller as compared to the proportions for low-abundance taxa (light blue
regions). This is contradictory to the Kraken2 chart where high-abundance
taxa seem to be way more prominent. Overall, it indicates that:
1. KMA results have lower amount of taxa density across samples than Kraken2
results because low-abundance taxa seems to be more uniformly present and
high-abundance taxa are less dominant in KMA results.
2. Kraken2 results seem to have a few or more high-abundance taxa being
dominant, indicating relatively higher sensitivity to overmapping of reads to
same or similar reference templates as well as highly dense distributions.
These results also hint at how the mapping tool and the database’s composition
and size can all impact the interpretations of microbiome community structure
81
==PAGE:83==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
Figure 31 :
Dark shades of blue represent taxa with high relative abundances, and light shades represent taxa with low relative abundances.
Overall, each bar shows the density of low- and high-abundance taxa present in each sample by means of the amount of dark and light
regions.
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
 11
 12
 13
 14
 15
 16
 17
 18
KMA Mapped Hits, Median Alpha=7.43
Samples
0.0
0.4
0.8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Kraken2 Mapped Hits, Median Alpha=15.88
Samples
0.0
0.4
0.8
82
==PAGE:84==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
and diversity levels.
7.1.4 Distribution of Concentration Parameters
Based on the higher proprotions of abundant taxa in the Kraken2 results com-
pared to the KMA results, it was speculated how the concentration parameters,
𝛼, varied for each taxa category. To this end, all estimated 𝛼values were vi-
sualised using scatter plots as below. It would have been a better option to
use boxplot for this step; however, the extremely high values of as well as huge
variation in 𝛼values made it diﬀicult to create legible boxplots at this point.
As observed in the scatter plots in Figures 32 and 33, Kraken2 results seem to
show significantly higher values for a big chunk of taxa categories, while KMA
results have a relatively evenly spread out distribution of higher 𝛼values.
The two mappers definitely disagree in terms of concentration parameters —
that is, both in terms of variation as well as mean and median 𝛼values. The
median values were specifically used here as there are too many extreme values
of 𝛼and a median provided a more robust measure of central tendency here.
It is worth noting that the median 𝛼for Kraken2 results is more than double
the value of median 𝛼for KMA results. Additionally, the Kraken2 based alpha
values seem more varied and dense which shows how there are many taxa with
neglible across-sample variances but also there are many more compared to
KMA that have extremely low 𝛼values and thus lead to significantly diverse
across-sample variances.
These differences can be attributed to the difference in the mapping approach
of the two tools. It is believed that KMA seems to have provided more sophis-
ticated results than Kraken2 owing to KMA’s effort to reduce overmapping and
variations. Kraken2, however, does not have this feature to avoid overmapping
that can lead to higher abundances for multiple taxa which can thus contribute
to high 𝛼values that reflect distributions that are not only even but also highly
dense. Additionally the database used for Kraken2 mapping has reference tem-
plates from several plasmid genomes as well, while BacATG used with KMA
is a more refined database - which can also be the contributing factor for ob-
servering such huge differences in their respective results.
83
==PAGE:85==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
Min = 0.06 
 Median = 7.43 
 Max = 1765.99
0
500
1000
1500
0
1000
2000
3000
Taxa categories
Alpha values
Estimated alpha values for all taxa based on KMA hits
Figure 32
Min = 0.06 
 Median = 15.88 
 Max = 1080.7
0
300
600
900
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
Taxa categories
Alpha values
Estimated alpha values for all taxa based on Kraken2 hits
Figure 33
84
==PAGE:86==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
It was also speculated if the validation of KMA results could have also been
done using KrakenUniq, which is an improved version of Kraken2 and applies
mapping based on uniq k-mer counts. However, considering the time constraint,
this point was instead added to the list of future prospective goals for such a
study.
7.1.5 Entropy and Effective Richness
The entropy estimates clearly reflect the huge variation coming in from the
high and varied concentration parameters as well as the overly high abundances
from Kraken2 hits. These entropy estimates directly as such may not provide in-
depth insights, but further investigation as described in the next sections would
shed some light into the factors influencing these estimates. As a preliminary
perspective, it was speculated if, apart from the different in mapping algorithm
and database sizes, the composition of different samples could also be one of
the factors that causes such a variation.
Table 17 :
Sewage data: average entropies for KMA and Kraken2 based abundances. The
averages were taken across samples for each estimation method.
Based on KMA hits
Based on Kraken2 hits
Method
Entropy
Effective
Richness
Entropy
Effective
Richness
Naive entropy
3.294536
27
4.681182
108
Chao-Shen
3.294694
27
4.681182
108
Hausser-Strimmer
3.294540
27
4.681190
108
Wolpert-Wolf
3.312092
27
4.763993
117
NSB
3.295597
27
4.683058
108
Piga
3.296940
27
4.686681
108
85
==PAGE:87==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
7.1.6 Difference between Individual Sample Entropy and Average Entropy for
All Samples Estimated Using Each Method
How far each entropy value of a sample is from the average entropy for all
18 samples using a particular method is an interesting way of comparing the
samples. A sample with the highest deviation from the average entropy across
all methods suggests that it is significantly different from the rest of the samples.
This raises questions about the homogeneity of the samples, which were all
collected from the same untreated sewage source.
In the two plots given under Figure 34, each bar represents the absolute differ-
ence between the entropy value of a sample and the average entropy calculated
for all 18 samples using a specific entropy method. Samples like 14 and 15
exhibit high deviations for multiple methods, indicating that their entropy val-
ues are significantly different from the average entropies. This could suggest
these samples have unique characteristics or are less homogeneous compared
to others. On the other hand, samples like 4 and 8 show minimal deviations
across all methods, databases and mapping tools, indicating higher consistency
in their entropy values and possibly homogeneity in their compositions. The
different shades of blue help distinguish between the methods, allowing for a
comparison of variability within each method across the samples.
7.1.7 PCoA Clustering Based Homogeneity Testing of Sewage Samples
The sewage samples used in this study were considered replicates because they
were taken from the same untreated sewage collection at the same place, time
and location. Therefore, the samples could be treated as statistically and com-
positionally identical or replicates. But based on the results from section 7.1.6,
it seemed that the samples might not actually be truly homogeneous. And
to investigate further into it, a principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) analysis
was applied for the ordination-based clustering of the 18 samples in order to
see which samples are homogeneous and thus appear in the same cluster and
which ones do not.
The PCoA is a multivariate analysis technique that allows one to use a similar-
ity or dissimilarity matrix and transform it into a set of coordinates in a lower
dimensional space, wherein observations such as the said samples in the sewage
86
==PAGE:88==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Samples
Absolute Differences between Entropy and Avg Entropy
Average entropy for each method is calculated as the mean entropy value across all samples.
Based on KMA hits
Deviation of Sample−wise Entropy Values from Average Entropy for Each Method
0.0
0.1
0.2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Samples
Absolute Differences between Entropy and Avg Entropy
Method
Chao.Shen
Hausser.Strimmer
Naive.entropy
NSB
Piga
Wolpert.Wolf
Based on Kraken2 hits
Figure 34
87
==PAGE:89==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
data can be compared in terms of common attributes, that is common taxa in
this case. Combined with hierarhical clustering, the samples could be observed
in a graphical visualition with the PCoA coordinates - with similar samples ap-
pearing in their corresponding clusters together. Samples that are in proximity
to one another or are in the same cluster share one or more common taxa to
a great extent and therefore are more similar to each other compared to the
samples that are further away. Samples belonging to the same cluster can thus
be considered homogeneous in terms of diversity levels. To conduct this anal-
ysis and visualise its results, a distance matrix was created for all 18 samples
using CLR-transformed abundances. Euclidean distances were used to create
the distance matrix with the help of vegandist() function from the vegan pack-
age. Next, hierarchical clustering was applied using complete linkage, wherein
the distance between two clusters is defined as the maximum distance between
any pair of elements, one from each cluster. This created a distance-based tree
of samples, which was then cut into two clusters to be seen as two sets of sam-
ples that are homogeneous within their own set but different from the other
and thus are compositionally hetergeneous. The hclust() and cutree functions
from stats package in R were used for these tasks. The PCoA was then applied
using classical multidimensional scaling of the Euclidean distance matrix using
cmdscale() function from the same stats R package, followed by visualisation of
the samples using the first two coordinates. The method was applied on both
KMA and Kraken2 based counts. And the following observations were noted
from the resulting visualisations in Figures 35 and 36.
KMA based PCoA results:
1. Samples 6, 4, 8, 10 and 15 may not be the identical to the rest of the samples
as they form a separate cluster.
2. These five samples fall in the negative quadrants for principal coordinate 1
(PCoA1) and possibly have lower relative abundances of taxa that drive PCoA1.
Kraken2 based PCoA results:
1. Samples 6, 4, 12 and 15 may not be the identical to the rest of the samples
as they form a separate cluster.
2. These four samples fall in the positive quadrants for PCoA1 and possibly
have higher relative abundances of taxa that drive PCoA1.
The two mapping tools agree on samples 4, 6 and 15 being different from the
88
==PAGE:90==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
 11
 12
 13
 14
 15
 16
 17
 18
−30
−20
−10
0
10
20
−20
0
20
PCoA1
PCoA2
Clusters
1
2
Clustering of samples is based on complete linkage with Euclidean distances
PCoA for testing samples' homogeneity using KMA counts
Figure 35 :
PCoA analysis of KMA abundance results for sewage data
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
−40
−20
0
20
−40
−20
0
20
PCoA1
PCoA2
Clusters
1
2
Clustering of samples is based on complete linkage with Euclidean distances
PCoA for testing samples' homogeneity using Kraken2 counts
Figure 36 :
PCoA analysis of Kraken2 abundance results for sewage data
89
==PAGE:91==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
rest of the samples. So, it can be stated that overall a few of the sewage samples
are not homogeneous or similar to the rest.
7.1.8 Relation between Entropy Estimates and Average of Pairwise Euclidean
Distances Among Samples
It was speculated if the differences observed during the PCoA analysis and the
distances between samples which represent the differences in their compositional
diversity levels could be culminating in different entropy estimates and if any
of the entropy estimators had a linear or non-linear relationship with these
distances. To this end, first a linear model study was conducted with the null
hypothesis being “There is no statistically significant relationship between the
entropy estimates (from any of the six methods) and the average Euclidean
distances among samples.” The study was conducted using abundances from
both KMA and Kraken2 hits.
The resulting p-values for all models assessing the said linear relationship were
above 0.7, which suggested that the null hypothesis could be accepted in the
lack of enough evidence to reject it. If a significant relationship had been found,
it would suggest that the entropy estimates for each sample are influenced by
their distance from other samples. Detailed results and summaries of the linear
models can be accessed in the Appendix. The lack of a linear relationship indi-
cates that the homogeneity or heterogeneity of the samples is not a significant
factor in determining entropy estimations for these methods. This suggests that
the entropy measures are relatively robust to the variability among samples.
However, these p-values when considered in combination with the multiple
𝑅-squared values, which were found to be quite low, proving that the model
did not explain enough amount of variability in the data- the linear model
was thus considered to be not a good fit at this point. Therefore, a round
of correlation coeﬀicient estimations using two different methods - Pearson’s
and Spearman’s - was conducted next.
The Pearson’s correlation is used
to measure the strength and direction of a linear relationship between two
continuous variables, while Spearman’s correlation assesses the strength and
direction of a monotonic relationship between two variables by ranking them
and then evaluating the proportional or inversely proportional relationship
between these ranks.[37]
90
==PAGE:92==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
62
64
66
68
70
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
 11
 12
 13
 14
 15
 16
 17
 18
Sample
Pairwise Distance
Based on KMA hits
Distribution of Pairwise Distances for Each Sample
60
70
80
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Sample
Pairwise Distance
Based on Kraken2 hits
Figure 37
91
==PAGE:93==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
KMA-based distances
Kraken2-based distances
Method
Pearson Cor
Spearman
Cor
Pearson Cor
Spearman
Cor
Naive entropy
0.08996447
-0.009287926
-0.01470153
0.06088751
Chao-Shen
0.08972277
0.011351909
-0.01470151
0.06088751
Hausser-Strimmer
0.08996004
-0.009287926
-0.01470236
0.06088751
Wolpert-Wolf
0.07166444
0.025799794
-0.03731813
-0.02167183
NSB
0.08897479
0.011351909
-0.01522590
0.06088751
Piga
0.08739574
0.025799794
-0.01602872
0.06088751
Table 18 :
Correlation Coeﬀicients for Entropy Estimates vs. Average Euclidean Distances
Based on CLR-Transformed Abundances from KMA and Kraken2 Hits
Table 18 provides the corresponding correlation estimates for each entropy esti-
mator and the average of pair-wise Euclidean distances for each sample. The re-
sulting correlation coeﬀicients are extremely low and very close to zero. Conse-
quently, they suggest that there are no strong linear or monotonic relationships
between the entropy estimates and the average of pairwise Euclidean distances
between samples. This suggests that irrespective of the lack of homogeniety as
observed for some of the samples during PCoA analysis, the entropy estima-
tors are robust in terms of being uninfluenced by the differences or similarities
between the 18 samples or by the sample-to-sample variability.
7.1.9 Signal-to-Noise Ratio Analysis
A signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is a measure that can be used to compare the
level of desired signal to the level of the background noise. The concept is quite
commonly used in the field of communication systems for analysing signalling
processes.
It acts as a significant parameter to assess the performance and
quality of communication systems, where a high SNR is considered to be a
signal being clear, easy-to-interpret and thus termed as “high quality” and a
low SNR conveys that the signal is corrupted or have too much noise and is
thus termed as “poor quality”. In communication systems, this analysis allows
for a rationale for further investigation into the possible steps that can be taken
to improve the quality of the signal.
In metagenomics studies such as this one, a “signal” can be considered as the
92
==PAGE:94==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
mean of centered relative abundances (CLR-transformed abundances) that are
obtained from the mapping of reads to a database, and the “noise” then auto-
matically is the variances of these centered values across taxa catgories.
To obtain signal-to-noise ratio for the sewage results from KMA and Kraken2
hits, average (signal) and variances (noise) for the taxa-wise clr values were
obtained for all taxa. This was followed by plotting the signal values against
the SNR values (calculated as 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑎𝑙
𝑛𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑒), in order to illustrate taxa categories that
have high signal with low noise, the ones that have low signal with high noise
and also the ones that have low signal and high but still tolerable amount
of noise (for instance, noise levels that are below the median of the all noise
values summed up for all taxa categories). For many taxa categories, the signal
values (mean clr) were negative and that means their relative abundances were
below the geometric mean of the entire set’s relative abundances. In Figure 38,
taxa categories with poor signal and high noise are the points that are below
zero on both x and y axes.
Tool
Original
High-signal,
low-noise
Rare
Spurious
mappings
KMA
3792
1546
414
1832
Kraken2
9909
3282
1849
4778
Table 19 :
Counts of taxa based on SNR analysis
The orange points indicate taxa categories that have low signal but still have
a noise level that is below the median value of combined noises (that is the
median of all taxa variances) for all taxa categories in the data. It is reasonable
to identify these particular taxa categories represented by orange points to be
the rare taxa that might have low abundances and moderate variances solely
because of their rarity. Of these rare taxa, a total of 124 were found to be the
common taxa that the two mappers agree on to have low abundances (signal)
and also relatively moderate variances across samples (noise).
93
==PAGE:95==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
0
30
60
90
0
4
8
12
Signal
SNR
For KMA mapped hits
SNR Analysis for Sewage Data
0
20
40
60
80
0
4
8
Signal
SNR
For Kraken2 mapped hits
Taxa categories indicated by solid colored points:
High−quality signal and low noise (major part of the composition)
Low−quality signal and high noise (potentially spurious counts)
Low−quality signal but relatively low noise (potentially rare taxa)
Figure 38 :
Signal-to-Noise Ratio Analysis for KMA and Kraken2: 124 Rare Taxa with Low Abundance and Variance
94
==PAGE:96==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
Entropy estimates for KMA and Kraken2 based mapped hits after removing
spurious counts based on the SNR analysis
Based on the SNR analysis results, the spurious counts were filtered out from
the two abundance datasets and entropy estimation was done again. Given
in Table 20 are the resulting entropy and effective richness estimates.
The
removal of these spurious counts seemed to have refined the dataset but has not
altered the diversity estimates in a significant manner (compared to the entropy
estimates in section 7.1.5, Table 17). Combined with the insights about the 124
rare taxa that the two mappers agreed on, although they formed a mere 3.27%
of the KMA hits and 1.25% of the Kraken2 hits, the neglible improvement in
the estimates post spurious counts removal indicates that those spurious counts
and the common rare taxa do not significantly impact the overall richness and
entropy measures in case of sewage data. Therefore, determining which mapper
has provided more accurate results is challenging.
At this point, the next step considered was to further analyse the KMA results,
with focus on how the entropy estimates change after removing variance towers
— a technique that provided somewhat better results in case of synthetic data
in section 6.
Table 20 :
Sewage data: average entropies for KMA and Kraken2 based abundances after
removing potentially spurious counts based on SNR analysis
Based on KMA hits
Based on Kraken2 hits
Method
Entropy
Effective
Richness
Entropy
Effective
Richness
Naive entropy
3.281861
27
4.601177
100
Chao-Shen
3.281861
27
4.601177
100
Hausser-Strimmer
3.281864
27
4.601183
100
Wolpert-Wolf
3.303354
27
4.672087
107
NSB
3.282395
27
4.602137
100
Piga
3.282823
27
4.601651
100
95
==PAGE:97==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
7.2 Part II: Comparative Analyses Based on KMA Hits Without Variance
Towers
In this section, analyses similar to the ones conducted in section 7.1 have been
redone for abundance data obtained from KMA hits after removing the variance
towers. Brief hyperlinked references to the figures and tables from the previous
section wherever required for comparison have been mentioned in order to avoid
repetition of content and information.
7.2.1 Distribution of Taxa and Concentration Parameters After Removing
Variance Towers
After removing the variance towers, the distribution of taxa across samples
seem to have changed in terms of density as can be observed in Figure 39,
but still with somewhat evenness between samples — although when zoomed
in, the figure does show some variation in that regards. There are no overly
dominant presence of high-abundant taxa anymore in the data compared to
what has been observed in case of the original KMA hits and Kraken2 hits as
well (section 7.1.3, Figure 31).
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
 11
 12
 13
 14
 15
 16
 17
 18
KMA Mapped Hits Without Variance Towers, Median Alpha=2.93
Samples
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 39
96
==PAGE:98==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
Min = 0.06 
 Median = 2.93 
 Max = 282.47
0
100
200
0
1000
2000
3000
Taxa categories
Alpha values
Estimated alpha values for all taxa based on KMA hits without variance towers
Figure 40
The taxa-wise concentration parameters illustrated in Figure 40 also indicate an
improvement in the variations that were observed in distribution of 𝛼estimates
before removing variance towers (Figure section 7.1.4 and 32 and 33). There
are now only a few extreme high values of 𝛼, with a median value of 2.93 —
which indicates that overall the distribution can be considered as still dense
but relatively even. Having said that, it must be noted that it does not mean
all taxa’s distributions are symmetric here but choosing the median value as a
reference point provides a simple approach for comparison.
7.2.2 Entropies and Effective Richness
The most interesting change by far after removing the variance towers is the
tremendous increase in entropy estimates by all six methods - shooting from 27
to to a range of 654 and 738. It is also interesting because one might expect the
entropy estimates and effective richness to go down after removing a portion
of the data, but this particular portion with high depth variance seemed to be
actually the reason behind low entropy values. Considering the data came from
untreated sewage, 654 to 738 species actually seems like a reasonable range for
97
==PAGE:99==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
the bacterial species composition in the collected samples.
With variance towers
Without variance towers
Method
Entropy
Effective
Richness
Entropy
Effective
Richness
Naive entropy
3.294536
27
6.483764
654
Chao-Shen
3.294694
27
6.488335
657
Hausser-Strimmer
3.294540
27
6.486157
656
Wolpert-Wolf
3.312092
27
6.604402
738
NSB
3.295597
27
6.490943
659
Piga
3.296940
27
6.531552
686
Table 21 :
Sewage data: average entropies for KMA hits with and without variance towers.
The averages were taken across samples for each estimation method.
7.2.3 Difference between Entropies and Respective Average Entropy from
Each Method
The deviations of sample-wise entropy values from the average entropy based on
the hits without variance towers show a completely different picture, in Figure
41, of these absolute differences as compared to the ones observed for hits with
variance towers, in section 7.1.6, Figure 34. Although the scale of the absolute
differences is not too high, it is still worth assessing which samples are different
from the majority of the samples by means of these deviations.
7.2.4 Re-testing Homogeneity of Samples
It was speculated that with the changes observed so far after the removal of
variance towers would have contributed to some level of homogenity in the
abundance data samples. Therefore, the PCoA-based clustering was applied
on the without-variance-towers dataset. As illustrated in Figure 42, sample 4
and 6 continue to remain different from the rest of samples as was observed in
Figure 35 section 7.1.7 for with-variance-towers data. However, this comparison
was done to get more of an overview of any corresponding change occurring as a
result of variance towers removal. As has already been asssessed in section 7.1.8,
the homogeneity or lack thereof does not influence the estimation of entropy by
the six methods being studied.
98
==PAGE:100==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Samples
Absolute Differences between Entropy and Avg Entropy
Method
Chao.Shen
Hausser.Strimmer
Naive.entropy
NSB
Piga
Wolpert.Wolf
Average entropy for each method is calculated as the mean entropy value across all samples.
Based on KMA counts without variance towers
Deviation of Sample−wise Entropy Values from Average Entropy for Each Method
Figure 41
99
==PAGE:101==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
 11
 12
 13
 14
 15
 16
 17
 18
−20
0
20
−20
0
20
PCoA1
PCoA2
Clusters
1
2
Clustering of samples is based on complete linkage with Euclidean distances
PCoA for testing samples' homogeneity using KMA counts without variance towers
Figure 42
7.3 Best Estimate of Richness in Sewage Data
So far from the the entropy estimates obtained overall through synthetic data
analyses, it is evident that the Piga method applied on abundance count datasets
after the removal of high variances provides better approximations of the true
entropy. Therefore, to obtain the single best estimate of entropy and effective
richness for sewage data, the Piga estimator was used in combination with a
non-parametric bootstrapping technique in R. In nonparametric bootstrapping,
random sets of data are created by resampling with replacement from the input
data.
Non-parametric bootstrapping was mainly used for this step because although
microbiome data is often explained by Dirichlet-Multinomial distribution, many
researchers use several different mixture models to fit and explain this kind of
abundance data; and in order to have a straightforward approach that relies
on the observed data and does not assume any specific distribution was more
suitable at this point for this project’s objectives. In any case, Piga’s method
of entropy estimation already applies several iterations of the underlying con-
100
==PAGE:102==
7 | RESULTS FOR SEWAGE SAMPLES
Mean Entropy = 6.531496
0
10
20
30
6.50
6.55
6.60
Bootstrapped entropy values
Density
Higher peaks represent entropy estimates that are more common among bootstrapped samples
Density of bootstrapped entropy estimates
Figure 43 :
Multimodal distribution, with several different peaks, was observed in the
bootstrapped entropy values across all 18 samples. Of these, the mean value was treated
as the best estimate of diversity in sewage data under study, with corresponding effective
richness of 686 species
centration parameter 𝛼star, 𝛼∗(10 iterations in this case, in a symmetric
reference) based on aggregated counts for each taxa. Overall, there were 50 it-
erations in the bootstrap, so in total there were 500 iterations of 𝛼∗estimation,
as part of Piga’s entropy method.
The sewage data subset used for this step was abundance counts from KMA
hits after the removal of variance towers. A density plot of all the bootstrapped
entropy values for the 18 samples can be referred to in Figure 43.
Based on the bootstrapping results, the following best estimates of entropy and
effective richness have been recorded. These estimates were calculated as the
overall mean value of the t-statistics for all the samples across all 50 iterations.
The respective 95% confidence intervals were also calculated as the average
of the upper bounds and the average of the lower bounds for the individual
confidence intervals obtained for each sample during these iterations.
101
==PAGE:103==
8 | KEY FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION
Table 22 :
Best Estimate of Entropy and Effective Richness for Sewage Data
Statistic
Value
Estimation approach
Entropy
6.531497
Rounded mean of bootstrapped entropy values
2.5% CI
6.498483
Mean of the lower bounds of 95% CIs for all 18 samples
97.5% CI
6.571294
Mean of the upper bounds of 95% CIs for all 18 samples
Effective Richness
687
Rounded mean of the exponential of the best entropy esti-
mate
Table 27 in the Appendix provides detailed boostrapping results with respective
values for bias and standard error, along with the summary statistics in Table
28 for the entropy estimates for each sample.
8 | Key Findings and Conclusion
8.1 Summary of Key Findings
Concentration parameters change post mapping and alignment
Based on the results from different tools and databases used for mapping, it
can be stated that the true concentration parameters cannot be estimated
precisely as such because their values typically change after mapping.
Using Chao1 for alpha diversity may not always be the best approach:
Chao1 is quite popularly used by researchers for alpha diversity estimates; how-
ever, as observed in this project’s results, it consistently overestimates richness
when using large reference databases using mapped hits from KMA output.
Additionally, it significantly underestimates richness when used with alignment
hits based on KMA results.
Therefore, it is advisable to always validate results from the Chao1 method, for
instance by using a relatively robust entropy estimator like Piga’s method or
Hausser-Strimmer’s method. Having said that, these results are mainly based
on outputs from KMA and may show different results when a different mapping
and alignment tool is used.
102
==PAGE:104==
8 | KEY FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION
Entropy estimation does not depend on the heterogeniety of samples
It was observed, based on the results from linear modeling of entropy esti-
mations and average Euclidean distances among samples, that the variability
between samples does not have a statistically significant influence on the per-
formance of entropy estimation methods. Therefore, it can be presumed that
it does not matter if the microbiome samples are homogeneous or hetergeneous
in order to assess their diversity levels based on the six entropy estimators
evaluated in this project.
Entropy estimates are influenced by the mapping tool and database sizes:
Using a specific mapping tool may provide very different results for a set
of abundance counts compared to another tool that works with a relatively
different algorithm such as KMA and Kraken2. And using a large database
typically leads to spurious mappings, which can be identified by the use of a
robust methodology like signal-to-noise ratio analysis and can be removed for
improved estimates of diversity.
High depth variances or disparity in sequencing depths across reference
templates impact diversity measures based on entropy:
High depth variances for taxa categories lead to poor estimates of entropy -
most often lower than the true entropy value. This is because the rare taxa
abundances still get affected and underestimated because of the inherenet wet
lab procedural biases, data bias as well as the bias introduced during mapping
and alignment steps. Removing the variance towers, as possible for the KMA
output, is a useful way of doing away with or at least reducing the impact of
those biases.
Alignment counts do not significantly improve Chao1 and entropy esti-
mates:
Using alignment counts does not influence entropy as well as Chao1 estimates
to a considerably significant extent. In this project, most of the times, using
alignment counts provided similar entropy estimates as the mapping counts or
at least resulted in quite similar values.
103
==PAGE:105==
8 | KEY FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION
The method given by Piga et al.
is robust, but does not account for as-
symetric distributions that are more realistic than symmetric distributions
for categories in metagenomics
Piga et al. provides a robust method for entropy calculation using the most
likely concentration parameter for a vector. However, this is with the assump-
tion that distribution in a vector of observations with K categories is a sym-
metric value for all categories. And that is not how microbiome distributions
occur in nature. Microbiome samples often occur with different concentrations
and variances for each category of taxa.
8.2 Future Directions for Research
The future prospects for this study could include the following themes:
1. Investigating into possible ways of obtaining absolutely symmetric distri-
butions with a consistent value of concentration parameters 𝛼for all taxa
categories
2. Investigating into the precise cause of variations that occur during mapping
and alignment processes and ways to reduce them
3. Using additional improved mapping tools, such as KrakenUniq, for conduct-
ing analyses that could be relatively more comparable to the results of KMA
4. Possible improvements in the entropy estimation with the most likely value
of 𝛼based on Piga et al.’s method; that is, in terms of obtaining the most likely
value of 𝛼for all individual taxa categories, instead of a single value for a vector
of observations, in line with the typical nature of microbiome compositional
data
104
==PAGE:106==
REFERENCES
References
[1]
Vidushi Aggarwal, Sushant Sunder, and Smita Rastogi Verma. “Disease-associated
dysbiosis and potential therapeutic role of Akkermansia muciniphila, a mucus
degrading bacteria of gut microbiome”. eng. In: Folia Microbiologica 67.6 (2022),
pp. 811–824. issn: 18749356, 00155632. doi: 10.1007/s12223-022-00973-6.
[2]
Evan Archer, Il Memming Park, and Jonathan W. Pillow. “Bayesian and quasi-
Bayesian estimators for mutual information from discrete data”. eng. In: Entropy
15.5 (2013), pp. 1738–1755. issn: 10994300. doi: 10.3390/e15051738.
[3]
Evan W. Archer, Il Memming Park, and Jonathan W. Pillow. “Bayesian entropy
estimation for countable discrete distributions”. In: The Journal of Machine Learning
Research 15.1 (2014), pp. 2833–2868.
[4]
Jakub Arnold. Maximum Likelihood for the Multinomial Distribution (Bag of
Words). https : / / blog . jakuba . net / maximum - likelihood - for - multinomial -
distribution/. Accessed: 2024-07-20.
[5]
A. Arora, C. Meister, and R. Cotterell. “Estimating the Entropy of Linguistic Distri-
butions”. In: Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics. Vol. 2. 2022, pp. 175–195.
[6]
Saeed El-Ashram. “Next Generation Sequencing and Microbial Community Associ-
ated with Eukaryotes Including Parasitic Helminths: A Review Article”. In: Inter-
national Journal of Advanced Research 5 (Mar. 2017). doi: 10.21474/IJAR01/3599.
[7]
S. Banerjee and M.G.A. van der Heijden. “Soil microbiomes and one health”. In:
Nature Reviews Microbiology 21 (2023), pp. 6–20. doi: 10.1038/s41579-022-00779-
w. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-022-00779-w.
[8]
Christoph Bleidorn. “Alignment and Mapping”. eng. In: Phylogenomics (2017),
pp. 105–125. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-54064-1_6.
[9]
Vittorio Boscaro et al. “Strengths and Biases of High-Throughput Sequencing Data
in the Characterization of Freshwater Ciliate Microbiomes”. eng. In: Microbial Ecol-
ogy 73.4 (2017), pp. 865–875. issn: 1432184x, 00953628. doi: 10.1007/s00248-016-
0912-8.
105
==PAGE:107==
REFERENCES
[10]
Christian Brinch. “Compositional Data Analysis with Applications in Genomics”.
In: Course 23257 Notes. Technical University of Denmark, 2023.
[11]
Christian Brinch et al. “Long-Term Temporal Stability of the Resistome in Sewage
from Copenhagen”. In: mSystems 5.5 (2020), 10.1128/msystems.00841–20. doi: 10.
1128/msystems.00841- 20. eprint: https://journals.asm.org/doi/pdf/10.1128/
msystems.00841-20. url: https://journals.asm.org/doi/abs/10.1128/msystems.
00841-20.
[12]
M Luz Calle. “Statistical Analysis of Metagenomics Data”. In: Genomics & infor-
matics 17.1 (Mar. 2019), e6. issn: 2234-0742. doi: 10.5808/GI.2019.17.1.e6. url:
https://doi.org/10.5808/GI.2019.17.1.e6.
[13]
Anne Chao. “Nonparametric Estimation of the Number of Classes in a Population”.
eng. In: Scandinavian Journal of Statistics 11.4 (1984), pp. 265–270. issn: 14679469,
03036898.
[14]
Anne Chao and Tsung Jen Shen. “Nonparametric estimation of Shannon’s index
of diversity when there are unseen species in sample”. eng. In: Environmental and
Ecological Statistics 10.4 (2003), pp. 429–443. issn: 15733009, 13528505. doi: 10.
1023/A:1026096204727.
[15]
Philippe Chouvarine, Burkhard Tümmler, and Colin Davenport. “Computational
Approaches for Metagenomic Datasets”. In: Encyclopedia of Metagenomics. Ed. by
Karen E. Nelson. New York, NY: Springer New York, 2014, pp. 1–12. isbn: 978-1-
4614-6418-1. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-6418-1_739-2. url: https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-1-4614-6418-1_739-2.
[16]
Philip T. L. C. Clausen, Frank M. Aarestrup, and Ole Lund. “Rapid and precise
alignment of raw reads against redundant databases with KMA”. In: BMC Bioin-
formatics 19.1 (Aug. 29, 2018), p. 307. issn: 1471-2105. doi: 10.1186/s12859-018-
2336-6. url: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-018-2336-6.
[17]
Wikipedia contributors. Dirichlet distribution. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Dirichlet_distribution. [Online; accessed 1-August-2024]. 2024. url: https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Dirichlet_distribution.
106
==PAGE:108==
REFERENCES
[18]
Jokūbas Daunoras, Audrius Kačergius, and Renata Gudiukaitė. “Role of Soil Micro-
biota Enzymes in Soil Health and Activity Changes Depending on Climate Change
and the Type of Soil Ecosystem”. In: Biology 13.2 (2024). issn: 2079-7737. url:
https://www.mdpi.com/2079-7737/13/2/85.
[19]
Jeff Gauthier and Nicolas Derome. “Evenness-Richness Scatter Plots: a Visual and
Insightful Representation of Shannon Entropy Measurements for Ecological Com-
munity Analysis”. eng. In: Msphere 6.2 (2021). Ed. by Jorge M. Rodrigues, pp. 1–10.
issn: 23795042. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.01019-20.
[20]
Joshua G. Harrison et al. “Dirichlet-multinomial modelling outperforms alterna-
tives for analysis of microbiome and other ecological count data”. eng. In: Molec-
ular Ecology Resources 20.2 (2020), pp. 481–497. issn: 17550998, 1755098x. doi:
10.1111/1755-0998.13128.
[21]
Henrik Hasman et al. “Rapid whole-genome sequencing for detection and charac-
terization of microorganisms directly from clinical samples”. In: Journal of clinical
microbiology 52.1 (Jan. 2014), pp. 139–146. doi: 10.1128/JCM.02452- 13. url:
https://jcm.asm.org/content/52/1/139.
[22]
J. Hausser and K. Strimmer. “Entropy inference and the James-Stein estimator,
with application to nonlinear gene association networks”. In: Journal of Machine
Learning Research 10 (2009), pp. 1469–1484.
[23]
Ian Holmes, Keith Harris, and Christopher Quince. “Dirichlet multinomial mixtures:
Generative models for microbial metagenomics”. eng. In: Plos One 7.2 (2012). Ed. by
Jack Anthony Gilbert, e30126. issn: 19326203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030126.
[24]
Natalie C Knox et al. “The Gut Microbiome as a Target for IBD Treatment: Are We
There Yet?” eng. In: Current Treatment Options in Gastroenterology 17.1 (2019),
pp. 115–126. issn: 1534309x, 10928472. doi: 10.1007/s11938-019-00221-w.
[25]
Maciej K. Konopiński. “Shannon diversity index: A call to replace the original Shan-
non’s formula with unbiased estimator in the population genetics studies”. eng. In:
Peerj 2020.6 (2020). Ed. by Patricia Gandini, e9391. issn: 21678359. doi: 10.7717/
peerj.9391.
107
==PAGE:109==
REFERENCES
[26]
Dirk Lange and Victor Wong. “Metagenomics and the Microbiome”. In: Role of
Bacteria in Urology. Ed. by Dirk Lange and Kymora B. Scotland. Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, 2019, pp. 147–157. isbn: 978-3-030-17541-2. doi: 10.1007/978-3-
030-17542-9_14.
[27]
Joshua I. Levy et al. “Wastewater surveillance for public health”. In: Sci-
ence 379.6627 (2023), pp. 26–27. doi: 10 . 1126 / science . ade2503. eprint:
https : / / www . science . org / doi / pdf / 10 . 1126 / science . ade2503. url: https :
//www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.ade2503.
[28]
Huang Lin and Shyamal Das Peddada. “Analysis of compositions of microbiomes
with bias correction”. eng. In: Nature Communications 11.1 (2020), p. 3514. issn:
20411723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-17041-7.
[29]
Jennifer Lu et al. “Bracken: Estimating species abundance in metagenomics data”.
eng. In: Peerj Computer Science 2017.1 (2017), e104. issn: 23765992. doi: 10.7717/
peerj-cs.104.
[30]
Vanessa R. Marcelino et al. “CCMetagen: Comprehensive and accurate identifica-
tion of eukaryotes and prokaryotes in metagenomic data”. eng. In: Genome Biology
(online Edition) 21.1 (2020), p. 103. issn: 1474760x, 14747596. doi: 10.1186/s13059-
020-02014-2.
[31]
Tara G. Martin et al. “Zero tolerance ecology: improving ecological inference by
modelling the source of zero observations”. In: Ecology Letters 8.11 (), pp. 1235–
1246. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1461 - 0248 . 2005 . 00826 . x. url: https :
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1461-0248.2005.00826.x.
[32]
Josep Antoni Martín-Ferńandez, Javier Palarea-Albaladejo, and Ricardo Antonio
Olea. “Dealing with Zeros”. English. In: Compositional Data Analysis: Theory and
Applications. Department of Computer Science, Applied Mathematics, Biomathe-
matics, and Statistics Scotland, US Geological Survey: John Wiley and Sons, 2011,
pp. 43–58. isbn: 978-0470711354, 978-1119976462, 978-1119976479, 978-1119977612,
978-1283204514. doi: 10.1002/9781119976462.ch4.
[33]
Anders Gorm Pedersen. “Computational Molecular Evolution”. In: Course 22115
Notes Week 6. Technical University of Denmark, 2023.
108
==PAGE:110==
REFERENCES
[34]
Angelo Piga et al. Bayesian estimation of information-theoretic metrics for sparsely
sampled distributions. 2023. arXiv: 2301.13647 [physics.data-an].
[35]
Wenly Ruan et al. “Healthy Human Gastrointestinal Microbiome: Composition and
Function After a Decade of Exploration”. eng. In: Digestive Diseases and Sciences
65.3 (2020), pp. 695–705. issn: 15732568, 01632116. doi: 10.1007/s10620-020-06118-
4.
[36]
Grace B. Russo et al. “Re-Emergence of Poliovirus in the United States: Consid-
erations and Implications”. eng. In: Annals of Neurology 92.5 (2022), pp. 725–728.
issn: 15318249, 03645134. doi: 10.1002/ana.26504.
[37]
Patrick Schober, Christa Boer, and Lothar A Schwarte. “Correlation Coeﬀicients:
Appropriate Use and Interpretation”. eng. In: Anesthesia and Analgesia 126.5 (2018),
pp. 1763–1768. issn: 15267598, 00032999. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000002864.
[38]
Kelly A. Shaw et al. “Dysbiosis, inflammation, and response to treatment: a longitu-
dinal study of pediatric subjects with newly diagnosed inflammatory bowel disease”.
und. In: Genome Medicine 8.1 (2016), p. 75. issn: 1756994x. doi: 10.1186/s13073-
016-0331-y.
[39]
E.J. Stewart. “Growing unculturable bacteria”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 194.16
(Aug. 2012). Epub 2012 Jun 1, pp. 4151–4160. doi: 10.1128/JB.00345-12.
[40]
Sanjeena Subedi et al. “Cluster analysis of microbiome data by using mixtures of
Dirichlet–multinomial regression models”. eng. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society. Series C: Applied Statistics 69.5 (2020), pp. 1163–1187. issn: 14679876,
00359254. doi: 10.1111/rssc.12432.
[41]
Torsten Thomas, Jack Gilbert, and Folker Meyer. “123 of Metagenomics”. In: En-
cyclopedia of Metagenomics. Ed. by Karen E. Nelson. New York, NY: Springer New
York, 2013, pp. 1–11. isbn: 978-1-4614-6418-1. doi: 10.1007/978- 1- 4614- 6418-
1_728-4. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-6418-1_728-4.
[42]
Debra Rose Wilson, Leslie Binford, and Shondell Hickson. “The Gut Microbiome
and Mental Health”. In: Journal of Holistic Nursing 42.1 (2024). PMID: 37082808,
pp. 79–87. doi: 10.1177/08980101231170487. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1177/
08980101231170487. url: https://doi.org/10.1177/08980101231170487.
109
==PAGE:111==
REFERENCES
[43]
D. H. Wolpert and D. R. Wolf. “Estimating functions of probability distributions
from a finite set of samples”. In: Physical Review E 52 (1995). Erratum: Phys.
Rev. E 54, 6973 (1996), p. 6841. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.52.6841. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.52.6841.
[44]
Derrick E. Wood, Jennifer Lu, and Ben Langmead. “Improved metagenomic anal-
ysis with Kraken 2”. eng. In: Genome Biology 20.1 (2019), p. 257. issn: 1474760x,
14747596. doi: 10.1186/s13059-019-1891-0.
[45]
Derrick E. Wood and Steven L. Salzberg. “Kraken: Ultrafast metagenomic sequence
classification using exact alignments”. eng. In: Genome Biology 15.3 (2014), R46.
issn: 14656914, 14656906, 1474760x, 14747596. doi: 10.1186/gb-2014-15-3-r46.
[46]
Yinglin Xia and Jun Sun. “Hypothesis testing and statistical analysis of micro-
biome”. In: Genes & Diseases 4.3 (2017), pp. 138–148. issn: 2352-3042. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.gendis.2017.06.001. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2352304217300351.
[47]
Yinglin Xia, Jun Sun, and Ding-Geng Chen. Statistical Analysis of Microbiome
Data with R. eng. Springer Singapore, 2018, Online–Ressource (XXIII, 505 p. 84
illus., 67 illus. in color, online resource) (unknown). isbn: 9811315337, 9811315345,
9789811315336, 9789811315343.
[48]
Amgad Zaky et al. “The role of the gut microbiome in diabetes and obesity-related
kidney disease”. eng. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences 22.17 (2021),
p. 9641. issn: 16616596, 14220067. doi: 10.3390/ijms22179641.
110
==PAGE:112==
GLOSSARY
Glossary
Terminology
Description
Operational
Taxonomic
Unit
A term used to classify groups of closely related organisms based
on DNA sequence similarity, for example, family, order, genus,
and species. Often used interchangeably with the term “taxa”
High-
throughput
sequencing
Advanced methods, such as Illumina, Ion Torrent, and PacBio,
that enable rapid and simultaneous sequencing of multiple DNA
or RNA fragments for comprehensive genomic and transcriptomic
analyses
16s rRNA
sequencing
A wet-lab method used for identifying and classifying bacteria and
archaea by analysing the sequences of the 16S ribosomal RNA gene
using high-throughput sequencing technologies
Shotgun
sequencing
A wet-lab method used for sequencing entire genomes by randomly
breaking the DNA into numerous small fragments and sequencing
these fragments using high-throughput sequencing technologies
Fragment
A piece of DNA that has been broken down (either naturally or
artificially) from a larger DNA molecule
Read
A single sequence of nucleotides generated by a sequencing ma-
chine during the process of sequencing DNA
Single-end
reads
Sequences generated from only one end of a DNA fragment during
the sequencing process
Paired-end
reads
Sequences generated from both ends of a DNA fragment during
the sequencing process, thereby producing two sets of reads for
each fragment sequenced
111
==PAGE:113==
GLOSSARY
Terminology
Description
Template or
template
sequence
A reference sequence or a known DNA sequence against which
sequencing reads are aligned or compared; it can be a segment of
a genome, a gene, or any specific DNA sequence used for alignment
Reference
genome
A complete or nearly complete sequence of the entire genome of
an organism
Conserved
genomic
regions
Sequences of DNA that are very similar or identical across different
species and that remain unchanged over evolutionary time because
they often play crucial roles in fundamental biological processes
Mapping
The process of assigning DNA sequences to specific locations on
a reference genome or assembly
Alignment
The process of arranging DNA, RNA, or protein sequences to iden-
tify regions of similarity that may indicate functional, structural,
or evolutionary relationships
Consensus
sequence
A stretch of nucleotides that is the most common nucleotides
found at each position among a set of sequences from different
organisms (differentiated by genus, species, strains or any other
operational taxonomic unit (OTU)), and it is obtained by align-
ing multiple reads or sequences (DNA, RNA or proteins) from
those organisms and identifying the most frequently occurring nu-
cleotide at each position in the alignment
Coverage
depth
A measure of the number of times each position in the template
sequence is covered by the reads
Depth
variance
A measure of variability or inconsistency in the number of reads
mapping to different positions along the template sequence, or
the variance in coverage depth for each template sequence that
the reads are mapped to
112
==PAGE:114==
GLOSSARY
Terminology
Description
KMA (K-mer
Alignment)
A bioinformatics tool used for mapping and aligning short DNA
sequences, known as k-mers, to a reference database, facilitating
fast and accurate identification and analysis of genomic data
KmerFinder
A bioinformatic tool developed by the Center for Genomic Epi-
demiology for the prediction of bacterial species using a fast K-mer
algorithm
BacATG
Bacterial ATG database from CGE’s KmerFinder Tool
BacOriginal
Bacterial database made up of complete genomes of 40 different
species, termed original because these are the very genomes that
were used to generate raw reads for synthetic datasets analysed
in the project
Mapped hits
Individual instances where a raw read is mapped to a reference
sequence or template in metagenomic data analysis
Counts
Total number of mapped hits assigned to each taxon, often sum-
marised as an abundance count table or OTU table
Variance
towers
Instances of mapped hits in the KMA output (*.mapstat file)
where the value of depth variance is above 1.5 times of the up-
per interquartile range of the depth variance metric as measured
across all template sequences in the mapstat
Rarefaction
A technique for the comparison of ecological or microbial diver-
sity across different sample sizes by standardising the number of
individuals sampled by means of repeatedly drawing random sub-
samples of individuals from the larger dataset and counting the
number of taxa or specifically species in each subsample, followed
by a graphical representation of species accumulation as a function
of the number of individuals sampled
113
==PAGE:115==
GLOSSARY
Terminology
Description
Species
accumulation
A method used to plot the cumulative number of species detected
as more samples or individuals are added. It helps visualise the
rate of species discovery and assess the completeness of sampling
True richness
The actual number of taxa present in a microbiome environment
or the actual number of taxa for which synthetic data has been
generated
Observed
richness
Total number of taxa present in an abundance table (can also be
just the number of columns where columns represent taxa)
Effective
richness
The number of taxa estimated from an entropy value by applying
exponential function on it
Simplex
a vector space of all possible compositions or sets of proportions
(probabilities) for different categories (such as different species in
microbiome data)
Method of
moments
A way to estimate parameters, like concentration parameter 𝛼in
a Dirichlet distribution, by using the averages and other sample
statistics to match them with the theoretical values expected from
the distribution
Ordination
A statistical technique used to analyse and visualise the relation-
ships among samples and taxa in a low-dimensional space
114
==PAGE:116==
APPENDICES
Appendices
Appendix 1 | Additional Tables and Figures
Description of KMA’s mapstat output file contents
Metric
Description
refSequence
Names of reference sequences
readCount
Number of reads mapped to the template
fragmentCount
Number of fragments mapped to the template
mapScoreSum
Accumulated mapping score or ConClave score
refCoveredPositions
Number of covered positions in the template with
a minimum depth of 1
refConsensusSum
Total number of bases identical to the template
bpTotal
Total number of bases aligned to the template
depthVariance
Variance of the depth over the template
nucHighDepthVariance
Number of positions in the template where depth
is more than 3 standard deviations higher
depthMax
Maximum depth at any position in the template
snpSum
Total number of SNPs
insertSum
Total number of insertions
deletionSum
Total number of deletions
Table 24 :
Description of Metrics in a Mapstat file
115
==PAGE:117==
APPENDICES
Figure 44 :
A KMA Mapstat file structure
116
==PAGE:118==
APPENDICES
Figure 45 :
Krona visualisation of the relative abundances based on Kraken2 hits for sewage samples
117
==PAGE:119==
APPENDICES
Figure 46 :
Sankey flow diagram of abundances from Kraken2 hits for sewage samples. The diagram was made using the Pavian web app.
118
==PAGE:120==
APPENDICES
Figure 47 :
Distribution of CLR-transformed Abundances of Synthetic Data for Set A
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Burkholderia cepacia
Yersinia pestis
Shigella flexneri
Clostridium botulinum
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Helicobacter mustelae
Bacteroides fragilis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Moraxella catarrhalis
Lactobacillus acidophilus
Bacillus subtilis
Listeria monocytogenes
Mycobacterium leprae
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Helicobacter pylori
Clostridium perfringens
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Shewanella oneidensis
Bordetella pertussis
Vibrio cholerae
Helicobacter hepaticus
Nostocoides japonicum
Streptococcus pyogenes
Salmonella enterica
Bacillus cereus
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Mycoplasmoides genitalium
Staphylococcus aureus
Cereibacter sphaeroides
Acinetobacter baumannii
Proteus mirabilis
Enterobacter cloacae
Nocardia asteroides
Legionella pneumophila
Escherichia coli
Haemophilus influenzae
Campylobacter jejuni
Species
CLR Abundance
Arranged by descending species−wise variances across samples
Set A Dirichlet, targeted alpha=10
Based on BacOriginal hits
Distribution of CLR−Transformed Abundances After Mapping
−3
−2
−1
0
1
Helicobacter cinaedi
Phycicoccus endophyticus
Mycobacterium haemophilum
Streptomyces harbinensis
Nocardioides sp
Serinicoccus marinus
Mycobacterium heidelbergense
Microbacterium oxydans
Ruania sp
Dermacoccus nishinomiyaensis
Mycobacterium spongiae
Helicobacter sp
Serinicoccus sp
Aeromicrobium erythreum
Mycobacterium colombiense
Streptomyces sp
Serinicoccus profundi
Shigella flexneri
Mycobacterium conspicuum
Janibacter melonis
Streptomyces fulvissimus
Mycolicibacter hiberniae
Mycobacterium fortuitum
Escherichia sp
Bacteroides fragilis
Ornithinimicrobium flavum
Ornithinimicrobium sp
Shewanella sp
Cellulomonas sp
Mycobacterium stomatepiae
Mycobacterium lepromatosis
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Yersinia pestis
Clostridium botulinum
Helicobacter mustelae
Burkholderia cepacia
Moraxella catarrhalis
Bacillus subtilis
Listeria monocytogenes
Helicobacter pylori
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Lactobacillus acidophilus
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Shewanella oneidensis
Clostridium perfringens
Bacteroides sp
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Bacillus cereus
Bordetella pertussis
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Salmonella enterica
Vibrio cholerae
Streptococcus pyogenes
Mycoplasma genitalium
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Acinetobacter baumannii
Proteus mirabilis
Staphylococcus aureus
Rhodobacter sphaeroides
Legionella pneumophila
Nocardia asteroides
Campylobacter jejuni
Haemophilus influenzae
Escherichia coli
Enterobacter cloacae
Species
CLR Abundance
Based on BacATG hits
119
==PAGE:121==
APPENDICES
Figure 48 :
Distribution of CLR-transformed Abundances of Synthetic Data for Set B
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
Shewanella oneidensis
Mycobacterium leprae
Helicobacter hepaticus
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Enterobacter cloacae
Proteus mirabilis
Helicobacter mustelae
Cereibacter sphaeroides
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Mycoplasmoides genitalium
Campylobacter jejuni
Legionella pneumophila
Clostridium botulinum
Burkholderia cepacia
Nostocoides japonicum
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Acinetobacter baumannii
Salmonella enterica
Bacteroides fragilis
Bacillus cereus
Lactobacillus acidophilus
Helicobacter pylori
Haemophilus influenzae
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Bordetella pertussis
Yersinia pestis
Clostridium perfringens
Listeria monocytogenes
Vibrio cholerae
Moraxella catarrhalis
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Streptococcus pyogenes
Bacillus subtilis
Nocardia asteroides
Shigella flexneri
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Staphylococcus aureus
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Escherichia coli
Species
CLR Abundance
Arranged by descending species−wise variances across samples
Set B Dirichlet, targeted alpha=1
Based on BacOriginal hits
Distribution of CLR−Transformed Abundances After Mapping
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
Shewanella oneidensis
Rhodobacter sphaeroides
Shigella flexneri
Helicobacter mustelae
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Clostridium botulinum
Enterobacter cloacae
Proteus mirabilis
Burkholderia cepacia
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Legionella pneumophila
Mycobacterium lepromatosis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Mycoplasma genitalium
Bacteroides sp
Campylobacter jejuni
Acinetobacter baumannii
Helicobacter pylori
Bacillus cereus
Haemophilus influenzae
Salmonella enterica
Lactobacillus acidophilus
Helicobacter cinaedi
Yersinia pestis
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Mycobacterium haemophilum
Listeria monocytogenes
Vibrio cholerae
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Streptococcus pyogenes
Clostridium perfringens
Bordetella pertussis
Moraxella catarrhalis
Nocardia asteroides
Bacillus subtilis
Staphylococcus aureus
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Phycicoccus endophyticus
Janibacter melonis
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Mycobacterium paraseoulense
Georgenia sp
Propioniciclava sp
Shewanella xiamenensis
Nakamurella multipartita
Mycobacterium shinjukuense
Streptomyces gardneri
Escherichia coli
Mycobacterium mantenii
Nocardia cyriacigeorgica
Dermacoccus sp
Nocardioides sp
Mycobacterium paragordonae
Janibacter indicus
Cellulomonas gilvus
Shigella boydii
Mycobacterium heidelbergense
Bacteroides fragilis
Mycobacterium seoulense
Luteipulveratus mongoliensis
Nocardioides aromaticivorans
Mycobacterium paraterrae
Mycobacterium shigaense
Mycobacterium noviomagense
Mycobacterium lacus
Helicobacter himalayensis
Shigella dysenteriae
Campylobacter sp
Species
CLR Abundance
Based on BacATG hits
120
==PAGE:122==
APPENDICES
Figure 49 :
Distribution of CLR-transformed Abundances of Synthetic Data for Set D
−2
0
2
4
Shigella flexneri
Enterobacter cloacae
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Bacteroides fragilis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Mycoplasmoides genitalium
Legionella pneumophila
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Proteus mirabilis
Yersinia pestis
Nocardia asteroides
Nostocoides japonicum
Bacillus subtilis
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Bordetella pertussis
Escherichia coli
Helicobacter mustelae
Listeria monocytogenes
Clostridium botulinum
Vibrio cholerae
Lactobacillus acidophilus
Staphylococcus aureus
Haemophilus influenzae
Burkholderia cepacia
Acinetobacter baumannii
Helicobacter pylori
Salmonella enterica
Shewanella oneidensis
Clostridium perfringens
Streptococcus pyogenes
Helicobacter hepaticus
Moraxella catarrhalis
Species
CLR Abundance
Set D Sparse Dirichlet, targeted alpha=0.01
Based on BacOriginal hits
Distribution of CLR−Transformed Abundances After Mapping
−4
−2
0
2
4
Enterobacter cloacae
Shigella flexneri
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Bacteroides sp
Helicobacter cholecystus
Mycoplasma genitalium
Yersinia pestis
Bacteroides fragilis
Shigella dysenteriae
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Proteus mirabilis
Legionella pneumophila
Bacillus subtilis
Neisseria meningitidis
Bordetella pertussis
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Nocardia asteroides
Clostridium botulinum
Helicobacter mustelae
Listeria monocytogenes
Vibrio cholerae
Haemophilus influenzae
Streptococcus pyogenes
Staphylococcus aureus
Burkholderia cepacia
Acinetobacter baumannii
Lactobacillus acidophilus
Salmonella enterica
Shewanella oneidensis
Clostridium perfringens
Helicobacter pylori
Moraxella catarrhalis
Escherichia coli
Species
CLR Abundance
Based on BacATG hits
121
==PAGE:123==
APPENDICES
Appendix 2 | Statistical Summaries
KMA hits based linear modeling summary results for entropies and average Euclidean
distances among samples
3.28
3.29
3.30
3.31
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Naive entropy ~ AvgDistance
Fitted values
Residuals
Residuals vs Fitted
 15
 14
 10
3.28
3.29
3.30
3.31
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Chao−Shen entropy ~ AvgDistance
Fitted values
Residuals
Residuals vs Fitted
 15
 14
 10
3.28
3.29
3.30
3.31
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Hausser−Strimmer entropy ~ AvgDistance
Fitted values
Residuals
Residuals vs Fitted
 15
 14
 10
3.300
3.305
3.310
3.315
3.320
3.325
3.330
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Wolpet−Wolf entropy ~ AvgDistance
Fitted values
Residuals
Residuals vs Fitted
 15
 14
 10
3.28
3.29
3.30
3.31
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
NSB entropy ~ AvgDistance
Fitted values
Residuals
Residuals vs Fitted
 15
 14
 10
3.285
3.290
3.295
3.300
3.305
3.310
3.315
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Piga's entropy ~ AvgDistance
Fitted values
Residuals
Residuals vs Fitted
 15
 14
 10
122
==PAGE:124==
APPENDICES
Table 25 :
KMA hits based linear modeling summary results for entropies and average Euclidean distances among samples
Model
Estimate
Std_Error
t_value
Pr
Multiple
R-
squared
Naive.entropy ∼AvgDistance
0.009979
0.027618
0.361
0.723
0.008094
Chao.Shen ∼AvgDistance
0.009954
0.027623
0.360
0.723
0.00805
Hausser.Strimmer ∼AvgDistance
0.009979
0.027619
0.361
0.723
0.008093
Wolpert.Wolf ∼AvgDistance
0.008076
0.028101
0.287
0.777
0.005136
NSB ∼AvgDistance
0.009877
0.027643
0.357
0.726
0.007917
Piga ∼AvgDistance
0.009715
0.027684
0.351
0.730
0.007638
123
==PAGE:125==
APPENDICES
Kraken2 hits based linear modeling summary results for entropies and average Euclidean
distances among samples
4.677
4.678
4.679
4.680
4.681
4.682
4.683
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Naive entropy ~ AvgDistance
Fitted values
Residuals
Residuals vs Fitted
15
14
9
4.677
4.678
4.679
4.680
4.681
4.682
4.683
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Chao−Shen entropy ~ AvgDistance
Fitted values
Residuals
Residuals vs Fitted
15
14
9
4.677
4.678
4.679
4.680
4.681
4.682
4.683
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Hausser−Strimmer entropy ~ AvgDistance
Fitted values
Residuals
Residuals vs Fitted
15
14
9
4.755
4.760
4.765
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Wolpet−Wolf entropy ~ AvgDistance
Fitted values
Residuals
Residuals vs Fitted
15
14
9
4.679
4.680
4.681
4.682
4.683
4.684
4.685
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
NSB entropy ~ AvgDistance
Fitted values
Residuals
Residuals vs Fitted
15
14
9
4.682
4.683
4.684
4.685
4.686
4.687
4.688
4.689
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Piga's entropy ~ AvgDistance
Fitted values
Residuals
Residuals vs Fitted
15
14
9
124
==PAGE:126==
APPENDICES
Table 26 :
Kraken2 hits based linear modeling summary results for entropies and average Euclidean distances among samples
Model
Estimate
Std_Error
t_value
Pr
Multiple
R-
squared
Naive.entropy ∼AvgDistance
-0.0006585
0.0111962
-0.059
0.9538
0.0002161
Chao.Shen ∼AvgDistance
-0.0006585
0.0111962
-0.059
0.9538
0.0002161
Hausser.Strimmer ∼AvgDistance
-0.0006585
0.0111963
-0.059
0.9538
0.0002162
Wolpert.Wolf ∼AvgDistance
-0.001755
0.011750
-0.149
0.8831
0.001393
NSB ∼AvgDistance
-0.0006824
0.0112027
-0.061
0.9522
0.0002318
Piga ∼AvgDistance
-0.0007196
0.0112226
-0.064
0.9497
0.0002569
125
==PAGE:127==
APPENDICES
Table 27 :
Bootstrap Statistics for Individual Sample Entropies based on KMA hits
without variance towers. Estimated using Piga et al.’s method
Original
Bias
Std. Error
t1*
6.531842
-0.015095422
0.02020629
t2*
6.494470
0.038436401
0.03255792
t3*
6.611336
-0.053444310
0.03740795
t4*
6.547139
-0.016218126
0.03833983
t5*
6.498807
0.020744673
0.02122981
t6*
6.524591
0.023549197
0.03594570
t7*
6.482324
0.042234540
0.01719393
t8*
6.519821
0.006734955
0.01820972
t9*
6.529844
0.001245620
0.01917048
t10*
6.529253
0.016754691
0.02591615
t11*
6.538026
-0.012645525
0.01713354
t12*
6.521701
0.003578373
0.01087880
t13*
6.547203
-0.005643353
0.02611161
t14*
6.530619
0.001216544
0.02754186
t15*
6.568235
-0.036238652
0.02687625
t16*
6.538224
-0.016270289
0.01532871
t17*
6.521419
0.001270358
0.02255308
t18*
6.533081
0.006904169
0.03494037
126
==PAGE:128==
APPENDICES
Table 28 :
Summary Statistics of Bootstrapped Entropy Results For Each Sample Estimated Using KMA Hits Without Variance Towers
and Piga et al.’s method
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Sample 4
Sample 5
Sample 6
Sample 7
Sample 8
Sample 9
Min.
6.482
6.494
6.525
6.482
6.482
6.520
6.482
6.494
6.494
1st Qu.
6.501
6.521
6.531
6.501
6.504
6.526
6.520
6.521
6.522
Median
6.521
6.527
6.538
6.530
6.522
6.531
6.527
6.529
6.532
Mean
6.517
6.533
6.558
6.531
6.520
6.548
6.525
6.527
6.531
3rd Qu.
6.529
6.544
6.595
6.543
6.536
6.559
6.532
6.538
6.537
Max.
6.547
6.611
6.611
6.611
6.547
6.611
6.547
6.547
6.568
Sample 10
Sample 11
Sample 12
Sample 13
Sample 14
Sample 15
Sample 16
Sample 17
Sample 18
Min.
6.525
6.482
6.499
6.520
6.482
6.482
6.494
6.482
6.494
1st Qu.
6.532
6.522
6.522
6.529
6.522
6.522
6.521
6.520
6.523
Median
6.538
6.529
6.527
6.534
6.530
6.538
6.527
6.523
6.535
Mean
6.546
6.525
6.525
6.542
6.532
6.532
6.522
6.523
6.540
3rd Qu.
6.545
6.532
6.532
6.545
6.547
6.538
6.531
6.528
6.561
Max.
6.611
6.547
6.538
6.611
6.568
6.568
6.538
6.568
6.611
127
==PAGE:129==
APPENDICES
Appendix 3 | Programming Resources
The following is a description of all the scripts used in this project, either for
process automation or for visualisation and plotting purposes. The scripts can be
downloaded from the Github repository.
Data Generation, Mapping and Abundance Quantification
Python Scripts Descriptions
read_generator_Dirichlet_alpha1.py:
generates DNA raw reads in FASTQ
format with an underlying symmetric Dirichlet distribution and a concentration
parameter (𝛼) of 10
read_generator_Dirichlet_alpha10.py: generates DNA raw reads in FASTQ
format with an underlying symmetric Dirichlet distribution and an 𝛼of 1
read_generator_sparseDirichlet.py:
generates DNA raw reads in FASTQ
format with an underlying sparse Dirichlet distribution and an 𝛼of 0.5
read_generator_sparseDirichlet2.py:
generates DNA raw reads in FASTQ
format with an underlying sparse Dirichlet distribution and an 𝛼of 0.01
combine_bracken_report.py: combines all individual sewage samples’ Bracken-
coverted Kraken2 reports and makes a single .csv file of abundance counts based
on the original Kraken2 hits (excludes the bracken estimates of counts)
Bash Scripts Descriptions:
For Synthetic data
bacOriginal_KMA.sh: applies kma index on a set of 40 annotated complete
bacterial genomes to make the BacOriginal database and then maps the synthetic
128
==PAGE:130==
APPENDICES
raw reads to that database, outputs .res, .fsa and .mapstat files
bacATG_KMA.sh:
maps the synthetic raw reads to the bacdb (bacATG
database from CGE’s KmerFinder tool), outputs .res, .fsa and .mapstat files
For Sewage data
run_KMA_Sewage.sh: runs KMA on sewage raw reads and maps them to the
bacATG database, outputs .res, .fsa and .mapstat files
run_Kraken2_Sewage.sh: runs Kraken2 on sewage raw reads and maps them
to the bacterial and plasmid libraries from NCBI, outputs .report files
run_Bracken_Sewage.sh: runs Bracken on the individual reports obtained from
Kraken2 run for the quantification of abundances from Kraken2 hits, outputs .csv
with abundance counts
Data Processing, Analytics and Visualisation
R Scripts Descriptions:
Cleaning and R packages
PACKAGES.R: installs and loads all the requisite R packages and libraries used in
the project, in one go
CLEANER.R: provides functions for cleaning of species names in an abundance
dataset
Alpha and entropy estimators
ALPHA_ESTIMATORS.R: provides functions to estimate concentration parameter
values for each category in an abundance dataset, applies alpha Star and alpha
Star NSB from Piga et al. as well as alpha estimation using method of moments
129
==PAGE:131==
APPENDICES
ENTROPY_ESTIMATORS.R: provides functions to estimate entropy using six dif-
ferent methods, as given by Piga et al., Nemenmann et al., Wolpert and Wolf,
Hausser and Strimmer, Chao and Shen, and Shannon (1948)
For Synthetic data
SYNTHETIC_UNMAPPED.R: analytics and visualisation for unmapped raw reads
for the four sets of synthetic data which was generated using python scripts above
SYNTHETIC_MAPPED.R: analytics and visualisation for mapped counts and align-
ment counts using mapstat files output from the KMA run for synthetic data
SYNTHETIC_ENTROPIES.R: entropy estimations for synthetic abundance datasets
using mapped counts and alignment counts before and after removing variance
towers
For Sewage data
SEWAGE_KMA.R: analytics and visualisation for mapped reads using mapstat files
output from the KMA run for sewage data
SEWAGE_KRAKEN2.R: analytics and visualisation for mapped reads using com-
bined bracken output csv from the Kraken2 run for sewage data
SEWAGE_KMA_ENTROPIES.R: entropy estimations and other related analytics for
sewage abundance datasets using mapped counts from KMA hits before and
after removing variance towers
SEWAGE_KRAKEN2_ENTROPIES.R: entropy estimations and other related analyt-
ics for sewage abundance datasets using mapped counts from Kraken2 hits
SNR_KMA+KRAKEN2.R: signal-to-noise-ratio analysis of CLR-transformed abun-
dances for KMA and Kraken2 hits, followed by entropy estimations after removing
high-noise, low-signal taxa counts (based on SNR)
130
==PAGE:132==
APPENDICES
SEWAGE_BOOTSTRAPPING.R: bootstrapping of KMA abundances using Piga et
al.’s method for KMA hits after removing variance towers
131
==PAGE:133==
APPENDICES
Pseudocode for synthetic reads generation using Python
The following pseudocode explains how synthetic FASTQ reads were generated
from complete genomes of 40 bacterial species, ensuring underlying Dirichlet-
Multinomial distributions with different values of concentration parameters.
Table 29 :
Steps and descriptions for generating and processing genomic reads
Step
Description
Import Libraries
• Import the required libraries: os, csv, random, numpy
(as np), and SeqIO from Bio
Define Functions
• Define a function generate_random_reads to create
random reads from a genome sequence:
1. Get the length of the genome sequence
2. Initialize an empty list to store the reads
3. For each read (from 0 to num_reads):
– Pick a random read length within the given
range
– Choose a random start position within the
genome sequence
– Extract the read from the genome sequence
– Add the read to the list
4. Return the list of reads
Set Parameters
• Define the folder containing genome files:
"BacOriginal genomes"
• Define a fixed read lengths: 200
• Define a fixed number of reads per genome: 1000
• Set the total number of samples: 20
• Define the folder for saving sample files, for example,
for sparse Dirichlet define as "sparseDirichlet".
132
==PAGE:134==
APPENDICES
Step
Description
Load Genome
Sequences
• Initialise an empty dictionary to store genome sequences
• For each file in the genome folder:
1. Get the species name by removing the file extension
2. Open the file and read the genome sequence
3. Store the genome sequence in the dictionary with
the species name as the key
Define Sparse
Dirichlet Function
• Define a function
generate_sparse_dirichlet_counts to create sparse
counts for each species:
1. Generate initial counts using a Dirichlet
distribution
2. Scale these counts to the desired range
3. Round the counts to integers
4. Return the rounded counts
Generate Reads
and Statistics for
Samples
• Initialise a list to store statistics for all samples
• For each sample (from 1 to num_samples):
1. Initialise dictionaries for reads, counts, and stats
for the sample
2. Generate the number of reads for each species using
the sparse Dirichlet function
3. For each species:
– Get the number of reads for the species
– Generate the reads from the genome sequence
– Store the reads and their count in the
respective dictionaries
– Add the count to the sample stats.
4. Add the sample stats to the list of all samples’ stats
133
==PAGE:135==
APPENDICES
Step
Description
Save Reads to
FASTQ Files
• Create the sample folder if it doesn’t exist
• For each sample:
1. Define the filename for the sample FASTQ file
2. Open the file for writing.
3. For each species:
– For each read:
∗Create a read ID.
∗Format the read and its quality scores into a
FASTQ entry
∗Write the FASTQ entry to the file
Save Statistics to
CSV
• Define the filename for the CSV file
• Get the field names for the CSV file from the sample
stats
• Open the CSV file for writing
• Write the header to the CSV file
• For each sample:
1. Add the sample number to the sample stats
2. Write the sample stats to the CSV file
Completion
Message
• Print a message indicating that all sample statistics
have been saved
134
