==PAGE:1==
Optimization and Experimental
Realization of Hybrid Field Source for
Magnetic Conﬁnement of Plasma
Written by:
Mathias Lendal - s183553
Main supervisor:
Andrea Roberto Insinga
Co supervisors:
Søren Bang Korsholm
Riccardo Ragona
Department of Energy Conversion
and Storage
Technical University of Denmark
July 15, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
i
==PAGE:3==
ii
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Plasma in toroidal systems will never be stable if not properly rotated. Diﬀerent conﬁgurations add
rotations to stabilize the plasmas, such systems are tokamaks and stellarators. Stellarators are of great
interest in the ﬁeld of plasma physics as they can provide a stable solution to plasma conﬁnement,
but the construction of their coils are usually expensive and tricky. Methods for constructing simpler
stellarators using permanent magnets have been proposed, using material density optimizations or
greedy algorithms. The methods have provided some valuable tools to designing stellarators.
In this thesis, a novel method for optimizing magnetic conﬁguration based on strength and position is
used to solve optimal magnet conﬁgurations for a linear device, and 2 types of stellarators. The method
used is a adjoint method, which provides a gradient descent approach to minimize the error between
the target ﬁeld and the ﬁeld generated by magnets. A linear device is build from the optimization and
tested to verify the simulations results. 3 methods of discretizing magnets is also shown. A suitable
solution for the linear device was found, but not for a quasiaxisymmetric stellarator.
iii
==PAGE:5==
iv
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:6==
Resum´e
Plasmaer i toridale kamre kan aldrig være stabile hvis ikke man roterer dem for at stabilisere dem.
Dette gøres i tokamaker og stellaratorer. Stellaratorer er vigtige i læren om plasmafysik siden at de er
en stabil løsning til plasma indeslutning, men at bygge deres spoler er som regel dyrt og svært. Forskere
har fundet metoder til a konstruerer nemmere stellaratorer hvor man bruger permanente magneter.
Disse metoder inkluderer materiale densitets optimiseringer eller greedy algorithms. Metoderne har
givet nogle vigtige metoder til at designe stellaratorer.
Denne tese bruger en ny metode til i stedet at optimerer konﬁgurationen af magneter gennem deres
styrke of placering. Metoden bliver brugt til at optimere konﬁgurationen for en linear device og 2
typer af stellaratorer. Metoden er en adjoint metode, som er en gradient descent til a minimerer
fejlen mellem feltet fra magneterne og feltet som ønskes. Den linear device bliver bygget og tested
for at veriﬁcere simulerings resulaterne. 3 metoder til a diskretisere magneterne vil ogs˚a blive vist.
En passende løsning til den linear device er fundet, en tilsvarende løsning var ikke lige s˚a godt for
quasiaksesymmetrisk stellarator.
v
==PAGE:7==
vi
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:8==
Preface
This thesis have been submitted to obtain the title, Master of Science in Engineering Physics at the
Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The thesis corresponds to 30 ECTS points, and the work
was carried out from end February 2024 to start August 2024.
I would like to thank my main supervisor Andrea Insinga for many useful discussions regarding the
algorithm of the project and for many great discussions regarding various problems and physics,
providing valuable insights.
Further I would like to thank Søren Bang Korsholm and Riccardo Ragona, for useful discussions
regarding plasma side of things, and help with getting started to receive the target ﬁeld as well as
how to build the plasma device. I also thank Søren for facilitating this project to start with it was
exactly the project I dreamt of. Overall it felt safe to have complete package of experts to support
discussions and provide valuable inputs when needed.
I will further thank Rasmus Bjørk for providing computational resources and some equipment for
testing.
Furthermore I want to thank DTU physics and DTU Energy, for providing places and resources for
developing and testing the physical device. It was a dream come true to solve an optimization problem
and further be able to build and experiment with it, showing and feeling the real experience of going
from problem statement all the way to a ”ﬁnished product”. The project have been fast paced, but
very giving to say the very least. A lot of support and interest have been given from many partners,
it helped the project tremendously.
At last I want to thank Magnetz.dk for sponsoring the magnets in the project by giving a reasonable
discount and a fast delivery, helping to make the experimental part possible.
vii
==PAGE:9==
viii
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:10==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Fusion energy and the world energy crisis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Plasma conﬁnement and stellarator design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Outline of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theory and Methods
7
2.1
Stellarator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
The quasiaxisymmetric stellarator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Maxwells equation and physical principles of the magnetic ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Magnetic form, demagnetization and generated ﬁeld strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Optimization framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.1
Landau lifshitz equation in a micromagnetic system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.2
Gradient based optimization of magnetization for a continous system . . . . . .
16
2.4.3
The objective function and its gradient
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4.4
Litterature review of other frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5
Numerical simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.5.1
Continous setup in COMSOL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.5.2
Discrete setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.5.3
Semi analytical target systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.5.4
Shape optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.6
Creation of 3D pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.7
Measurement setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3
The linear device
35
3.1
First iteration of linear device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.1.1
First discretization of linear device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.1.2
Compromising the design choice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.1.3
Continous model and discretized full model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2
Segmented magnets with problematic convergence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3
Linear device with dipole magnets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4
Replacement of magnets in model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.5
Stability to perturbations in position and magnetization norm . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.6
Final design: details and layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.7
Construction and Measurements from linear device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4
Stellarators
57
4.1
The classical stellarator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.1.1
The setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.1.2
Ideal case, classical stellarator in continuous model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.1.3
Classical stellarator model using real coils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
ix
==PAGE:11==
Contents
4.1.4
Classical stellarator correcting fringing ﬁeld and including ports . . . . . . . . .
61
4.1.5
Final remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.2
Stellarator – Muse target ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.2.1
Continuous model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.2.2
Dipole model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.2.3
Summarizing thoughts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5
Conclusion and outlook
71
6
Appendix
A
Vector projections
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.1
Vector projections for cylindrical system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.2
Vector projections in toroidal coordinates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B
The magnetic grid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C
Scaling of parameters in simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
D
Control of imported ﬁeld and poincar´e plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E
Domain operator in comsol and discretization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
x
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:12==
Nomenclature
Physics Constants
µ0
Vacuum permeability
1.256 × 10−6 N A−2
ε0
Vacuum permittivity
8.854 × 10−12 F m−1
Physics Symbols
N
Demagnetization tensor
α
Damping coeﬃcient
ι
Rotational transform
ωc
Cyclotron frequency
s−1
ρ
Filter function
ρ
Volume charge density
C m−3
⃗B
The magnetic ﬂux density
T
⃗E
Electric ﬁeld
V m−1
⃗H
Magnetic ﬁeld
A m−1
⃗J
Current density
A m−2
⃗JF
Free Current density
A m−2
⃗m
Magnetic dipole moment
A m2
⃗M
Magnetization
A m−1
⃗x
Position vector
m
A
Area
m2
h, w, d Height, Width, Depth
m
I
Current
A
L
Length
m
m
Mass
kg
q
Charge
C
==PAGE:13==
t
Time
s
V
Volume
m3
vi
Speed in direction i
m s−1
Operators
⟨··⟩
Volumen average of ··
∝
Proportional to
⃗ei
Unit vector pointing in direction i
d
di
Total derivative with respect to i
∂i
Partial derivative with respect to i
⃗∇·
Divergence
⃗∇×
Rotation
⃗∇k
Gradient of k
S
Objective
Toroidal directions
θ
Poloidal direction
ζ
Toroidal direction
R
Major radial direction
r
Minor radial direction
Cylindrical direction
ϕ
Azimuthal direction
r
Radial direction
z
Axial direction
Boozer coordinate directionsFGBoozer coordinate directions
φ
Boozer toroidal angle
ϑ
Boozer poloidal angle
s
Boozer ﬂux label
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Fusion energy and the world energy crisis
In 2015 UN developed the 17 goals of sustainability, which aims not only to provide end goals of society,
but furthermore to provide suitable directions of projects and research. Among these ambitious and
commonly good goals, is number 7, which states that we should strive to obtain ”Aﬀordable and Clean
Energy”.
Figure 1.1: The 17 Sustainable Development Goals made by United Nations.
In modern times we have and are actively developing on these options. We have solar, fuel cells, wind
and hydro power among others. The common problem for solar wind and hydro power is that suﬃcient
energy is only generated when the circumstances permit. These circumstances as irradiation from sun
or the power of the wind is not controllable.
It is therefore important to either realize suﬃcient
energy storage or suﬃcient on-demand energy production or most likely a combination of both. If
2
==PAGE:16==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.2: (a): Showing typical reaction of ﬁssion power with uranium. Uranium multiplies rapidly
and gives heat and radiation. Picture borrowed from [1] (b): Showing the reactivity as function of
temperature. Figure borrowed from [2].
fusion energy plants got realized, they would contribute to directly solve the goal of ”Aﬀordable and
Clean Energy”. If enough usable energy could be realised, this energy could potentially be key to
unlock processes, which could help contribute to example, ”Clean water and sanitation”, ”Sustainable
cities and communities”, ”Responsible consumption and production”, ”Climate action” as well as
”Life below water and on land”, to name some. An atttractive option for on demand energy is nuclear
power.
1.2
Plasma conﬁnement and stellarator design
Because reaction which produces for example alpha or beta decay can spark up a new set of reactions
which will rapidly multiply as in ﬁgure 1.2. The only limiting factor if no intervention is done (for
example by control rods) is when the reactions runs out of reactants. The huge advantage of fusion
power is that fusion power relies on controlled reaction. Observing ﬁgure 1.2b, it can be seen that
fusion reactions are temperature dependent and with a clear optimum in reaction. The consequence of
this, is that if a fusion power plant would run ”too hot”, the reaction gets limited by this temperature
and the reactions will then less. The less reactions which takes place, the less energy gets generated in
the system, and the temperature will then decrease to the optimum point. Ultimately a fusion reaction
cannot explode, which is a concern of ﬁssion power. Furthermore fusion relies on isotopes of hydrogen,
namely deuterium and tritium. Tritium can be done by using lithium in the fusion chamber, while
deuterium can be harvested directly from seawater. If the fusion technology becomes able enough,
then a deterium-deterium reaction can be controlled, in which case the abundance is extremely high[3].
Fission relies on uranium and thorium isotopes, which is less common. In conclusion fusion energy
processes are of great interest for both resource usage and safety concerns.
The ﬁrst fusion reaction was observed in 1934 and was a major breakthrough as it lay a foundation
for the energy generation[4]. Today the challenge lies not in producing a fusion reaction, it relies in
producing the reaction steadily without losing too much energy to the surroundings. The real question
of interest is then, how do one most optimally conﬁne fusion plasmas such that a lasting fusion reaction
can be sustained? This is not a trivial question, one needs to account for the instabilities a plasma
can experience, like turbulence or simple cross B drifts. The instabilities can be controlled, by using
magnetic conﬁnement, where the plasmas which consist of charged ions follows the magnetic ﬁeld.
The trick is then to construct the magnetic ﬁeld such that the instabilities are limited and the ions
3
==PAGE:17==
1.3.
Outline of the thesis
are conﬁned. In the business of fusion design, multiple designs exist. 2 of the most compelling are the
tokamak design and the stellarator design. The compelling nature of these 2 toroidal designs is that
one creates a rotation around the magnetic axis which acts to limit instabilities from drifting particles.
The big advantage of the tokamak is that a plasma is easier to heat up, while stellarator design easier
keeps the plasma stable. The reason for this diﬀerence in stability is that a tokamak is constructed to
use the internally generated current from the the plasma, while the stellarator operates independently
of this current. A typical issue with stellarators is that stellarators needs to change the elongation
of the ﬂux surfaces, which can require very delicate toroidal ﬁeld coil designs, and thereby increasing
engineering costs of the device. The big advantage of a stellarator design is that the magnetic ﬁeld
is independent (sometimes mostly) of the current generated by the plasma inside the chamber. This
is because the plasma is manipulated in such a way that no toroidal current is needed to rotationally
transform the ﬂux surfaces. The rotational transform is needed to limit instabilities, as it ensures
rotation, which limits cross B drifts see section 2.1. There exist 3 ways to have a rotational transform,
one is to have a current in the inner axis of the magnetic ﬁeld, as done in a tokamak. The second way
is to make sure the magnetic ﬂux surfaces elongates, when we follow the magnetic ﬁeld around in the
torus (usually done in a stellarator). The last is to make sure that there is a torsion of the magnetic
ﬁeld. The 3 ways can be mixed as one considers, but will generate diﬀerent target magnetic ﬁelds.
Diﬀerent codes exist for these purposes such as simsopt and pyQSC [5, 6].
For the generated magnetic ﬁelds to be truly interesting in a research scheme, one should be able to
build them. The natural predecessor to building is to have methods in order to simulate the magnetic
ﬁeld one targets, and make sure that the methods developed are reliable, and translates into realisable
designs. In nature 2 ways of generating magnetic ﬁelds exists, one is to have free currents in wires or
coils or moving plasmas. The second is to have bound currents in material, like permanent magnets.
Stellarators have traditionally been built with planar ﬁeld coils designed in exotic shapes in order to
realize the exotic shape of the stellarator ﬁeld. Designs with permanent magnets have been optimized
with diﬀerent methods [7–10], this project aims to add yet another method to the palette used to
design permanent magnet stellarators.
1.3
Outline of the thesis
This project aims to assist stellarator prototyping to study plasma physics. This is while simultane-
ously this project directly addresses a novel magnetic optimization technique in order to model the
magnetic conﬁguration. The project will focus on stellarator design with permanent magnets, and
ﬂat toroidal ﬁeld coils, as the ﬁnal proposed design is a stellarator which is only meant to be used
for studying plasma. The original goal of the thesis was to make a stellarator stencil ready, but the
project instead aims to verify the method for plasma device designs.
Chapter 2: Theory and methods
We will start by considering the cross B drift happening on charged particles in toroidal symmetric
magnetic ﬁelds, the implications of this, and how we can alleviate the problem by introducing a
rotational transform. The quasiaxisymmetric (QA) ﬁeld is introduced as a solution to generate a
rotational transform.
Then Maxwells equations is presented to see the governing equations solved in the system, the magne-
tization concept is introduced and put into the context of the governing equations. The framework for
optimizing the magnetic conﬁguration using the gradient based optimization approach is introduced
in detail. It is described why the adjoint method works, and some of the basic relations is introduced.
The relevant objective for the method is introduced, and an important quantity ( ⃗Meﬀ) for the algo-
rithm is derived directly. A brief description of other frameworks solving the same problem rounds
the theory in order to lay a foundation of works in the ﬁeld.
The methodology is presented in a meticulous manner for repeatability. 3 methods for discretization
is introduced and a simple algorithm to create a linear device 3D print base stencil.
4
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:18==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
Chapter 3: The linear device
The linear device target ﬁeld and basic setup is inspected, a couple of ﬁrst solutions with their re-
spective problems will then be seen. Afterwards a continuous base model is created for comparison
to the discrete models. We will with a threshold method that 1 of the discretization methods hits an
unsuitable local minima. Then by presenting dipole approximations, a boost in performance and con-
verged is reached. A ﬁrst good discretized case is presented and a discussion about demagnetization
is attend. The problem is alleviated by sweeping multiple magnets at once in the threshold method,
hence ﬁnding the most suitable magnet for the job. A short investigation sensitivity is included. A
ﬁnal stable design will then be presented, constructed and tested to verify the simulations done.
Chapter 4: Stellarators
Moving on to stellarators, a classical stellarator is optimized in an ideal case, a case with toroidal
coils, and a case with toroidal coils and ports. We will noted discrepancies in the convergence of the
cases. Following, a stellarator with the MUSE conﬁguration is optimized in a continuous model and
thereafter with dipoles. It is seen that a we can create and solve 10 000 magnetic dipoles with almost
as good performance as the continuous model. We will also discuss that the targeted ﬁeld was not
what was expected, and one possible source of error is found.
Chapter 5: Conclusion and outlook
At last a conclusion and outlook is carried out to wrap up the project and show some of the highlights
in the development of the method. Furthermore reﬂect on why the convergence is not better than it
is for some of the cases. We will also discuss what the next relevant strategies for the methodology is.
5
==PAGE:19==
1.3.
Outline of the thesis
6
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2
Theory and Methods
2.1
Stellarator
This section will describe why a plasma in a toroidal symmetry is prone to instabilities, how these
instabilities can be mitigated, the stellarator solution to addressing the problem and how the stellarator
ﬁeld was practically obtained in the project.
Cross B drifts in a plasma
Considering the guiding center theory of the plasma, charged particles will gyrate around their guiding
center with a frequency of
ωc = |q| B
m
called the cyclotron frequency. Here, q is the charge of the particle, B is the magnetic ﬁeld strength,
and m is the mass of the particle. The relevant drifts to consider are the grad-B drift and the ⃗E × ⃗B
drift.
Imagine that a torus is ﬁlled with a plasma as in Figure 2.1 (left). The magnetic ﬁeld strength in a
circular shape is 1/r dependent, and we assume a perfect toroidal circular ﬁeld. The 1/r dependence
means there exists a gradient in the magnetic ﬁeld strength ∇B. The grad-B drift is deﬁned as follows:
⃗v∇B = mv2
⊥
2q
⃗B × ∇B
B2
(2.1)
where v⊥is the speed in the direction perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld. As can be seen from the
ﬁgure, ⃗B = B⃗eζ. However, the gradient of B is ∇B = −|∇B|⃗eR because of the 1/r dependence. The
cross product then gives a drift ⃗v∇B ∼sign(q)⃗ez. A separation then occurs between the positive and
negative ions in the torus. One obvious problem is that the charged are not conﬁned as they will move
up/down and hit the wall. Since positive ions will drift up and negative ions will drift down, there is
a charge separation between them, creating a potential and an electric ﬁeld ⃗E = −E⃗ez. One could
imagine that then there will be a equilibrium distance between positive and negative charges where
the system is stable, but the ⃗E × ⃗B drift is given by
⃗vE =
⃗E × ⃗B
B2
(2.2)
The combination of ⃗E and ⃗B gives a drift for all particles that is outward radially in the ⃗eR direction
(Figure 2.1 (right)). There exists no equilibrium in this magnetic conﬁguration, and something more
is needed to contain a plasma within a torus.
7
==PAGE:21==
2.1.
Stellarator
Figure 2.1: (left): Visualizing cross drifts in a toroidal system with positive and neutral charges.
Grad B drift results in particle separation. (right): Separated particles, E cross B drift results in an
unstable situation.
Plasma and conﬁnement principles
The extra step needed for a plasma to be stable is to rotate the plasma around. This is achieved by
rotating the magnetic ﬁeld around. The rotation of the magnetic ﬁeld is described by a rotational
transform.
There exist three ways to produce a rotational transform around a toroidal magnetic axis.
The
rotational transform describes how many poloidal turns a magnetic ﬁeld makes per toroidal turn. The
expression for the rotational transform[11]:
ι = 1
q = 1
2π
Z L
0
µ0J
2B0
−(cosh η −1) d′ −τ

dl
cosh η −N
(2.3)
where J is the current density on the magnetic axis, η describes the elongation of the ﬂux surfaces,
d′(l) is the tilting angle with respect to the curvature vector, ⃗b is the unit vector along the magnetic
ﬁeld, N is a topologically generated integer, and τ is the torsion. (All details can be found in [11]).
A rotational transform measures the number of poloidal to toroidal turns a magnetic ﬁeld line takes
[12]:
ι = 2π RBθ
rBϕ
where R, r is deﬁned as in ﬁgure 2.1. In (2.3), it can be seen that inside the integral, which describes
the rotational transform along l, there are three terms, hence the three ways to generate the twisting
of the magnetic ﬁeld. The ﬁrst is to have a toroidal current (this is what tokamaks relies on). The
second is to elongate ﬂux surfaces and rotate them (stellarators relies on this). The third is to generate
a torsion, which can be done by making the magnetic axis non-planar.
When designing a plasma conﬁnement system, one does not have to rely solely on one of the three
mechanism but can use combinations. For example, Wendelstein 7-X uses both the torsion τ and
8
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:22==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
the elongation η, and the National Compact Stellarator Experiment (NCSE) uses all three. When
we apply the rotational transform, we remove the problem of the drifts because the ﬁelds twists, the
charges follows the ﬁeld and twists and we avoid charge separation.
2.1.1
The quasiaxisymmetric stellarator
The stellarator type we aim to construct is called a quasiaxisymmetric stellarator (QA). This section
addresses what quasiaxisymmetry means and brieﬂy how to describe it. The topics of creating quasi-
symmetric stellarator conﬁgurations and optimizing ﬁelds for speciﬁc metrics are topics worthy of
their own projects. We will not go into great detail about the quasiaxisymmetric conﬁguration as the
project is not trying to optimize or generally construct the ﬁeld but uses already made tools [5, 6]
to obtain the ﬁeld to be created. To get the general idea of the quasi-symmetric stellarator, Boozer
coordinates is introduced as well as VMEC, the concept of ﬂux surfaces, and Poincar´e plots to view
ﬂux surfaces. Lastly, it is described how the ﬁeld is extracted from the already established frameworks.
A Quasisymmetric (QS) system means that if the magnetic ﬁeld strength B =
 ⃗B
 is conserved
in one direction in a special coordinate system then the particles behave as if the system is truly
symmetric. The ﬁeld vector ⃗B does not need to be symmetric [6, 13]. Quasiaxialsymmetry, compared
to axisymmetric systems (tokamaks), oﬀers the advantage that an axisymmetric system needs an
electric current inside the nested ﬂux surface, and this might be hard to sustain [13]. A quasiaxial
system does not need a current as the rotational transform is created from elongating the nested ﬂux
surfaces.
A problem with QS is that it has been unclear if QS is realizable in a volume and not only on isolated
surfaces. It has until recent developments, been unclear to how high a precision QS could be achieved.
A precise quasisymmetry has been achieved in [14], which shows a quasiaxisymmetric conﬁguration
that has been created with much higher precision in a signiﬁcant volume. It has very small amplitudes
on symmetry-breaking modes, straight contours in the ϑ −φ Boozer plane, and good transport.
To understand what is meant with straight contours, we need to introduce the special coordinate
system: magnetic coordinates, speciﬁcally Boozer coordinates. Boozer coordinates are a special set of
coordinates where quasisymmetry is achieved when B is symmetric in this coordinate system. Thus,
in the Boozer coordinate system, the symmetry of B is crucial, as it guarantees the conﬁnement of
particles to appear truly symmetrical. It is also called quasi for a reason, the system is not truly
symmetrical, but it is very close to, and this is good enough.
Boozer coordinates consist of 3 coordinates, (s, ϑ, φ), where s is the ﬂux label indicating which ﬂux
surface we are on, ϑ is the Boozer poloidal angle, and φ is the Boozer toroidal angle.
In the Boozer coordinate system, one can decompose the magnetic ﬁeld into straight-line coordinates,
resulting in straight lines that form symmetry in the ϑ, φ plane for any given ﬂux surface label s. This
coordinate system allows for a direct construction that can be transformed back into the laboratory
system [15–17].
In Figure 2.2b, we observe the quasi-axisymmetric stellarator conﬁguration. From Figure 2.2a, it is not
apparent that any symmetry is present. However, when considering the case in Boozer coordinates,
as seen in Figure 2.2b, the following can be observed: a straight line is formed along φ continuously.
In this coordinate system, the construction is indeed almost continuously symmetric. The strength of
the magnetic ﬁeld depends only on the ﬂux label and the Boozer poloidal angle, B = B(s, φ), but is
totally independent on ϑ.
To understand the symmetry-breaking modes, we need to examine the description of the magnetic
ﬁeld in Boozer coordinates. In Boozer coordinates, the magnetic ﬁeld strength can be written as a
series:
B (r, ϑ, φ) =
X
m,n
Bm,n (r) cos (mϑ −nφ)
where Bm,n are the Fourier modes [6]. Some of these modes are called symmetry-breaking modes, and
9
==PAGE:23==
2.1.
Stellarator
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.2: (a): The last closed ﬂux surface visualized in a 3D Cartesian grid. (b): magnetic ﬁeld
strength visualized in VMEC coordinates (s, ϕ, ζ) for s = 0.5. The units on the colorbar is in Tesla,
and corresponds to the same coloration in (a).
One normally uses contour lines, but the general
tendency is captured. In more precise conﬁgurations the areas are less wavy and even more straight.
(c): Rotational transform as a function of the ﬂux surface s. There exists a rotational transform in
all ﬂux surfaces. (d) Showing nested ﬂux surfaces. r describes a radius, but can easily be converted
to s = r/ max (r).
it is crucial to minimize these modes to maintain quasisymmetry as closely as possible; this is what
simsopt aims to achieve. A symmetry-breaking mode leads to a loss of neoclassical transport, where
D ∼ε3/2
n
∼

Bm,n
B
3/2
[18]. Here, D represents the loss and εn is referred to as the helical ripple.
When the particles have good transport metrics, they move around in the ﬂux surfaces. A transport
refers to the movement in the ﬂuxes due to guiding centers and collisions when no turbulence is present
[6].
Good transport implies that particles move around the ﬂux surfaces with minimal collisions,
leading to eﬀective conﬁnement. In Figure 2.2c, we observe that a rotational transform exists for all
ﬂux surfaces hence mitigating drifts.
10
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:24==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
Such results make a quasiaxisymmetric stellarator an intriguing choice for magnetic conﬁnement of
plasma, making it a relevant ﬁeld to explore further using gradient-based optimization methods like
the algorithm in this project.
To create a Quasisymmetric conﬁguration, the approach would be to use a quasi symmetric construc-
tion [6] to create an initial guess for ﬁeld optimization [5], and then optimize to achieve the desired
ﬁeld. In this work, we skip these steps and directly extract the magnetic ﬁeld using a provided input
ﬁle [19]. The constructed ﬁelds are independent of scale and strength [6], allowing us to scale the size
and strength of the ﬁeld as needed. If a Quasisymmetric (QS) stellarator is constructed properly, it
gives rise to nested ﬂux surfaces as seen in Figure 2.2d. A Poincar´e plot in a stellarator conﬁguration
veriﬁes that the magnetic ﬁeld remains on the ﬂux surfaces as it traverses the torus. Poincare plots are
made from the following reasoning, imagine a magnetic ﬁeld line traversing through the torus many
times. When the ﬁeld line coincides with a rθ plane at a constant ζ, a dot is drawn. Over the course
of many turns, one should then create a ﬂux surface. Doing this for many ﬂux surfaces, one should
then get back to the initial ﬂux surfaces.
Extraction of the ﬁeld
The magnetic ﬁeld we are working with is extracted from the MUSE stellarator. Initially, we start
with an input ﬁle (in VMEC), which at the time of writing can be directly obtained from GitHub[19].
To perform the extraction, one needs a Unix-based system with VMEC and Simsopt [5] installed.
Simsopt is a framework capable of optimizing stellarator ﬁelds under various physical conditions,
including the speciﬁcation of coils and MHD equilibria. In this project, the equilibrium conﬁguration
is deﬁned by the VMEC equilibrium code, and the optimization has been previously conducted using
the STELLOPT code [8].
The MHD equilibrium is represented in the VMEC format, which is speciﬁcally used for MUSE among
other formats available. In this project, we do not perform direct calculations of the magnetic ﬁeld;
instead, we utilize an input ﬁle with speciﬁc conﬁgurations to generate the MUSE ﬁeld. The VMEC
format is essential for this purpose. To install the necessary classes, one typically requires a Unix
system, or alternatively, Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL).
In a standard procedure, one could start with Boozer coordinates to create a quasisymmetric stellarator
using tools like pyQSC, and then proceed with STELLOPT for coil optimizations. Instead in this case,
The input ﬁle was fed into the VMEC object within Simsopt. The .run() function was executed, followed
by using vmec compute geometry() from the VMEC diagnostics package to obtain coordinates x, y,
z and magnetic ﬁeld components Bx, By, Bz, along with other relevant ﬁeld quantities. Subsequently,
the data was written into a csv ﬁle, making the ﬁeld ready for use. Therefore, no ﬁeld construction
was necessary from my part. The vmec compute geometry() provided every quantity one could think
oﬀ. The function was computed with values of s ∈[0, 1], φ ∈[0, 2π], ϑ ∈[0, 2π] in a 90 × 90 × 90
equally spaced grid.
11
==PAGE:25==
2.2.
Maxwells equation and physical principles of the magnetic ﬁeld
2.2
Maxwells equation and physical principles of the magnetic
ﬁeld
The four fundamental relations of electromagnetism are the four Maxwell equations:
⃗∇• ⃗E = ρ/ε0
(2.4a)
⃗∇• ⃗B = ⃗0
(2.4b)
⃗∇× ⃗E = −∂t ⃗B
(2.4c)
⃗∇× ⃗B = µ0 ⃗J + µ0ε0∂t ⃗E.
(2.4d)
Where Gauss’s law (2.4a) states that electric ﬁeld lines will diverge from a positive charge distribution
ρ > 0 and converge towards a negative charge distribution ρ < 0, and ε0 is the permittivity of free
space. (2.4b) states that no magnetic monopoles exist in isolation. (2.4c) is called Faraday’s law and
states that a changes in magnetic ﬁelds create electric ﬁelds. The beauty of the curl operator is that
it requires the electric ﬁeld lines to be rotationally symmetric, thus forming closed loops. Equation
(2.4d) is called Amp`ere’s law with Maxwell’s correction and states that a magnetic ﬁeld will form
from a current or a change in the electric ﬁeld. Again, the curl operator ⃗∇× requires magnetic ﬁelds
to be rotationally symmetric around the current density ⃗J and the electric ﬁeld change ∂t ⃗E.
Magnetostatic approximation The toroidal ﬁeld (TF) coils we consider are using direct current
(DC). The permanent magnets (PM) are also time-invariant. The whole problem can thus be consid-
ered magnetostatic. Consequently ∂t ⃗B = 0, ∂t ⃗E = 0. The four equations now read:
⃗∇• ⃗E = ρ/ε0
(2.5a)
⃗∇• ⃗B = ⃗0
(2.5b)
⃗∇× ⃗E = ⃗0
(2.5c)
⃗∇× ⃗B = µ0 ⃗J.
(2.5d)
In the magnetostatic case, the four Maxwell’s equations become uncoupled. In this work, the plasma
is magnetically conﬁned, so the governing equations of interest are only (2.5b) and (2.5d). To account
for permanent magnets, we must consider the concept magnetization ⃗M.
The magnetization ⃗M
We are not only considering magnetic ﬁelds generated by the currents in the toroidal ﬁeld coils, but
also those produced by permanent magnets. The concept of magnetization ⃗M in a material is crucial.
In classical magnetic materials, magnetization arises from the small loops of electrons forming circular
currents. A current loop creates a magnetic dipole[20]. This results in a magnetic dipole moment
deﬁned as ⃗m = IA⃗en, where I is the current in the loop, A is the cross-sectional area through which
the magnetic ﬂux passes, and ⃗en is the normal to this area. The magnetic ﬁeld from a dipole is
expressed analytically as:
⃗B(⃗m, ⃗x) = µ0
4π
3 (⃗m • ⃗ex)⃗ex −⃗m
x3
(2.6)
The expression tells us that the magnetic ﬁeld at a point can be modulated by changing the dipole
position ⃗x, its strength ⃗m, or the angle of the dipole ⃗m · ⃗er. This will become important because in
the ﬁnal optimization scheme, the ﬁrst 2 quantities are varied.
Considering a collection of dipoles in a material, the magnetization ⃗M can be deﬁned as:
⃗M =
X
i
⃗mi
V
12
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:26==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
where V is the volume large enough to average out the magnetic moments. The magnetic dipoles
originate from currents bound in the material. Therefore, it is convenient to consider the magnetic
ﬁeld ⃗H, generated only from the free currents, such that:
⃗∇× ⃗H = ⃗JF
(2.7)
The bound currents contribute to magnetization in a magnetic material ⃗∇× ⃗M = ⃗Jb. The total
magnetic ﬁeld is the sum of all currents, resulting in the magnetic ﬁeld being expressed as:
⃗B = µ0

⃗H + ⃗M

(2.8)
in the picture of free and bound currents. A combination of H ﬁeld and the magnetization in the
material M.
Superposition
To simplify the collected load that should be calculated at once, from the magnetic sources in the
system, we consider the superposition of the magnetic ﬁeld. We consider this medium to be vacuum,
since one would normally work with an evacuated vessel, this is an almost exact approach.
In a
vacuum, the magnetic ﬁeld is simply a superposition of all the magnetic ﬁeld sources, and as such, in
the vacuum regime we can consider
⃗B = ⃗B0 + ⃗B1 + ... + ⃗BN
(2.9)
where ⃗Bi is the magnetic ﬁeld coming from source i. The magnetic ﬁeld measured at a single point is
the sum of contributions from all the toroidal ﬁeld coils: ⃗BTF = ⃗BTF,0+ ⃗BTF,1+. . .+ ⃗BTF,N, and from
all the permanent magnet sources: ⃗BPM = ⃗BPM,0 + ⃗BPM,1 + . . . + ⃗BPM,N. A more elegant approach
is to consider the total ﬁeld at any point as simply the sum of contributions from the permanent
magnets and the TF coils:
⃗BTot = ⃗BTF + ⃗BPM.
(2.10)
This is a particularly nice way to express the generated magnetic ﬁeld in the simulation method, as it
can account for both sources. The result is that the sources can be split into their respective physics
interfaces, and reduce computational times since the TF does not change in time but the PM does.
The magnetic ﬁeld lines are always radially symmetric. While a current generates a magnetic ﬁeld
symmetrically around itself, the magnetic ﬁeld from material magnetization requires the magnetic
ﬁeld to pass through the material itself. In the context of a stellarator, the toroidal ﬁeld can only be
created by the toroidal ﬁeld coils, and the role of a permanent magnet is to perturb these toroidal
ﬁeld lines. These perturbations should force the toroidal ﬁeld lines to bend into a quasi-axisymmetric
shape or any other desired ﬁeld conﬁguration. The magnets themselves cannot generate the toroidal
ﬂux but can create the poloidal ﬂux [21]. Hence ﬂux surfaces seen is not a rotated magnetic ﬁeld, but
the intersection between many ﬁeld lines and a constant ζ angle θ plane.
2.3
Magnetic form, demagnetization and generated ﬁeld strength
Magnets with high aspect ratios, results in a high self-demagnetization ﬁeld. This brings the magnets
closer to their intrinsic coercivity than necessary, causing demagnetization issues. This was discovered
late in the project but provides a crucial insight.
To get a better idea of what will be meant with the term high self-demagnetization and unstable,
Figure 2.3 shows the typical hysteresis loops for magnets. Magnets are usually magnetized by ap-
plying a magnetic ﬁeld and when the applied magnetic ﬁeld is turned back to zero ﬁeld, a remanent
magnetization Br = µrM is what the magnet will have of magnetization. When the magnet from
its remanent state gets an applied ﬁeld anti parallel to the magnetization, it will enter the region of
13
==PAGE:27==
2.3.
Magnetic form, demagnetization and generated ﬁeld strength
the demagnetization curve. In this region it will have a lower magnetization, but the diﬀerence is
marginal, until one gets close to the intrinsic coercivity Hci. At this point the magnet will be fully
demagnetized. This applied ﬁeld can come from both external sources like coils, but also from the
magnetic ﬁelds produced by the dipoles inside the magnet.
The important part about demagnetization is that a magnet will from all the dipole points inside the
material generate a magnetic ﬁeld, which turns around and returns at the surface of the magnet. This
can lead to self-demagnetization if the magnet is very wide and long, compared to its depth.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.3: Prototypical B-H curve, (a), and M H curve, (b), representing the magnetic behaviour of
permanent magnets along the easy axis of magnetization. Diﬀerent geometrical features of the curves
are associated with parameters commonly reported in permanent magnet data sheets. Reprinted with
permission [22]
To illustrate the importance of the aspect ratio, Figures 2.4a and 2.4b show how the aspect ratio aﬀects
stability and how magnetic volume inﬂuences experienced strength in a targeted volume. Figure 2.4a
shows the case where a wide magnet’s height is increased. As the height increases, the magnetic ﬁeld in
the square volume also increases due to the larger magnetized volume. However, the demagnetization
ﬁeld, meaning the µ0H ﬁeld experienced in the volume, decreases from -1.2 T to -0.88 T, resulting
in greater stability. This increase in the experienced magnetic ﬁeld within the cube volume could
potentially compromise the design, as the magnet may become too strong. Conversely, Figure 2.4b
illustrates the reverse tendency for a smaller magnet.
In Figure 2.4b, we start with a small magnet with a low aspect ratio and then increase its side lengths.
As the side lengths increase, the experienced ﬁeld in the observation block gets stronger due to the
increased magnetized volume. However, the magnet also becomes more demagnetized. These ﬁgures
show that for this linear device, the best option is a small magnetic volume with a low aspect ratio.
In systems where more magnetic ﬁeld is needed, the corresponding operation would be to increase the
height of the magnet towers.
From the arguments presented, we can conclude that the 10 x 10 x 1 mm³ magnets are intrinsically
unstable in their normal hardness. Therefore, when using the lowest hardness of magnets, we should
select a form factor with an aspect ratio closer to a cube than a thin slab. This is why the 10 x 10
x 1 mm³ magnets were replaced with 4 x 4 x 4 mm³ cube magnets. Fortunately, the methodology
implemented in COMSOL allowed for easy swapping of the magnet form factor, resulting in the
favorable outcomes seen in section 3.4. This approach also opens the possibility of using 1 x 1 x 1
14
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:28==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.4: (a): Parametric sweep of magnet shape plotted besides each other. left showing a magnet
with a low aspect ratio, giving a high self demagnetization and a low ﬁeld in a cube placed a distance
away. Middle showing a magnet with a higher aspect ratio, giving a lower demagnetization. The
magnet have a higher volume and produces a stronger ﬁeld away from the magnet. right, a even
higher aspect ratio produces a even lower demagnetization. The higher volume produces a higher
ﬁeld.
(b): left, a cube magnet, giving low demagnetization, and produces a low ﬁeld because of
small volume. Middle magnet have lower aspect ratio, giving higher demagnetization. Higher volume
gives a higher experienced magnetic ﬁeld in test volume. Right magnet have even lower aspect ratio
producing a even higher demagnetization. This whilst producing higher magnetic ﬁeld. Magnetic ﬁeld
strength is a function of volume. Demagnetization is a function of aspect ratio. (a): It is a bad idea
to choose a ﬂat magnet when many other magnetic ﬁelds can interact.
mm³ magnets, although this would require deploying more dipole sites, possibly in multiple layers.
Such a conﬁguration could potentially distribute the magnetization more evenly across more nodes,
yielding better results. Furthermore, one might also reduce the radius of the magnet cape and possibly
also the total magnetic volume.
15
==PAGE:29==
2.4.
Optimization framework
2.4
Optimization framework
2.4.1
Landau lifshitz equation in a micromagnetic system
In general the Landau-Lifshitz (LL) equation is used to determine dipole dynamics in micromagnetic
systems. The LL equation describes how a magnetic dipole is inﬂuenced by an eﬀective ﬁeld ⃗Heﬀ.
The full Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation is typically written as: [23]
d⃗m
dt = −γ ⃗m × ⃗Heﬀ+ α⃗m ×

⃗m × ⃗Heﬀ

(2.11)
where the ﬁrst term is a torque that tends to align the magnetization with the magnetic ﬁeld. The
second term is a dissipative ﬁeld which damps the magnetization until it aligns with the eﬀective ﬁeld
experienced by the magnetic moment. γ and α is damping coeﬃcients.
2.4.2
Gradient based optimization of magnetization for a continous system
This section is highly inspired by [24], but the paper contains even more details than will be discussed
here.
There exist two types of problems: a forward problem and an inverse problem. In a forward problem,
one knows the direct formulation and can, for example, solve for a magnetic ﬁeld ⃗H from a magnetiza-
tion ⃗M as the formalism exists directly. In an inverse problem, one aims to solve for the magnetization
⃗M (the design variable) given a desired target ﬁeld ⃗H. The magnetic inverse problem can be solved
for very simple cases such as a sphere [25].
Consider a problem with a domain Rm of permanent magnetic material which is intended to produce a
ﬁeld in a region Rg (Figure 2.5). One way to solve the inverse problem is a gradient-based optimization
method based on the Landau-Lifshitz formulation [24]. The method can optimize ⃗M in Rm to achieve
a desired ﬁeld ⃗H in Rg.
If the demagnetization tensor is denoted N, then the ﬁeld ⃗H depends on the magnetization by the
following relation:
⃗H = N ⃗M.
(2.12)
At any point, as a function of all points existing in Rm, the magnetic ﬁeld can be expressed as:
⃗H (⃗x) =
Z
Rm
dV ′N (⃗x, ⃗x′) ⃗M (⃗x′) .
(2.13)
Brieﬂy, N is a linear operator that serves as the link between magnetization and the magnetic ﬁeld.
It is useful for discussing properties of the algorithm but it is not computed directly. In this project,
COMSOL is used to compute ⃗H from ⃗M within the ﬁnite element framework, bypassing N. There
exist methods for calculating the demagnetization tensor in real space. N can also be computed within
the ﬁnite element framework [26], but this is not our focus.
The method belongs to the class of adjoint methods, which are often employed in solving PDE-
constrained optimizations. There are typically two variables, x ∈R and p ∈R, related by g(x, p) = 0,
and a functional f(x, p) that measures the a merit of interest. The essence of an adjoint method is to
utilize the transpose of the derivative of the relation, denoted as gT
x , to compute the gradient of the
merit with respect to p, denoted as dpf [27]. In the context of our problem, one can view p as a design
variable and x as a target variable, analogous to M (design variable) and H (target), respectively. The
adjoint method provides a direct approach to solving the inverse problem of minimizing f with respect
to the design variable by considering the transpose of the derivative of the relation with respect to
the target value.
A key point is that the operator N is symmetric, i.e., N = N T . Considering the system in Figure 2.5,
one can deﬁne an eﬀective magnetization of
16
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:30==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
⃗Meﬀ
h
⃗H∗i
=

⃗∇⃗HS

⃗H∗,
(2.14)
where ⃗H∗refers to the starting point. One can express the eﬀective ﬁeld, using the chain rule, as:
⃗Heﬀ=

⃗∇⃗
MS

⃗
M ∗= N T 
⃗∇⃗HS

N ⃗
M ∗= N T ⃗Meﬀ
h
N ⃗M ∗i
.
(2.15)
The chain rule allows us to switch from a derivative with respect to ⃗M ∗to one with respect to
N ⃗M ∗= ⃗H, albeit at the cost of considering N T . The last equality sign in (2.15) follows directly from
(2.14). In loose notation, the chain rule is expressed as
 ∇⃗
MS

⃗
M = d ⃗
M
d ⃗H
 ∇⃗HS

⃗H, where d ⃗
M
d ⃗H = N T .
Figure 2.5: Showing a schematic of the Real
and virtual system, and how these are coupled
in a minimization scheme. The ﬁgure is copied
with permissions from [24]
As discussed earlier, the symmetry of the operator in
the adjoint method (N = N T ) allows us to write
⃗Heﬀ
h
⃗M ∗i
= N T ⃗Meﬀ
h
⃗H∗i
= N ⃗Meﬀ
h
N ⃗M ∗i
(2.16)
This allows us to solve a virtual system directly in
COMSOL using the ﬁnite element framework.
We
now understand how to construct a virtual magneti-
zation and how to directly solve for the eﬀective ﬁeld
⃗Heﬀ. Additionally, we already know how to solve for
⃗H given a magnetization, as described in (2.12).
The virtual system is considered because in the
Landau-Lifshitz framework, a magnetic dipole evolves
when it experiences an eﬀective magnetization ﬁeld
⃗Heﬀ, as seen in (2.11). This framework can also be
applied to magnetization, and the change in magneti-
zation:
d ⃗M
dt = α ⃗M ×

⃗M × ⃗Heﬀ

(2.17)
which is minimized when ⃗M ∥⃗Heﬀ, meaning ⃗M ×
⃗Heﬀ= ⃗0, and dM/dt remains unchanged. This is con-
sistent with the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation in
(2.11), albeit without the torque term. The expres-
sion conserves the magnitude of ⃗M. In this project,
the magnetization does not need to be ﬁxed but opti-
mized, allowing for a more relaxed advancement:
d ⃗M
dt = α ⃗Heﬀ
(2.18)
Equation 2.18 does not preserve the norm of the magnetization. It is noted that the magnitude of
⃗Heﬀdirectly aﬀects the rate of change of the magnetization.
The method employs the Landau-Lifshitz equation in conjunction with adjoint methods to conduct
a complete adjoint optimization of the inverse magnetic problem. Using the design variable ⃗M to
optimize towards the target variable ⃗H through a virtual system. The directly applicable equations
for our COMSOL optimizations are (2.14) and (2.18). The rest of the explanation pertains to how
one can construct the virtual system in the adjoint method and solve it directly with COMSOL.
Discussed in [24], there are two classes of problems that this method addresses. One involves placing
the optimal solution at inﬁnity, where the objective is to align the ﬁeld parallel to the eﬀective
17
==PAGE:31==
2.4.
Optimization framework
ﬁeld, and ⃗Heﬀis not necessarily zero at every point. However, when the optimal solution coincides
within our constraints, the optimal solution has a gradient of zero, resulting in the virtual system
approaching zero at every point. This gradual approach to zero leads to slower and slower advancement
of magnetization, which can become computationally challenging. One possible approach to mitigate
this is by considering α = α(t, ⃗Heﬀ).
The method also operates on the principles of gradient descent, with no guarantee of reaching the
global minimum as the solution.
2.4.3
The objective function and its gradient
The appropriate objective function to measure the convergence of the inverse magnetic problem is
S =
s
1
Vgap
Z
Vgap
dV
 ⃗H −⃗HTot

2
=
s ⃗H −⃗HTot

2
∝
s ⃗B −⃗BTot

2
(2.19)
The expression 2.19 represents the squared diﬀerence between the targeted ﬁeld ⃗B and the ﬁeld
generated by the magnets and coils ⃗BTot. This formulation, when normalized, corresponds to the
standard deviation between the two ﬁelds. The choice of squared average arises because in a sym-
metric system, the average diﬀerence between the ﬁelds would be zero. Alternatively, one could use
the absolute diﬀerence between the ﬁelds, but squared error is preferred for its ease in performing
functional derivatives.
Note that this objective function is not uniquely deﬁned as the measure of how close the generated
ﬁeld is to the target ﬁeld. One could imagine diﬀerent formulations of the objective function as long
as they satisfy two conditions: 1. It is a functional of both the target ﬁeld and the generated total
ﬁeld. 2. It monotonically increases or decreases as the two ﬁelds become more identical.
In section 2.4.2, it was described that in the Landau-Lifshitz framework, the gradient of the objective
function directly inﬂuences the magnetization in the eﬀective system.
If we consider the Taylor
expansion of a functional, where we take a small step of ϵg, the expansion can be written as [28]:
F [n + εg] = F [n] + dF [n + εg]
dε

ε=0
ε + 1
2
d2F [n + εg]
dε2

ε=0
ε2 + ...
where F is the functional, n and g are functions, ϵ is a very small scalar (ϵ ≪1), and dF [n+ϵg]
dϵ
is
the functional derivative. By this deﬁnition, if we choose to ignore the second-order error correction
O(ϵ2) and reorder the terms, we obtain:
F [n + εg] −F [n] −O
 ε2
=
Z δF
δn εgdx = dF [n + εg]
dε
(2.20)
which can be used directly to calculate dF [n+ϵg]
dϵ
, the functional derivative. Using expression (2.19) as
the basis for (2.20), the expression becomes:
1
V
Z  ⃗H −

⃗Htot + ε⃗g

2
dV −1
V
Z 
⃗H −⃗Htot
2
dV −O
 ε2
=
Z
δS
δ ⃗Htot
ε⃗gdV
In order to solve this, some manipulation is needed. Since we are working with vector quantities,
we recognize that the norm is expressed by the dot product ∥⃗u∥2 = ⃗u • ⃗u. An easy rule to use is to
see that |⃗u −⃗v|2 = |⃗u|2 + |⃗v|2 −2⃗u • ⃗v, which is appealing because the dot product is commutative
(⃗u • ⃗v = ⃗v • ⃗u).
Using this, we thus get
1
V
R 
    ⃗H

2
+
 ⃗Htot + ε−→g

2
−2 ⃗H •

✟✟
⃗Htot + ε−→g

dV −1
V
R 
    ⃗H

2
+
 ⃗Htot

2
−✘✘✘✘✘
2 ⃗H • ⃗Htot

dV −O
 ε2
=
R
ε
δS
δ ⃗Htot • −→g dV .
18
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:32==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
Collecting all the terms into the integral,
1
V
Z  ⃗Htot + ε−→g

2
−2ε ⃗H • −→g −
 ⃗Htot

2
dV −O
 ε2
=
Z
ε δS
δ ⃗Htot
• −→g dV
Using the norm of the dot product of the dot product again, the expression expands to:
1
V
Z 
✚✚✚
✚
 ⃗Htot

2
+✟✟✟
✟
ε2|−→g |2 + 2ε ⃗Htot • −→g −2ε ⃗H • −→g −
✚✚✚
✚
 ⃗Htot

2
dV −✟✟✟
O
 ε2
=
Z
ε δS
δ ⃗Htot
• −→g dV
In the expression, the second-order error term counteracts ϵ2∥⃗g∥2, further simplifying the expression
to:
1
V
Z 
2ε ⃗Htot • −→g −2ε ⃗H • −→g

dV =
Z
ε δS
δ ⃗Htot
• −→g dV
Reducing the expression further, moving out the comon factor we thus get:
1
V
Z
2ε

⃗Htot −⃗H

• −→g dV =
Z
ε δS
δ ⃗Htot
• −→g dV
And from this expression, we can read out the functional derivative. The reason why we went through
all the trouble of ﬁnding this functional derivative was because we know from (2.14) that the eﬀective
magnetization comes from the gradient of the objective.
⃗Meﬀ=
δS
δ ⃗Htot
= 2
V

⃗Htot −⃗H

(2.21)
To comment on this result: we started from the magnetic inverse problem, where the objective func-
tion minimizes when the magnetic system replicates exactly the target ﬁeld in both distribution and
strength. The objective function is intuitive in the sense that it measures the average diﬀerence be-
tween the ﬁelds in the volume. Now, (2.21) is intuitive in that our gradient is simply the diﬀerence
between the targeted ﬁeld ⃗H and the produced ﬁeld ⃗Htot. The factor of 2 can be ignored, as we could
have deﬁned the objective with a factor of 1/2 in front. The same goes for the volume, which is also
a constant, and therefore although we can see a unit mismatch, it is just a scaling and the eﬀective
magnetization is ⃗Meﬀ= ⃗Htot −⃗H.
The objective in (2.19) is intuitive but inadequate in one obvious manner. The objective only measures
an average over the whole volume, and thus it is good at indicating the instantaneous average errors.
However, when observing the ﬁeld lines of the magnetic ﬁeld, they may still appear good (see the
results section). The point is that the average does not indicate whether the solution has converged
suﬃciently necessarily. Of course we should not omit it completely.
One might consider reformulating the objective to include the path through the geometry as a weight-
ing factor. However, in this project, it is assumed that the combination of the objective function and
Poincar´e plots are suﬃcient for assessing convergence.
2.4.4
Litterature review of other frameworks
Stellarator design with permanent magnets is not an entirely new topic and various methods already
exists for the optimization. Some of the papers will be reviewed shortly because some of the approx-
imations used by these papers are also used in this work, otherwise some inspiration can be found
further. The methods are very diﬀerent in their approaches. This section is also to motivate a bit that
permanent magnet stellarators have scientiﬁc interest and that the method presented in this work is
a novel method solving the problem.
19
==PAGE:33==
2.4.
Optimization framework
The section highlights methods based on linear least-squares method [29], greedy permanent mag-
net optimization algorithm (GPMO) [10], and topology optimization [9] called FAMUS. Even more
methods exists [21, 30].
One thing all the frameworks do have in common, which is fault from my side is that when they
evaluate the raw performance of the device, meaning how close the generated ﬁeld is on the optimized
ﬁeld, they evaluate an objective
fB =
ZZ
S

⃗B • ⃗n
2
dS
where they evaluate what is the outgoing ﬂux perpendicular to the last closed ﬂux surface. They thus
evaluate a surface integral objective while we are evaluating a volume integral. The ideal case is that
one have nested ﬂux surfaces where the only magnetic strength is in the parallel direction to the ﬂux
surfaces. It is an ill-posed problem to only consider ﬁnding ⃗M, because there exists inﬁnite number of
distributions that almost produce the same magnetic ﬁeld. The advantage of ill-posed is that one can
put constraints on magnet direction, and otherwise minimize the magnetic volume, or other quantities
with regularization [29]. In our framework, the volume is already ﬁxed, but the magnetization of the
magnets are not, giving a similar problem on another design quantity. It is not done in this project,
but one could put regularization on the objective, as to minimize the magnetization strength or limit
it. Otherwise one could also regularize the magnetization to be close to either 0 or µ0Br and punish
everything which is not.
Recent works combines approaches where continuous and discrete reﬁnements are included together[31],
based on GPMO or where the target ﬁeld and magnet optimizations are combined at once[32] based
on FAMUS. Their methods will not be covered. However combined methods are able to produce even
lower error on fB while lowering costs on magnets.
In the method of least-squares optimization, they constraint magnetization to µ0M ≤1.4 T, to account
for real magnets. They also claim that the algorithm is not formulated as a nonlinear optimization
problem, they note that nonlinear optimization problems are fragile because there exists local minima
which is not the global minima, giving a insensitivity to the initial conditions. If we dwell a little
on this observation, the problem we are solving is a nonlinear optimization in regards to S, and it is
then expected that the solution is expected to be sensitive to initial conditions. In the project we are
only using one type of initial condition, but one could try some diﬀerent ones, as random patterns
for example. In the paper, they do also optimize for a magnetization ⃗M with a ﬁxed volume V . In
the optimization, they solve for M,not uniformly distributed, but convert it to a uniform distribution,
by changing the height of magnets by linear scaling, similar to what I suggest later on the dipole
approach. This method is the one closest to the method used in this project, but is diﬀerent since
they formulate least-squares optimization in terms of linear sums, which they can formulate as a ma-
trix problem that can be least squares optimized. In contrast we are formulating an adjoint method
using a gradient approach. Interestingly the paper, describe Halbach equivalent methods, where it is
only the rotation which is changed in the method, which is also something, this method is able to do
through the usage of (2.17). The method was formulated in 2021.
A newer method (2023) uses a greedy algorithm to determine the placement of the magnets. The
advantage of this algorithm is that it natively contains the correct magnetization, and minimizes
directly the error with correct magnetic pieces. The method can start with an empty set of magnets
and iteratively adding the element that mostly minimizes the objective at each iteration. In this paper
they found solutions which was very satisfying seen from a fB perspective. The paper optimized the
MUSE conﬁguration, with better results on the objective compared to FAMUS and fewer magnets
used. Conceptually this method is very diﬀerent from our approach. The method is in principle a
decision tree, the only variables are whether the magnet is pointing inwards or outwards and what
position the magnet should be placed in.
The last method is the topology optimization (2020), which goes under the acronym FAMUS (Flexible
20
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:34==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
Advanced Magnets Used for Stellarators). In contrast to optimizing a magnetization in a ﬁxed volume,
optimizing for a volume with a ﬁxed magnetization. In this paper they are using dipoles for their
optimizations, which resonates ﬁnely with our similar approach. The diﬀerence is that we are using a
magnetization which goes between −M and M, while they are optimizing the density in the positions,
where the density ρ = ±1.
The method is based on a an analytical gradient on the density of
magnetization, using also regularization on density and port placement, in order to make the problem
more well behaved. FAMUS is also very likely to ﬁnd local minima and thus the authors point that
a good initial condition on the density is extremely important. They point that it is no surprise
since there is 16384 variables in their optimization. The point by this is that, it will for this speciﬁc
method, which in some regard looks like FAMUS on the properties that the initial conditions is played
more with. Another interesting feature of the FAMUS is that, when going to more realistic design
on their elements (dipoles), they threshold the density to create full density dipoles and 0 dipoles by
removing dipoles with ρ ∼0, this is not unlike what we do when using a threshold. Although the idea
was not inspired from FAMUS, FAMUS points towards the methodology being sensible for converting
from optimal to real design. In the method they also use a penalization of the values between 0 and
1 for the density, and regularize the algorithm to consider mostly full or empty spots. This is not
something we have in our algorithm, but could be an interesting addition. The FAMUS algorithm
showed promising results for optimizing permanent magnet stellarators. In the design of MUSE, they
use FAMUS with annealing to alleviate from each convergence to the next [8].
2.5
Numerical simulations
When referring to variables within COMSOL, they are written in the texttt format. It is assumed
that the reader is familiar with COMSOL syntax, where Hx would be represented as mf.Hx.
In
COMSOL, the eﬀective system will be denoted as Virtual, and the real system as Real in this
section.
COMSOL is using what is called the ﬁnite element method (FEM). FEM utilizes a geometry and
create a grid of ﬁnite elements to solve partial diﬀerential equations (PDE). When solving PDES
the continuous equations of interest is formulated in weak form which reduces the problem to a
matrix problem[33]. In this project, we are using predeﬁned physics and do not consider weak form
implementations.
2.5.1
Continous setup in COMSOL
This section will cover the continuous model, the auxiliary variables, the geometry and selections,
coils prestudy and optimization interface. References to cylindrical and toroidal coordinates are made
throughout. Details regarding these systems and the derivation of magnet projections into radial
directions is found in Appendix A.
Target Field and auxillary variables
In modeling, we sometimes want to re-scale variables such as the system size or the magnitude of the
ﬁeld. Firstly an interpolation function is created and used for importing the ﬁeld, we assign dummy
variable names to represent the ﬁeld components. Speciﬁcally, we choose the variable names Bxx, Byy,
Bzz, and sss. Here, sss represents the ﬂux surface labels. The csv data x, y, and z are the arguments
in the interpolation, and Bxx, Byy, Bzz, s is the function values. We opt for a linear interpolation
method.
Next, we deﬁne the target ﬁeld ⃗BT :
21
==PAGE:35==
2.5.
Numerical simulations
Target.Bx = fs*Bxx(x/ds, y/ds, z/ds)
Target.By = fs*Byy(x/ds, y/ds, z/ds)
Target.Bz = fs*Bzz(x/ds, y/ds, z/ds)
rho = step(sss(x/ds,y/ds,z/ds))
Here, fs represents the ﬁeld scalar, which scales the magnitude of the ﬁeld. ds is a dimension scalar
used to scale the spatial extent of the target ﬁeld. ρ serves as a ﬁltering function or density that
deﬁnes where the ﬁeld exists. step refers to a step function that will be introduced later, ensuring we
count only relevant ﬁeld locations, ﬁltering positions that does not correspond to the target ﬁeld out.
Since the ﬁeld contributions from the magnets and the TF coils are modeled separately in two diﬀerent
physics contexts, we deﬁne the total magnetic ﬁeld as BTotal:
Total.Bx = Real.Bx + coil.Bx
Total.By = Real.By + coil.By
Total.Bz = Real.Bz + coil.Bz
To simplify plotting quantities and integrating them into physics, continuous projections were also
included. The initial step involves converting from u, v, w (discussed later) to magnetization. We
deﬁne the magnetization ⃗M using (2.17):
Mx = Br/mu0 const*u
My = Br/mu0 const*v
Mz = Br/mu0 const*w
The remnant magnetization ﬂux is Br = 1.3[T]. By the description in appendix A, the radial compo-
nent is calculated and projected into a Cartesian system. Therefore, we deﬁne the radial component
as follows:
M r = Mx*x*(rcyl-RM)/(tor.r*rcyl) + My*y*(rcyl-RM)/(tor.r*rcyl) + Mz*z/tor.r
where rcyl = sqrt(x*x + y*y). Here, RM represents the major radius of the torus, and tor refers
to the toroidal system, which will be brieﬂy introduced later. The projection in the Cartesian frame;
Mr.x = Mr*cos(tor.theta)*cos(tor.zeta)
Mr.y = Mr*cos(tor.theta)*sin(tor.zeta)
Mr.z = Mr*sin(tor.theta)
,
is created and can be used as the magnetization in the real system, which is implemented under both
the continuous physics interface and when considering discrete options.
Step function ﬁltering on the target ﬁeld
In practical terms, the ﬁeld we work with needs to be deﬁned only within the actual gap of the ﬂux
surfaces. There are two methods to achieve this. The ﬁrst involves importing an STL of the target
ﬁeld into the geometry and deﬁning this as Rgap. The more reliable option is to deﬁne a step function,
which is expressed as
ρ (⃗r) =
 1 if ⃗r ∈RGap
0 else
Both options can optionally be used in conjunction. Deﬁne a function step. The coordinate system
used is VMEC, where the ﬂux surface label coordinate s ∈[0, 1].
Therefore, deﬁne the location
close to 1 and creates a very small transition zone. If not done properly, COMSOL may create bad
extrapolations resulting in over extended ﬂux surface, so ensure proper cutoﬀs.
22
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:36==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
The result of this function, when used correctly, is depicted in Figure 2.6 (left) as RGapρ(⃗r). A useful
trick to verify the eﬀectiveness of the step function is to apply a filter in a result plot and conﬁrm
that a volume plot reduces to the correct shape.
Geometry and selections
The ﬁrst step is to prepare the basic geometries. Deﬁne a torus with the inner radius of the vacuum
vessel, rm, and the major radius RM. Additionally, deﬁne another torus with the inner radius plus
the magnet thickness h, denoted as rM = rm + h.
When working with electromagnetic ﬁelds in COMSOL, they need to propagate in space. Therefore,
deﬁne a suitable volume. In this project, a sphere with a radius of 3 meters is used.
Next, it is beneﬁcial to add some selections: deﬁne the vacuum vessel as Rgap and the region within
the magnet as Rmag, representing the variables RGap and RMag. Ensure these two areas are deﬁned
as shown in Figure 2.6 (Left).
For the purposes of the objective, deﬁne a Volume integral within Rgap and name it intopGap.
RGapρ(⃗r)
RGap
RMag
Figure 2.6: (left): RM = 30cm, a = 8.5cm hMag = 1cm For the classical stellarator, the gap is just
RGap, while for the Quasiaxisymmetric stellarator the area have been ﬁltered with a weight ρ(⃗r).
(right): The meshing showed in the 3 diﬀerent regions. An STL of the target ﬁeld have been made to
mesh ﬁner in this area and make sure to have nodes close to the boundary.
Deﬁning the toroidal system in COMSOL
The toroidal system is a useful coordinate system in COMSOL, which we will use to create the
continuous current density in the model. Under Definitions, add a Mapped system and rename it to
tor for convenience. In this system, deﬁne First, Second, Third as r, theta, zeta corresponding
to the coordinates introduced earlier. Deﬁne the coordinates within the toroidal system as follows:
r = sqrt( (sqrt(x*x+y*y) - RM)^2 + z^2)
theta = atan2(z, (sqrt(x*x+y*y)-RM))
zeta = atan2(y,x)
For a linear device, one can just use the already made cylindrical system from COMSOL
Prestudy for coils
Before adding the projections or any other components, we need to include the base physics interfaces.
A total of 5 physics interfaces will be added. Two of them are for a preliminary study to minimize
23
==PAGE:37==
2.5.
Numerical simulations
the current of the coils or the cape’s current density. The remaining three interfaces will be used for
the actual minimization.
In the stellarator conﬁguration, most of the ﬁeld originates from the TF coils, creating a ﬁeld that
moves around toroidally. To add the preliminary study interfaces, add two magnetic fields (mf)
interfaces. Rename them in the model to coil 1amp and coil respectively. In the coil 1amp interface,
include an external current density node. Set the coordinate system to tor and add 1 A/m² in
the theta direction.
For the coil interface, repeat the steps but add a scaled constant i 0. Set the selection to Rmag. The
concept here is that in the preliminary study, the ﬁeld from the 1 A/m² density is used to calculate a
ﬁeld. Then we determine a scaling factor for the ﬁeld and apply the same scaling factor to the current
density, as there is a linear relationship between J and B.
To perform the current rescaling, we project the ⃗BTF ﬁeld into the ⃗BTarget direction at all points.
This is achieved using a standard vector projection:
i0 =
D
⃗Bcoil1A • ⃗BT ρ (s (⃗r))
E
RGap
 ⃗Bcoil1A

2
ρ (s (⃗r))

RGap
The average is created as the standard spacial average, explicitly:
⟨· · · ⟩RGap =
R
RGap · · · ρ (s (⃗r)) dV
R
RGap ρ (s (⃗r))
where the denominator represents the volume of the plasma ﬁeld. i0 can be straightforwardly deﬁned
as COMSOL variables and then used as the current density of the cape.
Once the interfaces have been implemented, a study can be created with 2 stationary study steps.
The ﬁrst step should solve the coil 1amp interface, and the second step should solve the coil interface.
Attempting to solve both interfaces simultaneously will result in an error in COMSOL, as the second
step depends on the ﬁrst being fully solved.
Physics interface for continous optimization
Now that the preliminary study has been set up, it is time to implement the optimization driver.
This section replicates the approach outlined in the appendix of [24], where the method was originally
proposed.
Start by adding 2 Magnetic fields (mf) interfaces, naming them Real and Virtual. Additionally,
add a Coefficient Form PDE named c. Conﬁgure c to have 3 independent variables and 3 depen-
dent variables, named u, v, and w. Set the selection for c to Rmag. In this implementation, we do
not conserve the magnitude of the system. Therefore, for the source term f, choose Virtual.Hx,
Virtual.Hy, and Virtual.Hz for the x, y, and z components respectively.
As for the damping,
da =


−1
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
−1


is applied to the xx, yy, zz components of the tensor. All other constants in the interface are set to 0.
The interface should then be reduced to only contain the following terms:
da
∂⃗u
∂t = f
For the virtual system, the gradient of the objective is utilized. In this simulation, the objective
function is given by 2( ⃗Htot −⃗H). Add an Ampere’s Law in Solids to Virtual. Set the selection
24
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:38==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
of the Ampere’s Law to Rgap. Choose the magnetization model as Magnetization and include the
following magnetization:
(Total.Bx-Target.Bx)*rho
(Total.By-Target.By)*rho
(Total.Bz-Target.Bz)*rho
Finally, for Real, set the same magnetization model and deﬁne the magnetization as Mr.x, Mr.y, Mr.z.
Set the selection to Rmag. The systems are now conﬁgured and prepared for continuous optimization.
Lastly, set up a Time Dependent study that solves Virtual, Real, and c simultaneously. Conﬁgure
the study to use the preliminary study results for the variables that are not explicitly solved for, as
the preliminary study contains the ﬁeld from the cape or coils. Adjust the solver times to a suﬃciently
high value. One should now be able to solve the continuous model
2.5.2
Discrete setup
Initially, using dipoles was not part of our original plan; this approximation was inspired by [8]. It was
expected that reducing the number of mesh elements by using points instead of cubes could accelerate
calculation times (It did). For the discrete setup, three discretization approaches was explored. This
section describes the methods, which have all been employed for diﬀerent parts of the results. The
methods are listed in reverse order of their implementation timeline. While all methods can perform
discretizations, they vary greatly in complexity to implement and runtime. The magnetic grid used
for deployment is detailed in Appendix B.
To give some perspective to how much reduction the switch from spatial to dipole magnets gave,
in the linear device, the meshing reduced from containing about 210k mesh elements (to include all
magnets), to only containing 60k mesh elements. This gave a signiﬁcant speed upgrade, which helped
the LL to converge much faster. Applying a domain operator dom became abundant in this approach.
A dipole approximation is valid when the distance between the dipoles is much larger than the physical
extend of the magnets r ≫w. In this project the magnets was placed at a large distance for reasons
of strength modulation. Therefore this requirement was already suﬃciently satisﬁed.
Collected dipoles
This setup is similar to the continuous model, allowing us to avoid discretized coordinate systems
since the points themselves contain the necessary information, from their placement. This method was
utilized for the discretized stellarator. It had advantageous speed due to the minimal implementation
of physics interfaces and the focus on using numerous points, which is eﬃcient in the Application
Builder interface. It also avoided creating average operators and separate selections.
The approach closely resembles the continuous model. Begin by adding all relevant magnet points as
geometrical points in the COMSOL geometry and collect them into a cumulative selection named
all mags. A Java routine for the Application Builder can be found in the repository of this project.
Instead of adding a Coefficient Form PDE, introduce a Point ODEs and DAEs (pode) interface.
Set the selection to all mags. Under the source term, utilize Virtual as previously done with c, and
apply the same damping.
For the Real interface, add a Magnetic Point Dipole interface and select all mags. Specify the
Dipole Specification as Dipole moment, and set the variables to mr.x, mr.y, mr.z. These vari-
ables are calculated by multiplying the magnetization with the volume, such as mr.x = Mr.x*(h*w*d),
where h, w, d are the dimensions of the magnet.
With this formulation, we maintain the same number of physics interfaces and selections as in the
continuous model. All the steps not addressed here should be exactly the same as the continuous
model, now one should be able to run a study.
Threshold:
When applying a threshold in this implementation, create a similar setup to Real and name it
25
==PAGE:39==
2.5.
Numerical simulations
filtered. The diﬀerence here is deﬁning a threshold parameter th. Then, set the magnetic dipole
moment to
mr.x*(abs(Mr*mu0 const) > th)
mr.y*(abs(Mr*mu0 const) > th)
mr.z*(abs(Mr*mu0 const) > th)
The threshold system is based on the results from the optimization study conducted with Real. To
calculate the threshold system, a new stationary study should be created with a parametric sweep,
varying th across the relevant range. The resulting plots of threshold versus objective will be presented
in the results section.
For the 3D aspect, which was not within the scope of this project, the approach would involve keeping
the width w, depth d, and magnetization ⃗M ﬁxed.
Then, since the magnetic dipole strength is
expressed
⃗m = hwd ⃗M
and all quantities including ⃗m are ﬁxed and calculated in the optimization, the height of the magnets
can be approximately determined as
h =
∥⃗m∥
wd
 ⃗M

One then needs to implement a routine that iterates through all the magnetic dipoles and converts
from dipole strength to magnetized blocks. This process may involve rounding the height to integer
values to balance precision with realistic design considerations. Subsequently, a position optimization
can be performed to allow the magnets to shift position to account for any imperfections in height.
When targeting strong magnetic ﬁelds, the dipole strengths can be signiﬁcant, and the error introduced
by rounding the height will be minimal. Similar expression was also used in [29].
3D magnets and split dipoles
In this section, the algorithmic setup for working with 3D magnets and split dipoles will be described
together. The methods are very similar and share all the same steps, except for one using cubes with
Ampere’s laws while the other uses points with Magnetic Point Dipoles.
The dipole method was employed in the second iteration of the linear device. It resembles the col-
lected dipoles method but is implemented with a less structured framework. Additionally, it neces-
sitates numerous selections in COMSOL, resulting in slower operations. It becomes impractical for
geometries with more than approximately 2000 points, where computation time becomes signiﬁcant.
The reason why it slows down is that every time one adds a selection, comsol have to update all the
previous selections including the self selection, which slows down as more selections are added.
The method was also utilized for the ﬁrst iteration of the linear device with 3D magnets. It is the
slowest method and its primary advantage is that users do not need to assume dipoles. However, it
requires more mesh elements due to the use of cubes, and still requires the addition of selections and
average operations for each cuboid.
3D Average discretization In the continuous case, every inﬁnitesimal piece of the magnet cape dV
responds to the eﬀective magnetic ﬁeld. However, in reality, a permanent magnet is magnetized in
one uniform direction. To address this, a COMSOL nonlocal average coupling operator was utilized
on each cuboid. Imagine the scenario depicted in Figure 2.7a. In this continuous approach, each
inﬁnitesimal piece of the magnet responds to the magnetic ﬁeld precisely at that point. The challenge
is that such magnets are not practical for testing purposes, as they are hard to build or buy. Instead,
magnets should be considered as ﬁnite pieces, where a single eﬀective magnetization number is applied
26
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:40==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.7: (left): Non averaged continuous eﬀective ﬁeld in material, every experienced eﬀective ﬁeld
is point wise. (right): Average felt eﬀective ﬁeld shown for each region. Averaging gives blocks of
uniform eﬀective ﬁelds.
to each discrete piece. A suitable choice for this number is the average, representing the collective
eﬀect felt within the volume.
Using averages, the scenario resembles Figure 2.7b, where each magnetic piece responds to an average
uniform eﬀective magnetic ﬁeld H in the volume.
As shown in the diagram, although individual
pieces may approximate the eﬀect crudely, the overall pattern is still captured. It is intuitive that
smaller magnetic pieces provide ﬁner descriptions of the eﬀective magnetic ﬁeld characteristics through
segmentation, approaching the continuous case as the segmentation becomes ﬁner.
The general idea involves knowing the expressions for the normal vector ⃗en and the two tangential
vectors ⃗et1, ⃗et2 at any point on the surface, along with their mappings to Cartesian coordinates
(x, y, z). Two coordinate systems are employed in this project:
1. Cylindrical system: (r, ϕ, z), where r is the radial distance from the z-axis, ϕ is the azimuthal angle
around the z-axis, and z is the Cartesian z-coordinate.
2. Toroidal system: (r, θ, ζ), where r is the minor radius in the torus, θ is the poloidal angle, and ζ is
the toroidal angle. R Refers to the major radius of the torus. In this approach, a grid of N magnets is
created in the surface system with speciﬁed spacing. The procedure is outlined in Algorithm 1. The
basic concept involves creating a square grid in the coordinate system of interest. Subsequently, in
COMSOL, a block is generated where each magnet senses an average magnetization from the virtual
system. This magnetization is then applied only to the speciﬁed magnet. This is achieved by deﬁning
a separate Landau-Lifshits damping in COMSOL that satisﬁes α
D
⃗Heff
E
−d ⃗
M
dt = 0, for each magnet.
I once again emphasize that this approach can be used directly with points instead of cuboids when
desired.
Practical Challenge of Applying Amp`ere’s Law in COMSOL
After each iteration in the Landau-Lifshitz approach, applying the magnetization to all magnets
becomes necessary. A straightforward approach is to create a separate Amp`ere’s Law node for each
sub-block of the system, as illustrated in Figure 4 (left). However, this method is computationally
intensive because COMSOL needs to handle 3 × N spatial equations (where N is the number of
27
==PAGE:41==
2.5.
Numerical simulations
Algorithm 1 Creating magnets in COMSOL for toroidal system
comsol←load in comsol model()
system←define grid shape("Torus")
Create a grid of r, ϕ, ζ points
for each point n in N do
create block n(h,w,l)
move to(centerpoint number n)
Find x,y,z from r, ϕ, ζ
normalvector ←system.find normal vector()
set axis of rotation to vector(normalvector)
add αVirtual.Hx - dge.Mx
dt
to Global equations
add αVirtual.Hy - dge.My
dt
to Global equations
add αVirtual.Hz - dge.Mz
dt
to Global equations
add amperes law for block in real system
set magnetization to M = (ge.Mx, ge.My, ge.Mz)
end for
magnets), leading to long compilation times. In practice, software loading could take up to an hour,
and simulation convergence could take more than 16 hours without suﬃcient convergence compared
to the continuous case, which typically converges in 4-8 hours depending on the problem.
An alternative approach that proved eﬀective is to leverage domain selections within COMSOL. See
Appendix E for more details on the subject.
2.5.3
Semi analytical target systems
Edge Current
Coil 1
Coil 2
Coil 3
Coil 4
Figure 2.8: Illustration of the semi analytical model. There is applied 4 coil physics one on each coil.
Edge current with positive and negative polarity is applied, as denoted by the arrows in the ﬁgure.
Grey surroundings correspond to the space where the ﬁeld occurs. Indicated by lines is the glass tube.
28
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:42==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
In both the linear device and classical stellarators, wires were also incorporated using the Edge
Current and Coil physics. In this section, a brief overview of their implementation will be presented.
The helicoidal wires used, were deﬁned using Parametric Curve expressions. For the linear device,
the expressions were:
x:
(VV.r + VV.t+2[mm] )*cos(2*pi*s)
y:
(VV.r + VV.t+2[mm])*sin(2*pi*s)
z:
VV.h*s
Here VV.r, VV.t, VV.h refer to the inner radius, glass thickness, and height of the vacuum vessel,
respectively. The geometry is illustrated in Figure 2.8. The parameter s ∈[0, 1] deﬁnes the position
along the curve. The expression describes a circular motion with added height along the z-axis.
For the classical stellarator, a similar parametrization is used to deﬁne the geometry
x:
(rM*cos(4s)+RM)*cos(s)
y:
(rM*cos(4s)+RM)*sin(s)
z:
rM*sin(4*s)
Here s ∈[0, 2π]. The parameter s deﬁnes the poloidal angle parameter. To the helicoidal wires, create
a Magnetic Fields (mf) interface named tw. Add an edge current for each wire, selecting the wire
in the physics and setting the current to I.
In the same study, add Coil physics to each planar coil.
Set Conductor model:
Homogenized
multiturn, Coil type:
Circular, Coil excitation:
Current, and use Number of turns:
216,
matching the experimental coils. Manually select the coil directions.
For the linear device, there should be 4 Coil physics interfaces and 2 Edge Currents. Solve the tw
physics interface in the prestudy and refer to it as Target.Bx, Target.By, Target.Bz. Select other
coil options and physics as needed.
2.5.4
Shape optimization
The shape optimization is a direct tool in COMSOL and will not be described as it is not directly part
of our optimization but a nice last reﬁnement. However the shape optimization node, was applied
after all of the 3D conversions in order to reduce the objective further. The method used is the MMA
method which is a gradient method moving the magnets directly in the direction that minimizes
the objective. In the interface, the magnets was chosen to free displacement, with limits up to 2.5
centimeters in either x or y direction, respectively.
2.6
Creation of 3D pattern
After optimizing the positions of the dipoles and applying ﬁltering, the next step is to create a 3D
template suitable for direct printing. Typically, one might think of exporting the geometry directly
after building it. However, following shape optimization, the geometry is deformed, necessitating the
export of magnet positions as STL meshes or other suitable formats from COMSOL into a new model.
To ensure correct orientation of the magnets, a script was developed in the original shape-optimized
model. This script generated 9 tables/lists containing the following information for each magnet:
tables with midpoint positions x, y, z for both the unoptimized (xold, yold, zold) and shape-optimized
(xnew, ynew, znew) conﬁgurations, and tables containing magnetization components Mx, My, Mz. Al-
though having all this information in one table would be ideal, it was not feasible in COMSOL. Each
table had dimensions of Number of Magnets ×1. Both old and new positions were exported because,
after shape optimization, magnet orientations remain unchanged but their positions are altered. As-
suming midpoints on a cylindrical grid introduces rotational errors, as they are rotated from the old
center point but are positioned in the new center point.
29
==PAGE:43==
2.6.
Creation of 3D pattern
Figure 2.9: schematic of the 2 step ﬂow to create the stencil pattern for the 3d model. (left): Average
operations is created to extract x,y,z and Mx,My,Mz from the old and new conﬁguration. (Right):
Second steps is where each magnet is placed, with midpoint from post-position optimized conﬁguration
but angle from pre-position optimized conﬁguration.
COMSOL does not provide access to old tags in STL format, which contain only mesh data. Moreover,
COMSOL cannot extrude multiple surfaces unless they lie on a single plane. Hence, the COMSOL/-
Java developer interface was used in the template model (code available in the repository). The basic
algorithm for this process is described in Figure 2.9.
Create an average volume operator for each magnet to evaluate and append the tables xold, yold, zold,
xnew, ynew, znew, Mx, My, Mz . Export the data tables and import them into a new model. Create
an empty geometry with only the imported STL magnets for visual veriﬁcation.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.10: Showing the diﬀerent steps of the 3D patterning of the linear device for experiments. (a):
Magnet block placed in optimal conﬁguration. (b): Extruded magnetic blocks for subtracting from
hollow cylinder. (c): Hollow cylinder, with holes, corresponding to subtraction with magnet aligned
to the holes, creating a complete structure ready to be printed.
With this data, the exact magnet conﬁguration can be recreated. Knowing the dimensions (height and
width) of all magnets and their identical nature, the spatial extent of each magnet is known. Using
cylindrical to Cartesian mapping, the correct orientation of the magnets was obtained. Next, create
30
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:44==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
a block and align its axis with the radial direction of a cylindrical system. Adjust the side-lengths to
include the width of the magnets plus a tolerance for 3D printing. Set the height to extend suﬃciently
beyond the 3D print template. Calculate the retraction from the centerpoint of the magnet: subtract
half of the magnet’s height hM and half of the stencil’s height hs. Project this height retraction into
Cartesian coordinates as shown in Figure 2.9. For the x-coordinate, the expression would be:
x = xnew +
hs −hM
2
 xold
rold
where cos(ϕ) = xnew
rnew .
For the ﬁnal print, holes for pushing out misplaced magnets were included using the same methodology.
Similarly, larger cubes were added to facilitate easier placement of magnets during assembly.
As seen in Figure 2.10a, after optimization, we begin with the optimized pattern in which the magnets
are only slightly moved from their initial positions. To achieve the ﬁnal 3D print structure, the stencil
approach is then employed, resulting in the pattern shown in Figure 2.10b.
The next step involves determining the structure from which these towers will retract. In this project,
a cylindrical shell was chosen.
By using a Difference operator between the stencil towers and
the cylinder, the ﬁnal basic 3D print structure was obtained, as illustrated in Figure 2.10c.
For
practicalities it was further modiﬁed with holes, this will be seen in the result section.
31
==PAGE:45==
2.7.
Measurement setup
2.7
Measurement setup
In this section, the setup used for measuring on the linear device will be introduced. We will go
through the overall setup as well as the considerations used to produce the setup. A sneak peek of
the resulting linear device will be given, but not described as this is for a later chapter. The focus is
on the measurement itself.
The used tools for the setup is an optical table, a positioning stage with a stick on and a hall probe.
Figure 2.11a shows the diﬀerent devices used to construct the setup. The hall probe and position
stage is controlled with a developed control program in Python, which can be found in the repository
[34]. Both use serial communication protocols which the script sends commands forming a sweep.
It is hard to make sure the probe do not hit the glass, so to create perfect alignment, bolts was
screwed into the table. This gives the operator the opportunity to slide along the axial direction,
securing consistent alignment. Furthermore bolts gives consistent displacement marks, each bolt in
axial direction corresponds to a movement of 2.5 centimeters, giving consistent sweep distances. There
is also bolts ﬁxing the device in the axial direction but they are hidden by the blue foam in Figure
2.11b.
B
E
D
C
A
(a)
F
(b)
Figure 2.11: (a): Showing the setup from the operators side. A: is mounting point of stick to the xy
stage. B: The device to be investigated. C: The hall probe device. D: Mounting point of power supply
to coils. E: Operator computer used to control the sweeping procedure. (b): Showing the setup from
the opposite side. F: The hall probe mounted on the stick. On the table is aligning bolts for the
setup.
With the bolt aligners and the stage placed perpendicular to the optical table, a stable and easy to
assemble swap setup is created. The setup is particular important as the hall probe only measures
one direction of magnetic ﬁeld at a time. Hence it is crucial, that one can consistently realign the
32
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:46==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
system when rotating the hall probe. A picture of the hall probe can be seen on Figure 2.12a. The
positive direction of the probe is the direction where the black dot is place on the wire. After a
measurement scan, the setup was slide out exposing the hall probe, the hall probe was rotated to the
other direction by just rotating the ﬁxating cable ties, until the little bulge head was pointing in the
correct direction. Then the setup was slide back again and a new scan could be done. To be clear,
the stage was stationary placed, but the wooden part could slide along the screws.
(a)
x [mm]
y [mm]
(b)
Figure 2.12: (a): Showing the hall probe ﬁxed on a metal stick. The metal stick is not magnetic. The
hall probe is pointing sideways indicated by the black dot on the cable as well as the tiny bulge head
on the apex pointing the same direction. The positive direction is the direction of the little bulge
head. (b): Showing the scan pattern of 1 millimeter grid-points, we can see the spacing results in a
ﬁne measurement range.
The scan pattern, consisted of 1millimeter spaced grid points encapsulated in a circle. The height was
the determining variable, and the width coordinate was constrained by the equation of circle
x + y = r ⇒x(y) =
p
r2 −y2
This produced the pattern seen in Figure 2.12b. The scan was further constrained by the spatial
extend of the stick, giving a smaller scan radius. The glass tube was removed when doing a scan to
have a bigger working area. Before a scan the extreme points of the scan was calibrated to ensure
no collision between setup and probe. When the hall probe was rotated around the axis, all points
were displaced with δx = −2 mm and δy = 2 mm to ensure the probe bulge was located at the same
location.
33
==PAGE:47==
2.7.
Measurement setup
34
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 3
The linear device
In this chapter, a linear device will be simulated, built, and tested to verify the results of the opti-
mization algorithm, including the discretization approaches. The Landau-Lifshitz approach has not
yet been veriﬁed by experimental measures at the time of this writing. Hence, it is a good idea to
verify the results of the algorithm before proceeding to build a costly stellarator. To make the device
as inexpensive as possible, the dimensions are chosen from already available materials. The tube is
chosen to be 30 cm in height and 4.5 cm in inner diameter, with a glass tube thickness of 0.5 cm. The
coils have an outer radius of R = 8 cm, and the coils start from a radius of r = 5 cm. The coils have
a thickness of h = 1 cm and consist of 216 windings. The current in the coils is set to Icoil = 2 A.
The view of the linear device can be seen in Figure 3.1a.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1: (a): Showing the device we model with COMSOL for semi-analytical ﬁeld. The red and
blue lines are the wires with diﬀerent polarity. (b): Showing the ﬁeld lines of the conﬁguration when
observing along the z-axis of the cylinder. The ﬁeld lines produced are circles.
This project investigates how magnets can replicate the magnetic ﬁeld in a device, speciﬁcally through
the implementation of a linear device where helicoidal wires are replaced by magnets.
The device modeled in this study is inspired by the classical stellarator, wherein the toroidal structure
has been linearized, as shown in Figure 3.1a. Only two helicoidal wires are attached to the system due
to construction simplicity. The polarities of the two wires are reversed relative to each other, producing
35
==PAGE:49==
3.1.
First iteration of linear device
a magnetic ﬁeld in the same axial direction. The resulting superposed ﬁeld lines are depicted in Figure
3.1b, where the magnetic ﬁeld lines form loops. This simpliﬁed model was selected as an initial test
model because it was straightforward to implement within the COMSOL framework. In a stellarator
model, the ﬁeld is imported with its own discretization, raising concerns about the resolution of the
imported ﬁeld. However, this issue does not arise in the linear model, as the sampling points are
identical to those used in the optimization process. Throughout this chapter, the way we inspect the
quality of the linear device is by looking at its top and see if the ﬁeld lines align with the ﬁeld lines
of targeted conﬁguration. This is an analogue to the Poincar´e plots, but as this symmetry does not
permit ﬁeld lines to close within the device itself it does not make sense to have many streamlines
going around.
The ﬁnal design is signiﬁcantly larger compared to the wire system it emulates. This is due to the
strong magnetic ﬁelds generated by neodymium magnets, while the laboratory power supplies can
only generate a limited current in the wires. Thus, the most cost-eﬀective solution was to space out
the magnets to compensate for their strength.
3.1
First iteration of linear device
In the initial iteration, it was not yet recognized that the optimal model is the continuous model,
despite this being the most logical conclusion.
Therefore, we begin with a discrete model before
transitioning to a continuous model.
3.1.1
First discretization of linear device
In the initial attempt to replicate the ﬁeld, the segmented algorithm was used with 10 × 10 × 1 mm3
magnets placed in the proximity of the planar coils, as shown in Figures 3.2a and 3.2b.
The algorithm produced a intuitive and coherent pattern. A thin inﬁnite wire exhibits a 1/r de-
pendence on the produced ﬁeld [35], this color conﬁguration mimics such a pattern using magnets.
There is a boundary between inward pointing (blue) and outward pointing (red) magnets, where both
polarizations have maximal strength, indicated by the most saturated colors. Moving perpendicularly
from this boundary, the magnet strength decreases before increasing again at the next boundary, re-
sembling a discrete 1/r distribution. The simple interpretation is then, magnets with these continuous
strengths look like the magnetic ﬁeld in the area of the wires.
Figure 3.2c shows that the magnetic ﬁeld lines produced by this conﬁguration of magnets are generally
agreeable. The ﬁeld lines near the center are closely aligned, while those near the edges are less so,
but still reasonable. This agreement is due to the glass tube having a diameter of 4.5 cm, compared
to the 30 cm travel distance of the ﬁeld lines. The lines are close relative to the tube’s diameter.
However, this iteration was not suitable for the experiment because, although the pattern appears
promising, the magnetization is too weak to ﬁnd in commercially available magnets. As shown by the
color bar in Figure 3.2a, the scale reaches up to ±14.7 mT. This is not feasible, as the weakest grade
neodymium magnets (N35) have a remanent magnetic ﬁeld of about 1.2 T, which is a factor of 100
stronger than this result.
3.1.2
Compromising the design choice
There are at least three options to create a system where the magnetic ﬁeld from twisted wires and
magnets match.
The ﬁrst option is to increase the current in the helicoidal wires. The problem is that powerful current
supply is not available. The second option is to move the magnets radially outward to weaken their
magnetic ﬁeld. The third option, which was not considered initially but could be implemented in a
newer iteration of the framework, involves using smaller magnets, such as 2 × 2 × 2 mm3 magnets or
smaller. This option was not considered initially because the framework used 3D magnets instead of
36
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:50==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.2: (a,b): Showing the ﬁrst optimization with discrete magnets, but arbitrary strengths.
The conﬁguration requires 780 magnets to build and consist of magnets with remanent ﬁeld up to
Br = 14.7mT as seen in (a) The coloration of the magnetic pieces corresponds to their strength in
radial direction measured in teslas, the more saturated the magnets, the stronger. Blue coloration
corresponds to magnets pointing inwards, while red coloration corresponds to magnets pointing out-
wards. The current in helicoidal wires was in this conﬁguration set to 6A. (c): The resulting (black)
streamlines from the optimization, agrees with the (green) targeted streamlines.
dipoles, which is slower for many magnets. Additionally, the design space of parameters is quite open,
and a more apparent option at the time was chosen. The decision was to move the magnets further
away and increase the current in the helicoidal wires to 25 A, up from the originally planned 6 A. The
new position was calculated using the ratio between the achieved magnetic ﬁeld and the targeted ﬁeld
with the following expression:
BT
Bdip
≈
r∗
r0
3
= η3
The power of 3 in the expression comes from the fact that the magnetic dipole strength approximately
scales as Bdip ∝1/r3 [20]. This expression is used to calculate the ratio of radial displacement for
the next iteration. η is the constant used to multiply the radius for optimal placement. r∗is the
optimal radius, which is not initially known, and r0 is the starting radius. It is assumed that the
optimal radius is achieved when the strength of the dipoles matches the target ﬁeld BT , hence when
BT = Bdip.
Although scaling the linear device radially outward is not the most optimal decision, the closely placed
conﬁguration scaled up to BR = 1.3 T would likely be very unstable due to high demagnetization
resulting from the aspect ratio of the magnets. The natural solution would be to choose a higher
grade of magnets. See Section 2.3 for a discussion on demagnetization.
3.1.3
Continous model and discretized full model
After scaling the radial positioning, it was realized that establishing a base model representing the
best case scenario would be beneﬁcial. This model provides an optimization benchmark free from
biases introduced by the discretization algorithm of the magnets, meaning for example averaging the
37
==PAGE:51==
3.1.
First iteration of linear device
volume. The optimal model is the continuous model, as it imposes no constraints on the magnets -
excepted the volume. In the segmented model, the magnets are averaged over their volume, while the
continuous model allows for optimal magnetization at every single point. The continuous model is
shown in Figure 3.3a, and its ﬁeld lines are depicted in Figure 3.3b.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.3: (a): A continous model of the outscaled caped, a very clean pattern is observed. (b):
the produced ﬁeld lines of the optimization (black), lies close to the target ﬁeld lines of the problem
(green). (c): A discretized version of the continous magnet provides a similar sensible pattern, the
discretization is done with the 3D discretization. A total of around 2000 magnets (10 x 10 x 1 mm3)
is used in this model. (d): The ﬁeld lines of the discretized optimization.
It is noted that the ﬁeld lines from this model are not as close to the targeted ﬁeld as those observed
from the conﬁguration close to the tube. This discrepancy is suspected to arise from the duration
for which the optimization framework ran. The simulations were halted when the convergence plots
appeared suﬃciently ﬂat, introducing human error in the results. However, the ﬁeld lines still appeared
adequate to proceed.
Observing the coloration of the conﬁguration in Figure 3.3a, it can be seen that, instead of decreas-
ing strength when moving away from unmagnetized regions (white lines), the conﬁguration instead
increases in strength, contrary to the ﬁrst iteration. This may seem counterintuitive, but it is nec-
38
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:52==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
essary to consider that the ﬁeld of the helicoidal wires might appear diﬀerent at greater distances.
Furthermore, the magnetic strength decreases when moving out of the magnetic domain, requiring
the magnets to compensate more to produce the desired strength in the tube. The shape remains a
candy cane shape, although more stretched, and the conﬁguration has also become larger due to the
increased radius.
It is also noted that the remanent magnetization is weaker than 1.2 T. This is not concerning, as the
distance scaling estimate was made on a smaller volume (due to the lower radius of the shell), and
the continuous model was intended for comparison purposes only. To validate that the discretization
algorithms work as intended, a discretized conﬁguration, similar to the continuous model, was created.
The discretized counterpart is expected to be rougher due to the discretizations, resulting in rougher
ﬁeld lines. Figure 3.3c shows the same conﬁguration radius, but implemented with the discretization
algorithm.
The coloration indicates that the converged solutions resemble the continuous model,
which is reassuring. This suggests that the algorithm is correctly implemented. Figure 3.3d shows
the ﬁeld lines of the discretized conﬁguration. The ﬁeld lines appear reasonable but not as precise as
the continuous model, which is also reassuring as it indicates that the rougher discretization leads to
rougher convergence. Initially, the 3D discretization algorithm (Section 2.5.2) seems stable, but this
was later found not to be the case.
3.2
Segmented magnets with problematic convergence
The same algorithm was also applied to a conﬁguration with fewer magnets (see Figure 3.4a). The
pattern retains a candy cane appearance but is irregular, lacking the smooth transitions and exhibiting
some magnets that are visibly more powerful than others. The conﬁguration was deployed using the
exact same code as in the full pattern, hence no implementation error is expected. The cause of this
irregular pattern is unclear. However, the ﬁeld lines in Figure 3.4b indicate that the optimization ran
and achieved sensible convergence. We know from the literature review that the problem is ill-behaved,
meaning that many magnetic conﬁgurations could produce the same convergence. Furthermore that
the solution is very sensitive to the initial value.
Although I start my simulations from a initial
magnetization of (0,0,0) in the magnetic cape, the choice of permanent magnet positions, is in fact
part of the initial value and also the form factor of magnets, or the volume one refers to as RMag.
Because I now have split the magnets I changed the initial value, and this is probably the reason why
the pattern got so diﬀerent. We have until now referred to the Rmag as if it was a constant, but in
fact I am changing in from iteration to iteration, and this is important to have in memory.
The irregular pattern itself is not an immediate problem. The issue arises when transitioning from a
continuous BR spectrum to a discrete spectrum, e.g., BR = 1.3 T. As described in Section 2.5.2, a sim-
ple method of selecting magnets using a threshold seemed the easiest implementation for determining
which magnets to keep and which to remove. Only the magnets with suﬃciently high magnetization
remained after threshold. Figure 3.4c. As seen, only the strongest magnets were reproduced. A very
obvious problem is that the top did not receive a single magnet, and many columns are empty.
The conﬁguration itself is not problematic, but the resulting ﬁeld lines are signiﬁcantly degraded from
the continuous pattern (Figure 3.4d). While the lines curl in the same direction, they do not retain
the same shape or magnitude and were immediately deemed of no experimental interest.
As we aim to construct a real device, it was clear that the best solution should use only one size
of magnet with a single type of magnetization while still producing precise ﬁeld lines. Figure 3.5a
illustrates the resulting objectives.
It shows that the threshold graph is far from the continuous
objective and also far from the time-converged objective. Shape optimization reduces the objective
a bit, but the result remains inadequate. Thus, the threshold method did not provide a satisfactory
objective, not even an optimal one.
39
==PAGE:53==
3.3.
Linear device with dipole magnets
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.4: (a): 928 magnets optimized with the landau-lifshitz approach. The magnets are giving an
irregular candy cane pattern. Only half of the conﬁguration is shown for easiness. (b): The resulting
ﬁeld lines (black) of the optimized magnet in (a). The lines match with the target ﬁeld (green). (c):
Optimal threshold value conﬁguration of magnets. The conﬁguration have many empty spots. (d):
The resulting ﬁeldlines of the optimal conﬁguration does not look like the targeted ﬁeld.
3.3
Linear device with dipole magnets
At this point it was noted that the calculation times and algorithm run times were slow. And it was
thought that using magnetic dipole approximation was a better option. The ﬁrst reason is that the
magnetic dipole only requires a point, which from the perspective of a mesh, is much cheaper and
requires less mesh elements. The second reason was that the COMSOL interface seems to handle
dipoles faster, as the script made for deploying the dipoles ran faster, and the COMSOL interface
too. The results of the test was that the everything was much faster. The dipole approximation have
below 2% error when one is 1.5radii from the bounding sphere box of a rectangular bar magnet [36].
Hence it was thought as a good option. The pattern generated with this approach as well as its ﬁeld
lines can be seen in ﬁgure 3.6a, 3.6d.
In Figure 3.6a, the dipoles form a smooth and regular pattern similar to the continuous baseline.
The generated ﬁeld lines in Figure 3.6d match the targeted ﬁeld lines closely. This regular pattern
40
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:54==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
(a)
Treshold value (T)
Objectives (mT)
(b)
Figure 3.5: (a): A curve illustrating the diﬀerent levels of objective encountered in irregular pattern
from ﬁg. 3.4. Baseline objective refers to the objective value after coils currents have been optimized
for lowest objective. It can be seen that a clear minimum is present of which threshold to choose on
the magnets. Choosing this threshold. When choosing threshold, the magnets are also normalized to
BR = 1.3T The objective after shape optimization is lower than any threshold value, but not close
to either the continuous model or the time converged objective of the conﬁguration. (b): Showing
the threshold versus objective graph of the dipole optimization. A clear minimum is present. Shape
optimization is done after conversion to 3D magnets. After shape optimization, the shape optimized
objective is comparable with continuous objective. After conversion to real magnet, the objective
reduced from threshold objective of 0.14mT down to around 0.135mT, so a reduced objective after
conversion.
provides a much better base for using the threshold method, as it excludes excessively colored patches
but keeps a consistent pattern. The search for the optimal threshold (see Figure 3.5b) resulted in an
optimal threshold value of 0.672 mT, with the threshold objective being 0.14 mT. Although this is
still a distance from the 0.12 mT target, the other objective convergences will be addressed shortly.
While the optimal threshold objective did not perfectly align with the continuous model, it was closer
than the 3D optimized situation shown in Figure 3.5a. Its time convergence was faster and yielded a
better value, with its cutoﬀobjective values S(Bth) being closer to the continuous model.
Figures 3.6b and 3.6d show the optimal conﬁguration where the dipoles were replaced with a Br =
1.32 T remanent ﬁeld, multiplied by the magnet’s volume to determine dipole strength. Although the
candy cane pattern was not fully retained, the number of magnets was reduced from 928 to 498. The
ﬁeld lines in Figure 3.6d indicate that discretization resulted in a worse outcome in terms of ﬁeld lines.
While the general trend of the lines remains, the quality, in terms of closeness, is less than tolerable.
It is noted that the replicated lines are wider than the targeted ﬁeld, indicating that the magnetic
strength is too strong. It was thus considered that shape optimization could correct this ﬁnal error
on the objective.
As a simple investigation, the threshold was set to 0 to observe the resulting conﬁguration. Figure
3.6c shows the fully colored cape. A fully colored candy cane is not ideal for two reasons. First, using
41
==PAGE:55==
3.3.
Linear device with dipole magnets
more magnets increases the cost and requires addressing even more forces generated between magnets,
which could lead to structural problems. Second, a fully colored design oﬀers fewer opportunities for
views and ports. Speciﬁcally for this optimization, it was not the most optimal design, though this
might not be the case for all optimization problems. The ﬁeld lines of this conﬁguration do oﬀer an
interesting niche feature: they start and end approximately at the same points as the targeted ﬁeld,
not that this is of interest in this project.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 3.6: (a,d): 926 optimized dipoles showing a candy cane pattern. The ﬁeldlines of the conﬁgura-
tion match with the target. Scale is from µ0M = −1.4T to µ0M = 1.4T. (b,e): Optimally thresholded
dipoles, Bth ≈0.7 with normalization of remanent magnetic ﬁeld to 1.3T. The magnetic ﬁeld lines
agree in pattern but not magnitude. (c,f): Showing threshold value of Bth = 0T, the magnetic ﬁeld
still agrees but, the magnitude does not.
Shape optimization would have been beneﬁcial for the points; however, COMSOL currently lacks
gradient-based position optimizations for points. Instead, dipoles were replaced by 3D magnet pieces
where appropriate. A simple Java program was developed in the application builder for this purpose.
In this ﬁrst iteration, 10 x 10 x 1 mm magnets were used, which later proved to be unstable due to
demagnetization, although they produced the best visual results.
The candy cane pattern (Figure 3.6b) was successfully transferred to the spatial magnets (Figure
42
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:56==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
3.7a). After converting from dipoles to spatial magnets, the objective was 0.138 mT, as shown in
Figure 3.5b. This value appears satisfactory, but the ﬁeld lines (Figure 3.7b) reveal nicer ﬁeld lines
compared to the dipole model (Figure 3.6e). This improvement, however, is not a general feature of
the threshold curves or the local minima. It was anticipated that an inbuilt shape optimization in
COMSOL could address the minor discrepancies, and Figure 3.5b shows that this shape-optimized
objective provided the ﬁnal adjustment needed.
Since the magnets were already ﬁxed in shape and strength, the ﬁnal degree of freedom was to adjust
their positions in the (r,ϕ)-plane, which conveniently coincides with the x,y-plane in the COMSOL
framework. The resulting value matched that of the continuous model and the time-converged dipole
model (Figure 3.5b). The ﬁeld lines were perfect (Figure 3.7d). The movement of the magnets (Figure
3.7c) showed only minor adjustments from their initial positions. This was expected, as the ﬁeld lines
and objective were already close to their ﬁnal values, requiring only small changes. The result was
satisfying, allowing us to consider how to position the magnets and transition from the COMSOL
results to a 3D print.
3.4
Replacement of magnets in model
At this point, it was discovered that the magnets were unstable to coercive forces which was explained
in section 2.3, as their experienced ﬁeld was 1.21 T, while their intrinsic coercivity is 1.2 T. Fortunately,
the framework implemented was well-suited for sweeping through diﬀerent form factors as needed. Five
magnet types were tested (Figure 3.8). Before explaining why these speciﬁc magnet types were chosen
and why the 10x10x1 mm magnets inevitably failed, I will go through the ﬁnished design.
Figure 3.8 shows a reiteration of the dipole model with a parametric sweep over 3 x 3 x 3, 4 x 4 x 4
cube magnets, and 5 x 5 x 1, 5 x 5 x 2, and 10 x 10 x 1 (original design) block magnets. It can be
observed that the 3 x 3 x 3 (red) and 5 x 5 x 1 (green) magnets did not yield a good solution at any
threshold. The reason is that these magnets, when placed as dipoles, do not have suﬃcient magnetic
volume. Magnetic strength, to a ﬁrst approximation, scales with volume |⃗m| ∼V . This also explains
the trend that the solution converges with a larger number of magnets.
The 10 x 10 x 1 solution shows a local minimum, indicating that conﬁgurations below the threshold
have excessive strength, while those above the optimal threshold have insuﬃcient strength and there-
fore insuﬃcient magnetic volume. The 4 x 4 x 4 cube magnets have a comparable objective to the
10 x 10 (original) magnets when considering a threshold of 0.7 T, converging closer to the continuous
objective. Using the same logic as before, I conclude that the lack of a local minimum, but rather a
global minimum, is likely due to insuﬃcient available magnetic volume in the converged conﬁguration.
The 10 x 10 magnets have 100 mm3 of available volume per magnet, while the 5 x 5 x 2 magnets
have 50 mm3. There is insuﬃcient time in this project to address this speciﬁcally, but a further study
could be conducted with additional sweeps of magnetic volumes to determine the required magnetic
volume before a local minimum is observed.
The reasoning is that with too many available sites, the superposed ﬁeld from the magnets would be
too strong, and the objective would not have a minimum value as the ﬁeld is disrupted. With too few
available sites, the superposed magnetic ﬁeld would never be strong enough. The 4 x 4 x 4 magnets
appear to ﬂatten considerably around a threshold value of 0.6 T, making them the chosen design.
This solution is lower than the 10 x 10 solution but requires slightly more magnets, around 600 pieces.
Ideally, a µ0Mth = 0 T should have been chosen for the lowest objective value, but the design is a
compromise between cost and precision, with position optimization still an available option.
A lesson from this is that when using the threshold method, if the computations are reasonably
fast, one should always try a parametric sweep. This example showed that a parametric sweep can
signiﬁcantly improve the objective. If the dipoles had been more closely spaced, hence more available
sited, the 4 x 4 x 4 objective might have converged even further. Switching from the dipole threshold
model to the 3D magnetized magnets yielded a slightly higher objective value, compared to earlier
cases where the objective would decrease. This indicates that there is no guarantee that the objective
43
==PAGE:57==
3.5.
Stability to perturbations in position and magnetization norm
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.7: (a,b): 498 Magnets after the normalized magnets have been deployed as 10 x 10 x 1 mm3
magnets. The ﬁeld lines of this conﬁguration looks closer to the target than the dipole model. The
objective after conversion lowered from 0.141mT down to 0.128mT. (c,d): Result after a position
optimization have been applied. The magnets move from the gray frames to their current positions.
It can be seen that the magnets are not moving far from original position. The ﬁeld lines of this
conﬁguration agrees well with the target ﬁeld. The objective of this conﬁguration is close to continuous
model.
will either decrease or increase when converting dipoles to magnetized cubes in the model.
3.5
Stability to perturbations in position and magnetization
norm
We wish to study the sensitivity to imperfections in the system. Natural imperfections arise from
the 3D printer’s precision, aﬀecting the position of the magnets.
Additionally, the magnetization
is not perfect in either direction or strength. We assume the tolerance of the printer is around 0.5
mm and that the magnetic strength varies by 5% of the remanent magnetic ﬁeld BR. It is common
44
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:58==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
Figure 3.8: Objective values for diﬀerent value of thresholds. Most of the magnets swept shows no
local minima, expect for 10 x 10 x 1 mm³ magnets. The magnets shows diﬀerent minimums. The 3D
magnets value is higher than the chosen 4 x 4 x 4 mm³ magnet conﬁguration at Bth = 0.7T. Choosing
a lower threshold result in more magnets, and choosing a higher results in less.
for magnets to vary by around 4% of BR [37].
For the position deviations, we choose a uniform
distribution (illustrated in Figure 3.9 top left), as there should be an equal chance of 0 deviation
as there is for the maximum deviations. The deviation in position is added independently to each
direction, so for example x = x + ∆x where ∆x ∼U(0 mm, 0.5 mm); the same applies for y and z,
causing variations in all directions independently. For the magnetic strength, we deﬁne the standard
deviation of a normal distribution (Figure 3.9 bottom left), which is added in the model to each of
the magnetic directions, for example, Bx = Bx + ∆Bx, where ∆Bx ∼N(0 T, (0.05 · 1.3 T)2). This
oﬀsets the magnetization not only in magnitude but also in direction. A convenient Java program was
created to apply the distributions to position and magnetization.
A parametric sweep was conducted with the following cases of (∆r, σ): (0 mm, 0 T), (0 mm, 5%·1.3 T),
(0.5 mm, 0 T), (0.5 mm, 5%·1.3 T), as shown in Figure 3.9 (middle). The ﬁgure indicates that within
our tested range, there are no signiﬁcant deviations that truly impact the system. The system appears
to be remarkably stable against perturbations in both position and magnetization.
As a sanity check, Figure 3.9 shows magnet positions perturbed by up to 10 cm, conﬁrming that the
algorithm is implemented correctly and that instability can cause signiﬁcant changes to the stream-
lines. The reason why realistic perturbations do not cause problems lies in the fact that magnetic
dipoles follow a B ∝
1
r3 relation [20]. Due to this rapid falloﬀin magnetic ﬁeld strength with distance,
the approximately 10 cm displacement of the magnets from the reference position results in a nearly
ﬂat magnetic strength curve.
However, it’s important to note that when designing systems with magnets placed close to sensitive
components like the VV (vacuum vessel), one must consider the potential for sharp variations in
magnetic ﬁeld strength near the magnets.
45
==PAGE:59==
3.6.
Final design: details and layout
Figure 3.9: (left): Showing the distributions used to perturb the magnetic system. (middle): Showing
4 result of not perturbing the system, perturbing only either the magnetization or the position and
perturbing both at the same time. Also showing that choosing a high value of the position results
in a high disturbance.
(right): Showing that since the magnets are placed so far away from the
center point, the magnetic ﬁeld of a magnet perturbed with the tolerance of the printer results in no
signiﬁcant eﬀect. The plot also shows that if close to the magnet position of ≈±10cm, the rate of
change is much higher.
3.6
Final design: details and layout
In the ﬁnal design, N42 4x4x4 mm³ magnets are used. This section will illustrate the pattern of the
position optimization, assess the stability of demagnetization in this magnet conﬁguration within the
full setup, and present the ﬁnal 3D print design.
Figure 3.10: Shape optimization result unpacked on a grid. dr is radial displacement. The optimization
is unpacked on a (ϕ,z)-plane as this is a natural surface in cylindrical coordinates. The radial distance
is most often around ±5mm, but up to ±10mm is also seen, this is probably to correct for boundary
eﬀects.
When considering the position optimization of the magnets, we analyze their movement in the (ϕ,z)-
plane. To visualize the radial displacement, Figure 3.10 depicts a grid of unpacked magnets on this
plane. As expected, we observe a symmetrical pattern. The symmetry is evident but reversed, which
aligns with the magnets’ reversed polarities. This symmetry becomes more apparent in Figure 3.11,
where the pattern is rotated to illustrate a continuous view of the displacements.
46
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:60==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
From this ﬁgure, it is apparent that one end exhibits the highest displacement of −11 mm. Subse-
quently, the displacement forms shells where, for instance, at a constant height of 100 mm, the color
pattern transitions from green (0 mm) to a slight yellowish hue and back to green. This shell pattern
was also observed in the 3D model, where the magnets formed small arch-like patterns.
Figure 3.11 also illustrates that while one end shows a displacement of −11 mm, the other end exhibits
a displacement of 10 mm. This observation suggests that due to the termination of the wire in the
model, the magnets need to be positioned in more unconventional placements to better correct the
edge eﬀects.
I intended to include a picture of the 3D situation to show these small arches, but their subtle nature
is reﬂected in the slight coloration seen in the displacement ﬁgure.
Figure 3.11: The same shape optimization as in ﬁgure 3.10.
The shape optimization have been
unpacked to get more continous patterns to follow.
After reoptimizing the system with 4 x 4 x 4 mm³ magnets, the resulting ﬁeld lines from the optimized
model are depicted in Figure 3.12a. The magnet movements are minimal, typically around 10 mm,
with a shell radius of approximately 11 cm. The ﬁgure shows the targeted ﬁeld lines (green), the ﬁeld
lines after the initial Landau-Lifshitz optimizations (red), and ﬁnally the ﬁeld lines after the position
optimization (black).
It is evident that after the ﬁrst optimization of the magnets, the generated ﬁeld lines (red) closely
approximate the targeted ones. However, after the position optimization, the generated ﬁeld lines align
precisely with the targeted ﬁeld lines. Therefore, the position optimization proves to be a valuable
addition in achieving the utmost precision after standardizing the magnets in terms of shape and
magnetization.
Figure 3.12b serves to assert conﬁdence in the optimization results generated by COMSOL. The ﬁgure
was created by exporting all magnets along with their respective magnetizations, and then importing
them into a new model to recreate the blocks with identical magnetizations. The purpose of this
approach is to validate the optimization process—if any errors were introduced during optimization
in the original model, they would manifest as ﬂawed streamlines in the recreated model. However, as
observed from the ﬁgure, there are no discrepancies. This validation reinforces that the optimization
process is reliable and can be trusted in this scenario, given one trusts the magnetic interface of
COMSOL.
As demagnetization proved problematic in the initial iteration, necessitating a new optimization,
Figure 3.13a illustrates the demagnetization ﬁeld of a single magnet. Although positioned within the
entire system, the image focuses on an isolated view of the most aﬀected magnet, representative of
the others.
47
==PAGE:61==
3.6.
Final design: details and layout
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.12: (a): Showing ﬁeld lines after conversion to 3 dimensional magnets (red). The ﬁeld lines
agrees somewhat with the green target lines. After position optimization the red ﬁeld lines become
the black ﬁeld lines and agrees more with the target. (b): Showing ﬁeld lines from a model where the
magnets have been imported, but where no optimization have taken place. Only knowledge model
have is the position and magnetization of the permanent magnets. The ﬁeld lines agrees.
In Figure 3.13a, the demagnetization expression
Bdemag = µ0

⃗HMag + ⃗HCoils

• ⃗MMag
∥⃗MMag∥
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.13: (a): Showing demagnetization ﬁeld on one of the 4x4x4 mm³ cubes. The demagnetization
is at most -1.03T which is not very close to Hci = −1.2T. The ﬁeld is including all the other magnets
in the system as well as the planar coils. (b): Illustrating which direction most of the ﬁeld from the
components is expected to point. For magnets close to end coils, the ⃗Hcoils component is also expected
to point in same direction as ⃗Hmag.
is plotted. This equation projects the total magnetic ﬁeld felt by the magnet ⃗H onto its magnetization
direction ⃗MMag, where a negative value indicates demagnetization. Demagnetization occurs when the
48
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:62==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
felt ﬁeld exceeds the intrinsic coercivity Hci [38]; for hardness of magnets, Hci = 1.2 T [39]. Generally,
the felt magnetic ﬁeld is expected to oppose the magnetization, while the coil’s magnetic ﬁeld primarily
aligns in the z-direction, as visualized in Figure 3.13b. However, the coils also have xy-components
that inﬂuence some magnets. From the color bar in Figure 3.13a, it can be observed that at most,
the magnets experience approximately −1.03 T. Demagnetization does not appear to be a signiﬁcant
issue aligning with the theory.
Figure 3.14a shows the ﬁnal conﬁguration of magnets, which produces the ﬁeld lines observed in
Figures 3.12a and 3.12b.
Figure 3.14b illustrates the magnet holder designed using the algorithm described in Section 2.6. The
holder consists of 8 pieces (one shown in Figure 3.14c) to ensure that if a 3D print goes wrong, only
1/8 of the progress is lost. Additionally, all the print stencils are designed to ﬁt into an Ultimaker S3
3D printer, providing ample space within a 230 x 190 x 200 mm cuboid.
In the design, I incorporated larger cubic holes aligned with the faces of the magnets to allow more
ﬂexibility during assembly. This design feature ensures that when assembling the magnets, they ﬁt
snugly into their designated positions. If a magnet does not slide down to align correctly with the
surface, it serves as an indicator to the assembler of a potential error with the hole alignment.
In Figure 3.14d, one part of the support structure, printed in 3 pieces, is shown. The inner diameter
is aligned with the inner diameter of the coils, facilitating alignment of the magnet holder on the same
structure as the coils.
Figure 3.14e shows the wire holder, designed to mimic the simulation we conducted. Both the support
structure and the wire holder are divided into parts to ﬁt within the build volume of an Ultimaker S3
printer.
And this concludes the ﬁnal design of the linear device. It uses 4 x 4 x 4mm³ magnets placed optimally
to achieve nicely aligned ﬁeld lines close to the target. We have discussed the generation of the 3D
print, the placement of magnets, and conﬁrmed the stability of the magnets under their own magnetic
ﬁeld as well as in conjunction with the coil.
A slimmer device might have been possible using 1 x 1 x 1 mm³ magnets placed in the inner ring, as
shown in Figure 3.2c, but time constraints prevented further exploration. Sometimes decisions must
be made within given constraints. However, reducing the magnetic volume with smaller magnets could
potentially be a solution, although it remains uncertain whether the optimization would converge for
such a conﬁguration.
Throughout this project, we have demonstrated that magnetic dipoles can eﬀectively address the
problem, implemented in a manner that approaches the speed of the continuous model.
49
==PAGE:63==
3.6.
Final design: details and layout
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 3.14: (a): The 4x4x4 mm³ magnets shown in their optimized conﬁguration. (b): The full
magnet holder. (c): 1/8 of the magnet holder. (d): 1 of the 3 support structures to hold the shell on
metal rods. The inner radius of the collected support is made to ﬁt the same metal rods as the coils.
(e): Helicoidal wires part. The part is made to ﬁt on the glass tube.
50
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:64==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
3.7
Construction and Measurements from linear device
The construction of the device consisted of 3D printing the parts and screwing them all together on
top of metal supports holding the coils. The construction can be seen in Figure 3.15. First all the
component were 3D printed as in Figure 3.15a, afterwards the white breakaway material was manually
removed and the prints cleaned. Then the magnets were placed as in Figure 3.15b, and colored to
get a better overview, when doing experiments. Coils and support were placed on the aligning metal
bars in Figure 3.15c, and sandwiched like in Figure 3.15d. The magnetic cape was assembled on top,
giving the full conﬁguration seen in Figure 3.15e and Figure 3.15f.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 3.15: (a): Freshly printed cape. (b): printed cape parts put together with magnets inserted.
(c): Supports holding part of magnetic cape in place, metal bars. (d): coils and supports sandwiched
on metal bar. (e,f): magnetic cape placed on metal bars. Top and side view respectively.
51
==PAGE:65==
3.7.
Construction and Measurements from linear device
We will now move on to some preliminary measurements. The amount of time left after assembling
was sparse. Hence instead of creating streamlines of the data, the focus is on a simple plane and a line
sweep. The ﬁeld from the twisted wires will also not be measured, as this does not add anything to
the discussion of the veriﬁcation of the magnets system. We rather want to interpret the result better
instead of using the time on a full mapping which might go wrong and provide no insight. For the
cross section, the focus is on a cross sectional area in the x,y plane, where z = 9.5 cm. This location
was chosen because the hall probe would be directly inside. This can be seen in Figure 3.16a, and the
advantage is that inside the coil, the fringing ﬁeld will be smallest, thus we are minimizing coil fringes
from the measurements. Furthermore the probe will be directly beneath a layer of magnets. Figure
3.16b and 3.16c shows that on the right side of probe side, the magnets are pointing outwards and on
the left side, they are pointing inwards. Because of the pattern, we can expect the resulting ﬁeld to
be minimized in fringing, and pointing in positive x direction, and slightly in the y direction.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.16: (a): Zoom in on probe being placed at z = 9.5 cm, it can be seen that, the coils
should be aligned, and the probe is placed in the middle of the coils. (b): Cape seen from negative x
perspective, the magnets are pointing inwards, resulting in a positive Bx. (c): Cape seen from positive
x perspective, the magnets are pointing outwards, resulting in positive Bx.
A measurement with the magnetic cape on and the coils turned on is shown in Figure 3.17a. It can be
seen that there is a magnitude distribution going from 9.6 Gauss down to 4.8 Gauss. At ﬁrst glance
one could think that the distribution is a superposition of the uniform magnetic ﬁeld from the magnets
plus the fringing outwards radial ﬁeld from the coils - maybe we were not perfectly in center of the
coil anyway. But remember now that we could deduct from the ﬁgure that a positive x direction was
suspected. In order to deduct why the pattern we observe with coils and magnets are not what we
are supposed to see, we start by observing the background ﬁeld/noise the scanner collects. Figure
3.17b is the background ﬁeld, where no coils nor magnets are aﬀecting the area. It can be seen that
the noise ranges from 0 and up to around 1 Gauss. It cannot be concluded from the plot itself if, the
noise is completely random, but it can be seen that it does not show clear indication of any certain
pattern. Something which can be seen is that the background noise is positive in both x and y, this
might be partially because of the earths magnetic ﬁeld, which is on the order of 0.5 Gauss. However
no compass was available, so it cannot be seen for certain. The background noise is high compared
to the measurements, being almost 10% in some areas. The background noise is pointing in opposite
direction of the the coil and magnet conﬁguration and we can conclude it is not a background eﬀect,
52
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:66==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
which gives misalignment between the expected and actual result. I want to emphasize that this eﬀect
is not the magnets as this measurement was taken when the magnetic cape was taken oﬀand placed
far away.
x [mm]
y [mm]
Gauss
(a)
x [mm]
y [mm]
Gauss
(b)
Figure 3.17: Magnetic cross sections at z = 9.5 cm. (a): Measurement of both coil and permanent
magnet magnetic ﬁeld in a cross sectional sweep. (b): Background ﬁeld measured without permanent
magnets or magnetic coils.
Focusing instead on a measurement only including the permanent magnets with the coils turned oﬀ,
Figure 3.18a shows the measurement. As can be seen we are measuring a ﬁeld, which points toward
positive x and slightly positive y. This ﬁts our prediction from the setup. The next question is then
if the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld ﬁts the model’s prediction. The prediction is plotted in Figure
3.18b. The prediction shows the magnetic ﬁeld in this cross section is supposed to point mostly right
and slightly upwards. It does in this regard ﬁt with the measurement. It is noted that the magnitude of
the theory is around 39% higher than the measured ﬁeld. This is quite some discrepancy in magnitude.
This might come from the strength of the magnets or the model not being able to completely calculate
the strength in the real system - it is after all just simulations which are aﬀected by mesh elements -
or most likely a combination of factors. An error which was discovered during the experimental setup
is that the optimized magnets does not in the cross section produce the correct ﬁeld as the helicoidal
wires. This was discovered late, but the measurement we used to accept the linear device optimization
were streamlines which is more of a collective eﬀect, while the vectors are a instantaneous errors. And
so the design was accepted on another premise from what we are measuring here. Overall, although
the vectors are not exactly the ones we try to replicate, on average they are the same direction and
magnitude. A thing to remember is, that it might be unreasonable to replicate a near ﬁeld of the
wires, which is rotates fast with magnets which are a great distance away, if one choose a model with
wires at a greater distance, as great as the magnets, the curvature of the arrows will be smaller. In
the theoretical prediction of the cross section, the coil fringes are also plotted, and it can be seen
that the the fringe should have been really low and pointing inwards radially. The discrepancy in the
angle between the theoretical model and the experiment, is small and is most likely due to 2 sources
of errors. The ﬁrst is that maybe the magnetic cape were not perfectly aligned. Some alignment
holes were made, so when measuring, the cape could be aligning, but there is a chance that this is
oﬀby a couple of degrees. The second source of error is that the hall probe is not perfectly aligned.
Also if the probe is not perfectly rotated between the x and y direction, it will give get some of the
perpendicular component from what it is supposed to measure. Of course the probe as well as the
53
==PAGE:67==
3.7.
Construction and Measurements from linear device
x [mm]
y [mm]
Gauss
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.18: Magnetic cross sections at z = 9.5 cm. (a): Permanent magnets magnetic ﬁeld, with coils
turned oﬀ. The pattern aligns with intuition from the physical placement of probe. (b): Theoretical
prediction of ﬁelds. The background color is the in plane magnetic ﬁeld consisting of Bx, By only
from magnets, with coils ﬁltered out. Black arrows correspond to the magnets only ﬁeld. Red arrows
correspond to the ﬁeld coming from twisted wires, it can be seen that at the cross section, the ﬁeld
is not exactly replicated from the algorithm. Green arrows indicates the directions from the coils,
showing a small fringing compared to the magnets.
cape was aligned very carefully, but no eﬃcient way to ensure perfect alignment were thought about,
so this could deﬁnitely explain the directional discrepancies. There is too much noise for us to say
anything about the distribution of magnetic ﬁeld density strength. We can see that the ﬁeld seems
to be slightly stronger in the sides of Figure 3.18a than in the middle. This however is very vaguely
seen and to noisy to be certain.
The only source of the downward ﬁeld is the coils. A measurement of only coils without magnetic
cape is seen in Figure 3.19a. It is evident that the downwards pointing ﬁeld is coming from ﬁeld coils
alone. The ﬁeld is dominating, and totally covered the measurements from the magnets. The rest of
the results are taken without coils turned on as they provided too many problems. The error seen
might be to the coil being tilted slightly, providing a coil, producing a stronger component of x or
y. This should have been correct by us clamping the coils between the 3D printed supports. For the
following measurements it is not a big problem as we can in the simulation model, remove the coil
component also.
Now where we have seen how the cross section looks, we are also interested in seeing how the ﬁeld
evolves along the axial direction. A sweep is made by sliding the tube on the table and measuring
the x and y components respectively. The results is seen in Figure 3.19b. It can be seen that the
components follows the same pattern as the theoretical counterpart. Again there is misalignment
between the magnitudes, but overall convincing. The curves might be oﬀset, because of how accurate
I measured the z direction, which gives a source of error.
Another source of error is that the gaussmeter was not calibrated and I did not have the means for a
calibration, so I can’t guarantee the measurements it made are correct.
54
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:68==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
x [mm]
y [mm]
Gauss
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.19: (a): Magnetic cross section at z = 9.5 cm. Coils only showing that the coil produces a
strong ﬁeld (compared to the permanent magnets, pointing in the negative y direction. (b): Sweep
along z-coordinate. Measuring Bx and By respectively and comparing to the modeling strengths. The
theoretical curves have been shifted in the z-direction with 2 cm to align curves with experimental.
55
==PAGE:69==
3.7.
Construction and Measurements from linear device
56
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 4
Stellarators
In the last chapter, we explored the linear device and examined the results of the streamlines from the
converged solution. We also presented a comprehensive example of the workﬂow from the continuous
algorithm to the realization of the device along with all the intermediate considerations necessary.
In this chapter, we will expand upon the linear device and delve into the construction challenges
of the classical stellarator conﬁguration.
Subsequently, we will optimize a magnet system for the
MUSE conﬁguration and discuss the convergence challenges associated with this setup. Finally, we
will introduce a dipole-discretized version of the MUSE conﬁguration and analyze how errors may
aﬀect the targeted ﬁeld. The directions described when talking about the stellarators are the minor
radius denoted by r, the poloidal direction denoted by θ, the toroidal direction denoted by ζ. the
major radius direction denoted by R and the axial direction, which is perpendicular to the R, ζ plane.
The system is drawn and used in Appendix A.
4.1
The classical stellarator
As an intermediate step towards the quasi axis symmetric stellarator, a classical stellarator has been
created in COMSOL. The rationale behind this choice mirrors that of the linear device: the classical
stellarator can be directly implemented in COMSOL without requiring interpolation functions. This
direct implementation allows for greater conﬁdence in the convergence of the method. If the opti-
mization converges successfully on such a system, any issues may indicate problems with the imported
data, such as errors in generating the targeted ﬁeld, overly coarse interpolation of the ﬁeld data, or
if the issue lies in inherent challenges with the targeted ﬁeld itself for the algorithm or permanent
magnets.
The ﬁeld in question is semi-analytically deﬁned on the exact same mesh as the optimization algorithm
operates on. Initially, a continuous classical stellarator using current density is optimized and analyzed.
Subsequently, the current density will be replaced with real coils, and this modiﬁed system will undergo
optimization. Finally, ports will be introduced into the model to explore why ports are not feasible
for this particular conﬁguration.
4.1.1
The setup
The targeted ﬁeld we aim to achieve is depicted in Figure 4.1. This ﬁeld represents a single ﬁeld line
positioned precisely at the midpoint of the conﬁguration. The ﬁeld line elongates and compresses
throughout the conﬁguration. The starting point of the ﬁeld line is located at coordinates (0, 0.3, 0)
m. When allowed to extend over a long trajectory, it forms the depicted ﬁeld boundary.
Figure 4.1 illustrates the ﬁeld that is entirely semi-analytically deﬁned within the boundaries of COM-
SOL, as shown in Figure 4.2a.
57
==PAGE:71==
4.1.
The classical stellarator
Figure 4.1: One long ﬁeld line in the classical stellarator conﬁguration. The line moves around in a
consistent pattern and creates ﬁeld line which is twisted around the magnetic axis. The ﬁeld visualized
is the one to be optimized for.
4.1.2
Ideal case, classical stellarator in continuous model
As a baseline, we employ the simplest model of a classical stellarator with 4 wires, each carrying current
of two polarities, as illustrated in Figure 4.2a. The setup consists of a continuous toroidal cape with
a current density Je = 6000 A/m2 ﬂowing in the poloilda ⃗eθ direction. To introduce twisting and
elongation elements in the plasma, we incorporate 4 twisted wires: 2 wires carry a current I = 19.2 A
(colored red) and the other 2 wires carry a current −I (colored blue). This conﬁguration produces an
average magnetic ﬁeld of ⟨B⟩= 0.27 mT.
The stellarator conﬁguration depicted here is arbitrary and does not resemble any speciﬁc known
conﬁguration.
This model does not account for correcting the fringing ﬁelds generated by the coils, as illustrated in
Figure 4.5a. Because the cape is perfectly continuous, there are no areas where the magnetic ﬁeld
escapes, unlike in the implementation with coils where the fringing ﬁelds are corrected by the cape.
The physical extend of for the wires have been parametrized as follows, using a parametric line:


x
y
z

=


(rM cos (4s) + RM) cos (s)
(rM cos (4s) + RM) sin (s)
rM sin (4s)

, s ∈[0, 2π]
(4.1)
Expression (4.1) is the standard description of the torus in Cartesian coordinates.
However, to
parametrize the lines, I ﬁxed the radius to rM = a + hMag and chose a constant ratio of poloidal
to toroidal turns of 4, s = ζ = θ
4. Therefore, each wire takes 4 turns around the torus before returning
to their starting position.
Figure 4.2b depicts the generated conﬁguration, with a quarter cropped out for clarity while viewing
the ﬁeld lines. The ﬁgure displays a candycane pattern, which is not unexpected given the design
similarity to the linear device. The white stripes denote the positions where the wires are located. This
design exhibits an intuitive layout, which provides reassurance regarding the optimization method’s
consistency and eﬀectiveness in this context.
The ﬁeld lines in Figure 4.2b are not very visible, so to further assert the convergence and provide a
qualitative view of the optimization process, the initial errors are visualized in Figure 4.3. The ﬁgure
illustrates the starting point of the optimization, before magnetization has been applied. From left to
right, it is evident that a systematic error exists where the yellow regions deviate signiﬁcantly from the
average ﬁeld within the vacuum vessel (VV). In the middle image, the error improves inside the VV,
with the lowest error observed along the axis in the very center. Additionally, within the torus, there
are areas where the error is on the order of 10−7 mT, which already shows promising agreement. The
rightmost panel illustrates how the targeted (green) ﬁeld lines exhibit twisting behavior, contrasting
with the perfect circular ﬁeld lines generated from the current density alone.
After the optimization has converged, the images noticeably change as shown in Figure 4.4, which
58
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:72==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2: (a): Showing the implemented conﬁguration ti optimized for. The black arrows indicate
a current in the ⃗eθ direction. Blue and red lines indicate the helicoidal wires generating the rotating
ﬁeld. The purple ﬁeld lines indicates the ﬁeld around the torus. (b): The converged solution of the
conﬁguration plotted on 3 quarters. The ﬁeld lines between target and the produced ﬁeld matches up
very well.
Figure 4.3: (left): Showing |B −BT | on the shell before optimization. (middle): Showing the same
quantity, but in the middle surface of torus. It can be seen that some parts of the conﬁguration
already matches well with the target ﬁeld, from their low diﬀerence. (right): Showing streamlines of
the target (green) and the not optimized conﬁguration (black). The streamlines does not agree.
presents the same pair of ﬁgures but at the ﬁnal time step. Starting from the left, the distinct pattern
of errors with deviations up to 10−1 mT is replaced by a pattern resembling random noise on the
shell, where the largest errors are mostly around 10−3 mT. Thus, the crust of the vacuum vessel (VV)
is not perfectly replicated. However, upon examining the interior, we observe two smooth regions
where errors range from 10−7 to 10−8 mT. This is a promising result. As the ﬁnal piece of evidence,
the image on the right shows that the ﬁeld lines, which were originally circular, now overlap perfectly
with the target. The green and black lines coincide, creating a color disturbance eﬀect where they
intersect.
In conclusion, the case of the twisted wire stellarator has converged perfectly. The errors relative to
the targeted ﬁeld are low, and the precision is maintained after approximately one turn in the system.
This demonstrates that on a well-behaved system such as this, the convergence achieved is satisfying.
59
==PAGE:73==
4.1.
The classical stellarator
Figure 4.4: (left): Showing |B −BT | on the shell after optimization. It looks like only numerical error
is present on the shell. (middle): Showing the same quantity, but in the middle surface of torus. It
can be seen that all parts of the conﬁguration now matches well with the target ﬁeld, from their low
diﬀerence. (right): Showing streamlines of the target (green) and the optimized conﬁguration (black).
The streamlines agree.
4.1.3
Classical stellarator model using real coils
Since the ”ideal” classical stellarator yielded promising results with low objective error and exact
replication of streamlines, the next logical step is to incorporate real geometric coils and observe their
implications. The objective remains to mimic the targeted ﬁeld from Figure 4.2a. The introduction
of real coils introduces a fringing ﬁeld, as shown in Figure 4.5a. This fringing ﬁeld manifests more
prominently in the outer radial region of the vacuum vessel (VV), whereas it is less pronounced in the
concave side due to the closer spacing of coils. The solved model aims to mitigate this fringing eﬀect
such that the red lines approximate the black lines. The solution is depicted in Figure 4.5b. Notably,
the solution exhibits a candycane pattern similar to that observed in the continuous coil model. It is
apparent from the ﬁgure that the targeted ﬁeldlines (green lines) do not perfectly match the generated
ﬁeldlines (black lines).
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5: (a): Showing produced ﬁelds of a perfect shell with uniform current density (black) and
the ﬁeld lines of the same conﬁguration using coils (red). The coils give a fringing pattern while the
uniform density does not. (b): Showing converged conﬁguration of model with real coils. A candy
cane pattern can be seen. The streamlines of the target and the optimized ﬁeld does not completly
agree.
60
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:74==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
It might be challenging to discern the diﬀerence between the two sets of ﬁeldlines, so Figure 4.6a and
4.6b provide an alternative perspective. These plots illustrate the situation from the viewpoint of a
streamline released at x = 0.32 m, y = 0, z = 0. In Figure 4.6a, the left panel shows a 3D perspective
where both the targeted ﬁeldlines (green) and the generated ﬁeldlines (black) are contained within
the visualization. This view is after 192 revolutions of the magnetic ﬁeld.
Figure 4.6b presents the Poincar´e plot in the same angle as where the streamline was released (indicated
by the red point). The plot demonstrates that after 192 revolutions, the plasma remains stable and
conﬁned within an approximately closed shell. There are no black dots extending away from the plane,
indicating stability.
Although the magnetic ﬁeld was not perfectly recovered, the tendencies was still there. The magnetic
ﬁeld still looks conﬁned.
A conﬁguration where the fringing eﬀects of the coils were included in the target ﬁeld was also inves-
tigated, and the convergence was similar to that observed in Section 4.1.2, where perfect convergence
was achieved. This suggests that correcting for the ﬁeld fringes using permanent magnets might be
more challenging than simply mimicking the magnetic ﬁeld from the helicoidal wires. I do not include
the ﬁgures here as they would be analogous to those in Section 4.1.2, but with the inclusion of coils
in the design.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: (a): Showing the resulting shell of a long streamline deployed at x = 32cm. The streamlines
did a total of 192 revolutions before the streamlines were stopped. (b): The resulting Poincare plots
of the 192 revolutions. Red point marks the start point. It can be seen that, the ﬁelds does not match
completely as the points are spread a bit. It can also be seen that they do lie in approximately the
same shell.
4.1.4
Classical stellarator correcting fringing ﬁeld and including ports
As a ﬁnal test of the classical stellarator conﬁguration, two ports with a radius of 5 cm were introduced.
The resulting magnetic ﬁeld pattern still exhibited the characteristic candycane pattern (Figure 4.7a)
as seen previously in 4.2b, and 4.5b.
Several key observations arise from this conﬁguration. Firstly, the desired target ﬁeld naturally pro-
duces a candycane pattern, which is consistent across various simulations.
Secondly, during the
optimization process, the magnets cover almost the entire volume, resulting in magnetic strengths
that are closely matched in color representation. Therefore, introducing ports in such a dense magnet
conﬁguration is expected to pose signiﬁcant challenges.
As discussed in the next chapter, quasi-symmetric stellarators may oﬀer more suitable locations for
ports with minimal impact on the magnetic ﬁeld. However, in this classical stellarator conﬁguration,
61
==PAGE:75==
4.1.
The classical stellarator
it is evident from ﬁgures 4.7c and 4.7d that introducing ports causes magnets near the ports to
become signiﬁcantly stronger. This adjustment at the boundaries likely compensates for the absence
of magnets in the region where the ports are located.
I suspect that the reason the classical stellarator still maintains its exact shape on the side adjacent
to the port is because the target in RGap is the same target ﬁeld and since our initial solution is the 0
solution, the ﬁrst step would be to apply the same change in magnetization from the virtual system.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.7: (a): Showing the situation with ports and coils. The color of the magnetization had a
nonlinear calibration performed on the colorbar to better see the candy cane pattern. (b): Objective
curves of the 3 classical stellarators. It can be seen that every disturbance from the ideal case gives less
convergence on the objective. (c,d): Showing the converged solution without a colorbar calibration.
It can be seen that the area around the port have a stronger magnetization, probably to account for
the boundary.
4.1.5
Final remarks
Introducing imperfections to the classical stellarator resulted in each case showing around a tenfold
decrease in convergence. Figure 4.7b illustrates how the ﬁelds converge over their respective conver-
gence times. Initially, all conﬁgurations start with errors around 10−1 mT. In the ideal model where
no correction for fringing ﬁelds or ports is needed, the objective converges to 10−4 mT. This, com-
bined with the streamlines seen in Section 4.1.2, demonstrated a perfect scenario for magnetic ﬁeld
62
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:76==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
optimization.
Introducing the fringing of the coils for the algorithm to overcome still leads to convergence, but as
shown in Figure 4.7b, the convergence is achieved at 10−3 mT, which is a factor of 10 higher than the
previous ideal case. The objective itself appears to be converged. However, as observed in Section
4.1.3, the ﬁeld lines still form what appears to be the same ﬂux surface, but not an exact replication
of the targeted ﬁeld. The result is a convergence to a ﬁeld that approximates the target, though not
precisely. If one is not concerned with correcting the fringing ﬁeld, the convergence is similar to the
ideal classical stellarator.
Introducing ports into the model resulted in yet another factor of 10 increase in the objective, as
seen where the objective is around 10−2 mT, compared to the starting objective. As observed, the
ports introduce a small region around them where the magnetization is stronger than in the rest of
the conﬁguration. This is likely to compensate for the missing magnets due to the inclusion of the
ports. I argued earlier that this conﬁguration is not intuitive for including ports because the optimized
magnet pattern already fully covers the intended space.
One might question whether it is even reasonable to fully correct for coil fringing eﬀects, especially
since these are most pronounced near the wall where conﬁnement eﬀects are typically less critical.
Furthermore, one might question the necessity of solving this particular challenge.
One potential
approach to mitigate this issue could be to deﬁne a smaller Rgap in the design. As shown in Figure
4.5a, the fringing eﬀects are not equally prominent for all radii.
4.2
Stellarator – Muse target ﬁeld
In this section, I begin by presenting the solution obtained from the continuous stellarator model. Us-
ing streamline plots, I will demonstrate that the algorithm produces a magnetic ﬁeld closely matching
the target ﬁeld. Subsequently, I will employ the method outlined in Section 2.5.2 to create a discretized
model of the stellarator and compare its performance against the continuous model. Speciﬁcally, I will
focus on the MUSE conﬁguration, which has been optimized using the FICUS algorithm [8], making
it a suitable initial problem for this thesis.
4.2.1
Continuous model
The baseline for these simulations is to apply the framework to the MUSE conﬁguration. It is consid-
ered a robust validation problem as it has already been successfully solved using another algorithm
[8] and has been physically constructed. Therefore, it provides a reasonable benchmark for the al-
gorithm’s performance. The model is constructed similarly to the previous simulations of the linear
device or classical stellarator models. However, in this case, the targeted magnetic ﬁeld ⃗BT is created
using interpolation, unlike the semi-analytical ﬁelds used in the previous examples.
As outlined in the introduction, the problem at hand involves targeting a magnetic ﬁeld deﬁned
by Python code, which can be referenced in the repository [34]. In this continuous model, we aim
to achieve a solution as depicted in Figure 4.8, where the targeted ﬁeld corresponds to the MUSE
conﬁguration. The approach once again involves employing a continuous toroidal cape that includes
an external current density Je within the cape, directed in the ⃗eθ direction. The current density is
selected using the method described in Section 2.5.1. Alongside the current density, the cape also
accommodates the magnetization we are optimizing for. In Figure 4.8, the magnetization is ﬁltered
out to highlight the characteristics of this conﬁguration in relation to our algorithm. It is evident
from the ﬁgure that the targeted ﬁeld conforms within the vacuum vessel.
The dimensions of the device are R = 30 cm and a = 8.5 cm, with the cape having a thickness of
RMag = 1 cm.
Targeting the described ﬁeld, the algorithm converges as follows. We begin with an average target ﬁeld
of ⟨B⟩= 79.293 mT, which serves as our objective before applying any system modiﬁcations. Through
optimizing the current density, the objective decreases to 16.621 mT, initially forming a circular shape
63
==PAGE:77==
4.2.
Stellarator – Muse target ﬁeld
Figure 4.8: An illustration of how a solution to the problem will look. One have a shell (black), with
a current density represented by the green arrows going in the ⃗eθ direction, producing a ﬁeld in the
⃗eζ. The quasiaxisymmetrical MUSE conﬁguration, which is to be replicated is shown in purple. In
addition to a current density, magnets shown in both blue (north pointing into the torus) and red
(north pointing out of the torus), is placed to produce the ﬁeld lines.
similar to what was observed in Figure 4.3. After approximately 18 hours of continuous computation,
the objective converges further to 3.4756 mT. Figure 4.9 displays the resulting conﬁguration.
In Figure 4.9, we observe that the streamlines adopt a shape closely resembling the targeted stream-
lines. The magnetic conﬁguration depicted in the ﬁgure reveals a pattern where there is signiﬁcant
magnetization in the inner ring and less in the outer radial part. This distribution is advantageous as
it provides logical areas for integrating ports and views, as we will explore in the dipole model. This
stands in contrast to classical stellarator designs, which exhibited narrow regions of unmagnetized
material. Here, the design features numerous areas of lightly magnetized material, which theoretically
have less inﬂuence on the overall magnetic ﬁeld compared to strongly magnetized regions.
In Figure 4.10, Poincare plots are generated from streamlines initiated at ﬁxed positions (y, z) = (0, 0)
with varying start positions along x = {0.31, 0.32, 0.33, 0.34, 0.35, 0.36, 0.37} m. It is observed that the
replicated streamlines converge to a single ﬂux surface. Therefore, over extended periods, the solutions
should exhibit further convergence, which my solutions currently do not fully capture. Additionally,
it is noticeable that the target ﬁeld ⃗BT also converges to only two ﬂux surfaces, lacking the nested
ﬂux surfaces as expected from [8]. This discrepancy is believed to stem from an error in the imported
ﬁeld or its associated ecosystem. Further elaboration on this issue follows. For this conﬁguration
the fB objective discussed in the literature review, which is also used for MUSE is calculated to be
fB = 2.61 · 10−6 T²m². For reference FAMUS, landed MUSE on around fB = 4 · 10−7 T²m². So a
factor of 5 lower, but again, we have not run the convergence to the full and we have not tested any
better initial value or regularizations.
Comments about, convergence and the targeted ﬁeld
As observed from the Poincare plot, the targeted ﬁeld does not exhibit complete sets of ﬂux surfaces.
Given this observation, I suspect the targeted ﬁeld to be ill-behaved. The likely source of error lies
in the COMSOL interpolation of the dataset. COMSOL typically performs linear interpolation when
presented with such datasets, which may not adequately capture the complexities of an exotic ﬁeld like
this. To address this issue, there are three potential solutions. The ﬁrst option is to extract a larger
dataset containing more ﬁeld data with a higher resolution. While intuitive, this approach may still
64
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:78==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
Figure 4.9: (left): The converged solution of the cape with all the cape being present. It can be noticed
that there is some areas with high magnetization compared to others.
(Right): The Streamlines
produced by this conﬁguration lines up with the targeted ﬁeldlines. After this optimization of 10 000
seconds, the solution converged to S = 3.4756mT
not guarantee optimal convergence. The second option involves using COMSOL’s external function
capability, which allows importing a C library. This can be used to interface with Python extraction
code or a C/Fortran library, thereby bypassing simple interpolation and potentially improving ﬁdelity.
The third option is to solve the quasi-symmetric construction (QSC) model directly within COMSOL
using the equations described in [6]. Here, external function can be utilized for expansions or other
functionalities not easily implemented within COMSOL itself.
I propose starting with the second option as it oﬀers the best trade-oﬀbetween complexity and speed.
The ﬁrst option, while simple, is potentially slow due to the large dataset extraction. On the other
hand, the third option involves solving the quasi-symmetric construction (QSC) equations, which is
complex but might oﬀer faster solution times.
If the issue is not solely due to interpolation, another possible concern could be the meshing in the
area. Although I aimed for ﬁne meshing, it’s good practice to conduct a mesh convergence test for
the system, which unfortunately hasn’t been done in this project.
The discovery of the ill-behaved target ﬁeld and the method to identify it through the Poincare plot
occurred late in the project, preventing any immediate tests to rectify this ﬁeld behavior. Until this
issue with the ill-behaved target ﬁeld is resolved, the validity of the convergence we have observed
remains uncertain.
Furthermore, one might question whether the interpolation accurately represents a physical ﬁeld.
The algorithm inherently cannot produce unphysical ﬁelds as it can only create magnetizations, and
currently, there is no compelling argument suggesting whether the ﬁeld interpolation is physical or
not.
65
==PAGE:79==
4.2.
Stellarator – Muse target ﬁeld
Target Field
Total Field
Figure 4.10: (left): The Poincare plot generated from the target ﬁeld. The plot shows the 7 release
points as black dots and the stream lines crossovers with the xz axis. It can be seen that 2 consistent
ﬂux surfaces are formed, the blue and the multicolored, which consists of rest of the colors. The points
are released from x = {0.31, 0.32, 0.33, 0.34, 0.35, 0.36, 0.37}m with y, z = 0. The points 0.31m and
0.37m are made to see that some points will not be captured by magnetic ﬁeld when not released
within the last closed ﬂux surface. (right): Poincare plot made from the generated ﬁeld. Only one
ﬂux surface is formed, consisting of all the colors released. Purple line is last closed ﬂux surface.
4.2.2
Dipole model
Despite identifying discrepancies in the continuous model with the target ﬁeld, promising results were
still observed from the algorithm. It is anticipated that once the issue with COMSOL interpolation is
resolved, the results should improve further. Therefore, in this section, we proceed to optimize dipoles
in the stellarator using the single interface method described in Section 2.5.2. This method was found
to be the fastest among the discretization methods tested, primarily because only dipole points need
to be deployed. In the model, 10,000 dipoles are uniformly deployed using the discretization algorithm
outlined in Section A.2. The optimization speed with this method is akin to continuous optimization
and is mainly governed by the number of mesh elements, thereby determining the degrees of freedom
in the problem. The deployment of points is eﬃcient, with 10,000 points in the COMSOL Application
Builder taking approximately 30 minutes.
Figure 4.11 illustrates the algorithm’s evolution over three cycles. Three consecutive COMSOL studies
were conducted in series. Figure 4.11a depicts the initial stage where no magnets have yet developed,
and only the magnetic cape (not shown in the ﬁgure but part of the model) generates a toroidal ﬁeld.
The ﬁeld lines indicate a signiﬁcant discrepancy between the generated (black lines) and target (green
lines) ﬁelds, with the generated ﬁeld resembling a simple circular pattern. After the ﬁrst optimization
cycle, shown in Figure 4.11b, the stellarator’s magnets have started to develop noticeably.
The
pattern begins to resemble its continuous counterpart. The objective function has also improved to
approximately 3.53 mT, which is close to the 3.46 mT achieved by the continuous model. Upon closer
66
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:80==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
inspection of the ﬁeld lines, they initially start at the same point and approximately follow each other
along the torus. However, even after just one revolution, diﬀerences between the target and generated
ﬁeld lines become noticeable.
A continuation of the time solver is depicted in Figure 4.11c.
Despite a marginal change in the
objective of only 0.028 mT, there is a noticeable improvement in the alignment of the ﬁeld lines with
the target. This suggests that the optimization in the initial simulation may not have fully converged.
In this step, the magnet conﬁguration did not undergo signiﬁcant changes, but careful observation
reveals some spots beginning to develop on the magnets.
Lastly, Figure 4.11d illustrates an even smaller change in objective, with only 0.008 mT diﬀerence,
but the ﬁeld lines are noticeably closer to the target now. Once again, the magnetic conﬁguration has
developed further, with more saturated spots appearing.
It appears that the initial stages of the optimization establish the general shape, while the subsequent
phases reﬁne the details, leading to the development of the distinct magnetic features.
Throughout the entire optimization process, we observe a consistent trend: even though the objective
converges slowly after the initial optimization where it appeared to be converged, small changes in
the objective result in noticeable diﬀerences in the ﬁeld lines over a 5-turn revolution. This highlights
how attention to detail can signiﬁcantly impact the overall outcome.
Certainly, the argumentation may seem somewhat arbitrary, especially considering that longer stream-
lines could have been analyzed. However, the concept still holds value when examining the convergence
of the system.
67
==PAGE:81==
4.2.
Stellarator – Muse target ﬁeld
Field Release Point
(a)
Field Release Point
(b)
Field Release Point
(c)
Field Release Point
(d)
Figure 4.11: (a): Showing the 0th step of the convergence t = 0, magnet have not started to develop
yet. Objective starts at S = 16.575mT. A round ﬁeld line is produces, resembling not close to the
ﬁeld line produced by the target ﬁeld. (b): Showing the conﬁguration after the ﬁrst run sweeping
10 000 seconds of model time. The optimization took 10 hours and reduced the objective down to
S = 3.532mT. The ﬁeld line start to have the same shape as the target ﬁeld, but has visible deviation.
(c): Showing the conﬁguration after the second run sweeping 30 000 seconds of model time. The
objective reduces to S = 3.504mT. The optimization took 14 hours. Field lines are more comparable.
(d): Showing the conﬁguration after the thirs run sweeping for 100 000 seconds in model time. The
optimization took 45 hours and reduced the objective down to S = 3.496mT. The ﬁeld lines agree
well.
68
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:82==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
In the outer shell, similar to the continuous model, we observe regions of white dipoles indicating
magnetization, suggesting natural locations for ports and views. To further analyze the results, I
applied a threshold in the last convergence study.
Figures 4.12 and 4.12c illustrate the eﬀects of
diﬀerent threshold values.
Figure 4.12c demonstrates that selecting a low threshold, speciﬁcally below 0.1 T, maintains proximity
to the converged objective.
Increasing the threshold signiﬁcantly alters the objective, which isn’t
desirable since our goal is to preserve convergence as closely as possible. I opted for thresholds of 0.05
T and 0.075 T; however, thresholds can be adjusted as long as they meet conﬁguration and precision
requirements.
Figure 4.12a depicts the result with a 0.05 T threshold, revealing a conﬁguration with expected
gaps. Most of the vacuum vessel (VV) is covered with magnetic dipoles, yet some spaces are visible.
Streamline inspection shows alignment between the generated and targeted ﬁelds, maintaining ﬁeld
conﬁnement.
Figure 4.12b, using a 0.075 T threshold, shows more free space within the conﬁguration. Streamline
quality is slightly degraded compared to the 0.05 T case, although ﬁeld lines still exhibit conﬁnement
to some extent. Overall, the conﬁguration’s streamlines and ﬁeld line conﬁnement are not perfect in
this scenario.
Although I chose magnets sized 10 x 10 x 10 mm3, one could also opt for the minimum size increment
of magnets and then choose integer heights.
For instance, starting with a baseline height of 0.1
mm and selecting integer multiples for magnetization, the heights would be factors of 0.1 mm with
a ﬁxed magnetization of 1.3 T. From the color bars, it can be observed that the dipoles with the
chosen magnetization settle around 1.25 T, which is close to the typical 1.3 T for many magnets.
The strength of a magnetic dipole, as discussed earlier, scales with ⃗m and ⃗r, allowing one to adjust
the remanent magnetization Mr to a suitable value and subsequently reduce the magnet’s height
accordingly, ⃗m = ⃗Mwdh. Overall, these dipoles oﬀer a discrete design possibility, similar to that used
for the linear device.
4.2.3
Summarizing thoughts
The continuous magnet stellarator provided promising results, serving as a solid baseline for the
discrete dipole problem. Solving the discrete dipole problem also yielded a reasonable solution. It
was observed that small changes in the objective led to signiﬁcant changes in the generated ﬁeld lines.
When using a threshold approach, it naturally created magnet-free areas suitable for port placement
and windows.
Despite the current lack of trust in the target ﬁeld, the algorithm demonstrated its capability to
produce a ﬁeld close to the target. The limitations of the algorithm and the challenge of achieving
hard convergence are believed to stem from the issues with the ill-behaved target ﬁeld. Although the
target ﬁeld seems to be an issue, it might be as simple as the algorithm converging on a local minima,
if this is the case, some intermediate steps should be taken, be a thermal annealing approach or other
initial conditions. It have been seen that the objective decrease slowly, however still decreasing, this
might be because ⃗Heﬀis decreasing to 0 in every point and thus is producing a computationally slow
algorithm. Visualizing only 5 turns is maybe not the best graphical representation either, the better
option is to do full Poincare plots with streamlines going around for many turns. This has been done,
but leads to the same conclusions, and I also thought that these 3D lines were a little more pleasing
for the eye in general.
69
==PAGE:83==
4.2.
Stellarator – Muse target ﬁeld
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.12: Colorbar unit is T. (a) and (b) have same colorbar. (a): Showing the optimized conﬁgu-
ration when Bth = 0.005mT, removing only a small part of the magnetic dipoles. The conﬁguration
gives some places for views and port and reproduces the ﬁeld lines to a good degree within 4 revo-
lutions. (b): Showing the optimized conﬁguration when Bth = 0.0075mT. The conﬁguration open
much more space, but gives less agreeable streamlines. The lines are still to some extent agreeable.
(c): Showing threshold versus objective, objective increases when threshold increases, meaning more
error is introduced. The relation is not linear.
70
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 5
Conclusion and outlook
The gradient based method for optimizing any objective have been discussed and used to optimize
permanent magnets for; a linear device, a classical stellarator and quasiaxisymmetrical stellarator. It
have been discussed why the quasiaxisymmetrical stellarator is interesting to replicate.
A simple 3D printing algorithm have been created to realize experimental veriﬁcation of the optimized
conﬁgurations.
The linear device mimicking a classical stellarator have been optimized on the magnetization in both
a dipole framework as well as a magnet framework, afterwards position optimized. The ﬁeld lines of
the optimizations steps agreed very well with the streamlines of the targeted ﬁeld. A stencil have been
generated and 3D printed. Optimal magnets placed in the 3D print, and a veriﬁcation of experiment
made. The experimental part showed that the magnitudes of ﬁelds diﬀered with up to almost 40%.
The directional and uniform behavior agreed well. It was seen that the coils produced a problematic
ﬁeld, probably resulting from a slight tilt, hence one should be careful assembling this setup.
A continuous framework of the classical stellarator have been optimized and showed a precise con-
vergence with extreme closeness to the target ﬁeld. The conﬁguration was seen to not oﬀer as good
results when trying to implement ports into the magnetic cape. The magnetic conﬁguration, did not
show any intuitive place to place ports.
A particular fast dipole formulation in COMSOL have been implemented and used to formulate a
discrete stellarator conﬁguration. The method can be used for any other problem using the formal-
ism, where dipole approximation is valid. The optimization provided an objective value close to the
continuous version of the optimized situations.
Problems were observed and although nice streamlines were observed with a certain closeness to the
ﬁeld lines of the target ﬁeld, one should include some reﬁnement for the convergence. It is not a unique
problem with the framework in this project, but is also known for the density optimizing algorithm
used on for example MUSE. One could consider to have multiple generations of convergence, where
each generation have a thermal annealing step or another reﬁnement step to jump out of potential
minima. Alternatively it could also be considered to ﬁgure out more ways to generate initial conditions
for the shape, as the project here only considered the 0 solution as a starting point. Possible starting
points, could be provided from other existing frameworks. The algorithm created sensible solutions.
It was considered that the optimization could be run for longer, still reﬁning the results, where the
small changes in objective lead to signiﬁcant changes in streamlines.
It was also discussed, that ﬂux surfaces was supposed to be nested, which was not seen, and a
suspicion to the imported ﬁeld was raised. In further work, this ﬁeld should be ﬁxed ﬁrst to ensure
the target ﬁeld is more well behaved in nature. A possible choice could be to provide instead of a
linear interpolation use a C function in COMSOL or solve for the conﬁguration within COMSOL to
generate the semi-analytical ﬁeld as was the case for linear device and classical stellarator.
This nonlinear optimization problem is particular hard to solve, and provides a computational chal-
lenge when ⃗Heﬀgoes to zero everywhere, which is will do when the optimization converges. It was not
71
==PAGE:85==
tried in this project to tune the damping parameter α or make it dependent on the virtual system for
faster convergence, but this should be tried in further experimentation.
From the literature review, we also learned that these method types are prone to local minima, and
are thus sensitive on initial conditions. More experimentation with initial condition is also a path to
consider. It was also learned that the problem in general is ill-posed and that to get a more well posed
problem, one needs to add regularization.
The ﬁnal remark is that this project adds novelty by considering a new approach to solving a known
problem and hence put a new tool in the world of permanent stellarator design, but that this tool
needs some more reﬁnement in order to be as competitive.
The algorithm could in future play a role in a bigger stellarator than one that can be build with
permanent magnets. If one imagines instead to use superconducting dipoles, the method is perfectly
suited for this type of optimization. The reason is that the dipoles can be tuned in strength by tuning
the current, giving a continuous spectra of magnetic strength, which this method produces nicely.
72
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 6
Appendix
==PAGE:87==
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:88==
Bibliography
[1]
Emirates Nuclear Energy Corporation. What is Fission and How Does It Work? [Online; ac-
cessed 13-July-2024]. 2022. url: %5Curl%7Bhttps://www.enec.gov.ae/discover/how-
nuclear-energy-works/what-is-fission-and-how-does-it-work-/%7D.
[2]
Dstrozzi. File:Fusion rxnrate.svg — Wikimedia Commons, the free media repository. [Online;
accessed 13-July-2024; Version: 00:36, 1 January 2020]. 2024. url: %5Curl%7Bhttps://commons.
wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Fusion_rxnrate.svg&oldid=888167172%7D.
[3]
Iter Organization ©. FUELLING THE FUSION REACTION. https://www.iter.org/sci/
FusionFuels. Accessed: 2024-07-05.
[4]
Euro Fusion. HISTORY OF FUSION. https://euro- fusion.org/fusion/history- of-
fusion/. Accessed: 2024-07-05.
[5]
Matt Landreman et al. “SIMSOPT: a ﬂexible framework for stellarator optimization”. In: Jour-
nal of Open Source Software 6.65 (2021), p. 3525.
[6]
Matt Landreman and Wrick Sengupta. “Constructing stellarators with quasisymmetry to high
order”. In: Journal of Plasma Physics 85.6 (2019), p. 815850601.
[7]
Kenneth C Hammond et al. Stellarator Simpliﬁcation using Permanent Magnets (PM4Stell).
Tech. rep. Princeton Plasma Physics Lab.(PPPL), Princeton, NJ (United States), 2023.
[8]
TM Qian et al. “Design and construction of the MUSE permanent magnet stellarator”. In:
Journal of Plasma Physics 89.5 (2023), p. 955890502.
[9]
Caoxiang Zhu et al. “Topology optimization of permanent magnets for stellarators”. In: Nuclear
Fusion 60.10 (2020), p. 106002.
[10]
Alan A Kaptanoglu, Rory Conlin, and Matt Landreman. “Greedy permanent magnet optimiza-
tion”. In: Nuclear Fusion 63.3 (2023), p. 036016.
[11]
Per Helander et al. “Stellarator and tokamak plasmas: a comparison”. In: Plasma Physics and
Controlled Fusion 54.12 (2012), p. 124009.
[12]
Allen H Boozer. “Physics of magnetically conﬁned plasmas”. In: Reviews of modern physics 76.4
(2004), pp. 1071–1141.
[13]
Matt Landreman. Quasisymmetry: a hidden symmetry of magnetic ﬁelds. 2019.
[14]
Matt Landreman and Elizabeth Paul. “Magnetic ﬁelds with precise quasisymmetry for plasma
conﬁnement”. In: Physical Review Letters 128.3 (2022), p. 035001.
[15]
Matt Landreman and Wrick Sengupta. “Direct construction of optimized stellarator shapes. Part
1. Theory in cylindrical coordinates”. In: Journal of Plasma Physics 84.6 (2018), p. 905840616.
[16]
Matt Landreman, Wrick Sengupta, and Gabriel G Plunk. “Direct construction of optimized
stellarator shapes. Part 2. Numerical quasisymmetric solutions”. In: Journal of Plasma Physics
85.1 (2019), p. 905850103.
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[17]
Gabriel G Plunk, Matt Landreman, and Per Helander. “Direct construction of optimized stel-
larator shapes. Part 3. Omnigenity near the magnetic axis”. In: Journal of Plasma Physics 85.6
(2019), p. 905850602.
[18]
Eduardo Rodriguez, EJ Paul, and Amitava Bhattacharjee. “Measures of quasisymmetry for
stellarators”. In: Journal of Plasma Physics 88.1 (2022), p. 905880109.
[19]
Tony Qian. MUSE PM Stellarator Design Data. June 2023. url: https://github.com/tmqian/
Muse-Design-Paper.
[20]
David J Griﬃths. Introduction to Electrodynamics Fourth Edition. 2021, pp. 252–255.
[21]
P Helander et al. “Stellarators with permanent magnets”. In: Physical review letters 124.9 (2020),
p. 095001.
[22]
Andrea Roberto Insinga. “Optimising magnetostatic assemblies”. In: (2016).
[23]
David J Sellmyer, Yi Liu, and Daisuke Shind¯o. “Handbook of advanced magnetic materials”.
In: (2005).
[24]
Andrea Roberto Insinga and Rasmus Bjørk. “Gradient-based optimization of permanent magnet
assemblies for any objective”. In: Physical Review Applied (2024).
[25]
Eduardo Andrade Lima, Andrei Irimia, and John P Wikswo. “The magnetic inverse problem”.
In: The SQUID handbook: applications of SQUIDs and SQUID systems (2006), pp. 139–267.
[26]
Rasmus Bjørk et al. “MagTense: A micromagnetic framework using the analytical demagneti-
zation tensor”. In: Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 535 (2021), p. 168057.
[27]
Andrew M Bradley. “PDE-constrained optimization and the adjoint method. 2019”. In: URL
https://cs. stanford. edu/˜ ambrad/adjoint tutorial. pdf (2021).
[28]
Eberhard Engel. Density functional theory. Appendix A. Springer, 2011.
[29]
Matt Landreman and Caoxiang Zhu. “Calculation of permanent magnet arrangements for stel-
larators: a linear least-squares method”. In: Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 63.3 (2021),
p. 035001.
[30]
GS Xu et al. “Design of quasi-axisymmetric stellarators with varying-thickness permanent mag-
nets based on Fourier and surface magnetic charges method”. In: Nuclear Fusion 61.2 (2021),
p. 026025.
[31]
KC Hammond and Alan A Kaptanoglu. “Improved stellarator permanent magnet designs through
combined discrete and continuous optimizations”. In: Computer Physics Communications 299
(2024), p. 109127.
[32]
Guodong Yu et al. “Single stage optimization for permanent magnet stellarators”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.14041 (2024).
[33]
Henrik Bruus. Numerical studies in physics. Lecture notes for DTU course 10350. 2022.
[34]
Mathias Lendal. Supportscriptsmasters. July 2024. url: https://github.com/Matty-len/
Support_scripts_masters.git.
[35]
David J Griﬃths. Introduction to Electrodynamics Fourth Edition. 2021, pp. 225–226.
[36]
Andrew J. Petruska and Jake J. Abbott. “Optimal Permanent-Magnet Geometries for Dipole
Field Approximation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 49.2 (2013), pp. 811–819. doi:
10.1109/TMAG.2012.2205014.
[37]
Kaspar K Nielsen et al. “Optimizing a Halbach cylinder for ﬁeld homogeneity by remanence
variation”. In: Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 514 (2020), p. 167175.
[38]
Arnold Magnetic Technologies. The Vocabulary of Magnetism. https://www.arnoldmagnetics.
com/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/Vocabulary-of-Magnetism.pdf. Accessed: 2024-06-23.
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:90==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
[39]
FIRST4MAGNETS®. Neodynium Magnet Grades. https://www.first4magnets.com/tech-
centre - i61 / information - and - articles - i70 / neodymium - magnet - information - i82 /
grades-of-neodymium-magnets-i92. Accessed: 2024-06-23.
[40]
Daniel Price and contributors. Coordinate transforms. https://splash-viz.readthedocs.io/
en/latest/geometry.html. Accessed: 2024-06-29. Revision: e9ec7281.
==PAGE:91==
A. Vector projections
A
Vector projections
A.1
Vector projections for cylindrical system
Figure 1: Cylindrical and toroidal system
In this particular case the linear device is cylindrical symmetric, and cylindrical are useful. A cylinder
is a rotationally symmetric shape with a height coordinate z. The rotational symmetry gives rise to
the usage of a radius r and an angle ϕ
r =
p
x2 + y2
x = r cos(ϕ)
(1a)
ϕ = tan−1(y/x);
y = r sin(ϕ)
(1b)
z = z
z = z
(1c)
While the vector components maps with the following relations
vr = vx
x
r + vy
y
r
vx = vr cos(ϕ) −vϕ sin(ϕ)
(2a)
vϕ = vx
−y
r + vy
x
r
vy = vr sin(ϕ) −vϕ cos(ϕ)
(2b)
vz = vz
vz = vz
(2c)
The transformation operation is done one all the components on the grid G In Comsol when imple-
menting the boxed in order to make them be correctly oriented, it is useful to set the axis of rotation.
This axis of rotation should coincide with a vector normal to the cylindrical surface. In a cylindrical
system the vector normal to the surface is the radial vector vR. For this implementation the normal
vector need not to be normalized. Considering the vector components to be the position on the surface
results in vx = x vy = y,
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:92==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
For the normal vector vphi = 0 and vz = 0 (they are tangential). and expression (2a) gives
vr = x2
r + y2
r = r2
r = r
which when we map back to cartesian coordinates the following normal vector components
x = r cos (ϕ)
y = r sin (ϕ)
which in vector notation of cartesian coordinates gives:
⃗en =


cos (ϕ)
sin (ϕ)
0


which the Python scripts sets as the normal vector to each point in G. which is exclusively determined
by ϕ. This analysis seems straight forward in the cylindrical case. However in the case of a torus, the
expression for the normal vector might not be as straightforward to guess but the recipe used here is
universal and can be applied to the toroidal system. Every point in the G then gets translated into
the cuboid, by directly applying the mappings in (1a) (1b) and (1c). To conclude, using the mapping
as well as the normal vector showed, gives the positions of the magnets centers, as well as the their
rotation, and can be put directly into COMSOL.
In order to ﬁx the magnetization to only be on the normal of the cylinder surface, (2a) is used, with
the vector component being Real.Mx, Real.My and the
Choosen only the radial component (the normal to the surface), equations (1a), (1b), (1c) now reads
⃗Mr = vr


cos (ϕ)
sin (ϕ)
0

=

Mx
x
r + My
y
r



cos (ϕ)
sin (ϕ)
0


(3)
The expression is measured in Cartesian coordinates and r is the radius from (1a). (3) makes sure
that the magnets are only pointing in radial direction. And the way to use it is to use it as the x, y, z
components in system with real magnetization. The reason that this is something we want is because
in a practical construction of this device, the magnets collective magnetization, should be normal to
their interface as is usually the case with permanent magnets.
For the ensemble of N magnets, equation (3), is applied on every magnet.
A.2
Vector projections in toroidal coordinates
A similar approach is used in the toroidal system, but here the mappings from one coordinate system
to the other is as follows:
r =
rh
(x2 + y2)1/2 −R
i2
+ z2
x = (r cos θ + R) cos ζ
(4a)
θ = tan−1
"
z
p
x2 + y2 −R
#
y = (r cos θ + R) sin ζ
(4b)
ζ = tan−1 y
x

z = r sin θ
(4c)
The coordinates can be seen in Figure 1. In this expressions R is the major radius of the torus. r is
the minor radius of the torus. θ is called the poloidal angle and ζ is called the toroidal angle. It is
common in the literature to use ϕ for the toroidal angle. Again is the magnetic dipole grid created
==PAGE:93==
A. Vector projections
within (r, θ, ζ) and transformed into their positions in the cartesian space. The vector radial vector
direction in this coordinate system is
vr = vx
x (rcyl −R)
rrcyl
+ vy
y (rcyl −R)
rrcyl
+ vz
z
r
(5)
where rcyl =
p
x2 + y2. The other 2 directions can be found in [40]. Only the radial direction is of
interest as it is the direction we want to have the magnets pointing. Transforming back to cartestian
coordinates is then done by
vx = vr cos θ cos ζ −vθ sin θ cos ζ −vϕ sin ζ
(6a)
vx = vr cos θ sin ζ −vθ sin θ sin ζ + vϕ cos ζ
(6b)
vz = vr sin θ + vθ cos θ
(6c)
In this project only the radial part is of interest, hence vθ = 0, vζ = 0. The transformations greatly
reduce to
vx = vr cos θ cos ζ
(7a)
vx = vr cos θ sin ζ
(7b)
vz = vr sin θ
(7c)
Using the magnetization vector components and equations (5), (7a), (7b), (7c) gives the full projection
⃗Mr =

vx
x (rcyl −R)
rrcyl
+ vy
y (rcyl −R)
rrcyl
+ vz
z
r
 

cos θ cos ζ
cos θ sin ζ
sin θ


(8)
to make sure the magnetization transforms to only the radial component, which is then what is
fed into the real system. These transformations are quite important, as they also allow to plot the
magnetization on the toroidal system.
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:94==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
B
The magnetic grid
In all of the three methods, placing points or block magnets is crucial. This small section contains a
brief description of how these entities are placed.
Cylindrical system: The magnets are spatially placed as followed. A grid in the cylindrical space
are deployed as where
G =

(r, ϕ, z) ∈R3|Rmin < ri < Rmax, 0 < ϕ < 2π, 0 < z < H
	
where Rmax and Rmin is chosen to be after the glass tube but inside the coils. For the toroidal system
the grid is created as The number of elements in each direction is found from the magnets formfactors
and are found by the following
Nr = Rmax −Rmin
h
,
Nϕ = (ϕmax −ϕmin) r
w + σw
,
Nz = zmax −zmin
d + σd
(9)
σ refers to the spacing between magnets, for r we are not interested in any spacing, we want to stack
them.
The spacing between the grid points is then deﬁned by
∆r = Rmax −Rmin
Nr
= h,
∆ϕ = ϕmax −ϕmin
Nθ
,
∆z = zmax −zmin
Nz
(10)
To increase the spacing one, a number smaller than the number of angular deploys is chosen to make
sure there is spacing between the magnets.
Toroidal system: For toroidal a grid of
G =

(r, θ, ζ) ∈R3|Rmin < ri < Rmax, 0 < θ < 2π, 0 < ζ < 2π
	
Nr = Rmax −Rmin
h
,
Nθ = (θmax −θmin) r
w + σw
,
Nζ = (ζmax −ζmin) R
d + σd
(11)
σ refers to the spacing between magnets
The spacing between the grid points is then deﬁned by
∆r = Rmax −Rmin
Nr
,
∆θ = θmax −θmin
Nθ
,
∆ζ = ζmax −ζmin
Nζ
(12)
When considering all the spacing, here this approach is ﬁne, but if one should allign the magnets
perfectly to each other, it would be a good idea, to project the size of the magnets down to a angle
instead of choosing an angle as I do here.
==PAGE:95==
C. Scaling of parameters in simulations
C
Scaling of parameters in simulations
Scaling of the time stepping:
As COMSOL solves a system governed by diﬀerential equations, it progresses through time steps
analogous to physical time (although not exactly). Hence, it was natural to simulate from 0 to 10
seconds with a time step of 1 second, and then repeat the simulation with scaled times. I selected
scaling factors of 1, 10, and 104. As depicted in Figure 2, these scaling factors visibly inﬂuence the
convergence of the system.
Figure 2: objective as function of time for diﬀerent time scalings
The reason for this behavior lies in COMSOL’s approach to time stepping: it attempts to take the
largest time steps possible while maintaining accuracy relative to the speciﬁed time steps (e.g., 1s
or 5s). Our interest, however, lies in the converged solution rather than intermediate steps. Scaling
factors of 10 and 104 necessitate more intermediate steps, but by setting the time steps suﬃciently
large, COMSOL adjusts to solve the problem eﬃciently. Based on this observation, it is advisable—as
chosen for this project—to use longer time steps. This allows us to halt the simulation once the
objective appears suﬃciently converged and the Poincar´e plots are satisfactory.
The eﬀect of changing the damping parameter α on a ﬁxed time:
Another quick experiment is to scale the parameter α
Figure 3: Objective versus time for diﬀerent alpha parameters.
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:96==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
In Figure 3, the objective changes are observed by varying the damping parameter α over ﬁxed
iterations, although in physical terms, it relates to time. The plot displays the objective as a function
of iterations, highlighting the initial sensitivity of the objective to α, which diminishes over subsequent
iterations. These experiments were conducted under ﬁxed norm conditions.
If norm constraints are not ﬁxed and projections are applied, adjusting α might still inﬂuence conver-
gence, aligning with our discussions. The initial disparity observed in Figure 3 suggests that scaling
α can be akin to adjusting time stepping, impacting convergence rates similarly. Notably, the units
here are iterations in COMSOL. From the plots, it’s evident that larger time steps contribute to faster
convergence, which could be achieved by maximizing time steps. Additionally, for the green, dark
blue, and brown curves starting from well-converged solutions, diﬀerences are negligible at this stage.
In conclusion, based on these scaling tests, the optimal computational approach would typically involve
using large time steps in study settings and setting α = −1 without additional modiﬁcations, ensuring
suﬃcient convergence.
==PAGE:97==
D. Control of imported ﬁeld and poincar´e plots
D
Control of imported ﬁeld and poincar´e plots
In this short section, we will talk a bit about the features quasisymmetric stellarators should exhibit.
According to [8], one measure to ensure the accuracy of the magnetic ﬁeld replication is to generate
Poincar´e plots.
To generate Poincar´e plots in COMSOL, you can follow these steps: Import the magnetic ﬁeld and
run an empty study. Then create a ﬁeldline plot with ⃗BT and allow them to run freely or within the
vacuum vessel (VV).
To
generate
the
plot,
ensure
to
set
the
starting
point
as
Starting-point controlled with
Coordinates, and choose an ap-
propriate start point that lies
within the ﬁeld.
For generating the plots, I use
the following advanced settings:
Allow backward time inte-
gration is turned OFF to move
only along the ﬁeld and not back-
wards. The Integration tolerance
is decreased to improve the accu-
racy of the results. The Maximum
number of integration steps is increased to a high value to allow streamlines to traverse multiple
times and create ﬂux surfaces.
As such, applying a filter di-
rectly on the streamlines will not
generate the desired result. The
trick is to create a view where two
clip planes are deﬁned, typically
in the xz-plane or alternatively in
the yz-plane.
These clip planes
should be placed very close to-
gether to create a small gap be-
tween them.
Since the streamlines in COM-
SOL are hollow by default, cre-
ating a visually pleasing plot can
be challenging. However, this plot primarily serves as a quick debugging tool.
Mathias Lendal - s183553
==PAGE:98==
Optimization and Experimental Realization of Hybrid Field Source for Magnetic Conﬁnement of
Plasma
I ﬁnd this tool useful because it helps identify unwanted features in
the Poincar´e plots generated from the imported ﬁeld (or possibly due
to interpolation). This allows us to assess whether the ﬁeld under
study meets our requirements. In a Poincar´e plot, black dots repre-
sent release points and unﬁlled points indicate where the ﬁeld lines
pass through.
In the example provided, the plot appears to exhibit only two ﬂux
surfaces, distinguished by the presence of distinct rings formed by the
blue circles. However, the purple, orange, green, and gray streamlines
do not form separate ﬂux surfaces for each color; instead, they collectively indicate one ﬂux surface.
Thus, the Poincar´e plot reveals anomalies that warrant further investigation, serving its intended
purpose for debugging.
==PAGE:99==
E. Domain operator in comsol and discretization
Figure 4: A schematic of the domain operator versus single law, versus combination between both.
E
Domain operator in comsol and discretization
COMSOL uses internal variables like dom to represent domains. Instead of multiple Amp`ere’s Law
nodes, a single Amp`ere’s Law can be applied with domain ﬁlters for magnetization within speciﬁc
regions (see Figure 4, middle). For example, Mx1 can be applied only in domain 1 where it exists,
and similarly for Mx2 in domain 2. The combined result in this simple case would be expressed as:
Mx1*(dom == 1) + Mx2*(dom == 2), and so forth.
Although theoretically optimal, this method encountered practical diﬃculties. Simulations could stall
for over 8 hours without starting, with memory consumption increasing. Thus, further reﬁnement was
necessary for practical use.
The third approach combines Amp`ere’s Law with domains (see Figure 4, right). This method involves
creating Amp`ere’s Laws for segments around the vacuum vessel, such as one turn of magnets in the
ϕ direction in a linear device. For instance, with J magnets in the ϕ direction and K magnets in the
z direction, this mixed approach requires only K Amp`ere’s Laws, each applied J times with the dom
ﬁlter.
This mixed approach proved to be the most eﬃcient of the three implementations. Simulations started
quickly (within around 5 minutes), and the software performance was less sluggish. Additionally, it was
faster to implement programmatically because fewer interactions with COMSOL’s API were required.
The primary reason for this eﬃciency is that writing multiple Amp`ere’s Laws involves numerous
interactions with COMSOL, whereas writing a combined domain equation with domain ﬁlters ((dom
== 1)) is comparatively faster.
A test conducted on a simple discretized 2D model conﬁrmed that using multiple Amp`ere’s Law
nodes or a single Amp`ere’s Law with domain selection yielded equivalent results. In the context of
results from a linear device, it was observed that a practical limit for the number of domain variables
per Amp`ere’s Law was around 30. This threshold ensured that computer memory usage remained
manageable, allowing computations to start promptly.
Mathias Lendal - s183553
