==PAGE:1==
Contact angle and freezing delay measurements.
Nicklas Garnæs Vagner
Department of Chemistry, Technical University of Denmark (DTU), 2800 Kgs,
Lyngby, Denmark July 2024
Supervisors:
Prof. Esben Thormann
PhD. Ingrid Eklundh Sørensen
PhD. Anand Raj Palanisamy
This thesis was submitted in partial fulfillment for the requirements for the degree of a
Masters of Science in Engineering (Applied Chemistry).
==PAGE:2==
This page is intentionally left blank.
2
==PAGE:3==
Abstract:
Passive anti-freezing methods are in the heat of development. The main cause of this is the danger of
active ice removal on a lot of industrial plants. Examples of this are ships sailing in extreme weather,
where members of the crew have to actively break the ice using large hammers, as well as windmills
where technicians have to stop the blades of the windmill and pour anti-ice chemicals down each
blade. Both methods are not only dangerous but also costly in terms of time that could have been spent
sailing or producing power respectively. From this, it is of great industrial importance and interest that
we find passive methods of ice-prevention to preferably remove this dangerous work or at least lower
the amount of it.
Hence, in this work, methods of static- and dynamic contact angle- as well as freezing delay
measurements were established, conducted and protocoled. These methods were employed to
understand the effect addition of zwitterionic content would have on the anti-freezing behavior of
polymer coated silicon wafer surfaces.
The contact angle measurements were conducted on a Theta Flex equipped with a tilting stage and
precision syringe for highly precise and efficient dynamic measurements.
Freezing delays were recorded using a Theta Lite with a liquid-cooled chamber stage setup. This setup
was sealed with parafilm to prevent air current disturbances throughout the measurements. A nitrogen
line provided dry gas for the measurements and proved necessary when conducting measurements on
pre-cooled sample surfaces due to otherwise extreme ice formation, especially at temperatures below
-5 °C. Illustrations of both setups are provided as well as detailed diagrams explaining each
component in the setup.
Samples measured were provided by Palanisamy, Anand Raj and were synthesized polymers
spin-coated on pre-treated silicon wafer surfaces. Alterations between each sample included: mol%
zwitterionic content, distance between zwitterionic groups and hydrophobicity of the co-monomer
backbone in the polymer.
3
==PAGE:4==
Table of content:
Introduction:
8
Theory:
Contact angles
9
Homogeneous nucleation
13
Nucleation rate
18
Heterogeneous nucleation
20
Experimental:
Contact angle setup
22
Freezing delay setup
24
Results and discussion:
Samples
27
Contact angle results
29
Freezing delay results
44
Conclusion:
55
References:
56
4
==PAGE:5==
List of figures:
Figure 1: Force diagram of a water droplet on a surface.
Figure 2: In-depth illustration of force diagram concerning a liquid droplet on a solid surface.
Figure 3: Illustration depicting the cycles of the advancing and receding contact angle measurements
using the needle filling method. Illustration by Huhtamäki T. et al. [3].
Figure 4: Illustration of tilting contact angle. Illustration acquired via. nanoScience [4].
Figure 5: Illustration of surface roughness effect on droplet.
Figure 6: Plot of Gibbs energy as a function of droplet radius.
Figure 7: Plot of critical radius as a function of temperature.
Figure 8: Plot of nucleation rate as a function of temperature (left) and barrier height (right).
Figure 9: Illustration of contact angle setup with (1) water droplet (2) sample surface (3) sample stage
(4) tilting cradle (5) backlight (6) water dispenser (7) high speed camera (8) computer connected to the
entire setup.
Figure 10: Full contact angle setup from different angles.
Figure 11: Theta Flex stage with silicon wafer sample on it.
Figure 12: Illustration of freezing delay setup with (1) water droplet (2) sample surface (3)
temperature logger (4) temperature controlled cooler (5) temperature controlled sample stage (6)
backlight (7) glass pane in chamber (8) humidity sensor (9) mountable manual syringe (10) high speed
camera (11) gas hose connected to nitrogen supply (12) computer connected to the entire setup (13)
temperature probe.
Figure 13: Full freezing delay setup from different angles.
Figure 14: Close up of chamber with syringe, hose, humidity sensor and temperature probe inserted.
Figure 15: Close up of droplet placed on a sample surface (this large amount of ice formation was not
the case for other measurements, the ice is present due to this sample having a freezing delay of 1.5+
hours!)
Figure 16: Structures of (a) Sulfobetaine methacrylate (b) Benzoylphenyl methacrylate (c)
Hydroxyethyl methacrylate.
Figure 17: Water absorbing surface before (left) and after (right) wetting.
Figure 18: Contact angle as a function of time for samples (3)-(10).
Figure 19: Water droplet volume as a function of time for samples (3)-(10).
Figure 20: First frames (left) and last frames (right) of advancing contact angle measurement of two
different sample surfaces (upper and lower).
Figure 21: Advancing contact angle experiments 1-5 of sample SB2HEBPA25 with observed sliding
behavior.
Figure 22: Advancing contact angle Experiment 5 of sample SB2HEBPA25 with contact angle plotted
alongside baseline.
5
==PAGE:6==
Figure 23: Receding contact angle measurement snapshots over time of HEBPA surface. Timeline
proceeds from upper left to lower right image.
Figure 24: Contact angle and baseline as a function of time for receding contact angle measurements
of HEBPA surface.
Figure 25: Receding contact angle measurement snapshots over time of SB3HEBPA95 surface.
Timeline proceeds from upper left to lower right image.
Figure 26: Contact angle and baseline as a function of time for receding contact angle measurements
of SB3HEBPA95 surface.
Figure 27: Illustration of droplet edges moving whilst performing receding measurements. Going
from left to right in time.
Figure 28: SB3HEBPA25 at 90°- (Left) and BMBPA at 60° of tilting (right).
Figure 29: Average (avg.), standard deviation (std. dev.) and percentile standard deviation (% std.
dev.) as a function of measurement number for SB3HEBPA50 at -5°C.
Figure 30: Modified average (avg.), standard deviation (std. dev.) and percentile standard deviation
(% std. dev.) as a function of measurement number for SB3HEBPA50 at -5°C after removing largest
and smallest measured values.
Figure 31: Hypothetical constant temperature freezing delay measurements at different temperatures
for the same sample.
Figure 32: Freezing delay and cooling rate as a function of measurement number for surface
SB3HEBPA50.
Figure 33: Constant temperature freezing delay as a function of mol% zwitterionic content of
SB3HEBPA surfaces at -10°C. 0% (7), 95% (6), 75% (5), 50% (4) and 25% (3).
Figure 34: Descending temperature freezing delay as a function of mol% zwitterionic content of
SB3HEBPA surfaces. 0% (7), 95% (6), 75% (5), 50% (4) and 25% (3).
Figure 35: Descending freezing temperature as a function of mol% zwitterionic content of
SB3HEBPA surfaces.
0% (7), 95% (6), 75% (5), 50% (4) and 25% (3).
Figure 36: Constant temperature freezing delay measurements (left) and descending temperature
freezing delay measurements (right) of PHFBMA and HEBPA.
6
==PAGE:7==
List of tables:
Table 1: Values of surface tension, free energy difference, critical radius and homogeneous barrier
height.
Table 2: Surface tension of water at sub-zero temperatures as reported by [20].
Table 3: Nomenclature of tested samples during contact angle measurements.
Table 4: Initial contact angle (Initial CA) is measured from the first still frame of the droplet and the
final contact angle (Final CA) is measured 100 seconds after the initial contact angle. The Linear fit is
done with data points from between 60 seconds to 110 seconds. All
.
𝑅
2 > 0. 99
Table 5: Static, advancing and receding contact angles for samples (3)-(10) as well as calculated
contact angle hysteresis. Static contact angles are taken from Table 4.
Table 6: Obtained values of advancing-, receding- and tilting angles of dynamic tilting experiments.
Table 7: Values obtained from constant and descending freezing delay measurements of
SB3HEBPA50. Percentile standard deviations are shown in sharp brackets [].
Table 8: Freezing time measurements of selected sample surfaces.
7
==PAGE:8==
Introduction:
The development of ice formation prevention methods is of great importance to not only the longevity
but also the safety of equipment and machinery in day to day life of most people on the planet today. A
lot of effort and money is spent every year removing ice from infrastructure such as windmills, ships,
car windows, housing etc. These methods are however mostly active methods of ice removal, such as
anti-freezing sprays and mechanical methods of removal such as scrapers for car windows or hammers
for removing large ice chunks on boats sailing in extreme climates. For a lot of cases, the removal of
ice becomes very dangerous as for the case of ships where sailors have to traverse the deck loosening
ice chunks with large wooden hammers and throwing them overboard. As for windmills, the main
practice is that of stopping the mill and pouring anti freezing solutions down each blade. Both methods
are extremely impractical and can be dangerous for the employees performing the task.
From all of these mentioned needs, it is expected that the desire for passive methods of ice prevention
have been of great interest for industrial applications. Even with this interest, the literature on such
methods is still very sparse and does not contain a lot of information. Most noticeably, affordable
instrumentation for standardized tests of different freezing behaviors for sampled surfaces is not
commercially available as of publishing this work. This makes results very hard to compare to
literature values, as nucleation is a very sensitive phenomenon and small changes in initial conditions
can cause differences in the obtained results.
8
==PAGE:9==
Theory:
Contact angles:
Surface-liquid interactions are very important in today's society. They are the reason why a lot of
things are possible such as rain coats, ball point pens, lacquer on tables, cars etc. Their importance has
led to a vast array of methods and theories regarding these interactions as well as standardized
commercially available instrumentation. The pioneer of these studies was Thomas Young, who was
the first to describe wettability in 1805. He found that wetting of a surface can be described from the
angle formed between the liquid and a droplet placed on the surface. This is known as the static
contact angle and is depicted on Figure 1.
Figure 1: Force diagram of a water droplet on a surface.
As seen, the contact angle is formed as a result of the different surface tensions obtained when placing
a droplet on the surface. Namely, the liquid-air surface tension (
) the solid-air surface tension (
)
γ𝐿
γ𝑆
and the solid-liquid surface tension (
). Surface tension is a phenomenon wherein an equilibrium is
γ𝑆𝐿
formed. That equilibrium is between the cohesive intermolecular forces of two phases. In the case of a
water droplet on a surface, we have the cohesive intermolecular forces holding the water molecules
together in the droplet as well as the attractive adhesive forces of the air molecules pulling the water
molecules out of the droplet. An equilibrium between these is established and that is what we observe
as the liquid-air surface tension. The principles apply for the cases of the solid-liquid- and solid-air
surface tensions [1].
9
==PAGE:10==
From these forces, the famous Young's equation can be derived from using a more in-depth force
diagram shown on Figure 2.
Figure 2: In-depth illustration of force diagram concerning a liquid droplet on a solid surface.
As seen, balancing the forces we obtain Young’s equation:
𝛾𝑠= 𝛾𝑆𝐿+ 𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝜃) · 𝛾𝐿
The angle
is what is known as the static contact angle or Young’s angle. It is the most basic
𝜃
characteristic of a surface and can be used to approximate the surface energy,
[2].
𝛾𝑠
Other reliable and measurable angles found by Pease et al. are the advancing and receding contact
angles. These were measured by puncturing a droplet on the sample surface with a needle and filling
the droplet at a very slow rate. These are known as dynamic contact angles. There are other dynamic
contact angles as well, namely those of the tilting contact angles. These are measured whilst tilting the
sample with a droplet on top of it and observing the form of the sliding droplet [2].
Dynamic contact angles, as the name implies, are only observable whilst the droplet is moving. In the
case of the filling experiments, the advancing and receding contact angles are only observable whilst
the baseline of the droplet is moving. This is depicted in Figure 3.
10
==PAGE:11==
Figure 3: Illustration depicting the cycles of the advancing and receding contact angle measurements using the
needle filling method. Illustration by Huhtamäki T. et al. [3].
As seen, the dynamic contact angles in filling experiments are only observable in c) and e) i.e. when
the baseline is moving and the contact angle is stable.
For the case of tilting experiments, the droplet will lean to one side and at some point slide on the
sample. This exact moment of sliding is where the tilting contact angles are measured. The
phenomenon is depicted on Figure 4.
Figure 4: Illustration of tilting contact angle. Illustration acquired via. nanoScience [4].
11
==PAGE:12==
As seen, the droplet will lean more to one side of the sample due to gravity. The impractical thing is
that both filling droplet- and tilting experiments are known to measure advancing and receding contact
angles. It is very important to note that the measured angles are NOT the same, they are different
measurements [5]. Hence, when referring to any advancing contact angles, it will be stated which
experiment they are observed from.
In general, contact angles are very useful in determining the chemical tendencies of the measured
surface. A surface with a contact angle > 90 for a given liquid is said to have poor wetting of said
liquid, in the same case contact angles of < 90 will be considered good wetting [6].
It is very important to understand that all of these measurement techniques as well as Young’s equation
are based on an assumption of an ideal flat surface. A completely flat ideal surface is one which does
not contain any surface roughness which could distort the droplet. An illustration of an ideal and a real
surface is shown on Figure 5 [7].
Figure 5: Illustration of surface roughness effect on droplet.
As shown, the droplet edges are distorted due to the roughness of the real surface. The roughness will
cause a difference in measured contact angle and easily causes unstable equilibriums of the droplet.
Ideally one would want as little surface roughness as possible, however this is not the case for most
surfaces, although the depicted roughness in Figure 5 is exaggerated to a cartoonish level, it shows the
basic idea of the effect surface roughness has on the droplet and hence the measured contact angles
[8]. This is not just a problem for the static contact angles, but also for the dynamic. Any movement of
the droplet edge will obviously be hindered by the roughness of the surface and in some cases it can
cause sliding of the droplet edge, which needs to be handled differently as will be seen later.
12
==PAGE:13==
Homogeneous nucleation:
The phase transition from a chaotic state of matter to that of a less chaotic state requires something
known as nucleation. Nucleation is the initial step of the phase transition and requires a proper
arrangement of the molecules in the phase to occur. The two main types of nucleation are
Homogeneous- and Heterogeneous nucleation. Homogeneous nucleation will be discussed in this next
chapter and is the case of nucleation where the phase is free of all impurities. Impurities in this sense
are described as any particles, ions and surfaces. For the case of a liquid phase, this allows for the
ability of the phase to be supercooled to temperatures below its freezing point. In practice, it is not
entirely possible to remove all impurities, however one can get quite close as will be seen later. The
discussion of homogeneous nucleation is not specifically relevant in the sense of experimental
comparisons. The reason for its discussion is the tight link to heterogeneous nucleation and the
comparisons between the two [9].
For nucleation to occur, the condition which needs to be fulfilled is the formation of a large enough
cluster of properly arranged molecules. Properly arranged molecules will have the arrangement of the
less chaotic state of the phase, as in the case of water freezing, the water will form a cluster resembling
that of the ice crystal structure which from the nucleation will take place. As known for the case of
gasses and liquids, molecules in these phases are constantly moving around and colliding with each
other. This behavior is, as mentioned, very chaotic and cannot easily be accounted for, nor controlled.
If the initial conditions are known (acceleration, velocity and positions), and the molecules are seen as
classical moving objects, nucleation can theoretically be predicted, since the point in time at which the
molecules are of a large enough cluster and properly arranged can be calculated. This is however not
the case for a droplet since it contains > 10^15 molecules, which is too many to be computed at a high
enough precision. Furthermore, the particles are NOT classical objects and rather have to be treated
with probabilistic quantum mechanics, therefore even if all of these things were known, one would
only be able to obtain a probability density for the freezing behavior. Hence, the phenomenon of
freezing can be deemed stochastic, meaning it is a random process and will happen after a random
amount of time for each experiment [10][11].
Hence to summarize, nucleation is the spontaneous process of formation of a crystal from a solution, a
liquid or a vapor. The initial process of nucleation is the arrangement of atoms, characteristic of the
crystalline solid, forming a site upon which crystals can grow (nucleation site). During the initial
process two things can occur, either the atoms “dissolve” back into solution, meaning the arrangement
changes from that of the crystalline solid back to a more random arrangement, or additional atoms
13
==PAGE:14==
surrounding the site also arrange into the crystalline structure, meaning crystals grow from the site and
solidification occurs.
Homogeneous nucleation is the term for nucleation with an equal probability of forming a nucleation
site throughout the whole phase of the system, since the system is pure. An example of this would be a
system containing a pure water droplet and nothing else. The droplet can only freeze homogeneously,
since no external factors can influence it .
The energy gain from adapting a lower energy crystalline conformation can be described, according to
nucleation theory, using the following equation:
∆𝐺= ∆𝐺𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙−∆𝐺𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙
Now it is apparent why the process is spontaneous, since the free energy of the crystalline solid
conformation (
) will always be lower than that of the liquid or gas (
). However, from
∆𝐺𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙
∆𝐺𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙
this a new question can be stipulated, “Why does everything not immediately freeze?”. This question
is answered by expanding the equation.
One must first consider a case of a phase containing N molecules with n molecules rearranging into the
new solid conformation. The chemical potential of each molecule is defined as
µ =
δ𝐺
δ𝑁
(
)
𝑇,𝑃
Associated with the change in conformation is a free energy penalty
, which can be understood as a
Φ
penalty of moving the molecule into the correct alignment, thus creating an interface between the
original phase and the newly formed crystal.
From this we can write the following relations
𝐺𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡= 𝑁µ𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙
𝐺𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙= (𝑁−𝑛)µ𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙+ 𝑛µ𝑛𝑒𝑤+ Φ
where
and
are the chemical potentials of the original bulk phase and the newly formed
µ𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙
µ𝑛𝑒𝑤
crystalline phase, respectively.
14
==PAGE:15==
Using the original equation for the free energy we end up with the following
∆𝐺= (𝑁−𝑛)µ𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙+ 𝑛µ𝑛𝑒𝑤+ Φ −𝑁µ𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙
= 𝑛µ𝑛𝑒𝑤+ Φ −𝑛µ𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙
= 𝑛(µ𝑛𝑒𝑤−µ𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙) + Φ
=−𝑛∆µ + Φ
where
.
∆µ = µ𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙−µ𝑛𝑒𝑤> 0
This result does not look particularly interesting in and of itself, but for a simple model of a spherical
nucleation site with a radius of r, hence it is known that n depends on
. The penalty,
, is dependent
𝑟
3
Φ
on
since this penalty is related to the new surface area of the interface between the original phase
𝑟
2
and the new phase. From this, it is seen that at very small site radii, the second term dominates
(volume < surface area whereas for larger sizes the first term dominates. Looking again at the free
energy in both cases, we can conclude that the bigger the site is the more negative our free energy
becomes, hence the more likely it is for nucleation to occur.
A visualization of this surface area vs. volume relationship in terms of
, is shown on Figure 6.
∆𝐺
Figure 6: Plot of Gibbs energy as a function of droplet radius.
It is seen here that the Gibbs free energy of the droplet has a maximum denoted
which is the
∆𝐺*
energy barrier height a nucleation site has to overcome to nucleate [11].
15
==PAGE:16==
An estimate of this energy barrier height, assuming we have a spherical nucleation site, can be found
using the following equation.
∆𝐺* = 4π𝑟*
2γ/3 = 16πγ
3/(3 ∆𝑔𝑣
2)
where
is the critical radius of the site,
is the free energy difference between ice and water and
𝑟*
∆𝑔𝑣
is the ice-water interfacial tension [12].
γ𝐼𝑊
From this we can express the critical radius,
, which is the minimum radius for a
𝑟* = 2γ𝐼𝑊/∆𝑔𝑣
nucleation site to cause nucleation in the bulk phase. The free energy difference can be expressed as
, where T is the temperature of the bulk phase,
is 273.15 K (melting
∆𝑔𝑣= (𝑇𝑚−𝑇)∆𝐻𝑣/𝑇𝑚
𝑇𝑚
point of ice)[13] and
MJ/m^3 (enthalpy of fusion)[14].
∆𝐻𝑣= 287
It is seen that
is temperature dependent and so is
. The temperature dependence of
has been
∆𝑔𝑣
γ𝐼𝑊
γ
estimated by other studies and here we follow the method of Heydari et al.
γ𝐼𝑊= 28. 0 + 0. 25(𝑇−273. 15)
where
is in mJ/m^2 and T in K.
γ𝐼𝑊
Different values of the parameters are calculated and shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Values of surface tension, free energy difference, critical radius and homogeneous barrier height.
𝑇 (°𝐶)
γ𝐼𝑊 (𝑚𝐽/𝑚
2)
∆𝑔𝑣 (𝑀𝐽/𝑚
3)
𝑟* (𝑛𝑚)
∆𝐺* (𝐽/𝑚
3)
-5
26.8
5.3
10.2
1. 2 · 10
−17
-10
25.5
10.5
4.9
2. 5 · 10
−18
-15
24.3
15.8
3.1
9. 6 · 10
−19
-20
23.0
21.0
2.2
4. 6 · 10
−19
The critical radius is then graphed as a function of the surface temperature (Figure 7).
16
==PAGE:17==
Figure 7: Plot of critical radius as a function of temperature.
Here it is seen that at higher temperatures, we need a larger critical radius (larger nucleation site) for
nucleation to commence. This is in line with what is expected from the previous conclusions made
from equation
. It also makes intuitive physical sense that nucleation is less likely
(∆𝐺=−𝑛∆µ + Φ)
at higher temperatures.
Hence a very useful and physically expected result appears out of simple assumptions as well as
equations.
17
==PAGE:18==
Nucleation rate (freezing delay):
The nucleation rate of homogeneous nucleation, , is the amount of nucleation sites which are formed
𝐽
in a bulk phase per unit volume per unit time. By treating the the barrier height,
, as an activation
∆𝐺*
energy, one can write an arrhenius expression for the nucleation rate
𝐽= 𝐴 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−∆𝐺*/(𝑘𝐵𝑇))
where
is a pre exponential factor,
is the Boltzmann constant and
is the temperature of the bulk
𝐴
𝑘𝐵
𝑇
phase [11].
The curve of this function with increasing temperature and increasing barrier height are displayed in
Figure 8.
Figure 8: Plot of nucleation rate as a function of temperature (left) and barrier height (right).
It is seen that with an increasing barrier height, the rate of nucleation is lowered, which makes sense
implicitly, due to the larger energy demand from a nucleation site, hence less probability to obtain the
higher energy nucleation sites.
However, it is seen that with increasing temperature, the rate of nucleation is higher. One must see this
result and not immediately be thrown off, since it physically still makes sense. Again, it has to be
mentioned that we are considering homogeneous nucleation. Homogeneous nucleation is observed in
the bulk phase of a sample, not at the interfaces where it otherwise most commonly occurs; nucleation
at the interfaces is called heterogeneous nucleation and is the topic of the next chapter.
18
==PAGE:19==
If we remember our basic physical understanding of temperature, at higher temperatures we have more
movement of the molecules in a phase. This in turn means that we also have a higher probability of
aligning molecules in the order necessary for nucleation to occur, hence it does actually make physical
sense that homogeneous nucleation occurs more easily at higher temperatures. Although as we will see
in the next chapter, heterogeneous nucleation is far more common and will most likely always occur in
a non-ideal system, so this result of the rate change as a function of temperature is not very useful
when considering real systems. Nonetheless it is an important result to show and understand.
19
==PAGE:20==
Heterogeneous nucleation:
Heterogeneous nucleation is the type of nucleation most commonly observed. It is most common since
typically the energy barrier is much lower than that of homogeneous nucleation and as we saw in the
last chapter, this in turn increases the rate of nucleation [15].
Studies have used different methods to determine empirical equations for calculating the energy
barrier of heterogeneous nucleation and in this work we will be using the expression
∆𝐺*𝐻𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑜= 𝑓(𝑚, 𝑥) · ∆𝐺*
where
is the already mentioned energy barrier of homogeneous nucleation and
is a
∆𝐺*
𝑓(𝑚, 𝑥)
correction function (ranging between 0 and 1) which includes terms describing the dependence of
wetting and topography of the surface of which the nucleation takes place [16][17][18].
is
𝑓(𝑚, 𝑥)
expressed as
𝑓(𝑚, 𝑥) = 1
2 1 +
1−𝑚𝑥
𝑔
(
)
3
+ 𝑥
3[2 −3
𝑥−𝑚
𝑔
(
) +
𝑥−𝑚
𝑔
(
)
3
] + [3𝑚
2𝑥
2( 𝑥−𝑚
𝑔
−1)]
⎡⎢⎣
⎤⎥⎦
where
,
and
[17].
𝑚=
γ𝐼− γ𝑊
γ𝐼𝑊
𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝜃) 𝑥= 𝑟/𝑟*
𝑔= (1 + 𝑥
2 −2𝑚𝑥)
1/2
The variable
consists of the surface energy of- ice ( ), water (
) and the ice-water interfacial
𝑚
γ𝐼
γ𝑊
energy (
) as well as the contact angle of water on the surface ( ).
can be calculated from
γ𝐼𝑊
𝜃
γ𝐼𝑊
equation x, the surface energy of ice is taken as
mJ/m^2 [19] and lastly, the surface energy
γ𝐼= 109
of water at below-zero temperatures has been reported by Floriano and Angell [20] and is seen in
Table 2.
20
==PAGE:21==
Table 2: Surface tension of water at sub-zero temperatures as reported by [20].
𝑇 (°𝐶)
γ𝑊 (𝑚𝐽/𝑚
2)
-5
76.0
-10
77.4
-15
78.0
-20
78.8
is much simpler however, usually it is a relation between an ice cluster in the droplet and the critical
𝑥
radius, however a common approach is to approximate
by using
where
is the surface
𝑥
𝑥≈𝑅/𝑟*
𝑅
roughness. This approximation is often used as it can be imagined that the roughness dictates the size
of any formed ice cluster, since a cluster would most likely form in a crevasse on the surface.
From all of this, assuming all else equal, only a change in contact angle, no significant difference
between surfaces is observed. The contact angle simply has a very small effect on . This means that if
𝑓
only the surface chemistry is altered and no difference in topography is observed or assumed, the
difference in the height of the heterogeneous nucleation barrier should not change either.
21
==PAGE:22==
Experimental:
Contact angle setup:
For measuring contact angles, both static and dynamic, the Theta Flex optical tensiometer was used.
The accessories for the Theta Flex were Automatic X Sample Stage (T320) for moving the sample,
Tilting Cradle (C204A) for tilting experiments and the Automatic Dispenser Holder (T301) for
depositing water droplets. Calibration was done using the Calibration ball (C216) as well as a bubble
leveler. Contact angles were recorded and analyzed using OneAttention software V4.2.2. (updated 8th
of January 2024) and the high speed camera on the Theta Flex. For static contact angles the recordings
were conducted at 3.3 fps and dynamic measurements were conducted at 1.1 fps. Measurements were
conducted at room temperature without any specific measurements due to the low change in contact
angle at around room temperatures [21]. All measurements were conducted using ultrapure water with
a resistance of 18.2 MΩ·cm (Sartorius Arium Pro) (hereafter denoted MilliQ water). An illustration of
the setup along with pictures of the actual setup is seen on Figure 9-11.
Figure 9: Illustration of contact angle setup with (1) water droplet (2) sample surface (3) sample stage (4) tilting
cradle (5) backlight (6) water dispenser (7) high speed camera (8) computer connected to the entire setup.
22
==PAGE:23==
Figure 10: Full contact angle setup from different angles.
Figure 11: Theta Flex stage with silicon wafer sample on it.
23
==PAGE:24==
Freezing delay setup:
The freezing delay measurements were conducted on a Theta Lite, using the Measuring chamber, fluid
bath heated, 110° C (C203W) as the chamber and stage, the Manual Precision Syringe Dispenser
(C205M) with the Manual Dispenser Holder (T221) for depositing water droplets. Temperatures of the
surface were measured using an RS PRO Type K Thermoelement temperature probe connected to a
PicoTech TC-08 Thermocouple Data Logger. Humidities inside and outside the chamber as well as
temperatures outside the chamber were monitored using a VWR digital Thermohygrometer
(620-0915). The freezing time was recorded using OneAttention v1.6 software and the high speed
camera on the Theta Lite. Recordings were performed at 0.76 frames per second (fps) and the camera
was calibrated using the Calibration ball (C216). For prevention of ice crystal formation on the surface
of the sample, a hose supplying the chamber with a steady stream of dry nitrogen was employed. All
measurements were conducted using MilliQ water. An illustration of the setup along with pictures of
the actual setup is seen on Figure 12-15.
Figure 12: Illustration of freezing delay setup with (1) water droplet (2) sample surface (3) temperature logger
(4) temperature controlled cooler (5) temperature controlled sample stage (6) backlight (7) glass pane in
chamber (8) humidity sensor (9) mountable manual syringe (10) high speed camera (11) gas hose connected to
nitrogen supply (12) computer connected to the entire setup (13) temperature probe.
24
==PAGE:25==
Figure 13: Full freezing delay setup from different angles.
25
==PAGE:26==
Figure 14: Close up of chamber with syringe, hose, humidity sensor and temperature probe inserted.
Figure 15: Close up of droplet placed on a sample surface (this large amount of ice formation was not the case
for other measurements, the ice is present due to this sample having a freezing delay of 1.5+ hours!)
26
==PAGE:27==
Results and discussion:
Samples:
Before showing any results, a walkthrough of the different samples measured has to be conducted.
Namely, the structure of the surfaces of each sample. This is not only important in the sense of
nomenclature, but also for the understanding of surface chemistry and later discussion of the observed
results. The samples provided were synthesized by Palanisamy, Anand Raj in relation to the work of
his PhD. thesis.
The basic structure of the polymer surfaces consisted of a zwitterionic component, Sulfobetaine
methacrylate (SBMA) as well as either one of two different co-monomers, Hydroxyethyl methacrylate
or (HEMA) or (BMA) and lastly a crosslinker, Benzoylphenyl methacrylate (BPMA). Structures of
these are shown on Figure 16.
Figure 16: Structures of (a) Sulfobetaine methacrylate (b) Benzoylphenyl methacrylate (c) Hydroxyethyl
methacrylate.
To make referencing easier, a designated nomenclature was developed. As an example the name
SB3HEBPA25 refers to the zwitterionic monomer SMBA with an average length of 3 carbon atoms
between the zwitterionic groups. HE refers to the HEMA polymer, while BM would refer to BMA.
The BPA at the end is the crosslinker and the 25 is the mol% amount of zwitterionic content, so in this
case the mol% of the SBMA would be 25%.
To highlight every sample and for future reference, Table 3 shows the content of every sample as well
as highlights specific differences.
27
==PAGE:28==
Table 3: Nomenclature of tested samples during contact angle measurements.
Sample name
Carbon atoms between
SBMA groups.
SBMA
(mol%).
HEMA
(mol%).
BMA
(mol%).
BPMA
(mol%).
(3) SB3HEBPA25
3
25
70
0
5
(4) SB3HEBPA50
3
50
45
0
5
(5) SB3HEBPA75
3
75
20
0
5
(6) SB3HEBPA95
3
95
0
0
5
(7) HEBPA
-
0
95
0
5
(8) SB3BMBPA25
3
25
70
70
5
(9) SB4HEBPA25
4
25
70
0
5
(10) SB2HEBPA25
2
25
70
0
5
With these descriptions, it is now possible to proceed into the data analysis part.
28
==PAGE:29==
Contact angle results:
As mentioned, different types of contact angle measurements were conducted, both static and
dynamic. For the static contact angles, a noticeably large change in angle over time was observed for
all surfaces (3) through (10). This change over time is not uncommon for contact angle measurements,
it is actually very much expected due to water evaporation and in this specific case the water absorbing
nature of the SBMA and HEMA monomers. Effects of water absorption for the surfaces is showcased
on Figure 17.
Figure 17: Water absorbing surface before (left) and after (right) wetting.
It is clearly seen from Figure 17 that wetting of the water absorbing surface changes the contact angle
heavily. Hence, other than submerging the surfaces in brine overnight and drying them in a 60°C oven
for 2 hours, the surfaces were also dried using compressed air right before conducting any
measurements. This not only dried the surfaces but also got rid of any dust or debris as well as
potential lint that might have been present.
Water evaporation also leads to lowering of the contact angle of an already wetted surface, as long as
the droplet volume does not decrease < ~5 microliters. To distinguish an angle change caused by the
surface rather than water evaporation, the measured water volumes were graphed as a function of time,
the same was done for the contact angles. The static contact angles were measured over a period of at
least 1 minute. This gave the surfaces time to absorb water and hence change their contact angles. For
each experiment, 3 droplets of ~20 microliters were placed on 3 different spots on each sample. 20
microliters were used since it was established that after reaching ~10 microliters, the contact angle
remained stable until > ~100 microliters. It is also to be noted that these 3 spots were kept track of for
the dynamic measurements, to make comparisons of static and dynamic contact angles easier. The
values discussed are averages of the mentioned 3 measurements. Results are seen on Figure 18 and 19.
29
==PAGE:30==
Figure 18: Contact angle as a function of time for samples (3)-(10).
Figure 19: Water droplet volume as a function of time for samples (3)-(10).
As seen, the contact angles seem to vary a lot by time. One way to analyze this quantitatively is doing
a regression on the linear part of the graphs and comparing the slopes. Another way is to calculate the
change in contact angle from surface contact to an arbitrary ending time. Surface contact entails a
contact angle from the moment the droplet is sitting still on the surface with no bouncing. The
bouncing comes from initial contact of the droplet with the stage and can be minimized by lifting the
30
==PAGE:31==
stage rather than lowering the dispenser's pipette tip. The arbitrary ending time is chosen depending on
the length of the experiments. It is desired that the contact angle of the ending time is observed at a
state of the graph being linear. The Results of these two methods are shown in Table 4.
Table 4: Initial contact angle (Initial CA) is measured from the first still frame of the droplet and the final
contact angle (Final CA) is measured 100 seconds after the initial contact angle. The Linear fit is done with data
points from between 60 seconds to 110 seconds. All
.
𝑅
2 > 0. 99
Sample name
Initial CA (°)
Final CA (°)
ΔCA (°)
Linear fit
Slope (°/s)
SB3HEBPA25
76.43 ± 3.55
69.22 ± 3.55
7.12
-0.046x+74.21
-0.046
SB3HEBPA50
78.50 ± 3.76
63.89 ± 3.76
14.61
-0.058x+70.08
-0.058
SB3HEBPA75
74.94 ± 4.21
51.07 ± 4.21
23.87
-0.056x+57.05
-0.056
SB3HEBPA95
48.04 ± 5.72
39.11 ± 5.72
8.93
-0.043x+43.65
-0.043
HEBPA
68.06 ± 1.13
64.74 ± 1.13
4.32
-0.029x+67.90
-0.029
SB3BMBPA25
86.54 ± 2.12
82.49 ± 2.12
4.05
-0.028x+85.79
-0.028
SB4HEBPA25
65.02 ± 1.79
56.28 ± 1.79
8.74
-0.059x+62.85
-0.059
SB2HEBPA25
66.47 ± 1.81
63.12 ± 1.81
3.35
-0.036x+67.02
-0.036
As seen, the final contact angles follow a trend of decreasing contact angle with increasing
zwitterionic content. This is expected, since even though HEMA is a hydrophilic monomer, the ionic
groups are expectedly more hydrophilic and hence a larger amount of them will equate to a more
hydrophilic surface. Replacing the HEMA monomer with the BMA, BMA being a more hydrophobic
monomer as compared to HEMA, we observe an increase in both the final and initial contact angles
(SB3HEBPA25 vs. SB3BMBPA25). Again, this is expected, as the higher hydrophobicity should
increase the contact angle of the water droplet. Altering the carbon chain length between the
zwitterionic groups also seems to have an effect on the contact angles. Most noticeably, the contact
angle seems to be the largest at a separation distance of 3 carbons, lowest at 4 carbons and in the
middle when a chain length containing 2 carbon atoms is utilized (SB3 vs. SB4 vs. SB2). One could
imagine that a larger chain length would equate to a more hydrophobic surface, since on average a
lower amount of ionic groups would be present over the same area. However, the opposite is observed
and it might lead to a possible explanation of a longer chain length allowing the water of the droplet to
fit more easily in between the ionic groups. This would however not explain the lowering of contact
31
==PAGE:32==
angle from SB3HEBPA25 to SB2HEBPA25 and hence no real explanation can be established for these
observations.
The change over time in contact angles seem to vary a lot between the different samples. For the case
of SB3HEBPA, there seems to be a maximum between 75% and 95% zwitterionic content where the
contact angle change is the highest. It simply seems that going to a very high percentage of
zwitterionic content alters the surface too much for the water to be absorbed properly. It is also seen
that even though water evaporation is higher for the case of SB3HEBPA25 as compared to
SB3HEBPA50, the rate of change in contact angle is still larger for SB3HEBPA50. This very heavily
suggests that these differences in change are caused by the difference in zwitterionic content.
One quite unexpected observation is however the lower initial and final contact angles of HEBPA as
compared to the SB3HEBPA surfaces. The surface containing 0% ionic content would be expected to
have the highest contact angle compared to any surface containing > 0%, due to the hydrophilicity of
the zwitterionic groups. This is however not the case. Even when comparing the final contact angles
where the system is supposed to be closer to equilibrium, HEBPA actually has a lower value as
compared to SB3HEBPA25 and a very similar angle to both SB3HEBPA50 and SB2HEBPA25.
However as seen before, there lies a maximum of contact angle change over time between 75% and
95% ionic content. It is not unlikely that another maximum, now of just the contact angle, can also lie
in between 0% and 50%. Frankly, there is no way to know without testing samples with smaller
differences of zwitterionic content. However, from the results obtained, the slope of HEBPA is larger
than that of SB3HEBPA25, whilst having a very similar droplet evaporation rate. This is indicative of
some higher degree of hydrophobicity in HEBPA. Many factors can however influence this and the
most likely one is a larger water absorbing capability of SB3HEBPA25. It is hard to determine from
the results whether or not a larger contact angle will be observed on HEBPA with longer experiment
runtimes since droplet evaporation will come significantly more into play at that point.
Dynamic contact angles were also measured, both via. drop filling experiments as well as tilting
experiments. The drop filling experiments were conducted using a filling and withdrawing rate of 0.05
microliters/s as well as an initial drop volume (advancing) of 20 microliters. The large starting volume
was due to the large pipette tip used for the experiments, hence if smaller drop volumes were used, too
much distortion of the droplet was observed as seen on Figure 20.
32
==PAGE:33==
Figure 20: First frames (left) and last frames (right) of advancing contact angle measurement of two different
sample surfaces (upper and lower).
As seen, the upper sample on Figure 20 is using too little water (10 microliters) which is causing the
uneven expansion of the droplet. The lower sample however, is using enough water (20 microliters) to
where the expansion is mostly even on both sides. The main reason for this phenomenon is that
centering the pipette is very difficult using low volumes of water.
The rates used (0.05 microliters/s) were established by (Huhtamaki) and proved to be very useful as
higher rates were ruled out due to the same observed uneven movement of the droplet baseline when
performing measurements. It simply seems that dynamic effects would take over when using high
rates. The reason for such care taken when assuring even expansion is that it causes the measurements
to become incorrect for the side which is not moving and usually a larger value than expected is
observed for the expanding side in these cases.
It was expected from previous results that dynamic measurements would be affected by the time the
droplet had been left on the surface before starting the experiment, however this was not the case. It
seemed that no matter how long the droplet was left on the surface for the measured advancing and
receding contact angles were unchanged. Simply for the case of the advancing contact angles, it
seemed that the droplet was always moving on a part of the surface which had not absorbed water yet.
33
==PAGE:34==
This meant no difference could be observed no matter the resting time of the droplet. For the case of
the receding measurements, even if a droplet was quickly placed and the receding measurements were
done without first performing an advancing measurement, no difference could be observed or
measured. Hence, the resting time of the droplet will not be taken into consideration when reporting
the results for the dynamic measurements.
Advancing measurements were otherwise relatively straightforward and very measurable values were
observed. In the case of SB2HEBPA25 however, some sliding of the droplet occurred. It is unknown
why this is the case, but it is unlikely to be a technical problem, since the measurements were tried on
different samples of the same surface chemistry and yielded the same results. No sliding occurred on
other samples, hence a practical issue is most likely not the cause either. The observed sliding for each
experiment of SB2HEBPA25 is shown on Figure 21.
34
==PAGE:35==
35
==PAGE:36==
Figure 21: Advancing contact angle experiments 1-5 of sample SB2HEBPA25 with observed sliding behavior.
As seen, the sliding behavior is present in every experiment except Experiment 2. The cause of it is as
mentioned unknown, however data is still usable and proves worthy of mention as an example of data
analysis methods. Previously mentioned theory states that the advancing and receding contact angles
are observed whilst the baseline of the droplet is expanding and contracting respectively. In this case, a
graph with the contact angle plotted alongside the baseline proves quite useful in analyzing these
36
==PAGE:37==
situations with sliding behavior. A combined plot of the contact angle and baseline as a function of
time for Experiment 5 is shown on Figure 22.
Figure 22: Advancing contact angle Experiment 5 of sample SB2HEBPA25 with contact angle plotted alongside
baseline.
By graphing the data like in Figure 22, it is very clear when the advancing contact angle is observable.
Simply, whenever the baseline is increasing, the advancing contact angle can be measured. The
baseline plot is not necessarily needed as it is intuitively expected that a stable contact angle equates to
the advancing contact angle. However, the baseline does prove that the values measured are indeed
those of the advancing contact angle and hence it seems optimal to consider the baseline when
reporting these values.
The receding angles from the filling drop experiments were a completely different story as compared
to the advancing ones. For non-ionic surfaces, the angles were measurable and measurements
proceeded as expected from theory. An example for this is shown on Figure 23 and 24, by using
pictures and graphs from that of the HEBPA surface measurements.
37
==PAGE:38==
Figure 23: Receding contact angle measurement snapshots over time of HEBPA surface. Timeline proceeds from
upper left to lower right image.
Figure 24: Contact angle and baseline as a function of time for receding contact angle measurements of HEBPA
surface.
As seen for the case of HEBPA, measurements show a clear lowering of the baseline right as the
contact angle becomes stable. This is very indicative of the receding contact angle being observable at
that specific point in time.
However, for some zwitterionic surfaces the receding contact angles were practically immeasurable
for the software. This is again highlighted through graphs and pictures on Figure 25 and 26, this time
using SB3HEBPA95.
38
==PAGE:39==
Figure 25: Receding contact angle measurement snapshots over time of SB3HEBPA95 surface. Timeline
proceeds from upper left to lower right image.
Figure 26: Contact angle and baseline as a function of time for receding contact angle measurements of
SB3HEBPA95 surface.
It is clearly seen that the software is having great trouble measuring the contact angle of such a thin
film of water on the surface. Even if the contact angle was measurable, it is hard to say if it would be
very accurate, since such a thin film of water would be subject to large dynamic effects from any slight
pipette tip movement or instrumental irregularities in withdrawal rate of the water.
39
==PAGE:40==
From all of this, it was determined that reporting the receding contact angles for surfaces displaying
this behavior was of no use and will therefore not be discussed quantitatively. Hence, a table can be
produced containing the different measured values alongside the calculated hysteresis (Table 5).
Table 5: Static, advancing and receding contact angles for samples (3)-(10) as well as calculated contact angle
hysteresis. Static contact angles are taken from Table 4.
Sample name
Static CA (°)
Advancing CA (°)
Receding CA (°)
CA hysteresis (°)
SB3HEBPA25
69.22 ± 3.55
80.01 ± 1.51
9.65 ± 2.12
70.36
SB3HEBPA50
63.89 ± 3.76
73.71 ± 2.44
8.39 ± 1.78
65.32
SB3HEBPA75
51.07 ± 4.21
60.18 ± 2.14
-
-
SB3HEBPA95
39.11 ± 5.72
48.17 ± 3.72
-
-
HEBPA
64.74 ± 1.13
69.47 ± 0.99
13.28 ± 1.15
56.19
SB3BMBPA25
82.49 ± 2.12
98.30 ± 2.63
-
-
SB4HEBPA25
56.28 ± 1.79
71.19 ± 2.31
10.71 ± 2.31
60.48
SB2HEBPA25
63.12 ± 1.81
92.51 ± 2.16
9.50 ± 1.35
83.01
It is carefully observed that the differences between the advancing- and static contact angles for the
SB3HEBPA surfaces seem to decrease with an increasing amount of zwitterionic content. An
explanation to this could be a “roll-over” effect, which happens more easily the larger the contact
angle is. Simply, the droplet tends to more easily form a larger advancing contact angle, just from the
fact that the static contact angle is larger. This effect is seen because water more easily adheres to
hydrophilic surfaces, as compared to hydrophobic ones.
It also seems that for samples (8)-(10), the difference in advancing- and static contact angles are much
larger than for that of the SB3HEBPA surfaces. This cannot be explained by a “roll-over” effect since
SB3HEBPA25, 50 and 75 have larger or similar static angles to that of SB4 and SB2. Something else
seems to be at play and it is not quite known or understood what is.
As expected, the surface with the lowest difference between static and advancing contact angle is seen
to be HEBPA. HEBPA also has the lowest measurable hysteresis out of all the surfaces and the largest
measurable receding angle. This really highlights the water absorbing effects of the ionic surfaces as
40
==PAGE:41==
compared to HEBPA. HEBPA is however still a water absorbing polymer and hence has quite a large
hysteresis anyway.
Contact angle hysteresis seems to be high for all of the surfaces, however SB2HEBPA25 seems to
have the largest measurable value out of them all. Even though the results of this surface have the
previously mentioned sliding problems, the hysteresis is still >12° larger than that of the second
highest measurable value (SB3HEBPA25). It seems that for the case of comparing the carbon chain
length, the trend of SB2 > SB3 > SB4 holds true going from largest to smallest contact angle
hysteresis.
SB3HEBPA75, SB3HEBPA95 and SB3BMBPA25 all had immeasurable receding contact angles. One
might argue that SB3BMBPA25 therefore technically has the largest amount of hysteresis. This is very
possible and cannot be ruled out, but for the sake of a quantitative analysis they are not compared to
the rest of the surfaces. It can only be said that apparently the receding angles are too small or
impossible to measure using these techniques.
An interesting problem occurred while doing the receding measurements. Namely, that of the starting
volume being so large that the droplet edges would move out of the camera focus. This is highlighted
in the illustration on Figure 27.
Figure 27: Illustration of droplet edges moving whilst performing receding measurements. Going from left to
right in time.
This problem caused the software to have great trouble precisely measuring the contact angles due to
the blurry edges. A solution to this problem would be automated focus from the software detecting an
out of focus droplet edge. This is not an option for the OneAttention software at the time of writing
this work, however it might be a possible addition in the future. The more labor intensive solution,
however the easier for the time being, was to manually focus the camera as the measurement was
41
==PAGE:42==
running. Luckily, the receding angles were so low that any receding was happening over a short period
of time near the end of the run. This meant that only one adjustment near the end of the experiment
was needed. No such problems with camera focus were observed for the advancing measurements, it
was only because of the very low receding angles that the starting volume had to be so large for those
measurements.
The final dynamic measurements were the tilting experiments. Rates of change for the tilting angles
were 0.5 °/s. Slower rates of change did not seem to affect the results, hence quite a fast rate was used
for these experiments. Not a lot of measurements were conducted due to time constraints, however
some interesting phenomena occurred whilst doing those few measurements. Namely, surfaces
containing zwitterionic components did not show any sliding of the droplet, even at 90° of tilting. This
was tested for two other non-ionic surfaces and each of those showed sliding behavior before 90° of
tilting. To highlight this, screenshots of experiments using different surfaces are shown on Figure 28.
Figure 28: SB3HEBPA25 at 90°- (Left) and BMBPA at 60° of tilting (right).
The surface shown to the right of Figure 28 is a BMBPA surface. This name follows the same rules as
before and hence it is a polymer surface containing 95 mol% BMA and 5% BPA crosslinker. It is not
mentioned before now since it was only used for this specific measurement.
As seen, these are the maximal degrees of tilting obtained for each surface. The difference is however
that for the case of SB3HEBPA25, no sliding occurred at all. The Theta Flex was moved back into a
state of 0° of tilting and the droplet was still in the exact same spot. This was not the case for BMBPA,
where at 60° of tilting, the droplet was seen to slide off the sample surface. One can imagine that the
obtained results from SB3HEBPA25 would be universal to all of the ionic surfaces and perhaps even
for the case of HEBPA. This can be expected due to the universally low receding angles between all
the surfaces. Hence, this observation of no-sliding for the case of SB3HEBPA25 is not unexpected and
very much in line with other observed results, specifically the other dynamic contact angle results.
42
==PAGE:43==
In the case of formality, the measured tilting advancing- and receding contact angles for both surfaces
are shown in Table 6.
Table 6: Obtained values of advancing-, receding- and tilting angles of dynamic tilting experiments.
Sample name
Static CA (°)
Tilting adv. CA
(°)
Tilting rec. CA
(°)
Tilting CA
hys. (°)
Tilting angle
(°)
SB3HEBPA25
69.22 ± 3.55
88.81 ± 5.67
44.03 ± 3.33
44.78
90
BMBPA
80.67 ± 1.32
91.16 ± 4.21
62.66 ± 2.65
28.50
60
As expected, the possibility for a higher tilting angle also allows for a larger hysteresis. Not much else
is to be said about these results. The most important thing to take away from these brief experiments
was the non-sliding behavior of SB3HEBPA25.
43
==PAGE:44==
Freezing delay results:
For the freezing delay measurements, two types of measurements were conducted: constant
temperature- and descending temperature measurements. Constant temperature measurements
consisted of precooling the stage to a desired temperature and placing a sample on the stage inside the
chamber. It was quickly discovered that ice crystals were forming on the sample surface due to the air
humidity. These crystals caused any water droplets deposited on the surface to freeze instantly. To
combat this, a stream of dry nitrogen gas was passed through the chamber. This solved the instant
freezing problem and was therefore used as a standard practice for all freezing measurements
conducted. Again, as to account for inhomogeneity of the sample, droplets were placed on different
spots on the samples, however specific spots were not considered since it quickly became obvious that
a lot of measurements would be needed for each sample to get consistent results. This is highlighted
through a trial run of 21 measurements on the SB3HEBPA50 surface at -5°C which will be further
discussed later.
A quick note on protocoling of the measurements. For constant temperature measurements, the
freezing delays were measured from the first frame of the droplet touching the surface, to the frame at
which the droplet started freezing. For descending measurements, freezing delays were measured from
the time at which the temperature hit 0°C until the frame at which the droplet started freezing. The
time from the droplet starting to freeze until the droplet was fully frozen would also be measured and
will be discussed later.
The mentioned runs of 21 measurements on the SB3HEBPA50 surface at -5°C were conducted to
obtain a grasp of the degree at which the stochastic behavior would be observed for the measurements.
The obtained results are shown on Figure 29.
44
==PAGE:45==
Figure 29: Average (avg.), standard deviation (std. dev.) and percentile standard deviation (% std. dev.) as a
function of measurement number for SB3HEBPA50 at -5°C.
As seen on Figure 29, the average and standard deviation is seen to stabilize when more measurements
are performed. This is the expected behavior when dealing with a stochastic process, hence it can
vaguely hint towards the measurements being performed correctly without any meaningful
disturbances to the system. If we look further into the quantitative values obtained, we see that at 10
measurements the standard deviation is at 50%. In the case of these measurements, it seems that large
deviations are of the norm. One way to lower the deviation is by removing the largest and smallest
values obtained in the measurements. If this is done, we obtain the graph seen on Figure 30.
45
==PAGE:46==
Figure 30: Modified average (avg.), standard deviation (std. dev.) and percentile standard deviation (% std. dev.)
as a function of measurement number for SB3HEBPA50 at -5°C after removing largest and smallest measured
values.
With the removal of the largest and smallest measurements it is clearly seen that the standard deviation
not only becomes lower but also stabilizes with fewer measurements. It has to be noted that normally
picking out measured values is incorrect and can cause the results to show more favorable evidence
that what was actually measured. In this case however, a condition is made and measurements are
removed based on that condition from every set of data. This means that even for sets containing very
closely measured values, the largest and smallest values have to be removed regardless, for integrity of
scientific conduct. The method of removing the smallest and largest measurements was decided upon
46
==PAGE:47==
to be used for analysis of the remaining datasets. Measurements were conducted at temperatures of
-5°C, -10°C and -15°C.
As for the descending measurements, they were conducted due to the possibility for correlation
between the two types of measurements. The basic idea is that whatever constant temperature freezing
delay is measured should be reflected in the descending temperature measurements. As an example,
imagine a surface having a constant freezing delay following the graph on Figure 31.
Figure 31: Hypothetical constant temperature freezing delay measurements at different temperatures for the
same sample.
From this, one sees a relationship between temperature and constant freezing delay. Now, let us
imagine a descending freezing experiment where a cooling rate of 1°C/min is used. We can consider
the probabilities of a sample freezing at a given temperature: at -5°C we see a constant freezing delay
of 60 min and to reach this temperature we would have been cooling for 5 min. This means that we
have only been at temperatures between 0°C and -5°C for 5 min, hence the probability of the droplet
freezing at this temperature is unlikely. At -10°C we have been at temperatures below 0°C for 10 min.
A constant freezing delay of 30 min however renders it quite unlikely for the droplet to freeze at this
temperature as well. Hypothetically, if we are at -15°C, we have been cooling for 15 min and the delay
is 1 min. This renders it very unlikely for the droplet to NOT be frozen at this temperature, hence it
can be expected that the droplet must freeze at a temperature between -10°C and -15°C based on the
given constant temperature freezing delay measurements.
Measurements of surfaces (3) - (7) were conducted both in the constant- and descending fashion. In
both types of measurements, a standard of 10 microliters per. droplet was used. For each measurement
the chamber was flooded with dry nitrogen gas when swapping samples and while the sample surface
47
==PAGE:48==
was initially equilibrating inside the chamber. This meant that the stream of gas was started, the
chamber top was lifted, the sample was placed on the stage whilst ensuring a stream of nitrogen from
the top of the chamber was covering the surface, the chamber was closed and the sample was left to
cool for a few minutes. This procedure was used for both types of measurements. Initially, a
temperature probe on the surface of a sample during equilibration showed no temperature differences
between the stage surface temperature and that of the sample. This was expected due to the samples
being < 1 mm of thickness, however it was important confirmation as to ensure that the samples were
at the desired temperature when starting each measurement.
Constant temperature freezing delay measurements of SB3HEBPA50 were also conducted at -10°C to
follow the above mentioned idea. To complement this, as well as test the theory above, descending
measurements were also conducted for SB3HEBPA50. Obtained values from both experiment types
are shown in Table 7.
Table 7: Values obtained from constant and descending freezing delay measurements of SB3HEBPA50.
Percentile standard deviations are shown in sharp brackets [].
Constant temperature
Constant temperature
Descending temperature
Freezing delay (min)
7.1 ± 1.9 [26%]
5.4 ± 2.7 [50%]
12.5 ± 1.3 [10%]
Temperature (°C)
-5
-10
-6.3 ± 0.6 [9%]
Cooling rate (°C/min)
-
-
0.5 ± 0.1 [12%]
Using the same idea as before, if the cooling rate is now -0.5 °C/min, when we reach a temperature of
-5°C, we should have been cooling for 10 min. This is already higher than the constant freezing delay
at -5°C, but it has to be remembered that the droplet has not spent 10 min at -5°C, but rather 10 min at
temperatures below -5°C. If we were to reach -10°C, we would have been cooling for 10 min above
the temperature of -5°C. This means that we will have been above the temperature of which the
droplet freezes after 7 min for longer than 7 minutes, hence it is very unlikely that we will reach
-10°C. Therefore, we expect the droplet to freeze in between -5°C and -10°C, which is also what we
observe.
As might have been an idea of the reader, the precision of these descending measurements would be
expected to be of higher accuracy than those of the constant nature. This is also what we observe as
seen in the square brackets of Table x. The biggest comparison is that of the descending
measurements, containing 14 measurements, meanwhile those of constant temperature contain 21.
48
==PAGE:49==
50% more measurements and still over twice as large a deviation as compared to that of the
descending temperature experiments. A thing to keep in mind as well, when doing this comparison, is
that the used cooler had a decrease in cooling rate over the timespan it took to do the 14
measurements. This is not a problem when doing constant temperature measurements, but with the
descending measurements it is critical that the cooling rate is kept generally constant. To highlight the
importance of this, the cooling rate and descending freezing delays are plotted on Figure 32. All 14
measurements were conducted over a period of 5 hours. The cooler was running for at least all of these
5 hours.
Figure 32: Freezing delay and cooling rate as a function of measurement number for surface SB3HEBPA50.
As seen, as the cooling rate decreases, the freezing delay increases. This is expected since as before
mentioned, the sample spends more time at lower temperatures, hence the expected constant freezing
delay must be larger. This comes from the fact that the lower the temperature of the surface, the faster
the droplet freezes, hence higher temperatures will equate to longer freezing delays. Therefore it can
be expected that using a constant cooling rate over a sample of 14 measurements would yield much
lower deviations and hence might be considered the superior method compared to that of the constant
freezing delay.
To dive further into this discussion, it was of interest to compare these two measurement types over
the series of zwitterionic surfaces ranging from 0 mol% to 95 mol% zwitterionic content. This would
not only give further backing of the postulated precision superiority of the descending measurements,
49
==PAGE:50==
but also establish any possible effects zwitterionic monomer content might have on the freezing delays
of the surfaces. The results of these measurements are shown on Figure 33-35.
Figure 33: Constant temperature freezing delay as a function of mol% zwitterionic content of SB3HEBPA
surfaces at -10°C. 0% (7), 95% (6), 75% (5), 50% (4) and 25% (3).
Figure 34: Descending temperature freezing delay as a function of mol% zwitterionic content of SB3HEBPA
surfaces. 0% (7), 95% (6), 75% (5), 50% (4) and 25% (3).
50
==PAGE:51==
Figure 35: Descending freezing temperature as a function of mol% zwitterionic content of SB3HEBPA surfaces.
0% (7), 95% (6), 75% (5), 50% (4) and 25% (3).
Now, these results do not quite line up. The surface with the largest freezing delay using the constant
temperature method, seems to have the lowest delay when using the descending temperature method.
How does this make any sense when the before mentioned theory seems to be correct, according to
other measurements. Simply, other phenomena are at play during the constant temperature
measurements. Exactly what, is very hard to say, but different theories can arise from simple thoughts
and ideas of surface topologies.
Firstly, some potential errors while performing these measurements might be too big or small a droplet
volume. The volume of the droplet was manually measured via. syringe, as compared to the contact
angle measurements, where an automatic dispenser was used. Secondly, just like the contact angle
measurements, a large change in contact angle (and hence droplet shape) was observed for surfaces
SB3HEBPA75 and SB3HEBPA95. Especially for SB3HEBPA95, a lot of measurements were deemed
unusable due to the fact that the contact angle was changing so fast that the droplet would freeze due
to the probably excessive movement. This was also highlighted when analyzing the contact angles,
since SB3HEBPA95 had a large contact angle change rate out of all the samples. It seemed that an
initial lowering of the contact angle would cause instant freezing, however if the droplet “survived”
the initial contact angle change, the freezing delay would be very large. This is shown by the very high
deviation of the data points.
The difference in results from the different methods do not seem to make sense as it would be
expected that the trends would be the same no matter the method. For the case of (3) - (6) the
measurements are however quite similar. It seems to be an opposite trend, as for the descending
51
==PAGE:52==
measurements, the more zwitterionic content, the lower the freezing delay, whereas for the constant
temperature measurements, the opposite is observed. A simple way of looking at this is that with the
knowledge of the process of nucleation being stochastic, even if the probability is large, there will still
be a deviation in the measurements. From this, one might recognize that the measurements are quite
similar. Especially considering the fact that SB3HEBPA25 and SB3HEBPA50 have essentially the
same freezing delay whilst having caused no large amount of trouble during measurements. Trouble
was, as mentioned, mostly met during the measurements of SB3HEBPA75 and SB3HEBPA95. Hence,
the obtained values for these surfaces should be met with a fair amount of criticism. This is a good
point since doubling the zwitterionic content, from 25% to 50%, should yield a measurable difference
however almost no difference is observed. From this it is established that altering the zwitterionic
content of the surface does not affect the freezing delay significantly.
As for the case of HEBPA towering the other measurements. The only possible explanation can be that
if the droplet is not left to equilibrate at temperatures above 0°C, the freezing delay will be extremely
large. An idea might be that upon initial contact with the surface at low temperatures, something
happens at the water/surface interface, causing a change in the properties of the surface. Another idea
might be that HEBPA changes properties as the surface is cooled. No experiments were conducted to
test this idea, however a possibility for future work might be to perform ellipsometry measurements of
the surface at temperatures below 0°C and see if water absorbing properties of the surface changes
upon cooling. As a final mark, the measurements of HEBPA were conducted multiple times at
temperatures of -5°C and no freezing of the droplet was observed after runs of > 1.5 hours.
As a final measure to ensure that the descending measurements were conducted properly, runs using a
super hydrophobic surface, PHFBMA, were conducted. PHFBMA, just like HEBPA, has a very large
freezing delay. Runs at -10°C using PHFBMA show freezing delays upwards of 1.5 hours just like
HEBPA at -5°C. Hence, the basic idea was that if the descending measurements were conducted
improperly, the results would be very close to those of the other samples. However, this was not the
case. As seen on Figure 36, freezing delay and -temperature comparisons of PHFBMA and HEBPA
are shown.
52
==PAGE:53==
Figure 36: Constant temperature freezing delay measurements (left) and descending temperature freezing delay
measurements (right) of PHFBMA and HEBPA.
As seen, a very noticeable difference between the two surfaces is observed. PHFBMA clearly has a
larger constant temperature freezing delay and hence we also expect it to have a larger descending
temperature freezing delay. This idea is in line with what we observe and hence, the methods used
regarding descending measurements are most likely not a cause of the unusual behavior observed for
HEBPA.
Some interesting observations were also made during the measurements. Namely, the freezing times of
each droplet. It was noted that at lower temperatures, freezing times would be faster. This is very
intuitive as freezing delays would also get shorter and was not thought of any further. An interesting
point however was that a lower contact angle resulted in a longer freezing time. This is also inherently
intuitive, since a larger surface area needed to freeze in these cases. To further test this idea,
measurements on a glass surface were conducted and these results were in line with expected freezing
times. From this, the freezing times for the different surfaces is shown in Table 8.
Table 8: Freezing time measurements of selected sample surfaces.
Sample name
Freezing time (s)
SB3HEBPA25 - 95
10.5 ± 0.55
HEBPA
10.4 ± 1.59
PHFBMA
18.4 ± 1.13
GLASS
30.3 ± 3.80
From these results it is seen that the contact angle matters less than what was initially thought. Simply,
the contact angle changes a lot from SB3HEBPA25 to SB3HEBPA95, however the freezing time does
53
==PAGE:54==
not seem to change. For the case of HEBPA, no change was observed either from the SB3HEBPA
surfaces; it is only seen that completely changing the surface yields different results. Namely, that of
PHFBMA is seen to be larger than that of the SB3HEBPA surfaces. This would correlate nicely with
the freezing delay measurements, however for the case of glass, which has a freezing delay at -10°C of
42.8 ± 10.3 seconds, the freezing time is ~30 seconds which does not correlate with the expected
trend. Hence, whatever is dictating the freezing times of the surfaces, does not seem to be any of the
parameters altered during previous measurements.
54
==PAGE:55==
Conclusion:
Altering the amount of zwitterionic content in polymers coated on silicon wafers has a large effect on
the static- and dynamic contact angles of the surface. It was seen that a larger amount of zwitterionic
content would decrease the content angle of the surface as expected due to the hydrophilic nature of
the zwitterionic groups. It was also observed that the rate of change of contact angles would increase
with increasing amounts of zwitterionic content.
Freezing delay measurements showed very unexpected results, namely that of the 0% HEBPA surface
having a much larger freezing delay using a particular test method as compared to the other surfaces.
In the other employed test this was not the case, rather the 0% surface would have a lower delay as
compared to surfaces containing zwitterionic groups.
In general, the surfaces showed very little differences, mostly differences came down to difficulty of
measurement. This was established as unwanted movement of the droplet edge in samples containing
large amounts of zwitterionic content, due to the large rate of change in contact angle.
As a general conclusion, adding zwitterionic groups to the polymer seemed to increase the freezing
delay, however adding more than 25% was not observed to produce significant changes in the freezing
delay, rather it could be detrimental at large percentages, due to mentioned dynamic effects.
55
==PAGE:56==
References:
[1] Surface Wetting - Characterization, Contact Angle and Fundamentals - Kock-Yee Law & Hong
Zhao - 2016 - Springer - Chapter 1 p. 1-3
[2] Surface Wetting - Characterization, Contact Angle and Fundamentals - Kock-Yee Law & Hong
Zhao - 2016 - Springer - Chapter 2 p. 7-9
[3] Surface-wetting characterization using contact-angle measurements. - Huhtamäki, T.; Tian, X.;
Korhonen J. & Ras, R. H. A. - 2018 - Nature Protocols - 13(7) p. 1521-1538
[4] Tilting contact angle/roll-off angle - nanoScience instruments -
https://www.nanoscience.com/techniques/tensiometry/contact-angle-measurements-and-wettability/ -
Visited 26/06/2024 at 16:53
[5] Understanding of Sliding and Contact Angle Results in Tilted Plate Experiments. - Pierce, E.;
Carmona, F.; Amirfazli, A. - 2008 - Colloids Surf. Physicochem. Eng. Asp., 323 (1-3) p. 73-82
[6] What is wettability - nanoScience instruments -
https://www.nanoscience.com/techniques/tensiometry/contact-angle-measurements-and-wettability/ -
Visited 01/06/2024 at 10:31
[7] Resistance of solid surfaces to wetting by water - Industrial & Engineering Chemistry - R. N.
Wenzel - 1936 - vol. 28, no. 8, p. 988-994
[8] Reliable Measurement of the Receding Contact Angle - J. T. Korhonen, T.; . Huhtamäki, O. Ikkala
& R. H. A. Ras - 2013 - Langmuir - vol. 29, no. 12, p. 3858-3863
[9] Theory of Nucleation - Handbook of Crystal Growth (2nd ed.) - Christo N. Nanev. - 2015 -
Elsevier - Chapter 7.1 Introduction, p. 316-317
[10] Homogeneous Nucleation Theory - The Pretransition Theory of Vapor Condensation - Farid
Fadlow Abraham - 1974 - Chapter 1 - The Nature of the Nucleation Process, p. 1-8
[11] Theory of Nucleation - Handbook of Crystal Growth (2nd ed.) - Christo N. Nanev. - 2015 -
Elsevier - Chapter 7.2 Classical (Capillary Nucleation Theory and Nucleation in Vapors, p. 318-327
[12] Homogeneous Nucleation Theory - The Pretransition Theory of Vapor Condensation - Farid
Fadlow Abraham - 1974 - Appendix - Homogeneous Nucleation of Vapor Condensation I,
Thermodynamic Aspects, p. 225-237
[13] Homogeneous Nucleation Theory - The Pretransition Theory of Vapor Condensation - Farid
Fadlow Abraham - 1974 - Appendix - Homogeneous Nucleation of Vapor Condensation II, Kinetic
Aspects, p. 238-256
[14] Freezing of Sessile Water Droplets on Surfaces with Various Roughness and Wettability - Hao, P.;
Lv, C.; Zhang, X. - 2014 - Appl. Phys. Lett., 104 , 161609.
[15] Theory of Nucleation - Handbook of Crystal Growth (2nd ed.) - Christo N. Nanev. - 2015 -
Elsevier - Chapter 7.8 Heterogeneous (Substrate) Nucleation, the Equilibrium Shape of Crystals on
Supports, and Energy Barriers for Heterogeneous Nucleation, p. 342-345
56
==PAGE:57==
[16] The Chemical Physics of Ice, 1st ed. - Fletcher, N. H. - 1970 - Press, C. U., Ed.; Cambridge
[17] Size Effect in Heterogeneous Nucleation - Fletcher, N. H. - 1958 - J. Chem. Phys. 29, 572.
[18] Are Superhydrophobic Surfaces Best for Icephobicity - Jung, S.; Dorrestijn, M.; Raps, D.; Das,
A.; Megaridis, C. M.; Poulikakos, D. - 2011 - Langmuir, 27, 3059–3066.
[19] Effect of Aluminum Substrate Surface Modification on Wettability and Freezing Delay of Water
Droplet at Subzero Temperatures - Rahimi, Maral; Afshari, Alireza & Thormann, Esben - 2016 -
American Chemical Society - ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces - Supporting Information, S-4
[20] Surface Tension and Molar Surface Free Energy and Entropy of Water to -27.2 °C - Floriano, M.
a.; Angell, C. a. - 1990 - The Journal of Physical Chemistry. 94, 4199–4202.
[21] Temperature dependence of the contact angle of water: A review of research progress, theoretical
understanding, and implications for boiling heat transfer - Jia-Wen Song & Li-Wu Fan - 2021 -
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science - Vol 288
57
