==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Anomaly Detection for Fetal Ultra-
sound Imaging using Out Of Distri-
bution Detection with Diffusion Mod-
els
Unsupervised approach for Visual Anomaly
Detection using Generative Models
Markus Ditlev Sjøgren Olsen -
S184073
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Congenital malformations of the brain are among the most common fetal abnormali-
ties that impact fetal development. Previous anomaly detection methods on ultrasound
images are based on supervised learning, rely on manual annotations, and risk missing
underrepresented categories. In this work, we introduce unsupervised detection meth-
ods for fetal brain anomalies using diffusion models. We explore the different settings
of unsupervised anomaly detection with diffusion models and propose inpainting-based
Noise Agnostic Anomaly Detection (iNAAD) method that identifies the abnormality
using diffusion-reconstructed fetal brain images from multiple noise levels. iNAAD only
requires normal fetal brain ultrasound images for training, addressing the limited avail-
ability of abnormal data. Our experiments on a real-world clinical dataset show the
potential of using unsupervised methods for fetal brain anomaly detection. Addition-
ally, we comprehensively evaluate how different noise types affect diffusion models in
the fetal anomaly detection domain and present a novel experimental method skewness
of aggregated normative diffusion (SANDi) for further development and validation.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU Compute) in fulfillment
of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering in Mathematical Modelling
and Computation. The master thesis was assigned to a workload of 30 ECTS and it
was supervised by Professor Aasa Feragen, Paraskevas Pegios, Ph.D. student at Tech-
nical University of Denmark and Jakob Ambsdorf Ph.D. student at the University of
Copenhagen. The project has been approved by Associate Professor Yiqiu Dong, Head
of Studies at the Mathematical Modelling and Computation M.Sc. program.
Kongens Lyngby, July 20, 2024
Markus Ditlev Sjøgren Olsen - S184073
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to say thanks for all the great supervision, and guidance I
have gotten from my supervisors Jakob Amsbsdorf, Paraskevas Pegios and Aasa Feragen.
Secondly, I would like to express my gratitude to everyone who has contributed to
or is part of the Pioneer Center for Artificial Intelligence. I have greatly enjoyed the
pleasant oﬀice environment and interacting with many kind and talented people.
At last, I have had the chance to utilize real patient data from an extensive national
database. I extend my gratitude to each patient who consented to participate, as well
as to all the clinicians and other collaborators involved in gathering the data.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Technical Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Project Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Fetal Ultrasound Imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Deep Learning Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Out-Of-Distribution Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3.1
Anomaly Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Visual Anomaly Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Generative Models for Anomaly Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5.1
Generative Adversarial Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5.2
Variational Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5.3
Diffusion Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5.4
Comparison of Generative Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Evaluation Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Diffusion Models for Anomaly Detection
12
3.1
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.1
Forward Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.2
Reverse Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.3
Diffusion Models with Arbitrary Noise Types
. . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Reconstruction-based Visual Anomaly Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
The Information Bottleneck Issue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.2
The Role of Noise in Anomaly Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.3
The Information Overload Issue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
3.2.4
Guided Diffusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.5
Anomaly Score for Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Aggregated Normative Diffusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Conclusion of Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Unsupervised Detection of Fetal Brain Anomalies with DDPMs
26
4.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.1
Data Extraction Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.2
In-distribution Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.3
Out-Of-Distribution Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Exploratory Analysis and Data Splitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
Learning the Distribution of Normal Brain Images with DDPMs . . . . .
35
4.5
Visual Anomaly Detection Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5.1
Inpainting-based Noise Agnostic Anomaly Detection (iNAAD) . .
37
4.5.2
Skewness of Aggregated Normative Diffusion (SANDi)
. . . . . .
38
4.5.3
Baselines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Experiments and Results
43
5.1
Evaluation of Generative Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Detecting Synthetic Abnormalities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
Ablation Studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4
Anomaly Detection Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4.1
Anomaly Detection with iNAAD
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4.2
Anomaly Detection with SANDi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.5
Qualitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
Discussion and Conclusion
54
6.1
Feasability of Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.2
Unsupervised vs Supervised Approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.3.1
Anomaly Detection Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.3.2
Data Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.4
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Bibliography
58
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Congenital malformations of the brain are among the most common fetal developmental
abnormalities, and their detection from ultrasound images is an important part of the
mid-trimester fetal anomaly scan performed routinely around the world [68]. Detect-
ing fetal brain anomalies using machine learning is challenging, as variations in image
quality and probe position cause large variations in normal images [52], while abnormal
images may differ only in small details [62], giving poor separability of the two distribu-
tions. Further, the distribution of possible malformations is long-tailed, with many rare
variations, and therefore little per-class training data.
Existing approaches [93, 95, 49] have demonstrated the feasibility of supervised de-
tection of abnormalities in the fetal brain. However, these methods (i) require labels for
the individual malformations, sometimes down to anatomical details [49], and (ii) they
are bound to the detection of a closed set of frequent anomalies from the training data.
To overcome these limitations, we present a proof-of-concept for the unsupervised de-
tection of fetal brain anomalies based on Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models [29]
(DDPMs). Specifically, we leverage reconstruction-based methods [89, 91, 26] to build
an inpainting-based Noise Agnostic method for Anomaly Detection (iNAAD), involving
inpainting the fetal anatomy, and averaging over reconstructions from multiple noise lev-
els . To the best of our knowledge, no prior work has investigated unsupervised detection
approaches for fetal brain anomalies. Our approach requires access only to ultrasound
images of normal fetal brains during training, which are more readily available than ab-
normal cases. In summary, we contribute 1) adaptations of diffusion-based algorithms
for unsupervised anomaly detection evaluated on a clinical dataset with a wide range
of common fetal brain anomalies, 2) the first extensive evaluation of different types of
noise in diffusion models for the fetal ultrasound setting.
1.2
Technical Scope
The visual anamaly detection of fetal brain abnormalities with ultrasound images is a
challenging fine-grained classification task, as many images of brain anomalies are visu-
ally similar to normal cases, with a long-tailed distribution of various rare abnormalities
that can in turn be expressed in different ways. Consequently, classification models are
==PAGE:9==
1.3 Project Goals
2
at risk of being unable to detect abnormalities that are underrepresented in the train-
ing dataset. As an alternative to the traditional classification setting, we are framing
the problem of recognizing fetal brain anomalies from ultrasound images as an out-of-
distribution (OOD) detection task. Different from the traditional classification setting,
where discriminative models are employed, the task of detecting out-of-distribution sam-
ples uses generative models to model the distribution of normal images.
1.3
Project Goals
The overall goal of the research in this thesis is to understand the framework of Vi-
sual Anomaly Detection, Out of Distribution Detection and deep generative models.
Specifically Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM) and Reconstruction-based
Out-of-Distribution detection are employed and tested in a fetal ultrasound setting:
1. Understand the general concepts of Anomaly Detection and OOD detection (chapter 2)
2. Investigate related work for Diffusion Models for Anomaly Detection (chapter 3)
3. Implementation of unsupervised detection algorithm for fetal brain anomalies (chapter 4)
4. Evaluation of generative models (DDPM) with different noise distributions (section 5.1)
5. Validate feasibility of unsupervised anomaly detection of fetal ultrasound images (sec-
tion 5.4 and 5.5)
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2
Background
2.1
Fetal Ultrasound Imaging
Ultrasound imaging is one of the most widely used modalities in medical diagnostics and
offers a non-invasive view of the human body, crucial for prenatal care. Its strengths
lie in real-time imaging, safety without ionizing radiation, and cost eﬀiciency, making it
widely accessible to monitor fetal development and guide minimally invasive procedures.
Despite its advantages, ultrasound imaging faces issues such as operator dependence
[1], image noise with various artifacts [65] and limited penetration depth compared to
other image modalities [71]. The noise, artifacts, and complexity results in diﬀiculties in
analyzing images, which requires years of experience and training. Identifying congenital
malformations is a crucial aspect of the routine mid-trimester fetal anomaly scan con-
ducted worldwide [69]. During the mid-trimester anomaly scan, the ultrasound probe
is positioned in various (but standardized) ways to capture the necessary anatomical
structures. These are referred to as ”standard planes” and are shown in Figure 2.1.
If anomalies are suspected, further analysis will be conducted; here ultrasound scans of
other ultrasound probe positions can be included, theses are referred to as ”non standard
planes”.
Figure 2.1: Axial views of the fetal head [12] (standard planes). (a) Transventricular
plane; (b) transthalamic plane; (c) transcerebellar plane. Image source: [12]
==PAGE:11==
2.2 Deep Learning Methods
4
2.2
Deep Learning Methods
Deep neural networks for computer vision can be categorized into two types of models,
as visualized in Figure 2.2. Discriminative models are designed to differentiate between
different classes of images, effectively learning the best separation of two (or more) class
distributions Pclass1 and Pclass2. These models are trained in a supervised manner and
do not easily support unsupervised training. Architectures such as Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) [64] are commonly used for discriminative tasks in computer vision [98].
Given a set of training samples, Generative models learn to generate samples similar to
the training samples and thereby effectively model the underlying training data distribu-
tion Ptrain. Various architectures such as Generative Adverserial Networks (GAN) [24],
Variational Auto Encoders (VAE)[41] and more recently Denoising Diffusion Probabilis-
tic Models (DDPM) [29] are all used for modeling distributions of images. Different from
the Discriminative model the Generative model does not directly allow for discrimination
between two classes, but is trained in a less supervised manner. Specifically for the task
of detecting anomalies the Discriminative models has limitations, as it requires labeled
anomalous data during training and fails to discriminate underrepresented abnormali-
ties among normal images. Therefore, another approach for discriminating between two
classes using Generative models is presented, namely the Out-Of-Distribution (OOD)
Detection.
Figure 2.2: Visual representation of discriminative vs generative models. Image source:
[25]
2.3
Out-Of-Distribution Detection
The task of detecting out of distribution samples can be framed as a binary classification
task, as to use Generative models to discriminate, we first train the model to learn the
training distribution, notating this PID for In-Distribution, and tries to detect whether a
sample x is likely contained in PID or Out-Of-Distribution (POOD), where POOD ̸= PID,
leaving only two outcomes.
Consider the task of distinguishing between images of cats and dogs. A Discrimina-
tive model can be employed to learn to differentiate between the two distributions Pcat
==PAGE:12==
2.3 Out-Of-Distribution Detection
5
and Pdog. However, if the model encounters an image of a house, it will still classify
the image as either a cat or a dog. Using an Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) approach, one
could utilize a Generative model to learn the distribution of Pcat, enabling the detection
of whether samples are In-Distribution (cats) or Out-of-Distribution (not cats). The
principal difference between these methods lies in this: with the generative approach,
both a house and a dog image will be identified as Out-Of-Distribution, whereas the
discriminative approach provides little to no insight about the image of a house.
2.3.1
Anomaly Detection
The detection of anomalies is a crucial task in many fields, such as manufacturing [53],
fraud detection [45], and medical science [21], and there are many methods to solve the
task, ranging from simple statistical measures to deep neural networks [13]. There is
a significant overlap between Out-of-distribution detection and Anomaly Detection, as
the latter can be redefined as the process of identifying samples that fall outside the dis-
tribution of normal samples. The overlap of the two concepts is illustrated in Figure 2.3,
where the other applications for Out-of-distribution detection include applications such
as handling possible distribution shift and novelty detection [100]. Other methods for
anomaly detection include the Discriminative models described above. To use OOD
detection to detect anomalies, it is crucial how we define the distribution PID to model.
By defining PID such that all normal samples are contained in the distribution, we ob-
tain an out-of-distribution POOD that consists of abnormal samples as the nature of the
OOD detection methods states that POOD ̸= PID.
Figure 2.3: Visual representation of OOD and AD and the relationship between them
2.3.2
Limitations
Defining PID so that it encapsulates the whole distribution of normal samples is by no
means a trivial task and impossible in some cases [20]. Even the Pcat, is a very complex
==PAGE:13==
2.4 Visual Anomaly Detection
6
and long tailed distribution. This is due to the fact that there is no easy limitation of
the number of perturbations one can apply to an image of a cat, before it is no longer an
image of a cat. Therefore, defining Pcat to be a sup-space of the full distribution of cat
images, such as images of cats ONLY where the head is visible, is necessary. By reducing
PID, the POOD will be bigger; therefore, there will always be a trade-off between the
ID and OOD distributions and what constitutes normal and abnormal. Furthermore, in
order to model complex distributions, a modeling strategy would require to be intelligent
and have complex modeling capacity [21].
2.4
Visual Anomaly Detection
To explain various Visual Anomaly Detection (VAD) methods, it’s helpful to recognize
different levels of information within images as categorized by datapoint, entity, relation,
and frame by Cao et al.[10].
Here, datapoint represents the lowest level, such as a
pixel value, while frame denotes the entire image. This segmentation of information is
beneficial because anomalies in certain images are more likely to be detected at the entity
or relation level rather than at the full frame level. Furthermore, identifying the specific
entity within the frame responsible for the anomaly aids in more detailed analysis. It
is important to note that these four levels are not universally defined for VAD and can
differ across the literature.
In general, the task of VAD with deep learning can be divided into two subcategories
supervised, where the models are trained both on normal and abnormal samples. And
unsupervised methods (OOD detection), where the model is trained only on normal
samples. Note that models in between such as semi-supervised, where a small amount
of abnormal data is also used for training due exist, but will not be touched further.
Supervised classifiers for normal/abnormal classification have been implemented with
promising results in fields such as agriculture, production and medicine [37, 77, 14].
However, Supervised VAD comes with limitations. First, labeled data would be needed
for both normal and abnormal data. which is not always possible. Second, the abnormal
domain is incomplete as it is impossible to ensure that the abnormal dataset contains
all possible abnormalities and the approach will struggle to detect specific abnormalities
that are under-represented in the dataset. Furthermore, as described in the example
with the images of cats, dogs and house (Sec. 2.3), a supervised approach will not be
able to handle novel abnormalities, which an OOD approach would.
In this thesis, we will focus mainly on work concerning unsupervised VAD, because of
the limitations of supervised approaches stated above. Unsupervised anomaly detection
can overall be split up into 4 categories: Density estimation, One-class classification,
reconstruction based and self supervised classification
Density Estimation
aims to estimate the underlying probability density function of
the PID. Then for a newly obtained sample determine whether it is likely to be sampled
from the learned distribution. This approach has been shown to require a large number
==PAGE:14==
2.4 Visual Anomaly Detection
7
of ID training data to accurately estimate the probability density function of the ID
data [99]. This approach directly translates to a confidence probability that an image is
abnormal or not, but does not provide any lower-level information as entity or datapoint
information about the anomaly.
One-class classification
is a classifier approach in which the aim is to learn to classify
images in ID as normal. This is beneficial compared to the Density Estimation because of
the fact that the model does not need to learn the probabilities of each sample. Instead,
the aim is to construct a decision boundary around ID in feature space. This results in
the need for a lower amount of training data [99]. Traditionally models such as Support
Vector Machines[19] have been used for this, however recently more modern models such
as CNN have also been implemented [67].
Self-supervised classification
is related to One-class classification as they both have
a classification approach. The difference is that this approach self-generates the labels
of possible different classes in training data, and require no annotated data at all. The
goal is for the model to learn feature specifics about the ID data instead of creating
a boundary in feature space. The model would then be able to recognize the learned
features in new inputs, and assign it to the group that is most similar [30].
Reconstruction based
approaches use generative models to reconstruct input images.
The assumption is that a generative model that has learned to generate ID data during
training, will reconstruct images that is similar to the ID data more accuratly than an
image that is not similar to ID data. Consider again the example of a cat and a dog;
a generative model that has been trained to generate cat images will more accurately
reconstruct a new image of a cat, than that of a dog, meaning that if the model attempts
to reconstruct an image of a dog, the reconstruction will be less similar to the original
image of a dog, and look more like a cat. This difference can then be quantified and used
to detect images that are not similar to ID images. Overall the reconstruction based
approach can be divided into 4 steps:
• Step 1: Train a generative model to generate ID images
• Step 2: Given a new image x0 corrupt it to some latent representation xt
• Step 3: Use the generative model to reconstruct the image from xt to ˆx0
• Step 4: Evaluate similarity between the reconstruction ˆx0 and the initial x0
Step 1 depends on the choice of generative model and the data you want to model,
where models such as Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM), Generative
Adversarial Networks (GAN), and Variational Auto Encoders (VEA), are generally the
preferred choice. Step 2 can depend on the choice of generative model, however, can also
be a non-parameterized corruption of the input image. Step 3 follows the worklow of the
implemented generative model and step 4 does not depend on the generative model and
==PAGE:15==
2.5 Generative Models for Anomaly Detection
8
any similarity or dissimilarity measure can effectively be used, such as a simple Mean
squared error or a more complex perceptual loss [105].
Feature modelling
is an alternative approach which uses an Encode/Decoder struc-
ture. First, the image is encoded to feature space, then anomalies are detected in feature
space. Finally, the encoded image can be decoded back to the image space, where the
features identified in the feature space will be decoded back with the image to identify
abnormal regions or features. [11].
It is not all above approaches that a suitiable for obtaining lower-level (datapoint,
entity) information about the anomaly. However, the reconstruction based, feature mod-
elling and Self-supervised Classification methods translate well to lower level anomaly
detection. For feature modeling and self-supervised classification, the lower-level infor-
mation can be optained as the model aims to identify specific features in the image
that diverge from the training features. The detection of lower-level anomalies with
the reconstruction based method works by analyzing the dissimilarity between input x
and reconstruction ˆx. Regions that have been reconstructed poorly are an indication
of anomalous features, whereas areas that has been reconstructed well indicate normal
image features.
2.5
Generative Models for Anomaly
Detection
The recent literature regarding generative models for images has been dominated by
three major architectures, namely diffusion models, Variational Autoencodors (VAE)
and Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [47][9]
2.5.1
Generative Adversarial Networks
GAN’s consists of two deep networks, a Discriminator and a Generator. The Discrimi-
nator is trained to classify between images from the training data and images generated
by the Generator. The Generator learns to generate images as close to the training
images to fool the Discriminator to classify the generated images as actual training im-
ages. This methodology can result in good image generation models and has been used
in reconstruction based anomaly detection [79].
2.5.2
Variational Autoencoders
Similarly to the GAN the VAE also consists of two deep networks, the Encoder and
the Decoder. The Encoder maps the input from the input space (x-space) to a latent
==PAGE:16==
2.5 Generative Models for Anomaly Detection
9
feature space (z-space), and the Decoder maps from the z-space back to the x-space.
The general methodology of a VAE can be seen in Figure 2.4
Figure 2.4: A VAE learns stochastic mappings between an observed x-space, whose
empirical distribution qD(x) is typically complicated, and a latent z-space, whose dis-
tribution can be relatively simple (such as spherical, as in this figure). The generative
model learns a joint distribution pθ(x, z) that is often (but not always) factorized as
pθ(x, z) = pθ(z)pθ(x | z), with a prior distribution over latent space pθ(z), and a stochas-
tic decoder pθ(x | z). The stochastic encoder qϕ(z | x), also called inference model,
approximates the true but intractable posterior pθ(z | x) of the generative model. Im-
age source: [41]
2.5.3
Diffusion Models
Similarly to the VAE the goal is to map the input from a complex distribution to
a simple prior distribution such as a Gaussian distribution. Diffusion models achieve
this by progressively perturbing the input data with noise. Then learns to reverse the
process and go from prior distribution, to input data distribution illustrated in Figure 2.5.
There are several different methods to reverse the noising process, some of the main are:
Denoising Probabilistic diffusion model (DDPM) , Score-based Generative Models (SGM)
, and Stochastic Differential Equations (SDE) [101].
==PAGE:17==
2.5 Generative Models for Anomaly Detection
10
Figure 2.5:
Workflow of Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) where
q(xt|xt−1) is the noising process to map image to simple gaussian distribution xT by
adding noise each step. pθ(xt−1|xt) is the learnable process where we learn to map from
noise back to input image, by iteratively removing noise. Image source: [29]
2.5.4
Comparison of Generative Models
With the introduction of GANs in 2014 by the work Goodfellow et al. [24] GAN was
generally the best performing generative model for computer vision.
It outperforms
other models such as VAE in terms of image resolution, sample speed, and visual fidelity
[7]. However, diffusion models have recently overtaken the spot as the best performing
generative models for many applications [43, 39, 101]. One of the main advantages of
diffusion models is that they do not share the same issue of mode collapse as GANs [44].
This means that diffusion models are generally able to synthesize a wider distribution
while still conforming to the desired distribution (mode coverage), whereas GANs have
a tendency to restrict the synthesis on a subset of the whole training distribution (mode
collapse) as illustrated in Figure 2.6. This is because different from GANs, diffusion
models are not trained with adversarial training, which has well documented limitations
[103]. Furthermore, diffusion models perform similarly or better than GANs on nearly
all other parameters [66]. This means that the research on diffusion models has been
increasing and diffusion models have been used and implemented in a variety of fields
such as computer vision, temporal data modeling, and medical image reconstructions
[101].
Figure 2.6: Visual representation of mode collaps and mode coverage. Image source
[6]
Although diffusion models outperform GANs and other generative models in terms
of sample diversity and quality, the downside is that the inference speed is lower because
==PAGE:18==
2.6 Evaluation Criteria
11
it consists of an iterative Markovian sampling process that requires inference of T steps
instead of the one-step inference of GANs. However, research has been conducted to
approximate the Markovian process of the diffusion model in order to obtain x0 directly
from xT [104] or faster sampling methods as proposed in DDIM workflow [86]
The fact that diffusion models can synthesize images from the entire training distri-
bution and not just a subset of it is a key property of the diffusion model that makes it
a very suitable model for the detection of OOD samples, as described in section 2.3. In
this thesis, the diffusion model denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM)[29] will
be used as the generative model for OOD detection of anomalies.
2.6
Evaluation Criteria
Despite the methodological differences between OOD detection and classification (sec-
tion 2.3), the performance of OOD detection methods can be evaluated in a manner
similar to a binary classification task. This implies that metrics such as receiver op-
erating characteristic (ROC) curves and performance measures such as the area under
the ROC curve (AUROC) are appropriate for evaluating the VAD algorithms’ perfor-
mance.
The ROC curve illustrates the relationship between the True Positive Rate
(TPR =
Tp
Tp+Fn) and the False Positive Rate (FPR =
Fp
Fp+Tn) at different threshold lev-
els for the calculated OOD score, illustrated in Figure 2.7. An alternative to the ROC
curve is to look at the area under the precision-recall curve. It plots precision =
Tp
Tp+Tf
against recall =
Tp
Fn+Tp at various threshold settings. Similarly for the AUROC score
the area under the precision-recall curve can also be used as a performance metric and
is also refered to as the Average Precision (AP).
A significant advantage of area-under-curve metrics is that they do not necessitate
selecting a metric threshold to effectively evaluate model performance, unlike metrics
such as accuracy or F1 score. In scenarios with highly imbalanced datasets, where one
class dominates, the Precision-Recall curve is favored due to its higher sensitivity to
enhancements in classifying the positive class over the negative. However both the ROC
curve and Precision-Recall curve is utilized to assess the OOD detection algorithms.
Figure 2.7: Illustration of ROC curve and AUROC metric. Image source [63]
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Diffusion Models for
Anomaly Detection
Considering the vast amount of literature regarding both OOD detection and visual
abnormality detection, we present in the following section those approaches that are
deemed to be of great interest for our specific problem. The key points, limitations, and
benefits of the different implementations in the literature are presented and taken into
account. The reviewed literature relates to diffusion models (DDPM), OOD detection
and the reconstruction based method.
3.1
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
Many existing methods for OOD detection utilize DDPM to model the In-Distribution
[22, 91, 26, 5, 62], which is based on two Markov chains called forward process and
reverse process, where the forward process progressively adds noise to the data and the
reverse process is a learnable process that aims to reverse forward process and can be
used to synthesize data from pure noise. In many implementations of DDPM’s there
is a probabilistic aspect of reverse process in addition to the probabilistic aspect of the
forward process
3.1.1
Forward Process
The forward process, as stated above, aims to deconstruct the data and reduce the
data to Gaussian noise. Let xt denote the image that has been deconstructed with the
forward process t times, then x0 represent the original image. The deconstructed images
of x1, x2, x3...xT, where T is the number of diffusion steps, can be sampled following
Equation 3.1. Note that Equation 3.1 describes the Markovian forward process using
Gaussian noise.
p (xt | xt−1) = N
(
xt;
√
1 −βt · xt−1, βt · I
)
, ∀t ∈{1, . . . , T}
(3.1)
Where p(xt|xt−1) is the probability density function for xt given xt−1 and can be
sampled with the RHS of the equation, here βt ∈[0, 1] represents the variance scheduler
==PAGE:20==
3.1 Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
13
for each diffusion step, I is the identity matrix of the same size as the input image x0
and N(x; µ, σ) is the Gaussian distribution with mean µ and variance σ.
This iterative sampling of xt does not result in problems when during back propaga-
tion, as it does for VAE’s as described in [40] as DDPM’s forward process is not trainable.
However, in terms of computation time, it would be much preferable to sample directly
from p(xt|x0) ∀t ∈[0, T]. Luckily, a property of the forward process is that it allows
for a non iterative sampling of xt, this can be achieved by utilizing the reparameteri-
zation trick and introducing αt = 1 −βt and
¯αt = ∏t
s=0 αs into Equation 3.1. The
reparametrization trick is a method used to sample x ∼N(µ, σ2) as such x = µ + zσ
where z ∼N(0, I) [15].
Applying this trick to Equation 3.1 one will get:
xt =
√
1 −βt · xt−1 +
√
βt · ϵ
where ϵ ∼N(0, I). Inserting αt = 1 −βt:
xt = √αt · xt−1 + √1 −αt · ϵ
Applying the transformation recursively from xt to x0 we accumulate the effect of αt
at each step. This accumulation can be expressed through ¯αt, which is the product of all
αs from s = 1 to t. To express xt directly in terms of x0 we consider the entire sequence
of transformations from x0 to xt in one step, leading to the simple way of sampling
p(xt|x0) as:
xt = √¯αt · x0 + √1 −¯αt · ϵ
(3.2)
where reversing the reparametrization yields the probability density function shown
in Equation 3.3
p (xt | x0) = N
(
xt; √¯αt · x0, (1 −¯αt) · I
)
(3.3)
Choosing ¯αt or, more specifically, the variance scheduler βt, as ¯αt is defined by,
influences how xt will be distributed when sampled as shown in Equation 3.3. Following
[15] the scheduler βt can be chosen to be linearly increasing from t = 1 to t = T such
that xT can be modeled according to a Gaussian distribution and no information from
x0 will remain in xT.
3.1.2
Reverse Process
The reverse process aims to be equivalent with the time reverse of the forward process
and can be used to synthesize data from a noised representation xT ∼N(0, I) (as
described above, it can be modeled to a Gaussian distribution). The probability density
function of the reverse process q(xt|xt−1) can be described as shown in Equation 3.4. We
introduce a deep neaural network U-Net [74], with an architecture similar to the one seen
in Figure 3.1, that aims to predict the transition from xt to xt−1 based on Equation 3.4.
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
14
q (xt−1 | xt) = N (xt−1; µ (xt, t) , Σ (xt, t))
(3.4)
Unfortunately, it is not possible to train the network to learn the parameters µ(xt, t)
and Σ(xt, t) directly, since the objective would be to learn µ(xt, t) and Σ(xt, t) so that the
maximum likelihood of p(x0) was as large as possible for each training point x0, but to
compute this one would have to estimate all possible reverse processes, which is infeasible.
Instead, it is possible to ensure that the reverse process closely approximates that of the
time reverse forward process by utilizing the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, which is
an estimation of the information lost when trying to approximate one distribution p(x)
with another q(x). This can be used to estimate the evidence lower bound (ELBO) of
the negative log-likelihood that can be found in Equation 3.5 [15, 101]
Lvlb = −log q (x0 | x1) + KL (p (xT | x0) ∥π (xT))
(3.5)
+
∑
t>1
KL (p (xt−1 | xt, x0) ∥q (xt−1 | xt))
(3.6)
Minimizing ELBO in Equation 3.5 will mean that for each timestep, the neural
network will approximate the predicted posterior distribution q(xt−1|xt) as close to the
true posterior p(xt−1|xt) [18]. As proposed in [29] by fixing the covariance Σ(xt, t) the
transition µθ(xt, t) can be rewritten as a function of noise as shown in Equation 3.7,
where ϵθ(xt, t) represents the noise predicted by the neural network at time step t.
µθ(xt, t) =
1
√αt
·
(
xt −1 −αt
√1 −ˆαt
· ϵθ (xt, t)
)
(3.7)
The formulation of µ shown in Equation 3.7 allows for a simpler computation of
the Variational Lower Bound shown in Equation 3.5. The new computation measures
the error based on the real noice ϵ and the predicted noice ϵθ(xt, t) and is shown in
Equation 3.8, where E is the expected values of the subscripts
Lsimple = Et∼[1,T]Ex0∼Px0Eϵt∼N(0,I) ∥ϵt −ϵθ (xt, t)∥2
(3.8)
The DDPM workflow can be summed up as such: A sample xt is corrupted from
input image x0 with forward process in Equation 3.2, and the reverse process is defined
by pθ(xt−1|xt) but instead of calculating the mean and covariance of the distribution, a
neural network is given the inputs xt and t and is trained to predict the noise ϵθ(xt, t)
of an image xt, to minimize the training objective in equation Equation 3.8.
==PAGE:22==
3.1 Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
15
Figure 3.1: Visual representation of example Unet architecture used in DDPM. Image
source: [78]
3.1.3
Diffusion Models with Arbitrary Noise Types
The original DDPM implentation from Ho, Jain, and Abbeel[29] is implemented with
purely Gaussian noise. However more recently experimentation’s with different forms
of image perturbations have been proposed and formalized [2, 38, 22, 59]. We intro-
duce a notation for a more general workflow of DDPM that suits better different noise
perturbations. The forward process can simply be reformulated from Equation 3.2 by
introducing a noise distribution P such that ϵ ∼P resulting in
xt = x0
√¯αt + √1 −¯αt · ϵ,
ϵ ∼P
(3.9)
where ϵ represents noise from the pre-defined distribution P and 0 ≤t ≤T denotes
the level of noise degradation. When t is low, a significant amount of information from
the original image is retained.
No information is assumed to remain at t = T and
xT appears similar to noise sampled from P.
Similarly the training objective easily
translates to this new notation as the Gaussian training objective is just a special case
of the training objective below where P ∼N(0, I)
Lsimple = arg min
θ
Ex0∼Px0,Et∼[1,T ]Eϵ∼P ∥ϵ −ϵθ (xt, t)∥2
(3.10)
where xt follows the forward process in Equation 3.9 and θ are learnable parameters.
With the ability to predict noise with the trained network ϵθ(xt, t) we can now formulate
how to optain xt−1 as follows
xt−1 =
1
√αt
(
xt −1 −αt
√1 −¯αt
ϵθ (xt, t)
)
+ βtϵ,
ϵ ∼P
(3.11)
Where we effectivly remove the predicted noise according to αt and ϵθ(xt, t), and add
back random noise ϵ ∼P according to the variance scheduler βt, note that for the final
step (x1 →x0) the β1 = 0 to ensure that the final x0 is noiseless. The training and
sampling of DDPMs with general noise notation can then be seen in Algorithms below:
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Reconstruction-based Visual Anomaly Detection
16
Algorithm 1 Training Algorithm for Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM)
Input: Dataset X, number of timesteps T, variance schedule β1, β2, . . . , βT, neural
network ϵθ, noise distribution P
for number of training iterations do
Sample x0 ∼X
Sample t ∼Uniform(1, . . . , T)
Sample ϵ ∼P
Compute xt = √¯αtx0 + √1 −¯αtϵ, where ¯αt =
∏t
s=1 αs and αt = 1 −βt
Compute the loss Lt = ∥ϵ −ϵθ(xt, t)∥2
Update the neural network parameters θ by minimizing the loss Lt
end for
Algorithm 2 DDPM Reconstruction Algorithm
Require: Trained model ϵθ, input sample x0, number of time steps t, noise distribution
P
Corrupt image x0 to xt with noise distribution P. (Eq. 3.9)
for t = t to 1 do
Sample xt−1 with Eq. 3.11
end for
return ˆx0
3.2
Reconstruction-based Visual Anomaly
Detection
Due to the development of deep generative models such as DDPM, the algorithms for vi-
sual anomaly detection have shifted more towards a reconstruction-based method, where
previous work has focused on Feature modelling and Density Estimations [48, 39].
Based on the description of the reconstruction based method in section 2.4 a simple
OOD detection algorithm with DDPM can be theorized as the one seen in Algorithm 3
and will be used for reference for work done by others.
3.2.1
The Information Bottleneck Issue
The work by Graham et al.[26] highlights some advantageous characteristics for OOD
detection of the diffusion model. The implementation uses a set of standard benchmark
datasets, such as CIFAR10[46], CelebA[57] and MNIST[92] for ID and OOD data, using a
DDPM reconstruction-based approach to identify samples from various datasets. They
introduce a multiple reconstruction technique that surpasses both density estimation
based methods and other reconstruction based methods. The rationale behind a multiple
reconstruction method is to tackle bottleneck issues [23] depicted in Figure 3.2 for a VAE
==PAGE:24==
3.2 Reconstruction-based Visual Anomaly Detection
17
Algorithm 3 Simple reconstruction based OOD detection with diffusion model
Require:
Noise distribution P, trained model ϵθ, noise level t, input x0
Outputs:
Similarity score, reconstructed image ˆx0
Corrupt input x0 to optain xt with DDPM forward process (Eq. 3.9):
x0 →xt
Reconstruct ˆx0 with a DDPM:
for t to 1 do
DDPM reverse process (Eq. 3.11):
xt →ˆxt−1
end for
Compare similarity:
OODscore = Similarity(ˆx0, x0)
with an Encoder/Decoder framework. The bottleneck z symbolizes the size of the latent
image representation. The size of the information bottleneck is vital in the quality of the
reconstruction. A larger bottleneck allows for accurate reconstruction of OOD samples,
whereas a smaller bottleneck can lead to poor reconstruction of ID samples. Adjusting
the information bottleneck z to fit particular datasets, can be a complex task for many
neural networks, as it depends on the model’s architecture. In the case of DDPMs, the
information bottleneck can be interpreted as the chosen level of noise degradation t.
Thus, it is not a parameter inherent to the model but one that can be adjusted after
the model is trained. The paper took advantage of this characteristic by implementing
an algorithm in which the input image is reconstructed with several values of t, and
the similarity between these reconstructions xt and the original image is measured to
compute an OOD score.
Figure 3.2: Visual representation of the information bottleneck of VAEs. Image source:
[60]
This method provides more details on the input image by computing the similarity for
multiple reconstructions at different information bottleneck sizes. Performing iterative
reconstructions for various t values increases the computation time. As mentioned in
subsection 2.5.4, this is a drawback of the DDPM model. Despite the paper’s solution
using the PLMS sampler [54], the issue of computation time remains. Adapting the
workflow with multiple reconstruction approaches from [26] the simple Algorithm 3 can
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Reconstruction-based Visual Anomaly Detection
18
be rewritten into an extended version, as shown in Algorithm 4. Where S denotes the
different values of t ∈[0, T] and ˆx0,s is the reconstruction for noise degradation level s
Algorithm 4 Reconstruction based OOD detection with multiple reconstructions
Require:
Noise distribution P, trained model ϵθ, noise levels S, input x0
Outputs:
Similarity score, reconstructed images ˆx0,s, ∀s ∈S
for s in S do
Define timestep: t = s
Optain xt DDPM forward process (Eq. 3.9):
x0 →xt
Obtain ˆx0,s with a markov chain:
for t to 1 do
DDPM reverse process (Eq. 3.11):
xt →ˆxt−1
end for
end for
Compare similarity:
OODscore = Similarity(ˆx0,s, x0), ∀s ∈S
The work presented above took inspiration from the AnoDDPM model implemented
in the paper by Wyatt et al.[91]. Wyatt et al. showcases the importance of the noise
distribution P in diffusion models for OOD detection. This has also been addressed by
Marimont et al.[59] and Kascenas et al.[38], proposing alternatives to standard Gaussian
noise.
3.2.2
The Role of Noise in Anomaly Detection
The reason why the noise distribution impacts performance is due to the inherent struc-
ture of natural images, where the image’s low-frequency components contribute more
prominently than the high-frequency components [88][75]. When Gaussian noise is ap-
plied during the forward process as shown in Equation 3.9, its uniform spectrum results
in greater corruption of the high-frequency components compared to the low-frequency
ones. Consequently, the deconstructed image mainly retains low-frequency information.
The work of Wyatt et al.[91], Marimont et al.[59], and Frotscher et al.[22] addresses this
specific issue and proposes different solutions.
The AnoDDPM model from Wyatt et al.[91] show that by simply changing the noise
distribution P from a Gaussian noise to a Simplex noise [27] during both forward and
reverse process of the DDPM they achieve better results for detecting anomalies, even
though the Simplex model could not reconstruct images with as low reconstruction loss
as the standard Gaussian model. They find that the proposed method AnoDDPM with
Simplex noise would outperform AnoDDPM with Gaussian noise and other state-of-the-
art models such as the GAN based method f-AnoGAN [79] for segmentation of brain
tumours in MRI scans.
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Reconstruction-based Visual Anomaly Detection
19
3.2.2.1
Simplex Noise
Simplex noise is an improvement on the classical Perlin noise and was developed by
the same person to overcome some of the limitations of the Perlin noise. Simplex and
Perlin noise are both gradient-based noise, for Perlin noise one picks pseudo-randomly
gradients for each pixel and then fits a curve to the full image representing the noise.
This is not exactly how the Simplex noise is calculated, as the computational complexity
of Perlin noise is O(N 2) for N dimensional data. Instead, the Simplex noise divides the
data up into a Simplex grid (the simplest most compact shape that can be repeated to
fill the grid). Then computes the noise at a datapoint as a summation only using near
datapoints [27]. The Simplex noise provides a more structural corruption of the image
and allows the reverse process to reconstruct specific entities more effectively.
Simplex noise also provides the possibility for parameter tuning.
The parameter
frequency can be thought of as the frequency of stationary points in the noise curve,
where a very high frequency will look more like Gaussian noise, and a lower frequency
will be more structured. By applying a number of octaves of noise, the distribution of
the noise will start to resemble a Gaussian distribution. as shown by Wyatt et al. in
Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Simplex noise comparing the affect of the octave N (y- axis) and the initial
starting frequency ν (x-axis) on the distribution and structure. Image source: [91]
Although the results showed that Simplex noise surpassed the performance of Gaus-
sian noise for their specific framework, the work of Graham et al.[26] found that in their
implementation, which was based on AnoDDPM and implemented with multiple t val-
ues as described above, Simplex noise actually hindered the OOD detection performance
compared to Gaussian noise. This indicates that the optimal noise distribution P for
OOD detection with diffusion models depends on the specific dataset and should be
tuned thereafter.
Comparing AnoDDPM with the simple Algorithm 3 we simply change the chosen
noise distribution P to present Simplex noise. This small change to the simple OOD
algorithm is only possible if the DDPM is also trained on images corrupted with Simplex
noise.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Reconstruction-based Visual Anomaly Detection
20
3.2.2.2
Pyramid Noise
Furthermore an alternative to Simplex noise was proposed by Frotscher et al.[22] called
Pyramid Gaussian noise. Pyramid noise achieves a similar structured noise to Simplex
by an iterative addition of Gaussian noise as:
ϵ =
10
∑
i=1
ci · U
(
ϵ(i); H, W
)
(3.12)
where c ∈[0, 1] is a constant scaling factor, ϵ(i) ∼N (0, Ihi×wi×C) is independent
standard Gaussian noise of size hi × wi × C, and U is a bi-linear up sampling operation
that up scales the images to size H × W × C.
This Pyramid noise allows for better reconstruction for different scales of abnormal-
ities similar to the Simplex noise. The main benefit of Pyramid noise is that it is much
simpler to generate, as it is more closely related to simple Gaussian noise. The work done
by Frotscher et al. showed that the reconstructions and anomaly detection with Pyramid
noise outperformed AnoDDPM that uses Simplex noise. The visual representation of
the noise can be seen in Figure 3.4
Unlike the AnoDDPM implementation, where images is degradated with Simplex
noise during both training and reconstruction phases, Frotscher et al.[22] finds that
optimal results is achieved by training the model exclusivly with Pyramid noise, but
employing Gaussian noise during reconstruction phase. Meaning the noise distribution
PGauss is applied during forward process when during reconstructions, while noise from
PPyramid is used in the reverse process. Intuitively, they argue that by degrading an image
with Gaussian noise, and try to remove the noise with a model trained on Pyramid noise,
the model attempts to eliminate the injected Gaussian noise in addition to the lower
frequency components, such as anomalous regions.
3.2.2.3
Other Perturbations than Noise
The work by Bansal et al.[2] presents the possibility to implement diffusion models with
non-noise-like degradation’s. They show that methods such as deterministic noise, blur,
transformations can work well together with diffusion models.
Figure 3.4: Visual representation of the Pyramid noise used for anomaly segmentation
[22]
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Reconstruction-based Visual Anomaly Detection
21
An approach utilizing this is implemented for Anomaly Detection by Marimont et
al.[59]. This implementation provides a more complex way of overcoming the limitations
of using Gaussian noise for images, by introducing synthetic anomaly generation to
replace the noise corruption. The synthetic anomaly generation refers to a process during
DDPM training that effectively replaces the forward process of the diffusion model. The
input image x0 is corrupted by replacing an image patch with a linear interpolation of
the original x0 and a random image patch extracted from the training data xfp. Then
xt can be obtained in a way similar to the original DDPM forward process shown in
Equation 3.13.
xt = (1 −α · m) · x0 + α · m · xfp
(3.13)
Notice that α is different from the one found in the original DDPM sampling Equa-
tion 3.9, it denotes the interpolation factor between x0 and xfp where α ∈[0, 1]. The
patch to interpolate is controlled by the parameter m ∈RHxW where the value of
mi ∈[0, 1] can be used to smooth out the interpolation of the mask towards the edges
of the mask. An illustration of the forward process in action can be seen in Figure 3.5
Figure 3.5: Illustration of forward process presented by Marimont et al.[59]. 1st row:
examples of anomaly generation inputs: healthy image x0, shape mask m and foreign
patch xfp. 2nd row: synthetic corruption forward process for different t values (with
T = 100)
The reverse process will be similar to the original DDPM in Equation 3.4 when train-
ing the DDPM. This will allow the model to learn to denoise one part of the images and
should therefore be better to reconstruct areas with possible anomalies without chang-
ing much in the healthy anatomy around the abnormality. Unlike AnoDDPM, running
OOD inference with this model does not look similar to the simple OOD algorithm pre-
sented in Algorithm 3. As the DDPM has learned to reconstruct images with synthetic
anomalies and not noisy images, the OOD detection algorithm would not require one to
corrupt the image in the first place. The assumption is that if an image with an anomaly
is given as input, the DDPM will be able to reconstruct the abnormal part of the image.
if no abnormality is present, the image will be reconstructed to the input image. This
method effectively masks out the section of the image that is OOD (abnormal) and then
recreates that section as ID healthy.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Reconstruction-based Visual Anomaly Detection
22
To run the inference, the input image is restored with the reverse process of the
DDPM, and Marimont et al. introduces an Anomaly Score that is the cumulative abso-
lute values of the gradient across restoration steps. The algorithm for DISYRE can be
seen in Algorithm 5 where R denotes the reverse process of the DDPM and Q denotes
the forward process from Equation 3.13
Algorithm 5 Algorithm for OOD detection for DISYRE
t ←T
AS ←zero_like(x0)
while t ≤0 do
Restore input image with DDPM:
ˆx0 ←R(xt, t)
Calculate Anomaly score:
AS ←AS + |ˆx0 −xt|
Synthetic anomaly generation:
xt ←Q(ˆx0, xt, t −step, m = 1)
Update t ←t −step
end while
3.2.3
The Information Overload Issue
As mentioned in section 2.4 the information in an image can be split up in different
levels. If you want to model all levels of information, there will be a trade-off between the
different levels. Specifically for Anomaly Detection it might be desired to allow for higher
modeling capability for entity level information in the image as the abnormality can often
be described as an entity in the image. This however, is specific to the abnormality
you aim to detect. To ensure that the VAD algorithm accurately captures entity level
information, implementations include utilizing patches or masks of the original image.
[96, 48, 33, 5, 4]. These approaches assume that the abnormality that is desired to detect
has a specific size and shape, and therefore removing the relation and frame information
before reconstruction will not result in the loss of any necessary information. On the
contrary it will actually improve the reconstruction of information at the datapoint and
entity levels as the generative model will not need to be able to model information at the
relationship and frame levels. Others [62] use an Encoder/Decoder structure training the
Encoder to map the input to feature space, then use the reconstruction capabilities of a
trained DDPM on the latent representation, and finally decode the latent representation
back to image space for comparison. The work by Liu et al.[56] leverages a feature of
DDPM sampling introduced by Lugmayr et al.[58], allowing inpainting of only part of
the original image while preserving the essential information in the remaining part. As
seen in Figure 3.6 the masked out area does not change from the input image and the
surrounding is reconstructed to fit, allowing the reconstruction based method to focus
on specific regions of the input image x0
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Reconstruction-based Visual Anomaly Detection
23
Figure 3.6:
Image Source: [58].
We use Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
(DDPM) for inpainting. The process is conditioned on the masked input (left). It starts
from a random Gaussian noise sample that is iteratively denoised until it produces a
high-quality output. Since this process is stochastic, we can sample multiple diverse
outputs. The DDPM prior forces a harmonized image, is able to reproduce texture from
other regions, and inpaint semantically meaningful content.
3.2.4
Guided Diffusion
The DDPM workflow allows for many options as shown in the work by Wolleb et al.[89]
which utilizes a classifier guided diffusion model, where the diffusion model and classifier
are trained on both healthy and unhealthy images. This approach is not unsupervised
in the same way as others [91, 22, 26], however still uses a generative model and imple-
ments a classifier that helps the generative model generate images closer to the normal
data. The approach is interesting because it not only employs a classifier-based tech-
nique to distinguish images as normal or abnormal, as seen in [94], but also adopts
a reconstruction-based strategy. This strategy facilitates the extraction of lower-level
details about the anomaly detected and permits post-training algorithmic refinements,
which are not as straightforward with the classifier-based method.
3.2.5
Anomaly Score for Evaluation
Not only does choosing the correct generative model and optimizing reconstructions in
terms of multiple levels of noise degradation [26], noise distributions [91, 22] and the
removal of redundant information [58] influence the OOD detection performance. The
quantification of anomalies after the reconstruction process is also a vital parameter for
model performance. In [91] and others, a simple pixel-wise loss (squared error) with
a threshold can be used to compute a mask of the abnormal regions. Quantification
metrics such as Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) have been implemented in [56] where
others [26] use more complex deep similarity metrics such as LPIPS [105]. Specifically
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Aggregated Normative Diffusion
24
for anomaly score for ultrasound images, the work done by Mishra et al.[62] proposes
the Dual Conditioned Diffusion Model (DCDM) including an encoder trained on heart
planes ultrasound scans, where the encoded images is used to calculate the OOD score.
This method is akin to the LPIPS similarity score but is specifically trained on the
available data, unlike LPIPS which typically uses a pre-trained VGG model [84] trained
on ImageNet [17].
3.3
Aggregated Normative Diffusion
The reconstruction-based method can be used to obtain both an OOD score and an
anomaly map derived from the the difference in reconstruction ˆx0 and the original im-
age x0. The work done by Frotscher et al.[22] introduces a new way of computing an
anomaly map, illustrated in Figure 3.7. Even though it is not a reconstruction-based
approach it still uses a diffusion models ability to reconstruct images. Instead of a post-
reconstruction evaluation, the anomaly map is calculated during reconstruction. For
each denoising step t ∈[Tl, Tu] they calculate the normative transition predicted by
the network µθ(xt, t) given the denoiser ϵθ(xt, t) (Equation 3.7) and define ground truth
backward transition µq(xt, x0) as
µq (xt, x0) =
√αt (1 −¯αt−1)
1 −¯αt
xt +
√αt−1 (1 −αt)
1 −¯αt
x0
(3.14)
Which is the reverse transition conditioned on x0. The Euclidean distance between the
two can be calculated as
dt = (µq(xt, x0) −µθ(xt, t))2
further dt is then aggregated throughout time steps (in their case also image modality as
they use a multi-model input) to obtain the final anomaly map with a novel geometric
aggregation function as:
Agm(dt) = exp


1
Tu −Tl
Tu
∑
t=Tl
log dt


(3.15)
where Tl and Tu denote the boundaries of the degradation level interval. The in-
tuition behind the approach is that the learned transition µθ(xt, t) represents a step
towards ID distribution and the ground truth backwards transition µq(xt, x0) represents
a step towards the original image x0. Therefore anomalous regions can be found in the
difference between the two transitions, as if the original images x0 was similar to ID
image, the transition towards x0 and ID image would be very similar. The aggregated
value Agm(dt) is then used to segment MRI tumors. The results shows that their Aggre-
gated Normative Diffusion (ANDi) surpassed that of the AnoDDPM algorithm in terms
of segmentation of anomalous regions; however, they do not compute an OOD score to
quantify whether an image is ID or OOD.
==PAGE:32==
3.4 Conclusion of Literature Review
25
Figure 3.7: Aggregated Normative Diffusion (ANDi). First, we train a DDPM model
using our proposed Gaussian pyramidal noise on healthy brain slices to approximate
the normative distribution qnorm (x0). In order to obtain an anomaly map for a possi-
bly anomalous image x0, we first partially noise it using the Gaussian forward process
(indicated by the gray arrow). We then calculate the pixel-wise Euclidean distance dt
between the ground truth backwards transition ˜xt = µq (xt, x0) and the denoising step
ˆxt = µθ (xt, t) for a partial range of t. The denoising step towards ˆxt can be thought
of as normative diffusion as it is taking one step towards the normative distribution.
Finally, using the geometric mean Agm, we aggregate deviations over dt. Image source:
[22]
3.4
Conclusion of Literature Review
Work on unsupervised reconstruction for medical visual anomaly detection has predom-
inantly concentrated on MRI imaging [91, 37, 89], with limited literature available
for ultrasound imaging in an unsupervised context. Additionally, existing work with
reconstruction-based OOD detection primarily experiments with different noise distri-
butions [91, 22], various masking/inpainting techniques [96, 56], and combinations of
encoders or classifiers with DDPM models [62]. These approaches have proven effec-
tive for both anomaly detection [26, 56] and anomaly segmentation [22, 91]. The key
elements from literature regarding DDPM reconstruction based OOD detection, can be
summed up as follows:
• Size of Information Bottleneck (e.g number of denoise steps)
• Different perturbations methods (e.g noises)
• Removing redundant information (e.g masks, inpainting or encoders)
• Methods for anomaly score evaluations and reconstruction heat maps
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Unsupervised Detection of
Fetal Brain Anomalies with
DDPMs
This section outlines all the necessary components for developing a functional VAD
algorithm for congenital anomaly detection using reconstruction-based OOD detection
of mid-trimester ultrasound scans. It will cover the existing methods, data extraction
and cleaning, the implementation details for the generative models and the final workflow
of the VAD algorithm.
4.1
Related Work
As previous stated ultrasound scans is used widely to asses well being of fetals during
pregnancy, and is used is during the mid-trimester anomaly scan to detect possible ab-
normal fetus growth [35]. This is a challenging task, so methods for using computer algo-
rithms to aid the diagnosis workflow have been implemented [34, 93]. These approaches
have the potential to significantly improve prenatal anomaly detection precision, reduce
dependence on human interpretation, and minimize the chances of misdiagnosis. The
work of J et al.[34] shows that the use of AI tools for physicians when performing ul-
trasound scans could effectively ease and speed up the process, demonstrating the use
of AI tools in during ultrasound scans. Specifically for detecting congenital anomalies
in ultrasound scans, previous studies have utilized supervised algorithms such as those
proposed in [95], yielding significant results. Other methods include using biometric
parameters from anotomical structures [85, 70, 90], the identification of expected nor-
mal structures in the fetal brain [42] or standard supervised binary classification using
discriminative models to directly predict abnormal brains [95]. Specifically the work by
Xie et al.[95] suggests that using a discriminative model to detect anomalies in the fetal
brain can achieve high performance. They propose a three-step process:
• 1. Craniocerebral segmentation.
• 2. Classification as normal or abnormal.
• 3. Lesion localization using heat maps and overlay images.
==PAGE:34==
4.1 Related Work
27
The initial phase focuses on eliminating unnecessary details from the image by isolating
the head. The second phase distinguishes between normal and abnormal cases using
a CCN network, while the third phase employs saliency maps [82] for localization and
interpretability. The proposed method demands a significant amount of supervision, as
the segmentations and class labels were manually annotated for training. However, with
this approach they achieve a performance in terms of area under reception operations
curve (AUROC) of 0.989.
Specifically for DDPM in an OOD context for ultrasound images the work of Mishra
et al.[62] proposes an unsupervised Dual Condition Diffusion Model (DCDM) to iden-
tify anatomical structures in ultrasound images. They utilize ultrasound scans from 5
distinct planes of cardiac anatomy as ID data, and images from other anatomical areas
such as the fetal head, abdomen, and femur as OOD data. The method involves an En-
coder/Decoder architecture and employs classifier-guided DDPM reconstructions of the
image’s latent representation. The reconstructed latent representation is then decoded
back into image space using a trained Decoder. Additionally, they compute the cosine
similarity between the features of the input image x0 and the reconstructed image ˆx0 to
determine the OOD score. A key distinction between their OOD detection approach and
the one applied in this thesis is that their method is used to detect different anatomical
structures in ultrasound scans, as illustrated in Figure 4.1, whereas our goal is to de-
tect OOD images within the same anatomy as ID images. Their approach outperforms
the likelihood-based method Deep-MCDM [80], the GAN-based ALOOCC [76], and the
DDPM with multiple reconstructions Mishra et al. [26] in terms of AUROC, achieving
a score of 77.60 for their particular task.
Figure 4.1: Qualitative representation of the DCDM models reconstruction held up
against baselines. Image Source: [62]
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Dataset
28
4.2
Dataset
For our specific task the available data are from a national database (SONAI), which
includes prenatal ultrasound images taken by experienced physicians from various hos-
pitals in Denmark. Each entry in the database consists of a DICOM format image and
associated details regarding the pregnancy, including maternal information, pregnancy
outcome, scan date, pregnancy maturity, and crucially for our project, diagnostic codes
for any detected diagnoses. These diagnoses can be made at various stages of pregnancy
maturity. As stated in section 2.3, in order to detect anomalies, one must define ID
data as what constitutes healthy (with no abnormalities), leaving the OOD data as ab-
normal or unhealthy. Since we implement a unsupervised method the generative models
will only be trained on the ID data. And the OOD data would be part of the test and
validation of OOD detection algorithm. The final definitions of the ID training data and
OOD test data, as shown below, were formulated to reflect workflow in medical clinics,
and eliminate possible confounders.
Properties of In Distribution data:
• Consists only of healthy images (e.g no diagnostic codes at all)
• Consists only of images from mid-trimester scans
• Consists only of ultrasound images with visible head anatomy
• Should not include annotations in ultrasound cone
• Can consist of any ultrasound scan plane (Sec. 2.1)
• Should not contain multiple ultrasound scans for same patient
Properties of Out Of Distribution data:
• Consist of images with diagnostic codes related to brain abnormalities
• Consists only of images from mid-trimester scans
• Consists only of ultrasound images with visible head anatomy
• Should not include annotations in ultrasound cone
• Can of consist any ultrasound scan plane (Sec. 2.1)
• Should not contain multiple ultrasound scans for same patient
==PAGE:36==
4.2 Dataset
29
4.2.1
Data Extraction Pipeline
For creating the ID and OOD dataset we follow a three step process consisting of ex-
traction, pruning and cleaning.
Extraction.
For the ID data we extract ultrasound images from mid-trimester scans
ensuring that the fetus has not been diagnosed with any diagnosis.
This refers not
only to diagnosis related to congenital abnormalities but to all diagnoses, since it is
not possible to say that other abnormality can present a change in the anatomy of the
fetal head. Furthermore including other diagnostic codes would make the ID even longer
tailed and more diﬀicult to model, as mentioned in section 2.3. For abnormal OOD data,
all images will be chosen where any diagnostic code including ”DQ0” will be chosen, as
these relate to brain abnormalities. Some of the most prevalent congenital abnormalities
can be found in 4.2
Head images.
Since the database does not provide information about the type of
anatomy (e.g., Head, Abdomen) or the plane of the ultrasound scan (section 2.1), we
use a pretrained classifier to determine the anatomy in ultrasound images [51] ensuring
that all ID and OOD images contains the anatomy of fetal heads.
Mitigating Confounders
As some of the images in the database were annotated, and
information from the ultrasound scanner was included, a model from Mikolaj et al. [61]
was employed to eliminate annotations, text, and ultrasound-specific details from all ID
and OOD images, illustrated in Figure 4.2. This ensures that confounding information
in the annotations is not used for OOD detection. Additionally, it removes redundant
information from ID data, facilitating the generative models in learning to produce head
anatomy and not redundant features. To further reduce the data only one image per
patient was randomly chosen. Finally the images where converted to grey scale images.
Figure 4.2: Illustrations of confounding annotations that were removed with model
[61], and converted to greyscale for final use
4.2.2
In-distribution Data
Following the process described above for the ID dataset we achive the following: Healthy
images were extracted from the database, resulting in 10336041 images, where no diag-
nostic codes were present from the mid-trimester scan. By removing duplicates from the
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Dataset
30
same patient, we get 221177 images. Extracting only images from head scans results in
14268 images.
Figure 4.3: Random sample of final ID images
4.2.3
Out-Of-Distribution Data
Extracting all images with congenital abnormalities from the database results in 43297
images from 608 unique patients. The head images were then extracted, resulting in a
total of 3557 classified head images. Reducing the images to unique patients results in
492 images. The number of different diagnosis codes in the final OOD images can be
seen in Table 4.1.
Figure 4.4: Random sample of final OOD images
As shown in Table 4.1, many abnormalities are significantly underrepresented. How-
ever as described in section 2.3, the OOD detection algorithm should perform similarly
for all abnormalities, provided that they differ in appearance from ID data. For simplic-
ity, we group all underrepresented abnormalities into the ’others’ category and primarily
concentrate on the most prevalent abnormalities listed in Table 4.2.
==PAGE:38==
4.2 Dataset
31
Table 4.1: Overview of number of instances of different diagnosis in OOD dataset, for
further information about the diagnostic codes see ICD-10 https://www.icd10data.
com/ICD10CM/Codes/O00-O9A
Diagnostic code
Number of
instances
Diagnostic code
Number of
instances
DQ000
2
DQ048C
9
DQ000A
7
DQ048D
13
DQ019
4
DQ048E
115
DQ029
54
DQ049
41
DQ031C
27
DQ054
69
DQ039
109
DQ057
2
DQ040A
54
DQ057B
26
DQ042
5
DQ058
2
DQ043
6
DQ059
34
DQ043B
5
DQ079
10
DQ045
4
DQ092
1
DQ046
59
Table 4.2: Some of the most prevalent diagnostic codes for fetal head abnormalities
present in the database
Medical Code
Abnormality description
DQ048E
Ventricumegaly
DQ039
Congenital Hydrocephalus UNS
DQ029
Microcephaly
DQ040A
Agenesis of Corpus Callosum
DQ054
Spina bifida with Hydrocephalus
DQ046
Congenital cerebral cysts
Others
All other anomalies
4.2.3.1
Annotation of Abnormalities
Lastly the OOD data where presented together with the diagnosis to a MD with 3 years
of experience in prenatal ultrasound imaging. The open source program Label-me was
used to annotate anomalous regions on the images, to be used for further validation and
to test the possibility of localisation of anomalies. Example annotation can be found in
Figure 4.5.
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Exploratory Analysis and Data Splitting
32
Spina bifida
Hydrocephalus
Figure 4.5: Example of anomaly annotations for anomaly Spina befida and Hydro-
cephalus
4.3
Exploratory Analysis and Data Splitting
Figure 4.6: Overview of the data used for training and evaluation. Data for generative
model consists only of healthy images, Data for VAD consists both of healthy and
abnormal
In order to eﬀiciently setup the datastructure for training, experimenting and testing
the OOD methods we create multiple datasets shown in Figure 4.6 with the final split
seen in Table 4.3. The data can generally be split up into data for generative models
==PAGE:40==
4.3 Exploratory Analysis and Data Splitting
33
and data for visual anomaly detection (VAD). The data for training and validating the
generative models consist only of ID data, where a set of 13568 samples where used for
training and another 200 ID images were used for post-training testing of the generative
models.
The VAD data includes both ID and OOD data. The subsequent 500 ID images
and the 492 OOD images gathered were randomly divided into two sets: 250 images
each of ID and OOD for validation and 250 ID images / 242 OOD images for testing.
Furthermore, a synthetic data set was created for VAD to explore various anomaly scores
and validate model alignment. This synthetic abnormal data set was generated to ensure
testing in an unbiased setting and to provide straightforward interpretation of the models
performance. The data set was developed by taking a collection of ID samples from the
ID/OOD Validation set and introducing random black spots. Illustrations of synthetic
OOD data can be found in Figure 4.7.
ID Image
Synthetic anomaly
Synthetic anomaly
ID Image
Figure 4.7: Visual representation of the synthetic data. Original ID image compared
to the synthetic anomaly detection image where random black spot was added
Table 4.3: Overview of different datasets and the split of ID and OOD data for each
dataset. The ”()” means that it is made synthetic and is not part of clinical OOD data
Train
ID test
Synthetic Val
Val
Test
ID Samples
13568
200
75
250
250
OOD Samples
0
0
(75)
250
242
Because the OOD images were randomly split and there are a total of 23 distinct
abnormalities (Tab. 4.1), we make sure that these abnormalities are evenly distributed
between the clinical validation and test sets. This avoids the risk of optimizing the VAD
algorithm on a validation set where a particular abnormality is overrepresented, only
to then evaluate the model on a test set where that abnormality is entirely absent. In
Figure 4.8 we observe that the split abnormalities for validation and test set are evenly
distributed.
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Exploratory Analysis and Data Splitting
34
Others
DQ029
DQ048E
DQ040A
DQ054
DQ046
DQ039
Dignostic Codes
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Number of images
Barplot of the distribution of different codes in validation and test set
Test
Validation
Figure 4.8: Barplot of the distribution of different Diagsnostic codes in the validation
and test split of the data
Given that our data extraction process is entirely automated, we examine potential
confounders between the ID and OOD data of the test and validation sets as shown
in Figure 4.10 and Figure 4.9. We conduct statistical analyses on the pixel intensities,
including standard deviation, average pixel intensity, and the number of non-zero pixel
intensities. Latter ensures that the size of the ultrasound cone is approximately similar
between both ID and OOD data sets.
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Mean pixel values of images
Abnormal
Normal
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of none zero pixels in images
Abnormal
Normal
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Standard diviation of pixel values
Abnormal
Normal
Figure 4.9: Histogram of basic statistics for test set. From left to right: Mean Value
of pixel intensities. Number of none zero pixels in images. Std of pixel intensities
==PAGE:42==
4.4 Learning the Distribution of Normal Brain Images with DDPMs
35
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Mean pixel values of images
Abnormal
Normal
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
0
5
10
15
20
Number of none zero pixels in images
Abnormal
Normal
30
40
50
60
70
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Standard diviation of pixel values
Abnormal
Normal
Figure 4.10: Histogram of basic statistics for validation set. From left to right: Mean
Value of pixel intensities. Number of none zero pixels in images. Std of pixel intensities
Additionally, we visualized the data distribution using t-SNE [8]. t-SNE is applied to
reduce the dimensionality of high-dimensional data, like images, for easier visualization.
Should there be an uncomplicated method to distinguish between ID and OOD images,
the low-dimensional visualization will illustrate clusters of ID and OOD data. As shown
in Figure 4.11, no obvious confounding elements appear in the images to separate ID
images from OOD image.
15
10
5
0
5
10
t-SNE Dimension 1
10
5
0
5
10
t-SNE Dimension 2
t-SNE Visualization
Normal
Abnormal
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
t-SNE Dimension 1
10
5
0
5
10
t-SNE Dimension 2
t-SNE Visualization
Normal
Abnormal
Figure 4.11: t-SNE low dimensional representation of the images in the test (left) and
validation set (right) with t-SNE perplexity = 30 [8]
4.4
Learning the Distribution of Normal Brain
Images with DDPMs
For our unsupervised approach we train a Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM)
to generate healthy ultrasound images, and therby modelleling the underlying Distribu-
tion of training ID data. Further, as we found in chapter 3, the noise distribution P is
crucial for VAD performance and can differ across various frameworks. Therefore, we
implement three distinct DDPMs with different noise distributions as:
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Learning the Distribution of Normal Brain Images with DDPMs
36
• DDPM - Gaussian
• DDPM - Simplex
• DDPM - Pyramid
For implementations of the DDPM models the work done by Wyatt et al.[91], Frotscher
et al. [22] and Jeanneret, Simon, and Jurie[36] was used as a starting point and altered
to fit our data structure. We implement the three distinct DDPM as follows:
For the DDPM - Gaussian model we follow the implementation of Gaussian noise PGauss
from [29] as
ϵ ∼N(µ = 0, σ = 1)
Where µ is the mean, and σ is the standard deviation.
For the DDPM - Pyramid model we implement PPyramid such that the noise is sampled
similar to the work in [22] as
ϵ ∼
10
∑
i=1
0.8i · U
(
ϵ(i); H, W
)
Where the selected scaling factor c = 0.8 H,W is equal to the image size of (256,256).
For the DDPM-Simplex we used the implementation from Wyatt et al.[91] resulting in
ϵ ∼Simplex
(
ν = 2−6, N = 6, γ = 0.8
)
Where ν is the starting frequency, N is the number of layers, and γ is the decay factor
between layers.
The denoiser ϵθ for all three DDPMs uses a the same U-Net architecture. We applied the
U-Net framework from [36], achieving attention resolutions at different scales: 32x32,
16x16, and 8x8.
4 layers of convulutional down and upsampling from resolution of
256x256 to a resolution of 8x8, with the number of channels set to 256. The maximum
number of diffusion steps is set to 500. All models where trained on the Training ID
Data resulting in 13568 greyscale images, as described in the prior section. The DDPM
models were trained with the hyperparameters shown in Table 4.4 with the training
objective presented in Equation 3.10 on GPU NVIDIA RTX A6000 with 49140 MiB.
==PAGE:44==
4.5 Visual Anomaly Detection Algorithms
37
Hyperparameter
Value
Training Steps
200.000
Optimiser
Adam
Noise Scheduler
Linear
learning rate
0.001
batch size
20
drop out
0
weight decay
0.05
Image resize
(256,256)
Table 4.4: Hyper parameters for training the DDPM models
4.5
Visual Anomaly Detection Algorithms
Two different VAD algorithms will be implemented in our framework. One is based on
a reconstruction-based method similar to the work done in [91, 26, 4]. The other repre-
sents a novel experimental anomaly quantification method implemented on top of the
Aggregated-Normative Diffusion (ANDi) workflow from Frotscher et al.[22] introducing
a statistical measure to quantify abnormalities. While the methods could function sim-
ilarly with all implemented DDPMs, we choose to follow the approach [22] specifically
applied to DDPM - Pyramid, where images are corrupted with Gaussian noise and recon-
structed using a model trained exclusively on Pyramid noise. For the DDPMs trained
with Simplex and Gaussian noise, the images are corrupted with the corresponding noise.
4.5.1
Inpainting-based Noise Agnostic Anomaly
Detection (iNAAD)
For reconstruction-based method we adopt the method [91, 26, 89], aiming to recon-
struct input images x0 using the Generative models trained on healthy anomaly-free
ID ultrasound images.
Specifically we corrupt the input x0 to latent representation
Input 
containing 
anomaly
Corruption 
via noising to
different levels
Masking
of the
fetal head
Inpainting 
by iterative
reconstruction
Average
 of the
inpaintings
Difference
 of average
and input
Figure 4.12: Overview of iNAAD for unsupervised detection of fetal brain anomalies.
==PAGE:45==
4.5 Visual Anomaly Detection Algorithms
38
xt, 0 ≤t ≤T with the forward process for the DDPM and retrieve the reconstructed
image ˆx0 from the reverse process. Where the hyperparameter t controls the level of
information still contained from input x0 in xt. The difference between x0 and ˆx0 is then
to be seen as an indication of an anomaly. To prevent reconstructions from concentrat-
ing on irrelevant anatomical structures and intrinsic artifacts in ultrasound images, we
utilize inpainting with DDPM as presented by Lugmayr et al. [58]. In particular, we
apply a binary mask m obtained with a pre-trained segmentation model [50] to ignore
all the variations beyond the fetal brain. Given a pre-defined noise distribution P and
a trained denoiser ϵθ, we reformulate the reverse process (Eq. 3.11) of the DDPM and
define the inpainted reconstruction ˆxt−1 by,
xinput
t−1
= x0
√¯αt + √1 −¯αtϵ
xrecon
t−1
=
1
√αt
(
xt −
1−αt
√1−¯αtϵθ (xt, t)
)
+ βtϵ
ˆxt−1 = m ⊙xinput
t−1 + (1 −m) ⊙xrecon
t−1
(4.1)
where xrecon
t−1
is the full frame reconstruction, xinput is the corrupted full frame x0, m
is the binary mask of the fetal head obtained from the pretrained model, t indicates the
diffusion step, and ϵθ denotes the prediction noise.
During the forward process, the information content of x0 is controlled by the noise
level s. Following [26], we aggregate reconstructions obtained by degrading x0 a range
of multiple noise levels s ∈S.
By reconstructing all corrupted versions of x0 and
averaging these reconstructions, we obtain a final reconstructed image ˆx0 that integrates
information from all reconstructed versions while reducing noise from individual reverse
processes [26].
Finally, for detecting abnormalities, the choice of the similarity metric between x0 and
ˆx0 is essential. We observed that the similarity metrics such as LPIPS, used in [26], was
not effective for distinguishing abnormal from normal fetal images. Despite exploring
other deep semantic similarity metrics [16], similar to other work in ultrasound with
DDPM (Dual Conditioned Diffusion Model) [62] we empirically chose to utilize the
standard pixel-based Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) which proved more effective
for our task.
iNAAD requires only normal fetal brain ultrasound images for training. It identifies
abnormalities by aggregating diffusion-reconstructed fetal brain images from various
noise levels, incorporating an inpainting step to limit reconstruction changes in the fetal
brain. The proposed method is summarized in Algorithm 6.
4.5.2
Skewness of Aggregated Normative Diffusion
(SANDi)
For quantifying anomalies with aggregated normative diffusion we utilize the workflow
of ANDi [22] to optain an error heatmap Dt that represents the difference between an ac-
curate reconstruction of x0 and the normative reconstruction. Unlike the reconstruction-
based method this approach does not utilize the reverse process to reconstruct the image;
==PAGE:46==
4.5 Visual Anomaly Detection Algorithms
39
Algorithm 6 iNAAD for unsupervised fetal brain anomaly detection.
Input: original x0, binary mask m, noise distribution P, model ϵθ, noise levels S
Output: average reconstructed image ˆx, similarity metric between x0 and ˆx
for s in S do
Define time step t := s
Corrupt original image x0 up to noise level t by sampling from P (Eq. 3.9)
for t to 1 do
Get inpainted reconstruction ˆxt−1 using mask m and model ϵθ (Eq. 4.1)
end for
end for
return ˆx =
1
|S|
∑
s∈{S} ˆx0,s and similarity_metric(x0, ˆx)
instead, we calculate the difference between the predicted transition µθ(xt, t) (Eq. 3.7)
and the transition conditioned on the original image µq(xt, x0) (Eq. 3.14) as:
dt = (µq(xt, x0) −µθ(xt, t))
(4.2)
where xt is the corrupted image with the forward process for t steps. The main
difference between this and the reconstruction based approach is that this is not a
Markovian chain, as xt is sampled from the forward process and not from the reverse
process. We follow the original implementation and compute dt, t ∈[Tl, Tu] and obtain
the final heatmap by aggregating all the dt as
Dt = exp


1
Tu −Tl
Tu
∑
t=Tl
log dt


(4.3)
Where the upper noise value Tu = 200 and lower value Tl = 75. Finaly we apply a
median filter of kernel size 5 to the image to further reduce noise.
This method was initially designed to convert Dt into a binarized segmentation map
for MRI scans. Thus, we incorporate the statistical measure of skewness to quantify the
map into an anomaly score. In particular, we calculate the Fisher-Pearson skewness g
of the pixel intensities of the heatmap using the equation below:
g =
n
(n −1)(n −2)
n
∑
i=1
(xi −ˆx
σ
)3
(4.4)
where n is the number of pixels, xi is the pixel intensity in the ith pixel, ˆx is the mean
pixel intensity and σ is the standard deviation of pixel intensities.
The intuition for this approach is that the Dt of a healthy ID image would be entirely
random, causing the pixel intensity distribution to align with a distribution where g = 0.
However, for an OOD sample, the anomalous region in the heatmap will have high pixel
values, leading to a pixel intensity distribution that skews to the right, with a longer
and fatter right tail.
This statistical measure has been utilized for OOD detection
algorithms in various other fields, including timeseries [72] and data mining [31]. The
==PAGE:47==
4.5 Visual Anomaly Detection Algorithms
40
proposed method Skewness of Aggregated Normative Diffusion (SANDi) is summarized
in Algorithm 7
Algorithm 7 SANDi for fetal ultrasound anomaly detection
Input: original x0, noise distribution P, model ϵθ, noise levels Tu, Tl
Output: aggregated normative difference Dt, Skewness of pixel intensities in Dt
for t ∈[Tu, Tl] do
Corrupt original image x0 up to noise level t (Eq. 3.9)
Compute dt (Eq. 4.2)
end for
Optain Dt by aggregating all dt (Eq. 4.3) and apply median filter (k=5)
Calculate skewness g of Dt (Eq. 4.4)
return Dt and g
4.5.3
Baselines
For baselines we implement both an unsupervised model and a supervised model. The
unsupervised baseline should be used as a lower bound of unsupervised methods, whereas
the supervised baseline is seen as an upper baseline for the performance achievable for
our specific setting, with supervised training.
4.5.3.1
Unsupervised Baseline
For the lower unsupervised anomaly detection baseline we train a VAE on the ID training
data following the implementation of Subramanian[87] and implement a simple algorithm
where the model reconstructs the image x0 to ˆx0 by first encoding and then decoding the
image (Figure 4.13). The final anomaly score is opbtained by the mean squared error
(MSE) between x0 and ˆx0.
==PAGE:48==
4.5 Visual Anomaly Detection Algorithms
41
Input image
Reconstruction
Figure 4.13: Reconstructions with baseline VAE for ID images
4.5.3.2
Supervised Baseline
For the supervised baseline method we implement a Resnet-18 [28] architecture in the
form of a binary classifier (normal/abnormal). We group all anomalies into one class
due to the per-class scarcity. The model is initiated with ImageNet [17] pre-trained
weights and fine-tuned for 60 epochs using random augmentations during training, on
the validation set (250 ID/250 OOD cases), and evaluated performance on the final test
set (250 ID/242 OOD cases).
Figure 4.14: Loss curves for training of supervised baseline, using binary cross entropy
as the training objective
A significant observation about the supervised baseline is that the limited training
data led to overfitting issues. Therefore, the relatively small Resnet-18 architecture and
==PAGE:49==
4.5 Visual Anomaly Detection Algorithms
42
data augmentation were used. Additionally, we did not develop a separate dataset for
training and validation, the data structure we created (Fig. 4.6) compelled us to use the
validation data as training and the test data for both validation and testing.
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 5
Experiments and Results
5.1
Evaluation of Generative Models
Gauss
Initial
Pyramid
Simplex
Corrupted
Corrupted
Corrupted
Reconstructed
Reconstructed
Reconstructed
Figure 5.1: Reconstructions from the three DDPM Models, for noise degradation level
t = 150
To ensure the trained generative models can effectively generate healthy fetal ultrasound
images, 400 images were generated from pure noise by all models, examples found in
Figure 5.2, and the FID score between these images and the ID Test Data is shown in
Table 5.1. Given that the implemented methods focus on reconstructions rather than
new sample generation, reconstructions for several levels of noise degradation t were
computed and the mean SSIM scores for the generative model were calculated to estimate
the model’s ability to reconstruct healthy ID images, examples of reconstruction found in
Figure 5.1. In line with the work by Wyatt et al.[91], the DDPM with standard Gaussian
noise generated images with highest fidelity to healthy ultrasound images. The Pyramid
noise exceeds Simplex in terms of generation fidelity. Furthermore, it is observed that for
reconstructions at low levels of noise degradation, all models can achieve high similarity
in terms of SSIM. However, as the noise degradation increases, the Simplex and Pyramid
noise struggle to match the Gaussian noise in reconstruction quality, and the similarity
in reconstruction declines more rapidly with increased noise degradation.
5.2
Detecting Synthetic Abnormalities
At first, synthetic data was utilized for qualitative validation to ensure the model was
aligned with the intended purpose, of reconstructing synthetic anomalies as healthy
tissue. Reconstruction for ID and synthetic OOD images in Figure 5.3 shows that the
reconstruction error with a simple setup, where the full frame reconstruction results in
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Detecting Synthetic Abnormalities
44
Table 5.1: SSIM and FID for generation and reconstruction of ultrasound images of
normal fetal brains
Model
FID
SSIM for different noise step levels t
50
75
100
150
200
250
300
DDPM-Gaussian
48.39
0.989
0.984
0.979
0.968
0.955
0.933
0.897
DDPM-Pyramid
57.89
0.980
0.968
0.955
0.928
0.892
0.830
0.752
DDPM-Simplex
199.40
0.981
0.967
0.948
0.905
0.836
0.753
0.702
Gaussian
Pyramid
Simplex
Figure 5.2: Example of ultrasound images generated from pure noise for the models
(a) Gauss, (b) Pyramid and (c) simplex
very noisy heat maps, however the ANDi map is better aligned with the syntheticly added
anomaly. Although it may not be readily apparent on the ˆx0−x0 heat map in Figure 5.3,
an inspection of the reconstructions ˆx0 reveals that the model successfully removes the
synthetic anomaly. However, because of the high reconstruction error outside the head,
particularly for Gaussian and Pyramid, this is not easily visible in the error heatmap,
deeming the need of inpaining or similar necessary. More than the visual validation
the synthetic data was also used to validate that similarity measures and statistics can
be used to quantify the anomalies, hence the number of noise steps were set to a fixed
value of 150 for all noise distributions, and different measures where used to quantify
==PAGE:52==
5.2 Detecting Synthetic Abnormalities
45
X0
Xt
X0
X0
X0
ANDi
Gaussian
Simplex
Pyramid
Figure 5.3: Visual representation of the 3 generative models reconstructing healthy ID
image and the synthetically added anomaly
anomalies as seen in Table 5.2. Different measures where tested however we found that
the Skewness metric, and SSIM metric performed best for the synthetic dataset, further
we see a very high performence for the synthetic data with the Skewness metric. By
generating synthetic data with the aim of eliminating bias, using identical images, both
with and without black spots, we can determine that the skewness metric is effective
in identifying these artificially introduced spots. However, whether this translates to
clinical anomalies whose characteristics differ, needs to be tested on the clinical data.
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Ablation Studies
46
Table 5.2: AUROC scores for synthetic dataset consisting of 75 ID and 75 Synthtic
OOD images with noise steps t = 150
Gaussian
Simplex
Pyramid
SSIM(x0, ˆx0)
0.61
0.57
0.59
Lpips(x0, ˆx0)
0.54
0.54
0.55
MSE(Dt)
0.53
0.61
0.48
Skewness(Dt)
0.96
0.88
0.85
The rationale for using the skewness metric as anomaly score becomes evident by
looking at the histograms of the pixel intensities for a normal and abnormal case of the
ANDi Dt map found in Figure 5.4. Here, it is clear that the anomalous area results in
a fatter right tail of the distribution and therefore a higher skewness score.
Skewness = 1.65
Skewness = 2.30
Normal
Normal
Figure 5.4: Example of pixel intensity distributions for ANDi map for both normal
and synthetic abnormality. The ANDi maps are taken from Figure 5.3 Pyramid example
5.3
Ablation Studies
The approach for ablation is related to the work presented in chapter 3 we conducted
an extensive study of, evaluating the performance based on the AUROC value.
With inspiration from workflow in [91] a simple OOD detection algorithm where we
reconstruct input image x0 and calculate the similarity metric LPIPS as proposed in
==PAGE:54==
5.3 Ablation Studies
47
[26] as a starting point for OOD detection, we optimize and develop the final algorithms
iNAAD and SANDi by iterativly optimizing the AUROC and AP values of the clinical
validation set consisting of 250 ID and 250 OOD images. Initially we tested different
levels of noise levels t and found that the optimal level of noise degradation t differs for
each noise distributions P as one would also suspect as the Gaussian noise reconstructs
with higher similarity for larger noise steps compared to the two other noise distributions
as seen in Table 5.1 when evaluation generative models in section 5.1.
Ablation iNAAD
The noise degradation that performed the best for iNAAD was
t=150 for Gaussian, 50 for Simplex and 75 for Pyramid and used that as a starting
point for anomaly detection’s. Table 5.3 reports AUROC and Average Precision (AP)
for different similarity metrics and the impact of inpainting and aggregated reconstruc-
tions. Furthermore, we observed that SSIM outperforms LPIPS, used in [26], and other
semantic similarity metrics such as DeepSim [16] with pre-trained SonoNet-64 [3] as
feature extractor. Inpainting the fetal head removes reconstruction errors from anatom-
ically unrelated regions while aggregating reconstruction results in better performance
in terms of SSIM for all noise types.
Table 5.3: Ablation study for iNAAD. AUROC and AP results are reported on all
anomalies of the validation set (250 ID/250 OOD cases).
P
S
Similarity Metric
Inpainting
AUCROC
AP
{150}
LPIPS

0.54
0.53
{150}
DeepSim

0.54
0.52
Gaussian
{150}
SSIM

0.58
0.59
{150}
SSIM

0.65
0.65
{75, 100, 150, 200, 250}
SSIM

0.68
0.68
{50}
LPIPS

0.51
0.53
{50}
DeepSim

0.49
0.49
Simplex
{50}
SSIM

0.56
0.54
{50}
SSIM

0.59
0.58
{50, 75, 100}
SSIM

0.58
0.58
{75}
LPIPS

0.55
0.54
{75}
DeepSim

0.52
0.50
Pyramid
{75}
SSIM

0.57
0.55
{75}
SSIM

0.61
0.57
{50, 75, 100}
SSIM

0.62
0.58
As seen in Table 5.3 the implementation of inpainting significantly improves the
performance of the iNAAD method. This is possible because many artifacts and noise
are present in ultrasound images, resulting in poor reconstructions of areas with artifacts.
This is evident in Figure 5.3 where normal images have areas with high reconstruction
error that may not be localized around the head. Inpainting technique has the benefit
over the simple masking technique that possible errors in reconstructions around the
head will not influence reconstructions of the head image, as the surrounding tissue is
sampled from x0 for each step and is not affected by the reconstructed ˆxt during the
reverse process.
==PAGE:55==
5.4 Anomaly Detection Results
48
Ablation SANDi
We found that the inpainting technique that imporved performance
for iNAAD, did not translate to better results in SANDi method. This can be explained
by the fact that only inpainting the head we remove the low pixel intensities making
the distribution less sensitive to skewness towards high values. Furthermore we did not
find it relevant to compute the average of multiple Dt for different t as this is already
implemented in the Aggregated Normative Diffusion (ANDi) process. AUROC and AP
for different iterations can be seen in Table 5.4.
We can observe that the Pyramid
noise distribution does not seem to work well with the SANDi approach for detection of
abnormalities compared to the other approaches, and that it is the only noise distribution
where the inpainting technique improves the performence.
Note that due to the algorithmic differences of the two methods, the inpainting
technique described in Eq. 4.1 does not have a similar effect on the two heatmaps. As
the ANDi method is not a Markovian chain, the xt−1 of each step does not depend on
previous xt. This means that applying the inpainting strategy for ANDi the head region
will look the same as if we did not apply inpainting, and we effectivly just crop out the
head region. While for reconstructions, the appearance of the head region will differ
depending on whether inpainting is applied or not.
Table 5.4: Ablation study for SANDi. AUROC and AP results are reported on all
anomalies of the validation set (250 ID/250 OOD cases).
P
Statistical Measure
Inpainting
AUCROC
AP
MSE

0.52
0.51
Gaussian
Skewness

0.65
0.64
Skewness

0.59
0.60
MSE

0.48
0.50
Simplex
Skewness

0.58
0.59
Skewness

0.49
0.48
MSE

0.49
0.48
Pyramid
Skewness

0.49
0.49
Skewness

0.55
0.52
5.4
Anomaly Detection Results
The final performance of the two proposed methods is evaluated with AUROC and AP
metrics on the final test set, consisting of 250 ID images and 242 OOD images. AUROC
is reported in Table 5.5 and examples of ROC curves in Figure 5.5 and 5.6. Average
precision is reported in Table 5.6. We evaluate the performence of the methods on the
ability to detect all abnormalities and the groupings of anomalies described in section 4.2.
5.4.1
Anomaly Detection with iNAAD
The performance of iNAAD varies across different anomaly groups, with AUROC rang-
ing from 0.53 to 0.76. A similar variability is observed for the supervised baseline. High
==PAGE:56==
5.4 Anomaly Detection Results
49
performance in the supervised approach generally predicts high performance in the un-
supervised approach, but this effect is more pronounced for iNAAD compared to the
Baseline.
Notably, all iNAAD variants match or exceed the supervised baseline for
anomalies that manifest in a localized way, such as cerebral cysts, ventriculomegaly, or
corpus callosum agenesis (Acc), up to a difference of 0.13 in the case of Acc (iNAAD-
Gaussian). For microcephaly, hydrocephalus, or spina bifida, supervised performance is
0.04 to 0.16 higher, with the largest gap for spina bifida.
5.4.2
Anomaly Detection with SANDi
The SANDi method shows even more variability in performance across different anomaly
groups compared to iNAAD. For example, SANDi - Gaussian performance ranges from
0.52 to 0.84. In general, we see a trend where the Microcephaly anomaly results in rela-
tively low performance for all methods and the baseline, while anomalies like Acc, Ven-
triculomegaly, and Hydrocephalus lead to high performance across all methods. Note-
worthy is that the SANDi - Pyramid’s performance is on par with or worse than the
VAE-MSE baseline, with the lowest AUROC score being 0.38 for Cerebral Cyst. This
differs from iNAAD - Gaussian and SANDi - Gaussian, where SANDi usually surpasses
iNAAD, where the SANDi - Gaussian performs on level with the supervised baseline
both acheiving a AUROC of 0.67 and for all anomalies grouped together, aswell as a
very similar AP of 0.65 and 0.63.
Table 5.5: AUROC results on the test set (250 ID/242 OOD cases) for iNAAD, SANDi,
and the Resnet-18 supervised baseline trained for binary classification, per anomaly
group. The best scores are in bold, second best are underlined.
AUROC per anomaly group
Model
Microcephaly
(n=40)
Hydrocephalus
(n=64)
Acc
(n=38)
Cerebr. cyst
(n=43)
Ventriculomegaly
(n=69)
Spina bifida
(n=39)
Others
(n=93)
All
(n=242)
Resnet-18
0.63
0.69
0.63
0.60
0.71
0.78
0.65
0.67
VAE - MSE
0.45
0.48
0.47
0.48
0.48
0.47
0.47
0.46
Gaussian
0.60
0.62
0.76
0.53
0.74
0.57
0.60
0.62
iNAAD
Simplex
0.56
0.65
0.69
0.61
0.69
0.62
0.56
0.58
Pyramid
0.60
0.64
0.68
0.57
0.69
0.62
0.56
0.57
Gaussian
0.54
0.78
0.84
0.52
0.64
0.79
0.67
0.67
SANDi
Simplex
0.56
0.60
0.61
0.53
0.63
0.53
0.56
0.57
Pyramid
0.41
0.56
0.57
0.38
0.47
0.49
0.53
0.51
==PAGE:57==
5.4 Anomaly Detection Results
50
Table 5.6: Test set AP for iNAAD, SANDi, and the Resnet18 supervised baseline
trained for binary classification, split into individual diagnoses.
The best scores are
bold, second best are underlined.
AP per anomaly group
Models
Microcephaly
(n=40)
Hydrocephalus
(n=64)
ACC
(n=38)
Cerebr. cyst
(n=43)
Ventriculomegaly
(n=69)
Spina bifida
(n=39)
Others
(n=93)
All
(n=242)
Supervised Resnet18
0.12
0.37
0.19
0.15
00.42
0.30
0.29
0.65
Chance level
0.10
0.17
0.9
0.11
0.18
0.09
0.19
0.48
Gaussian
0.17
0.28
0.37
0.11
0.37
0.17
0.28
0.62
iNAAD
Simplex
0.25
0.33
0.30
0.25
0.36
0.30
0.27
0.56
Pyramid
0.24
0.32
0.30
0.22
0.36
0.27
0.26
0.55
Gaussian
0.09
0.37
0.33
0.13
0.30
0.30
0.29
0.63
SANDi
Simplex
0.28
0.13
0.17
0.26
0.36
0.16
0.27
0.57
Pyramid
0.09
0.22
0.14
0.09
0.17
0.09
0.26
0.50
The AUROC for iNAAD and SANDi related to anomaly detection on the validation
set, shown in Table 5.7, is used to deeper analyze the methods. We generally observe a
superior performance on the validation set in comparison to the test set, as depicted in
Table 5.5. This trend is also apparent in the performance of the lower baseline VAE -
MSE, which tends to have a slightly higher AUROC for the validation set than for the
test set. The same patterns observed for the test set are also seen for the validation
set, specifically that iNAAD performs well for Hydrocephalus, Ventriculomegaly, and
Acc, that the Gaussian noise distribution performs the best and that SANDi - Pyramid
performs similarly or worse than the VAE - Baseline. The consistent performance pat-
terns across methods and anomalies in two separate datasets (test and validation) serve
as confirmation that the model’s performance is not impacted by confounding variables
in the test set. To this extend we observe that specifically SANDi - Gaussian acheives
high AUROC for the anomaly Acc on test set but not on validation set, whereas iNAAD
acheives similarly AUROC for boths sets for Acc.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
FPR
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
TPR
ROC AUC  All anomalies
Resnet18 (AUC = 0.67)
Simplex (AUC = 0.58)
Chance level (AUC = 0.5)
Pyramid (AUC = 0.57)
Gauss (AUC = 0.62)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
FPR
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
TPR
ROC AUC  Spina Befida
Resnet18 (AUC = 0.78)
Simplex (AUC = 0.62)
Chance level (AUC = 0.5)
Pyramid (AUC = 0.62)
Gauss (AUC = 0.57)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
FPR
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
TPR
ROC AUC  Ventriculomegaly
Resnet18 (AUC = 0.71)
Simplex (AUC = 0.69)
Chance level (AUC = 0.5)
Pyramid (AUC = 0.69)
Gauss (AUC = 0.74)
Figure 5.5: Roc Curve for iNAAD of all anomalies, ventriculomegaly and spina befida
in test set.
==PAGE:58==
5.5 Qualitative Results
51
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
FPR
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
TPR
ROC AUC  All anomalies
Resnet18 (AUC = 0.67)
Chance level (AUC = 0.5)
SANDi - Pyramid (AUC = 0.51)
SANDi - Gauss (AUC = 0.67)
SANDi - Simplex (AUC = 0.55)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
FPR
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
TPR
ROC AUC  Spina Befida
Resnet18 (AUC = 0.78)
Chance level (AUC = 0.5)
SANDi - Pyramid (AUC = 0.49)
SANDi - Gauss (AUC = 0.79)
SANDi - Simplex (AUC = 0.58)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
FPR
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
TPR
ROC AUC  Ventriculomegaly
Resnet18 (AUC = 0.71)
Chance level (AUC = 0.5)
SANDi - Pyramid (AUC = 0.47)
SANDi - Gauss (AUC = 0.64)
SANDi - Simplex (AUC = 0.61)
Figure 5.6: Roc Curve for SANDi of all anomalies, ventriculomegaly and spina befida
in test set.
Table 5.7: AUROC results on the Validation set (250 ID/250 OOD cases) for iNAAD,
SANDi, and the VAE - MSE supervised baseline, per anomaly group. The best scores
are in bold, second best are underlined.
AUROC per anomaly group
Model
Microcephaly
(n=37)
Hydrocephalus
(n=64)
Acc
(n=36)
Cerebr. cyst
(n=43)
Ventriculomegaly
(n=61)
Spina bifida
(n=40)
Others
(n=92)
All
(n=250)
VAE - MSE
0.51
0.52
0.50
0.50
0.53
0.50
0.50
0.52
Gaussian
0.73
0.70
0.78
0.65
0.73
0.62
0.64
0.68
iNAAD
Simplex
0.62
0.60
0.65
0.56
0.63
0.52
0.56
0.57
Pyramid
0.65
0.62
0.68
0.57
0.68
0.56
0.58
0.60
Gaussian
0.66
0.72
0.59
0.66
0.62
0.71
0.65
0.65
SANDi
Simplex
0.56
0.66
0.60
0.58
0.54
0.58
0.61
0.58
Pyramid
0.61
0.55
0.45
0.45
0.47
0.54
0.49
0.49
5.5
Qualitative Results
Other work has shown that reconstruction based method, and ANDi can be used to
segment anomalous regions of MRI images [22, 91]. Our implemented framework gen-
erates heatmaps illustrating the reconstruction error for iNAAD and the Aggregated
Normative Diffusion map using SANDi. These heatmaps can be employed to assess the
potential for anomaly localization and to verify the alignment of the models with the
task. In Figure 5.7, 5.8 and 5.9, we present examples of annotated anomalies from Out-
of-distribution (OOD) images, healthy ID images and the results from both methods.
The heatmaps for iNAAD are derived from ˆx0 −x0, where ˆx0 represents the aggregated
inpainted reconstructions as per the iNAAD method (subsection 4.5.1), with a Gaus-
sian filter of kernel size 5 applied. The SANDi heatmap is produced by employing the
procedure outlined in the ANDi method [22], as detailed in the SANDi method (subsec-
tion 4.5.2).
In general, the conclusion of the Qualitative results is this; iNAAD method provides
better anomaly localization than SANDi, and it can be qualitatively concluded that
==PAGE:59==
5.5 Qualitative Results
52
Dandy Walker 
 Syndrome
iNAAD
SANDi
iNAAD
SANDi
iNAAD
SANDi
Gaussian
Pyramid
Simplex
Hydrocephalus
iNAAD
SANDi
iNAAD
SANDi
iNAAD
SANDi
Microcephaly
iNAAD
SANDi
iNAAD
SANDi
iNAAD
SANDi
Figure 5.7: Visualisations of annotations, heatmaps from methods iNAAD and SANDi
of different anomalies. We observe that for conditions such as Dandy Walker Syndrome
and Hydrocephalus, which manifest as an entity (section 2.4), the heatmaps produced by
iNAAD and SANDi can partially identify the anomalous region, with iNAAD showing a
more pronounced effect. Unlike entity level anomalies, Microcephaly is associated with
relation level information in the image, as it pertains to head size in comparison to
other anatomical features. In the case of Microcephaly, where the direct localization of
anomalous region is not feasible, the heatmaps can (with some ambiguity) indicate that
the the methods work as intented, since the highlighted region is near the border of the
inpainting mask, and no other distinct anomalous areas are present.
the iNAAD method can in some cases localize entitiy level anomalies and reconstruct
healthy ID images without error. However, the qualitative results for SANDi indicate
that, eventhoug we in some cases observe the anomalous regions highlighted, it is not
suitable for anomaly localisation for clinical anomalies.
==PAGE:60==
5.5 Qualitative Results
53
Hydrocephalus
iNAAD
SANDi
iNAAD
SANDi
iNAAD
SANDi
Gaussian
Pyramid
Simplex
Ventriculomegaly
iNAAD
SANDi
iNAAD
SANDi
iNAAD
SANDi
Hydrocephalus
iNAAD
SANDi
iNAAD
SANDi
iNAAD
SANDi
Figure 5.8: Visualisations of annotations, heatmaps from methods iNAAD and SANDi
of different anomalies.
From the results above, it is evident that the Pyramid and
Simplex sometimes produce highly noisy reconstructions, even though the noise levels
are lower than those of the Gaussian. Additionally, we note that although all displayed
anomalies are entity level anomalies, the anomalous areas may not be highlighted at all
or may be highlighted to the same extent as other areas.
Cerebral cyst
iNAAD
SANDi
iNAAD
SANDi
iNAAD
SANDi
Gaussian
Pyramid
Simplex
No diagnosis
No diagnosis
Figure 5.9: Visualisations of annotated anomaly Cerebral cyst, healthy ID images
and heatmaps from methods iNAAD and SANDi. In the given example, the iNAAD
method demonstrates good performance by distinctly highlighting the anomalous areas
of the Cerebral Cyst and showing minimal reconstruction errors in images without any
diagnosis. In contrast, the results for SANDi are less clear; however, one may infer
that the anomalous images (including all presented results Figure 4.5, 4.6 and 4.7) have
regions within the head area with higher pixel intensities compared to the normal images.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion and Conclusion
6.1
Feasability of Unsupervised Anomaly
Detection
Our findings indicate that unsupervised reconstruction-based methods can achieve com-
parable, even superior performance in some cases, compared to supervised approaches
for anomaly detection in ultrasound imaging, which are characterized by a scarcity of
labeled data for supervised training, but a relative abundance of normal data.
Our
experiments on the effect of different noise types show that Gaussian noise is more suit-
able for the fetal ultrasound setting for image generation, reconstruction, and anomaly
detection, unlike MRI settings where Simplex and Pyramid perform better for anomaly
segmentation [91, 22]. We hypothesize that Gaussian noise achieves optimal performance
because of the balance between; insuﬀiciently reconstructing out-of-distribution (OOD)
images (making them appear more like ID images) and precisely reconstructing ID im-
ages. Specifically, Gaussian noise excels in accurately reconstructing ID images (Fig.
5.9 and Tab. 5.1). The proposed method reconstructs normal brains with neglectable
reconstruction error while it provides inherent explainability for localized anomalies as
illustrated in Fig. 5.7. Our analysis of the heatmaps indicates that they possess high
precision. Consequently, if an anomalous region is detected, it is highly probable that it
is indeed an anomaly (Fig. 5.7). However, if the heatmap resembles noise or lacks clear
anomalous regions, it cannot be trusted to the same degree that the image is healthy
(Fig. 5.8).
The performance of the proposed method varies significantly across various anoma-
lies, as shown in Table 5.5. We theorize that the variabillity comes from the fact that
anomalies, which manifests locally such as ventriculomegaly, are more readily detected
with the implemented method.
Several key points would need to be developed further before it is possible be deployed
in clinical use. Firstly the anomaly score (SSIM for iNAAD and Skew for SANDi) would
need to be mapped into something more intepretable, such as a probability or likelihood.
Secondly more clinical validation would be required in terms of both the anomaly score
and the explainability of the heatmaps, as we have shown that in some cases it is diﬀicult
to locate the anomaly using the methods (Fig. 5.8). Finally, the performance (AUROC
and AP) of unsupervised anomaly detection techniques should be evaluated in a different
setting, where the data have undergone a more rigorous manual validation, to ensure
that detection of all anomalies is achievable.
==PAGE:62==
6.2 Unsupervised vs Supervised Approaches
55
6.2
Unsupervised vs Supervised Approaches
The techniques employed in this thesis are purely based in unsupervised machine learning,
implying that training was conducted without any annotations or labels. Nonetheless,
the data extraction method applied ensures that the training dataset exists of healthy
ultrasound scans. The study from [95] uses a supervised method to identify anomalies in
mid-trimester ultrasound scans, achieving an anomaly detection performance superior
to the one in this thesis, with an AUROC of 0.987, compared to 0.62 for iNAAD and
0.67 for SANDi. However, the findings from the implemented supervised baseline model
suggest that the discrepancy between supervised and unsupervised methods are not as
big as compared to the results of 0.987, since the implemented supervised baseline model
achieves a AUROC of 0.67 for our specific dataset. This could imply that performance
of the unsupervised methods might be affected by the diﬀiculty of dataset. Compared
with unsupervised DCDM method [62] used for the OOD task of differentiating between
cardiac ultrasound images and other anatomical structures, which achieves an AUROC
of 77.60, it is understandable that our performance is notably lower (0.62 iNAAD and
0.67 SANDi). As depicted in Figure 4.1, their in-distribution (ID) and out-of-distribution
(OOD) data differ more than our ID and OOD data, as they involve entirely different
anatomy.
The work done in this thesis highlights the benefits that arise from using generative
models rather than discriminative models. These benefits include post-hoc algorithmic
and metric optimisations (sec. 5.3), validation through heat maps (Fig. 5.9), improved
explainability, and anomaly localization (Fig. 5.7). These ”tools” deem the development
of saliancy maps [83, 102] and post-hoc calibrations [81, 73] on top of discriminative
models unecessary. When coupled with the need for minimal supervision during training
and a theoretical basis for identifying both rare and novel anomalies, these advantages
makes the unsupervised approach more robust for many settings.
6.3
Limitations
6.3.1
Anomaly Detection Algorithms
The results of the proposed methods iNAAD and SANDi are similar when evaluated
using AUROC and AP. The theoretical basis is more robust in the iNAAD method [100,
38], and it closely aligns with methods already implemented in the literature [26, 91, 22].
Although the Skewness metric has been employed in anomaly detection for timeseries
data [55, 72] and hyperspectral imagery [97], its application in the context proposed
by the SANDi method is not well documented and warrants further investigation and
experimentation in similar settings. Additionally, the heatmaps ANDi(Dt) shown in
Figure 5.7 do not clearly indicate that the calculated skewness of pixel intensities is
due to higher pixel values in the anomalous areas. A noteworthy concern regarding the
==PAGE:63==
6.3 Limitations
56
SANDi algorithm is its subpar performance in the SANDi - Pyramid approach when
compared to those of Simplex and Gaussian, despite the fact that, in certain instances,
the heatmap visually highlights the anomalous regions (Fig. 5.7). A potential issue with
the iNAAD method arises from a confounding factor related to the inpainting technique.
Specifically, an increase in head size leads to a higher reconstruction error in terms of
SSIM. Consequently, AUROC and AP metrics could be partially influenced by head
sizes if OOD images typically have larger heads compared to ID images, or vice versa.
The similarity in performance between the unsupervised methods and the supervised
approach indicates that the proposed methods are effective. Nonetheless, one issue with
intrepreting the baseline as an upper benchmark is that, due to the lack of OOD data
in the utilized dataset structure, we faced overfitting problems (Fig. 4.14) and had to
validate and test the classifier on the identical dataset, which is not ideal. A different
approach could have been to incorporate many more ID images, as these are highly
abundant, into the classifier’s training data to enhance its robustness. Despite these
challenges with the baseline, we believe that it still serves as an upper benchmark for
the VAD performance on our dataset implying the performance of the implemented
methods as good, given the data. Since our performance evaluation relies solely on AU-
ROC and AP metrics, determining a specific threshold for Skewness (SANDi) and SSIM
(iNAAD) for anomaly detection was unnecessary. For future work, one might consider
implementing and assessing performance metrics such as accuracy and F1 score. We
used the AUROC anomaly detection in the validation dataset (Tab. 5.7) and compared
it with AUROC of the test dataset (Tab. 5.5), observing similar patterns across both
sets. The stochastic nature of the methods, particularly the reverse and forward pro-
cesses within DDPM allows for an easy computation of a confidence interval for AUROC
and AP by running the methods on the test data multiple times using different random
seeds, which would offer valuable insights into the robustness of the methods.
6.3.2
Data Extraction
We rely on a fully automated data extraction process by sampling images from unique
patients without additional manual validation, beyond the identification of anatomy, to
confirm that anomalies are clearly visible in the OOD images. However, the absence
of extensive data cleaning likely increases the diﬀiculty of the dataset, as reflected by
the relatively low performance of even the supervised baseline compared to previous
studies [94, 50]. They implement a more extensive data collection and cleaning process,
including manual validation of the presents of anomalies and removal of images with
certain artifacts and poor image quality. However, the data cleaning process of [94]
involved extracting abnormal images from ultrasound videos resulting in many similar
looking images of the same patient and scan, which could contribute to the high AUROC
of 0.987. Differently in our approach only one OOD image were randomly selected for
each patient, however this image might not be the image where the anomaly is most
prevalent resulting in a more ID like image. This is further proven by the fact that out of
the 492 images that where presented for anomaly annotations only 77 where successfully
==PAGE:64==
6.4 Conclusion
57
annotated. This however does not mean that anomalies where not present in the rest
of the images, just that they where not visible at first glance or deemed not worthy of
annotations. Another approach to the data could have been to split the patients up
into 2 groups one for test and one for validation and use all images for each patients
resulting in a total of 3557 OOD images instead of 492. An important consideration
regarding the dataset is that the distribution of different ultrasound planes has not been
determined. This could imply that the model may not generalize well to real-world
scenarios if the plane distributions are significantly skewed in either the ID training
data or OOD test data. Therefore, future work should include an evaluation of SANDi
and iNAAD, segmented by different planes, as it can be expected that the performance
would vary across planes, and certain planes allow for better performance for certain
abnormalities.
6.4
Conclusion
To conclude, we present iNAAD a proof-of-concept for applying reconstruction-based
OOD detection with DDPMs to detect fetal brain anomalies. Additionally, we present
the method SANDi for further development and validation. Despite a scarcity of litera-
ture supporting this approach, the performance of SANDi for our setting measures up
to both the supervised baseline and the unsupervised iNAAD. Our methods performs
comparable to the supervised baseline without the need for abnormal cases during train-
ing. Finally, iNAAD serves as a general framework for diffusion-based unsupervised
medical anomaly detection with arbitrary noise types and posthoc adjustments for val-
idation and explainability. We determine that within our specific framework, iNAAD -
Gaussian delivers the optimal performance.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
Jacques S. Abramowicz. “Benefits and risks of ultrasound in pregnancy.” In: Sem-
inars in Perinatology 37.5 (2013). Fetal Imaging, pages 295–300. issn: 0146-0005.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1053/j.semperi.2013.06.004. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0146000513000694.
[2]
Arpit Bansal et al. Cold Diffusion: Inverting Arbitrary Image Transforms Without
Noise. 2022. arXiv: 2208.09392 [cs.CV].
[3]
Christian F Baumgartner et al. “SonoNet: real-time detection and localisation
of fetal standard scan planes in freehand ultrasound.” In: IEEE transactions on
medical imaging 36.11 (2017), pages 2204–2215.
[4]
Cosmin I Bercea et al. Reversing the Abnormal: Pseudo-Healthy Generative Net-
works for Anomaly Detection. 2023. arXiv: 2303.08452 [eess.IV].
[5]
Cosmin I. Bercea et al. Mask, Stitch, and Re-Sample: Enhancing Robustness and
Generalizability in Anomaly Detection through Automatic Diffusion Models. 2023.
arXiv: 2305.19643 [cs.CV].
[6]
Sebastian Berns, Simon Colton, and Christian Guckelsberger. Towards Mode Bal-
ancing of Generative Models via Diversity Weights. April 2023.
[7]
Sam Bond-Taylor et al. “Deep Generative Modelling: A Comparative Review
of VAEs, GANs, Normalizing Flows, Energy-Based and Autoregressive Mod-
els.” In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 44.11
(November 2022), pages 7327–7347. issn: 1939-3539. doi: 10.1109/tpami.2021.
3116668. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3116668.
[8]
T. Tony Cai and Rong Ma. Theoretical Foundations of t-SNE for Visualizing
High-Dimensional Clustered Data. 2022. arXiv: 2105.07536 [stat.ML].
[9]
Hanqun Cao et al. A Survey on Generative Diffusion Model. 2023. arXiv: 2209.
02646 [cs.AI].
[10]
Yunkang Cao et al. A Survey on Visual Anomaly Detection: Challenge, Approach,
and Prospect. 2024. arXiv: 2401.16402 [cs.CV].
[11]
Mark Carlotto. “Feature-based anomaly detection.” In: volume 6567. April 2007.
doi: 10.1117/12.721149.
[12]
Gustavo Carneiro et al. “Semantic-based indexing of fetal anatomies from 3-D
ultrasound data using global/semi-local context and sequential sampling.” In: July
2008, pages 1–8. isbn: 978-1-4244-2242-5. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2008.4587358.
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
59
[13]
Varun Chandola, Arindam Banerjee, and Vipin Kumar. “Anomaly Detection:
A Survey.” In: ACM Comput. Surv. 41 (July 2009). doi: 10.1145/1541880.
1541882.
[14]
Weng Yan Chow et al. “Explainable Machine Learning on Classification of Healthy
and Unhealthy Hair.” In: 2022 2nd International Conference on Intelligent Cyber-
netics Technology Applications (ICICyTA). 2022, pages 162–167. doi: 10.1109/
ICICyTA57421.2022.10037969.
[15]
Florinel-Alin Croitoru et al. “Diffusion Models in Vision: A Survey.” In: IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 45.9 (September
2023), pages 10850–10869. issn: 1939-3539. doi: 10.1109/tpami.2023.3261988.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2023.3261988.
[16]
Steffen Czolbe et al. “Semantic similarity metrics for image registration.” In: Med-
ical Image Analysis 87 (2023), page 102830.
[17]
Jia Deng et al. “Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database.” In: 2009
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. Ieee. 2009, pages 248–
255.
[18]
Ming Ding. “The road from MLE to EM to VAE: A brief tutorial.” In: AI Open
3 (2022), pages 29–34. issn: 2666-6510. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
aiopen.2021.10.001. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2666651021000279.
[19]
Theodoros Evgeniou and Massimiliano Pontil. “Support Vector Machines: Theory
and Applications.” In: volume 2049. September 2001, pages 249–257. isbn: 978-
3-540-42490-1. doi: 10.1007/3-540-44673-7_12.
[20]
Zhen Fang et al. Is Out-of-Distribution Detection Learnable? 2023. arXiv: 2210.
14707 [cs.LG].
[21]
Tharindu Fernando et al. “Deep Learning for Medical Anomaly Detection – A
Survey.” In: ACM Comput. Surv. 54.7 (July 2021). issn: 0360-0300. doi: 10.
1145/3464423. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3464423.
[22]
Alexander Frotscher et al. Unsupervised Anomaly Detection using Aggregated
Normative Diffusion. 2023. arXiv: 2312.01904 [cs.CV].
[23]
Ziv Goldfeld and Yury Polyanskiy. The Information Bottleneck Problem and Its
Applications in Machine Learning. 2020. arXiv: 2004.14941 [cs.LG].
[24]
Ian J. Goodfellow et al. Generative Adversarial Networks. 2014. arXiv: 1406.2661
[stat.ML].
[25]
Chirag Goyal. “Deep Understanding of Discriminative and Generative Models in
Machine Learning.” In: Analytics Vidhya (2021). url: https://www.analyticsvidhya.
com/blog/2021/07/deep-understanding-of-discriminative-and-generative-
models-in-machine-learning/.
[26]
Mark S. Graham et al. Denoising diffusion models for out-of-distribution detection.
2023. arXiv: 2211.07740 [cs.LG].
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
60
[27]
Stefan Gustavson. “Simplex noise demystified.” In: (January 2005).
[28]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition.” In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016,
pages 770–778.
[29]
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Models. 2020. arXiv: 2006.11239 [cs.LG].
[30]
Hadi Hojjati, Thi Kieu Khanh Ho, and Narges Armanfard. “Self-supervised anomaly
detection in computer vision and beyond: A survey and outlook.” In: Neural Net-
works 172 (April 2024), page 106106. issn: 0893-6080. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.
2024.106106. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2024.106106.
[31]
Yuehua Huang et al. “Interpretable Single-dimension Outlier Detection (ISOD):
An Unsupervised Outlier Detection Method Based on Quantiles and Skewness
Coeﬀicients.” In: Applied Sciences 14.1 (2024). issn: 2076-3417. doi: 10.3390/
app14010136. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/14/1/136.
[32]
ICD10data.com. ICD-10-CM Codes O00-O9A: Pregnancy, childbirth and the
puerperium. Accessed: 2024-07-09. url: https://www.icd10data.com/ICD10CM/
Codes/O00-O9A.
[33]
Hasan Iqbal et al. Unsupervised Anomaly Detection in Medical Images Using
Masked Diffusion Model. 2023. arXiv: 2305.19867 [eess.IV].
[34]
Matthew J et al. “Exploring a New Paradigm for the Fetal Anomaly Ultrasound
Scan: Artificial Intelligence in Real-time.” In: Prenatal Diagnosis (2021). url:
https://doi.org/10.1002/pd.6059.
[35]
Doaa Jabaz and Mohammed Abed. “Sonography 2nd Trimester Assessment, Pro-
tocols, And Interpretation.” In: May 2021.
[36]
Guillaume Jeanneret, Loïc Simon, and Frédéric Jurie. Diffusion Models for Coun-
terfactual Explanations. 2022. arXiv: 2203.15636 [cs.CV].
[37]
Jonalee Barman Kakati and Tapashi Kashyap Das. “Classification of healthy and
unhealthy banana leaves using deep learning approach: A comparative assess-
ment.” In: 2023 4th International Conference on Computing and Communication
Systems (I3CS). 2023, pages 1–5. doi: 10.1109/I3CS58314.2023.10127309.
[38]
Antanas Kascenas et al. The role of noise in denoising models for anomaly detec-
tion in medical images. 2023. arXiv: 2301.08330 [eess.IV].
[39]
Amirhossein Kazerouni et al. “Diffusion models in medical imaging: A compre-
hensive survey.” In: Medical Image Analysis 88 (2023), page 102846. issn: 1361-
8415. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2023.102846. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1361841523001068.
[40]
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. 2022.
arXiv: 1312.6114 [stat.ML].
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
61
[41]
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. “An Introduction to Variational Autoen-
coders.” In: Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning 12.4 (2019), pages 307–
392. issn: 1935-8245. doi: 10.1561/2200000056. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1561/2200000056.
[42]
Masaaki Komatsu et al. “Detection of cardiac structural abnormalities in fetal
ultrasound videos using deep learning.” In: Applied Sciences 11.1 (2021), page 371.
[43]
Heejoon Koo. A Survey on Generative Diffusion Models for Structured Data. June
2023.
[44]
Youssef Kossale, Mohammed Airaj, and Aziz Darouichi. “Mode Collapse in Gen-
erative Adversarial Networks: An Overview.” In: 2022 8th International Confer-
ence on Optimization and Applications (ICOA). 2022, pages 1–6. doi: 10.1109/
ICOA55659.2022.9934291.
[45]
Yufeng Kou et al. “Survey of fraud detection techniques.” In: volume 2. February
2004, 749–754 Vol.2. isbn: 0-7803-8193-9. doi: 10.1109/ICNSC.2004.1297040.
[46]
Alex Krizhevsky. “Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images.” In:
2009. url: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:18268744.
[47]
Alex Lamb. A Brief Introduction to Generative Models. 2021. arXiv: 2103.00265
[cs.LG].
[48]
Jingyao Li et al. Rethinking Out-of-distribution (OOD) Detection: Masked Image
Modeling is All You Need. 2023. arXiv: 2302.02615 [cs.CV].
[49]
M Lin et al. “Use of real-time artificial intelligence in detection of abnormal
image patterns in standard sonographic reference planes in screening for fetal in-
tracranial malformations.” In: Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology 59.3 (2022),
pages 304–316.
[50]
Manxi Lin et al. “DTU-net: learning topological similarity for curvilinear struc-
ture segmentation.” In: International Conference on Information Processing in
Medical Imaging. Springer. 2023, pages 654–666.
[51]
Manxi Lin et al. I saw, I conceived, I concluded: Progressive Concepts as Bottle-
necks. 2022. arXiv: 2211.10630 [cs.CV].
[52]
Manxi Lin et al. “Learning semantic image quality for fetal ultrasound from noisy
ranking annotation.” In: 21st international symposium on biomedical imaging
(ISBI 2024). 2024.
[53]
Jiaqi Liu et al. “Deep Industrial Image Anomaly Detection: A Survey.” In: Ma-
chine Intelligence Research 21.1 (January 2024), pages 104–135. issn: 2731-5398.
doi: 10.1007/s11633- 023- 1459- z. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s11633-023-1459-z.
[54]
Luping Liu et al. “Pseudo numerical methods for diffusion models on manifolds.”
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.09778 (2022).
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
62
[55]
Maohua Liu et al. “Intricate Anomaly Detection in Time Series by Caculating
Shift of Non-Gaussianity.” In: SoutheastCon 2024. 2024, pages 386–391. doi: 10.
1109/SoutheastCon52093.2024.10500255.
[56]
Zhenzhen Liu et al. “Unsupervised out-of-distribution detection with diffusion
inpainting.” In: Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine
Learning. ICML’23. Honolulu, Hawaii, USA: JMLR.org, 2023.
[57]
Ziwei Liu et al. Deep Learning Face Attributes in the Wild. 2015. arXiv: 1411.7766
[cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.7766.
[58]
Andreas Lugmayr et al. “Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilis-
tic models.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF CVPR. 2022, pages 11461–11471.
[59]
Sergio Naval Marimont et al. DISYRE: Diffusion-Inspired SYnthetic REstoration
for Unsupervised Anomaly Detection. 2023. arXiv: 2311.15453 [cs.CV].
[60]
Author Name (unavailable on Medium). Mathematical Prerequisites For Under-
standing Autoencoders and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs): Beginner Friendly,
Intermediate Exciting, and Expert Refreshing. Accessed: 2024-07-06. Analytics
Vidhya, 2020. url: https://medium.com/analytics-vidhya/mathematical-
prerequisites-for-understanding-autoencoders-and-variational-autoencoders-
vaes-8f854025390e.
[61]
Kamil Mikolaj et al. Removing confounding information from fetal ultrasound
images. 2023. arXiv: 2303.13918 [cs.CV].
[62]
Divyanshu Mishra et al. Dual Conditioned Diffusion Models for Out-Of-Distribution
Detection: Application to Fetal Ultrasound Videos. 2023. arXiv: 2311 . 00469
[cs.CV].
[63]
Sarang Narkhede. Understanding AUC - ROC Curve. Towards Data Science. 2018.
url: https://towardsdatascience.com/understanding-auc-roc-curve-
68b2303cc9c5.
[64]
Keiron O’Shea and Ryan Nash. An Introduction to Convolutional Neural Net-
works. 2015. arXiv: 1511.08458 [cs.NE]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.
08458.
[65]
Ammar A. Oglat et al. “Artifacts in Diagnostic Ultrasonography.” In: Journal for
Vascular Ultrasound 44.4 (2020), pages 212–219. doi: 10.1177/1544316720923937.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1177/1544316720923937. url: https://doi.
org/10.1177/1544316720923937.
[66]
Achraf Oussidi and Azeddine Elhassouny. “Deep generative models: Survey.” In:
April 2018, pages 1–8. doi: 10.1109/ISACV.2018.8354080.
[67]
Poojan Oza and Vishal M. Patel. “One-Class Convolutional Neural Network.”
In: IEEE Signal Processing Letters 26.2 (February 2019), pages 277–281. issn:
1558-2361. doi: 10.1109/lsp.2018.2889273. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/LSP.2018.2889273.
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
63
[68]
Gianluigi Pilu et al. “Sonographic examination of the fetal central nervous system:
guidelines for performing the ‘basic examination’and the ‘fetal neurosonogram’.”
In: Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology 29.1 (2007), pages 109–116.
[69]
Gianluigi Pilu et al. “Sonographic examination of the fetal central nervous system:
guidelines for performing the ‘basic examination’and the ‘fetal neurosonogram’.”
In: Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology 29.1 (2007), pages 109–116.
[70]
Szymon Płotka et al. “FetalNet: Multi-task deep learning framework for fetal
ultrasound biometric measurements.” In: Neural Information Processing: 28th
International Conference, ICONIP 2021, Proceedings. Springer. 2021, pages 257–
265.
[71]
Dan Popescu et al. “Optical coherence tomography: Fundamental principles,
instrumental designs and biomedical applications.” In: Biophysical Reviews 3
(September 2011), pages 155–169. doi: 10.1007/s12551-011-0054-7.
[72]
Alva Presbitero et al. “Anomaly Detection in Clinical Data of Patients Undergo-
ing Heart Surgery.” In: Procedia Computer Science 108 (2017). International Con-
ference on Computational Science, ICCS 2017, 12-14 June 2017, Zurich, Switzer-
land, pages 99–108. issn: 1877-0509. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.
2017.05.002. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1877050917304805.
[73]
Amir Rahimi et al. “Post-hoc calibration of neural networks.” In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.12807 2 (2020).
[74]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-Net: Convolutional Net-
works for Biomedical Image Segmentation. 2015. arXiv: 1505.04597 [cs.CV].
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.04597.
[75]
Daniel L. Ruderman. “Origins of scaling in natural images.” In: Vision Research
37.23 (1997), pages 3385–3398. issn: 0042-6989. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0042- 6989(97)00008- 4. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0042698997000084.
[76]
Mohammad Sabokrou et al. Adversarially Learned One-Class Classifier for Nov-
elty Detection. 2018. arXiv: 1802.09088 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1802.09088.
[77]
Sidharth Sankhye and Guiping Hu. “Machine Learning Methods for Quality Pre-
diction in Production.” In: Logistics 4 (December 2020), page 35. doi: 10.3390/
logistics4040035.
[78]
Hiroshi Sasaki, Chris G. Willcocks, and T. Breckon. “UNIT-DDPM: UNpaired
Image Translation with Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models.” In: ArXiv
abs/2104.05358 (2021). url: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
233210328.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
64
[79]
Thomas Schlegl et al. “f-AnoGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection with gen-
erative adversarial networks.” In: Medical Image Analysis 54 (2019), pages 30–44.
issn: 1361-8415. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2019.01.010. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1361841518302640.
[80]
Thomas Schlegl et al. Unsupervised Anomaly Detection with Generative Adver-
sarial Networks to Guide Marker Discovery. 2017. arXiv: 1703.05921 [cs.CV].
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.05921.
[81]
Zhihui Shao, Jianyi Yang, and Shaolei Ren. “Calibrating deep neural network
classifiers on out-of-distribution datasets.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.08914
(2020).
[82]
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep Inside Convo-
lutional Networks: Visualising Image Classification Models and Saliency Maps.
2014. arXiv: 1312.6034 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6034.
[83]
Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. “Deep inside convolu-
tional networks: Visualising image classification models and saliency maps.” In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6034 (2013).
[84]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for
Large-Scale Image Recognition. 2015. arXiv: 1409.1556 [cs.CV].
[85]
Matthew Sinclair et al. “Human-level performance on automatic head biometrics
in fetal ultrasound using fully convolutional neural networks.” In: 40th EMBC.
IEEE. 2018, pages 714–717.
[86]
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising Diffusion Implicit
Models. 2022. arXiv: 2010.02502 [cs.LG].
[87]
A.K Subramanian. PyTorch-VAE. https://github.com/AntixK/PyTorch-VAE.
2020.
[88]
A. van der Schaaf and J.H. van Hateren. “Modelling the Power Spectra of Natural
Images: Statistics and Information.” In: Vision Research 36.17 (1996), pages 2759–
2770. issn: 0042-6989. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0042 - 6989(96 )
00002- 8. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
0042698996000028.
[89]
Julia Wolleb et al. “Diffusion Models for Medical Anomaly Detection.” In: Med-
ical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2022.
Edited by Linwei Wang et al. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2022, pages 35–
45. isbn: 978-3-031-16452-1.
[90]
Yuzhou Wu et al. “Automatic measurement of fetal cavum septum pellucidum
from ultrasound images using deep attention network.” In: 2020 International
Conference on image processing (ICIP). IEEE. 2020, pages 2511–2515.
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
65
[91]
Julian Wyatt et al. “AnoDDPM: Anomaly Detection with Denoising Diffusion
Probabilistic Models using Simplex Noise.” In: 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW). 2022, pages 649–
655. doi: 10.1109/CVPRW56347.2022.00080.
[92]
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-MNIST: a Novel Image
Dataset for Benchmarking Machine Learning Algorithms. 2017. arXiv: 1708 .
07747 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.07747.
[93]
Baihong Xie et al. “Computer-aided diagnosis for fetal brain ultrasound images
using deep convolutional neural networks.” In: Int. Journal of Computer Assisted
Radiology and Surgery 15 (2020), pages 1303–1312.
[94]
H. N. Xie et al. “Using deep-learning algorithms to classify fetal brain ultrasound
images as normal or abnormal.” In: Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology 56.4
(2020), pages 579–587. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/uog.21967. eprint:
https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/uog.21967.
url: https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/uog.
21967.
[95]
HN Xie et al. “Using deep-learning algorithms to classify fetal brain ultrasound
images as normal or abnormal.” In: Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology 56.4
(2020), pages 579–587.
[96]
Rui Xu, Yunke Wang, and Bo Du. MAEDiff: Masked Autoencoder-enhanced Dif-
fusion Models for Unsupervised Anomaly Detection in Brain Images. 2024. arXiv:
2401.10561 [eess.IV].
[97]
Lina Xun and Yonghua Fang. “Anomaly Detection Based on High-order Statistics
in Hyperspectral Imagery.” In: 2006 6th World Congress on Intelligent Control
and Automation. Volume 2. 2006, pages 10416–10419. doi: 10.1109/WCICA.2006.
1714044.
[98]
Jiamiao Yan. “Application of CNN in computer vision.” In: Applied and Compu-
tational Engineering 30 (January 2024), pages 104–110. doi: 10.54254/2755-
2721/30/20230081.
[99]
Jie Yang et al. “Visual Anomaly Detection for Images: A Systematic Survey.”
In: Procedia Computer Science 199 (2022). The 8th International Conference
on Information Technology and Quantitative Management (ITQM 2020 2021):
Developing Global Digital Economy after COVID-19, pages 471–478. issn: 1877-
0509. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2022.01.057. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050922000576.
[100]
Jingkang Yang et al. Generalized Out-of-Distribution Detection: A Survey. 2024.
arXiv: 2110.11334 [cs.CV].
[101]
Ling Yang et al. “Diffusion Models: A Comprehensive Survey of Methods and
Applications.” In: ACM Comput. Surv. 56.4 (November 2023). issn: 0360-0300.
doi: 10.1145/3626235. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3626235.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
66
[102]
Hanwei Zhang et al. “Opti-CAM: Optimizing saliency maps for interpretability.”
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.07002 (2023).
[103]
Huan Zhang et al. The Limitations of Adversarial Training and the Blind-Spot
Attack. 2019. arXiv: 1901.04684 [stat.ML].
[104]
Hui Zhang et al. DiffusionAD: Norm-guided One-step Denoising Diffusion for
Anomaly Detection. 2023. arXiv: 2303.08730 [cs.CV].
[105]
Richard Zhang et al. The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Deep Features as a Per-
ceptual Metric. 2018. arXiv: 1801.03924 [cs.CV].
==PAGE:74==
