==PAGE:1==
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
A Generic Framework for Study Participation on
the Copenhagen Research Platform
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Matteo Enrico Hoffmann ­ s222952
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Digital Phenotyping, which describes the process of using data collected from personal
digital devices, such as smartphones and wearables, to measure and analyze human
behavior and physiological characteristics in real time, has shown great success in stud­
ies, especially in mental health. There are two types of data collected in this process,
each coming with its own challenges. Active data requires input from the user, thus it is
dependent on compliance from the user, meaning they actually complete the tasks, and
the technological understanding of the user, meaning they are able to complete the task.
Passive data on the other hand does not require any interaction from the user. However,
technical challenges such as the operating system of a phone stopping data collection
due to battery usage impede the collection of this data as well. Research has shown that
both active and passive data is often missing, and that this significantly impacts the results
of a study.
A useful tool to combat missing data is analysing the coverage of data, which com­
pares the collected data to the expected data. In order to implement coverage analysis
in a reproducible and customisable manner, Copenhagen Center for Health Technology
(CACHET) was interested in a framework achieving this for their research platform Copen­
hagen Research Platform (CARP). This project clearly defines the concept of coverage in
the domain of CARP, and then designs, implements and evaluates a framework for cov­
erage analysis on digital phenotyping studies. The design was based on the CARP Core
framework and the Onion Architecture, while the implementation was done in Kotlin. The
framework was evaluated on requirements and three use cases gathered from interviews
with CARP researchers, showing that it is able to fulfill the need for coverage analysis.
iv
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Prior Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Research Goals and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Impact and Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.6
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background and Related Work
7
2.1
Missing Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Expectations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3
Data Imputation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Coverage Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.5
CARP Core . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3
Analysis of Problem Domain
23
3.1
Use Cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2
Definition of Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.3
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Design
31
4.1
Onion Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Domain Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3
Application Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.4
Infrastructure Layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.5
Component Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5
Implementation
41
5.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
Domain Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.3
Application Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.4
Infrastructure Layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6
Evaluation
53
6.1
Automated Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6.2
Use Cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7
Discussion
61
7.1
Goals and Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
7.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
7.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
8
Conclusion
67
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
v
==PAGE:6==
A Questionnaire and Interview Notes
69
A.1 Questionnaire Template . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
A.2 Interview Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
B Code repositories
75
Acronyms
77
List of Figures
79
Listings
80
Bibliography
81
vi
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Technological advances in recent years have allowed humans to deeply integrate with
technology. In 2022, Europe had a 81% smartphone adaption rate, a number that is ex­
pected to grow to 90% in 2030 [1]. These smartphones are often used daily and thus have
an intimate view of their user, as well as being equipped with multiple sensors that con­
tinuously analyze their daily situations. This allows for a valuable integration of technology
with studies on human behaviour, through scalable collection of large amounts of data,
which is also called digital phenotyping [2]. This technique, as defined by Torous et al.,
refers to the ”moment­by­moment quantification of the individual­level human phenotype
in­situ using data from smartphones and other personal digital devices” [3, p. 2]. It has
especially seen great success in mental health studies, as for example features extracted
from phones and wearables, such as sleep [4], social interactions [5], and mobility [6] can
be linked to symptoms of depression.
Data collected in this process can be divided into two categories: active and passive.
Active data requires active participation of the user through, for example, filling out surveys
as part of the data collection. Passive data on the other hand is collected entirely without
any input from the user and originates from the sensors of the smartphone, e.g. the
location data, and thus has the least amount of interruption to the user. The collection
itself then happens through the smartphone of the participant, more specifically through
an application they installed previously [7].
Once the data has been collected, analysis needs to be applied in order to draw conclu­
sions from it. The data collected through digital phenotyping, coming from a large number
of diverse people using a wide range of smartphones in various ways, presents several
challenges [7]. One area that is in need of further research is the coverage of data, which
Currey and Torous define as the comparison of the number of expected data with the
number of actually collected data [8]. A study conducted by them further confirmed the
importance of missing data, finding that data sets with a large amount of missing data
may lead to incorrect clinical interpretations [8].
DTU Health Tech and Copenhagen Center for Health Technology (CACHET) are devel­
oping their own research platform for digital phenotyping, called Copenhagen Research
Platform (CARP), which includes a study portal, an application to run studies with, and
multiple other components focused around running studies [9]. An important focus now
is the analysis of those studies, and visualizing this information to the researchers on
the study portal. One important aspect that CACHET aims to analyze is the coverage of
studies. Important here is that the analysis of coverage is reproducible and customisable
for the various types of studies they may run. Therefore, a software is needed that is
able to fulfill these requirements. In order to have extensibility and reusability, it is import­
ant to consider the architecture of a software, which, according to Bass et al., is defined
as following: ”The software architecture of a system is the set of structures needed to
reason about the system, which comprise software elements, relations among them, and
properties of both” [10, p. 18]. In order to offer customisability, a framework should be
used, which can be seen as a semi­complete application, which can be extended and
customized to fit specific applications [11].
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
1
==PAGE:8==
Therefore, this thesis proposes a framework for analysis on the coverage of digital phen­
otyping data in the CARP domain. The focus of the thesis is on the software architecture
that allows the framework to be extensible and adaptable to the wide range of studies that
are conducted in the digital phenotyping space.
1.2
Prior Work
In the existing research around missing data, a common goal can be seen: reducing the
impact missing data has on digital phenotyping studies. In order to achieve this, three
main areas can be defined: Pre­study approaches, post­study approaches, and during­
study approaches.
A pre­study approach suggested by Currey and Torous include the design of studies.
Concretely, they suggest run­in periods, which are short testing periods before participants
enter a study. Only participants who achieve a minimum threshold of data coverage are
then able to participate in the study. Additionally, they suggest hands­on support in the
beginning of the studies to educate the participants [8]. While this is a good approach to
prevent technical or user errors to happen, it does not account for any errors or challenges
that may arise during the study. Especially for longer studies, participants also may forget
what was taught to them in the beginning. Thus, pre­study approaches can serve as an
addition to other approaches, but may be inadequate by itself.
A post­study approach that can be identified in the literature is data imputation, reducing
the amount of missing data by filling it in. One such approach by Hsu et al. used data im­
putation to reduce missing data to then provide clinical ratings of bipolar disorder severity.
Their results showed that the models trained with imputation outperformed models trained
without imputation, showing imputation as an effective approach to reduce missing data
[12]. While data imputation thus can be a viable approach in certain situations, it is still
a complex process [7] to impute data that may not guarantee more accurate results [13].
Additionally, the more data is missing, the more difficult it gets to impute it accurately.
Therefore, it is important to reduce the amount of missing data during data collection.
Therefore, it may be a useful in combination with the other two approaches, but is limited
by itself.
For during­study approaches, Currey and Torous suggest actively monitoring data quality
to identify participants that may need help [8]. As mentioned before, they identify coverage
as an important measure to analyse, which they define by the number of collected data
compared to the amount of expected data. This is also implemented in their research
platform LAMP [14]. Another approach in this area is RAPIDS, a data processing pipeline
by Vega et al. [15]. Their approach differs from LAMP in that is not a research platform,
but simply a processing tool that can be used by e.g. research platforms [15]. As part of
this, they provide measures and visualizations on data quality, where they visualize how
many minutes or hours contain sensor data [16].
Through this analysis of coverage measures, the amount of missing data can be easily
monitored in a study. It is especially powerful since it allows for monitoring of an entire
study, but also monitoring single participants or even specific sensors sensor, offering a
detailed analysis. As Currey and Torous suggest, a visualization of coverage can provide
insights to identify participants that require help, or can be shared directly with a par­
ticipant to motivate them for better participation [8]. However, the tools presented are
quite limited in several ways. The time periods for which coverage analysis is conducted
are predefined. For instance, Currey and Torous examine hourly data [8], while RAPIDS
measures data per minute and aggregates it into hourly measures [16]. Moreover, these
2
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:9==
tools do not allow for modifications to the actual amount of dataexpected within these peri­
ods, often considering the presence of at least one data point as sufficient. They also lack
any analysis of the quality of the data. For example, a survey filled with invalid responses
would still count as data points, though they should be considered missing. Therefore, to
effectively use active coverage analysis during a study, these tools need improvements
to become more robust and versatile.
1.3
Research Question
Through the analysis of approaches to combat missing data in digital phenotyping, it can
be seen that the during­study approach of analysing and monitoring a coverage metric
has a large potential to combat this problem. However, existing approaches are limited in
scope and often do not allow for customisability. This is partly due to coverage analysis
currently only being a smaller part of larger projects such as research platforms, but not
a dedicated project. Therefore, this leads to the following research question:
What is a software architecture design for a framework that allows developers to
implement coverage analysis on digital phenotyping studies?
The question can be further divided into three subquestions, that are explained in more
detail here:
1.3.1
What is coverage analysis and how can coverage be measured?
The software deals with the analysis of coverage of digital phenotyping studies. In order
to analyze coverage, a concrete definition of it needs to be developed which improves
upon the existing definitions. These improvements should include flexiblity for the period
in which coverage is defined for, flexibility in how many data points are expected, and
should consider the quality of the data.
1.3.2
What is a software architecture design for a framework for coverage
analysis?
The design needs to be suited to allow for coverage analysis based on the definition of
coverage that will be developed. This means that developers need a simple way to define
their analysis, based on their expectations for the incoming data. Furthermore, it is to be
investigated how the design can support a large variety of data and thus be customizable.
1.3.3
Can the framework be integrated into existing digital phenotyping
frameworks?
It needs to be investigated whether the framework has the ability to align and integrate
into existing digital phenotyping frameworks. An integration should consist of being able
to obtain data from the framework and analyzing it correctly, and returning results in a
certain format.
1.4
Research Goals and Methods
The goal of the developed software is to solve the above mentioned problem statements.
In this section, more detailed goals are provided and connected to the questions.
1.4.1
Definition of Coverage
This goal solves research question 1.3.1. In order to find a concrete definition for cov­
erage, existing digital phenotyping literature will be reviewed in order to find common
definitions. In addition, discussions with researchers involved in the DTU Health Tech de­
partment will be held to align the definition of coverage to what is in their interest. Finally,
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
3
==PAGE:10==
these different viewpoints will be combined to create a concrete definition of coverage in
the CARP domain and for this project.
1.4.2
Design and implementation of software architecture prototype
This goal answers multiple research questions, namely 1.3.2 and 1.3.3, and thus is the
main goal of this project. To achieve this, domain­driven design will be utilized to design
an architecture based on the CARP Core domain model, thus enabling coverage ana­
lysis based on the previous definition of coverage. After defining the architecture, the
framework will then be implemented accordingly. Finally, an integration to an existing
framework utilizing the CARP Core domain model will be done, by analyzing data from it
and returning the results accordingly.
1.4.3
Evaluation
In order to evaluate the design and implementation, and thus research question 1.3.2, re­
quirements will be defined that the software is expected to fulfill. Consisting of both func­
tional requirements, such as supporting both active and passive data, and non­functional
requirements, such as extensibility. These requirements will be defined in the beginning
phase, through interviews with researchers and CACHET’s requirements. The final pro­
totype will then be evaluated based on those requirements.
1.5
Impact and Application
Digital phenotyping utilizes the deep integration humans have with their personal mobile
devices in order to produce studies that can be run at scale, without major disruptions to
the participants and that provide clinically relevant results. This is a major development
for medical research and represents an area that will continue to grow. In order to properly
utilize this data, and to ensure that the results are in fact clinically relevant, the quality of
the data is of upmost importance. An important factor for the quality is the coverage of
the data, which is an area that is under­researched. In order to ensure data quality, a way
to analyse coverage in a reproducible manner is thus needed. This project solves this
need for the CARP domain, by defining what coverage is and how it can be analysed.
Additionally, it provides a framework that allows for easy coverage analysis, while being
adaptable to different types of studies and analysis that may be run. CARP developers
will be able to use this framework in the future to easily and quickly create coverage
analysis for their specific studies, which can then be, for example, utilized in the front end
to visualize the coverage for a specific study to aid researches in supervising their digital
phenotyping studies.
1.6
Thesis Outline
This thesis is structured in 8 chapters. Chapter 1 gives an introduction to the topic by
describing some important background, giving a short overview of prior work, and then
clearly defining the research question and the resulting goals. Related work for the thesis
in then analyzed in Chapter 2. It first details research around missing data and its pos­
sible factors, after which the concept of expectations for data is investigated. Next, data
imputation is analyzed more closely, after which tools that employ coverage analysis are
examined. Finally, the key dependency for this project, CARP Core, is detailed.
In Chapter 3, the problem domain is thoroughly investigated. First, three concrete use
cases for coverage analysis are given, which are based on conversations with research­
ers involve with CARP. Afterwards, a definition of coverage is given, based on the use
cases and a short literature review, before the requirements for the framework are de­
tailed. In Chapter 4, the software architecture design for the framework is explained, the
4
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:11==
implementation of which is then described in Chapter 5. The implemented framework is
evaluated in Chapter 6, based on the use cases previously mentioned.
Chapter 7 presents and discusses the results of this thesis based on the questions and
goals that were defined, before giving some limitations and future work. Finally, Chapter
8 resumes the entire thesis and thus concludes it.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
5
==PAGE:12==
6
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:13==
2
Background and Related Work
In this chapter, related work is given. First, research on missing data is explored, providing
context and insights into its impact on digital phenotyping. Next, the concept of creating
data expectations is examined. Then, the two primary approaches for addressing missing
data are analyzed: data imputation and coverage analysis. Finally, the key dependency
for this project, CARP Core, is detailed.
2.1
Missing Data
Several researchers have looked into the topic of missing data in digital phenotyping,
especially the context around why and when data is missing, and what effects that may
have. In the following subsections, four papers around this topic are introduced and a
short analysis is given for each one.
2.1.1
Sociodemographic characteristics of missing data
Kiang et al. looked into the sociodemographic characteristics of missing data in digital
phenotyping. For this, they analyzed data from six different studies amounting to 211
participants and 29,500 person­days of GPS and accelerator data using a Bayesian hier­
archical negative binomial regression [17].
In this, they found missing data of 19% for accelerometer and 27% for GPS. They did
not find any major variation in sensor non­collection based on gender, age, or education.
Additionally, only minor differences between black and white participants were found in
accelerometer data, with black participants missing sligthly more data, while no racial
differences were observed in GPS collection. Interestingly, iOS users had a substantially
lower amount of missing data for GPS compared to Android users, a difference that Kiang
et al. attribute to the system design of the operating systems. Furthermore, they found a
statistically significant temporal increase of non­collection of ~0.5­0.9% per week. They
note however that due to the effect being small, it may not be an important factor for
studies. Finally, they point out that they observed larger variations of missing data on
the participant level than the study level, suggesting that missing data is not related to
structural problems of the study, but due to variability of the participants [17].
2.1.2
Predictors of missing data
Another study, conducted by Beukenhorst et al., investigated location data in order to
find predictors of missing data. For this, they analyzed a UK study of 9665 research
participants and 488,400 participant days, where hourly location data was collected to
investigate the relationship between chronic pain and weather conditions. They utilized
a generalized mixed­effects linear model with logistic regression to find correlations of
successfully recorded location data and various contextual parameters [18].
They found that 63% of the expected hours were missing. 18.2% of participants collected
a median of 2 out of 24 locations per day, while 17.2% collected a median of no location
data and 16.3% collected a median of all 24 locations per day, as can be seen in Figure
2.1. Interestingly, participants with an Android phone had 22.91 times higher odds to
successfully record a location, with Android users most often having complete location
data, while iPhone users recorded a median of 2 locations per day. Additionally, they
found that more data was missing during nights and weekends, finding that the highest
odds of a successful location collection was during the afternoon. Finally, the duration of
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: Median locations per day per participant over all participants (N=9665), by
Beukenhorst et al. [18]
a participant’s involvement in the study and the length of time since the participant last
used the app both contributed to lower odds of location data collection. Similar to Kiang
et al., they also did not find age or gender to be a predictor of missing location data [18].
2.1.3
Long­term participant engagement and retention
Another relevant paper by Zhang et al. analyzed long­term participant retention and en­
gagement patterns through a study using data from the Remote Assessment of Disease
and Relapse Major Depressive Disorder (RADAR­MDD) program [19]. The program aims
to evaluate the utility of smartphones and wearables to monitor depression and under­
stand key factors [19].
Their study consisted of 614 participants, from whom both active and passive data was
collected regularly. The active data consisted of surveys collected using a study app, while
the passive data, such as phone usage or heart rate, was collected both using the phone
and a Fitbit device. The participants all had a current or prior history with depression, a
median age of 49, and consisted of 75.7% women, which Zhang et al. explain with women
having a higher prevalence of depression. The study utilized RADAR­base, which is an
open­source platform and two Android study apps, one each for active and passive data.
Since the study was only designed for Android phones, participants using an iPhone,
25.1% of all participants, were provided with Android phones to use as their main phone
for the duration of the study [19].
They defined engagement for active data using two important surveys, which needed to be
filled out using the phone every two weeks, with a 3 day completion period. If a participant
completed one of these two surveys, they were considered to be engaged for active data
for the entire 14 day period. For the phone passive data, they defined a participant to be
engaged on a given day, if there was at least one data point collected. The same definition
was utilized for Fitbit passive data [19].
The study determined the retention rate after 43 weeks to be 54.6% for active, 47.7% for
phone passive and 67.6% for Fitbit passive data. The analysis identified three distinct en­
gagement subgroups: most engaged, medium engaged, and least engaged. Participants
in the least engaged group showed higher depression severity and were generally 5 years
younger than the most engaged group. Interestingly, 44.6% of participants who stopped
completing surveys after 8 weeks still sent passive Fitbit data for an average of 42 weeks.
Additionally, the highest retention was observed in the oldest age group, over 60 years
old, while participants using their own phone, especially Motorola and Samsung devices,
8
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:15==
generally had higher retention rates [19].
2.1.4
Clinical relevance of digital phenotyping data quality
Torous et al. analyzed the clinical relevance of digital phenotyping data quality with applic­
ations to a cohort with schizophrenia [20]. To do this, they collected data from 16 patients
with diagnosed schizophrenia for up to three months. The data consisted of both passive
data, such as GPS and accelerometer, and active data, such as surveys on mental health.
The collection was done using the Beiwe platform and the Beiwe smartphone app, which
the participants installed on their personal Android or iOS phone.
Overall, they reported a mean coverage within the first month of 50.2% for GPS data,
while accelerometer data was slightly lower at 46.9%. Even though these numbers are
relatively low, they note that this is still much more preferable to traditional methods since
it is a more continuous form of monitoring. Additionally, they determined significant as­
sociations between data quality metrics and clinical outcomes, indicated by worse survey
scores. Specifically lower accelerometer coverage was associated with this, while slightly
higher GPS coverage had a similar association.
Moreover, faster viewing times and
slower completion rates were also associated with worse results, particularly in anxiety­
related questions. Finally, lower rates of survey completion had a similar negative indic­
ation, particularly for schizophrenia [20].
Interestingly, the study observed that differences in data coverage could be influenced
by the type of smartphone operating system. For instance, Android phones showed sig­
nificantly less GPS coverage but comparable accelerometer coverage compared to iOS
devices. They do however note that due to the small size of participants in the study, no
strong conclusion can be drawn [20].
2.1.5
Summary
All four presented papers dealt with missing data and the reasons for it. While Kiang et al.
[17], Beukenhorst et al. [18] and Torous et al. [20] focused on how much data was missing,
Zhang et al. [19] focused on the continuous engagement in a study. Although this is a
slightly different concept, it still relates to missing data and coverage since engagement
is defined through non­missing data. Interestingly, the three papers reporting their ratio
of missing data reported quite different ratios. While Kiang et al. reported a missing
rate of 27% for location data [17], Beukenhorst et al. obtained a rate of 63% [18], and
Torous et al. a rate of 50.2% [20]. These different results underline the complexity of
understanding missing data, which is a consequence of several factors that are not easy
to control, such as study size, study protocol and the topic of the study. Another interesting
factor is the sociodemographic context. Kiang et al. [17] and Beukenhorst et al. [18] state
no significant differences in missing data for age, while Zhang et al. report significant
differences in retention rate, with older participants having the highest rate in both active
and passive data [19].
All presented papers agree on the importance of technical challenges, especially related
to the type of smartphones used. Kiang et al. reported lower amounts of missing data
on iOS devices [17], which was also reported by Torous et al. [20]. On the other hand,
Android devices performed much better in the study by Beukenhorst et al. [18]. Inter­
estingly, these differences also appear inside the same operating system, as Zhang et
al. reported higher retention rates for Motorola and Samsung devices compared to other
Android phones [19].
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
9
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Expectations
As mentioned in Section 1.2, in order to calculate coverage, one needs to define some
expectation for data, in order to then compare the actual results to it. In most papers
dealing with coverage or missing data, this is mostly done through the corresponding
study protocol, where the sampling rate of a sensor or the timing of requests to complete
active tasks define the expectation. For example, in the survey by Beukenhorst et al.,
location data was requested hourly from the participant’s phone, setting the expectation
to be 24 location measurements each day [18]. But, depending on the objective of the
study, researchers also move away from simply looking at the sampling rate and set the
expectation to a less granular view. For example, to study participant engagement and
retention rate, Zhang et al. determined a day to be engaged with passive data if there
was at least one data point of any type per day [19]. This is a very broad example of an
expectation, showing that it may not necessarily depend on how often data is collected.
Additionally, this is an expectation that aggregates multiple different data types into one
single expectation.
Great Expectations is a data quality platform that aims to make verifiability and clarity
easier. It is an open­source framework by Gong and Campbell [21], and their core fea­
ture consists of expectations, which they describe as unit­tests for data. Through expect­
ations, one can define assertions on how data should look or behave like. For example,
an expectation can assert that a certain column should not contain null values, or that
numerical values should fall within a specified range [21]. Most of their expectations con­
tain a domain, which they define as the subset of data that is being addressed, and an
approach on how the data is evaluated. There are four domains, targeting a batch of
data, a specific column, a pair of columns or multiple columns. Each of the latter three
domains can be applied to a particular batch of data, thus creating a structure. There are
two approaches, the first is based on aggregating the expectations, so a single value for
the entire batch of data, for example the mean of the data. The second approach consists
of evaluating each row independently, for example an expectation on how many rows are
not null [22].
Through their expectation system, Great Expectations can thus be useful for determining
missing values and low coverage. Setting up an expectation that, for example, counts
the number of rows in a given time frame and compares it to the expected number could
be used to calculate coverage. However, since Great Expectations focuses more on
the results of the validation rather than providing in­depth reporting on coverage, it lacks
support for detailed visualizations.
2.3
Data Imputation
As mentioned in Section 1.2, data imputation tries to deal with missing data by filling it
in, thus creating a complete data set. An interesting paper for data imputation by Barnett
and and Onnela [23] identified a large missing data problem in GPS data. It has been
proven to be useful for various health research issues, such as change of state for bipolar
patients, depressive symptom severity and dementia patients. However, Barnett and
Onnela state that many of these early studies provided wearable GPS devices or study­
provided smartphones, a key attribute distinguishing these studies from being scalable
and less intrusive to participants. When utilizing the built­in GPS capability of the parti­
cipant’s phones, a key issue arises: Battery consumption. GPS is the sensor with the
highest battery consumption, making too frequent usage of it impossible without drain­
ing the phone’s battery massively. Therefore, studies with GPS data are confronted with
10
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:17==
a large amount of missing data, as Barnett and Onnela suggest cycling between longer
off­periods and short on­periods for the sensor [23].
Therefore, they introduce a data imputation approach, that imputes data on an individual
level, only relying on data from the same individual it is imputing on. They compare this
to a simple imputing approach called linear interpolation (LI), which simply assumes a
constant travel speed of 1 m/s over the missing periods. Their approach consists of first
mapping GPS coordinates onto a 2D Euclidean plane to facilitate the computation of mo­
bility metrics. This is then converted into mobility traces, which is a sequence of flights
(linear movements) and pauses (stationary periods) together with their duration and dis­
placements. For missing data, they then impute the missing flight and pause events
through weighted resampling of observed events [23].
In order to evaluate their approach, they utilized the Geolife data set, which contains 855
outings from 182 individuals. They simulated missing data according to a 2 minute on­
cycle, and a 10 minute off­cycle. They then calculated mobility measures using different
variations of their approach, and compared it to linear interpolation by calculating the
relative error to the ground truth. They found linear interpolation to have a 10.85% average
error, while their approach resulted in an average error of 1.06%, thus proving the viability
of their approach [23].
Another approach to data imputation is the one mentioned in Section 1.2. Hsu et al. [12]
built a system that utilizes GPS, self­scale, daily mood, user emotion, sleep time, and
multimedia data to assess the severity of bipolar disorder in participants. For predicting
the severity scores, the study employs a regression­based model. Only the GPS data was
collected passively every minute, while the other data had to be filled out manually by the
user. Data was collected in cycles of ten weeks, and in order to prevent missing data from
affecting the model, they filtered every period of data collection based on the existence of
data, e.g. only accepting periods with at least 2000 GPS points collected. They filtered
for every data type, ending up only with periods that conformed to every expectation. This
resulted in 107 valid periods out of 1682 total periods for patients with bipolar disorder, a
coverage of 6.4%. The healthy controls ended with 79 out of 313 periods, a coverage of
25.2% [12]. This is in line with papers analyzed in Section 2.1, where missing data was
found to be linked to the severity of mental diseases.
Since the amount of valid data was considerably less than required to train their predic­
tion model, they decided to add data imputation. They chose the K­nearest neighbors
approach, combing it with a one­to­one correlation map of features. In order to impute
data with multiple missing feature types, they use an iterative approach. First, they impute
data with only one feature missing using the complete data. Then, they impute data with
two feature types missing using the new complete data. They iterate over the number of
missing features until all data is, at least theoretically, complete. However, they note that
with more iterations, the quality of imputed data may decrease [12].
In order to evaluate their imputation, they simulated missing data using complete data and
calculated the root mean square error between the imputed and real value. Their results
showed an average root mean square error of 17.5% for the group with bipolar disorder,
and 14.1% for the health control group. Both of these were lower than simply using the K­
nearest neighbor approach without the correlations. Additionally, they validated the error
based on how many feature types were missing. Here, it shows that with more missing
types, the error increases drastically. For one type, they observed 17.5% in the bipolar
disorder group, while for two types it increased to 27.8% and for three types to 33.7%.
This clearly shows that the imputation method struggled with more than two data types,
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
11
==PAGE:18==
and may therefore be unsuitable in those cases. Finally, they observed that using imputed
data reduced the error in their prediction model, adding imputed data for two missing types
resulted in the lowest errors for both the bipolar and health control groups [12].
However, data imputation may not always be the right choice. First, the computational
complexity of it must be assessed. Onnela describes a situation where data imputation
does not happen only after data collection, but in regular periods during it, for ongoing ana­
lysis. In his example of daily analysis, and therefore daily imputation, the computational
complexity accumulates as time goes on. He describes how on day 1, the imputation only
uses data from day 1, while for day 2, it requires data from day 1 and day 2. Therefore,
on day T, data from day 1 to day T has to be processed, resulting in a quadratic O(T 2)
complexity, for a normally linear algorithm [7].
Additionally, some papers report a reduction in accuracy through data imputation. Nick­
els et al. tested the feasibility of a fully remote study to collect measures on depression
severity. They utilized both active and passive data to build behavioral features. They
ended up with 1013 participant­weeks from 186 participants, where all of their 34 beha­
vioral features were present, from a total of 3779 participant weeks by 384 participants.
In order to impute the data, they used in­participant mean imputation, setting the missing
value of a feature for a week to the mean value of that feature from the participant’s other
weeks. This resulted in a data set of 2016 participant­weeks for 197 participants. How­
ever, models trained with this imputed data performed worse than models training without
imputed data, showing the complexity of imputing accurately [13].
The described research that data imputation is a valid approach for missing data, albeit
with some limitations. While it is possible to impute data and thus gain more complete
data, accuracy of the imputed data is not always high, leading to worse results. This is
also affected by the amount of data that needs to be imputed, when there is a large amount
of missing data this may become difficult. Therefore, it is important to take measures to
reduce missing data beforehand, by understanding the factors and problems around miss­
ing data, which was done in section 2.1, and then continuously monitoring and analyzing
coverage of data during collection, which the next section is focused on.
2.4
Coverage Analysis
In this section, tools and platforms that perform coverage analysis are investigated. In
Section 1.2, some tools were already mentioned, but will now be explored in more detail.
2.4.1
RAPIDS
RAPIDS was one of the examples mentioned in Section 1.2, and is an analysis pipeline
for data streams by Vega et al. [15]. It is open­source and extensible, and able to analyze
data from various data streams. Currently natively supported are mobile sensing streams
from the AWARE framework, as well as streams from Fitbit and Empatica devices. How­
ever, researchers can add their own new data streams to support various different formats
and applications [15]. A central functionality of RAPIDS is the ability to extract behavioral
features from the various sensors, such as using a phone’s GPS to calculate the time a
user spends at home [24].
Another important feature of RAPIDS is the visualizations of data quality and thus cov­
erage. For this, RAPIDS supports four different types of visualizations. The first type
consists of two histograms showing the number of time segment instances that had cer­
tain ratios of valid yielded minutes and hours. A valid yielded minute is defined as having
at least one row of data from any smartphone sensor, whereas a valid yielded hour is
12
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.2: Histogram of the data yielded minute ratio for a single participant during five
time segments (daily, morning, afternoon, evening, and night) by RAPIDS [16].
defined as containing at least M valid minutes. Since this data can be aggregated over all
participants, it can serve as an indication of smartphone coverage for the entire study. An
example for this can be seen in Figure 2.2, where a histogram showing the data yielded
minute ratio for a single participant during five time segments (daily, morning, afternoon,
evening, and night) is depicted [16].
The second type similarly uses the ratio of valid yielded minutes or hours, but displays
them in a heatmap per participant and per time segment, an example of this can be seen
in Figure 2.3. Since this visualization shows the coverage of multiple participants, it allows
for quick assessment of the overall study coverage. Additionally, by presenting coverage
per participant, it also allows to go more in­depth and examine single participants [16].
The third type of visualization uses heatmaps where rows represent time segment in­
stances, columns represent minutes since the start of a time segment instance, and cell
colors indicate the number of phone sensors that logged at least one row of data dur­
ing those 1­minute windows. A plot is generated for each participant and time segment,
providing an indication of whether time­based sensors adhered to their sensing schedule,
e.g. if location data was actually sent every two minutes. An example can be seen in
Figure 2.4, where it is drawn for phone sensors collected by a participant in daily time
segments from April 23rd to May 4th. From the example, one can see that most of the
time at least seven sensors sent data [16].
Finally, the fourth visualization breaks the information down into the specific sensors in
form of another heatmap. In this, each row represents a different sensor, while columns
again represent time instances. The values of the cells indicate the normalized row count
of each sensor in the given time instance, with grey representing missing data. An ex­
ample is shown in Figure 2.5, where it can be clearly seen that no activity recognition data
has been received the entire period. This heatmap is generated for every participant, thus
creating a very detailed view of each participant’s sensor coverage [16].
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
13
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.3: Heatmap of valid yielded minutes ratio for daily time segments per participant
by RAPIDS [16].
Figure 2.4: Heatmap of the recorded phone sensors per minute and per time segment of
a single participant by RAPIDS [16].
14
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.5: Heatmap of the sensor row count per time segment of a single participant by
RAPIDS [16].
2.4.2
LAMP Platform and Cortex
A platform conducting coverage analysis is the LAMP platform, as mentioned in Section
1.2. LAMP is specifically designed for patient generated health data, and is a custom­
izable clinical care management and neuropsychiatric research platform. It is able to
analyze mobile and wearable data, define activities for patients, offer visualizations and
analysis pipelines. The platform itself is available through any desktop web browser, while
the mindLAMP app allows for access through iOS and Android devices. LAMP includes
a data analysis companion named Cortex, which offers interactive visualizations and a
processing pipeline for secondary active and passive data features [25].
Cortex contains a number of different visualizations for data quality, both on a study and
participant level. In order to assess the coverage of an entire study, they present several
visualizations. For active data, they provide a graph on activity counts over the past week,
such as how often a survey was filled out, which can be seen in Figure 2.6. For passive
data, they offer two visualizations. First, a graph over the average screen time, steps,
and home time over the past week, which can be used to gauge the overall amount of
data collected [26]. The second visualization depicts coverage and is shown in Figure
2.7. Seen here is a visualization of screen, GPS, and accelerometer quality over the
past week, by calculating the percentage of hours with data per day for each data type
[26]. This coverage visualization was used in a study ran by Currey and Torous, which
aimed to explore engagement with mental health apps in college students, and to evaluate
the accuracy of predicting mental health changes. To do this, the college students had
to participate in different therapeutic modules each week, some of which were adapted
based on surveys in previous modules. In order to monitor the coverage of collected
data, the cortex coverage graph, seen in Figure 2.7, was then available to the study team
through slack notifications and the study portal [27].
On the participant level, there also exist several visualizations related to coverage. For
active data, there is a similar graph on activity counts as in Figure 2.6, but on an arbitrary
number of days, not only the past week. For passive data, they provide two different types
of graphs for a given sensor and a given time period. The first graph, seen in Figure 2.8,
depicts the amount of hourly data collected for a given sensor over an amount of given
days, and compares this to the target sample rate. The second graph, shown in Figure
2.9, shows the amount of data a given sensor collected for every hour for the number of
given days as a heatmap [28].
Through these visualizations, the LAMP platform thus allows for monitoring of a study’s
coverage, both on an overall study­level and a participant­level. Important here is that
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.6: Activity counts over the last week by LAMP Cortex [26].
Figure 2.7: A measure of screen, GPS, and accelerometer quality over the past week by
Currey and Torous [27] via the LAMP Cortex platform [26].
Figure 2.8: Scatter plot by LAMP Cortex showing the amount of GPS data collected on
an hourly level compared to the target sample rate [28].
16
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.9: Heatmap by LAMP Cortex showing the amount of GPS data collected per
hour per day [28].
these visualizations are easily integrated into the platform’s portal, and participant­level
visualizations can also be shown directly to participants. Through the example of Cur­
rey and Torous [27], it was shown how these visualizations can be utilized in a study to
effectively track participant’s coverage.
2.4.3
m­Path Sense
The platform m­Path sense combines experience sampling methodology, a standard for
data collection in participant’s everyday life, which is usually done through daily digital
surveys, with passive data collection through mobile sensing. For this, Niemeijer et al.
combined m­Path, a framework for experience sampling methodology, with CARP Mobile
Sensing (CAMS), a mobile sensing package developed by CACHET [29].
Figure 2.10: Screenshot of the coverage heatmap on the dashboard of m­Path sense,
depicting the ratio of actual versus expected measurements for each sensor [29].
In order to analyze data in studies run through their platform, they built a dashboard in R
using Shiny. Based on the sampling frequencies they specified in their protocol, ranging
from every five seconds to once per day, they then determine hourly expectations for their
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
17
==PAGE:24==
data. These expectations are then used to calculate the coverage for each data type,
which are displayed as heatmaps for each participant [29]. An example of this can be
seen in Figure 2.10.
2.4.4
Summary
In this section, three different approaches to coverage analysis were detailed. All ap­
proaches consisted of various visualizations, that either depicted the actual amount of
measurements on some time­scale, or the amount of measurements relative to some
expectation. These expectations were always formed on a time­scale, by expecting a
certain number of measurements within a certain time frame. However, they differed in
their granularity. Some visualizations simply expected a single data point in a time frame
across all sensors, such as the first two by RAPIDS [16], while some defined expecta­
tions for each sensor specifically, such as m­Path sense [29]. Additionally, the timeframe
of these expectations differed strongly, with RAPIDS analyzing data in minute intervals
[16], while other platforms, such as LAMP, analyzed data on an hourly basis [26].
2.5
CARP Core
The framework relies on the framework CARP Core, this section will first give a short
overview of the project and then explain the parts relevant to this thesis in more detail
[30].
CARP Core was created through a collaboration of iMotions1 and CACHET. It is a soft­
ware framework which aims to help developers implement research platforms which use
distributed data collection. This type of collection involves the data from various differ­
ent devices at various different locations. CARP Core thus provides modules to support
the definition, deployment, and monitoring of research studies, as well as the aforemen­
tioned data collection. Through its domain­driven design and independence of specific
infrastructure concerns, it defines an open standard for distributed data collection in Kot­
lin, Java and Javascript [30].
It contains two core features to differ itself from similar projects. The first is modularity,
meaning that any implementation using the framework can choose which of the subsys­
tems to utilize and how to deploy them without needing to implement the entire framework.
Another important feature is extensibility, which allows for study­specific requirements to
be fulfilled. This can be done by extending the domain objects in the protocols subsystem
to create a custom study logic [30].
The architecture of CARP Core can be seen in Figure 2.11. It consists of 7 different sub­
systems that interact with each other. Of these, the relevant subsystems for this frame­
work are Data, Protocols and Deployments, each of which will be explained in the following
subsections:
2.5.1
Data
Data contains all pseudonymized data in form of data streams. The class diagram for this
is shown in Figure 2.12. As can be seen, a Measurement contains Data measured at a
specific instance of time, with the corresponding DataType. Multiple measurements of the
same DataType can then be aggregated as DataStreamPoints into a data stream, which is
identified by a DataStreamId. Subsequent DataStreamPoints can then be combined into
a DataStreamSequence, which is still tied to the same DataStreamId. Finally, in order
1https://imotions.com/
18
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.11: Architecture of CARP Core by Jeuris and Bardram [30].
to aggregate one or multiple DataStreamSequences of one or multiple data stream, they
can be aggregated into a DataStreamBatch [30].
The data model is especially relevant for this thesis since it deals with the formatting of
data and how data can be obtained. For this, the most important class is Measurement,
since it contains the actual data at a specific point in time. Furthermore, DataStreamId is
similarly important, since it uniquely identifies the data stream which is needed to access
the Measurement, and ties the data to the actual deployment of a study, and thus the
participant(s).
2.5.2
Protocols
Another relevant subsystem is Protocols, which deals with study protocols. These pro­
tocols define how a study should be run, by determining what data should be collected
when and from where. A diagram of the domain model of a study protocol is shown in
Figure 2.13. A central component in this is the DeviceConfiguration, which describes any
electronic device that can collect data. A special case of this is the primary device, defined
by the PrimaryDeviceConfiguration, which is a device that aggregates and synchronizes
data from connected devices (and itself) [30]. Another central component is the TaskCon­
trol, which denotes a task that is sent to a specific device using a TriggerConfiguration,
which starts or stops the task based on a condition. The task itself is given by a TaskCon­
figuration, which contains the list of Measures that need to be collected, containing both
active and passive data. Similar to the Data domain model, each of the measures has
a DataType that uniquely identifies it. Finally, possible sampling configurations for each
DataType are defined in a DataTypeSamplingScheme, with a specific SamplingConfigur­
ation being set for a device [30].
2.5.3
Deployments
This subsystem takes the definition of the study, the study protocol, and translates it into
runtime configuration to be run on actual devices, thus deploying the study. In order to
achieve this, there needs to be an invitation process of participants, registration of devices
and collection of consent to process the data [30].
An important note here is that a deployment is defined as a single instantiation of the
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.12: Class diagram of the data model for the data subcomponent by Jeuris and
Bardram [30].
Figure 2.13: Protocols domain model by Jeuris and Bardram [30].
20
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:27==
study protocol, which corresponds to a set of devices collecting data. Since those devices
though may be from different participants, a deployment is not necessarily tied to a single
participant, but rather a participant group. In the simplest case, there is a single device
from a single participant, meaning that each deployment corresponds to a single parti­
cipant. In this case, the participant group size is one. In more complex cases though, a
study may be run on an entire household, e.g. collecting data from the father’s, mother’s
and child’s smartphones. Therefore, a single deployment of this study protocol would
have multiple participants with multiple devices, creating a participant group of three par­
ticipants and three devices [30].
Thus, when analyzing data, it is important to keep in mind that a deployment of a protocol
does not translate to a single participant but to a participant group, which may contain
multiple participants. This also allows one to see different possible aggregation levels for
coverage analysis, since there is a clear structure of data streams, devices, participant
groups and studies.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
21
==PAGE:28==
22
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:29==
3
Analysis of Problem Domain
In this chapter, the problem domain is thoroughly analysed. Based on interviews with
researchers, notes of which can be found in Appendix A, three concrete use cases for
the framework are first described. Afterwards, the definition of coverage is given, which
is based on a small literature review, and the previously mentioned use cases. Finally,
according to the previous analysis and definition, requirements for the framework are
denoted.
3.1
Use Cases
As part of analyzing the context of the project, several interviews with researchers involved
with CARP were undertaken. As a result of that, three possible use cases were identified,
that are explained in more details here.
3.1.1
CAMS: Mobile Sensing Validation
CARP Mobile Sensing (CAMS) is a Flutter­based mobile sensing platform that is de­
veloped as part of CARP. Through its implementation in Flutter, it is available on both
Android and iOS phones and supports a wide range of data types. An important technical
parameter for evaluating CAMS is its sampling coverage, to what amount data is actually
collected compared to its expectation [31]. For this, regular testing has been conducted
at CACHET, where a sample study using CAMS was ran to calculate the coverage of a
defined list of data types. For each data type, an hourly expectation was defined. Finally,
a visualization was created to obtain an overview of the sampling coverages for each data
type over time. Currently this process is done using python scripts, which are however
quite limited in functionality and are not fully user­friendly. Therefore, a use case for this
framework is to be utilized in the validation of the CAMS sampling coverage, in order to
make the process easier and more standardized.
3.1.2
CATCH: Different granularity for different data
The Cardio­relay Model for Cross­sectoral Ambulatory Treatment of Congestive Heart
Disease based on Personal Health Technology (CATCH) project aims to establish clin­
ical evidence and commercial viability for a cross­sectoral ambulatory treatment using
personal health technology, with a particular emphasis on heart failure [32]. The project
aims to create a model for treating heart failure linked to atrial fibrillation, develop new
technology for health data collection and analysis, explore early detection markers, and
run a clinical trial to test the treatment’s effectiveness [32]. Through an interview with a
researcher involved in CATCH, the varying importance of different data was pointed out.
In this project, the Electrocardiogram (ECG) data is central to the success of the study,
since the focus is on heart failure. Additionally, other data such as activity and lifestyle
data is collected. Even though this is important information, it is not quite as critical as the
ECG data. Therefore, the use case for this project is to be able to monitor the coverage
of the entire study, but with different levels of granularity for different data types, reflecting
the importance of each data type,
3.1.3
DiaFocus: Coverage analysis for consultations
DiaFocus is a mobile sensing application designed for the long­term ambulatory manage­
ment of Type 2 diabetes. For this, physiological, behavioral, and contextual data was
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
23
==PAGE:30==
collected from mobile and wearable sensing. The collected data was then used to im­
prove the communication between patient and clinician during their meetings. In order to
facilitate this, clinicians were able to generate a report, that contained a full summary of
the data collected since the last report [33].
The feasibility of the system was tested in a six week study with 12 participants. During
five months, more than 2600 data points were collected, including both passive data, such
as step count, and active data, such as surveys. In the study, coverage was calculated
based on the step count, which was collected daily. A high spread could be observed, with
an average coverage of 55%, and a standard deviation of 32% [33]. During interviews with
researchers connected to DiaFocus, a use case for this project was identified. Since some
participants had a very low coverage, the clinician needs to be able to quickly gauge the
coverage of a participant, since it puts the collected results in context. Therefore, having
a simple coverage overview as part of the generated report would be valuable, since it
allows the clinician to discuss the coverage with the patient. Additionally, the combination
of active and passive data in the same study is an important factor for this use case.
Especially in active data such as a survey, it is important that the existence of a filled out
survey does not necessarily mean that the answers are valid. Therefore, it is also an
important factor for DiaFocus to consider validity of data points.
3.2
Definition of Coverage
In this section, the concept of coverage in the context of this thesis will be clearly defined.
In order to arrive to a definition, various definitions of coverage will be analyzed in existing
literature, before a definition based on the use cases and the analysis is given.
3.2.1
Definitions in Literature
Large parts of the current literature in digital phenotyping do not use the term coverage
specifically, instead using the term missing data, such as Kiang et al. [17] and Beuk­
enhorst et al. [18]. Some literature does however define coverage, and four of these
definitions are given and analyzed in the following paragraphs. To provide an easy over­
view, Table 3.1 contains a summary of the definitions and their limits.
Study
Definition
of
Cover­
age
Time Scale
Limitations
Currey and Tor­
ous (2023) [8]
Percentage of expected
data collected
Overall
percent­
age of expected
data
Does not handle invalid
data
Torous
et
al.
(2018) [20]
Proportion of estimated
pings to expected pings
Daily
estimated
pings
Study­specific,
does
not handle invalid data,
based on sampling rate
Bardram
et
al.
(2023) [33]
Ratio of days with col­
lected
step
count
to
total study days
Overall study dur­
ation
Does not account for
other data types, only
daily
coverahe,
no
validity considered
Niejmeier
et
al.
(2023) [29]
Ratio of actual meas­
urements to expected
measurements,
calcu­
lated hourly
Hourly
Emphasizes
relative
expectations, but may
not
capture
complete
data dynamics
Table 3.1: Summary of Coverage Definitions in Literature
24
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:31==
Increasing the value of digital phenotyping through reducing missingness
This paper by Currey and Torous [8], which was already mentioned in Section 1.2, ana­
lyzes multiple studies conducted between 2019 and 2022, with a combined participant
count of 1178, to analyze the impact of various features on the coverage of data. These
features include the sampling frequency, active engagement with the application, phone
type, gender and study protocol. In order to achieve this, they create a simple definition of
data coverage for passive data. In this case, coverage is simply the per cent of expected
data that was collected [8].
This definition has several benefits. It is a very simple definition and makes it obvious
how coverage is finally calculated. However, they hide the complexity of the definition
behind the term ”expected data”. While they mention that this could be based on the
maximum sampling rate of a sensor, they also note that this does not necessarily have to
be the case. For GPS data, they found that accurate data was only collected every 10min
instead of the maximum sampling rate of once per second, leading them to choose this
as the expectation [8]. Thus, this definition also fulfills the granularity that was discussed
in the CATCH use case in Subsection 3.1.2. However, no mention of the validity of data
is found in this definition, making it only partly suitable for this project.
Clinical relevance of digital phenotyping data quality
Torous et al. clearly state their definition of coverage in their paper, an overview of which
was given in Subsection 2.1.4. In their study, the data consisted of both passive data,
such as GPS and accelerometer, and active data, such as surveys on mental health.
Interestingly, they utilized an on­off scheduling for the GPS and accelerometer data in
order to save battery. Accelerometer data was gathered with a sampling rate of 10 Hz
for 60s, after which there was a period of 60s of non­collection. GPS followed the same
cycles, but with a sampling rate of 1 Hz. In order to calculate coverage, they then refer to
the periods of data collection as bursts, while a single measurement is denoted as a ping
[20].
They define the coverage of a day i based on the proportion of estimated pings compared
to the number of expected pings. In order to estimate the pings, they estimate the number
of bursts ˆbi and the pings in each burst ˆ
pij. They do this by defining a threshold, if two
pings are further apart than the threshold, they belong to different bursts. After estimating
the bursts and the number of pings inside them, the number of pings of each burst are
added up to calculate the estimated number of daily pings: ˆpi = ∑ˆbi
j=1 ˆ
pij. This is then
divided by the number of expected daily pings pi, to estimate the daily coverage, ˆCi = ˆpi
pi
[20].
This definition of coverage is again based on comparing to an expectation, however in this
case it is about comparing pings. However, the concrete definition is specific to the context
of the study, with cycles of collection and non­collection. Additionally, this definition does
not leave a lot of room for customisability. The expectation of the data is based on the
sampling rate, thus not allowing less granular expectations, and the coverage period is
determined to be daily. Finally, validity is once again not part of the definition, making this
definition unsuitable for this project.
DiaFocus
As mentioned in Subsection 3.1.3, DiaFocus determined the coverage of their passive
data using the daily collected step count, dividing the number of days with a collected step
count by the entire length of the study [33]. While this is a very simple way to indicate
the passive coverage of the entire study, it only serves an indication for the coverage of
other data types, both passive and active, not allowing any more detailed observations to
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
25
==PAGE:32==
be made. Additionally, it does not allow for customisation of which data is expected how
often, and does not consider validity of data, because of which it cannot be considered
as a definition for this project.
m­Path Sense
As mentioned in Section 2.4.3, Niejmeier et al. calculate and display coverage for their
studies in a dashboard, an example can be seen in Figure 2.10. Similarly to Currey and
Torous, they define coverage as the ratio of actual measurements collected versus the
number of expected measurements. They chose to look at coverage hourly, therefore
definining expectations for each data type, where they determine the number of expected
observations in a given hour. This is then used to calculate a coverage value hourly. They
especially note that observing only the total numbers of measurements in a given hour
does not reliably indicate coverage, pointing out the importance of it being relative to the
expectation [29]. This definition is very similar to the definition by Currey and Torous,
however it defines the expectation for data more clearly as hourly. While this is fine for
most passive data, especially for active data this may become problematic. A survey for
example will not be filled out hourly, thus making this too restrictive. Additionally, validity
of data is not considered. While this definition is also not quite suitable, it reinforces the
idea of having a flexible expectation as the basis of a coverage definition.
3.2.2
Definition
In the current state of literature, coverage can be seen as a simple measure ­ collected
data divided by expected data. There are some differences on whether this coverage is
calculated on all measures or just a single representative one, but overall it is on a similar
state. However, this simple definition does not satisfy the requirements set for this project,
mainly in terms of customisability. Therefore, this project introduces its own definition of
coverage, which is based on existing literature, but expands on it by allowing for a more
customisable and open coverage analysis, as determined by the requirements.
In order to define coverage in the context of this thesis, the foundational concept needed
for it is first defined, the expectation.
Definition 3.2.1 Expectation is defined as a certain number of valid measurements for
a defined data type, that should be provided within a certain time frame.
From this definition, an expectation is thus defined by four key parameters:
1. Number of measurements: How many measurements do we expect?
2. Validity of a measurement: When do we accept a measurement as valid?
3. Data type: For which data type is the expectation defined?
4. Time frame: In what time frame do we expect the measurements to be collected?
Following this definition of expectation, we can then define coverage:
Definition 3.2.2 Coverage is defined as the proportion of instances where a predefined
expectation for a data type is fulfilled or exceeded, within a given time frame.
From this definition, coverage for a data type is thus defined through two parameters:
1. Expectation for the data type: The previously defined expectation for the specific
data type.
2. Time frame: The time frame for which coverage is calculated, which is separate
from the time frame of the expectation.
26
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:33==
This definition builds on the discussed literature by defining coverage as a proportion of
what is expected versus what was collected, but gives a clear and flexible definition of
coverage, which fulfills the needs determined in the use cases.
3.2.3
Example
As an example on how coverage is actually calculated, consider this case: A simple study
is defined, which aims to collect one step count every 30 minutes, defining the sampling
rate. A step count is only accepted if it fulfills this: 0 ≤step count ≤100, 000. Based on
this information, we can then create a simple Expectation:
1. Number of measurements: One measurement is expected.
2. Validity of measurement: Only step counts inbetween 0 and 100,000 are valid.
3. Data type: We define this expectation for step count.
4. Time frame: We expect the above number of measurements every 30 minutes.
Once we have defined an expectation, we can then focus on the coverage. For this,
we need to define the time frame for the coverage. In this case, we could be interested
in the coverage of an entire day. Thus, we have an expectation to fulfill for every 30
minutes of the day, resulting in 48 expectations. Based on this, we can then calculate
the coverage. If every expectation is fulfilled, so there is at least one measurement every
30 minutes, we have a coverage of 48/48 = 100%. If there is a duration of 3h where no
step data was collected, and thus six unfulfilled expectations, this will result in a coverage
of 42/48 = 87.5%. However, the definition of expectation also allows one to choose a
granularity lower than the sampling rate of the sensor. In our example, it could be okay
for the study to obtain one measurement ever four hours. Applying this to the example
with missing data, all six expectations would then be fulfilled, leading to a coverage of
6/6 = 100%.
In conclusion, this definition of coverage fulfills multiple important requirements that were
discovered through interviews and literature. First, it supports varying levels of detail by
time­boxing expectations and coverage. Second, it accounts for data quality, recognizing
data as missing if collected but invalid. By requiring valid data points, this crucial distinc­
tion is addressed. Lastly, it offers customization, allowing users to define what constitutes
valid data, set timeframes for expectations, and determine the periods for coverage cal­
culation. An important factor that has not been discussed is who coverage is calculated
for, since coverage can be calculated for one or multiple participants. However, the cov­
erage of multiple participants is defined through some aggregation of the coverage of
each single participant, thus simply introducing an additional step, but not changing the
definition of coverage itself.
3.3
Requirements
Through the aforementioned use cases, further interviews with researchers and research
into relevant literature, the following requirements for the framework were compiled:
3.3.1
Functional requirements
The functional requirements can be seen in Table 3.2.
3.3.2
Non­functional requirements
The non­functional requirements are described in Table 3.3.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
27
==PAGE:34==
Name
Description
Characteristics
Creation of Expectations
The framework must allow for specific, re­
usable expectations to be created based
on the provided definition.
• The exact number of measurements expected.
• The specific time period within which these measure­
ments are expected.
• When to consider a measurement point to be valid.
• The specific CARP Core DataType for which the ex­
pectation is for.
Support for Arbitrary Data Stores
The framework must be able to integrate
any CARP Core­compliant data store.
• Provide a concrete specification on what functionality
a data store should offer.
• Include a data store that reads data from a CAMS­
generated SQLite database file to demonstrate this
capability.
Support for Arbitrary Export Targets
The framework must support exporting
coverage results to various targets that
can be defined by developers.
• Provide a concrete specification on what an export tar­
get should look like.
• Provide an example of an export target that outputs
coverage values into a CSV file to demonstrate this
capability.
Coverage Analysis
The framework must calculate coverage
based on a given expectation.
• Allow specification of a time period for the coverage
calculation.
• Request the needed data from a data store.
• Compute coverage according to the project’s defini­
tion.
Creation of Aggregations
The framework must support the calcula­
tion of coverage for various aggregations.
• Multiple Deployments: Ability to aggregate coverage
across multiple study deployments.
• Multiple Expectations: Ability to aggregate coverage
across different expectations.
Table 3.2: Functional Requirements.
28
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:35==
Name
Description
Flexibility
The framework must be able to handle different types of data, sensors,
and studies included in the CARP Core domain model.
Extensibility
The framework must be able to be extended with additional data stores,
export targets, and expectations.
Table 3.3: Non­functional Requirements.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
29
==PAGE:36==
30
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:37==
4
Design
This chapter gives an overview of the overall architecture and design of the framework.
4.1
Onion Architecture
In this section, the chosen architecture for the application, Onion Architecture, is explained
in more detail. This architecture was chosen due to its benefits, which are explained in
Subsection 4.1.2.
4.1.1
Overview
The Onion Architecture is a layered architecture that supports separation of concerns. As
can be seen in Figure 4.1, the domain layer is at the core of the Onion Architecture, while
the application layer surrounds it and provides abstractions from the details of the do­
main. Finally, the infrastructure layer deals with infrastructual concerns and the technical
capabilities of the application [34].
A key concept of the Onion Architecture that Millett and Tune identify is the inversion of
dependencies [34]. This is reflected through all dependencies only facing inwards, never
outwards. This means that the domain layer does not depend on any implementational
details, but rather focuses solely on the domain model and logic. Additionally, the ap­
plication layer is not concerned with technical details and infrastructural problems such
as what type of database is being used, but depends solely on the domain model. Us­
ing interfaces, use cases such as saving the state of domain objects can be achieved
without coupling it to technical details, through the application service defining interfaces
that the infrastructure layer needs to implement. Thus, the domain and application layers
are completely independent of any technical details [34].
The domain layer then simply contains the domain model, which according to Millett and
Tune ”represents a conceptual abstract view of the problem domain created to fulfill the
needs of the business use cases” [34, p. 107]. Since it is a conceptual model that should
not concern itself with any technical details, it sits inside the domain layer at the core of
the application, without any dependencies [34].
The application layer on the other hand deals with the behavior and use cases of the
application. It contains application services that operate on a higher level of abstraction
than domain objects, abstracting away from their logic. In order to fulfill the use cases, it
requires dependencies on external layers, such as a database implementation. Through
the aforementioned dependency inversion, this is solved by the application layer providing
interfaces that the infrastructure layer needs to implement, allowing the application layer
to not be coupled to any technologies. Another key task of the application layer is the
notification of significant events. Again, this is achieved by the application layer providing
interfaces that are implemented in the infrastructure layer. Through these key attributes
of the application service, it defines the contract for the application while being untouched
by any technical details [34].
The final layer is the infrastructural layer. This layer is responsible for the technical cap­
abilities of the system, such as persistence, communication with external endpoints, and
more. It does not contain any additional domain logic but simply implements the inter­
faces given to it by the inner layers and thus provides the technical details behind the
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.1: Visualization of a layered Onion Architecture by Millett and Tune [34, p. 106]
.
application. Since the inner layers do not depend on the infrastructural layer, it can be
switched out for different implementations without affecting the core business logic [34].
4.1.2
Benefits
For this framework, the Onion Architecture brings multiple benefits. Through the clear
separation into three layers, the framework obtains a simple structure, that enables de­
velopers to easily enfore seperation of concerns. Additionally, by isolating the domain
layer, the core logic of the system can be more easily tested without worrying about tech­
nical details. Furthermore, separating the domain logic from any technical details makes
the domain model of the framework much clearer and obvious, leading to improved usabil­
ity. Extensibility is also achieved, through the technological independence of the two inner
layers and the implementation of interfaces which can be easily switched and replaced.
In addition to these benefits, CARP Core utilizes the Onion Architecture due to the same
reason. Since this framework depends on CARP Core, it is beneficial to have a common
architecture, making the two frameworks more aligned.
4.1.3
Integration
An overview of the applied Onion Architecture in the project can be seen in Figure 4.2.
As it is an Onion Architecture, it consists of the three layers, domain, application and
infrastructure. These layers are explained in more detail in the following sections. As
they adhere to dependency inversion, the domain layer does not have any outwards de­
pendencies, but simply models the domain model. The application layer only depends
on the domain layer and deals with the domain objects. An important factor here is the
EventBus, which allows the application layer to communicate with components in the in­
frastructure layer. As mentioned before, the application layer provides the interface for
this, but the infrastructure layer both implements the interface and consumes the imple­
32
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.2: Component diagram of the Onion Architecture applied to the system.
mentation. This solution was chosen so the infrastructure layer can relay events to the
application layer, e.g. a coverage analysis should be started. More importantly. the ap­
plication layer can also notify the infrastructure layer of the system status without having
any outward dependencies, e.g. a coverage analysis finished successfully. Finally, the
infrastructure layer provides the technical implementations needed for the system to work,
such as where the data comes from and what needs to be calculated.
4.2
Domain Layer
As mentioned before, the domain layer describes the core entities, relationships and be­
havior of the application. A domain diagram can be seen in Figure 4.3. At the center of
the application is the Expectation, in line with the definition of coverage in Section 3.2.
In this model, an Expectation contains the method calculateCoverage, which calculates
the coverage for this expectation for a given time frame, deployments, and a DataStore
to obtain data from. Since there are two cases of expectations, DataTypeExpectation,
which represents the definition of expectation in Section 3.2, and AggregateExpectation,
which represents the aggregation of multiple expectations, a shared base class Expecta­
tion was chosen. This was done in order to implement the composite pattern, which allows
individual objects and compositions to be treated uniformly, creating tree­like hierarchies
[35].
DataTypeExpectation represents an expectation for a single, specific data type and is
based on the Expectation. It contains the method isValid, which returns whether given
measurements are valid for the expectation or not, thus modeling the validity requirement.
Furthermore, it contains the number of data points for the expectation, as well as the
DataType and device name for which this expectation is created for. Finally, it contains
the duration of the expectation, as discussed in Section 3.2.
AggregateExpectation on the other hand models the coverage for multiple expectations
by aggregating them, implementing the Expectation type as well. It contains multiple ex­
pectations that it aggregates into one. Since these are Expectations, they can be both
a DataTypeExpectation, but also an AggregateExpectation, thus implementing the afore­
mentioned composite pattern. However, the leafs of this tree­like structure must always
be DataTypeExpectations.
In order to encapsulate the aggregation logic further, creating a more flexible component,
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.3: The domain model of the system, encompassing the model of expectation for
coverage.
34
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:41==
the strategy pattern is applied. The strategy pattern aims to encapsulate an algorithm,
so that new implementations of it can be easily integrated [35]. The strategy pattern was
implemented as AggregateExpectationStrategy, which encapsulates how the Aggregate­
Expectation aggregates its sub­Expectations. Two strategies could, for example, be ag­
gregating over Expectations or over deployments. To further encapsulate the calculation,
the strategy pattern is also implemented as CoverageAggregator, which contains the logic
used by the AggregateExpectationStrategy when aggregating multiple coverage values
into one, such as simply returning the average.
An important class in this model is the Coverage, which is the result of the definition in Sec­
tion 3.2. In order to provide as much information as possible, it was decided to model Cov­
erage to contain the expectation­based coverage, the absolute coverage, which simply
compares the number of expected data points to actual data points, and additionally the
time frame of the calculated coverage. In order to add additional metadata such as the
deployments and a description, Coverage is wrapped by CoverageWithMetadata. In or­
der to contain full provenance of a Coverage that is the result of aggregation, Coverage­
WithMetadata contains the sub­CoverageWithMetadata objects that were aggregated to
arrive to the value, in combination with a description and the deployments for which the
coverage was calculated for.
Another important class is the DataStore. As mentioned before, it represents the source
of data that is to be analyzed. For example, this could be a database or an API such
as CARP Web Services (CAWS) that is CARP Core compliant. In order to obtain the
data, a method obtainData is needed, which obtains data for a specific time frame and
DataStreamId, thus containing the DataType and deployment.
Since the class DataStore represents the source of the data, there also needs to be a
target to which we can export the results of the analysis to. This is modeled using the
ExportTarget. This class can represent any type of target, ranging from a simple CSV
file to a database or a messaging queue. It provides the method exportCoverage, which
is called whenever coverage data has been calculated and is passed one or multiple
CoverageWithMetadata objects and the CoverageAnalysis for full access to the metadata.
Finally, there is the CoverageAnalysis class, which ties all other classes together. It rep­
resents a concrete analysis which is executed, containing one or multiple Expectations
for which coverage is calculated, a DataStore from which the needed data is collected
and an ExportTarget to which the results need to be published to. Additionally, it contains
a start and end time for the analysis, as well as the duration between the executions of
the analysis. Furthermore, it also contains the deployments for which the analysis is done
for.
Aside from the classes necessary for the domain model, the domain layer also contains
the CoverageAnalysisRepository, defining how CoverageAnalysis objects are stored and
handled through the methods add, delete, and getBy.
4.3
Application Layer
As described in Subsection 4.1.1, the application layer defines the behavior of the system
and the communication within it. An overview of the important classes in the application
layer can be seen in Figure 4.4. In order to define the behavior of the system and to handle
the domain objects, the application layer defines the key interface CoverageAnalysisSer­
vice. This defines all the needed methods to interact with the system for an external layer
by handling CoverageAnalysis objects. For this, one can register new CoverageAna­
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.4: Class diagram showing the structure of the application layer.
36
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:43==
lysis instances, as well as start and stop existing CoverageAnalysis instances saved in
the CoverageAnalysisRepository based on their IDs. Additionally, all currently running
analysis can be stopped. Finally, a DefaultCoverageAnalysisService is included, which
implements the interface and provides a standard implementation.
Another central component is the event­based communication. In order for the infrastruc­
ture layer to communicate asynchronously with the application layer, and the applica­
tion layer vice versa without depending on the infrastructure layer, the application layer
defines the EventBus interface. This defines two methods that allow for subscribing to
certain event types, and the publishing of events. As part of this definition, the application
layer also defines an interface for events, on which the specific events are based. All
events possess an ID that is the same in related events, to allow for correlation of events.
Through this system, an event­based communication system was built, where compon­
ents of the application layer and infrastructure layer can publish and subscribe to events.
These events then get picked up by the CoverageAnalysisService to be handled.
Currently, there are nine events defined:
• CoverageAnalysisCompletedEvent: Fired whenever a CoverageAnalysis has suc­
cessfully completed.
• CoverageAnalysisRequestedEvent: Fired whenever a new CoverageAnalysis is
to be started, which is contained inside of the event. It can then be picked up by the
CoverageAnalysisService to register and start the analysis.
• CoverageAnalysisStartedEvent: Fired whenever a CoverageAnalysis has been
successfully started.
• CoverageCalculatedEvent: Fired whenever a CoverageAnalysis successfully cal­
culates a coverage.
• CoverageAnalysisRejectedEvent: Fired whenever a CoverageAnalysis could not
be registered successfully.
• CoverageAnalysisStopRequestedEvent: Fired whenever a running CoverageAna­
lysis is to be stopped.
• CoverageAnalysisStopCompletedEvent: Fired whenever a running CoverageAna­
lysis was successfully stopped.
• CoverageAnalysisStopFailedEvent: Fired whenever a CoverageAnalysis could
not be stopped
• CoverageCalculationFailedEvent: Fired whenever a calculation of coverage was
not successful.
4.4
Infrastructure Layer
In this section, important components and design choices for the infrastructure layer are
explained.
The infrastructure layer contains the specific implementation of interfaces defined in the
domain and application layer. This includes the following:
• DataStores: Concrete implementations of the DataStore interface defined in the
domain layer are found in the infrastructure layer.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
37
==PAGE:44==
• ExportTargets: Similarly, different implementations of the ExportTarget interface
can be found here.
• Expectations: Different classes implementing or extending the Expectation class,
or one of its derivatives AggregateExpectation and DataTypeExpectation, are defined
in the infrastructure layer.
• CoverageAggregators: Different strategies to aggregate Coverage are implemen­
ted in the infrastructure layer.
• AggregateExpectationStrategies: Different strategies to aggregate an Aggreg­
ateExpectation are implemented in the infrastructure layer. Two important strategies
identified are aggregation over deployments, DeploymentAggregateExpectationStrategy,
and aggregation over expectations, ExpectationAggregateExpectationStrategy
• EventBus: The infrastructure layer also contains implementations for the EventBus,
which are then used in the CoverageAnalysisService.
• CoverageAnalysisRepository: Finally, it contains implementations for the Cover­
ageAnalysisRepository.
As mentioned in the list, the infrastructure layer implements the various Expectations for
the system. An important aspect of expectations is the AggregateExpectation, which can
be used to aggregate multiple expectations into a single one using a AggregateExpect­
ationStrategy. As mentioned in Section 4.2, aggregation can happen in two ways: The
first is aggregation across deployments, meaning that the same Expectation is calculated
for multiple different deployments, the results of which are then aggregated. The other
way is aggregation across Expectations, meaning that, for the same deployment, mul­
tiple different expectations are calculated, the results of which are then aggregated. The
two strategies are denotes as DeploymentAggregateExpectationStrategy and Expecta­
tionAggregateExpectationStrategy
In addition to this, a data hierarchy was identified in CARP Core in Subsection 2.5.3, the
corresponding design diagram can be seen in Figure 4.5. For visibility, the interfaces that
the classes implement were left out. On the base level, a single data stream can be iden­
tified, consisting of one or multiple measurements for the same deployment for the same
DataType, represented by a DataTypeExpectation. However, each data stream is also
assigned to a device, from which the data is collected. Therefore, multiple data streams
of the same device can be aggregated together, which is modeled as a DeviceAggreg­
ation, which aggregates multiple DataTypeExpectations. Next is another aggregation of
data streams, however this time to a participant group. Therefore, all data streams of
all devices belonging to a protocol are aggregated together, representing the study pro­
tocol for a single participant group. This is designed as a ParticipantGroupAggregation,
once again aggregating multiple different DataTypeExpectations. Finally, if we look at the
ParticipantGroupAggregation and aggregate it over all of the different deployments of it,
we arrive to the coverage of an entire study ­ all expectations aggregated together over
all deployments. This is represented through the StudyExpectation, which aggregates a
single ParticipantGroupExpectation over all deployments.
4.5
Component Interactions
In this section, the interactions between key components are explained, in order to obtain
a better view of how they work together. In Figure 4.6, a sequence diagram is shown,
which shows a specific case of a coverage analysis. Other more complex cases are not
38
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.5: Aggregation structure for different levels of analysis and their strategies.
shown, as it would lead to an increasingly complex diagram. Therefore, the interactions
are explained based on the simplest case: Coverage is calculated for a single DataType­
Expectation using the DefaultCoverageAnalysisService.
First, the user requesting the analysis must publish a CoverageAnalysisRequestedEvent
containg the CoverageAnalysis to the EventBus. The EventBus then notifies the Default­
CoverageAnalysisService by calling its handleCoverageAnalysisRequested function, passing
the event along. The service then first communicates to the CoverageAnalysisRepos­
itory to store the new CoverageAnalysis, after which it starts the calculation process.
Based on the start and end time of the analysis, as well as the duration inbetween cal­
culations, the service calls the calculateCoverage method of the CoverageAnalysis for
every determined calculation period. The CoverageAnalysis then calls the DataTypeEx­
pectation’s calculateCoverage method, which handles the actual calculation. For this,
the DataTypeExpectation first obtains the necessary measurements from the DataStore,
after which it calculates the Coverages based on that. If no exception is thrown to the
CoverageAnalysisService after requesting the calculation, a CoverageCalculatedEvent
is sent to the EventBus, which notifies the subscribers to it. This is repeated for all calcu­
lation periods. When the end of the analysis duration has been reached, a CoverageAna­
lysisCompletedEvent is published, notifying the subscribers of the completion, and thus
finishing this analysis.
However, there are of course more complex cases. In case an AggregateExpectation is
calculated instead of a DataTypeExpectation, the calculateCoverage method of Aggreg­
ateExpectation will call each of its sub­expectation’s methods, and aggregate the results.
Additionally, error events are not considered in this diagram for simplicity. In case an
e.g. calculation goes wrong, the corresponding CoverageCalculationFailedEvent is sent,
notifying the consumer.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.6: Sequence diagram showcasing the interactions between key classes for the base case, consisting of a DataTypeExpectation being
calculated using the DefaultCoverageAnalysisService.
40
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:47==
5
Implementation
In this section, the implementation of the framework, based on the defined designed, is
explained. Similar to Chapter 4, an overview will be first given, before each layer of the
onion architecture is described in detail. However, not every single class will be described
in detail, only key implementation choices will be highlighted.
5.1
Overview
In this section, general implementation choices such as the programming language are
described.
5.1.1
Kotlin
It was chosen to implement the framework using Kotlin, a JVM­based statically­typed
language, which is similar to Java but aims to improve on it. Developed by Jetbrains and
supported by Google for Android development, the focus on the language is on enabling
more concise code. Additionally, Kotlin has more safety features, such as support for
nun­nullable types. However, it maintains interoperability with Java, allowing any Java
library to be used in Kotlin [36]. This makes it a great choice for a framework that aims
to be easily extendable, as it can be used with any Java library and is compatible with
Java code. Additionally, Kotlin is used in CARP Core [30]. Since this is an important
dependency for this framework, compatibility with CARP Core is of the highest priority.
Finally, maintaining a shared language also makes the maintenance easier, as developers
do not need to maintain projects in two different languages.
5.1.2
Asynchronous Processing
Since the framework is designed to support multiple analysis running concurrently, asyn­
chronous processing is important. In Kotlin, this is done using coroutines, which provide
an efficient way to handle asynchronous programming. Coroutines can be seen as light­
weight threads, allowing tasks to be executed without blocking the main thread. Due to
their simplicity, many coroutines can be executed without significant overhead. In Kotlin,
these are initiated using coroutine builders such as launch, which starts a new coroutine
but does not expect any result [37].
Another key concept are suspended functions, which are functions whose execution can
be paused and resumed later, marked by the suspend keyword. Thus, they can perform
long­running tasks without blocking the main thread. They can only be called from other
suspended functions or a coroutine, thus combining to create a simple and efficient struc­
ture for asynchronous programming in Kotlin [37].
5.1.3
Dependencies
This framework is a Gradle1­based project, ensuring efficient dependency management
and build automation. Gradle was chosen due to its usage in CARP Core [30].
Key dependencies for the entire framework include:
• CARP Core: For the CARP Core domain model and key functionalities.
• kotlinx.datetime: For a modern date and time API, which is also used in CARP
Core [30].
1https://gradle.org/
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
41
==PAGE:48==
• kotlinx.serialization: For serialization and deserialization, which is used in
CARP Core as well [30].
Dependencies are declared in the build.gradle file, facilitating updates and integration.
Additional dependencies exist, however they are specific to certain implementations and
will therefore be explained in the upcoming sections, as they are not necessary for the
general framework.
5.1.4
Structure
The project’s source code is contained in the src folder, which consists of two more
folders. The folder main contains the implementation, while testing files can be found
in the folder test. Inside of the main folder, each layer was implemented as its own
package, resulting in the three packages domain, application and infrastructure.
5.2
Domain Layer
As mentioned in Subsection 4.1.1, the domain layer contains the key implementations for
the domain model of the framework. For this, the domain objects were implemented ac­
cording to Section 4.2. In the following subsections, key implementations are described.
However, components that simply follow the previously described design without any spe­
cial implementation choices will not be explained in detail.
5.2.1
Expectation
Expectation was implemented as an interface defining two methods, calculateCoverage
and getDescription. calculateCoverage is called to calculate the coverage of this ex­
pectation for a given time period, using data from the DataStore and for the specific de­
ployments, returning one or multiple CoverageWithMetadata objects. getDescription
on the other hand simply returns a description of this Expectation, which is used in Cover­
ageWithMetadata as metadata. The two derivatives of Expectation, DataTypeExpectation
and CompositeExpectation were implemented as abstract classes implementing the Ex­
pectation interface.
5.2.2
DataTypeExpectation
DataTypeExpectation therefore implements the Expectation interface to calculate cov­
erage for a single data type based on the definition in Section 3.2. For this, the class
contains the number of data points as an Integer, the data type as DataType class from
CARP Core, the device name as a String, and the duration using the Duration class from
kotlinx.datetime. Additionally, the isValid function was implemented as an abstract
function, thus leaving it to be implemented by each class. As an input, it takes a Measure­
ment from CARP Core, with the generic Data class allowing for any data to be passed.
In order to calculate the coverage for a single data type, the calculateCoverage method
was implemented, which can be seen in Listing 5.1.
1
override suspend fun calculateCoverage(
2
startTime: Instant ,
3
endTime: Instant ,
4
deploymentIDs: List<UUID>,
5
dataStore: DataStore
6
): List<CoverageWithMetadata > {
7
validateDuration(startTime , endTime)
8
9
val numExpectedExpectations = calculateNumExpectedExpectations(startTime ,
endTime)
10
42
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:49==
11
val coverages = mutableListOf <CoverageWithMetadata >()
12
13
for (deploymentID in deploymentIDs) {
14
val dataStreamId = DataStreamId(deploymentID , deviceName , dataType)
15
16
val data = dataStore.obtainData(startTime , endTime , dataStreamId)
17
18
val coverageResult = calculateCoverageInWindows(data, startTime ,
endTime , numExpectedExpectations)
19
20
val metadata = createCoverageMetadata(coverageResult , deploymentID)
21
22
coverages.add(metadata)
23
}
24
25
return coverages
26
}
Listing 5.1: Implemention of the calculateCoverage method in the DataTypeExpectation
class.
Figure 5.1: Visualization showing how time boxes are used to calculate coverage. This
example is for an Expectation of three measurements every 20 minutes. Note that a time
interval of [15:00 ­ 15:20) includes 15:00, but excludes 15:20.
The actual calculation was split up in several smaller methods, which will be explained in
the following paragraph, but have been left out of the code listing. Before anything, the
method validates whether the duration of the Expectation is longer than the duration of
the calculation. If it is longer, it throws an IllegalArgumentException, since this defies the
definition of coverage. After this, the expected number of Expectations is calculated based
on the time period of the calculation and the time period of the DataTypeExpectation.
Then, for every deployment passed, a DataStreamId is created in accordance with the
CARP Core data model described in Subsection 2.5.1, using the id of the deployment,
the name of the device and the DataType defined in the DataTypeExpectation. Next, the
DataStore passed as a parameter is used to obtain the data for the given time period and
the created DataStreamId. Finally, the actual coverage is calculated based on the data,
the expected number of expectations, and the time period.
The coverage calculation was implemented by creating expectation windows, a visual­
ization of which can be seen in Figure 5.1. Based on the start time of the calculation,
expectation windows are created. In the example, a DataTypeExpectation was defined to
require three measurements every 20 minutes, thereby creating expectation windows of
20­minute durations. Since the measurements are sorted by time, only one expectation
window at a time is examined by counting the number of valid measurements inside. If
they fulfill or exceed the number required, the expectation window is marked as fulfilled,
and the next window is examined. This is repeated until no measurements are left or
the measurements are outside of the calculation period, thus obtaining the number of
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
43
==PAGE:50==
1
open class AggregateExpectation <T : Expectation >(
2
private val aggregateExpectationStrategy: AggregateExpectationStrategy
3
) :
4
Expectation {
5
val expectations: MutableList <T> = mutableListOf()
6
7
override suspend fun calculateCoverage(
8
startTime: Instant ,
9
endTime: Instant ,
10
deploymentIDs: List<UUID>,
11
dataStore: DataStore
12
): List<CoverageWithMetadata > {
13
return aggregateExpectationStrategy.aggregate(this, startTime , endTime
, deploymentIDs , dataStore)
14
}
15
}
Listing 5.2: Part of the implementation of the AggregateExpectation class.
fulfilled Expectations by the given measurements. Finally, the actual Coverage value is
calculated. In order to offer both the definition in this thesis and a more widely used defin­
ition of coverage, two different values are calculated. Expectation Coverage is calculated
based on this project’s definition and is shown in Equation 5.1. Absolute Coverage on
the other hand does not make use of the expectation windows, rather simply using the
total number of measurements and dividing that through the expected total number of
measurements, determined by the number of expected Expectations and how many data
points the Expectation expects, as seen in Equation 5.2.
expectation coverage =
number of fulfilled Expectation
number of expected Expectations
(5.1)
absolute coverage =
total number of measurements
number of expected Expectations × number of datapoints
(5.2)
5.2.3
AggregateExpectation
AggregateExpectation, as defined in Section 4.2, is an Expectation composed of other Ex­
pectations. It thus implements the Expectation interface, and has a list of expectations,
as can be seen in Code Listing 5.2. However, a type parameter is used, which defines
the type of Expectation that can be added to the list. This was chosen so a AggregateEx­
pectation can restrict itself to a specific Expectation type, which can be necessary when
aggregating. However, this is optional as the parameter can be simply set to Expecta­
tion, thus allowing any type of Expectation to be added. AggregateExpectationStrategy
was implemented as an interface, which contains a CoverageAggregator and the method
aggregate, which aggregates the Expectations accordingly. This method is called in the
calculateCoverage method of the AggregateExpectation.
5.2.4
Coverage
The Coverage class was implemented according to the design, containing both the ab­
solute and expectation coverage as a double, together with the period for which the cov­
erage was calculated for. Additionally, it was implemented as a data class, which offers
benefits such as automatically generated functions that, for example, print readable out­
put [38]. Similarly, this was done for the CoverageWithMetadata class, which contains the
Coverage, the list of deployments, the description as a String and the sub­coverages.
44
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:51==
5.3
Application Layer
The application layer implements two key components: The CoverageAnalysisService,
and the EventBus and its Events.
5.3.1
CoverageAnalysisService
For the CoverageAnalysisService, a simple interface defining the needed methods, registerAnalysis,
startAnalysis, stopAnalysis and stopAllAnalysis was implemented. Since the ana­
lysis is supposed to run asynchronously, all methods were defined as suspended. Then, a
default implementation for the interface, DefaultCoverageAnalysis was added. This uses
the EventBus and the CoverageAnalysisRepository to implement each method. Addition­
ally, it keeps track of running jobs in a simple Map, in order to administrate them in the
methods. It additionally contains an initializer block, that uses the EventBus to listen to rel­
evant events, which are then passed along to the corresponding methods. The method
registerAnalysis, which registers CoverageAnalysis objects, simply uses the Cover­
ageAnalysisRepository method to manage them. Similarly, the method stopAnalysis
uses the map of jobs to cancel the specific job, while stopAllAnalysis uses a Coroutin­
eScope that was defined to cancel all jobs currently running.
The core method in this class is startAnalysis, which can be seen in Listing 5.3. In
this method, it is determined when and how the analysis is run, based on the current
system time and the period for which the analysis is run on. If the analysis is supposed
to run on data collected entirely before the current time, then it means that all the data
has already been collected, and the analysis can run in its entirety without any delays. If
the data is supposed to be collected after the current time, the analysis has to wait until
this start time has been reached, and will have recurring delays depending on the analysis
duration to wait for more data. Finally, there is the mixture of the two cases: some data has
already been collected, but the collection is still in process. Then, a partial full analysis
can be run on the already collected data, after which delays have to be introduced to
wait for new data to analyze. Additionally, the method also saves the created job in the
aforementioned Map using the ID of the CoverageAnalysis for consistency. Finally, it
asynchronously waits for the created job to finish, which is followed by publishing the
CoverageAnalysisCompletedEvent.
5.3.2
Events
The EventBus was implemented as an interface with the two methods defined, subscribe
and publish. The code listing for this can be seen in Listing 5.4. It was chosen to imple­
ment the interface in a functional way, allowing classes to subscribe to events by simply
passing along a listener function, which is executed whenever the event occurs. By us­
ing the generic type parameter <T : Event>, type safety is ensured, allowing only events
that conform to the Event class to be published and subscribed to.
The Event class itself was implemented as an abstract class, initializing the ID using
a randomized UUID generated through CARP Core, with specific Event classes simply
extending this class. Notably, CoverageAnalysisRequested requires a CoverageAnalysis
object in its constructor, since it needs to communicate which CoverageAnalysis is to be
started.
5.4
Infrastructure Layer
5.4.1
Expectations
As part of the evaluation and documentation process, several example Expectation classes
were defined. In order to showcase the flexibility of the framework, Expectations were im­
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
45
==PAGE:52==
1
override suspend fun startAnalysis(id: UUID) {
2
val analysis = coverageAnalysisRepository.getBy(id) ?: throw Exception("
Analysis not found")
3
4
val currentTime = Clock.System.now()
5
6
val job: Job = when {
7
currentTime > analysis.endTime ->
8
analyze(id, false, analysis.startTime , analysis.endTime)
9
10
currentTime < analysis.startTime ->
11
analyze(id, true, analysis.startTime , analysis.endTime)
12
13
else -> analyzePartially(id)
14
}
15
jobs[id] = job
16
analysisScope.launch {
17
job.join()
18
eventBus.publish(CoverageAnalysisCompletedEvent(id))
19
}
20
}
Listing 5.3: StartAnalysis function of the DefaultCoverageAnalysisService.
1
interface EventBus {
2
fun <T : Event> subscribe(eventType: KClass <T>, listener: (Event) -> Unit)
3
fun <T : Event> publish(event: T)
4
}
Listing 5.4: Implementation of the EventBus interface.
46
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:53==
1
class StepCountExpectation(
2
numDataPoints: Int, deviceName: String , duration: Duration
3
) : DataTypeExpectation(
4
numDataPoints , CarpDataTypes.STEP_COUNT.type, deviceName , duration
5
) {
6
override fun isValid(input: Measurement <Data >): Boolean {
7
val stepCountData = input.data as StepCount
8
return stepCountData.steps >= 0
9
}
10
}
Listing 5.5: Implementation of the StepCountExpectation class.
plemented for both existing data types, as well as custom data types. Not all implemented
Expectations will be described, since some classes differ only slightly in their implement­
ation.
StepCountExpectation
The code for the implementation of the StepCountExpectation class can be seen in Listing
5.5. Since this is an expectation for a specific data type, it extends the DataTypeExpect­
ation class. It does so by implementing two key components. First, the data type of the
Expectation is set to CarpDataTypes.STEP_COUNT. Since this is a common data type to
collected data from, a standard implementation exists in CARP Core which is used in this
case. Second, the isValid function is implemented, by utilizing the existing StepCount
class in CARP Core. Thus, a simple check can be performed to ensure no step counts
are below zero.
WHO5Expectation
This is an example for the implementation of a more complex expectation that is not
already defined in CARP Core. In this case, this is an expectation for a survey collected
using CAMS, which uses the CARP Research Package2 for surveys. The implementa­
tion is shown in Listing 5.6. Similar to the StepCountExpectation, the data type is set,
however to a custom DataType. Additionally, the deviceName is given here. In order to
implement the isValid function, it is important to note that this survey data type is not
part of CARP Core. Therefore, it is parsed as CustomData by CARP Core, which in turn
contains the actual data as a JSON string. Therefore, in order to access the data, this
string has to be parsed. While it is possible to access the JSON objects directly, it is a
safer approach to create custom serializable classes which match the data structure. This
has been implemented here as SurveyData. Using this structure, the CustomData can
be parsed, and the data contained can be accessed. In this case, answers to a question
must be an integer in the range of zero to five, therefore defining the isValid Function.
5.4.2
Aggregations
A key component of the infrastructure layer is the implementation of the aggregation struc­
ture that was defined for Expectations, including the CoverageAggregator and Aggreg­
ateExpectationStrategy interfaces.
CoverageAggregator
For testing purposes, a single CoverageAggregator was implemented, the AverageCov­
erageAggregator. This is a simple case of aggregation, where the average values are
calculated for both the time and absolute coverages given to it.
2https://carp.cachet.dk/research-package/
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
47
==PAGE:54==
1
class WHO5Expectation(numDataPoints: Int, duration: Duration) :
2
DataTypeExpectation(
3
numDataPoints , DataType("dk.cachet.carp", "who"),
4
"Survey Service",
5
duration
6
) {
7
override fun isValid(input: Measurement <Data >): Boolean {
8
val customData = input.data as CustomData
9
val data = Json.decodeFromString <SurveyData >(customData.jsonSource)
10
for ((step, result) in data.surveyResult.results) {
11
val answer = result.results.answer
12
13
if (answer !in 0..5) {
14
return false
15
}
16
}
17
return true
18
}
19
}
Listing 5.6: Implementation of the WHO5Expectation class.
AggregateExpectationStrategy
According to the two different aggregation strategies identified in Section 4.2, the Deploy­
mentAggregateExpectationStrategy and the ExpectationAggregateExpectationStrategy
classes were implemented. The first class iterates through each of the sub­Expectations,
calling the calculateCoverage method for each, using the list of deployments. Thus,
every loop will return a list of coverage values for the current expectation, one coverage
value per deployment. Therefore, this list can be aggregated in every loop using the Cov­
erageAggregator, returning a coverage value over all deployments for each Expectation.
The second class on the other hand iterates through each deployment, aggregating the
coverage values of each expectation’s calculateCoverage for the current deployment
using the CoverageAggregator. This results in a coverage value over all Expectations for
each deployment.
Aggregation Expectations
Through the two implemented strategies, all in Section 4.4 identified aggregation classes
can be trivially implemented by setting the type parameter and choosing an Aggregate­
ExpectationStrategy. An example of this can be seen in Listing 5.7, where the DeviceAg­
gregation class is implemented. Since a DeviceAggregation aggregates solely DataType­
Expectations, this was passed as a type parameter while implementing the AggregateEx­
pectation definition. Since this is a aggregation over the expectations, the Expectation­
AggregateExpectationStrategy class is passed in the constructor, together with the Cov­
erageAggregator parameter. All other classes were similarly implemented, Participant­
GroupAggregation uses the same type parameter and strategy. StudyAggregation on the
other hand restricts its type to ParticipantGroupAggregation, and uses the DeploymentAg­
gregateExpectationStrategy pattern.
5.4.3
ExportTargets
In order to showcase an implementation of an ExportTarget and for further use in the eval­
uation, the CSVExportTarget was created. It exports the obtained CoverageWithMetadata
values into a CSV file. In order to do this, the additional dependency org.apache.commons.csv3
3https://commons.apache.org/proper/commons-csv/
48
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:55==
1
class DeviceAggregation(coverageAggregator: CoverageAggregator) :
2
AggregateExpectation <DataTypeExpectation >(
ExpectationAggregateExpectationStrategy(coverageAggregator)) {
3
4
override fun getDescription(): String {
5
return "DeviceAggregation: " + expectations.joinToString("\n") { it.
getDescription() }
6
}
7
}
Listing 5.7: Implementation of the DeviceAggregation class.
Start Time
End Time
Absolute Coverage
Expectation Coverage
Deployment IDs
Description
2024­01­01T01:00
2024­01­01T07:00
0.33
0.33
7a46a288­7f8e­4242­
bedf­ebc80bc9e693
Expectation for Location Service:
1 data points of type
dk.cachet.carp.location in 1h
2024­01­01T01:00
2024­01­01T07:00
0.66
0.66
301d0cb4­0482­411d­
b58e­f347586dae84
Expectation for Location Service:
1 data points of type
dk.cachet.carp.location in 1h
2024­01­01T01:00
2024­01­01T07:00
0.66
0.66
09824317­e14c­4b48­
9ddf­122d7aadaa87
Expectation for Location Service:
1 data points of type
dk.cachet.carp.location in 1h
2024­01­01T01:00
2024­01­01T07:00
0.16
0.16
521dd33b­cd9a­4991­
b0d3­04c781c0704c
Expectation for Location Service:
1 data points of type
dk.cachet.carp.location in 1h
Table 5.1: Data from a CSV file generated by the CSVExportTarget.
was added, which is able to write and read CSV files.
The path to the CSV file needs to be passed into the constructor, after which it is created
or emptied based on its existence in the initializer block. Additionally, the header row is
added in the initializer block. Whenever a new CoverageWithMetadata value is passed
to the CSVExportTarget, a row gets added to the file. The startTime and endTime values
are converted to the ISO 8601 standard4 to be more readable, while the deploymentIDs
are joined together to form a single string. An example of a file generated by the CSVEx­
portTarget can be seen in Table 5.1.
5.4.4
DataStores
JSONDataStore
In order to read data from existing studies that were exported from CAMS to analyze
coverage and other characteristics, a JSONDataStore was implemented. This DataStore
requires a path to an existing JSON file, which follows the CARP Core standard and thus
consists of a DataStreamBatch, which simply is a sequence of DataStreams. An excerpt
of such a file can be seen in Listing 5.8. The CARP Core data structure can clearly be
seen in the listing, with a DataStream being defined by the deployment it is for, the device
the data was collected from, and the DataType that was collected. Additionally, one can
see the measurements that were collected, including their sensorStartTime. However,
in this case the sensorStartTime was collected in microseconds, resulting in 16 digits.
This needs to be considered when parsing this file, since the kotlinx.datetime library
requires timestamps to be 13 digits long, which is milliseconds.
In order to parse the file, it was first loaded and read into a string. Next, CARP Core’s seri­
alization mechanics, which utilize the kotlinx.serialization.json library, were used.
The existing JSON deserializer DataStreamBatchSerializer was used to deserialize the
string into a DataStreamBatch object, which was saved as a property.
4https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
49
==PAGE:56==
1
[
2
{
3
"dataStream": {
4
"studyDeploymentId": "0b15f421 -5107-4201-98be-1473a85532ea",
5
"deviceRoleName": "Primary Phone",
6
"dataType": "dk.cachet.carp.stepcount"
7
},
8
"firstSequenceId": 1,
9
"measurements": [
10
{
11
"sensorStartTime": 1684249200000000,
12
"data": {
13
"__type": "dk.cachet.carp.stepcount",
14
"steps": 2064
15
}
16
},
17
{
18
"sensorStartTime": 1673017200000000,
19
"data": {
20
"__type": "dk.cachet.carp.stepcount",
21
"steps": 272
22
}
23
},
Listing 5.8: First part of a JSON file generated by CAMS conforming to CARP Core.
When the obtainData method is called, the method getDataStreamPoints of the Data­
StreamBatch is called using the DataStreamId that is passed as a parameter. This re­
turns a list of DataStreamPoints, which contain the Measurements that we want to access.
However, as mentioned before, these measurements may have a startTime and endTime
that are denoted in microseconds. Therefore, it is checked whether the timestamps are
bigger than the highest 13 digit number 9999999999999. If so, the timestamps are divided
by 1000 to convert them into a milliseconds timestamp. After this change, the measure­
ments are filtered on whether their timestamp is in between the startTime and endTime
that was required, before returning this list of measurements to the method caller.
SQLiteDataStore
CAMS offers the ability to store recorded measurements into a SQLite5 database on the
phone. In order for the framework to be able to analyze these databases, a SQLiteData­
Store was implemented, which is able to parse the created .db files. In order to access the
data, the java.sql library was utilized in combination with a sqlite-jdbc driver6. The
SQLiteDataStore is initialized with the name of the database and the table name which
contains the measurements. In the case of CAMS, the measurements are exported into
a measurements table. A shortened example of three rows of this table can be seen in
Table 5.2. As one can see, the columns deployment_id, device_rolename and data_type
define the DataStreamId of this measurement. The actual data of the measurement is
then contained in the measurement column as a JSON object.
5https://www.sqlite.org/
6https://github.com/xerial/sqlite-jdbc
50
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:57==
deployment_id
device_rolename
data_type
measurement
a030c0a7­279a­4054­
bfce­197cca7a7f94
Primary Phone
dk.cachet.carp.stepcount
{
”sensorStartTime”: 1702908535926457,
”data”: {
”__type”: ”dk.cachet.carp.stepcount”,
”steps”: 0
}}
a030c0a7­279a­4054­
bfce­197cca7a7f94
Primary Phone
dk.cachet.carp.location
{
”sensorStartTime”: 1702908535961816,
”data”: {
”__type”: ”dk.cachet.carp.location”,
”latitude”: 55.7813629,
”longitude”: 12.5181641,
...
}}
a030c0a7­279a­4054­
bfce­197cca7a7f94
Primary Phone
dk.cachet.carp.activity
{
”sensorStartTime”: 1702908536076522,
”data”: {
”__type”: ”dk.cachet.carp.activity”,
”confidence”: 100,
”type”: ”STILL”
}}
Table 5.2: Three of the rows contained in a SQLite Database created by CARP Mobile
Sensing. The columns id, uploaded and trigger_id were removed and the measurement
value for the second row was shortened due to space purposes.
In order to connect to the database, a connection object from the java.sql library was cre­
ated using the database name in the initializer block. Whenever the obtainData method
is called, the following SQL Command is executed:
SELECT measurement FROM <tableName > WHERE deployment_id=<
deploymentID > AND device_rolename=<deviceRoleName > AND
data_type=<dataType >
The parameters are populated using the name of the table and the method’s parameter
DataStreamId. For each returned row, CARP Core’s MeasurementSerializer is then used
to parse the JSON string into a Measurement object.
Finally, for data that contains
timestamps in microseconds, the same approach as in the JSONDataStore is applied
to convert them to milliseconds, before the data is again filtered for sensorStartTime
inbetween the startTime and endTime of the request.
5.4.5
CoverageAnalysisRepository
In order to have a simple implementation of the CoverageAnalysisRepository, the In­
MemoryCoverageAnalysisRepository was created, which contains a Map structure to
contain the CoverageAnalysis objects, and implements the three methods accordingly.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
51
==PAGE:58==
52
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:59==
6
Evaluation
In this chapter, the created framework is evaluated. The evaluation is first done through
the description of automated tests that were created, after which the three use cases
defined in Section 3.1 are used to evaluate the framework.
6.1
Automated Testing
Automated testing was used to evaluate the framework throughout the development phase
to ensure validity. Although 100% code coverage was never the goal, the core functional­
ities of the system needed to be tested in a consistent and reproducible way, thus allowing
for the system as a whole to be evaluated. For this, three test classes were created, that
each target different core functionalities.
6.1.1
DataTypeCoverageTest
The first class is DataTypeCoverageTest, which tests the calculateCoverage method of
the DataTypeExpectation class. Since this is the method that calculates actual coverage
values, it is the most important method in the framework. Therefore automated testing is
key to ensure correct calculation and to catch errors. In order to achieve this, a simple
LocationExpectation of 10 measurements every 30 minutes was defined. Additionally, a
DataStore was mocked to provide an evenly distributed number of location measurements
over a time period. Next, three test cases were developed:
• calculateCoverage returns correct coverage when all expectations are met
• calculateCoverage returns correct coverage when no expectations are met
• calculateCoverage returns correct coverage when some expectations are met
Through these test cases, it can be verified that the calculation of both time and absolute
coverage work correctly in the three different cases.
6.1.2
AggregationCoverageTest
The second class is AggregationCoverageTest, which validates that the aggregation struc­
tures calculate coverage properly. It works similarly to DataTypeCoverageTest by mock­
ing a DataStore to generate data and by looking at the same three coverage cases.
However, it tests the three cases for two different aggregation structures, which are Par­
ticipantGroupAggregation and StudyAggregation. Since DeviceAggregation and Parti­
cipantGroupAggregation calculate coverage in the same manner, it was decided to only
test ParticipantGroupAggregation, thus arriving to the two structures. In order to test the
ParticipantGroupAggregation, a LocationExpectation of 1 measurement every 30 minutes
was created, in addition to a StepCountExpectation of 10 measurements every 30 minutes.
These two DataTypeExpectations were then aggregated into a ParticipantGroupAggreg­
ation. Since a StudyAgregation aggregates a ParticipantGroupAggregation over all de­
ployments, the mocking of the DataStore was adapted to support multiple deployments.
This mock was then used in the tests for the StudyAggregation. In total, these six tests
were implemented accordingly:
• calculateCoverage returns correct participant coverage when all expectations are
met
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
53
==PAGE:60==
• calculateCoverage returns correct participant coverage when some expectations
are met
• calculateCoverage returns correct participant coverage when no expectations are
met
• calculateCoverage returns correct study coverage when all expectations are met
• calculateCoverage returns correct study coverage when some expectations are met
• calculateCoverage returns correct study coverage when no expectations are met
Through these test cases, it can be verified that the aggregation structures work correctly,
thus providing tests for all different ways to calculate coverage.
6.1.3
EndToEndTest
Finally, the third class is EndToEndTest, which tests that the end­to­end interaction between
the different layers and components works correctly. For this, the test ”end to end test
returns correct coverage” was implemented. This test once again creates a LocationEx­
pectation of 10 measurements every 30 minutes, and mocks the DataStore as in the other
cases. Additionally, it creates the DefaultCoverageAnalysisService using the InMemory­
CoverageAnalysisRepository. After creating a CoverageAnalysis, the CoverageAnalys­
isRequestedEvent is published to the service. After this, the test waits for a CoverageAna­
lysisCompletedEvent to be published. If it does not receive it within 3 minutes, the test is
failed. If it is received, it is verified whether the Event’s id matches the sent Event. After
this, it is verified whether the mocked ExportTarget was called with the correct coverage,
thus completing the entire flow of the application.
6.2
Use Cases
In this section, the framework is evaluated using the three use cases defined in Section
3.1.
6.2.1
CAMS
As mentioned in Subsection 3.1.1, the goal of the CAMS use case was to support recurring
validation of the sampling coverage. In order to implement this use case, it was decided
to recreate an existing analysis using the same data. A successful recreation would then
not only mean that the use case can be fulfilled, but would also show that the framework
calculated the values correctly.
The existing CAMS analysis consisted of 16 measures, for each of which the hourly
amount of expected data points is given, as can be seen in Table 6.1. During collec­
tion, CAMS automatically stored the measurements in a local SQLite database on the
phone, which was then used in the analysis process. Thus, the previously described
SQLiteDataStore, which can be seen in Paragraph 5.4.4, was utilized to read the data
directly from the exported database. For each of the data types, a DataTypeExpectation
was created, containing the expected measurements. Finally, a CoverageAnalysis was
then started, for the deploymentId indicated in the database, and the time frame of the
data. The absolute coverage result of the analysis can be seen in Figure 6.1. When com­
pared with the existing analysis of the same data, the results match exactly, showing that
the framework is able to fulfill this use case.
6.2.2
CATCH
The CATCH use case described in Subsection 3.1.2 consisted of a study that only collects
passive data. However, different granularities were to be applied for different data types.
54
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.1: Heatmap of the absolute coverage values of each data type for the CAMS
analysis use case.
Measure
Expected measurements pr. hour
activity
60
airquality
2
ambientlight
12
bluetooth
6
connectivity
12
deviceinformation
1
error
6
freememory
60
heartbeat
60
location
60
noise
12
screenevent
6
stepcount
60
weather
2
Table 6.1: CAMS data types and their corresponding expectations per hour.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
55
==PAGE:62==
While the ECG data in this study needs to be frequent in order for a successful study,
other types of data are less important and can be of a lower granularity. Thus, study data
is needed that contains multiple different measures, from which one is high­frequency,
while the other can be lower frequency. Additionally, it was decided to let this use case
also test multiple participants, to evaluate the potential of aggregations, and to evaluate
how the framework handles a lot of data.
However, due to limitations that will be further discussed in Section 7.2, it was not possible
to obtain any real study data that fit the requirements in terms of data and participants.
Thus, the large language model ChatGPT 4o1, developed by OpenAI, was used to gen­
erate study data. This version of ChatGPT was chosen due to its capabilities to write and
execute python code, and offer generated files as a direct download. The data format
was based on the JSON file created by CAMS, but the data was replaced by three new
data types:
Polar HR data was created every minute in order to simulate the high­frequency ECG data
of CATCH. Location data and step count data then simulated the lower­frequency lifestyle
data, which was designed to occur every hour and every four hours respectively. The
study was defined to start on the 01.01.2024 at 00:00, and end on the 02.01.2024 at 23:59,
resulting in a length of 48 hours. In order to evaluate the aggregations, it was decided to
simulate data for 10 participants. Finally, missing data was randomly introduced in order
to test the coverage metrics. All of these instructions can be found in the references [39]
[40], and the generated code can be found in the code repository in B.
Using the generated JSON file, containing all the data for the ten deployments, coverage
analysis could be run to evaluate the functionalities of the system. It was chosen to run the
analysis every 8h for the entire 48h period, since this offers a balance between too few and
too many coverage values. In order to read the JSON file, the JSONDataStore was util­
ized, in combination with the CSVExportTarget to export the coverage values into CSV
files. Additionally, three different levels of aggregations were decided to be evaluated.
This consisted of looking at each of the three data types for every deployment, a simple
DataTypeExpectation, aggregating each data type over all deployments, an Aggregate­
Expectation with the DeploymentAggregateExpectationStrategy, and finally calculating a
single value across all expectations and deployments, a StudyAggregation.
In order to visualize the results, the CSV file was utilized in Python scripts with matplotlib2,
which directly uses the exported CSVs. First, the expectation coverages for each data
type were visualized in a heatmap for each deployment, one of which can be seen in
Figure 6.2. Here, it can be clearly seen that the step count has the lowest granularity
of once every 4h, thus oscillating between with expectation coverage values of 0, 0.5 or
1. The aggregated version of this over all deployments can be then seen in Figure 6.3.
Here it can be seen that most values hover around 0.5, which fits ChatGPT’s process
of randomly introducing missing data, which was based on selecting a random number
between 0 and the number of all measurements, thus resulting in an expected value of
0.5.
Finally, the results of analyzing the StudyAggregation, which aggregates over all expect­
ations and deployments, can be seen in Figure 6.4. Again, this shows expectation cover­
age values hovering around 0.5 as expected, with a clear rise at the end, which was also
observed in the two other figures. Thus, through this part of the evaluation, it was eval­
1https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/
2https://matplotlib.org/
56
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:63==
Figure 6.2: Heatmap visualization of the expectation coverage over all data types for a
single deployment for the CATCH use case.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
57
==PAGE:64==
Figure 6.3: Heatmap visualization of the expectation coverage over all data types for all
deployment for the CATCH use case.
Figure 6.4: Expectation coverage over the entire study, including all deployments and
expectations, for the CATCH use case.
58
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:65==
uated whether the framework can handle larger studies with multiple data streams and
multiple participants. Additionally, the effectiveness of the aggregation structure could be
seen, and another implementation of a DataStore, JSONDataStore, proved to be able to
be implemented. Thus, the framework successfully showed that it is a viable solution for
the CATCH use case.
6.2.3
DiaFocus
The second use case that was described in Subsection 3.1.3 was DiaFocus, which is
a study designed for long­term ambulatory management of Type 2 diabetes. Here, a
combination of both automatically collected data points, such as step count, and patient
collected data were used, such as surveys [33]. This combination differentiates DiaFocus
from the two previous evaluation, since it combines both active and passive data.
Since the actual DiaFocus data was not available due to an incompatible version of CARP
being used, a simplified study was again created using ChatGPT. Similarly to before, it
was used to create a JSON file, containing a study of ten different deployments, which was
defined to run from the 01.01.2024 15:00 to 01.07.2024 14:59, a full six months. It was
then chosen to let the study contain three data streams, two surveys from the DiaFocus
study for the active data, and step count for the passive data. The two studies were
chosen to be WHO­5, which captures general well­being, and HADS FOR depression
and anxiety. In DiaFocus, most surveys were requested weekly or bi­weekly [33]. Thus,
the WHO5 survey was generated to be weekly, while the HADS survey was defined to be
bi­weekly. Additionally, the step count was generated daily.
In order to simplify further, only two questions were considered for each survey. Based
on these requirements, ChatGPT was instructed to generate the measurements and to
introduce missing data randomly. However, in order to evaluate partly filled out surveys,
ChatGPT also introduced invalid answers randomly at a probability of 10% per answer.
Since surveys are a manual task, it can happen that answers are given that do not conform
to the standards, or that some answers are simply not filled in at all. The conversations
to generate this file can be seen in the references [40] [41], while the generated code is
given in the code repository in B.
In order to implement the evaluation, the existing StepCountExpectation was used, and
two new expectations, WHO5Expectation and HADSExpectation were implemented. Since
the survey structures are very similar, the implementation of both differs only slightly. The
implementation of the WHO5Expectation is explained more in Subsection 5.4.1. Notable
here is the isValid method, which checks whether the answers to a survey question fit
inside of the required range. Similarly to before, a JSONDataStore was used to read the
data, and the CSVExportTarget to export the coverage values, which was then utilized in
a Python script to create a visualization. The coverage analysis was run for the entire six
month period, and coverage was calculated every 28 days. The result for one of the de­
ployments can be seen in Figure 6.5. Since the HADS survey was only collected every 14
days, it clearly has a noticeable low coverage. This is due to the fact that it is quite likely
that out of 2 surveys, at least one of them is missing or has an invalid answer. Through
this use case, it was evaluated how both active and passive data could be combined in
the same coverage analysis. Additionally, the validity of measurements, especially for
passive data, was proven to be an important function of the framework. Therefore, the
DiaFocus use case was also successfully implemented.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
59
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.5: Heatmap of the expectation coverage for the three data types collected in the
DiaFocus use case for a single deployment.
60
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:67==
7
Discussion
7.1
Goals and Results
In this section, the three goals identified in Section 1.4 are discussed and it is determined
whether and how they were satisfied according to the results of the thesis.
7.1.1
Definition of Coverage
This goal, defined in Subsection 1.4.1, aimed to find an improved definition of coverage
for this project, since existing definitions seemed to lack depth and customisability. Spe­
cifically, the goal set out to achieve flexibility, both in the period for which coverage is
calculated for, but also in terms of the expectations against which collected data is com­
pared to. Additionally, the concept of valid data was also to be included, since low quality
data may be considered as missing as well.
In Section 3.2, the topic of defining coverage was analyzed in depth. A small literature
review was conducted by analyzing several relevant papers that contain definitions of
coverage for digital phenotyping. Here, it could be quickly seen that current definitions
were all specific to their domains and did not offer enough customisability. Additionally,
none of them considered data validity as a deciding factor. Thus, in order to achieve the
goal, a new definition of coverage was given. While the definition of coverage is similar
to the existing definitions, comparing collected data with expected data, the definition of
expectation is where this project differs. While in existing definitions, the expectations
for data are either implicit or non­customisable, this definition makes the expectation a
customisable and flexible component.
The expectation can be adapted by the number of measurements and the time period in
which they are expected. Furthermore, the concept of validity ensures that invalid meas­
urements are not counted the same as valid measurements. Thus, the goal of finding a
definition of coverage was achieved, answering the research question 1.3.1.
However, while this definition of coverage is more customisable, it also is more complex.
It requires the user of the framework to exactly consider the expectations for data, instead
of simply giving a pre­defined expectation such as in simpler definitions. Additionally, due
to the results of a coverage analysis being dependent on the given parameters, values
may not be as comparable as in other definitions. For example, if we look at coverage
every minute for an expectation of one data point every minute, having a single zero value
may not be very significant, since this is a very detailed coverage analysis. However, if we
look at coverage over a month for the same expectation, a coverage value of zero is very
significant, since it implies no data in an entire month. Thus, it is not only important how to
define the expectation, but also for which period coverage is analyzed is important, since
it significantly impacts the interpretation of the results. Therefore, while this definition is
more powerful and offers more flexibility, the results have to always be seen in context of
the parameters that were used, in order to gain value from them.
7.1.2
Design and Implementation of a Software Architecture Prototype
The second goal, described in Subsection 1.4.2, aimed to develop and implement an
architecture for a framework for coverage analysis in digital phenotyping, based on the
above definition of coverage and the CARP Core domain model. Additionally, an integra­
tion with an existing framework needed to be achieved, in order to showcase its ability to
integrate.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
61
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 4 dealt with the design part of this goal. Before designing the system, the overall
architecture of the framework was chosen to be the Onion Architecture, due to its usage
in CARP Core, enabling consistent architectures, and its numerous benefits such as sep­
aration of concerns and dependency inversion. Based on this decision, domain­driven
design was applied to first define a domain model and thus the domain layer. The defini­
tion of coverage that was achieved previously was converted into key domain objects such
as Expectation and Coverage. Additionally, the concepts needed to realize the coverage
analysis, such as where to obtain data from and where to export results to, were also
defined, creating a complete domain model for coverage analysis based on the CARP
Core domain model. Finally, the question of aggregating expectations was also included
in the domain model and modeled as AggregateExpectation, using strategy patterns to
abstract the aggregation logic. In order to allow access to the domain layer, the applica­
tion layer was designed to contain a service, which defines the API the framework offers.
Additionally, in order to enable communication between the application and infrastructure
layer, an event bus system was designed. Finally, the infrastructure layer was determ­
ined to contain the key implementations of the domain objects needed to achieve the use
cases that were defined, and serve as a basis for evaluation steps. This completes the
design part of this goal, providing the framework with a design based on the Onion Ar­
chitecture, the definition of coverage and the CARP Core framework to achieve coverage
analysis.
Even though the Onion Architecture was chosen due to its successful application in the
CARP Core framework and its mentioned advantages, it still adds a layer of complexity to
the framework. It requires a clear understanding of the difference between the domain, ap­
plication and infrastructure layer, which is often not quite obvious. Another design choice
that adds significant complexity is the design of AggregateExpectation. The decision to
make this also an Expectation was driven by the potential of using the composite pattern,
which has proven to be powerful. Nevertheless, this differs from the original definition of
an expectation. Furthermore, this single aggregation component represents a large num­
ber of different concepts: How to aggregate over expectations, how to aggregate over
deployments, what does the actual aggregation of coverage values look like? Therefore,
this is one of the more complex components of the framework, which can also be seen in
its usage of two different instances of the strategy pattern.
The second part of the goal, the implementation of the design, was described in Chapter
5. First, general implementation choices for the framework were given, such as the usage
of Kotlin due to it being used in the CARP Core framework and in CACHET in general,
and additional specific libraries that were needed to achieve the design. Next, the design
was split once again into its layers, and the implementation of each layer was given in
detail. Key implementation choices were, for example, the usage of generics in Aggreg­
ateExpectations to ensure type safety, the calculateCoverage method of DataTypeEx­
pectation, which calculates coverage in expectation windows, and the implementation of
specific examples of the interfaces, such as the CSVExportTarget. The integration to an
existing framework was done through the implementation of the JSONDataStore and the
SQLiteDataStore, both of which integrate with data exported into the according format by
CAMS. Thus, data generated through CAMS could then be imported into the system and
analyzed for its coverage, showing the framework’s compatibility with a CARP Core­based
digital phenotyping framework.
The overall implementation choices such as the usage of Kotlin remain the obvious best
choice, due to its usage in CARP Core and other related projects. However, the framework
has critical dependencies to a few key libraries, the most important of which is CARP Core,
62
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:69==
requiring the framework to remain compatible with it. Additionally, implementing new use
cases such as a new DataStore or ExportTarget will often come with new dependencies
that need to be introduced, making the project dependent on a numerous libraries. For
example, the CSVExportTarget required the dependency org.apache.commons.csv to be
added.
Through these three parts, the design, the implementation and the integration into an
existing framework, the goal was clearly achieved. Thus, two research questions were
answered: The question in 1.3.2, of what a software architecture design for a framework
for coverage analysis is, and the question in 1.3.3, asking whether the framework can be
integrated into existing frameworks.
7.1.3
Evaluation
The evaluation of the design and implementation in Subsection 1.4.3 is the third and final
research goal of this thesis. The framework must be able to fulfill the use cases and
requirements defined in Section 3.1 and 3.3 respectively.
Functional requirements
In the following list, each functional requirement is analyzed on its fulfillment:
• Creation of Expectations: The Expectation class fulfills this requirement and con­
tains all of the required parameters.
• Support for Arbitrary Data Stores: The DataStore interface clearly defines the
functionality a data store needs to provide in order to be included in the framework.
The implemented SQLiteDatabaseStore is a concrete solution for the CAMS use
case.
• Support for Arbitrary Export Targets: Similarly, the ExportTarget clearly specifies
how a target for coverage values can be defined, and the CSVExportTarget is the
corresponding implementation for a CSV export.
• Coverage Analysis: Through the CoverageAnalysis class, coverage for an ex­
pectation and time period can be calculated. This is done by obtaining data from
a provided DataStore and then calculating the coverage of that data against the
expectation, according to the project’s definition.
• Creation of Aggregations: Through the AggregateExpectation and the classes
DeploymentExpectationAggregator and ExpectationExpectationAggregator, aggreg­
ation of multiple deployments and multiple expectations is implemented.
Non­functional Requirements
The two non­functional requirements, flexibility and extensiblity also need to be investig­
ated. Flexibility was defined as the framework’s ability to handle different types of data,
sensor and studies. This is given due to the flexible domain model, which simply defines
clear standards on what, for example, an Expectation has to look like. Since the definitions
of Expectation only depend on the CARP Core domain model, any sensors or data types
that are supported by CARP Core are thus also supported by the framework. Furthermore,
all steps of the coverage calculation can be customized to support special cases which
are not supported currently. Extensibility, the ability of the framework to be extended with
e.g. additional DataStores, is also given. Through clear but simple interfaces for each
of these concepts, additional implementations can be easily integrated. Furthermore, the
Onion Architecture further emphasizes easy integration by allowing modifications in the
infrastructure layer without affecting the other layers.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
63
==PAGE:70==
Use Cases
In Section 6.2, the framework was evaluated based on three use cases defined in Sec­
tion 3.1. All three use cases could be successfully implemented in the framework and
showcased the flexibility further. However, due to limited testing data, an issue that will
be discussed further in the Limitations Section, only the CAMS use case was done us­
ing real data. Both the CATCH and DiaFocus use cases had to be implemented with
AI­generated data. This naturally introduces some bias to the evaluation, as the data
generated was simplified in order to be able to be generated. For example, the timing
of the measurements was very regular, something that does not accurately represent
real­life data.
7.2
Limitations
Due to a limited scope and circumstances outside of this project’s control, several limita­
tions need to be noted for this framework.
7.2.1
Definition of Coverage
While the initial definition of coverage was based partly on discussions with researches
involved with CARP, the final definition of coverage was not discussed with the same
researchers once again. Thus, it lacks validation with digital phenotyping researchers,
which could provide valuable feedback to make the definition clearer and more powerful.
This also may make it incompatible with unforeseen practical challenges that emerge
during real­world application outside of the smaller examples made in this thesis, which
is something that has not been properly validated.
7.2.2
Design and Implementation
There are several limitations that need to be noted for the design and implementation of
the framework.
A major limitation in the implementation of the project was the inability to further integrate
with CARP beyond CAMS. An integration with CARP Web Services (CAWS) and the
study portal would allow the framework to be directly integrated into the research platform.
However, this was not possible due to CAWS not being stable enough in its current form,
and relying on an outdated version of CARP Core. Since CAWS is still being updated and
fixed, an integration to it will have to wait until it is in a more stable state. Until then, the
framework can not be fully integrated into the CARP runtime.
Additionally, there is a lack of a wider range of implementations for key components such
as ExportTarget and Expectations. Having implementations for the most common Expect­
ations that can quickly be used in an analysis would benefit the usability of the framework,
and would give more examples for developers to learn from. Additionally, currently only
a single ExportTarget is implemented, thus not providing enough examples on how the
framework can potentially be used.
Furthermore, there is a lack of proper error handling and logging in the system. While
there are some events designated to communicate errors, there is no logging mechan­
ism implemented which would aid in debugging when an error occurs. Especially if there
are multiple coverage analyses running at the same time, it will be very difficult to under­
stand when and where an error happens, thus impacting the functionality of the framework
severely.
64
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:71==
7.2.3
Evaluation
The most important limitation of the evaluation process and thus the validity of the frame­
work was the lack of real­world test data. The only real data available was a one­person
study using CAMS. Larger studies with more participants were not available, due to exist­
ing studies being run on an outdated version of CARP Web Services (CAWS) and CARP
Core. While generating the data using ChatGPT served well to give an indication of valid­
ity and performance, it does not replace testing with real­world data and studies.
Another limitation of the framework is that it is quite specialized. While Section 2.4 showed
some tools for coverage analysis, none of these tools go as in­depth on coverage analysis
as this project. Therefore, it is quite difficult to compare the framework with other solutions,
since no other solution has implemented coverage analysis to this extent.
The performance of the framework is something that has also not yet been properly val­
idated. While larger studies with multiple deployments and high­frequency data have run
smoothly and not caused any issues, running multiple analyses of larger studies at the
same time has not been explored. Obtaining performance indicators could also give a
hint to potential bottle­necks that need to be improved when running large­scale studies,
thus making the framework more efficient.
Finally, the evaluation done only focused on the feasibility of implemented the use cases.
While this is an important factor, the usability of the framework was not evaluated. Since
it is a framework, developers need to be able to understand and utilize it to achieve use
cases. Therefore, evaluation with developers is an important step, that was not part of
this thesis.
7.3
Future Work
In order to reduce the above described limitations and issues of this project, several steps
for future work can be identified.
A key future step will be integrating CAWS into the framework, once it is fully stable and
compatible with the updated version of CARP Core. This should be done by creating a
CAWSDataStore, which accesses the provided CARP Core API through CAWS, allowing
it to access data directly from CARP. This will be a major step, since it then allows for
coverage analysis on any study run through CAWS, creating a deep integration. Similarly,
an integration to the study portal, the frontend for CAWS, to show coverage for studies
would be impactful. For this, some form of ExportTarget would have to be implemented.
However, it would need to be investigated in what form the coverage results should be
passed to the study portal.
Next, more implementations of the core interfaces should be done. This includes more
Expectations, in order to have a library of expectations ready to go. More ExportTargets
should also be developed, especially differing from simply exporting to a file. An inter­
esting use case could be notifications via Slack, which was something implemented by
Currey and Torous [27].
Finally, more testing should be done. This includes both more automated testing to ensure
validity of the implemented interfaces, but more importantly also more testing with real­
world data. Once CAWS has been integrated and/or some larger studies have been run
in the updated CARP Core format, analyzing these real studies will be an important step
to fully validate the framework. Additionally, testing the framework under higher load is an
important step, thus analyzing multiple large­scale studies at the same time is an effective
test that will need to be done.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
65
==PAGE:72==
66
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:73==
8
Conclusion
This thesis set out to design and implement a framework for coverage analysis on digital
phenotyping studies. In order to realize this, the current state of research around digital
phenotyping, including missing data, expectations for data and coverage analysis was
surveyed. Additionally, CARP Core, the key dependency for this project, was analyzed
thoroughly.
Following this, interviews were held with researchers involved with CACHET to investig­
ate potential use cases for coverage analysis, and how a framework could be applied to
their cases. Through this, three distinct use cases were identified, each of which came
with its own requirements. Since coverage is not a standardized term, the thesis set out
to obtain a concrete definition for this project. A small literature review was conducted to
obtain an overview of definitions in relevant literature. However, the definitions found did
not fit the use cases and requirements that were defined previously. Because of this, a
new definition of coverage was introduced based on the concept of expectations, which is
based on existing definitions but improves on them. After the definition had been reached,
the focus was set on the development of the framework. Through the discussions with
researchers and the resulting use cases, the definition of coverage and CARP Core, re­
quirements were set for the framework. This included both functional and non­functional
requirements.
Once the requirements were set­up, the design part of the framework could begin. For
this, the Onion Architecture was analyzed and, due to its benefits and its usage in CARP
Core, chosen as the architecture of the system. Through UML diagrams and descriptions,
each layer of the onion was examined and key choices were explained. The implement­
ation chapter then described how the design was exactly implemented using Kotlin and
some core libraries, showcasing important implementation libraries.
Finally, after designing and implementing the framework, an evaluation was conducted.
As part of this, automated testing was used to validate key functionalities of the system
automatically and reproducibly. Next, the three use cases that were described in the
beginning were investigated once again. Each of the use cases was implemented in the
framework and visualizations were made to show the results that were achieved for each
use case. Through this evaluation, it was clearly shown that the framework is able to
achieve the goals set out by the use cases.
Finally, the discussion chapter returned back to the research goals set out initially. For
each goal, the results were discussed in­depth and it was shown how the goal was
achieved. Additionally, the limitations of the framework were given, which were mainly
based around limited testing data and an integration to CAWS not being possible. Fi­
nally, future work was described for the framework, which mainly revolved around further
testing, especially with real­world large studies.
In conclusion, the research question set out in Section 1.3 was successfully answered.
A software architecture design for a coverage analysis framework in digital phenotyping
was created, successfully implemented and shown to be sufficient for the defined use
cases and requirements. However, some limitations for the framework still exist before
the framework can be determined to be fully operational.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
67
==PAGE:74==
68
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:75==
A
Questionnaire and Interview Notes
A.1
Questionnaire Template
Objective: Obtain requirements for a framework from an end­user perspective (research­
ers) in the context of their research project. Additionally, obtain definitions of coverage
and how it could be measured.
Context:
• Introduce CARP domain digital phenotyping studies: active vs. passive data.
• CARP (Copenhagen Research Platform) runs digital phenotyping studies.
• Digital phenotyping: “moment­by­moment quantification of the individual­level hu­
man phenotype in­situ using data from smartphones and other personal digital devices.”
• Differentiate between active data (questionnaires) and passive data (sensor collec­
tion).
• Introduce the problem of missing data and the term “coverage.”
• Data is obtained through smartphones and other digital devices and transmitted to
a central unit (CARP).
• Digital devices are not error­proof, and errors can happen in data collection or trans­
mission.
• Missing data can affect study outcomes; hence, analyzing missing data is crucial.
• Coverage analysis: expectation vs. reality to provide insights.
• Introduce the research question: What is a software architecture design for a frame­
work that allows developers to implement coverage analysis on digital phenotyping
studies?
Input from the Interviewee: More information on the project, thoughts on coverage ana­
lysis, and how it could be useful in the project. The conversation is semi­structured.
Questions:
1. Can you give me a quick overview of the project and your role in it?
2. Can you give me some information on the type of data you are collecting in the
project?
3. Have you dealt with missing data in the project?
4. What would ”coverage analysis” mean to you within the context of the project?
5. What would you deem as important to clinical researchers?
6. Can you provide scenarios on how you would use coverage analysis in the project?
7. What specific aspects or parameters do you believe should be considered in cover­
age analysis?
8. When should coverage analysis be run?
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
69
==PAGE:76==
9. What type of output would you expect from a coverage analysis?
10. From a user perspective, what would be the ideal interface for coverage analysis?
11. Brainstorm solutions: how to report these findings?
12. Is there any additional insight or perspective you would like to share regarding cov­
erage analysis in digital phenotyping or the design of the framework?
A.2
Interview Notes
A.2.1
Interview with Goutham
Input from Interviewees: More information on CATCH, thoughts on coverage analysis,
and its usefulness in CATCH.
CATCH:
• The Cardio­relay Model for Cross­sectoral Ambulatory Treatment of Congestive
Heart Disease based on Personal Health Technology.
• Focus on heart failure (HF) and atrial fibrillation (AF).
• Develop state­of­the­art personal technology for collecting and analyzing physiolo­
gical, contextual, and patient­reported data.
• Research digital biomarkers for early detection of HF and AF.
• Conduct a randomized clinical trial involving 300 patients to provide clinical evidence
for the efficacy of the proposed treatment pathway.
Questions and Responses:
1. Can you give me a quick overview of CATCH and your role in it?
• Focus on AI for digital biomarkers of heart failure.
• Contextual data such as ECG and sleep data are currently collected, with plans
to expand to exercise data.
• Challenges with data volume and sampling rates.
2. Can you give me some information on the type of data you are collecting in CATCH?
• Various data types including ECG, actimetry, and surveys.
3. Have you dealt with missing data in CATCH?
• Study protocol has been created, but the study has not started yet.
• Challenges in meeting expected data collection timelines.
4. What would ”coverage analysis” mean to you within the context of CATCH?
• Ensuring data collected meets expectations.
• Some measures are prioritized over others.
5. What would you deem as important to clinical researchers?
• Key data points and their timely collection.
6. Can you provide scenarios on how you would use coverage analysis in CATCH?
70
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:77==
• Automating the detection of missing data over long periods.
7. What specific aspects or parameters do you believe should be considered in cover­
age analysis?
• AI papers and coverage imputation methods.
8. When should coverage analysis be run?
• During the study, depending on the importance of measures.
9. What type of output would you expect from a coverage analysis?
• Automation and visualization to find patterns in data post­study.
10. From a user perspective, what would be the ideal interface for coverage analysis?
• Easy­to­use interface with clear visualization.
11. Brainstorm solutions: how to report these findings?
• Consider participant perspectives and differences in phone coverage.
12. Is there any additional insight or perspective you would like to share regarding cov­
erage analysis in digital phenotyping or the design of the framework?
• Metrics relevant to the patient population.
A.2.2
Interview with Nigel
Objective: Obtain requirements for the framework from an end­user perspective (re­
searchers) in the context of their research project. Additionally, obtain definitions of cov­
erage and how it could be measured.
Input from Interviewee: More information on CARP analysis, thoughts on coverage ana­
lysis, and its usefulness in CARP analysis.
Questions and Responses:
1. Can you give me a quick overview of CARP analysis and your role in it?
• Framework development for workflows, placing data scientists at the core.
• Standardized pipelines for both post­analysis and real­time analysis.
2. Can you give me some information on the type of analysis you will be doing in CARP
analysis?
• Ongoing and post­analysis requirements as needed by data scientists.
3. Are you expecting to deal with missing data in CARP analysis?
• Requirement for analysis as needed by data scientists.
4. What would ”coverage analysis” mean to you within the context of CARP analysis?
• Coverage of data in terms of value, quality, and timeliness.
• Use of manual and dynamic thresholds.
5. What would you deem as important to clinical researchers?
• Start with simple approaches to provide the most information.
• Modeling expectations and eliciting them from data.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
71
==PAGE:78==
6. Can you provide scenarios on how you would use coverage analysis in CARP ana­
lysis?
• Application during the study to monitor and post­study to analyze.
7. What specific aspects or parameters do you believe should be considered in cover­
age analysis?
• Hierarchical structure and sampling rates.
8. When should coverage analysis be run?
• Continuously with real­time dashboard updates, with batch processing for tech­
nical analysis.
9. What type of output would you expect from a coverage analysis?
• Simple, understandable outputs with visualizations and notifications for critical
issues.
10. From a user perspective, what would be the ideal interface for coverage analysis?
• A system that provides easy­to­understand, actionable insights.
11. Brainstorm solutions: how to report these findings?
• Consider both researcher and participant perspectives.
12. Is there any additional insight or perspective you would like to share regarding cov­
erage analysis in digital phenotyping or the design of the framework?
• Emphasis on user­friendly interfaces and actionable data.
A.2.3
Interview with Jakob
Objective: Obtain requirements for the framework from an expert on mobile sensing and
the entire CARP infrastructure. Additionally, obtain definitions of coverage and how it
could be measured.
Input from Interviewee: More information on mobile sensing, thoughts on coverage ana­
lysis, and its usefulness in CARP.
Questions and Responses:
1. Can you give me a quick overview of CARP and your role in it?
• Focus on physiological, behavioral, and contextual data collection.
2. Can you give me some information on the types of data you frequently work with?
• Physiological data: wearable devices (e.g., ECG).
• Behavioral data: step counts, sleep patterns, mobility.
• Contextual data: location, timestamp, weather.
• Self­reported data: surveys and cognitive tasks.
3. Have you dealt with missing data in mobile sensing?
• Missing data in both active and passive sensing, due to technical errors and
user participation issues.
4. What would ”coverage analysis” mean to you within the context of CARP?
72
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:79==
• Ensuring expected data features are met.
5. What would you deem as important to clinical researchers?
• Level of activity and the quality of both passive and active data.
6. Can you provide scenarios on how you would use coverage analysis in CARP?
• Monitoring the study and post­study analysis.
7. What specific aspects or parameters do you believe should be considered in cover­
age analysis?
• Hierarchical data structures and sampling rates.
8. When should coverage analysis be run?
• Continuously with dashboard updates and on­demand technical analysis.
9. What type of output would you expect from a coverage analysis?
• Visualization with percentages, time dimensions, and notifications for critical
issues.
10. From a user perspective, what would be the ideal interface for coverage analysis?
• An interface that provides clear, actionable insights.
11. Brainstorm solutions: how to report these findings?
• Consider both researcher and participant perspectives.
12. Is there any additional insight or perspective you would like to share regarding cov­
erage analysis in digital phenotyping or the design of the framework?
• Emphasize user­friendly interfaces and actionable data.
A.2.4
Interview with Per
Objective: Obtain requirements for the framework from a researcher perspective in Dia­
Focus. Additionally, obtain definitions of coverage and how it could be measured.
Input from Interviewee: More information on mobile sensing, thoughts on coverage ana­
lysis, and its usefulness in DiaFocus.
DiaFocus:
• Improved and structured communication between people with type­2 diabetes mel­
litus and healthcare professionals.
• Platform collects health behavior and emotional habits, both sensor­based and self­
reported.
• Improve communication with healthcare professionals and personalized planning
and goal setting.
• Mobile sensing and research package uploaded in CANS.
Questions and Responses:
1. Can you give me a quick overview of DiaFocus and your role in it?
• Data collection between visits and personalized goal setting.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
73
==PAGE:80==
2. Can you give me some information on the types of data you dealt with in DiaFocus?
• Automatically collected data and self­reported questionnaires.
3. Have you dealt with missing data in DiaFocus?
• Issues with expected data not being obtained due to platform or patient­related
reasons.
4. What would ”coverage analysis” mean to you within the context of DiaFocus?
• Monitoring data collection and adherence.
5. What would you deem as important to clinical researchers?
• Ensuring expected data is collected and analyzing adherence to data collection
protocols.
6. Can you provide scenarios on how you would use coverage analysis in DiaFocus?
• Included in reports for monitoring and post­hoc analysis.
7. What specific aspects or parameters do you believe should be considered in cover­
age analysis?
• Dashboard for on­demand analysis and specific participant monitoring.
8. When should coverage analysis be run?
• Continuously, with updates to APIs and validity scores.
9. What type of output would you expect from a coverage analysis?
• Validity scores and detailed reports.
10. From a user perspective, what would be the ideal interface for coverage analysis?
• Clear and actionable insights through user­friendly interfaces.
11. Brainstorm solutions: how to report these findings?
• Emphasize the researcher and participant perspectives.
12. Is there any additional insight or perspective you would like to share regarding cov­
erage analysis in digital phenotyping or the design of the framework?
• Consider diverse metrics relevant to the patient population.
74
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:81==
B
Code repositories
The code for this thesis is contained in two repositories, which will be quickly described:
The code for the implementation of the described framework is contained in the following
repository: https://github.com/hoffmatteo/thesis-Coverage-Analysis. This repository con­
tains the source code of the implementation, the unit tests, the data that was used for the
evaluation, and the two Python scripts generated by ChatGPT.
The code that was used to visualize the evaluation results is contained in this repos­
itory: https://github.com/hoffmatteo/thesis-Coverage-Analysis-Eval. This repository con­
tains both the data and the script used for the visualizations for each of the three defined
use cases.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
75
==PAGE:82==
76
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:83==
Acronyms
API Application Programming Interface. 62
CACHET Copenhagen Center for Health Technology. iv, 1, 4, 17, 18, 23, 62, 67
CAMS CARP Mobile Sensing. 17, 23, 28, 47, 49, 50, 54–56, 62–65, 78, 80
CARP Copenhagen Research Platform. iv, 1, 2, 4, 23, 59, 64, 65
CATCH The Cardio­relay Model for Cross­sectoral Ambulatory Treatment of Congestive
Heart Disease based on Personal Health Technology. 23, 25, 54, 56–59, 64, 78, 79
CAWS CARP Web Services. 35, 64, 65, 67
CSV Comma­separated values. 28, 35, 48, 49, 56, 63
ECG Electrocardiogram. 23, 56
GPS Global Position System. 7, 9–12, 15–17, 25, 78
JSON JavaScript Object Notation. 47, 49–51, 56, 59
JVM Java Virtual Machine. 41
LAMP Learn, Assess, Manage, and Prevent. 2, 15, 16, 78
RAPIDS Reproducible Analysis Pipeline for Data Streams. 2, 12–14, 18, 78
UML Unified Modeling Language. 67
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
77
==PAGE:84==
List of Figures
2.1
Median locations per day per participant over all participants (N=9665), by
Beukenhorst et al. [18] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Histogram of the data yielded minute ratio for a single participant during five
time segments (daily, morning, afternoon, evening, and night) by RAPIDS
[16]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.3
Heatmap of valid yielded minutes ratio for daily time segments per parti­
cipant by RAPIDS [16].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.4
Heatmap of the recorded phone sensors per minute and per time segment
of a single participant by RAPIDS [16]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.5
Heatmap of the sensor row count per time segment of a single participant
by RAPIDS [16].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.6
Activity counts over the last week by LAMP Cortex [26]. . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.7
A measure of screen, GPS, and accelerometer quality over the past week
by Currey and Torous [27] via the LAMP Cortex platform [26]. . . . . . . . . 16
2.8
Scatter plot by LAMP Cortex showing the amount of GPS data collected on
an hourly level compared to the target sample rate [28]. . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.9
Heatmap by LAMP Cortex showing the amount of GPS data collected per
hour per day [28]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.10 Screenshot of the coverage heatmap on the dashboard of m­Path sense,
depicting the ratio of actual versus expected measurements for each sensor
[29]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.11 Architecture of CARP Core by Jeuris and Bardram [30]. . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.12 Class diagram of the data model for the data subcomponent by Jeuris and
Bardram [30]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.13 Protocols domain model by Jeuris and Bardram [30]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.1
Visualization of a layered Onion Architecture by Millett and Tune [34, p. 106] 32
4.2
Component diagram of the Onion Architecture applied to the system. . . . . 33
4.3
The domain model of the system, encompassing the model of expectation
for coverage. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.4
Class diagram showing the structure of the application layer.
. . . . . . . . 36
4.5
Aggregation structure for different levels of analysis and their strategies. . . 39
4.6
Sequence diagram showcasing the interactions between key classes for
the base case, consisting of a DataTypeExpectation being calculated using
the DefaultCoverageAnalysisService.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.1
Visualization showing how time boxes are used to calculate coverage. This
example is for an Expectation of three measurements every 20 minutes.
Note that a time interval of [15:00 ­ 15:20) includes 15:00, but excludes 15:20. 43
6.1
Heatmap of the absolute coverage values of each data type for the CAMS
analysis use case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
6.2
Heatmap visualization of the expectation coverage over all data types for
a single deployment for the CATCH use case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
6.3
Heatmap visualization of the expectation coverage over all data types for
all deployment for the CATCH use case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
78
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:85==
6.4
Expectation coverage over the entire study, including all deployments and
expectations, for the CATCH use case.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6.5
Heatmap of the expectation coverage for the three data types collected in
the DiaFocus use case for a single deployment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
79
==PAGE:86==
Listings
5.1
Implemention of the calculateCoverage method in the DataTypeExpecta­
tion class. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.2
Part of the implementation of the AggregateExpectation class.
. . . . . . . 44
5.3
StartAnalysis function of the DefaultCoverageAnalysisService.
. . . . . . . 46
5.4
Implementation of the EventBus interface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.5
Implementation of the StepCountExpectation class.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.6
Implementation of the WHO5Expectation class. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.7
Implementation of the DeviceAggregation class.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.8
First part of a JSON file generated by CAMS conforming to CARP Core. . . 50
80
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1]
GSMA. Smartphone Adoption Rate Worldwide in 2021, 2022, 2025 and 2030, by
Region. Accessed: February 02, 2024. Statista Inc. 2023.
[2]
Ignacio Perez­Pozuelo et al. ‘Chapter 3 ­ Wearables, smartphones, and artificial
intelligence for digital phenotyping and health’. In: Digital Health. Ed. by Shabbir
Syed­Abdul, Xinxin Zhu and Luis Fernandez­Luque. Elsevier, Jan. 2021, pp. 33–
54. ISBN: 978­0­12­820077­3. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-820077-3.00003-1. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128200773000031.
[3]
John Torous et al. ‘New Tools for New Research in Psychiatry: A Scalable and Cus­
tomizable Platform to Empower Data Driven Smartphone Research’. EN. In: JMIR
Mental Health 3.2 (May 2016). Company: JMIR Mental Health Distributor: JMIR
Mental Health Institution: JMIR Mental Health Label: JMIR Mental Health publisher:
JMIR Publications Inc., Toronto, Canada, e5165. DOI: 10.2196/mental.5165.
[4]
Yuezhou Zhang et al. ‘Relationship Between Major Depression Symptom Severity
and Sleep Collected Using a Wristband Wearable Device: Multicenter Longitudinal
Observational Study’. eng. In: JMIR mHealth and uHealth 9.4 (Apr. 2021), e24604.
ISSN: 2291­5222. DOI: 10.2196/24604.
[5]
Yuezhou Zhang et al. ‘Predicting Depressive Symptom Severity Through Individu­
als’ Nearby Bluetooth Device Count Data Collected by Mobile Phones: Preliminary
Longitudinal Study’. eng. In: JMIR mHealth and uHealth 9.7 (July 2021), e29840.
ISSN: 2291­5222. DOI: 10.2196/29840.
[6]
Yuezhou Zhang et al. ‘Associations Between Depression Symptom Severity and
Daily­Life Gait Characteristics Derived From Long­Term Acceleration Signals in
Real­World Settings: Retrospective Analysis’. eng. In: JMIR mHealth and uHealth
10.10 (Oct. 2022), e40667. ISSN: 2291­5222. DOI: 10.2196/40667.
[7]
Jukka­Pekka Onnela. ‘Opportunities and challenges in the collection and analysis
of digital phenotyping data’. en. In: Neuropsychopharmacology 46.11 (Jan. 2021),
pp. 45–54. ISSN: 1740­634X. DOI: 10.1038/s41386-020-0771-3.
[8]
Danielle Currey and John Torous. ‘Increasing the value of digital phenotyping through
reducing missingness: a retrospective review and analysis of prior studies’. en. In:
BMJ Mental Health 26.1 (Feb. 2023), e300718. ISSN: 2755­9734. DOI: 10.1136/
bmjment-2023-300718.
[9]
Copenhagen Center for Health Technology. Copenhagen Research Platform. https:
//carp.cachet.dk/. Accessed: 2024­02­17.
[10]
L. Bass, P. Clements and R. Kazman. Software Architecture in Practice. SEI series
in software engineering. Addison­Wesley, 2003. ISBN: 9780321154958. URL: https:
//books.google.dk/books?id=mdiIu8Kk1WMC.
[11]
Douglas Schmidt, Aniruddha Gokhale and Ran Natarajan. ‘Frameworks: Why They
Are Important and How to Apply Them Effectively’. In: (May 2004).
[12]
Jia­Hao Hsu et al. ‘Digital Phenotyping­Based Bipolar Disorder Assessment Using
Multiple Correlation Data Imputation and Lasso­MLP’. In: IEEE Transactions on Af­
fective Computing (2023), pp. 1–14. ISSN: 1949­3045, 2371­9850. DOI: 10.1109/
TAFFC.2023.3299607.
[13]
Stefanie Nickels et al. ‘Toward a Mobile Platform for Real­world Digital Measure­
ment of Depression: User­Centered Design, Data Quality, and Behavioral and Clin­
ical Modeling’. In: JMIR Mental Health 8.8 (Aug. 2021), e27589. ISSN: 2368­7959.
DOI: 10.2196/27589. (Visited on 26/05/2024).
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
81
==PAGE:88==
[14]
Rebecca Bilden et al. BIDMCDigitalPsychiatry/LAMP­platform: Release 2023.2.15.
Feb. 2023. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.7643628. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
7643628.
[15]
Julio Vega et al. ‘Reproducible Analysis Pipeline for Data Streams: Open­Source
Software to Process Data Collected With Mobile Devices’. In: Frontiers in Digital
Health 3 (2021). ISSN: 2673­253X. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/
digital-health/articles/10.3389/fdgth.2021.769823.
[16]
RAPIDS. RAPIDS Data Quality. https://www.rapids.science/1.10/visualizations/
data-quality-visualizations/. Accessed: 2024­02­13.
[17]
Mathew V. Kiang et al. ‘Sociodemographic Characteristics of Missing Data in Digital
Phenotyping’. In: Scientific Reports 11.1 (July 2021), p. 15408. ISSN: 2045­2322.
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-94516-7. (Visited on 30/01/2024).
[18]
Anna L. Beukenhorst et al. ‘Understanding the Predictors of Missing Location Data
to Inform Smartphone Study Design: Observational Study’. In: JMIR mHealth and
uHealth 9.11 (Nov. 2021), e28857. DOI: 10.2196/28857. (Visited on 02/02/2024).
[19]
Yuezhou Zhang et al. ‘Long­term participant retention and engagement patterns in
an app and wearable­based multinational remote digital depression study’. en. In:
npj Digital Medicine 6.11 (Feb. 2023), pp. 1–13. ISSN: 2398­6352. DOI: 10.1038/
s41746-023-00749-3.
[20]
John Torous et al. ‘Characterizing the Clinical Relevance of Digital Phenotyping
Data Quality with Applications to a Cohort with Schizophrenia’. In: npj Digital Medi­
cine 1.1 (Apr. 2018), p. 15. ISSN: 2398­6352. DOI: 10.1038/s41746-018-0022-8.
(Visited on 30/01/2024).
[21]
Abe Gong, James Campbell and Great Expectations. Great Expectations. URL:
https://github.com/great-expectations/great_expectations.
[22]
Abe Gong, James Campbell and Great Expectations. Expectation classes. https:
//docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/reference/learn/conceptual_guides/expectation_
classes. May 2024. (Visited on 25/05/2024).
[23]
Ian Barnett and Jukka­Pekka Onnela. ‘Inferring Mobility Measures from GPS Traces
with Missing Data’. In: Biostatistics 21.2 (Apr. 2020), e98–e112. ISSN: 1465­4644.
DOI: 10.1093/biostatistics/kxy059. (Visited on 25/05/2024).
[24]
RAPIDS. RAPIDS Phone Locations. https://www.rapids.science/1.10/features/
phone-locations/. Accessed: 2024­03­19.
[25]
Aditya Vaidyam, John Halamka and John Torous. ‘Enabling Research and Clinical
Use of Patient­Generated Health Data (the mindLAMP Platform): Digital Phenotyp­
ing Study’. In: JMIR mHealth and uHealth 10.1 (Jan. 2022), e30557. DOI: 10.2196/
30557. (Visited on 20/03/2024).
[26]
Data Quality | LAMP Platform. https://docs.lamp.digital/data_science/cortex/
visualizations/data_quality. Mar. 2024. (Visited on 20/03/2024).
[27]
Danielle Currey and John Torous. ‘Digital Phenotyping Data to Predict Symptom
Improvement and App Personalization: Protocol for a Prospective Study’. In: JMIR
Research Protocols 11.11 (Nov. 2022), e37954. ISSN: 1929­0748. DOI: 10.2196/
37954. (Visited on 19/03/2024).
[28]
Data Quality | LAMP Platform. https://docs.lamp.digital/data_science/cortex/
visualizations/participant_level/. Mar. 2024. (Visited on 20/03/2024).
[29]
Koen Niemeijer et al. ‘Combining Experience Sampling and Mobile Sensing for Di­
gital Phenotyping With M­Path Sense: Performance Study’. In: JMIR Formative Re­
search 7 (Mar. 2023), e43296. ISSN: 2561­326X. DOI: 10.2196/43296. (Visited on
28/05/2024).
82
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
==PAGE:89==
[30]
Steven Jeuris and Jakob E. Bardram. CARP Core. Copenhagen Center for Health
Technology (CACHET). May 2024. URL: https://github.com/cph-cachet/carp.core-
kotlin (visited on 15/05/2024).
[31]
Jakob E. Bardram. The CARP Mobile Sensing Framework – A Cross­platform, Re­
active, Programming Framework and Runtime Environment for Digital Phenotyping.
June 2020. arXiv: 2006.11904 [cs]. (Visited on 30/01/2024).
[32]
CATCH: The Cardio­relay Model for Cross­sectoral Ambulatory Treatment of Con­
gestive Heart Disease Based on Personal Health Technology ­ CACHET. https:
//www.cachet.dk/research/research_projects/catch. (Visited on 15/03/2024).
[33]
Jakob E. Bardram et al. ‘DiaFocus: A Personal Health Technology for Adaptive As­
sessment in Long­Term Management of Type 2 Diabetes’. In: ACM Transactions on
Computing for Healthcare 4.2 (Apr. 2023), pp. 1–43. ISSN: 2691­1957, 2637­8051.
DOI: 10.1145/3586579. (Visited on 15/03/2024).
[34]
Scott Millett and Nick Tune. Patterns, Principles, and Practices of Domain­Driven
Design. John Wiley & Sons, May 2015. ISBN: 978­1­118­71470­6.
[35]
E. Gamma et al. Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object­Oriented Software.
Addison­Wesley Professional Computing Series. Pearson Education, 1994. ISBN:
9780321700698. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=6oHuKQe3TjQC.
[36]
Matheus Flauzino et al. ‘Are You Still Smelling It? A Comparative Study between
Java and Kotlin Language’. In: Proceedings of the VII Brazilian Symposium on Soft­
ware Components, Architectures, and Reuse. SBCARS ’18. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, Sept. 2018, pp. 23–32. ISBN: 978­1­4503­
6554­3. DOI: 10.1145/3267183.3267186. (Visited on 21/06/2024).
[37]
Roman Elizarov et al. ‘Kotlin Coroutines: Design and Implementation’. In: Proceed­
ings of the 2021 ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on New Ideas, New
Paradigms, and Reflections on Programming and Software. Onward! 2021. New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Oct. 2021, pp. 68–84. ISBN:
978­1­4503­9110­8. DOI: 10.1145/3486607.3486751. (Visited on 21/06/2024).
[38]
Kotlin Foundation. Data Classes | Kotlin. https://kotlinlang.org/docs/data-classes.
html. Jan. 2024. (Visited on 09/06/2024).
[39]
OpenAI. Private Conversation with ChatGPT on generation of CATCH study data.
https://chatgpt.com/share/281d9db5-bbab-4f9a-a324-ad380ca8d429. Chat conduc­
ted over multiple days in May. 2024.
[40]
OpenAI. Private Conversation with ChatGPT. https://chatgpt.com/share/eb2d3d06-
bd74-4cfa-9986-4cea83e940f2. Chat conducted over multiple days in May and June
on both CATCH and survey study data. 2024.
[41]
OpenAI. Private Conversation with ChatGPT. https://chatgpt.com/share/fd368a38-
43a1- 443e- a4ea- d1b2d3e029e9. Chat conducted over multiple days in June over
survey study data. 2024.
Analysing Coverage in Digital Phenotyping
83
==PAGE:90==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 3435C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
