==PAGE:1==
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in
embryonic stem cells
Udforskning af interaktionen mellem NME og MUC1 i embryonale stamceller
Master Thesis (30 ECTS)
by William Marcus Morgenthaler Echwald (s193767)
Supervised by: Prof. Kedar Nath Natarajan
DTU Bioengineering
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
Udforskning af interaktionen mellem NME og MUC1 i embryonale stamceller
Master Thesis (30 ECTS)
by William Marcus Morgenthaler Echwald (s193767)
Supervised by: Prof. Kedar Nath Natarajan
Submitted on June 22, 2024
By
William Echwald
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Natarajan Group, DTU, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Søltofts Plads,
Building 221, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Medical Biotechnology,
Department of Bioengineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Biotechnology, MSc Eng.
William Echwald ­ s193767
Signature
Date
ii
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
26 / 06 / 2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract (English)
The protein MUC1 has been a topic of research for decades now. The transmembrane
MUC1 or mucin protein 1 has been implicated in many important cellular processes and
diseases including cancer, where it has been identified as a biomarker. Overexpression
of MUC1 leads to metastasis and poor patient prognosis in pancreas, gall bladder, and
colon cancers. In Cancers but also in development, the cleavage product of MUC i.e.
MUC1*, acts as a growth factor receptor, and its interaction with NME1 protein (acting
as a dimerizing ligand) stimulates increased growth and resistance to apoptosis. MUC1*
is reported to have similar functions in human embryonic stem cells, allowing for growth
without the addition of exogenous growth factors. However, the mechanism of action is
unknown, and moreover, further investigation in the mouse ESC counterpart is also un­
known. Therefore, it is of interest to investigate the expression of MUC1 and target genes
in mouse and human ESCs. The mouse ESCs can be cultured under distinct culture con­
ditions (termed serum+LIF or M15 and 2i+LIF or just 2i), known to give rise to mouse ESCs
of distinct pluripotent states. Therefore, it is of interest to understand whether MUC1 and
NME play a role in maintaining mouse ESCs in these different conditions. To investigate
this, I have examined the expression of MUC1, NME1, NME2, and NME7 in mouse and
human ESCs cultivated in the three culture conditions to explore differences in their ex­
pression, using flow cytometry, Western blotting and reverse transcriptase qPCR. Efforts
to compare these results across species were met with some complications in interpreta­
tion of data. Using these methods, I found no noticeable difference in the gene expression
of these key targets except for NME7 mRNA, which was found in higher levels in 2i con­
ditions of mouse ESCs. A possible trend was also seen in the decreased expression
of the N­terminal part of MUC1 in serum (M15) compared to non­serum conditions (2i).
However, these results require additional replications to confirm their significance.
Abstract (Dansk)
MUC1 har været et forskningsemne i årtier. Mucinproteinet har i årenes løb ledt til mange
vigtige opgdagelser. Det transmembrane MUC1 eller mucinprotein 1 er blevet impliceret
i mange vigtige cellulære processer og sygdomme, herunder kræft, hvor det er blevet
identificeret som en biomarkør. Overekspression af MUC1 fører til metastase og dårlig
patientprognose for kræft i bugspytkirtlen, galdeblæren og tyktarmen. I kræft, men også i
udvikling, fungerer spaltningsproduktet af MUC i.e. MUC1*, som en vækstfaktorreceptor,
og dets interaktion med NME1­proteinet (der fungerer som en dimeriserende ligand) stim­
ulerer øget vækst og resistens over for apoptose. Det er blevet rapporteret, at MUC1* har
lignende funktioner i humane embryonale stamceller (humane ESCs), hvilket giver mu­
lighed for vækst uden tilsætning af eksogene vækstfaktorer. Hvordan MUC1* agere til at
forårsage dette er dog ikke kendt, og yderligere undersøgelser i musestamceller (muse
ESCs) er også ukendte. Derfor er det interessant at undersøge udtrykket af MUC1 og
NME i ESC’er fra mus og mennesker. Musestamceller kan kultiveres i forskellige dyrkin­
ingbetingelser betegnes serum+LIF eller M15 og 2i+L eller 2i), som vides at fremkalde
musestamceller i forskellige pluripotente tilstande. Derfor er det interessant at forstå, om
MUC1 og NME spiller en rolle i vedligeholdelsen af musestamcellerne under disse forskel­
lige forhold. For at lærer mere om dette har jeg undersøgt udtrykket af MUC1, NME1,
NME2 og NME7 i menneske­ og muse­embyroniske stamceller, der er dyrket under de tre
kulturbetingelser, for at udforske forskelle i deres udtryk ved hjælp af flowcytometri, West­
ern blotting og reverse transcriptase qPCR. Forsøg på at sammenligne disse resultater
på tværs af arter støtte på nogle komplikationer i fortolkningen af data. Ved hjælp af disse
metoder fandt jeg ingen mærkbar forskel i genekspressionen af disse vigtige mål bort­
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
iii
==PAGE:6==
set fra NME7 mRNA, som blev fundet i højere niveauer under 2i­betingelser for musens
ESC’er. En mulig tendens blev også set for et nedsættet udtryk af den N­terminale del
af MUC1 i serum (M15) sammenlignet med ikke­serumbetingelser (2i). Disse resultater
kræver dog yderligere gentagelser for at bekræfte deres betydning.
iv
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This report represents the efforts towards my Master’s thesis at Natarajan lab in DTU
Bioengineering. I would like to thank everyone who helped me complete this thesis. Over
the course of this project, I have tried my hands with many new things and encountered
many unfamiliar situations. I have troubled many people in the Natarajan group during my
attempts to learn new things. For their compassion and patience, I am grateful. During
each new experiment and analysis I have had to learn how to do or understand has in
no small part been aided by the people I have been working side by side with during
the last five months. I want to especially thank Gergo Kovacs (postdoc) for helping me
with stem cell culture, flow sorting, analysis as well as several other experiments. I also
want to thank Rahul Agrawal (postdoc) for his help as well as for sharing mouse stem cell
samples and experiments. Finally, I want to thank the entire group for all their help, group
meeting cakes, and conversations. I will not forget everything you have done for me, and
I wish everyone from the lab good fortunes to come.
The help of friends and family has played a big role in helping me not lose my footing and
kept me going during the thesis. For that, my family, my girlfriend, and my friends have
my eternal thanks.
Finally, I would like to thank my supervisor Prof. Kedar Natarajan, for believing in me and
providing support and help whenever I asked.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Pluripotency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Core Pluripotency Regulatory network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
MUC1 in Human Pluripotent Stem Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Theory of Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2
Results
21
2.1
H9 And E14 ESC Cultivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.2
qPCR Expression of MUC1 & NME genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
2.3
Flow cytometry Measurements of MUC1 & NME Proteins . . . . . . . . . . 36
2.4
Western blotting of MUC1 & NME Proteins
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
3
Materials and Methods
51
3.1
Stem cell culturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
3.2
Stem cell collection for qPCR, Western blotting, and FACS analysis
. . . . 52
3.3
qPCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
3.4
Western blotting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
3.5
Flow cytometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
4
Discussion
61
4.1
Establishment of distinct states of pluripotency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
4.2
MUC1 and NME in mouse ESCs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
5
Conclusion
68
Bibliography
70
A Appendix
75
A.1
Flow cytometry data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
A.2
Hamster secondary antibody only control for non­permealized cells . . . . . 77
A.3
Hamster secondary antibody only control on permeabilizd cells . . . . . . . 79
A.4
Mouse secondary antibody only control on permeabilized cells
. . . . . . . 80
A.5
Rabbit secondary antibody only control on permeabilized cells
. . . . . . . 81
A.6
Unstained permeabilized cells control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
A.7
qPCR data of condition specific genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Stem cells hold vast potential, both in a biological sense and from the perspective of pos­
sible applications. Pluripotent stem cells, in particular, have received a lot of attention for
use as, e.g., a model system for drug development, as well as in the study of disease de­
velopment in living systems and studies of the earliest stages of embryonic development.
Additionally, they are the primary driving force behind regenerative medicine. Hence, it
is expected that pluripotent stem cells are and will be a potential solution or tool to many
current and future problems [1, 2, 3, 4, 5].
To use pluripotent stem cells to their full potential, it is critical to understand the underlying
mechanisms that control the differentiation of the stem cells and those that keep them
undifferentiated. According to the Web of Science (as shown here), this interest and
potential have resulted in over 9,000 published articles covering the topic of pluripotent
stem cells since 2000.
Although great strides have been made in discovering regulators of pluripotency and their
core network, the complexity of the systems involved leaves many questions unanswered.
Recently, it was found that Mucin1 (MUC1), a mucin protein and a well­known cancer
marker([6, 7]), in combination with proteins of the Nucleoside Diphosphate Kinase Family
(NME proteins), was able to affect the state of pluripotency in human embryonic stem
cells (ESCs)[8, 9, 10, 11], resulting in a novel naive state of pluripotency. Impressively,
the MUC1/NME interaction allowed for the growth and maintained pluripotency of human
ESCs in defined, unconditioned, minimal media without the use of Mouse Embryonic Fi­
broblasts (MEF) feeder cells. This discovery has the potential to be incredibly important
for the application of human ESCs in commercial and clinical instances. In many cases,
the robust expansion of undifferentiated human ESCs in defined conditions is a bottle­
neck, and expanding the knowledge of how to keep human ESCs pluripotent is sure to
be of great importance. However, this MUC1/NME interaction has currently only been
observed in human pluripotent stem cells, and its method of action for influencing pluripo­
tency and how it is regulated is still unclear.
It is expected that MUC1/NME maintains a very naive stage of ESC pluripotency, and
loss of the interaction should be seen in less naive states of pluripotency. As such, It
is suspected that in a cell population with more naive ESCs, the average transcriptional
and/or translational expression of these genes will be higher compared to ESCs grown
under conditions that promote a higher fraction of less naive cells. To test this hypothesis,
mouse embryonic stem cells, E14, cultured in two conditions: Serum+LIF (termed M15)
and two inhibitors of Wnt and ERK/MAPK (PD and CHIR) and LIF (termed 2i) were tested.
These two conditions both maintain cells in a pluripotent state, with the M15 condition
inhibiting cells from differentiating with less scrutiny [12]. As such M15 is expected to
allow for a higher fraction of cells in culture that are relatively less pluripotent than 2i
ESCs. A baseline comparison of expression with qPCR, Western blotting, and FACS
analysis between these two states could show if these proteins of interest are differently
expressed in these conditions and lay the groundwork for further exploration into their
functions related to pluripotency. Similarly, human ESCs of the H9 strain were cultured in
either KOSR supplemented with bFGF or using the defined media mTesR1 to simulate a
more naive condition (mTesR1) or a less naive condition (KOSR+bFGF). As with mouse
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
1
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.1: Genealogical tree, showing the lineage of the House of Austria, dating back
to the 12th Century and including the royal families of Spain, Austria, Tuscany, Pama and
the State of the Church, Portugal, Castille, Aragon, Navarre, Bourgogne, Hungary and
Bohemia, Austria, Anjou Sicily, Bragance, Castille, Leon, and Navarra.[14]
ESCs, it is expected that a higher fraction of ESCs in the native state will be present in the
mTesR1 condition, while the opposite should be the case for the KOSR + bFGF condition,
and this would be reflected in the mRNA and protein expression.
Before going into the results of the experiments done during this master’s project, some
necessary background and theory related to pluripotency in stem cells and origin, as well
as the factors that have been found to be essential for human and mouse stem cells. The
proteins of interest, namely the MUC1 and NME, will then be introduced, along with their
proposed method of functioning in human embryonic stem cells to control pluripotency.
1.1
Pluripotency
1.1.1
What are stem cells
The term ”stem cell” has been used for almost 200 years and was first attributed as a
description of the theoretical single­cell organism that, through evolution, evolved into the
basis of all multicellular life[13]. The term was initially used in German as ”Stemzelle”,
and derived from the use of a similar word: ”Stammbaume”. A Stammbaume is a family
tree, where one’s family relations, such as siblings, parents, and cousins, are depicted as
branches extending from the trunk of a tree to show the family heritage and lineage of the
person­centered as the tree’s trunk.
These meanings and relations to heritage and lineage were carried over into the use of the
new term’ stem cell’, and terms related to family are today still used to explain how cells in
multicellular organisms relate to each other. For instance, the processes and steps a cell
has taken to become a particular type of cell are referred to as its lineage and are often
2
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.2: Hematopoietic stem cells, a type of multipotent stem cell, and their lineage of
differentiation into the lymphoid cells and myeloid blood cells.[15] Drawn in Biorender.
depicted in a similar manner as family trees. Another example is cell lines, which use the
term family lines to indicate a common heritage of the cells.
However, a more modern description of stem cells are cells that can differentiate into
numerous other cells and are also capable of self­renewal[16]. It is this combination that
makes stem cells truly powerful. Not only can they become many, if not all, types of
cells, but they are also able to expand and replenish themselves, in theory, indefinitely.
This means stem cells could be used as an infinite source of cells to regenerate any
lost tissue, replace dysfunctional cells, or serve as a production unit to create complex
humane proteins and factors currently impossible to manufacture.
In general, there are two possible results of cell expansion. Either the daughter cells are
phenotypically different than the mother cells, or they retain their cell type and remain
identical to the mother cell. Additionally, this division of cells can be symmetric or asym­
metric. Symmetric division results in both daughter cells being identical, meaning both
cells either retain the original cell type or both change into the same, new, cell type. In
contrast, asymmetric division of cells causes the two daughter cells not to be identical.
This could mean one daughter cell remains the same as the mother cell while the other
daughter cell undergoes changes. It is also possible that both cells end up different from
the mothercell, but are themselves different from each other. What exactly controls if
stem cells differentiate or remain identical to their mother cell following cell division, and
whether this happens asymmetrically or not, is often complicated by the involvement of
many different systems combined. It is through these complex systems that stem cells
undergo differentiation and adult matured cells come to be.
However, stem cells do not have the same potential for differentiation. This measure of
the differentiation potential of the cells is often referred to as the potency of the stem cell.
In general, there are 4 levels of potency that are used to describe stem cells: totipotent,
pluripotent, multipotent, and unipotent [1]. Totipotent cells are cells capable of differenti­
ating not only from all germ and somatic cells but also extraembryonic tissue, such as the
placenta. One step down is the pluripotent cells. These stem cells can differentiate into
all lineages of somatic and germ cells but not the extra­embryonic tissue. An example
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
3
==PAGE:14==
of pluripotent stem cells are embryonic stem cells, isolated from the embryo after it has
been implanted. Continuing on, multipotent cells are still able to differentiate into various
cell types but have lost some degree of potency in comparison to truly pluripotent cells.
Haematopoietic stem cells are a prime example of multi­potent stem cells, being able to
differentiate into all lymphoid and myeloid cells in the human body. Meanwhile, unipotent
cells have either a very limited range of cell types they can differentiate into or only one
specific type of tissue [17].
Of these cells, pluripotent stem cells are a prime candidate for utilization based on their
potency to develop into all three germ layers of cells.
1.1.2
Pluripotent stem cells and Embryonic stem cells
In comparison to other multipotent and unipotent stem cells, pluripotent stem cells are
very well­defined in their potency. By definition, they can differentiate into all three ma­
jor germ layers found in the embryo, the ectoderm, the mesoderm, and the endoderm
layers[18]. These three distinct layers of cells are formed in the earliest stages of em­
bryonic development in many animals, including humans, and give rise to distinct parts
of the body, representing the very first stages of distinct differentiation for the cells of the
embryo. Pluripotent stem cells are then found in the embryo, only prior to the formation
of the three distinctive germ layers. As such, for some time, pluripotent stem cells and
embryonic stem cells referred to the same collection of cells. These embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) have been isolated and cultured from the cells of the inner cell mass that forms in
the blastocyst of both mouse[19] and human[20], giving rise to cell lines of ESCs that are
still in use today. Additionally, the ability to induce mature adult cells to become ESC­like
pluripotent stem cells[21, 22, 1], aptly named induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), has
greatly opened up for the possibility to research these potent stem cells.
However, naturally, in mammalians, these pluripotent stem cells do not persist. During
development, they differentiate terminally, highlighting that the ability of ESCs to end­
lessly self­renew is a property acquired from manipulating the factors that control these
cells’ ability to expand while maintaining their pluripotency. Additionally, with alternative
methods for cultivating ESCs, variations between conditions and species have highlighted
differences in the regulatory network of transcription factors, epigenetics, and morphology
of ESCs cultivated in different conditions.
To understand how these culture conditions maintain the pluripotency of ESCs, the core
network of factors that control pluripotency, including three transcription factors: Oct4,
Sox2, and Nanog, will be covered.
1.2
Core Pluripotency Regulatory network
While human and mouse embryonic stages share many features [23], there are distinct
species differences between the ESCs in vitro [24], including a difference in the impor­
tance of certain receptors and factors.
Three transcription factors are essential for pluripotency in both mouse and human ESCs
and iPSCs [25, 26, 27]. These are the Octamer binding transcription factor 4 (aka. OCT4,
Pou5f1, OCT3/4), Sex determining region box 2 (aka. Sox2), and the homeobox protein
NANOG. Together, these three proteins maintain the cells’ ability to renew and hinder
spontaneous differentiation to cells of the three germ layers[28]. They positively regulate
their transcription, inducing a bi­stable state in the ESCs[29]. This bi­stability is due to
4
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:15==
the nature of the positive feedback loop that the three transcription factors are suggested
to impose. The transcription factors can regulate and maintain their own expression;
when their expression is inhibited by external factors or by fluctuations in expression, the
regulatory feedback loop further affects the transcription factors, resulting in a reduction of
expression. Lower expression, in turn, causes lower levels of OCT4, SOX2, and NANOG,
which again causes even lower expression of these transcription factors. As such, if a
large enough disturbance is created, the self­regulatory nature of the feedback loop.
It is worth mentioning that the actions of OCT4, SOX2, and NANOG have been shown
to be concentration­dependent [30, 31]. Likely, total repression of these genes is not re­
quired for ESCs to start differentiating, but rather a shift in concentration may be sufficient.
Even slightly lowered concentrations could result in a loss of binding to DNA sites with
lower affinity for the three factors. NANOG is also known to require to be in a dimeric
state in order to bind DNA and interact with other factors, such as Oct4[32]. It is generally
accepted that concentrations of proteins can control their multimeric state, which could
indicate another avenue for how the concentration of these three transcription factors
could regulate their ability to interact and bind DNA, critical for their function as transcrip­
tion factors. Indeed, increases in the concentration of NANOG and OCT4 have shown
alternative effects on the regulation of both their own and each other’s transcription[33].
A representation of the most accepted model for how targets of the OCT4, SOX2, and
NANOG affect pluripotency can be found in Jaenish et. al, Figure 5 ([34]).
These three transcription factors and many more are shared in their importance across
human and mouse ESCs for maintaining pluripotency. As such, it may be surprising that
the current methods for manipulating these factors and maintaining pluripotency for in
vitro ESC cultivation differ substantially between the two. The widely accepted methods
for human and mouse ESC will be covered here.
1.2.1
In vitro cultivation
As mentioned, there are several methods and options for facilitating ESC and IPSC growth
in vitro conditions while maintaining pluripotency.
Human ESCs
Certain proteins were found to be required for maintaining pluripotency over long periods
of time and across sub­cultures. In the case of human ESCs, Basic Fibroblast Growth
Factor (bFGF aka. FGF­2) was found to be necessary for human ESCs to viably maintain
pluripotency[35]. bFGF signals through Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptors (FGFRs),
and in particular FGFR1 was found to be important for signaling in human ESCs [36].
The FGF/FGFR signaling is known to activate the Mitogen­activated kinases (MAK): Ex­
tracellular signal­regulated kinase 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) through phosphorylation, which was
shown to be upregulated in human ESCs and critical for maintaining pluripotency [37].
However, the exact effects of bFGF on the three core pluripotency factors is not well un­
derstood, to my knowledge. Additionally, is it possible that the need for ERK1/2 activation
is only transient or due to other factors in culture conditions promoting differentiation.[38]
It was also found that bFGF activates the PI3K/AKT cascade, and both of these pathways
help maintain the stem cell­ness of human ESCs. Inhibition of these pathways has shown
decreased expression of the core pluripotency markers OCT4, SOX2 and NANOG [39],
highlighting their ability to effect pluripotency. The PI3K/AKT pathway is suggested to
control pluripotency through its phosphorylation of the protein Glycogensynthase kinase­
3β (GSK3), which was shown to inhibits its function [40].
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
5
==PAGE:16==
GSK3 is known to act on β­catenin, the effector molecule of the Wnt/β­catenin path­
way[41]. GSK3 mediates the phosphorylation of β­catenin, signaling the β­catenin for
degradation downstream. In the canonical pathway of the Wnt/β­catenin, this phospho­
rylation of β­catenin by GSK3 is prevented by the action by the binding of an extracellular
Wnt ligand to the transmembrane receptor Frizzled. This binding recruits another trans­
membrane protein and the complex responsible for β­catenin phosphorylation and subse­
quent degradation. The recruitment by Frizzled results in the inactivation of the complex
responsible for the degradation of β­catenin, resulting in an increased cytoplasmic con­
centration of β­catenin. This increased concentration of β­catenin is known to travel to
the nucleus and bind a range of DNA­bound transcription factors of the TCF family, which
in turn confers the ability of Wnt ligand binding to Frizzled to affect gene expression.
Alternatively, the direct inhibition of GSK3 has been shown to increase levels of β­catenin
[42] and increase expression of pluripotency markers OCT4 and NANOG.
Other factors have been found to help maintain human ESCs in a pluripotent state, such
as Transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) and Activin A. These factors have been shown to
inhibit differentiation of human ESCs through the activation of another factor SMAD2/3 and
inactivation of SMAD 1/5 [43]. However, a common theme of human ESC pluripotency
regulation is the requirement for feeder cells. Many concurrent methods require either that
the human ESCs be grown on fibroblast feeder cells or that the media used for cultivation
is first conditioned with these feeder cells. This provides unknown factors and surface
coating needs for the ESCs to maintain pluripotency. This is however problematic, as
these unknown factors can have led to conflicting reports on the mechanisms by which
human ESC are maintained. As such much work has gone into developing methods for
cultivating human ESCs in animal­free conditions and defined medium, and this work is
still ongoing. Additionally, human ESCs are less readily available than mouse ESCs, in
part due to ethical concerns, meaning research into the pluripotency regulation of human
ESCs is more difficult.
Mouse ESCs
In comparison, bFGF does not have the same effect in mouse ESCs, and mouse ESCs
cannot be cultured using added bFGF only, without serum, feeder­cell, and/or other growth
factors [44]. In contrast, bFGF has been used to induce a less pluripotent state compared
mouse ESCs without bFGF [45, 46].
A different molecule, Leukemia Inhibitor Factor (LIF), was the first factor found to be criti­
cal in allowing for the continuous expansion of mouse ESCs in feeder­free conditions [47,
48]. It was found that LIF acts as a ligand for the aptly named low affinity LIF receptor (LIF­
R) that together with another transmembrane protein, Glycoprotein 130 (gp130), forms a
hetero­dimeric complex [49]. This complex of LIF­R and gp130 recruits and subsequently
activates specific tyrosine kinases of the Janus kinase family (JAK kinases) by phospho­
rylation. These JAK kinases in turn cause phosphorylation of the tyrosine residues on the
cytoplasmic region of the gp130 receptor and allows for binding of the transcription factor
STAT3, abbreviated from Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription[50]. STAT3 is
phosphorylated by the JAK kinases, causing it to dimerize. It is then transported to the
nucleus, where it acts to support self­renewal as a critical transcriptional regulator. In
fact, deletion of STAT3 in mouse leads to early embryonic failure[51]. Among the genes
regulated by STAT3 are the OCT4 and NANOG genes, highlighting that STAT3 activation
by LIF directly regulates the state of pluripotency of the mouse ESCs[52].
But without serum, such as Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS), LIF signalling alone fails to main­
6
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:17==
tain pluripotency [53], and cells grown without serum start differentiating. Additionally,
there are noticeable differences in how effective LIF is at culturing different strains of
stem cells in vitro [54]. For human ESCs, LIF is also not sufficient to maintain undifferen­
tiated cells for continuous passages [55]. This reliance on serum for mouse ESCs can be
avoided by the addition of Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (BMPs) to media, which blocks
the differentiation of the cells [56]. This effect is conveyed by the activation of SMAD2/3,
similar to its activation by TGFβ in human ESCs. However, it was apparent that another
factor was actively promoting the differentiation of the ESCs. Interestingly, it was found by
Ying et al., 2008 [57] that the inhibition of ERK1/2 phosphorylation by a small molecule,
PD184352 (PD), replaced the need for the addition of BMPs to mouse ESCs medium,
indicating that these proteins, at least in part, are the cause of differentiation. One ob­
servable effect of this inhibition is the downregulation of ERK1/2 target Myc­c. And with
the use of another inhibitor, CHIR99021 (CHIR), it was found that mouse ESCs could be
cultivated under serum (M15) and LIF free conditions, even without induction of STAT3
signaling. It was also found that CHIR, an inhibitor of GSK3, does not induce its effect
through the canonical pathway with un­phosphorylated β­catenin acting on transcription
factors such as LEF1. LEF1 negative cells were able to propagate and maintain pluripo­
tency when CHIR was used, indicating a possible separate function for β­catenin in these
conditions[57].
The conditions that make use of these two inhibitors to maintain mouse ESCs were coined
as 2i conditions and are the current gold standard for cultivating mouse ESCs in serum­
free conditions. It also allowed for the cultivation of mouse strains that were incompatible
with M15 conditions [58]. It should be noted that both M15 and 2i mouse ESCs can be
propagated on plate surfaces treated with gelatin.
These two conditions of ESC cultivation, as well as human ESC in vitro conditions, high­
light both species and conditional differences. However, these different methods do not
equally maintain pluripotency, which has given rise to the notion that pluripotency can be
defined in a spectrum rather than a distinct binary property.
1.2.2
Differences in pluripotency across culture conditions
One key difference in mouse cells maintained in M15 and 2i conditions is heterogeneity.
Studies have shown that mouse ESCs cultivated in 2i condition eliminates heterogeneity
in expression of certain genes, including NANOG [59, 60].
Additionally, the transcriptional profile of mouse ESCs in these two conditions has been
shown to be remarkably different. To describe these differences, ’primed,’ ’naive’, and
’ground state’ of pluripotency have been used for the different mouse ESCs[61]. Re­
search has shown that cells maintained in 2i conditions are efficient in differentiation, per­
haps owing to some cells in LIF + serum culture being transiently biased towards some
cell fates [62]. Additionally, ESCs cultured under these conditions also have distinct ex­
pression profiles, with 2i conditions being more similar to earlier stages of development
[12]. Therefore, one can argue that cells in 2i are closer to the ground state of pluripotency
than cells in LIF + serum.
Another fact that points towards 2i cells being more naïve is the epigenetic state of the
cells in the two conditions. Epigenetics plays a crucial role in differentiation and determi­
nation of cell fate during development.[63] To give a brief introduction, epigenetics refers
to the regulation of phenotypic expression without altering any DNA sequences. One
can understand it as the regulation of gene expression that happens via alteration of the
physical state of DNA or the modification of DNA and its attached proteins. Examples
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
7
==PAGE:18==
by which gene expression is regulated epigenetically are DNA methylation/acetylation,
histone modification, and chromatin formation.
One epigenetic event that occurs during embryonic development is the silencing of one
X chromosome in female embryos. When a female cell that carries two X chromosomes
goes through development, the major part of one of these chromosomes is usually inac­
tivated. Some causes for the inactivation are DNA methylation, removal of active histone
modifications, the addition of repressive histone modifications, and heterochromatin for­
mation [64].
Analysis of the epigenetic landscape of mouse cells in the two conditions indicated a clear
difference in the epigenetic state of the DNA between the two[59]. Noticeably, repressive
histone marks were found to be reduced in 2i conditions. However, this difference in
increased repressive histone marks in LIF + serum conditions was also present in genes
that were also up­regulated in LIF + serum compared to 2i. Another interesting difference
between 2i and M15 is in MYC­C expression. A significant difference in expression is
noted between cells in the two conditions, with 2i expressing less MYC­C than M15. MYC­
C has been shown to be an important transcription factor for many genes expressed
particularly in ESCs, so the downregulation of MYC­C in 2i is very distinctive of a large
shift in the transcriptional profile of ESCs from M15 to 2i. Evidence has shown that MYC­C
regulates transcriptional events by releasing polymerase two (pol II) that has paused near
the transcriptional start site of many genes[65]. This correlates with increased occupation
of pol II near transcription start sites in 2i ESCs, where MYC­C is greatly reduced.
But while there are differences between mouse ESCs propagated under either M15 or 2i,
these are minor compared to the differences between either of these and human ESCs
cultivated under conventional conditions with bFGF.[24]. In fact, human ESCs have been
found to be more similar to mouse stem cells derived from a later stage of the blastocyst.
These mouse cells were isolated from post­implantation blastocysts and termed EpiScs
for post­implantation epiblast stem cells [66, 67]. To clarify, these cells are also derived
from the inner cell mass of the embryo, like conventional mouse ESCs, but they were
isolated after the embryo had been implanted in the uterus of the mouse. Conventional
mouse ESCs are derived from the pre­implantation embryo, showing a significant physi­
ological difference between the two states depending on where the cells were isolated.
EpiSc, like other pluripotent stem cells, expresses the three pluripotency markers, OCT4,
SOX2, and NANOG, and can be induced to differentiate into all three germ layers [66].
However, LIF, BMP4 or ERK, and GSK3 inhibitors (2i) do not allow for EpiSc propaga­
tion. Rather, these cells require human ESC­like conditions for propagation. This includes
feeder cells and the addition of bFGF and Activin A to the culture medium. Like human
ESCs, EpiScs also have poor clonogenic capabilities, meaning they do not propagate
well as single cells and must be sub­cultured as cell clusters rather than single cells. This
stands in contrast to mouse ESCs that can be propagated readily as single cells using
trypsin to detach the cells from each other and the surface coating. Another difference to
mouse ESC shared for human ESC and mouse EpiScs is the inactivation of one X chro­
mosome in female individuals by human ESCs and EpiScs. The degree of pluripotency
between human ESCs and EpiScs is also similar[66].
While all stem cells mentioned here expressed the core pluripotency markers, their ability
in vivo to give rise to all cell types has been rigorously tested. While there are many
markers of pluripotency, the most significant test of pluripotency capabilities of stem cells
is to directly show the viability of the cells to give rise to an entire, new organism.
8
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:19==
Several methods exist to test ESCs’ pluripotency. Some of these are limited to mouse
ESCs and model systems due to ethical concerns. Perhaps the most non­invasive method
of testing pluripotent capabilities is by forming embryonic bodies (EBs). When ESC cells
are detached from a surface, they form spherical aggregates. If ESCs are actively kept
from attaching to any surface, these aggregates persist, which causes the cells of the
aggregates to start differentiating into precursors of the three germ­layer­specific cells.
These cells can be collected, and the protein/mRNA expression of marker genes for the
three germ layers can be assayed via immunochemistry or PCR protocols.
Before EB formation assays were developed, another widely used assay format was ter­
atoma formation. When ESC cells are injected subcutaneously into immuno­compromised
mice, they start to form benign tumors that contain many different tissue types from all
three germ layers; for example, tissues similar to organs, muscles, and bone can be
found. This in vivo assay contains many variables, from teratoma host to method and
location of cell injection, for example, but is still considered a very powerful assay to de­
termine the in vivo pluripotency of the stem cells used.
Finally, a more extreme pluripotency test is the formation of chimeric animals. By injecting
marked ESCs into embryos at the early stages, pluripotent stem cells have been shown to
be able to contribute and integrate into the host embryo and effectively participate in the
formation of an adult animal with cells of two separate genetic origins. While incredibly
powerful, this assay of chimeric formation is of course species specific and extremely
resource demanding.
Both mouse EpiSc and ESC have been shown to contribute to chimera formation, when
introduced at the appropriate stages of embryonic development [68, 69], showing that
both cell types are truly pluripotent, with 2i ESCs efficiently contributing at an earlier stage
of development than EpiSc. This again indicates that ESCs in 2i conditions are closer to
a ground state of pluripotency, found earlier in development than EpiSc.
For some time now, attempts have been made to establish equivalent states of pluripo­
tency for human ESCs. Since culturing with bFGF and (TGFβ) has been shown to be
more similar to mouse EpiSC, the hope is that a state more similar to ESCs 2i or LIF +
serum and the ground state of pluripotency can be established. In this context, the mucin
protein, MUC1, has been investigated.
1.3
MUC1 in Human Pluripotent Stem Cells
1.3.1
The MUC1 Protein
MUC1 is a transmembrane mucin protein, typically found on the surface of glandular ep­
ithelial cells, such as those along the gastrointestinal tract [70]. Its normal function is
thought to be part of the mucin layer of proteins protecting the lining of the epithelium
from bacteria, but a specific function has yet to be found [71]. Much of the focus on
MUC1 concerns its role in cancer, and MUC1, in particular, has been found to be overex­
pressed in many different types of cancer[72]. In particular, the expression of MUC1 has
been found in cases of aggressive, metastasizing cancer [73], emphasizing the value of
understanding this protein in cancers.
Decades of work analyzing this protein have now resulted in considerable information
on the protein being readily available, including the structure and sequence of both the
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
9
==PAGE:20==
protein and the single gene (Muc­1) that transcribes it.
The protein structure of MUC1 can be seen in figure 1.3. It comprises four regions: the
signal peptide, a region of Variable Number Tandem Repeats (VNTR), a transmembrane
domain, and a cytoplasmic tail. MUC1 is orientated such that the N­terminus faces out­
wards extracellularly while the C­terminus faces inwards intracellularly. MUC1 is normally
found to be highly O­glycosylated at the VNTRs, with 50 to 90 % of the molecular weight
stemming from glycosylation. As such, the weight of the full­length MUC1 can vary from
ca. 250 kDa to 500 kDa, depending on the degree of glycosylation [74]. However, MUC1
is found to be autocatalytically cleaved at a conserved site named the SEA domain. This
SEA domain is located close to the transmembrane domain on the extracellular side of
the protein. This cleavage happens inside the cell before it is inserted into the mem­
brane, and the two parts of MUC1 remain attached by non­covalent interactions. These
two parts of MUC1 will be referred to as N­terminal MUC1 (NT­MUC1) and C­terminal
MUC1 (CT­MUC1) in the following. NT­MUC1 has been found to be cleaved from the rest
of the protein via cleavage by metalloproteases ADAM17 and MMP14 that separates the
two parts of MUC1 from each other and have been shown to create two variant forms of
CT­MUC1 [75, 76]. These forms vary in the length of their extracellular domain, with one
being 45 amino acids long and the other 27. While the 27 amino acid variant is found to
be rapidly degraded in both normal and cancer cells [77], the 45 amino acid variant was
stably detected both in cancer cells and human ESCs. This 45 amino acid extracellular
domain variant of CT­MUC1 that was found to act as a growth factor receptor in human
cancer cells and in human ESCs. These properties were shown in a series of papers
published in 2008 to 2016 [10, 11, 8, 9] and forms the background for the use as MUC1
as factor in pluripotency in human ESCs. To couple this knowledge into mouse ESCs, the
main discoveries of these papers will be covered.
1.3.2
A Minimal Fragment of MUC1 Mediates Growth of Cancer Cells
Mahanta et al.[10] show in this paper that the 45 amino acid extracellular domain CT­
MUC1 variant, named MUC1*, is the dominant form of MUC1 expressed on the cultured
human cancer cells. This was done by immunocytochemistry, using a novel antibody,
specific to the 45 amino acid extracellular domain found in MUC1*. The novel antibody,
Anti­MUC1*, showed specificity towards MUC1* by comparison with commercially avail­
able antibodies, VU4H5 and Ab­5, that are specific to the VNTR and CT­domain of MUC1
respectively. While co­immunoprecipitation with Ab­5 found both full­length MUC1 and
MUC1*, using anti­MUC1* only, found a small molecular weight product of 16­45 kDa,
matching the expected size of MUC1*, with the variation stemming from different glycosy­
lation states. Using the MUC1* antibody, it was found that MUC1* is the dominant form of
MUC1 on the surface of cancer cells, showing higher levels compared to the non­cleaved
form of MUC1 and is expressed uniformly over the surface of the cells. Transfection of
cells with a construct of MUC1 that could only produce MUC1* showed higher cell growth
and resistance to induction of apoptosis by chemotherapy agents. From this effect on
growth and its membrane locality, it was suggested that MUC1* acts as a growth recep­
tor for an unknown ligand. If the MUC1* receptor was activated by dimerization, then it
was reasoned that the addition of the MUC1* antibody should bind to two extracellular
domains of MUC1* and mimic the effect of ligand addition. It was seen that the growth
rate was affected in a dosage­dependent manner by the anti­MUC1* antibody, following
a bell­shaped curve, where after a critical concentration of antibody, growth rates began
to fall with the addition of more antibody. It was also shown that using a monovalent Fab
version of MUC1* decreased the growth rates of cells. These findings highlight that it is
10
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:21==
Human MUC1 
N-Terminal subunit (NT)
aa 24-1097
C-Terminal subunit (CT)
aa 1098 - 1255
SEA domain
aa 1039-1148
= tandem repeats
= transmembrane domain
= signal peptide
=  C-terminal
=  N-terminal
Cleavage product MUC1*
aa 1085 - 1255
Figure 1.3: Linear schematic of the human MUC1 protein. Domains and regions of interest
are marked and color­coded.
the MUC1* dimerization by the antibody which leads to increased growth rates and that
the opposite effect is observed when MUC1* is blocked by the addition of a saturating
concentrations of MUC1* antibody or its monovalent Fab variant.
To show that cancer cells produced a dimerizing ligand for MUC1*, cell lysate was washed
over MUC1* peptides and fixed onto gold nanoparticles. Crosslinking of MUC1* peptides
by a ligand would result in a color shift, caused by the gold nanoparticles. This was ob­
served for the MUC1­positive cancer cells and not for MUC1­negative. By co­precipitation
with the MUC1* peptide and immunochemistry, both NME1 and NME2 were found and
confirmed to bind to MUC1* in a dimerizing manner. Indeed, MUC1­positive cells showed
a similar increase in growth with the addition of exogenous NME1 protein, which was not
observed when MUC1 expression was knocked out by siRNA. It was also found that can­
cer cells stimulated with anti­MUc1* show increased phosphorylation of ERK1/2.
This paper thus concluded that the MUC1* variant of MUC1 has growth­stimulating abili­
ties, and NME1 and possibly NME2 act as activating ligands in a concentration­dependent
manner.
1.3.3
MUC1* Mediates the Growth of Human Pluripotent Stem Cells
In this paper, Hikita et al.,[11] show that these properties of increased cell growth and
resistance to apoptosis, also apply to MUC1* in human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs).
Additionally, by using immunofluorescently stained human ESCs, the paper shows that the
presence of MUC1* greatly coincides with markers of pluripotency, like OCT4 and SSEA­
4, and which is only seen for full­length MUC1, in regions of cells appearing to differentiate.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
11
==PAGE:22==
Importantly, the MUC1* variant is not observed in ESCs induced to differentiate, while full­
length MUC1 is seen. This indicates that MUC1* is only expressed on un­differentiated
cells and could correlate with a high degree of pluripotency.
To show that MUC1* and NME1 interact and confer the same properties as seen in hu­
man cancer cells, Hikita et al. treated human ESCs plated at low densities with increas­
ing amounts of MUC1* antibodies over a period of 10 days. This experiment showed a
dosage­dependent increase in the growth of ESCs, similar to that seen in MUC1­positive
cancer cells. The expected bell curve shape is, however, not observed. Surprisingly, the
ESCs of this experiment were grown in minimal media containing no bFGF or fibroblast­
conditioned media, which, as mentioned, is conventionally required for human ESC growth.
To test whether NME1 continued to be a ligand for MUC1* on human ESCs, this ability to
cultivate undifferentiating ESCs in minimal media conditions was investigated by adding
exogenous NME1 or a mutant variant of NME1. In particular, the S120G mutantional
variant of NME1, gave results similar to cells cultivated with MUC1* antibody. The NME1
S120G variant is known to preferentially form dimers in contrast to wild­type NME1, sug­
gesting that the multimeric state of NME1 is important for its ability to bind MUC1*. In
conclusion, all three conditions of either anti­MUC1*, NME1, or NME1 S120G allowed for
long­term growth of human ESCs in the absence of conditioned media, bFGF, or other
growth factors.
1.3.4
MUC1* Ligand, NM23­H1, Is a Novel Growth Factor That Maintains
Human Stem Cells in a More Naïve State
The following paper by Smagghe et al.[8] is, in many ways, an extension of the previous
work by Hikita et al., continuing the work on NME1 and its use as a growth factor and the
MUC1* receptor to grow human PSCs. The topic of NME1 multimeric states and how it
is related to MUc1* binding is also investigated in more detail.
In particular, it was shown that soluble NME1 exists mainly in hexameric states when
extracted and analyzed by Western blotting, naive gels, and size exclusion chromatog­
raphy. However, a solution of mostly dimeric NME1 can be generated using the NME1
mutant, S120G, by denaturing and refolding the proteins. To demonstrate the effects of
the NME1 multimeric state, human ESCs were cultured in minimal media, with either a
dimeric population of NME1 S120G, a hexameric population of NME1 S120G, or wild­
type NME1. As expected, they found that cells cultured with dimeric NME1 were able to
remain undifferentiated in minimal media, whereas cells in wild­type NME1 or hexameric
NME1 were not able to do so, as determined by microscopy techniques.
Smagghe et al. also introduce a novel surface coating containing the anti­MUC1* antibody
and show, using plates with high protein binding capacity, that ESCs could be cultured on
this surface alone. iPSC and human ESCs using both this surface coating and dimeric
NME1 were compared to cells grown on feeder cells or matrigel with either supplemented
bFGF or in mTesR1­defined medium. The comparisons included the expression of gene
markers for pluripotency, doubling time, and differentiation capabilities.
Although a period of adjustment is needed for cells transferred into NME1/anti­MUC1*
conditions, it is shown that cells maintained in these conditions over a period of 25­30
days achieve an equal, if not lower, doubling time for both ESCs and iPSCs compared to
contemporary methods.
Comparison of gene expression by qPCR, was reported to show that expression of naivety
markers such as Oct4 and Nanog were significantly increased in comparison to cells cul­
12
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:23==
tured without NME1 or anti­MUC1* surface. A trend in increasing expression of these
markers was also noticed with increasing passage number of the cells in NME1 on anti­
MUC1*, which was not seen in cells from other conditions. The opposite was seen for
gene markers indicative of a more primed state of pluripotency, with cells in NME1 on
anti­MUC1* expressing these markers significantly less than ESCs in mTesR1 on ma­
trigel. However, high levels of variance were detected in these measurements, especially
between cells of different passages.
Cells cultured in NME1 and on an anti­MUC1 surface were able to differentiate into cells
of the three germ layers, as tested by ICC of embryoid bodies and formation of teratomas
in mice. In the embryoid body, protein markers for cells of the three germ layers were
used to show differentiation (Alpha Feto, β III­Tubulin, and Smooth muscle actin).
Additionally, the state of the X chromosome in ESCs cultured in NME1/anti­MUC1* shows
a greatly reduced concentration of tri­methylation of lysine on histone 3 (H3K27me3).
ICC staining for H3K27me3 showed that female cells cultured in NME1/anti­MUC1* over
time reverted from one active, one inactive X chromosome state to having two active X
chromosomes. This double­active X chromosome state is most commonly seen in naive
ESCs and indicates a state closer to ground­state pluripotency.
Finally, Smagghe et al. show that the cloning efficiency of ESCs cultured in NME1/anti­
MUC1* is significantly higher. This was tested by passaging the cells by tryptonization into
single cells and counting the total number of individual colonies formed on a new plate.
In conclusion, NME1 interactions with MUC1* were shown to greatly influence the growth
and pluripotency of human ESCs and iPSCs, with the NME1 required to be in a dimeric
state to dimerize MUC1* and induce growth. A system where this NME1 / MUC1* in­
teraction could act as a switch for exit from pluripotency is suggested. This trigger in
differentiation would be caused by the switch of NME1 from its dimeric state to a hexam­
eric state due to an increase in concentration. The concentration would be dependent on
the density of cells, where fewer cells would secrete NME1 in concentrations that allow
for dimer formation until a threshold of cells is reached that then results in an increase
in the concentration of secreted NME1 and subsequent switch from a dimeric state to a
hexameric state of NME1. This hexameric from then results in no binding of NME1 to
MUC1* and an exit from pluripotency, as seen in the paper.
However, this system of NME1 concentrations controlling pluripotency fails to explain how
pluripotency can be maintained when NME1 concentrations are lower than the level re­
quired for dimer formation.
1.3.5
A Primitive Growth Factor, NME7AB, Is Sufficient to Induce Stable
Naïve State Human Pluripotency;
The final paper by Carter et al[9]. introduces another NME protein, NME7, as a dimerizing
ligand for the MUC1* growth factor receptor, similar to NME1. A truncated version of
NME7 of 33 kDa instead of 42 kDa, named NME7ab, was shown to confer similar effects
on human pluripotent stem cells as NME1. This included increased growth in minimal
media without the use of feeder cells or conditioning of media. Also, NME7ab allowed
for passaging human ESCs as single cells, with increased cloning efficiency compared to
cells grown with bFGF on feeder cells. Serial passaging experiments showed that iPSCs
and ESCs grown in NME7ab showed a stable karyotype over an average of 30 passages.
The ability to form teratomas was also confirmed for ESCs grown with NME7ab.
Similar to NME1, iPSCs, and ESCs cultivated on MUC1* antibody in minimal media with
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
13
==PAGE:24==
NME7ab show a high fraction of cells that switch from a one­active X chromosome state to
a two­active X chromosome state, with the two­X­state fraction increasing with additional
passages in media.
To confirm that NME7ab function similarly to NME1, by dimerizing MUC1*, NME7ab was
shown to bind to the extracellular domain of two MUC1* peptides by a sandwich ELISA­
like protocol. The experiment was designed such that an immobilized MUC1* peptide is
exposed to NME7ab in solution, causing NME7ab to bind MUC1*. Afterward, the solu­
ble fraction of NME7ab is removed, and additional free MUC1* tagged with a reporter is
added. As the addition of free MUC1* resulted in increased binding to the immobilized
MUC1*, the NME7ab was likely able to bind each of the two molecules of MUC1* simulta­
neously. It was also shown that the 33 kDa form of NME7 could be extracted from the cell
lysate of cells grown in NME7ab media and visualized by Western blotting. This variant
could not be found in the bFGF­grown counterpart.
Next, Carter et al. compared the expression profile of NME7ab­grown ESCs with ESCs
cultivated with either bFGF or NME1. Additionally, a line of NME7ab cells with one in­
active X chromosome was included in the comparison. Principle component analysis of
the different cells showed that bFGF­grown cells differ the most in expression compared
to the other cell types, as would be expected. Comparing the remaining three states,
NME7ab two­X, NME1 two­X, and NME7ab one­X showed a clear difference in expres­
sion for all groups, also between the two NME7ab expressions, indicating a key role of X
chromosome activation in expression pattern.
This comparison of expression profiles was also performed on expression data sets of re­
portedly naïve ESCs generated via alternative methods. These expression profiles were
individually compared to bFGF­primed ESCs, and the genes that showed a twofold or
higher difference in expression were then compared between the naïve ESCs of the dif­
ferent methods to investigate what genes were commonly up­ or downregulated and which
genes differed from study to study. To briefly summarize, the expression pattern of up­and
down­regulated genes across the different studies showed little consistency and indicated
that at the expression level, there is a redundancy in the expression of genes that allows
for the establishment of naïve pluripotency.
While the individual gene expression differed between studies, the functionality of these
genes and what they affect could still show similarities. To investigate this, Carter et al.
sorted the up­ and down­regulation genes into functional groups and compared them.
This analysis showed that several of the studies were in agreement in the downregulation
of genes functionally related to MAP kinase, BMP, and Wnt signaling, indicating a common
theme for these pathways to be down­regulated in naïve human ESCs.
In conclusion, the paper highlights the similarity of NME7ab and, by extension, NME7’s
similarity to NME1 in promoting a naïve state of pluripotency in human ESCs by dimeriza­
tion of MUC1* and suggests a solution to the paradox presented around NME1 during the
early stages of development. NME1 was shown to require a dimeric state for dimerizing
MUC1*, which only forms at certain concentrations of NME1. So until this concentration
is reached during early development, how do the cells stimulate pluripotency and avoid
inhibition by the binding of monomeric NME1? Carter et al. propose that NME7 in a
monomeric state is expressed when too few cells are present to generate the concentra­
tion required for the formation of dimeric NME1 and thus compete for binding of MUC1*
with the monomeric NME1. As the cell count and concentration of NME1 increases, the
dimeric form of NME1 replaces NME7 as a ligand for MUC1*. To prevent rebinding of
NME7 when NME1 concentrations start to cause hexamer formation, the initial binding of
14
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:25==
dimeric NME1 to MUC1* must cause NME7 to be down­regulated going forward.
However, this fascinating system of swapping ligands and concentration­dependent switches
has received little attention in recent years. Very little of the work shown in these four
papers has been replicated in mouse ESCs to test whether the system could hold signifi­
cance across species.
As such, this work will attempt to help fill in these gaps in knowledge of MUC1 and its
NME ligands in the well­studied mouse ESC systems. However, there are differences in
the proteins between the two species that are worth consideration.
1.3.6
MUC1 in Mouse embryonic stem cells
The first step to ascertain if MUC1 could play the same role in mouse ESCs would be to
look at the protein structure across the two species to establish their similarity.
Mouse and Human MUC1 are highly similar at the structural level, with both found to form
the heterodimeric complex of an N­terminal (NT) containing part and a C­terminal (CT)
containing part, seen in figure ??. Like the Human MUC1, this auto­proteolytic cleavage
and reconnection of the NT and CT is due to conserved motifs in the SEA domain, with
the two parts being connected non­covalently. The NT part is highly O­glycosylated and
does not contain the transmembrane domain. The CT part contains the transmembrane
domain and only shows a low degree of N­glucosylation on its extracellular sequence [78].
As in the human counterpart, the murine NT­domain is O­glycosylated many times on
highly repetitive sequences. However, unlike the human VNTR, where the number of
repeats can differ greatly, the mouse MUC1 does not show this hyper­variability in the
number of repeats between individuals[79]. The total number of repeats found in mice is
also lower than in humans, with sixteen (16) total repeats being canonical. This makes
the NT­part of mouse MUC1 smaller than the human counterpart, consisting of a total of
473 amino acids. In total, the two NT parts of mouse and human MUC1 share a sequence
identity of less than 50% using sequence alignment tools NCBI. Other studies have shown
the sequence homology of the tandem repeats of the two proteins can be as low as 37%.
Outside of the tandem repeat region, the protein sequence similarity is much greater. In
the CT parts of MUC1, the sequence identity goes up to 76% using the same sequence
alignment tools. Other studies show that the intra­cellular domain of the CT parts has a
sequence identity as high as 87%.
While the NT domains’ sequence similarity is low, their functional properties as a scaffold
for glycans are the same across humans and mice. This indicates that the amino acids
and overall structure that facilitate this are similar. Regardless, the SEA domain and CT
parts are highly similar in sequences, which is very relevant as the MUC1* variant in
human ESCs is exclusively comprised of these parts. This is also important for detection,
as antibodies that recognize these parts of human MUC1 are also likely to bind the mouse
counterparts.
MUC1* is, however, not a native sequence but a cleavage product of MUC1, and the
formation of this variant is required for the MUC1 / NME interaction described earlier
to occur. Whether mouse MUC1 can form this variant has yet to be reported, but the
proposed method by which the NT­part of human MUC1 is shed has also been seen to
affect mouse MUC1. ADAM17 and MMP14 have both been implicated in the shedding of
mouse and human MUC1 from the surface membrane. If this method is how MUC1* is
formed in human ESCs, then these proteases are likely to generate a similar product in
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
15
==PAGE:26==
N-terminal subunit (NT)
aa 21-473 
C-Terminal subunit (CT)
aa 474-630 
= tandem repeats
= transmembrane domain
= signal peptide
=  C-terminal
=  N-terminal
Mouse MUC1 
SEA domain
aa 416 – 521
Figure 1.4: Linear schematic of the mouse MUC1 protein. Domains and regions of interest
are marked and color­coded.
mouse cells, given the similarity in sequence. This opens up the possibility that a similar
MUC1* product can be formed in mice.
As for NME1 and NME2, (aka. Nucleotide Diphosphate Kinase A and B), they too play a
critical role in the system of MUC1 / NME interaction as the ligand of MUC1*. These two
proteins are highly similar in sequence, both between the proteins themselves and their
mouse homolog. While only NME1 was used to induce pluripotency with MUC1*, NME1
and NME2 are incredibly hard to distinguish from each other and have been found in het­
erooligomeric complexes. NME1 and NME2 form heteromeric complexes, with various
combinations of NME1 and NME2 participating in the complex [80]. Since a hexameric
population of NME1 results in a lack of binding to the MUC1* receptor, it is also of interest
to investigate the involvement of NME2, as its expression could also relate to the forma­
tion of hexamers with NME1, potentially locking away the ability of NME1 to interact with
MUC1*. Recently, NME2 has also been shown to be involved in regulating MYC­C in
pluripotent cells, with its transportation to the nucleus being key to increased expression
of MYC­C [81]. As mentioned, a decrease in MYC­C expression is also seen for mouse
ESCs in a very naïve state, leading to the possibility of NME1 / NME2 regulating pluripo­
tency in other ways than through MUC1. It is perhaps also possible that MUC1 plays a
role in the translocation of NME2 to the nucleus.
Nevertheless, given that MUC1 proteases function similarly in mouse and human cells and
NME and MUC1 proteins share common functionality across species, it could indicate that
there is a distinct possibility that MUC1* and NME interactions could also occur in mouse
ESCs.
16
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:27==
1.4
Theory of Experiments
The previous sections outline the conditions and targets that this work will attempt to
investigate. For clarity’s sake, these targets and conditions are specified here.
To investigate the possibility of MUC1 / NME interactions in mouse ESCs, the expression
of MUC1, NME1, and NME2 was found across three conditions of interest: Human ESCs
in conventional culture conditions and mouse ESCs in gelatin with either LIF and serum
or 2i and LIF medium. Abbreviations for the conditions were adopted based on their
components. For human ESC conditions, as they were cultivated with the defined media
mTesR1 on geltrex­coated plates, the abbreviation mT+ is used for this condition. For
mouse ESC conditions, 15% v/v Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) was added to the basal media
of cells grown only with LIF. As such, this condition is abbreviated m15 + LIF. For cells
grown with the two inhibitors PD and CHIR, as well as LIF, the common abbreviation 2i is
used for this condition.
The transcriptional and protein expression of the targets was investigated using qPCR,
Western blotting, and Flow cytometry analysis. Their principles of function are briefly
covered here.
1.4.1
qPCR
Quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction (qPCR) is a widely used and recognized method
for determining the quantity of DNA in a sample. This method uses the principles of DNA
replication by DNA polymerases to amplify target DNA sequences selectively. A critical
feature of this method is the use of temperature­resistant polymerases, allowing us to
denature sample DNA strands into single strands without causing the polymerase to lose
its function.
Firstly, DNA is denatured at typically 95 degrees to allow the DNA strand to be separated,
enabling access for the primers. Next, the temperature is slightly lowered to allow the
short primer sequences to anneal to the template DNA sequence and for the polymerase
to initiate replication. This round of replication continues for a few minutes to ensure that
the sites of both the forward and reverse primer have been replicated. The temperature is
then increased to denature DNA into single strands again. This initial round of replication
has resulted in the generation of another set of template strands for the primer pairs and
a doubling of the target sequence. The original DNA sequences and an anti­parallel copy
are now available for primer binding, and the following round of replication results in both of
these templates being replicated, again doubling the number of template strands available
for binding by primers in the next round of replication. Multiple rounds of replication, here
shown by X, thus result in the generation of 2X new strands of DNA that are identical to
the target sequence.
To monitor this increase in specific DNA sequences, a fluorescent reporter is often used.
Two popular options are either non­specific intercalating dyes, such as SybrGreen, which
emits fluorescence when bound to any double­stranded DNA or fluorescently tagged
probes, which emit fluorescence when the probe target sequence is amplified. In both
cases, each successive round of amplification results in an increase in emitted fluores­
cence that is proportional to either the total amount of DNA (SybrGreen) or the total
amount of primers that have been consumed during amplification.
However, the expression of genes cannot be measured using genomic DNA as the ex­
pression is reflected by the amount of transcribed mRNA, not DNA. As such mRNA must
first be extracted from samples and turned into DNA before it can be used by polymerases.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
17
==PAGE:28==
The generation of the complementary DNA (cDNA) of the mRNA is done by reverse tran­
scription of the mRNA sequences using reverse transcriptase enzymes. These two reac­
tions, reverse transcription and qPCR can be done in either the same step, where both
enzymes are added, or separately. Both methods have benefits and downsides, but in
this work, the two­step approach was used. This means mRNA extracted from samples
was converted into cDNA using non­specific primers. These non­specific primers allow
for reverse transcription of all sample mRNA, which should theoretically generate a cDNA
population that mimics the distribution of the mRNA it was made from. So, transcripts of
a specific mRNA sequence that was half as abundant as another mRNA transcript should
equally have half as much cDNA compared to the other mRNA transcript. This cDNA can
then readily be used for qPCR to measure their relative abundances, as done in this work.
1.4.2
Western Blotting
Due to various post­transcriptional and post­translational regulatory processes, the mRNA’s
expression does not always reflect the final protein expression. It is, therefore, optimal to
also verify the relative quantities of the proteins that the genes of interest encode. One
method of doing this is Western blotting. This technique can be split into two parts: gel
electrophoresis and immunoblotting. Gel electrophoresis is done to separate proteins in
the sample according to size by applying an electric charge. All the proteins are treated
with a reagent that applies a negative charge to the surfaces of the proteins and loaded
into a gel­like porous matrix. When an electric field with a negative and positive charge
is applied to the proteins in the gel, a force is applied to the proteins and causes them to
migrate away from the negative charge and towards the positive charge. This movement
is based on the mass­to­charge ratio of the protein and the resistance it faces moving
through the gel matrix. When all proteins in the sample have the same mass­to­charge
ratio, they can be separated only by the resistance of the gel, as smaller proteins will have
less difficulty moving through a gel with low porosity compared to larger proteins. This
uniform mass­to­charge ratio can be achieved through a variant of gel electrophoresis
called SDS­PAGE.
SDS­PAGE uses sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) as a detergent to unfold and denature
protein structures, allowing the SDS to bind equally to the proteins’ amino acids. SDS
molecule binds and confers a negative charge to the amino acids and masks any intrin­
sic charge it may have. Thus, the ratio of amino acids and charge is the same for both
large and small proteins. Proper unfolding and denaturing is critical for the SDS to bind
uniformly across the protein. SDS by itself is sometimes not sufficient to denature the pro­
teins, so the proteins are often also heated to near boiling temperatures, which increases
the unfolding of the proteins.
The second part of western blotting involves transferring the now size­separated proteins
to an exposed membrane for blotting with antibodies that are specific to the proteins of
interest. The membranes used are often composed of nitro­cellulose, as it has a high
protein binding capability. The proteins are transferred to the membrane using a similar
electromotive force as during the SDS­PAGE. The gel containing the proteins is placed
onto the membrane, and an electrical charge is applied such that the positive charge is
behind the membrane and in front of the gel. This causes the negatively charged proteins
to move out of the gel and onto the membrane. It is often advised to check that pro­
teins have successfully transferred to the membrane. The proteins on the membrane can
now be exposed to the protein­specific antibodies during the blotting process. A primary
and secondary antibody setup is often used, where the primary antibodies are specific
towards the proteins of interest, and the secondary antibodies subsequently bind the pri­
18
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:29==
mary antibodies and contain a reporting molecule. This reporter could be a fluorescent or
radioactive molecule or an enzyme such as Horseradish peroxidase (HRP) that generates
a chemiluminescent signal upon the addition of its substrate.
Thus, a signal can be seen only if both the primary and secondary antibodies bind to their
respective targets. The signal of a successful antibody binding showing the appropriate
size can be used to confirm the presence of the protein and to compare relative amounts
of proteins if a consistent protein concentration is used. However, the specificity of the
experiment is very dependent on the performance of the antibodies used. To prevent un­
specific binding, blocking solutions of serums or milk are used to occupy sites on proteins
that the antibodies could bind to unspecifically.
1.4.3
FACS / Flow cytometry analysis
The two previous methods are most commonly used for analyzing bulk samples and not
for analyzing single cells. Flow cytometry takes advantage of flow dynamics to separate
single cells in suspension and allow for single­cell resolutions. It is similar to Western
blotting in that it uses immunochemistry to detect and label proteins. The key difference
is that flow cytometry allows for the investigation of protein expression at the single­cell
level with high throughput, while Western blotting does not.
The cells used in flow cytometry are treated with antibodies to stain for proteins and
targets of interest before being sent through a flow cytometer. The cells can either be
live cells from culture or fixed cells that have been treated with a fixative agent such as
paraformaldehyde (PFA), which keeps the structure of cells intact and prevents the degra­
dation of molecules even if the cells are dead. To allow for high throughput of cells, the
reporter molecules of the antibodies are often fluorophores that can be rapidly excited
and emit strong signals by using lasers.
Flow cytometry is done on flow cytometers. These machines take up the antibody­stained
cells suspended in liquid and pass them through a system called the flow cell. Inside the
flow cell are two fluid streams with different flow rates. One can imagine this setup as one
stream of fluid, often called the sheath fluid, surrounding a small circular second stream,
often called the sample fluid. The difference in flow rates between the two streams is
controlled such that the streams do not mix, and the width of the inner stream is accurately
set to a size through which only single cells can pass, with a few micrometers variability.
This method of using the flow of one liquid to control the diameter of another flow of liquid
inside it is called hydro­dynamic focusing.
As the cells are injected into the narrow sample stream, they are stuck by lasers or other
light sources. If fluorophores are excited, their emitted light can be collected by detectors
in the flow cytometer and converted into digital data for analysis. Many different lasers
can be used to cause the emission of light by many different fluorophores, and as such,
many different targets can be assayed in each cell. One limitation is that the spectrum
of absorbance and emission of the fluorophores must not overlap, or it can risk that the
signal from one target overlaps with another, giving false negatives and positives.
Two other parameters often collected by flow cytometry are forward scattering and side
scattering. These two values represent the amount of light reflected either by the cell’s
surface or by the intracellular components. Forward scattering light is collected behind
the cell relative to the direction of the light applied, while the side scattering is collected
perpendicular to the cell and the applied light to measure the amount of light that is re­
flected to the sides of the cell. These two values give a representation of the size and the
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
19
==PAGE:30==
granularity of the cells, respectively
The single­cell resolution of flow cytometry makes it very powerful at detecting subpopu­
lations that could otherwise be hidden in bulk analysis. In this work, the purpose of using
flow cytometry is to try to identify patterns of expression for MUC1 and its NME ligands
on single cells and investigate whether differences can be observed across the different
conditions of m15, 2i, and mT+ culturing.
20
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:31==
2
Results
2.1
H9 And E14 ESC Cultivation
2.1.1
H9 ESC
H9 human ESCs used in this thesis were cultivated using defined media, mTesR1 (mT+),
in six­well plates coated with Geltrex. The cells grown under these conditions showed the
expected flattened morphology of human ESCs with well­defined edges, as seen in Figure
2.1. The cells were examined daily using phase contrast light­microscopy and were seen
to expand readily in culture, with few to no colonies appearing substantially different from
one another. H9 cells were able to be passaged as colonies and attached to the Geltrex
surface without incident.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
21
==PAGE:32==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1: H9 ESCs of passage 105, cultivated in mTesR1 for three days (a) and two days
(b) since passaging, scale bar = 500µm. Captured with phase contrast light­microscopy
In addition to the H9 cells cultivated using mT+, a more differentiated sub­culture was
attempted to be cultivated in order to compare the relative states of pluripotency. H9
mT+ cells were switched to a standard minimal medium containing DMEM, KnockOut
serum replacement, and bFGF as the main components. A change in morphology was
seen within hours of medium switching, with the edges of the colonies forming elongated
structures. After a few days in the SME media, the H9 cells adopted a dotted­colony mor­
phology, as seen in Figure 2.2. After switching the medium, the cells appeared to adapt to
the new conditions, and the growth of colonies was still seen after passaging. However,
this growth quickly arrested after two or three passages, and the colonies appeared to fall
apart and disintegrate. This was the case regardless of the addition of any range from
10 to 100 ug/ml of bFGF. These cells could be rescued by switching the medium back to
mT+.
22
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:33==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2: H9 ESCs of passage 105, cultivated in SME media (KOSR + bFGF). Days
since passaging indicated in the bottom left corner of (a) and (b), scale bar = 200µm (a)
and 500µm (b). Captured with phase contrast light­microscopy
2.1.2
E14 ESC
Mouse E14 ESCs used in this thesis were cultivated in both defined media with PD, CHIR,
and LIF (2i) as well as in a 15% v/v serum­containing medium with only LIF (M15). Cells
in both media were plated on 0.1% v/v gelatin. All 2i cells were initially cultured in M15
conditions and then switched to the 2i condition, where they were kept.
The E14 showed distinct morphological differences across culture conditions, as observed
by light microscopy.
These differences can be seen in Figure 2.3­2.4.
Cells in M15
medium grew as imperfect spherical domes, with a high fraction of cells appearing to
form colonies with a darker appearance and protruding axon­like structures. The darker
appearances of these cells could be due to a decrease in the nucleus volume relative
to the cytoplasm. As the nucleus of cells is more dense and reflects more light than the
cytoplasm, a decrease in the volume of the nucleus could be what is causing these cells
to appear darker. The high ratio of nucleus to cytoplasm volume is often found in undif­
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
23
==PAGE:34==
ferentiated stem cells, as their primary purpose is to replicate their DNA quickly to expand
and differentiate into mature functional cells. This, in turn, could implicate that the darker
cells seen here are cells that have either started differentiating or have already undergone
some level of differentiation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.3: E14 ESCs in 15% v/v with LIF, captured with phase contrast light­microscopy.
Date of capture and scale bar are indicated in images
This distribution of brighter and darker cells across passages indicates that these cells
reappeared following each passage or survived passaging as single cells and expanded
in the new cultures. Nevertheless, this suggests that a fraction of cells in the M15 medium
could be less pluripotent or not at all pluripotent.
E14 mouse ESCs grown in 2i medium had a dense morphology of domes with many
colonies shaped as a near­perfect sphere. When observed under a light microscope,
these cells were uniformly bright, with few exceptions. This is within expectations of the
morphology of mouse ESCs cultivated in the 2i­containing medium. Both M15 and 2i cells
were readily passaged as single cells and attached when re­plated.
In general, observations of the H9 and E14 cells in 2i culture showed morphologies con­
24
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:35==
sistent with the morphologies expected of cells grown in these conditions. The E14 cells
in M15 media, which appeared to show an uncommonly high fraction of differentiating
cells.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.4: E14 ESCs in 2i medium, captured with light­microscopy. Date of capture and
scale bar is indicated in the images
2.1.3
Pluripotency
The expression of known pluripotency markers such as OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, and MYC­
C was tested across the three types of cells by qPCR and flow cytometry to validate the
pluripotency of the cultured cells.
Reverse transcriptase qPCR was done using cell pellets of H9 from the mTesR1 medium
and E14 cells from the M15 and 2i mediums. The relative expression of the three markers
was found both by comparing internally between the three types of cell with the ∆∆­Cq
and by comparison to the expression of two reference genes, Gapdh and Ubiquntin­c
directly. The results are shown in Figure A.7.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
25
==PAGE:36==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.5: Relative expression of the four pluripotency markers: Oct4, Sox2, Nanog and
Myc­c. Data is presented as averages of four biological replicates (n = 4), and error
bars indicate +−1σ standard deviation. (a) Show expression in relation to the average
expression of two reference genes from the same conditions, and (b) show the relative
expression normalized to the expressions seen in H9 mT+ cells by the ∆∆­Cq method.
The results of the qPCR experiments show that all three samples expressed the genes of
interest. It was seen that the mouse M15 and 2i cells exhibit a lower overall expression of
the four pluripotency markers in comparison to the human cells. It is at this point unclear
whether these differences can be correlated to the pluripotency states of the cells or a
difference in species. Another uncertainty lies in the fact that the primers used for human
and mouse ESCs are different, which could result in different amplification efficiencies
across the primers.
Between the two E14 conditions, it was found that the average level of expression of Oct4,
Sox2, and Nanog was higher in cells of the 2i condition, while cells in M15 expressed Myc­
26
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:37==
c at higher levels (p­values < 0.05). These expressions are consistent with what has been
shown in other studies, that cells in the 2i condition express Myc­c at low levels compared
to ESCs cultivated in other conditions. The higher levels of the remaining genes of interest
could indicate that cells in the 2i condition are more pluripotent, as higher expression
of these markers is typically expected for very pluripotent cells. Bur while it has been
reported that mouse ESCs in 2i conditions express Oct­4, Sox2, and Nanog at higher
levels than mouse ESCs in M15, the difference observed here could also be due to the
observed higher fraction of differentiated cells present in the culture.
The expression of MYC­C, OCT­4, and NANOG was also examined by flow cytometry
of fixed cells in the three conditions: mT+, M15, and 2i.
The cells were fixed using
4% paraformaldehyde and permeabilized using Triton­X100. Data analysis was done
by isolating single cells based on their side and forward scattering and determining the
thresholds for positive and negative populations for the targets of interest using negative
controls.
MYC­C was found to be present in approximately 85% or more of the cells from each
condition, with the highest percentage being 91.4% for the cells in the M15 condition, as
seen in Figure 2.6. This result matches the qPCR results, showing high expression of
MYC­C in cells from the M15 condition.
The expression of other genes, that was found in literature to be deferentially expressed
between mouse ESCs in the two conditions or between mouse and human ESCs. These
results are along shown in the appendix.
More than 80% of cells stained with an primary OCT­4 antibody conjugated to a fluo­
rophore, had a higher signal than unstained cells. The lowest percentage of OCT­4 posi­
tive cells was found in mouse ESCs from the 2i condition and was 83.4%, while the highest
percentage of OCT­4 positive cells was found in mT+ condition human ESCs with 97.9%
positive cells, as seen in Figure 2.7. This stands in contrast to the results of the qPCR
experiments, where M15 mouse ESCs showed the lowest average expression of Oct­4
than cells in other conditions.
Finally, the percentage of NANOG­positive cells were determined for the three different
types of cells. Using the threshold of fluorescent signal from a sample stained only with
the respective secondary antibody, it was found that mT+ human ESCs had a NANOG
positive population of 14.4%, M15 mouse ESCs had 0.61%, and 2i mouse ESCs had
0.70%, as seen in Figure 2.8. These results suggest that few or almost no cells across
conditions express NANOG. This is unexpected since the pluripotency markers, OCT­4
and MYC­C, were present in the majority of cells. The qPCR experiment also indicated
that Nanog should be expressed in the three cell conditions.
One possible explanation for the contradictory results seen for NANOG expression could
a the poor performance of the antibody used. An antibody with low affinity for its target
would result in a lack of binding. The concentration used in this experiment was based
on the recommendations provided by the supplier, but it is not uncommon for antibody
concentrations to require optimization to work with specific protocols.
Alternatively, the permeabilization of cells could have been insufficient to allow antibodies
to reach the NANOG protein during staining, as NANOG is found in the nucleus of cells.
However, both OCT­4 and MYC­C are also found in the nucleus of cells, and a positive
signal was detected from these targets.
To investigate the NANOG antibodiy and their binding targets, a western blot using the
same antibody was carried out on new samples of the three cell conditions. The results
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
27
==PAGE:38==
mT+
m15
2i
Myc_c
Figure 2.6: Flow cytometric data of permeabilized human ESC cultivated in mTesR1
(mT+) and mouse ESCs cultivated in LIF + % 15 serum (M15) or 2i. MYC­C antibody
binding was detected via AlexaFluor 647 (AF647). Gating indicates the threshold for an
unspecific signal.
28
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:39==
Oct4
mT+
m15
2i
Figure 2.7: Flow cytometric data of permeabilized human ESC cultivated in mTesR1
(mT+) and mouse ESCs cultivated in LIF + % 15 serum (M15) or 2i. OCT­4 was de­
tected via fluorescence of AlexaFluor 647 (AF647). Gating indicates the threshold for
unspecific signals.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
29
==PAGE:40==
Nanog
mT+
m15
2i
Figure 2.8: Flow cytometric data of permeabilized human ESC cultivated in mTesR1
(mT+) and mouse ESCs cultivated in LIF + % 15 serum (M15) or 2i. NANOG was de­
tected via fluorescence of AlexaFluor 647 (AF647). Gating indicates the threshold for
unspecific signals.
30
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:41==
Figure 2.9: Western blot membrane of human ESCs in mTesR1 (mT+) and mouse ESCs in
serum + LIF (M15) and non­serum + 2i + LIF (2i) conditions. Probed for NANOG (left) and
subsequently reprobed for BETA­ACTIN (right). Values to the left of the image indicate
the size of ladder protein bands in kDa.
can be seen in Figure 2.9. Four clear bands are seen, one for each cell condition at ap­
proximately 55­56 kDa, with the band for the 2i sample being more prominent and one
additional band at 130 kDa for the mT+ sample. To test whether the proteins had trans­
ferred equally for each sample, the membrane was stripped of the NANOG antibodies and
reprobed for BETA­ACTIN. Reprobing produced three bands across the three samples,
with the mT+ and M15 bands being noticeably larger than the 2i band. Assuming equal
expression of BETA­ACTIN is a positive control and expressed equally in all samples, this
indicates that more protein is present overall in the mT+ and M15 samples than in the 2i
sample.
The NANOG antibody is stated to bind to a band of protein at 42 kDa, which does not
match what is seen in the western blotting experiment. Including the appearance of the
additional band at 130 kDa in the mT+ sample, these results indicate that the antibody did
not bind to the expected NANOG in this experiment. Since the same secondary antibody
was used for both NANOG and BETA­ACTIN staining, it is unlikely that the bands seen
with Nanog staining are due to secondary antibody contamination.
One possible explanation could be that the antibody used is unspecific to its target. If it was
generally unspecific, a smear of bound proteins would have been seen on the membrane.
However, since only distinct bands are seen, it is more likely that the antibody is binding
to other distinct proteins and not proteins many different proteins that vary in size.
Another possibility is that during sample preparation, the denaturing was inadequate to
fully denature the NANOG protein itself or the complexes it is known to associate with[32].
If this was the case, the protein could have migrated more slowly than expected, resulting
in a shift from its intended size of 42 kDa. It is known that NANOG forms dimers and
participates in other complexes, which could also explain why the expected size is not
seen and why another band at 130 kDa is seen in the mT+ sample. These bands could
be the result of the antibody binding to NANOG that was still bound to other proteins,
resulting in a larger size than expected.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 2.10: Western blot membrane of human ESCs in mTesR1 (mT+) and mouse ESCs
in serum + LIF (M15) and non­serum + 2i + LIF (2i) conditions. Probed for MYC­C (left) and
subsequently reprobed for BETA­ACTIN (right). Values to the right of the image indicate
the size of ladder protein bands in kDa.
The question of whether the low level of NANOG detected by flow cytometry was due
to a poor performance of the antibody remains without a clear answer. Based on the
experiments performed here, it seems likely that the antibody does not detect NANOG as
intended. This makes the use of this antibody, with the current setup, to detect NANOG
expression questionable for now. However, additional repetitions of the experiments done
here are needed to confirm whether this statement is true or not.
Similar to NANOG, the MYC­C antibody was tested using Western blotting to confirm its’
specific binding to MYC­C and determine whether the expression pattern of MYC­C in bulk
samples matches what is observed with qPCR. The results of the experiment can be seen
in Figure 2.10. Using the MYC­C antibody, one clear band was observed at approximately
38 kDa in the mT+ sample, and two slight bands were seen at approximately 110­120 kDa
for samples mT+ and 2i. The size of MYC­C is known to be 62 kDa, and the antibody used
detects MYC­C with a 67 kDa weight band. These sizes do not match what is observed
in the Western blot done here, indicating a problem with the experiment. Reprobing the
membrane with BETA­ACTIN antibody showed three clear bands of the expected size (42
kDA) across all three samples, with equal signal. This indicates the samples received an
equal amount of protein. Since the same secondary antibody was used for both MYC­
C and BETA­ACTIN staining, it decreases the likelihood of the bands seen with MYC­C
staining was due to secondary antibody binding.
A final test of pluripotency was done by measuring the expression of the surface protein
markers for pluripotency: Stage Specific Embryonic Antigen (SSEA) 4 and 1 on human
and mouse ESCs, respectively. Expression of SSEA­4 and 1 was tested using flow cy­
tometry of non­permeabilized fixed cells, stained for their respective targets. Results are
shown in Figure 2.11. The percentage of single human ESCs emitting a positive signal of
SSEA­4 was 99.5%. The percentage of single mouse ESCs emitting a positive signal for
SSEA­1 was 96.9% for the M15 condition and 84.7% for the 2i condition. This indicates
that the highest fraction of pluripotent ESCs was found in human ESCs and the lowest in
mouse 2i ESCs, which is unexpected. Although SSEA­1 and 4 cannot be directly com­
pared as markers of pluripotency, a lower SSEA­1 expression in 2i than in M15 ESCs
32
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:43==
conflicts with the assumption that ESCs in 2i conditions are usually found to be more
pluripotent.
In summary, observations made during cultivation of the H9 and E14 cells in mT+, M15,
and 2i conditions showed morphological traits characteristic of pluripotent ESCs. A size­
able population of cells in the E14 M15 culture was seen to deviate in morphology with
darker colonies and elongated shapes.
qPCR analysis of pluripotency markers showed the highest relative expression of Oct­4,
Nanog, Sox2, and Myc­c in human ESCs from mT+ conditions. Comparison of mouse
ESCs in 2i and M15 conditions showed higher expression of the three pluripotency mark­
ers Oct­4, Nanog, and Sox2 in cells of the 2i­condition, while Myc­c expression was sig­
nificantly elevated in the M15 condition.
This expression pattern differed from the one observed by flow cytometric measurements
of OCT­4, NANOG, and MYC­c expression. The data generated in the flow cytometry
experiment done here are shown as percentages of cells positive for the expression of
the proteins in question. While more than 80% of cells stained positive for MYC­C and
OCT­4, a low fraction of cells stained positive for NANOG, falling as low as 0.7%. The
significance of the exact values of these percentages will require multiple iterations to be
determined. However, the significant deviation of NANOG expression from the expected
values brings the validity of the data into question.
Indeed, testing the antibodies of both MYC­C and NANOG in Western blots showed that
neither antibody bound to a product of the expected size of their targets. Instead, the
antibodies produced distinct bands at sizes unrelated to the intended target, possibly
indicating alternative target(s) to which the antibodies bind.
Finally, testing the expression of surface protein markers of pluripotency, SSEA­4 and ­1,
for human and mouse ESCs, respectively, showed that all cell populations contained a
high fraction of SSEA­4 or ­1 positive cells. Unexpectedly, M15 mouse ESCs were found
to have higher expression of SSEA­1 than 2i mouse ESCs.
2.2
qPCR Expression of MUC1 & NME genes
The expression of genes related to the MUC1 / NME interaction in human H9 mT+ and
mouse E14 M15 and 2i cells was tested by reverse transaction qPCR of cDNA from cell
pellets. The results can be seen in Figure 2.12
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
33
==PAGE:44==
mT+
m15
2i
SSEA-4 / SSEA-1
Figure 2.11: Flow cytometry data of non­permeabilized fixed H9 cells cultivated in mTesR1
(mT+) and E14 cells cultivated in either LIF + 15% serum (M15) or 2i. Gating for negative
signal threshold was set by unstained cells. Antibodies were conjugated to Brilliant Violet
(BD605) or AlexaFluor 647 (AF647). The number in the bottom right corner of each plot
indicates the total number of single cells measured for fluorescence.
34
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:45==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.12: Relative expression of Muc1, Nme1, Nme2 and Nme7. Data is presented
as averages of four biological replicates (n = 4), and error bars indicate +−1σ standard
deviation. (a) show expression relative to the average expression of two reference genes,
and (b) show the relative expression normalized to the expression seen in H9 mT+ cells by
the ∆∆­Cq method. Nme7 data gathered with four (n = 4) separate biological replicates.
As seen with the qPCR data of the pluripotency markers, H9 mT+ cells appear to have the
highest expression of the genes of interest. Comparison between the two mouse ESCs
conditions showed no significant differences in expression, with the exception of NME7.
Paired t­test of NME7 expression across biological replicates of M15 and 2i cells showed
a significant difference with a p­value smaller than 0.05 (∆NME7, p −value = 0.002).
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
35
==PAGE:46==
2.3
Flow cytometry Measurements of MUC1 & NME Proteins
Using fluorescently labeled antibodies for NME­1, NME2 as well as the three MUC1 spe­
cific antibodies: MUC1­CT2, MUC1­VU4H5, and MUC1­PA5, the three cell types were
stained, and the expression was investigated using flow cytometry. Double staining was
used to stain the cells for both CT­2 and VU4H5 MUC1 to determine if the cells that are
positive for both CT­2 and VU4H5 differed across the different samples. A lower level
of VU4H5 in CT­2 positive populations would indicate that the cells express a variant of
MUC1 that does not contain the NT­part of the protein. This in turn could indicate that they
express a form of MUC1 that resembles MUC1*, the target of interest in this thesis. These
results can be seen in Figure 2.13. The binding of these antibodies were also tested on
permeabilized cells and is shown in Figure 2.14.
It can be seen that non­permeabilized mT+, M15, and 2i cells all had different percent­
ages of cells positive for both CT­2 and VU4H5. The highest double positive percentage
was seen in mT+ with 64.6%, followed by M15 with 51.2%, and 2i with 23.7%.
Less than 0.1% VU4H5­only positive cells were found for any given sample, and more
than 95% of all cells measured were positive for CT­2. These results indicate that if the
conditions of the three samples mT+, M15, and 2i truly reflect the primed, naïve, and
ground state of pluripotency, respectively, then a decrease in the expression of MUC1
containing its’ NT­part is seen with increasing pluripotency. As the percentage of CT­2
positive cells remains high across cells, this decrease in the VU4H5 signal is not due to a
decrease in the expression of MUC1, but specifically a decrease in the NT­part of MUC1.
The results of staining permeabilized cells for CT2 and VU4H5 showed similar percent­
ages of CT­2 across the samples, but the disparity in VU4H5 percentages between mT+,
M15, and 2i cells was greatly reduced. The lowest percentages of double­positive VU4H5
and CT2 are seen for 2i cells at 74%, followed closely by M15 cells with 74.5% double­
positive and 87.3% double­positive mT+ cells. This indicates that intracellularly, the NT­
part of MUC1 is expressed in equally many cells across the samples, in contrast to its
expression on the cytoplasm membrane.
The PA­5 antibody is stated to be specific towards linear peptides identical to the SEA­
domain in human MUC1, which covers some part of both the NT­part and the extracellular
region of the CT­part of MUC1. The experiment aimed to test whether this antibody binds
preferentially to its MUC1 epitope in more pluripotent stem cells or to a MUC1 epitope
from less pluripotent cells. The results of this experiment could show if this antibody can
be used to identify the exposed CT­part of MUC1 following the shedding of the NT­part, as
it is hypothesized that this variant of MUC1 is more frequently found on highly pluripotent
stem cells. If the antibody is found to stain more strongly to cells expressing SSEA­1 or
­4, there is an increased chance that this antibody is identifying a MUC1 product that is
related to pluripotency, possibly MUC1*. To test this, cells were double­stained with both
PA­5 and SSEA­1 or ­4 for mouse and human ESCs, respectively. The results can be
seen in Figure 2.16. Additionally, to test whether the PA­5 antibody binds membrane­
bound MUC1 and cytoplasmic MUC1 at different rates, as seen with VU4H5, the PA­5
antibody alone was also tested in permeabilized cells, seen in Figure 2.15.
The double­staining of cells with PA­5 and SSEA­1 or ­4 showed a double­positive pop­
ulation of 98.4% in mT+ condition cells, 86.2% in M15 condtion cells and 59.4% in 2i
condition cells. 99% or more of the cells from each sample were positive for PA­5, indi­
cating that PA­5 binds regardless of whether or not the cells are positive for SSEA­4 or
SSEA­1. This indicates that the epitope PA­5 binds is not constrained by the pluripotency
36
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:47==
mT+
m15
2i
CT2 & VU4H5 : non_perm
Figure 2.13: Flow cytometric data of non­permeabilized human ESC cultivated in mTesR1
(mT+) and mouse ESCs cultivated in LIF + % 15 serum (M15) or 2i. MUC1 protein was
detected with two antibodies specific to the N­terminal part (VU4H5) and the C­terminal
part (CT2). Antibody binding was measured by fluorescence of AlexaFluor 488 (AF488)
and AlexaFluor 647 (AF647), respectively. Gating indicates the threshold for unspecific
signal.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
37
==PAGE:48==
mT+
m15
2i
CT2 & VU4H5 : perm
Figure 2.14: Flow cytometric data of permeabilized human ESC cultivated in mTesR1
(mT+) and mouse ESCs cultivated in LIF + % 15 serum (M15) or 2i. MUC1 protein was
detected with two separate antibodies specific to the N­terminal part (VU4H5) and the
C­terminal part (CT2). Antibody binding was measured by fluorescence of AlexaFluor
488 (AF488) and AlexaFluor 647 (AF647), respectively. Gating indicates the threshold
for unspecific signal.
38
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:49==
mT+
m15
2i
PA-5
Figure 2.15: Flow cytometric data of permeabilized human ESC cultivated in mTesR1
(mT+) and mouse ESCs cultivated in LIF + % 15 serum (M15) or 2i. MUC1­PA5 antibody
binding was measured via fluorescence of AlexaFluor 647 (AF647). Gating indicates the
threshold for unspecific signal.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
39
==PAGE:50==
mT+
m15
2i
SSEA-4 & PA-5 : non_perm
Figure 2.16: Flow cytometric data of non­permeabilized human ESC cultivated in mTesR1
(mT+) and mouse ESCs cultivated in LIF + % 15 serum (M15) or 2i. Cells were stained
with MUC1­PA5 antibody and SSEA­4 for mT+ or SSEA­1 for M15 and 2i. Antibody
binding was measured by fluorescence of AlexaFluor 488 (AF488) and AlexaFluor 647
(AF647), respectively. Gating indicates the threshold for unspecific signal.
40
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:51==
of the cells.
Staining permeabilized H9 and E14 cells for PA­5 alone, gave cell populations with mostly
positive signals, with mT+, M15, and 2i cells having PA­5 positive populations of 97.2%,
97.7%, and 98.3%, respectively. All these populations are slightly lower than those found
for non­permeabilized cells.
The expression of NME1 and NME2 was also tested using cell staining and flow cytome­
try, to evaluate whether a difference could be seen across the cells and conditions tested.
It is expected that the expression levels of NME1 in H9 mT+ conditions maintain a pop­
ulation of mostly hexameric NME1/2, so a relatively lower expression of NME1 or NME2
could signify a switch away from the hexamer­dominated population of NME1/2 towards
a dimeric one which required for MUC1 interaction. The results of NME1 and NME2 ex­
pression by flow cytometry are shown in Figure 2.17 and 2.18.
However, the population of cells positive for NME1 or NME2 staining is below 1% in mT+
and 2i samples, indicating close to no expression of NME1 or NME2 in all 3000+ single
cells measured in this experiment. One exception could be M15 cells that show 1.96% of
cells were positive for NME1. These results conflict with the expectations of a measurable
population of NME1 and NME2 in all samples, particularly in mT+ cells.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
41
==PAGE:52==
mT+
m15
2i
NME1
Figure 2.17: Flow cytometric data of permeabilized human ESC cultivated in mTesR1
(mT+) and mouse ESCs cultivated in LIF + % 15 serum (M15) or 2i. NME1 antibody
binding was measured via fluorescence of AlexaFluor 647 (AF647). Gating indicates the
threshold for unspecific signal.
42
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:53==
mT+
m15
2i
NME2
Figure 2.18: Flow cytometric data of permeabilized human ESC cultivated in mTesR1
(mT+) and mouse ESCs cultivated in LIF + % 15 serum (M15) or 2i. NME2 antibody
binding was measured via fluorescence of AlexaFluor 647 (AF647). Gating indicates the
threshold for unspecific signal.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
43
==PAGE:54==
2.3.1
Confocal microscopy imaging of flow cytometry stained cells
Before the stained cells were used for flow cytometry, some of the stained cells were
taken to be visualized by confocal microscopy. They were attached to glass slides using
Cytospin, stained for DAPI, and trapped by coverslips. After securing the coverslips with
nail polish, the cells were taken for imaging in the following days. The images of the non­
permeabilized H9 and E14 from the mT+, M15 and 2i conditions that were stained for
CT­2, VU4H5 and DAPI, can be seen in Figures 2.19 to 2.21. These images show the
antibodies binding to individual DAPI­stained cells.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.19: ICC images of non­permeabilized E14 cells from serum + LIF culture: stained
with DAPI (a), VU4H5 antibody (b) and CT­2 antibody (c). An overlay is shown in (d).
Scale bar in bottom right corner represents 100 µm
44
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:55==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.20: ICC images of non­permeabilized E14 cells from 2i + LIF culture: stained
with DAPI (a), VU4H5 antibody (b) and CT­2 antibody (c). An overlay is shown in (d). The
scale bar in the bottom right corner represents 100 µm
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
45
==PAGE:56==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.21: ICC images of non­permeabilized H9 cells from mTesR1 culture: stained
with DAPI (a), VU4H5 antibody (b) and CT­2 antibody (c). An overlay is shown in (d). The
scale bar in the bottom right corner represents 100 µm
2.4
Western blotting of MUC1 & NME Proteins
All antibodies used in flow cytometry to test MUC1 and NME single­cell protein expres­
sion were also tested in their ability to bind expected targets in Western blots in all three
samples, mT+, M15, and 2i. These results can be seen in Figures 2.22 to 2.26.
To summarize the results, all above­mentioned antibodies for MUC1 or NME1/2 produced
no visible bands except for MUC1­PA5 when used in Western blotting of bulk mT+, M15,
and 2i cells. The PA­5 staining produced three strong bands at different positions for the
human mT+ samples and the mouse M15 and 2i samples. In mT+, a strong band is seen
to be just above 250 kDa. In M15 and 2i, the strongest signal is seen at approximately
120 kDa, with smears trailing down to 110 kDa.
To test whether the lack of signal in most membranes was due to loss of proteins over
46
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:57==
Figure 2.22: Western blot membrane of human ESCs in mTesR1 (mT+) and mouse ESCs
in serum + LIF (M15) and non­serum + 2i + LIF (2i) conditions. Probed for MUC1 C­
terminal domain (MUC1 CT2) (left) and subsequently reprobed for BETA­ACTIN (right).
Values to the left of the image indicate the size of ladder protein bands in kDa. The
membrane was exposed for six minutes in the first round of probing
Figure 2.23: Western blot membrane of human ESCs in mTesR1 (mT+) and mouse ESCs
in serum + LIF (M15) and non­serum + 2i + LIF (2i) conditions. Probed for MUC1 VNTRs
(VU4H5) (left) and subsequently reprobed for BETA­ACTIN (right). Values to the left of
the image indicate the size of ladder protein bands in kDa. The membrane was exposed
for six minutes in the first round of probing
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
47
==PAGE:58==
Figure 2.24: Western blot membrane of human ESCs in mTesR1 (mT+) and mouse ESCs
in serum + LIF (M15) and non­serum + 2i + LIF (2i) conditions. Probed for MUC1­SEA
domain (MUC1 PA­5) (left) and subsequently reprobed for BETA­ACTIN (right). Values
to the left of the image indicate the size of ladder protein bands in kDa.
Figure 2.25: Western blot membrane of human ESCs in mTesR1 (mT+) and mouse ESCs
in serum + LIF (M15) and non­serum + 2i + LIF (2i) conditions. Probed for NME1 (left) and
subsequently reprobed for BETA­ACTIN (right). Values to the left of the image indicate
the size of ladder protein bands in kDa. The membrane was exposed for six minutes in
the first round of probing
48
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:59==
Figure 2.26: Western blot membrane of human ESCs in mTesR1 (mT+) and mouse ESCs
in serum + LIF (M15) and non­serum + 2i + LIF (2i) conditions. Probed for NME2 (left) and
subsequently reprobed for BETA­ACTIN (right). Values to the right of the image indicate
the size of ladder protein bands in kDa. The membrane was exposed for six minutes in
the first round of probing
the duration of the experiment, all membranes were stripped of antibodies using strip­
ping buffer and reprobed with a positive control BETA­ACTIN antibody. In all cases, the
secondary staining produced visible and approximately equal bands at 40 to 42 kDa, as
expected of BETA­ACTIN staining. Again, one exception was the membrane stained with
PA­5, which produced a single wide band at 42 kDa, covering all three sample columns.
These results indicate that all membranes were initially loaded with proteins from sam­
ples, but all except PA­5 failed to detect any target proteins of the correct size. As for
PA­5, the irregular pattern of protein migration seen in the mT+ column was to some de­
gree also seen when the membrane was stained with Ponceau S, as seen in Figure 2.27.
This indicates a fault with the separating gel used before transfer to separate the pro­
teins. It is seen that around the ladder markers for 100 kDa, the stains appear to spread
out horizontally across the three sample columns. This results in the proteins from each
sample mixing with the others and a loss of sample­to­sample resolution, as seen with
BETA­ACTIN restaining. However, the three strongest bands seen with PA­5 staining ap­
pear to be just above this merge of samples that occurs at 100 kDa, indicating that the
signal they show could still be sample­specific.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
49
==PAGE:60==
Figure 2.27: Western blot membrane of human ESCs in mTesR1 (mT+) and mouse ESCs
in serum + LIF (M15) and non­serum + 2i + LIF (2i) conditions. Probed for MUC1­SEA
domain (MUC1 PA­5) (left) and subsequently reprobed for BETA­ACTIN (middle). Pon­
ceau staining of the membrane is shown (right). Values to the left of the image indicate
the size of ladder protein bands in kDa.
50
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:61==
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Stem cell culturing
In this work, two cell lines of embryonic stem cells were used: the human H9 and the
mouse E14 cells. The H9 line was derived from female embryos at the blastocyst stage
and is widely used in research. The E14 cells were derived from the late mouse blastocyst
of a 129/Ola strain mouse. Both of these ESCs are reported to be karyotypically normal
in vitro. When live cells were not being analyzed, they were maintained at 37 degrees
with 5% CO2 levels in incubators.
3.1.1
H9 human ESC
H9 cells were fed with either mTeSR™1 (STEMCELL Technologies, Cat.No 85850) or
SME basal medium made of 400 mL DMEM/F12 (Gibco, Cat.No 31331028), 100 mL
KnockOut Serum Replacement (Invitrogen, Gibco, cat. no. 10828), 5 mL MEM Non­
Essential Amino Acids (Invitrogen, Gibco, cat. no. 11140), β­mercaptoethanol (Invitrogen,
Gibco, cat. no. 31350­010) and a range of 5 to 100 ug of recombinant bFGF, added
each day. All H9 cells were plated in 6­well plates (VWR/Nunc, Cat.No 734­2323) coated
with Geltrex™(Gibco, Cat.No A14133­01) diluted 100 times with DMEM/F12 following
suppliers instruction. Before plating of cells, the Geltrex­coated wells were incubated at
37 degrees for 30­60 minutes.
H9 cells cultured were passaged using Versene EDTA solution (Gibco, Cat.No 15040066).
Cells at 60­80% confluence had the current medium aspirated and were then washed in
DPBS (no Calcium/no Magnesium) (Gibco, Cat.No 14190144) before adding of 1 mL
of Versene. Plates were briefly swirled to ensure Versene was spread throughout the
wells. The cells were then incubated in the Versene for 3­5 minutes at 37 degrees, or until
cells were starting to separate from the plate, as visible under a bright­field microscope.
Versene was removed by pipetting to avoid losing cells. 2 mL of mTesR1 was added
to the cells gently with a 2mL serological pipette, and the cells were resuspended by
light mixing of the medium with the 2ml serological pipette, being careful not to break
up colonies. An appropriate volume of medium was then transferred to a new Geltrex­
coated well, containing 2mL of mTesR1, according to a split ratio of either 1:10, 1:15, or
1:20, depending on the planned culture time for the cells.
H9 cells culture in SME medium were passaged following the same protocol as mTesR1
H9 cells, with SME medium replacing mTesR1 and the addition of Rho Kinase inhibitor
(ROCK inhibitor) to the media in the well where the cells were passaged.
3.1.2
E14 mouse ESC
The E14 mouse ESCs were cultured and passaged in two mediums, M15 and 2i. The M15
medium was made using DMEM Knockout medium (Gibco, Cat. No 10829­018) with 15%
v/v FBS (ES­qualified), Gibco, Cat.No 10270­106), Penicillin­Streptomycin­Glutamine (1%
Pen­strep­Glutamine, Gibco, Cat.No 10378016), 1% v/w Non­essential Amino Acids (Gibco,
Cat.No 11140035), β­mercaptoethanol (0.1mM final concetration, Gibco, Cat.No 21985023),
and LIF (LIF (103 units/mL; stock: 107 units), dilutied 1: 10 in the final volume(Millipore,
Cat.No ESG1107). The 2i medium was prepared using NDiff227 medium (Takara, Cat.No
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
51
==PAGE:62==
Y40002) with CHIR99021 (Tocris, Cat.No 4423, (1:3000 dilution)), PD0325901 (Tocris,
Cat.No 4192, (1:10000 dilution)) and LIF (103 units/mL, Millipore, Cat.No ESG1107) di­
luted 1:10 in the final media volume.
Mouse ESCs were cultured on six­well plates (VWR/Nunc, Cat.No 734­2323), coated with
1 mL 0.1% gelatin (Sigma, Cat.No 1393) and briefly swirled to ensure equal coating of
the whole well bottoms. After coating, the wells were incubated at 37 degrees for 15­
30 min. Cells were passaged when a confluency of 70­80% was observed. Mouse cells
were detached by adding approx. 400 µL Accutase (Accutase ­ Enzyme Cell Detachment
Medium, Gibco, Cat. No 00­4555­56) and incubated for 2­3 min at 37 degrees Celsius.
The Accutase was neutralized using the respective medium, and the detached cells in
suspension were collected with 1mL pipettes, transferred to 15 mL tubes, centrifuged
(1000rpm for 3 min), and the supernatant aspirated. The cells were then washed with
PBS (DPBS, no calcium, no magnesium, Gibco, Cat.No 14190144). The washed cells
were centrifuged (1000 rpm for 3 min), the DPBS aspirated, and resuspended in their
respective medium before being distributed onto new wells of 6­well plates previously
coated with 0.1% gelatin.
3.2
Stem cell collection for qPCR, Western blotting, and
FACS analysis
3.2.1
qPCR and Western blotting
Mouse E14 cells were collected using Accutase (Gibco, Cat. No 00­4555­56), centrifuged
(1000rpm for 3 min) and the supernatant aspirated. The cell pellets were resuspended
with PBS before being transferred into 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged into cell
pellets. The supernatant was aspirated, and the cell pellet flash­frozen on dry ice and
stored at ­20 degrees until use.
Human H9 cells were collected using Versene following the protocol for passaging the
cells. After resuspending the cells in either mTesR1 or SME medium, they were trans­
ferred to a 15mL tube and centrifuged (1000rpm 3min). The supernatant was removed by
aspiration and resuspended in PBS. The cells were then transferred to 1.5 mL Eppendorf
tubes and centrifuged (2500 rpm 3min) until a pellet formed. Excess liquid was removed,
and the cell pellet flash­frozen on dry ice. Frozen cell pellets were stored at ­20 degrees
until use.
3.2.2
Fixing for FACS analysis
The same protocol for collecting cells for qPCR and Western blotting was used here.
The final volume of cells was resuspended in 500 µL, 4% Paraformaldehyde (PFA), and
incubated at room temperature for 15­20 min. The cells were centrifuged (3500 rpm for
5min), and the PFA was removed carefully. The cells were resuspended in 1mL PBS and
stored at 4 degrees until use (maximum of four weeks).
3.3
qPCR
3.3.1
Design of primers
Several primer pairs were designed for the qPCR experiments. Those made during this
work were found and designed using NCBI’s Primer­Blast function (Link to website) and
IDT’s Oligoanalyser software (Link to website). Specific parameters and criteria were used
52
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:63==
Gene
5’­Forward primer­3’
5’­Reverse primer­3’
Product size
basepairs
Gene bank
accession number
ADAM17
Human
TCTGTTTCACCCCAGTAACG
GCAGGAAAGGGTTTGATAATGC
78
NM 003183.6
B­ACTIN
Human
GCCGAGGACTTTGATTGCAC
GGACTTCCTGTAACAACGCA
76
NM 001101.5
BMP2
Human
CCCCCTACATGCTAGACCT
TGGTAGTTCTTCCAAAGATTCTTCA
140
NM 001200.4
FOXP1
Human
GGCAGTATGGACAGTGGATG
AAGGGAAGGGTTACCACTGA
73
NM 001349338.3
GAPDH*
Human
AACGGATTTGGTCGTATTGG
CTTCCCGTTCTCAGCCTTG
174
NM 002046.7
LIN28A
Human
AGATCAAAAGGAGACAGGTGC
GTAGGTTGGCTTTCCCTGTG
174
NM 024674.6
MUC1
Human
TAGCCCCTATGAGAAGGTTTC
CCCTACAAGTTGGCAGAAGT
93
NM 002456.6
MYC­C
Human
TCTTCCCCTACCCTCTCAAC
TCATCTTCTTGTTCCTCCTCAGA
196
NM 002467.6
MYC­N
Human
AGTCGGCGGGAGTGTT
GTTTTAATACCGGGGGTGCT
82
NM 005378.6
NANOG*
Human
CAAAGGCAAACAACCCACTT
TCTGCTGGAGGCTGAGGTAT
158
NM 024865.4
NME1
Human
GATCAAACCAGATGGGGTCC
GATCTTCGGAAGCTTGCATG
110
NM 000269.3
NME2
Human
CAGGTTGGCAGGAACATCA
TCTTCAGGCTTAAACCATAGG
83
NM 002512.4
NME7
Human
GAAAAGACTGCTGGGACCTG
AAAACAACTCCATTTCTCTGGC
149
NM 013330.5
OCT4*
Human
CGAAAGAGAAAGCGAACCAG
AACCACACTCGGACCACATC
146
NM 002701.6
SOX2*
Human
ACACCAATCCCATCCACACT
CCTCCCCAGGTTTTCTCTGT
117
NM 003106.4
SPIC
Human
ATTAACAGTGCTGCGGACTT
GGAGCTTCTTCCTGCCTTTT
127
NM 152323.3
STAT3
Human
ATCTGTGTGACACCAACGAC
CTCCATGTCAAAGGTGAGGG
150
NM 139276.3
UBC
Human
CTCTGCACTTGGTCCTGC
TGCAATGAAATTTGTTGAAACCTT
74
NM 021009.7
Table 3.1: Table of qPCR primers used for detection of human gene expression. Primers
marked with * were designed prior to this work
to design the primers based on settings and reagents used to run the qPCR. The annealing
temperature of the primers was chosen to be between 57 and 59 degrees Celsius. To
provide optimal and comparable amplification among amplicons, the length of the resulting
product should not be shorter than 70 base pairs or longer than 150 base pairs. One
primer in a pair should also span an exon­exon junction to ensure the amplicon reflected
the measurement of mRNA and not any potentially contaminating DNA. The primer pairs
were also selected based on the melting temperature of any hairpins or the number of base
pairs matching in primer­dimers found when running sequences in IDT Oligoanalyser.
Primers found with hairpins with melting temperatures above 45 degrees Celsius or more
than five matching base pairs in a primer­dimer were excluded. A complete list of primers
designed is provided in table ??. Primer product generation was also verified with melting
curves following qPCR reactions.
3.3.2
Extraction of mRNA
mRNA was extracted from frozen cell pellets using the RNA isolation kit (E.Z.N.A. Total
RNA isolation kit I, omega bio­tec, Cat.No: R6834­01), following the supplier’s instruc­
tions. The cell pellet was resuspended in PBS, centrifuged (3000g for 3 min), and the su­
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
53
==PAGE:64==
Gene
5’­Forward primer­3’
5’­Reverse primer­3’
Product size
basepairs
Gene bank
accession number
Adam17
Mouse
ACATCGTTGGGTCTGTTCTG
TCCAGTTTCTTATCCACACAGT
85
NM 001291871.1
B­actin
Mouse
GCCTTCCTTCTTGGGTATGG
AGCACTGTGTTGGCATAGAG
108
NM 007393.5
Bmp2
Mouse
TTCCATCACGAAGAAGCCGT
GTGAGAAACTCGTCACTGGG
104
NM 007553.3
Foxp1
Mouse
AAACGGAGGCCACAAAAGAT
CAGCCATGGAAGCCTGTAAA
109
NM 001347345.1
Gapdh*
Mouse
TGGTGAAGCAGGCATCTGAG
GGTGGAAGAGTGGGAGTTGC
101
NM 001289726.2
Lin28a
Mouse
CCAAGGGTCTGGAATCCATC
CAGTTGTAGCACCTGTCTCC
124
NM 145833.1
Muc1
Mouse
CCCTACCTACCACACTCACGGACG
GTGGTCACCACAGCTGGGTTGGTA
126
NM 013605.2
Myc­c*
Mouse
TGAAGGCTGGATTTCCTTTG
CGAGGTCATAGTTCCTGTTGG
91
NM 001177353.1
Myc­n
Mouse
CTTGAGCGACTCAGATGATGA
CCGCCTTGTTGTTAGAGGAG
104
NM 008709.3
Nanog*
Mouse
ATGAAGTGCAAGCGGTGGCAGAAA
CCTGGTGGAGTCACAGAGTAGTTC
464
NM 028016.3
Nme1*
Mouse
GACCGCCCCTTCTTTACTGG
AGACCCTCCCAGACCATAGC
74
NM 001378854.1
Nme2*
Mouse
TGGGCGAGATCATCAAACGG
TCTTCATCAGAGGCCCGAAGGAA
79
NM 008705.5
Nme7
Mouse
ATGTCAGCGATACAGATGTTCAA
GGTTGCTCTGTTGGATCTCTA
148
NM 138314.4
Oct4*
Mouse
CTGAGGGCCAGGCAGGAGCACGAG
CTGTAGGGAGGGCTTCGGGCACTT
485
NM 013633.3
Sox2*
Mouse
ATGGACAGCTACGCGCAC
CGAGCCGTTCATGTAGGTCTG
192
NM 011443.4
Spic
Mouse
GACTGGAGAGGTGTAACAAATGG
TTCCTCCCTTTTGCTGGAAG
124
NM 011461.3
Stat3
Mouse
ATCTGTGTGACACCAACGAC
ATGAATCTAAAGTGCGGGGG
70
NM 213659.3
Ubc*
Mouse
AGGAGGCTGATGAAGGAGCTTGA
TGGTTTGAATGGATACTCTGCTGGA
183
NM 009456.3
Table 3.2: Table of qPCR primers used for detection of mouse gene expression. Primers
marked with * were designed before this work.
54
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:65==
pernatant removed. The cells were then lysed using a TRK lysis buffer with added β­ME
(10ul for every 0.5mL buffer). The lysed cells were centrifuged (13000g for 5 min), and the
supernatant was transferred into 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes. 70% ethanol was added, fol­
lowed by rigorous mixing, and the contents were transferred to the RNA­binding columns.
The columns were washed three times in total with the kits wash buffer 1 and 2 (one
time with wash buffer 1 and two times with wash buffer 2), followed by centrifugation at
10000 rpm. The RNA­binding columns, containing the samples were transferred to new
collection tubes and dry spun at maximum speed for 5 min to remove excess ethanol.
The final RNA contents were eluded from the RNA­binding columns using nuclease­free
water into labeled Eppendorf tubes. The final concentration of RNA was measured on a
NanoDrop Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fischer, Cat.No: ND­ONE­W) and stored at ­20
degrees Celsius until use.
3.3.3
Reverse Transcription of mRNA
RNA extract from cell pellets was used to generate cDNA of samples using an RT­PCR kit
(High­Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit, Applied Biosystems, Cat. No 4368814)
with random primers. The PCR reaction was run for 2 hours at 37 degrees. The final DNA
concentrations and purity were measured with a NanoDrop Spectrophotometer.
3.3.4
qPCR method
The qPCRs were carried out following the instructions of the SybrGreen provider (PowerUp
SYBR Green Master Mix, Applied Biosystems, A25742) on a Quantstudio 5(Thermo Fis­
cher, A34322). Each reaction was set up to contain 200 ng of starting cDNA, measured
on a NanoDrop Spectrophotometer. qPCR was run for 40 cycles, followed by a melt­
curve run with temperatures from 60 to 95. The results were analyzed using the ∆∆­Cq
method with two reference genes with paired t­tests for testing significance between two
samples and one­way ANOVA for testing between all three samples. All reactions were
run in duplicates.
3.3.5
qPCR data analysis
The amplification and melt curves were used to detect unintended variables, such as
multiple primer products, uneven fluorescence measurements, or inconsistent increases
in fluorescence measurements over the course of the 40 PCR cycles. The quantification
cycle (Cq) was extracted from the individual reactions and used for further analysis.
Cq values were analyzed in two separate ways to show a relative comparison of mRNA
expression across the samples. The total relative expression method converts the Cq
value of the individual reactions into an inversely proportional value of the mRNA con­
tent through the 2(−Cq) formula, meaning a lower Cq value equates to a proportionally
higher value. The geometric average of the reference genes expression is then found
and compared to the expression of the individual genes of interest:
(Exp GOI)/(Exp REF) = Relative Expression
These relative expressions were averaged across biological replicates to determine vari­
ation and gene expression differences.
For the ∆∆­Cq method, Cq’s for several (minimum 3) biological replicates and their tech­
nical replicates were taken, and the geometric average of the reference genes across all
biological replicates was found. From this, a common ∆­Cq was found by subtracting the
average reference gene Cq from the individual Cq values of the genes of interest. Next,
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
55
==PAGE:66==
the ∆∆­Cq was found in this case by choosing the average ∆­Cq from human ESCs in
mTesR1 medium as the control condition and subtracting them from the individual ∆­Cq
values. These values were then put through the 2−∆∆−Cq formula to find the expression
values of the genes of interest relative to the expression values of those same genes in
the mTesR1 control condition. The average relative expressions and standard deviations
were found across biological replicates and tested for significance with Student t­tests
done with the Analysis Toolpak add­in from Excel.
3.4
Western blotting
3.4.1
Cell lysis and sample protein quantification
Frozen cell pellets were lysed in 60 µL strep lysis buffer containing HEPES, EGTA and
0.5% v/v Triton­X100. Triton­X100 is a strong detergent that can lyse both cell and nuclear
membranes. After adding lysis buffer, the cells were incubated on ice for 15 min. Next,
the tubes containing lysis buffer and cells were centrifuged at maximum speed for 30
minutes at 4 degrees. The supernatant was collected in a separate tube, and the protein
concentration was estimated using BCA (Pierce™BCA, Cat.No. 23227).
4 µL of samples were transferred to a clear 96­well microplate with a flat bottom in tripli­
cates. A standard dilution of known protein concentration was made from 2mg/mL BSA,
covering a range of 0.125 mg/mL to 2mg/mL. The BCA working solution was prepared
in advance following the instructions of the supplier. 200 µL of working BCA solution
was added to each sample, the BSA standard solutions, and to empty wells to serve as
negative controls. The microplate was incubated at 37 degrees for 30 minutes before ab­
sorption of light at 652 nm wavelength was measured on FLUOstar Omega plate reader.
Absorption data was analyzed in Excel, and BSA dilutions were made to generate stan­
dard curves to estimate the concentration of ESC samples.
3.4.2
Western blot protocol
The estimated protein concentrations were used to calculate the dilutions required for
7µg/well loading concentration. The total loading volume was set to 18 µL. Included in
the dilution was 4.5 µL of 4X Laemmli SDS sample buffer (Bio­Rad, Cat. No. 1610747).
Diluted samples were heated to 95 degrees for 5 min to allow the binding of SDS to
unfolded proteins.
9% acrylamide gels were placed in electrophoresis chambers (Bio­rad), and the chambers
were filled with 1x SDS running buffer (10g of SDS per liter). Sample wells were loaded
with 7µg protein and wells next to these were loaded with protein ladder. Any remaining
wells were loaded with 4x SDS loading buffer to reduce uneven running. The gels were
run at 150v for 60 min or until just before the edge of 4x SDS reached the bottom of the
gels.
The gels were removed from the electrophoresis chambers and extracted from their cas­
settes. One gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue to examine protein loading in
the gels, while the remaining gels were used to transfer their separated proteins to nitro­
cellulose membranes. Transfer of proteins was done by soaking transfer pads and gels
in 1x transfer buffer (Tris­buffered saline with 0.1% v/v Tween­20) and assembling in the
following order: Transfer pad, Nitrocellulose membrane, gel, Transfer pad. Air bubbles
were removed using a roller, and the assembly was placed in transfer cassettes (Bio­rad);
the lid was closed, and any excess transfer buffer was drained. The transfer was done
56
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:67==
using semi­dry rapid transfer with appropriate settings for the mixed size of downstream
target proteins.
After the transfer was done, the membranes were stained using Ponceau S to validate
protein transfer. The staining was removed by washing with transfer buffer. Next, antibody
staining solutions were prepared. 5% w/v blocking buffer was prepared from skimmed
milk powder and 1x transfer buffer. Antibody dilutions made in the blocking buffer can be
seen in Table 3.3 (MUC1­CT2: 1:200 dilution, MUC1­VU4H5: 1:500 dilution, MUC1­PA5:
1:1000 dilution, NANOG: 1:250 dilution, MYC­C: 1:500 dilution, NME1: 1:100 dilution,
NME2: 1:250 dilution, Beta­actin: 1:4000 dilution).
Initially, membranes were soaked in blocking solution (without any antibody) for 60 min
at room temperature on rocking stand. Blocking solution was then discarded and the an­
tibody solutions were added. Antibody solutions were added to membrane strips, each
containing a protein ladder and all samples. Membranes were left to incubate overnight at
4 degrees or for 1 hour at room temperature. Antibody solutions were decanted and dis­
carded. Membranes were washed 3­4 times in 1x transfer buffer for 3­5 min each time.
Next, secondary antibody solutions made with blocking buffer and Armenian Hamster
and Rabbit secondary antibodies were added to the MUC1­CT2 and MUC1­PA5 primary
antibody­stained membranes, respectively (Anti­Armeanian Hamster: 1:3000 dilution,
Anti­rabbit: 1:5000 dilution). All other primary antibody solutions received mouse sec­
ondary antibody (1:5000 dilution). All secondary antibodies are conjugated to Horseradish
peroxidase (HRP) enzymes.
Membranes were left on a rocking stand to incubate for 60 min at room temperature.
Secondary antibody solutions were discarded, and the membranes were washed with 1x
transfer buffer 3­5 times for 3­5min each time. Membranes were placed on plastic covers,
and 300 µL of ECL mixture was added to the membranes. The membranes were covered
with a plastic sheet, and chemiluminescence and colorimetric images were quickly cap­
tured. This process was done piece­wise for each membrane to ensure no membrane
dried out or ECL mixture was exhausted before the image was captured.
3.4.3
Stripping and Re­probing
Previously exposed membranes were washed in 1x transfer buffer three times, for 5 min
each time. 1x transfer buffer was drained, and the membranes soaked in the stripping
buffer, Restore PLUS Western Blot stripping Buffer (Thermo Scientific, Cat. No. 46430),
and incubated for 5­10 min at room temperature on a rocking stand. The stripping buffer
was removed, and the membranes were washed with transfer buffer. Previous steps of
blocking and staining were then repeated with blocking solution, anti­Beta actin antibody,
and anti­mouse secondary antibody. The re­stained membranes were placed on plastic
covers, and 300 µL of ECL mixture was added. The membranes were covered with a
plastic sheet, and chemiluminescence and colorimetric images were quickly captured.
This process was done piece­wise for each membrane to ensure no membrane dried out
or ECL mixture was exhausted before the image was captured.
3.4.4
Image capture and analysis
For images where no clear signal was seen within 90 seconds of exposure time, a signal
accumulation program was run to test if a gradual increase in signal could be seen with
gradually increased exposure time. The total exposure time was set to 5 minutes for these
membranes, and 1 picture for each minute was gathered to capture the chemilumines­
cence signal increase.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
57
==PAGE:68==
Antibody
Target
Expected Band Size
Dilution
Supplier and Cat.No
MUC1­CT2
C­Terminal MUC1
14­ 28 kDa
1:200
Thermo Fisher
MA5­11202
MUC1­VU4H5
VNTR Region MUC1
200 kDa
1:500
Santa Cruz
sc­7313
MUC1­PA5
SEA Domain MUC1
122 kDa
1:1000
Thermo Fisher
PA5­95487
NANOG
NANOG
42 kDa
1:250
Cell Signaling Tech
4893S
C­MYC
C­MYC
67 kDa and 114
1:500
Santa Cruz
sc­40
C­8
NME­1
17 and 24 kDa
1:100
Santa Cruz
sc­514515
X­42
NME­2
17 and 24 kDa
1:250
Santa Cruz
sc­100400
Beta­actin
BETA­ACTIN
42 kDa
1:4000
Sigma­Aldrich
A2228
Table 3.3: Primary antibodies, their target epitopes, expected size on SDS­PAGE, and
the dilutions used for Western Blot experiments
Antibody
Target
Dilution
Supplier and Cat.No
Goat Anti­Mouse
Mouse IgG
1:5000
Southern Biotech
1031­05
Goat Anti­Rabbit
Rabbit IgG
1:5000
Southern Biotech
4030­05
mouse anti­Armenian Hamster
Armenian Hamster IgG
1:3000
Santa Cruz
sc­2789
Table 3.4: Secondary antibodies and their dilutions used for Western Blot experiments
58
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:69==
Images were exported and analyzed in Image J.
3.5
Flow cytometry
3.5.1
Staining protocol
Fixed cells were split into new tubes to ratios following the ratio of cells to be permeabilized
and non­permeabilized. For permeabilization, a solution of 1mL 0.5% v/v Triton­X100 in
PBS was added to cells. These cells were left to incubate at room temperature for 5
minutes. Permeabilized cells were centrifuged for 4 minutes at 1000g, and the perme­
abilization solution was removed by aspiration. All cells were washed two times in wash
buffer (PBS with 0.1% v/v Tween­20). After the final wash, the wash buffer was removed,
and 1mL of blocking buffer (1% v/v BSA in wash buffer) was added to the cells. Cells were
incubated for 30 min and transferred to a V­shaped 96­well plate, each well receiving an
equal volume of cells suspended in the blocking buffer. After blocking, the plate was
spun down at 1000g for four minutes, and the blocking solution was removed. Cells were
resuspended in solutions containing primary antibody diluted in blocking buffer, follow­
ing suggested dilutions given by suppliers for flow cytometry (MUC1­CT2: 1:10 dilution,
MUC1­VU4H5: 1:20 dilution, MUC1­PA5: 1:50 dilution, SSEA­1: 1:50 dilution, SSEA­4:
1:10, Nanog: 1:2000 dilution, Oct4: 1:50 dilution, Myc­c: 1:50 dilution, NME2: 1:1000
dilution, NME1: 1:200 dilution). An overview of primary antibodies used can be seen in
Table 3.5. Both conjugated and non­conjugated antibodies were added in this step.
Wells not receiving primary antibodies were resuspended in 100 µL wash buffer. Plates
were left to incubate overnight at 4 degrees or for 1 hour at room temperature. Regardless,
due to the addition of conjugated primary antibody, plates were handled from this point
in low light settings and incubated in environments protected from light to avoid photo­
bleaching.
Plates were then spun at 1000g for 3 to 4 minutes, and primary antibody solutions were
removed. Cells were washed three times with wash buffer, and secondary antibody solu­
tions were prepared (anti­Armenian Hamster secondary: 1:1000, anti­mouse secondary:
1:1000 or 1:500, anti­rabbit secondary: 1:1000 or 1:500). All secondary antibodies were
conjugated to either Alexafluor­647 or Alexafluor 488 fluorescent dyes. Secondary an­
tibody solutions were added to their respective primary antibodies and one well without
primary antibody to test for unspecific binding. An overview of all secondary antibodies
used can be seen in Table 3.6.
Cells were left to incubate at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Next, plates were
spun at 1000g for 4 minutes, and all secondary solutions were removed from cells. Cells
were washed three times with wash buffer before finally being resuspended in wash buffer.
The plates were taken for flow cytometry and run on CytoFLEX (CytoFLEX, Beckman
Coulter Life Sciences).
3.5.2
Data analysis
The flow cytometry data were analyzed in FlowJo V.10.10. Unstained cells and cells
stained only with secondary antibodies from each condition were used to separate the
populations into positive and negative sub­populations, with the positive populations indi­
cating specific binding to primary antibodies. The thresholds used to determine negative
and positive populations can be found in the appendix. The characteristics and fractions
of these sub­populations were then compared across samples.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
59
==PAGE:70==
Antibody
Target
Secondary
Dilution
Supplier and Cat.No
MUC1­CT2
C­Terminal MUC1
Anti Armenian Hamster
1:12
Thermo Fisher
MA5­11202
MUC1­VU4H5
VNTR Region MUC1
Anti­Mouse
1:20
Santa Cruz
sc­7313
MUC1­PA5
SEA Domain MUC1
Anti­Rabbit
1:50
Thermo Fisher
PA5­95487
NANOG
NANOG
Anti­Mouse
1:2000
Cell Signaling Tech
4893S
OCT­4A
OCT4
Conjugated to AF­647
1:50
Cell Signaling Tech
5263S
C­MYC
C­MYC
Anti­Mouse
1:50
Santa Cruz
sc­40
C­8
NME­1
Anti­Mouse
1:200
Santa Cruz
sc­514515
X­42
NME­2
Anti­Mouse
1:1000
Santa Cruz
sc­100400
SSEA­1
SSEA­1
Conjugated to AF647
1:50
R&D Systems
IC2155R
SSEA­4
SSEA­4
Conjugated to BV605
1:50
BD Biosciences
563119
Table 3.5: Primary antibodies and the dilutions used for Flow Cytometry experiments.
(AF­647 : AlexaFluor­647, BV605 : Brilliant Violet 605
Antibody
Target
Conjugation
Dilution
Supplier and Cat.No
Goat Anti­Armenian Hamster
Armenian Hamster IgG
AF­647
1:1000
Thermo Fisher
A78967
Donkey Anti­Mouse
Mouse IgG
AF­647
1:1000
Thermo Fisher
A31571
Goat Anti­Rabbit
Rabbit IgG
AF­647
1:1000
Thermo Fisher
A78967
Goat Anti­Mouse
Mouse IgG
AF­488
1:500
Thermo Fisher
A10667
Donkey Anti­Rabbit
Rabbit IgG
AF­488
1:500
Thermo Fisher
A32790
Table 3.6: Secondary antibodies and the dilutions used for Flow Cytometry experiments.
(AF­647 : AlexaFluor­647, AF­488 : AlexaFlour­488)
3.5.3
ICC of flow cytometry stained samples
After the full staining protocol for flow cytometry, approximately 10.000 cells were taken
and used for ICC. The cells were attached to glass slides(VWR, 631­0108), covered with
filter cards (Fisher Scientific 11630601), using Cytospin technique with funnels (Fisher
Scientific, 11610591). Before transfer, the cells were diluted 1:5. Following transfer, the
buckets containing the glass slides were carefully removed from the centrifuge and the
filter was taken off. The cells were then stained for DAPI (Thermo Fisher, S36964) and
prepared for mounting of the coverslip. After a glass coverslip was placed on the cells, the
rim of the coverslips was coated with nail polish and left to dry overnight while protected
from light sources. Images were captured the following days on a Leica systems confocal
microscope.
60
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:71==
4
Discussion
The experiments done in this work aimed at trying to investigate if a difference could
be measured in the expression of MUC1, NME1, NME2, and, to a lesser extent, NME7
across the three distinct states of pluripotency: primed, naïve, and ground state. To sim­
ulate these three states, human ESCs cultivated in mT+ and mouse ESCs cultivated in
either serum + LIF or under serum­free conditions with PD, CHIR, and LIF were used.
The research question raised was whether the MUC1 and NME interactions that had pre­
viously been noted for human ESCs, could be playing a role in maintaining a higher degree
of pluripotency in mouse ESCs as well. From this, it was expected that a higher expres­
sion of a variant of MUC1, MUC1*, or a similar product would be noted as the degree
of pluripotency increased. Additionally, the expression of the NME proteins, NME1 and
NME2, should maintain a lower concentration with increasing pluripotent naïvety, to alter
the proteins’ multimeric state into a dimeric one that interacts with MUC1* in the manner
discussed.
The success of the experiments and the interpretation of the results will be covered in this
chapter.
4.1
Establishment of distinct states of pluripotency
A key requirement for answering any of the questions about MUC1, NME, and pluripo­
tency is the establishment of samples in different states of pluripotency. As the three
pluripotency states were originally identified by the differences noticed across different
cultivation methods, it is logical to assume that they can be recapitulated using those
same methods. In an attempt to verify that the cells cultured here truly reflect the differ­
ent states of pluripotency, they were morphologically assessed, and their expression was
examined for known pluripotency markers.
4.1.1
Morphology of cells cultured
As mentioned, the cells were assessed by light microscopy using phase contrast. The
morphology of the H9 cells and the E14 cells in 2i was as expected, with H9 cells forming
sheet­like colonies and 2i cells forming symmetrical and dome­like colonies. The outlier
was the E14 cells in the M15 condition. These cells were repeatedly found with both
the intended morphology of compact cells in dome­like colonies and as darker, highly
unsymmetrical, and elongated colonies. Plating of new stocks of E14 cells showed a
transient period where more cells showed correct morphology, but ultimately more cells
started to take on the unintended morphology.
This could be due to variations in the media, inherent with the use of animal components
like serum. Variations in growth factors present in the medium across cultures could have
led to the M15 cells becoming more susceptible to differentiation in some instances. If
this susceptibility to differentiation coincides with external influences, such as local over­
crowding of cells, some of the cells could have been induced to begin differentiation, re­
sulting in the observed morphology. Because of the level of care needed when handling
ESCs, it is labor intensive and requires a certain amount of experience to properly assess
the cells’ situation and ensure optimal conditions. As this was my first time working with
cell culturing and ESCs, this probably also affected the susceptible M15 cells. However,
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
61
==PAGE:72==
the presence of this sub­population of differentiated cells seems to have not significantly
influenced the other methods by which pluripotency was estimated.
The unsuccessful culture of H9 using the minimal medium SME allowed cells to survive
and proliferate briefly after medium switching, and samples were taken during this time.
However, given that the cells do not appear to differentiate but rather slowly decompose,
its use as a proxy for any state of pluripotency was seen as misleading.
4.1.2
Pluripotency Markers
In addition to morphological assessment, the cells’ expression of known pluripotency
markers was also used to confirm their state. qPCR experiments showed that cells from all
conditions expressed common markers for pluripotency such as Oct4, Sox2, Nanog, and
Myc­c. Relative expression of the markers in the two mouse ESC conditions matches the
pattern expected for cells cultivated in M15 and 2i medium. Comparison across species,
however, shows that the expression of the markers is increased in the supposedly least
pluripotent cells. Especially Nanog expression was expected to be decreased in the hu­
man ESCs that represent the primed state of pluripotency, but like the other markers, it
was found expressed at higher levels compared to M15 and 2i mouse ESCs.
One possible explanation for these results could be that the species difference is too big
of a factor to allow for direct comparison, as done here. Attempts were made to diminish
the species­to­species differences. For the ∆∆­Cq data analysis, the reference gene ex­
pressions were averaged across data from M15 and 2i to one common ∆­Cq value that
was used across the different biological replicates. However, the ∆­Cq value used for
human samples only contained the expression of reference genes from human samples
across biological replicates separately. If the human samples simply contained relatively
more mRNA than mouse samples due to, for instance, differences in cell size, then this
separation of ∆­Cq values should account for general differences in mRNA content. Sim­
ilarly, the amount of cDNA used for each reaction was calculated to be equal across the
samples to eliminate such variables.
Another, perhaps more likely explanation of the tendency for higher expression in human
ESCs is a difference in the measured expression of these reference genes across mouse
and human samples. If the expression of Gapdh and UBC specifically was measured to
be generally lower in human samples than mouse samples, then the relative expression
of the genes normalized to these values would appear higher compared to the genes in
mouse samples that were normalized to more highly expressed reference genes.
Comparing Cq values of Beta­actin, Gapdh, and UBC of three E14 M15 samples and
three E14 2i samples with six human H9 samples using a paired t­test, testing the null­
hypothesis, gave p­values smaller than 0.01, 0.06, and 0.001 for Beta­actin, Gapdh, and
UBC, respectively. This indicates that the qPCR expression data collected here are inap­
propriate for comparison between mouse and human samples, as the reference genes,
from which relative gene expression is determined, differ significantly between species.
An option exists to pool these control genes’ expressions into an average that removes
this species difference but this also results in a loss of information for the mouse con­
ditions as their relative differences are diminished. I believe that doing so will introduce
unnecessary variables to the interpretation of the expression data. As such, this method
was not used.
Several possible explanations for this difference in the expression of the reference genes
exist. One is that these genes are simply differently expressed in the two species, and the
62
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:73==
averaged expression of these genes is still too different between the two, to compensate
for this biological difference.
Another possibility is that the different primers used for mice and humans in the qPCR
experiments have significantly different efficiencies in the amplification of their targets.
Complicating this issue is that primers designed prior to this work were not subject to
the same criteria as those designed here, such as annealing temperatures and product
lengths. This could have led to the primers used for one species, not having the same
efficiency as those used for the samples of the other species. Differences in primer se­
quences are an unavoidable consequence of species differences, but the criteria by which
these primers were designed should ideally be consistent to compensate.
To allow for more accurate cross­species analysis, the mouse or human primers should
be redesigned following the same criteria as the other primers. One method to consider to
avoid the need to quantify the expressions relatively is digital PCR (dPCR). This method
provides an ’absolute’ measure of the amount of target sequences present in the sample,
thus circumventing the need to use reference genes to compare the expression across
samples. In instances like this, with conditions that are difficult to find reference genes
that show comparable expression levels across conditions, such as species differences,
dPCR could prove very useful.
However, mouse samples from the M15 and 2i conditions show a relative expression that
matches expected expression patterns, indicating they are in separate states of pluripo­
tency.
The cells’ pluripotency was also evaluated using the protein expression of NANOG, MYC­
C, and OCT4 and tested with Western blotting and flow cytometry. Flow cytometry gave
results mostly consistent with the expectations that a high number of cells in culture ex­
pressed the pluripotent markers, including the surface­expressed SSEA­1 and ­4. While
more M15 cells were positive for SSEA­1 than 2i cells, other studies have found ESCs in
2i to have lower expression of SSEA­1[82]. NANOG was an exception to these results,
which was found to be mostly negative in all the tested samples. As a measurable pop­
ulation of NANOG­positive cells is expected to be present, even at the primed and naïve
states of pluripotency, this result is inconsistent with current knowledge.
While more iterations of the experiment are needed to confirm the significance of the flow
cytometry results, some possible explanations exist as to why few to almost no cells were
stained positive. Following the supplier’s recommendations, the antibody was diluted
1:2000. However, while this concentration of antibody is recommended, optimization is
often required based on the types of cells and protocol used. In particular, as the anti­
body is stated to be mainly specific to human NANOG, it could be that the antibody shows
lower specificity for mouse NANOG. The fact that the mT+ human cells show 14% posi­
tive cells, while M15 and 2i mouse cells show less than 1%, could support this hypothesis.
Another possibility is that the NANOG proteins found in the other cells are in another state
that is not recognized. As dimeric NANOG acts as a transcription factor in complex with
OCT4 and SOX2, which is suggested to be more active in the naïve and ground state of
pluripotency, the NANOG epitope might be less available in these states and thus, less
binding to the antibody occurs. One way to test this would be to see if the antibody finds
denatured NANOG in a western blot scenario.
However, as shown, Western blotting did not find NANOG or MYC­C using their respective
antibodies. Instead, distinct bands at other molecular weights are seen for both Western
blots. For NANOG staining, a band was produced from each sample at around 55­57
kDa, and another band at 130 kDa for the mT+ sample only. While the antibodies may
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
63
==PAGE:74==
still find the target protein, the molecular weights found here do not match the weight of
any potential multimers of NANOG. It could be of interest to do western blotting of OCT­
4 or SOX­2 to see if they also produce the bands seen with NANOG, to test if it is their
binding to NANOG that causes the increased molecular weight seen. However, given that
the proteins in the samples are expected to be denatured by SDS and heat treatment, it
is unlikely that the proteins here are in complexes with other proteins. As such, more
testing is needed to determine if these results are consistent. Coomassie staining of gels
containing the same samples as those used here, showed no obvious errors in protein
migration down the gel. Ponceau staining of the membranes following protein transfer
showed bands along the full length of the membrane, indicating that proteins of similar size
to NANOG did transfer from the gel, which was also confirmed by BETA­ACTIN restaining
of the membrane. Finally, it should be noted that storage of the NANOG antibody could
have been inadequate, as it was stored for extended period of time (several months) in 4
degrees Celsius, while it is recommended to be stored at ­20 degrees Celsius.
The same situation was seen for MYC­C western blotting, where a strong band was seen
in the mT+ sample at approximately 35 kDa. Two diminished bands are also seen at
approximately 110­120 kDa in the mT+ and 2i lanes. This membrane, too, showed no
problems with Ponceau staining or BETA­ACTIN restaining. As such, more replicates
of this experiment are needed to confirm if the antibody is consistently binding to other
proteins present in the sample, as these results could indicate.
Generally, due to time limitations of the project, doing replicates of the flow cytometry and
western blotting experiments was not possible. This should, of course, have been done
to ensure the results found here are reproducible and significant.
4.2
MUC1 and NME in mouse ESCs
The main objective of this work was to establish that MUC1 / NME could relate to the
state of pluripotency of mouse ESCs, as was seen in previous studies done with human
ESCs and iPSCs. Human ESCs were also tested as a simulation of a more differentiated
ESC, where the MUC1 / NME interaction is known to play a role. The expression of four
genes, Muc1, Nme1, Nme2, and Nme7, was examined for the ESCs by qPCR to show if
a correlation to the pluripotency state could be seen.
4.2.1
qPCR and Flow cytometry
As stated with the pluripotency markers, comparison of qPCR expression across species
was found to be potentially inappropriate due to significant difference in the expression of
the reference genes used. However, comparison between the states of pluripotency in the
two mouse conditions is assumed to still be relevant. The analysis of the results, shown in
2.12, revealed that the expression of these genes between M15 and 2i cells did not differ
significantly when tested by paired t­testing with an alpha of 0.05, except the expression
of NME7 that was found to be 1.729 times higher in the 2i condition (p −value = 0.002).
This could indicate that NME7 has a function distinct in the 2i condition, that it does not
have in the M15 condition. If NME7 does interact with MUC1 in mouse ESCs, this would
match the expectation that at a higher degree of pluripotency, instead of NME1 interacting
with MUC1*, NME7 would be responsible for binding MUC1* and controlling pluripotency.
However, since no difference in the expression of NME1 is seen, the replacement of NME7
with NME1 due to higher concentrations is either not reflected in the mRNA expression
or does not happen in the conditions and cells tested here.
64
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:75==
While a difference in expression at the mRNA level is not seen for MUC1, NME1, and
NME2, it could still be regulated at the level of translation and post­translationally across
the different states of pluripotency. To test if this was the case, MUC1 was stained by two
antibodies for its’ NT­part (VU4H5) and its membrane­bound CT­part (CT­2) to investigate
if not only the total expression of MUC1 differed across the three samples, but also if a
MUC1 variant not containing the NT­part, was differentially present in the three samples.
The results, shown in 2.13, show that a similarly high percentage of cells was positive for
the membrane­bound CT­part across the samples, but the percentage of cells positive for
the NT­part of MUC1 varied between the samples. Assuming that the three samples rep­
resent cells in three states of increasing pluripotency, going from H9 cells in mT+, to E14
cells in M15, to E14 cells in 2i, it is seen that the percentage of cells positive for the NT­part
of MUC1 decreases with increasing pluripotency of samples. Testing permeabilized cells
with the same antibodies, this difference in NT­part of MUC1 is not seen. These results
indicate that a variant of specifically membrane­bound MUC1, that does not contain its
NT­part, is increasingly found in cells as the degree of pluripotency increases.
This result, if true, shows that the fraction of membrane­bound MUC1 is increasingly found
in a variant that could be similar to MUC1*, as the pluripotency of the mouse ESCs in­
creases. As such, the pluripotency­specific MUC1* found in human ESCs by others,
could also be pluripotency­specific in mouse ESCs. However, the function of any poten­
tial MUC1 variant or its interaction with NME1/2 cannot be ascertained from these results.
The flow cytometry experiment for the expression of NME1/2 across the different samples
yielded mostly negative results, as seen in Figure 2.17 and 2.18. Western blotting, us­
ing the same antibodies gave the same negative results, indicating that either NME1 and
NME2 are present only at levels too low for detection, or not present at all. This would
clash with the expectations that NME1 and NME2 are present in human and mouse ESCs
and play a role in pluripotency [11, 81]. As such, it is not unlikely that the negative results
found here do not represent the expression of NME1 and NME2. However, experiments
with known negative and positive controls are needed to confirm this.
Western blot experiments with antibodies against the CT and NT parts of MUC1 also
yielded negative results, underlining the need for additional replications of the experi­
ments done here to confirm the significance of any results seen using flow cytometry.
The consistency of the western blot experiments in producing negative or unexpected re­
sults could indicate that the experimental protocol requires optimization to be functional
with the antibodies and target proteins that this work was focused on.
Finally, a third antibody against the SEA domain of MUC1 was tested for its ability to
differentiate between MUC1 expression in pluripotent states. The SEA domain contains
most of the 45 amino acids found in the extracellular domain of MUC1*, which could allow
it to detect a similar MUC1 variant. If this antibody binds with different affinities to the
CT­part of membrane­bound MUC1 with and without its NT­part, it might be seen in this
experiment, if it is true that a MUC1*­like variant is preferentially expressed by pluripotent
stem cells. However, flow cytometry analysis of cells with this antibody showed no clear
difference in the percentage of positive cells across the different conditions or dependence
on the presence of pluripotent marker SSEA­1 or ­4, as seen in Figure 2.16. As such,
there is very little evidence that the assumptions stated for this antibody are true, and
suggests it binds to MUC1 irrespective of the status of the NT­part. Alternatively, it could
indicate that MUC1 does not change its form across the different conditions, or that the
antibody is unspecific, as this would also lead to the highly positive results seen here.
Testing the antibody in western blotting also showed inconclusive results, in no small
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
65
==PAGE:76==
part due to a defect in the gel used for SDS­PAGE that appeared to have caused the
individual lanes of samples to combine. This is likely to have compromised the sample­
to­sample resolution of the experiment, as seen when the membrane was restained with
BETA­ACTIN. While any interpretation bands formed after this point of merging would
most likely be compromised, three bands matching the size of human MUC1 (250+ kDa)
and mouse MUC1 (64 ­ 128 kDa) are seen in the mT+ human and M15/2i mouse sample
lanes, respectively. However, as stated, due to the defective gel used for this experiment,
any meaningful results will require additional iterations of this experiment. One possibility
to be mindful of is that the epitope of this antibody is part of a functional domain found
in many mucin proteins, meaning it is possible that the antibody could also detect these
proteins.
4.2.2
Alternative methods for investigating MUC1 and NME interactions in
mouse ESCs
The experiments here aimed to detect differences in expression across the conditions to
infer whether MUC1 and NME could be implicated in the state of pluripotency in mouse
ESCs. However, they do not test the proposed MUC1 / NME interaction, which is central to
the proposed method of action for MUC1 and NME. To investigate deeper and potentially
prove that this method of action also exists in mouse ESCs, and if the time limitations
allowed, more sophisticated methods could be used. One option is a CRISPR­based
genetic modification that allows for control of the degradation of a protein of interest in real­
time. The degradation of a target is accomplished by fusing the target protein with a variant
of FKBP12 which was found to bind an ubiquitin ligase complex, called E3, resulting in
the rapid degradation of the protein fused to FKBP12. However, this degradation only
happens through bridging the FKBP12 domain to the E3 ubiquitin ligase complex by a
linker molecule. Thus, the system can be controlled by adding and removing this linker
molecule. This allows for rapid depletion and restoration of the target protein and to test
the effect of loss and gain of the target protein in cell systems without deleterious effects
that would otherwise be seen with classical knockout methods, as the effective depletion
is only transient.
Using this method could allow one to test if the temporary knockout of the different proteins
of interest for the MUC1 / NME system affected the ESCs, thus showing a direct cause
and effect between the protein and the state of the cell.
Another method that uses genetic engineering is Förster resonance energy transfer (aka
FRET). This method can be used to show that two proteins of interest interact by a shift
in emitted light by fluorophores caused by the close proximity of the two fluorescently
tagged proteins to each other. Labeled proteins are prepared by genetically introducing
two different fluorophores, an acceptor and a donor fluorophore into the targets. When
these two fluorophores are in close proximity (a few nanometers), excitation of the donor
fluorophore does not result in the emission of fluorescence. Instead, the energy that would
normally be released by the emission of light by the donor fluorophore, is transferred to
the acceptor fluorophore. This excites the acceptor fluorophore, and a signal is emitted,
with a higher wavelength than what the donor fluorophore would emit when alone. Thus,
two different fluorescent signals would be detected, based on the proximity of the donor
fluorophore to the acceptor fluorophore. Coupling the C­terminal domain of MUC1 and
NME1/2 to the acceptor and donor fluorophores respectively, could allow for determining
if the NME proteins bind with MUC1.
Finally, antibody­based methods can also be used to show protein­protein interactions
and multimeric forms of proteins. One subject of interest to the MUC1 / NME system is
66
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:77==
the multimeric state of NME proteins. As mentioned, using SDS­PAGE results in the de­
naturing of proteins and dissolution of protein­protein interactions. However, this does not
allow one to determine the naive state of the proteins in the sample, as in this example,
which multimeric forms of NME1/2 are present in the samples. Using native­PAGE, the
original state of the proteins is maintained, including the oligomeric state of the proteins
of interest. This allows one to probe for proteins and their oligomeric state and protein
interactions. If MUC1 binds the dimeric state of NME1, then when staining either protein
would lead to a common band. This experiment, if successful, would provide strong evi­
dence for which NME1/2 state is present in the different conditions and possibly MUC1 /
NME interaction.
In a similar manner, co­immunoprecipitation could allow for the extraction of proteins of
interest along with any protein attached to it at the time of extraction. By binding an an­
tibody to beads that allow for the separation of the antibodies and their bound products
from the rest of the solution, the proteins of interest can be purified from the sample. This
purified solution should contain both the target protein and any other proteins it can form
complexes with. This solution can then be run on a ordinary SDS­page and western blot
to identify if certain proteins got purified along with the original target. One could imag­
ine that if NME1/2 could be co­immunoprecpitated using a MUC1 antibody, it would give
strong evidence for interaction between the proteins.
Ideally, the same antibody, anti­MUC1*, used to originally show that MUC1* acts as a
growth receptor, could have been used here also to test if the effects seen in human
ESCs could also be seen here. However, as of writing, this antibody is not commercially
available.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
67
==PAGE:78==
5
Conclusion
Pluripotent stem cells are a fascinating subject of research, not only due to the potential
they hold as a source of tissue for regenerative medicine but also because they stand at
the precipice of single­cell and multicellular organisms. How a single cell can expand and
differentiate into the many different and complex tissues in multicellular organisms such
as humans, is a fundamental question to ask when attempting to answer how biology and
our cells function to make us who we are.
As such, the topic of pluripotent stem cells, consisting of ESCs and iPSCs, has received
a lot of attention, and great strides have been made because of it. In recent years, it
has been shown that ESCs or PSCs, in general, exhibit a spectrum of pluripotency, with
three distinct states: primed, naive, and ground state, being found in mouse ESCs. All
three states have also been shown to be maintainable in vitro. However, these states of
pluripotency have been proven difficult to find and maintain for human ESCs. Currently
used methods rely on cocktails of inhibitors and growth factors, whose function and effect
on ESCs have yet to be well­defined. One potentially better alternative lies in the use
of the mucin protein MUC1. A series of studies done shows that stimulation of a MUC1
variant, MUC1*, with NDPK proteins NME1 and NME7 transformed human ESCs and
iPSCs into a more naïve state of pluripotency without the addition of inhibitors or growth
factors. To better understand how this interaction between MUC1 and NME proteins could
control pluripotency, it is of interest to see if the system is also present in mouse ESCs,
where the pluripotent states are more clearly defined.
To this end, I have in this project, investigated the expression of the genes and proteins
related to the MUC1 / NME system proposed, by qPCR, flow cytometry, and western
blotting across human and mouse ESCs, representing different states of pluripotency. H9
human ESCs cultivated in mTesR1 on Geltrex are proposed to represent the primed state
of pluripotency, while E14 mouse ESCs cultivated in a medium containing serum and
LIF or in a serum­free medium with PD, CHIR and LIF represent the naïve and ground
state pluripotency. Together, these three conditions, mT+, M15, and 2i, cover a wide
spectrum of pluripotency across which the core components of the MUC1 / NME system
were examined.
The results of these experiments, however, are inconclusive. Due to species differences,
the relative expression of the target genes could not readily be compared between human
and mouse samples, limiting the analysis to the comparison between mouse samples in
different conditions. Of the inter­species comparison, the only gene with differential ex­
pression was Nme7, showing higher expression in 2i mouse samples. It was attempted to
cultivate human ESCs in more differentiation­inducing conditions for inter­human compar­
isons, but the conditions used were observed to lead to colony disintegration and arrested
cell growth.
Comparison of protein expression by flow cytometry used antibodies specific for NME1,
and NME2 as well as three separate antibodies against different epitopes of MUC1 to de­
termine if these proteins and epitopes were differently expressed across states of pluripo­
tency. While the NME1 and NME2 experiments returned negative results, a difference
was noted in the percentage of cells positive for the expression of the NT­part of MUC1. It
appears this NT part of MUC1 is found less frequently on the surface of cells with increas­
ing pluripotency. These findings need to be re­tested to show significance, but if found
68
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:79==
true, they could indicate that a MUC1* ­like variant of MUC1 could be seen with increas­
ing frequency in mouse ESCs with of increasing pluripotency. Western blotting to confirm
these results has been inconclusive, and the inherent time limitations of this project have
made the necessary replications unfeasible at the time of writing. It is, however, my belief
that these assays can be made to work and potentially expanded to also show more direct
evidence for the interaction of MUC1 and the NME1/2 proteins.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
69
==PAGE:80==
Bibliography
[1]
Wojciech Zakrzewski et al. “Stem cells: past, present, and future”. In: Stem cell
research & therapy 10.1 (2019), pp. 1–22.
[2]
Vimal K Singh et al. “Induced pluripotent stem cells: applications in regenerative
medicine, disease modeling, and drug discovery”. In: Frontiers in cell and develop­
mental biology 3 (2015), p. 2.
[3]
Sean M Wu and Konrad Hochedlinger. “Harnessing the potential of induced pluripo­
tent stem cells for regenerative medicine”. In: Nature cell biology 13.5 (2011), pp. 497–
505.
[4]
Yishai Avior, Ido Sagi, and Nissim Benvenisty. “Pluripotent stem cells in disease
modelling and drug discovery”. In: Nature reviews Molecular cell biology 17.3 (2016),
pp. 170–182.
[5]
Mototsugu Eiraku et al. “Self­organizing optic­cup morphogenesis in three­dimensional
culture”. In: Nature 472.7341 (2011), pp. 51–56.
[6]
Lopamudra Das Roy et al. “MUC1 enhances invasiveness of pancreatic cancer
cells by inducing epithelial to mesenchymal transition”. In: Oncogene 30.12 (2011),
pp. 1449–1459.
[7]
Joyce A Schroeder et al. “MUC1 alters β­catenin­dependent tumor formation and
promotes cellular invasion”. In: Oncogene 22.9 (2003), pp. 1324–1332.
[8]
Benoit J Smagghe et al. “MUC1* ligand, NM23­H1, is a novel growth factor that
maintains human stem cells in a more naive state”. In: PloS one 8.3 (2013), e58601.
[9]
MG Carter et al. “A primitive growth factor, NME7AB, is sufficient to induce stable
naive state human pluripotency; reprogramming in this novel growth factor confers
superior differentiation”. In: Stem Cells 34.4 (2016), pp. 847–859.
[10]
Sanjeev Mahanta et al. “A minimal fragment of MUC1 mediates growth of cancer
cells”. In: PloS one 3.4 (2008), e2054.
[11]
Sherry T Hikita et al. “MUC1* mediates the growth of human pluripotent stem cells”.
In: PloS one 3.10 (2008), e3312.
[12]
Javier Martin Gonzalez et al. “Embryonic stem cell culture conditions support distinct
states associated with different developmental stages and potency”. In: Stem cell
reports 7.2 (2016), pp. 177–191.
[13]
Miguel Ramalho­Santos and Holger Willenbring. “On the origin of the term “stem
cell””. In: Cell stem cell 1.1 (2007), pp. 35–38.
[14]
Stanford University Libraries. Image from the The Barry Lawrence Ruderman Map
Collection. Licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial Share
Alike 3.0 Unported license (CC BY­NC­SA). 2024.
[15]
J Gordon Betts et al. “Anatomy and Physiology 2e”. In: (2022).
[16]
Tannishtha Reya et al. “Stem cells, cancer, and cancer stem cells”. In: nature 414.6859
(2001), pp. 105–111.
[17]
“Chapter 3 ­ What Are Stem Cells?” In: Stem Cells (Second Edition). Ed. by Christine
Mummery et al. Second Edition. Boston: Academic Press, 2014, pp. 53–68. ISBN:
978­0­12­411551­4. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-411551-4.00003-9.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780124115514000039.
[18]
Gilbert SF. “Comparetive Embryology”. In: Developmental Biology, 6th edition. (2000).
[19]
Martin J Evans and Matthew H Kaufman. “Establishment in culture of pluripotential
cells from mouse embryos”. In: nature 292.5819 (1981), pp. 154–156.
70
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:81==
[20]
James A Thomson et al. “Embryonic stem cell lines derived from human blasto­
cysts”. In: science 282.5391 (1998), pp. 1145–1147.
[21]
Kazutoshi Takahashi and Shinya Yamanaka. “Induction of pluripotent stem cells
from mouse embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors”. In: cell
126.4 (2006), pp. 663–676.
[22]
Kazutoshi Takahashi et al. “Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human
fibroblasts by defined factors”. In: cell 131.5 (2007), pp. 861–872.
[23]
Deanna M Church et al. “Lineage­specific biology revealed by a finished genome
assembly of the mouse”. In: PLoS biology 7.5 (2009), e1000112.
[24]
Irene Ginis et al. “Differences between human and mouse embryonic stem cells”.
In: Developmental biology 269.2 (2004), pp. 360–380.
[25]
Jennifer Nichols et al. “Formation of pluripotent stem cells in the mammalian embryo
depends on the POU transcription factor Oct4”. In: Cell 95.3 (1998), pp. 379–391.
[26]
Ariel A Avilion et al. “Multipotent cell lineages in early mouse development depend
on SOX2 function”. In: Genes & development 17.1 (2003), pp. 126–140.
[27]
Helen Fong, Kristi A Hohenstein, and Peter J Donovan. “Regulation of self­renewal
and pluripotency by Sox2 in human embryonic stem cells”. In: Stem cells 26.8
(2008), pp. 1931–1938.
[28]
Guilai Shi and Ying Jin. “Role of Oct4 in maintaining and regaining stem cell pluripo­
tency”. In: Stem cell research & therapy 1 (2010), pp. 1–9.
[29]
Richard B Greaves et al. “A conceptual and computational framework for modelling
and understanding the non­equilibrium gene regulatory networks of mouse embry­
onic stem cells”. In: PLoS computational biology 13.9 (2017), e1005713.
[30]
Hitoshi Niwa, Jun­ichi Miyazaki, and Austin G Smith. “Quantitative expression of
Oct­3/4 defines differentiation, dedifferentiation or self­renewal of ES cells”. In: Na­
ture genetics 24.4 (2000), pp. 372–376.
[31]
Janel L Kopp et al. “Small increases in the level of Sox2 trigger the differentiation
of mouse embryonic stem cells”. In: Stem cells 26.4 (2008), pp. 903–911.
[32]
Jianlong Wang, Dana N Levasseur, and Stuart H Orkin. “Requirement of Nanog
dimerization for stem cell self­renewal and pluripotency”. In: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 105.17 (2008), pp. 6326–6331.
[33]
Guangjin Pan et al. “A negative feedback loop of transcription factors that con­
trols stem cell pluripotency and self­renewal”. In: The FASEB Journal 20.10 (2006),
pp. 1730–1732.
[34]
Rudolf Jaenisch and Richard Young. “Stem cells, the molecular circuitry of pluripo­
tency and nuclear reprogramming”. In: Cell 132.4 (2008), pp. 567–582.
[35]
Michal Amit et al. “Clonally derived human embryonic stem cell lines maintain pluripo­
tency and proliferative potential for prolonged periods of culture”. In: Developmental
biology 227.2 (2000), pp. 271–278.
[36]
Yoshiki Nakashima and Takeshi Omasa. “What kind of signaling maintains pluripo­
tency and viability in human­induced pluripotent stem cells cultured on laminin­511
with serum­free medium?” In: BioResearch open access 5.1 (2016), pp. 84–93.
[37]
Jian Li et al. “MEK/ERK signaling contributes to the maintenance of human embry­
onic stem cell self­renewal”. In: Differentiation 75.4 (2007), pp. 299–307.
[38]
Jie Na, Miho K Furue, and Peter W Andrews. “Inhibition of ERK1/2 prevents neural
and mesendodermal differentiation and promotes human embryonic stem cell self­
renewal”. In: Stem cell research 5.2 (2010), pp. 157–169.
[39]
Lyle Armstrong et al. “The role of PI3K/AKT, MAPK/ERK and NFκβ signalling in the
maintenance of human embryonic stem cell pluripotency and viability highlighted
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
71
==PAGE:82==
by transcriptional profiling and functional analysis”. In: Human molecular genetics
15.11 (2006), pp. 1894–1913.
[40]
Shinya Fukumoto et al. “Akt participation in the Wnt signaling pathway through Di­
shevelled”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 276.20 (2001), pp. 17479–17483.
[41]
Bryan T MacDonald, Keiko Tamai, and Xi He. “Wnt/β­catenin signaling: compo­
nents, mechanisms, and diseases”. In: Developmental cell 17.1 (2009), pp. 9–26.
[42]
Noboru Sato et al. “Maintenance of pluripotency in human and mouse embryonic
stem cells through activation of Wnt signaling by a pharmacological GSK­3­specific
inhibitor”. In: Nature medicine 10.1 (2004), pp. 55–63.
[43]
Daylon James et al. “TGFβ/activin/nodal signaling is necessary for the maintenance
of pluripotency in human embryonic stem cells”. In: (2005).
[44]
Laura C Rose et al. “Effect of basic fibroblast growth factor in mouse embryonic
stem cell culture and osteogenic differentiation”. In: Journal of Tissue Engineering
and Regenerative Medicine 7.5 (2013), pp. 371–382.
[45]
Katsuhiko Hayashi et al. “Reconstitution of the Mouse Germ Cell Specification Path­
way in Culture by Pluripotent Stem Cells”. In: Cell 146.4 (2011), pp. 519–532. ISSN:
0092­8674. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.06.052. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0092867411007719.
[46]
Masaki Kinoshita et al. “Capture of Mouse and Human Stem Cells with Features of
Formative Pluripotency”. In: Cell Stem Cell 28.3 (2021), 453–471.e8. ISSN: 1934­
5909. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2020.11.005. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1934590920305439.
[47]
R Lindsay Williams et al. “Myeloid leukaemia inhibitory factor maintains the devel­
opmental potential of embryonic stem cells”. In: Nature 336.6200 (1988), pp. 684–
687.
[48]
Jean­Francois Moreau et al. “Leukaemia inhibitory factor is identical to the myeloid
growth factor human interleukin for DA cells”. In: Nature 336.6200 (1988), pp. 690–
692.
[49]
Samuel Davis et al. “LIFRβ and gp130 as heterodimerizing signal transducers of
the tripartite CNTF receptor”. In: Science 260.5115 (1993), pp. 1805–1808.
[50]
Yong Tang and Xiuchun Tian. “JAK­STAT3 and somatic cell reprogramming”. In:
Jak­Stat 2.4 (2013), e24935.
[51]
Kiyoshi Takeda et al. “Targeted disruption of the mouse Stat3 gene leads to early
embryonic lethality”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 94.8
(1997), pp. 3801–3804.
[52]
Dang Vinh Do et al. “A genetic and developmental pathway from STAT3 to the
OCT4–NANOG circuit is essential for maintenance of ICM lineages in vivo”. In:
Genes & development 27.12 (2013), pp. 1378–1390.
[53]
S Faherty, MT Kane, and LR Quinlan. “Self­renewal and differentiation of mouse
embryonic stem cells as measured by Oct4 gene expression: effects of LIF, serum­
free medium, retinoic acid, and dbcAMP”. In: In Vitro Cellular & Developmental
Biology­Animal 41 (2005), pp. 356–363.
[54]
EIHACHIRO Kawase et al. “Strain difference in establishment of mouse embryonic
stem (ES) cell lines”. In: International Journal of Developmental Biology 38 (1994),
pp. 385–385.
[55]
Laurence Dahéron et al. “LIF/STAT3 signaling fails to maintain self­renewal of hu­
man embryonic stem cells”. In: Stem cells 22.5 (2004), pp. 770–778.
[56]
Qi­Long Ying et al. “BMP induction of Id proteins suppresses differentiation and sus­
tains embryonic stem cell self­renewal in collaboration with STAT3”. In: Cell 115.3
(2003), pp. 281–292.
72
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:83==
[57]
Qi­Long Ying et al. “The ground state of embryonic stem cell self­renewal”. In: nature
453.7194 (2008), pp. 519–523.
[58]
Akifumi Kanda et al. “Establishment of ES cells from inbred strain mice by dual
inhibition (2i)”. In: Journal of Reproduction and Development 58.1 (2012), pp. 77–
83.
[59]
Zakary S Singer et al. “Dynamic heterogeneity and DNA methylation in embryonic
stem cells”. In: Molecular cell 55.2 (2014), pp. 319–331.
[60]
Simon Hastreiter et al. “Inductive and selective effects of GSK3 and MEK inhibition
on Nanog heterogeneity in embryonic stem cells”. In: Stem cell reports 11.1 (2018),
pp. 58–69.
[61]
Sabitri Ghimire et al. “Comparative analysis of naive, primed and ground state
pluripotency in mouse embryonic stem cells originating from the same genetic back­
ground”. In: Scientific reports 8.1 (2018), p. 5884.
[62]
Hendrik Marks et al. “The transcriptional and epigenomic foundations of ground
state pluripotency”. In: Cell 149.3 (2012), pp. 590–604.
[63]
Michael K Skinner. “Role of epigenetics in developmental biology and transgenera­
tional inheritance”. In: Birth Defects Research Part C: Embryo Today: Reviews 93.1
(2011), pp. 51–55.
[64]
Zhuo Sun et al. “X­chromosome inactivation and related diseases”. In: Genetics
Research 2022 (2022), e67.
[65]
Peter B Rahl et al. “c­Myc regulates transcriptional pause release”. In: Cell 141.3
(2010), pp. 432–445.
[66]
I Gabrielle M Brons et al. “Derivation of pluripotent epiblast stem cells from mam­
malian embryos”. In: Nature 448.7150 (2007), pp. 191–195.
[67]
Paul J Tesar et al. “New cell lines from mouse epiblast share defining features with
human embryonic stem cells”. In: Nature 448.7150 (2007), pp. 196–199.
[68]
Yali Huang et al. “In vivo differentiation potential of epiblast stem cells revealed by
chimeric embryo formation”. In: Cell reports 2.6 (2012), pp. 1571–1578.
[69]
Hiroshi Kiyonari et al. “Three inhibitors of FGF receptor, ERK, and GSK3 estab­
lishes germline­competent embryonic stem cells of C57BL/6N mouse strain with
high efficiency and stability”. In: genesis 48.5 (2010), pp. 317–327.
[70]
Donald W Kufe. “Mucins in cancer: function, prognosis and therapy”. In: Nature
Reviews Cancer 9.12 (2009), pp. 874–885.
[71]
Malin EV Johansson, Henrik Sjövall, and Gunnar C Hansson. “The gastrointesti­
nal mucus system in health and disease”. In: Nature reviews Gastroenterology &
hepatology 10.6 (2013), pp. 352–361.
[72]
Sean K Lau, Lawrence M Weiss, and Peiguo G Chu. “Differential expression of
MUC1, MUC2, and MUC5AC in carcinomas of various sites: an immunohistochem­
ical study”. In: American journal of clinical pathology 122.1 (2004), pp. 61–69.
[73]
Teresa M Horm and Joyce A Schroeder. “MUC1 and metastatic cancer: expres­
sion, function and therapeutic targeting”. In: Cell adhesion & migration 7.2 (2013),
pp. 187–198.
[74]
Sritama Nath and Pinku Mukherjee. “MUC1: a multifaceted oncoprotein with a key
role in cancer progression”. In: Trends in molecular medicine 20.6 (2014), pp. 332–
342.
[75]
Amantha Thathiah, Carl P Blobel, and Daniel D Carson. “Tumor necrosis factor­α
converting enzyme/ADAM 17 mediates MUC1 shedding”. In: Journal of Biological
Chemistry 278.5 (2003), pp. 3386–3394.
[76]
Amantha Thathiah and Daniel D Carson. “Mt1­Mmp mediates muc1 shedding inde­
pendent of tace/adam17”. In: Biochemical Journal 382.1 (2004), pp. 363–373.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
73
==PAGE:84==
[77]
JoAnne Julian, Neeraja Dharmaraj, and Daniel D Carson. “MUC1 is a substrate for
γ­secretase”. In: Journal of cellular biochemistry 108.4 (2009), pp. 802–815.
[78]
Sandra J Gendler. “MUC1, the renaissance molecule”. In: Journal of mammary
gland biology and neoplasia 6 (2001), pp. 339–353.
[79]
Andrew P Spicer et al. “Molecular cloning and analysis of the mouse homologue of
the tumor­associated mucin, MUC1, reveals conservation of potential O­glycosylation
sites, transmembrane, and cytoplasmic domains and a loss of minisatellite­like poly­
morphism”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 266.23 (1991), pp. 15099–15109.
[80]
Anne­Marie Gilles et al. “Nucleoside diphosphate kinase from human erythrocytes.
Structural characterization of the two polypeptide chains responsible for hetero­
geneity of the hexameric enzyme”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 266.14 (1991),
pp. 8784–8789.
[81]
Shoutian Zhu et al. “A small molecule primes embryonic stem cells for differentia­
tion”. In: Cell stem cell 4.5 (2009), pp. 416–426.
[82]
Renpeng Guo et al. “Feeders facilitate telomere maintenance and chromosomal
stability of embryonic stem cells”. In: Nature communications 9.1 (2018), p. 2620.
74
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:85==
A
Appendix
A.1
Flow cytometry data
Figure A.1: Average Fluorescence from staining with CT­2 (channel 1) and VU4H5 (chan­
nel 2) measured in H9 cells from mTesR1 culture (mT+) and E14 cells from serum + LIF
(m15) or 2i + LIF culture (2i). Error bars represent +1 standard deviation
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
75
==PAGE:86==
76
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:87==
A.2
Hamster secondary antibody only control for non­permealized
cells
mT+
m15
2i
Ham_sec : non_perm
Figure A.2: Background fluorescence of anti­hamster secondary antibody only. Used for
gating in appropriate experiments.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
77
==PAGE:88==
78
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:89==
A.3
Hamster secondary antibody only control on permeabilizd
cells
mT+
m15
2i
Ham_sec : perm
Figure A.3: Background fluorescence of anti­hamster secondary antibody only. Used for
gating in appropriate experiments.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
79
==PAGE:90==
A.4
Mouse secondary antibody only control on permeabilized cells
mT+
m15
2i
Mouse_sec
Figure A.4: Background fluorescence of anti mouse secondary antibody only. Used for
gating in appropriate experiments.
80
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:91==
A.5
Rabbit secondary antibody only control on permeabilized cells
mT+
m15
2i
Rabbit_sec
Figure A.5: Background fluorescence of anti­rabbit secondary antibody only. Used for
gating in appropriate experiments.
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
81
==PAGE:92==
A.6
Unstained permeabilized cells control
mT+
m15
2i
unstained
Figure A.6: Background fluorescence of unstained cells. Used for gating in appropriate
experiments.
82
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
==PAGE:93==
A.7
qPCR data of condition specific genes
(a)
(b)
Figure A.7: Relative expression of five genes expected to be differently expressed across
conditions: Bmp2, Foxp1, Lin28a, Spic, and Stat3. Data is presented as averages of four
biological replicates (n = 4), and error bars indicate +−1σ standard deviation. (a) Show
expression in relation to the average expression of two reference genes from the same
conditions, and (b) show the relative expression normalized to the expressions seen in
H9 mT+ cells by the ∆∆­Cq method. Expectations of relative expression: Bmp2 high in
mT+, Foxp1 high in m15, lin28a high in 2i, Spic high in 2i, Stat3 low in mT+
Exploring the interaction of NME and MUC1 in embryonic stem cells
83
==PAGE:94==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Søltofts Plads, Building 221
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
