==PAGE:1==
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communi-
cation in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
Master Thesis
DTU ELECTRO
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and
Beyond
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Pietro Marrone
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
ITEGRITI, 2023
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds Plads
Bygning 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://electro.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Sector of DTU Compute, Department
of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU,
in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Computer Engineering, MSc Eng. as an
exchange student from Politecnico di Torino.
Pietro Marrone - s231987
Signature
Date
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This study explores the capabilities and performance of Device-to-Device (D2D) commu-
nication within the 5G network framework, focusing on the DECT NR+ standard. Devel-
oped by the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), DECT NR+ aims
to meet the stringent requirements of 5G technology. The hypothesis assumes that DECT
NR+ can significantly enhance communication efficiency and reliability in D2D scenarios.
To test this hypothesis, hardware and software tools from Nordic Semiconductor was uti-
lized, including the nRF9161 Development Kit, nRF Connect for Desktop and nRF Con-
nect SDK. These tools facilitated the setup and evaluation of seamless communication
between devices using the DECT NR+ standard.
Key performance metrics were systematically evaluated, including latency, coverage,
Packet Success Rate (PSR), data rate, and power consumption. The results indicated
that DECT NR+ provides robust data rate performance, achieving up to 2.2 Mbps, and
high PSR in controlled environments up to a critical distance, beyond which PSR declined.
The maximum observed range was 220 meters, which is notable but still less compared
to other technologies as LTE-M and NB-IoT. Latency analysis revealed a linear relation-
ship between Round Trip Time (RTT) and packet size, with higher Modulation and Coding
Scheme (MCS) values improving latency performance. However, observed RTTs did not
fully meet the Ultra-Reliable Low Latency Communication (URLLC) standards, suggesting
the need for further optimization. Finally, Power consumption analysis showed that DECT
NR+ demonstrated significantly lower power consumption compared to Wi-Fi, especially
during idle and active operation, and was comparable to NB-IoT and LTE-M. Future im-
plementations of the complete DECT NR+ stack and additional power-saving features are
expected to enhance this efficiency further.
In conclusion, this thesis contributes to the ongoing development and optimization of
DECT NR+ technology, underscoring its promise as a versatile and efficient solution for
future wireless communication challenges. Future work will focus on addressing the iden-
tified optimization areas to further enhance DECT NR+ performance.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Pietro Marrone, MSc Computer Engineering, DTU
During the realisation of this master thesis at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU,
I have been in contact with various collaborators. Therefore, I would like to express my
sincere gratitude and appreciation to the following people for their cooperation and sup-
port. Their role as mentors and their support towards me, an exchange student, have
been fundamental to the successful accomplishment of this project.
Michael Stübert Berger, Associate Professor, Department of Electrical and Photonics
Engineering, Technical University of Denmark.
Claudio Ettore Casetti, Associate Professor, Department of Automatics and Computer
Science, Politecnico di Torino.
Christian Kloch, IoT Tech Lead, FORCE Technology.
Radheshyam Singh, PhD student, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering,
Technical University of Denmark.
For their close support, guidance and good spirit throughout the project.
To my family and friends, my greatest cheerleaders, for standing by me and making this
incredible experience possible. Thank you for always being by my side.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
State of the art
5
2.1
Introduction to D2D Communication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Architecture and Technologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
D2D Use Cases and Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4
Introduction to DECT NR+ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.5
Network topologies and Technologies used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.6
Network Protocol Layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.7
DECT NR+ Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3
Experimental Setup
29
3.1
Hardware Components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.2
Software Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.3
Broadcast Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.4
Modem Shell Application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4
Test and Results
54
4.1
COVERAGE - PSR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
4.2
Data Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
4.3
Latency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
4.4
Power Consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
5
Conclusion and Future Work
79
5.1
Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
5.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Bibliography
81
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
1.1.1
The evolution of 5G
The advent of 5G technology marks a significant leap forward in wireless communication,
promising unprecedented improvements in speed, capacity, and connectivity. Unlike its
predecessor, 4G LTE, which primarily focuses on enhanced mobile broadband services,
5G aims to provide a versatile platform capable of supporting a diverse range of applica-
tions, including the Internet of Things (IoT), autonomous vehicles, smart cities and more.
5G promises to be much more than an incremental improvement over 4G LTE in at least
three aspects: speed performance, projected to be about 600 times better than the current
4G LTE standard; network latency, enabling instantaneous and real-time communication
across devices and applications; and capacity, leading to ubiquitous connectivity with an
astonishing 100× increase in traffic capacity and network efficiency and thus significantly
overcoming the traditional issues of band scarcity that plagued earlier generations of mo-
bile connectivity [1].
But these are not the only advantages of 5G networks. 5G technology offers significantly
wider bandwidth and greater flexibility regarding how bands are used. This means 5G
networks can maintain stable connectivity for a far greater number of devices in a con-
centrated area. This is the primary way 5G is transforming the Internet of Things, opening
the door to a revolution in the IoT world. In fact, there are already billions of IoT devices,
but the wider bandwidth and more efficient spectrum usage of 5G networks will allow far
more devices to operate in close proximity without interfering with one another [2].
5G is divided into three frequency bands (low, mid and high). Each band has different
capabilities: the low band (less than 1 GHz) offers greater coverage but lower speeds,
the mid band (1 GHz–6 GHz) provides a balance of both, and the high band (24 GHz–
40 GHz) delivers higher speeds but with a smaller coverage radius. 5G can utilize more
frequencies across all three bands to achieve optimal performance, even using multiple
frequencies simultaneously [3]. In contrast, 4G/LTE cellular technology primarily operates
within the 700 MHz to 900 MHz and 1.8 GHz to 2.5 GHz frequency bands [4]. The key to
this versatility and enhanced performance lies in the new radio access technology known
as 5G New Radio (NR).
However, because of this broader frequency use, 5G necessitate a greater number of
base stations to ensure comprehensive coverage, and this can be seen as the most sig-
nificant disadvantage of 5G. In fact, considering that 4G primarily operates below 3 GHz,
it cannot support the vast number of end devices and the massive influx of data that 5G
can handle. The 4G network simply is not designed for this level of connectivity [5].
1.1.2
5G NR
5G New Radio, or 5G NR, is the global standard for the air interface of 5G networks. De-
veloped by the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), 5G NR replaces the 4G LTE
standards and enables a wide array of enhancements in wireless communication. 5G NR
significantly improves speed and reduces latency compared to previous 4G standards,
supporting the growing demand for high-speed, low-latency applications. Key improve-
ments introduced by 5G NR include:
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
1
==PAGE:8==
• Diverse Spectrum Utilization: Ranging from several hundred kilohertz to millimeter
wave (mmWave) bands, enabling various use cases, cell sizes and data rates.
• Advanced Modulation and Coding: New orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing
methods and channel-coding techniques.
• Frequency Reuse Algorithms: Enhanced algorithms for dense environments.
• Beam-forming: A signal processing technique to improve signal quality and cover-
age.
• Massive MIMO: Supports multiple input, multiple output capabilities to increase ca-
pacity and throughput.
• Ultra-low Latency: Slot time operations designed to deliver ultra-low-latency com-
munications.
The benefits of 5G NR over the best LTE networks include larger network capacity, in-
creased energy savings per device, shorter service creation time cycles, enhanced speed
and data rates, improved efficiency in data sharing and better latency [6]. 5G NR plays
a crucial role in the 5G network, primarily addressing the radio access technology com-
ponent. It integrates the physical (PHY) and medium access control (MAC) layers of the
OSI protocol stack, managing radio transmissions and channel sharing. These layers are
vital for ensuring the high performance and capabilities of 5G networks.
1.2
Overview
The rapid evolution of cellular technology has paved the way for innovative communica-
tion paradigms, with Device-to-Device (D2D) communication emerging as a significant
feature. Traditionally, mobile devices communicate via a centralized network infrastruc-
ture, such as a base station or a mobile switching center. However, D2D communication
enables direct interaction between devices without traversing the core network, offering
numerous advantages in terms of latency, throughput and energy efficiency.
This evolution is particularly significant in the context of 5G and beyond 5G (B5G) net-
works, where D2D communication optimizes the utilization of available network resources,
reduces latency, enhances data transmission speed and increases overall network capac-
ity. Mobile operators play a crucial role in driving D2D development by leveraging short-
range communication data, enhancing proximity-based services and overall network per-
formance. Current research focuses on various aspects of D2D communication, including
the discovery process, mode selection methods, interference management and power al-
location, especially in 5G technologies. As the industry moves beyond 5G, leveraging
these advancements to address the growing demand for efficient and reliable communi-
cation systems is crucial, facilitating applications such as public safety, content distribution
and the Internet of Things (IoT) [7].
The motivation behind this project is to explore the potential of D2D communication within
the realm of 5G and future cellular technologies. By bypassing traditional network infras-
tructure, D2D communication can significantly enhance spectral efficiency and improve
overall network performance. These benefits are particularly relevant in scenarios requir-
ing high-speed and reliable communication, such as emergency response situations and
dense urban environments. Understanding the challenges and solutions associated with
D2D communication, such as interference management, resource allocation and security,
is essential for its successful integration into existing and future cellular networks.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
2
==PAGE:9==
1.3
Objectives
In the context of Device-to-Device (D2D) communication, this thesis focuses on the DECT
NR+ standard. Developed and standardized by the European Telecommunications Stan-
dards Institute (ETSI), DECT NR+ is a radio access technology designed to meet the
technical requirements of 5G. Standards organizations like ETSI and the 3rd Generation
Partnership Project (3GPP) play crucial roles in developing these technologies, ensuring
they adhere to stringent performance and interoperability criteria.
Nordic Semiconductor is one of the companies that has invested in the DECT NR+ stan-
dard, underscoring its commitment to advancing D2D communication technologies. This
investment includes becoming a full member of the DECT Forum, which highlights Nordic’s
active involvement in shaping the future of DECT NR+ technology. Nordic has developed
several devices, including the nRF9161 DK, which supports not only the LTE-M and NB-
IoT standards but also the new DECT NR+ standard.
The tools used in this project include both software and hardware components provided
by Nordic Semiconductor. For the software part, nRF Connect for Desktop and nRF Con-
nect SDK were utilized. These tools offer comprehensive development environments for
building and testing applications on Nordic’s hardware platforms. The nRF Connect SDK
provides a robust software framework for developing complex wireless applications, while
nRF Connect for Desktop facilitates easy configuration and management of connected
devices.
For the hardware aspect, the nRF9161 Development Kit (DK) was used. This develop-
ment kit offers a versatile platform for prototyping and testing DECT NR+ communication
features in various applications. It supports a wide range of functionalities necessary for
evaluating the performance of the communication link between devices.
To achieve seamless communication between devices using the DECT NR+ standard and
evaluate its performance, several experimental methodologies were employed. These
methodologies included controlled indoor and outdoor testing environments to measure
key performance metrics such as latency, coverage, Packet Success Rate (PSR), data
rate and power consumption:
1. Latency Measurement: Latency tests were conducted by sending and receiving
packets between devices and recording the Round Trip Time (RTT). Different Mod-
ulation and Coding Schemes (MCS) were applied to understand their impact on la-
tency. A linear relationship between packet size and RTT was observed, with higher
MCS values improving latency. However, current latency levels suggest further op-
timization is needed to meet Ultra-Reliable Low Latency Communication (URLLC)
standards.
2. Coverage and PSR Testing: Coverage and PSR were evaluated by placing de-
vices at incremental distances and monitoring the success rate of packet transmis-
sions. This helped identify the maximum effective range and the impact of environ-
mental factors on communication quality. DECT NR+ demonstrated higher PSR in
controlled indoor environments, and a noticeable decline beyond critical distances.
The maximum effective range was observed to be around 220 meters.
3. Data Rate Analysis: Data rate tests involved transmitting data with different MCS
values to determine the highest sustainable throughput. This provided insights into
the efficiency of data transmission under various conditions. The highest data rate
achieved was 2.2 Mbps, lower than the expected maximum of 3.4 Mbps. However,
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
3
==PAGE:10==
robust performances are still achieved, making the standard suitable for various IoT
applications.
4. Power Consumption Assessment: Power consumption was measured during dif-
ferent states of device operation, including idle, active, and transmission modes.
Comparisons were made with other communication standards to highlight DECT
NR+’s efficiency. In particular, DECT NR+ showed similar power consumption com-
pared to technologies like NB-IoT and LTE-M and significantly better performance
than Wi-Fi, making it ideal for applications requiring long battery life.
By systematically assessing these parameters, this project aims to provide a comprehen-
sive understanding of DECT NR+’s potential in real-world applications and contribute to
its further development and optimization.
1.4
Structure of the Thesis
This section provides an outline of the structure and content of the thesis. It highlights
the main chapters and their subtopics, emphasizing the order in which the research was
conducted, and the methodology used to address the research questions. The thesis
follows this structure to ensure a thorough investigation of the subject matter:
Chapter 1: Introduction. The first chapter introduces the background of the thesis, fo-
cusing on 5G and 5G NR (New Radio). It provides an overview of the project, outlines the
objectives and details the tools used along with the expected outcomes. This chapter also
includes the structure of the report to guide the reader through the subsequent chapters.
Chapter 2: Related Work/State of the Art. The second chapter reviews existing lit-
erature on D2D communication, concentrating on its development, benefits, challenges
and solutions. Initially, it discusses D2D communication in general terms, then delves
deeper into the DECT NR+ standard. This review sets the foundation for understanding
the current state of the technology and identifies gaps that this thesis aims to address.
Chapter 3: Experimental Setup. The third chapter explains the experimental setup,
detailing the tools, configurations and logic used in the study. It includes descriptions of
the software tools (nRF Connect for Desktop and nRF Connect SDK) and the hardware
(nRF9161 DK and Power Profiler Kit II). This chapter ensures that the methodology is
transparent and reproducible.
Chapter 4: Tests and Results. The fourth chapter presents the tests conducted and
the results obtained. It evaluates the performance of the DECT NR+ standard in terms of
key metrics such as latency, coverage, Packet Success Rate (PSR), data rate and power
consumption. This chapter also provides a comprehensive analysis of the experimental
findings.
Chapter 5: Conclusion and Future Work. The fifth chapter concludes the thesis, sum-
marizing the key findings and their implications. It also discusses potential future work,
suggesting areas for further research and development to enhance DECT NR+ commu-
nication technologies, particularly in the context of 5G and beyond.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
4
==PAGE:11==
2
State of the art
This chapter provides a comprehensive review of existing literature and the current state
of the art in Device-to-Device (D2D) communication. Initially, the concept of D2D com-
munication will be introduced, covering its definition, architecture, features, channels and
resources used, as well as the problems and challenges it faces. This section aims to
present the general communication paradigm and its envisioned implementation.
Following this general overview, the focus will shift to a specific standard: DECT NR+.
DECT NR+ is an example of a concrete standard that has been approved and developed
for D2D communication. By examining DECT NR+, this chapter will illustrate how D2D
communication can be standardized and implemented in real-world scenarios, highlight-
ing its practical applications and advancements. DECT NR+ will be the primary standard
addressed throughout the remaining part of this thesis work.
2.1
Introduction to D2D Communication
2.1.1
Definition
Device-to-Device (D2D) communication is a paradigm in wireless networks where devices
communicate directly with each other without routing data through the network infrastruc-
ture, such as base stations (BSs) or access points (APs), allowing you to bypass them
[8]. This technology reduces the workload on the network infrastructure by enabling direct
interaction between user equipment (UE), especially when they are in close proximity to
each other.
From a technical perspective, exploiting the natural proximity of communicating devices
may provide multiple performance benefits. First, D2D UE may enjoy high data rates and
low end-to-end delay due to the short range direct communication. Second, it is more
resource-efficient for proximate UE devices to communicate directly with each other than
routing through an evolved Node B (eNB) and possibly the core network. In particular,
compared to normal downlink/uplink cellular communication, direct communication saves
energy and improves radio resource utilization and spectral efficiency. Third, switching
from an infrastructure path to a direct path offloads cellular traffic, alleviating congestion
and thus benefiting other non-D2D UE as well [9] [10].
In D2D communication, the mode selection technique allows the devices to switch from
the infrastructure path to direct path easily. This reduces the congestion in the network.
From an econometric point of view, D2D communication can play a big role in commercial
applications, social networking applications, e-commerce, etc., where users can directly
share the required information locally [11]. However, 3GPP Release 12 introduced D2D
communication in the context of LTE-A architecture, and its major targeted application is
public safety.
2.1.2
Frequencies used
D2D communication can operate using both licensed cellular spectrum and unlicensed
spectrum; the two modes are known as in-band communication and out-band communi-
cation, respectively.
In-band Communication allows both D2D and cellular communication to share the entire
licensed cellular spectrum. This mode, known as underlay D2D communication, can lead
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
5
==PAGE:12==
to increased interference between D2D and cellular users. To address this, overlay D2D
communication has been proposed. In this mode, D2D users utilize a portion of cellular
resources that are not assigned to regular cellular users, focusing on effective resource
allocation to avoid spectrum wastage.
Out-band Communication operates using unlicensed spectrum, reducing the potential for
interference with cellular communications [12].
Figure 2.1: The System Model of the D2D enabled 5G NR network (from [13]).
As it is shown by the image above, in the 5G NR network, the cellular users can either
transmit via the BS, i.e., in cellular mode (CM), or communicate directly with each other,
i.e., in D2D mode. When users are working in the CM mode, they are named CM users
(CU), and different licensed channels will be allocated to different users to avoid the co-
channel interference. When two users work in D2D mode, they can reuse the licensed
uplink channels and share the unlicensed channels with the WiFi APs. Therefore, it is
named as D2D on unlicensed channels (D2D-U), where the transmitter and receiver are
denoted as D2DT and D2DR, respectively [13].
2.2
Architecture and Technologies
As already said, the main goal of D2D communication is to reduce dependency on network
infrastructure. This is supported by two key technologies: Proximity Services (ProSe) and
Group Communication [14].
1. Proximity Services (ProSe), introduced in 3GPP Release 12, enable devices in
physical proximity to discover each other and communicate directly. ProSe encom-
passes D2D discovery and direct communication. During D2D discovery, a User
Equipment (UE) finds another UE nearby, either through the Evolved Packet Core
(EPC) or directly between the UEs. For direct communication, the UEs that have
discovered each other can communicate directly via the LTE air interface without
routing signals through the eNodeB (eNB) and the core network. This method re-
duces network congestion and allows devices to communicate even when network
coverage is absent. Notably, device discovery is not always necessary for direct
communication since it can also happen through broadcasting.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
6
==PAGE:13==
2. Group Communication is essential for meeting public safety needs, as it allows
for services like one-to-many calling, which can quickly distribute messages to large
groups. The 3GPP standardization efforts have significantly emphasized improving
group communication techniques. In this type of communication, all user equip-
ment (UE) in a group receives the same downlink stream, which helps to optimize
overall resource use. To make group communication more efficient and adaptable,
3GPP has focused on enhancing broadcast and multicast techniques. This type
of communication can be facilitated through Device-to-Device (D2D) communica-
tion or through existing or improved 3GPP multimedia broadcast/multicast services
(MBMS) in LTE/LTE-A networks.
Figure 2.2: An example of group communications in a public safety network (from [14]).
2.2.1
D2D Architecture
The ProSe architecture includes several components:
• ProSe App Server: Provides ProSe capabilities for public safety and commercial
use cases, directly communicating with applications in UEs.
• ProSe UE App: An application within the UE that utilizes ProSe capabilities.
• ProSe Function: Acts as a reference point for the ProSe App Server, EPC and
UEs, handling verification, authorization and configuration of UEs. It also facilitates
EPC-level discovery for direct communication.
A UE (user equipment) that wants to use ProSe must first contact the ProSe function
through the logical interface named PC3 to get authorization and security parameters.
After the discovery request and response message exchange via PC3 is completed, the
UE can start the direct discovery process to find other UEs with ProSe capability in their
proximity using the PC5 interface. When two (or more) ProSe-enabled UEs have discov-
ered each other, they can start direct communication over the direct link between them.
The physical interface between two ProSe UEs is called sidelink. The sidelink transmis-
sion is based on multicasting with no hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ) feedback.
Instead, each medium access control (MAC) protocol data unit (PDU) is re-transmitted
three times with a different redundancy version for each transmission [15].
If a UE is out of the coverage area of eNB, but the signal strength is good enough for
the UEs to communicate with each other, then they can exchange data directly among
themselves by creating an ad hoc network; here, UEs communicate using a lower level
interface called PC5ah [16].
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: D2D architecture in 3GPP specifications (from [12]).
2.2.2
Scenarios for D2D Communication
D2D communication can be utilized in various scenarios including:
• in-coverage,
• out-of-coverage,
• partial coverage situations.
In-coverage refers to when UEs are within the eNB coverage area, out-of-coverage is
when they are outside this area and partial coverage involves some UEs within and some
outside the coverage area.
Figure 2.4: D2D Communications scenarios supported in 3GPP Release 12 (from [12]).
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
8
==PAGE:15==
Figure below also gives an illustration of possible D2D use cases and the potential ben-
efits.
Figure 2.5: Illustrations of possible D2D use cases and potential benefits (from [10]).
2.2.3
Channels and Modulation techniques
In developing LTE standards, it was decided that User Equipments (UEs) would transmit
on uplink LTE frequencies using SC-FDMA and OFDMA modulation and uplink resources
[17]. Understanding the selection of these uplink resources involves introducing sidelink
channels and resource pools. Release 12 of the LTE standard introduces sidelink as a
new interface for D2D communication and discovery, incorporating transport and physical
channels:
• Physical Sidelink Shared Channel (PSSCH): Carries sidelink data for multiple
UEs.
• Physical Sidelink Control Channel (PSCCH): Carries sidelink control information
(SCI) for PSSCH resource allocation.
• Physical Sidelink Discovery Channel (PSDCH): Related to direct discovery ser-
vices.
• Physical Sidelink Broadcast Channel (PSBCH): Carries frame number, band-
width and TDD (Time Division Duplex) UL/DL configuration.
Additionally, the sidelink physical signals defined include:
• Sidelink synchronization signals: Primary and secondary synchronization sig-
nals (PSS and SSS) are necessary for synchronizing UEs that are out of coverage
and cannot use the primary and secondary synchronization signals emitted by the
eNodeB. PSBCH occurs simultaneously with PSSS/SSSS (Primary and secondary
Sidelink synchronization signals ).
Resource Pools
A resource pool, defined by a subset of subframes and resource blocks within these sub-
frames, allocates resources for sidelink data transmission and control. The PSCCH period
ranges from 40 ms to 320 ms. According to [18], the resource pool is further detailed as
follows:
• Subframe pools: Defined by a bitmap where a ‘1’ indicates an available subframe
for sidelink operation.
• Resource block pools: Defined by three parameters: prb-Num, prb-Start and prb-
End, specifying the start, end and number of resource blocks available, as it can be
seen in Figure 2.6.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
9
==PAGE:16==
Transmission and Modulation
Both the PSCCH and PSSCH utilize resources from designated resource pools. The
PSSCH uses either QPSK or 16-QAM modulation with one of the allowed coding rates.
The modulation and coding scheme (MCS) information is included in the sidelink control
information carried by the PSCCH. Since PSSCH carries data for multiple UEs, a closed-
loop HARQ scheme cannot be used; instead, transmissions are repeated three times,
although individual UEs might decode a transport block in fewer transmissions.
The PSCCH and PSSCH are allocated to physical resources within resource pools, fol-
lowing two transmission modes specified in LTE Release 12:
• Transmission mode 1 (network-directed): When the UE is within coverage, the
eNodeB dynamically assigns resources for D2D transmission, ensuring no collision
between sidelink and uplink transmissions or between sidelink transmissions.
• Transmission mode 2 (UE-selected): The UE independently selects resources for
transmission, applicable in both coverage and out-of-coverage scenarios, choosing
resources randomly to reduce collision risk.
Figure 2.6: Resource block pool in a subframe that is part of the subframe pool (from
[18]).
2.2.4
Features of D2D Communication
To facilitate efficient direct transmission between UEs, synchronization, discovery and
direct communication are essential features in the 3GPP specifications:
• D2D Synchronization involves several steps:
1. When a UE powers on, it synchronizes to a synchronization signal (PSS/SSS)
from an eNB if detected.
2. If no eNB signal is detected but signals from other UEs are found, it synchro-
nizes to those signals.
3. If no signals are detected at all, the UE becomes a D2D synchronization source
itself, transmitting synchronization signals and PSBCH.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
10
==PAGE:17==
The first scenario happens when the UE is within the coverage area of an eNB, while
the other scenarios occur when the UE is outside the eNB coverage area. In the first
scenario, if a UE is synchronized with an eNB but detects a synchronization signal
and PSBCH from another UE (indicated by the source type in the synchronization
signal), it realizes that there is an out-of-coverage UE acting as a synchronization
source. As a result, it becomes a D2D synchronization source itself, allowing the
out-of-coverage UEs to synchronize with the eNB.
Figure 2.7: D2D Synchronization (from [12]).
• D2D Discovery is primarily an application layer procedure where specific mes-
sages are exchanged between UEs using the PSDCH at the physical layer. It can
be network-assisted (EPC-level) or direct, where UEs physically close to each other
detect and identify one another using E-UTRAN signals. Direct discovery has two
models:
1. Model A (”I am here”): The announcing UE periodically broadcasts discovery
messages. The process involves monitoring and announcing. UEs broadcast
information to discover nearby devices, which other UEs within proximity can
use.
2. Model B (”who is there?” / ”are you there?”): The discovering UE broadcasts
a message indicating the information it needs. Another UE that receives this
message responds with the relevant information.
Transmission and reception of discovery packets vary in complexity. Smaller pack-
ets are easier to transmit but offer limited information, while larger packets provide
more information but are challenging to transmit periodically [19] [20] [21].
• Direct Communication involves exchanging control signals via the PSCCH, while
data is transmitted using the PSSCH through the PC5 interface at Layer 1. Direct
communication between UEs occurs through broadcast without feedback channels
at Layer 1. At Layer 2, destination UE identifiers (UE ID) are used for unicast trans-
mission, and Group ID is used for groupcast transmission [22].
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
11
==PAGE:18==
2.3
D2D Use Cases and Challenges
Apart from public safety, the use cases for D2D communication are diverse:
• IoT and Wearables: IoT devices and wearables would especially benefit from short
D2D links, improving power efficiency by connecting to a relay UE. This can be
within or outside cell coverage or in coverage-enhanced mode, with relaying being
bi- or uni-directional, as shown in Figure below. There are still several open issues
regarding D2D and UE relaying for cellular IoT. For example, it is clear that, with
UE relaying, the devices willing to operate as relays consume more power than the
remote UEs [23].
Figure 2.8: D2D Relaying variants for cellular Internet of Things (IoT) devices (from [15]).
• Security in Data Communication: D2D communication enhances security by en-
abling data transfer between trusted nearby devices, avoiding potentially insecure
third-party databases.
• Maritime Communication: 3GPP Release 16’s LTE-Maritime system provides seam-
less communication up to 100 kilometers offshore, supporting voice and data com-
munication between vessels using D2D technology.
• Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) Communication: Allows direct communication between
vehicles, providing warnings about lane changes to prevent accidents. This extends
to Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) communication, including vehicle-to-pedestrian, vehicle-
to-infrastructure and vehicle-to-network interactions, enabling advanced features
like vehicle platooning and automated driving [24].
• D2D Offloading: Enables opportunistic data offloading, reducing overall network
load and conserving spectrum resources. UEs with poor channel conditions can
transfer data to neighboring UEs with better conditions, improving user experience
and reducing network congestion [25].
• Indoor Installation and Positioning: Enhancements in D2D communication aim
to improve location services and mission-critical voice services for LTE devices in
indoor environments, addressing multi-path propagation challenges.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
12
==PAGE:19==
• Multi-user Cooperative Communication (MUCC): in heterogeneous networks, a
supporting user with strong signals helps a benefited user with weak signals, im-
proving communication through LTE-A D2D [26].
Figure 2.9: MUCC communication (from [26]).
2.3.1
Problems and Challenges
Device-to-Device (D2D) communication promises enhanced spectrum efficiency, increased
data rates and improved coverage for 5G networks. However, several challenges need
to be addressed for its successful integration into 5G networks:
• User Mobility: Managing user mobility involves efficient handoff selection, cate-
gorized into horizontal (within the same network) and vertical (across different net-
works) handoffs. Vertical handoffs in dense heterogeneous networks is influenced
by controlling and signaling frequencies, which can deteriorate the signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) and performance. Developing standardized handover criteria is essen-
tial to minimize energy consumption and enhance device longevity [27].
• Synchronization: Achieving complete synchronization in in-coverage scenarios is
difficult due to multiple D2D links and varying distances from eNBs, causing confu-
sion over uplink and downlink timing. In out-of-coverage scenarios, periodic trans-
mission of synchronization signals from UEs increases power consumption, making
discovery more challenging if the target device is not synchronized.
• Discovery Mechanisms: Discovery signals can be sequence-based or packet-
based, with complexities in centralized (EPC-level) or distributed (direct discovery)
mechanisms. Continuous transmission of pilot signals in direct discovery consumes
power and causes interference, necessitating standardized scheduling to avoid in-
terference.
• Hybrid Automatic Repeat Request (HARQ): Combining ARQ and forward error
correction [28], HARQ can be direct (between devices) or indirect (involving the
eNB). Integrating HARQ into D2D communication can enhance robustness but in-
creases network overhead.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
13
==PAGE:20==
• Resource Allocation: Effective resource management and reuse are crucial for
network scalability, reduced power consumption and minimized interference. This is
complex in dense networks with multiple base stations, requiring versatile resource
allocation strategies.
• Mode Selection: D2D users choose between D2D mode and infrastructure mode
based on channel quality and distance [29]. Frequent mode changes generate net-
work overhead, making mode selection in dynamic conditions complex and neces-
sitating further exploration.
• Interference Management: Interference occurs when D2D and cellular links share
the same spectrum. Managing interference through power control, frequency se-
lection and resource allocation is vital to ensure high communication quality and
system efficiency [30].
• Energy Efficiency: to improve energy efficiency, techniques like power control,
duty cycling and sleep mode can be used. Balancing communication quality and
energy efficiency is crucial, as increasing power for better communication range
raises energy consumption.
• Security and Privacy: Issues such as data theft, hacking and privacy violations are
significant. Ensuring secure D2D communication requires robust key management,
physical layer security and secure routing. Most existing proposals address specific
issues but lack comprehensive protocols, underscoring the need for robust security
protocols in 5G D2D communication [31].
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
14
==PAGE:21==
2.4
Introduction to DECT NR+
2.4.1
A 5G technology
In the world of wireless communication technologies, Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecom-
munications New Radio (DECT-2020 NR), marketed as DECT NR+, represents a pivotal
advancement ready to redefine the deployment and capabilities of local area wireless
networks. Developed by the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI),
DECT NR+ emerges as a robust standard specifically designed to meet the demand-
ing requirements of Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) applications. Its inclusion as part
of the 5G standards in IMT-2020 technology recommendation made by the International
Telecommunication Union Radio-communication Sector (ITU-R) [32] underscores its sig-
nificance as a non-cellular 5G technology. Not relying on a cellular network, DECT NR+
is distinguished as the first and only standard approved as a 5G standard.
The 5G standard defines three separate use cases for 5G technologies to service: En-
hanced Mobile Broadband (eMBB), Massive Machine Type Communication (mMTC) and
Ultra-Reliable Low Latency Communication (URLLC). URLLC brings wireless technolo-
gies into mission-critical applications where failure is not an option, such as self-driving
factory vehicles, high-speed robots working alongside human operators and critical in-
frastructure in buildings and cities. mMTC involves large networks with machine-type
devices, connecting up to tens of billions of nodes that need to operate for many years
from small batteries, transmitting small amounts of data. Typical use cases include col-
lecting measurements from a vast number of sensors, such as smart metering, which
requires a low-maintenance and low-cost autonomous network structure.
DECT NR+ is the first non-cellular radio standard to be recognized as a radio technology
fulfilling the formal IMT-2020 5G requirements for both URLLC and mMTC use cases.
This offering allows enterprise IoT customers to build their own low-cost private networks,
filling a gap in the IoT ecosystem for large-scale machine-to-machine operations [33].
Figure 2.10: DECT NR+ fulfills the requirements for both mMTC and URLLC
Key features of DECT NR+ include highly reliable point-to-point and point-to-multipoint
wireless connections, effectively serving as a valid alternative to traditional cable-based
solutions [34]. This fits perfectly when it comes to set up large Internet of Things (IoT) net-
works in industries such as manufacturing, warehousing, energy and commercial build-
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
15
==PAGE:22==
ings, where is crucial to have the ultra-high reliability and low latency of a wired (e.g.,
Ethernet) connection but without the physical constraints of the wires, even at a massive
scale involving millions to billions of nodes.
DECT NR+ is built to be low-cost, autonomous, self-healing and decentralized, opening
up many new opportunities for different industries. Its design emphasizes simplicity and
accessibility, enabling organizations of various sizes to cost-effectively deploy and man-
age independent 5G wireless networks. By leveraging the license-exempt 1.9 GHz DECT
band, DECT NR+ mitigates interference concerns while reducing operational costs asso-
ciated with spectrum allocation and certification, making it an attractive proposition for
medium-sized enterprises seeking sustainable connectivity solutions [35].
The inclusion of DECT NR+ in the IMT-2020 framework positions it uniquely within the
5G ecosystem, although it is distinct from conventional cellular and Wi-Fi technologies.
Unlike traditional 5G networks that rely on infrastructure support from mobile network op-
erators, DECT NR+ networks operate independently —meaning no base stations, no SIM
cards and no subscriptions— offering inherent scalability and reliability through their self-
organizing mesh architecture. This distinction enhances data security and operational
autonomy, reduces dependency on external service providers and improves overall net-
work efficiency by eliminating single points of failure [36]. However, even if DECT NR is
not a cellular technology, its implementation shares fundamental similarities with cellular
systems, including a robust radio physical layer with advanced modulation and coding
schemes.
2.4.2
Frequency Used
DECT NR+ leverages the 1.9 GHz frequency band, significantly influencing its perfor-
mance and suitability for various industrial applications. In Europe, the commonly used
spectrum allocation is 1880 MHz to 1900 MHz, but bands 1900 MHz to 1920 MHz and
1910 MHz to 1930 MHz are also prevalent in many countries [37].
Benefits of the 1.9 GHz Frequency Band
One notable advantage of the 1.9 GHz frequency band is its relative lack of conges-
tion. Unlike the heavily utilized 2.4 GHz band, the 1.9 GHz band experiences much lower
levels of traffic, reducing the likelihood of interference and leading to more stable and
reliable network performance. Additionally, the 1.9 GHz band offers superior coverage
and penetration capabilities. Lower frequency bands like 1.9 GHz are better at pene-
trating obstacles such as walls and machinery, ensuring robust connectivity in industrial
environments. Another significant advantage is that the 1.9 GHz band is license-exempt,
allowing organizations to operate their DECT NR+ networks without securing costly and
time-consuming licenses, reducing deployment costs and making it attractive for medium-
sized enterprises and cost-sensitive deployments [38].
Disadvantages of the 1.9 GHz Frequency Band
Despite its benefits, the 1.9 GHz frequency band has drawbacks. Initial costs may be
higher compared to the 2.4 GHz band due to the need for specialized equipment. Lim-
ited compatibility is another challenge: not all devices support this frequency, which can
restrict connectivity options and require additional investment in compatible hardware.
Higher power consumption is also a potential disadvantage, as operating at this fre-
quency may require higher transmission power, increasing energy consumption — critical
for battery-operated devices or energy-efficient applications. Additionally, even if the 1.9
GHz band supports higher bandwidth than many other frequencies, it still offers less band-
width than the 2.4 GHz band, making the latter more suitable for applications requiring
extensive data throughput.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
16
==PAGE:23==
2.5
Network topologies and Technologies used
DECT NR+ supports three primary network topologies: point-to-point, star and mesh.
Each of these topologies serves different purposes and offers unique benefits, ensuring
versatility and efficiency in various deployment scenarios.
2.5.1
Point-to-Point and Star Topologies
In point-to-point and star topologies, the network is structured simply and efficiently. Nodes
with a backhaul to the internet are defined as sink nodes. These sink nodes act as gate-
ways to the internet, selecting operating frequencies and initiating beacon transmissions
to signal their connectivity to the external world. All other nodes are characterized as leaf
nodes, which connect directly to the sink or sinks. This configuration ensures a centralized
control model, facilitating efficient and reliable data transfer.
2.5.2
Mesh Topology
The mesh topology in DECT NR+ is more sophisticated and is defined as a partial mesh,
clustered tree topology. This means devices are organized into individual cluster tree
topologies, known as clusters. A cluster tree topology is essentially a star topology with
branches. All clusters are interconnected to form the overall mesh network, described
as partial mesh because not all nodes are connected to each other, unlike in a full-mesh
topology [39].
Figure 2.11: Example of a DECT NR+ mesh network with one sink and three clusters
operating on three different frequency channels. In cluster 3, note that the relay nodes
do not necessarily have to be forwarding data - the role just indicates their ability to do so
(from [39]).
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
17
==PAGE:24==
Roles of Nodes in Mesh Networks
In DECT NR+ mesh networks, nodes can take on various roles, including sink nodes,
relay nodes and leaf nodes. Each role has specific responsibilities and functions within
the network:
• Sink Nodes: These nodes serve as gateways to the internet. They are responsi-
ble for selecting operating frequencies and initiating beacon transmissions to signal
connectivity. Networks can have multiple sinks to enhance redundancy and relia-
bility.
• Relay Nodes: These nodes extend the network by routing messages between clus-
ters and to leaf devices within their cluster. It is worth noting that clusters can also
use different channels within the specified operation frequency, so relay nodes can
continuously scan frequency channels to find the one with the least interference,
instructing other nodes in the cluster to switch channels accordingly.
• Leaf Nodes: Positioned at the network’s periphery, leaf nodes are the outermost
points of the network and can only send data.
Scalability and Efficiency
DECT NR+ mesh networks are designed to support massive machine-type communica-
tion (mMTC) use cases. The system is scalable to a very high number of devices, with
routing based on cost value, eliminating the need for centralized routing tables. Key fea-
tures that support scalability and efficiency include:
• Autonomous Decision-Making: All radio devices can route data, with decisions
based on local conditions. Devices take local decisions on radio resources, such as
Hybrid ARQ and modulation and coding schemes.
• Dynamic Mode Switching: Radio devices can switch between sink, relay or leaf
mode, based on local decisions.
• No Central Coordinators: This enables massive network scalability, as there is no
need for central coordination.
• Multi-Channel Operation: Radio devices can operate on multiple radio channels,
further enhancing performance and reducing interference.
Self-Organizing and Self-Healing
The mesh topology in DECT NR+ supports a self-organizing and self-healing network.
Device roles are appointed autonomously based on the network, and each device de-
cides its next hop individually based on available routes toward the sink, forming clusters
autonomously. Furthermore, each node can function as an access point with a direct con-
nection to the internet, and nodes can change roles based on the needs of the network,
enabling it to adjust dynamically to congestions. This means that each radio device can
act as a node transmitting a message, as a node forwarding any message from another
radio device or as a node being the destination of a message. Each radio device can com-
municate directly (device to device) or, if not in range, indirectly - via other radio devices
establishing a communication route - with each other which minimizes the probability of
outage. This property eliminates single points of failure in the network and autonomously
resolves high-traffic situations that can occur in dense IoT networks.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
18
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.12: Upon disconnection of the Sink Radio Device, the RDs automatically re-
route to the top Sink node, ensuring seamless communication without application layer
intervention. In FT mode, the RD provides connection info (corresponds to Sink), while in
PT mode RDs select FT mode RDs for association (corresponds to Leaf). RD in FT and
PT modes corresponds to a Relay node (from [40]).
Formation of Clustered Tree Topology
The formation of a clustered tree topology involves the following steps:
1. Sink Node Initialization: An RD (Radio Device) with internet connectivity, operating
in sink mode, selects an operating frequency and initiates beacon transmissions to
signal its route to the external world. This enables other RDs to detect and associate
with it.
2. Beacon Detection and Association: RDs detecting a beacon from another RD
evaluate the connection based on the information and signal quality. Based on this
evaluation, RDs make an independent decision on which node to associate with.
3. Autonomous Association: RDs monitor their neighborhood and may autonomously
initiate an association process towards another RD based on routing cost, continu-
ously optimizing the network.
2.5.3
Goals and Technologies of DECT NR+
The DECT NR+ standard is designed to address the evolving needs of modern industrial
and IoT applications by focusing on several key objectives:
• Scalability, supporting networks from a few devices to a million within a km2, accom-
modating dense environments without performance loss.
• Power saving, extending battery life for devices operating long-term without frequent
replacements.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
19
==PAGE:26==
• Low latency, ensuring end-to-end latency of less then 50 ms on the application layer
and less then 1 ms on the radio interface for efficient data exchange in high-demand
scenarios.
• Reliability, ensuring that data is transmitted accurately and consistently, with an
ultra-reliability requirement of over 99.99% packet delivery, making it suitable for
mission-critical applications.
The techniques utilized to achieve these four objectives will now be examined. Addi-
tionally, the DECT NR+ standard promises to impressive indoor wireless coverage and
an outdoor range of up to 2 km, categorizing it as a Wireless Neighborhood Area Net-
work (WNAN) rather than a Wide Area Network (WAN) like cellular IoT. Initial products
can achieve data rates of up to 3.4 Mb/sec, with the standard enabling much higher data
rates for future designs [41].
Scalability
DECT NR+ achieves scalability through several key mechanisms, enabling the creation of
highly scalable and dense networks. Its autonomous and decentralized nature allows for
efficient network management and expansion without centralized control. A major con-
tributor to this scalability is the construction of DECT NR+ IDs. The 32-bit network IDs can
create up to 16.7 million unique global networks and support 256 overlapping networks
within the same radio area, allowing multiple networks to coexist without interference.
Additionally, the 48-bit radio device IDs accommodate up to 4 billion individual devices in
a single network and 65 thousand within radio communication distance, supporting vast
numbers of devices in dense environments such as industrial settings and smart cities.
DECT NR+ also incorporates advanced techniques from the cellular world to maximize
bandwidth utilization. It employs Cyclic Prefix Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplex-
ing (CP-OFDM) combined with Frequency Division Multiple Access (FDMA) and Time
Division Multiple Access (TDMA). These techniques enable efficient bandwidth utilization
by overlapping channel divisions, thereby saving bandwidth and allowing for higher data
rates.
Figure 2.13: Illustration of bandwidth efficiency achieved through OFDM technique ([39]).
OFDM is a modulation technique that transmits high data rates by dividing the available
spectrum into multiple orthogonal subcarriers, each carrying a portion of the data. This
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
20
==PAGE:27==
division allows efficient use of the spectrum, minimizing interference and maximizing data
rates. FDMA assigns different users separate frequency bands within the available spec-
trum, while TDMA divides the channel into time slots, allocating one or more slots to each
user for transmission. The combination of FDMA and TDMA in DECT NR+ ensures non-
overlapping channels in the frequency domain and non-overlapping transmission slots in
the time domain, providing efficient bandwidth utilization and reliable data transmission.
This combination allows DECT NR+ to use minimal bandwidth while maintaining reliable
data transmission, even if the network scales up to accommodate more devices. So, while
OFDM itself is not a multiple access scheme, it is used as the modulation technique within
the DECT-2020 system, which employs a combination of TDMA and FDMA for multiple
access.
Reliability
One of the primary methods DECT NR+ employs to achieve high reliability is the hybrid
automatic repeat request (HARQ) methodology. HARQ combines forward error correction
(FEC) and automatic repeat request (ARQ) error-control techniques to enhance the relia-
bility of packet transmissions. When a packet is only partially received or not received at
all, the receiver buffers the received portion and notifies the transmitter to resend the miss-
ing data. This process continues until the complete packet is successfully reconstructed.
Since HARQ operates at the physical layer, higher protocol layers remain unaffected by
re-transmissions, which conserves resources and improves overall system efficiency.
Figure 2.14: Illustration of the HARQ Protocol: The transmitter sends DATA 1, which is
correctly received, prompting an ACK. When DATA 2 is sent, the receiver does not receive
the entire data and buffers what it has. It sends a NACK to the transmitter, which then
re-sends the missing data to complete the transmission (from [39]).
Additionally, DECT NR+ uses relay nodes to scan frequency channels and detect the ones
with the least interference. Relay nodes can then instruct other nodes in their cluster
to switch channels, optimizing interference avoidance. This capability ensures that the
network maintains reliable and low-latency communication, even in environments with
high device density.
These techniques provide ultra-reliable communication, fulfilling the requirement of over
99.99% packet delivery. This high level of reliability ensures that DECT NR+ can support
mission-critical applications where failure is not an option.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
21
==PAGE:28==
Power Saving
DECT NR+ incorporates several innovative features designed to achieve significant power
savings, ensuring long battery life for devices. One of the key power-saving mechanisms
in DECT NR+ is the management of radio usage by relay devices within their clusters.
Relay devices coordinate with leaf nodes, informing them when uplink data can be for-
warded. This scheduling allows relay devices to enter sleep mode outside of these desig-
nated periods, reducing overall power consumption. Leaf nodes are informed via beacon
messages sent by relay devices, indicating when they need to listen for downlink data.
These beacon periods can vary from 10 milliseconds up to 32 seconds, providing the
flexibility to balance between low latency and extended sleep periods for power savings.
Furthermore, DECT NR+ integrates many core features, such as routing and re-transmitting
packets, directly into the radio stack level. This approach enables multi-core systems to
maintain reliable radio communications without the need to wake up additional cores. By
keeping the device’s power usage to a minimum, this feature significantly contributes to
energy efficiency.
Additionally, DECT NR+ devices utilize autonomous dynamic power control of transmis-
sions, varying from -40 dBm up to +23 dBm. This power control limits overhearing in dense
networks and achieves low power consumption by adjusting the transmission power based
on the proximity of the receiving device. This means that if the receiving device is nearby,
there is no need for high transmission power, further enhancing the overall energy effi-
ciency of the network.
Low Latency
DECT NR+ meets ultra-low latency requirements through several advanced techniques:
one of them consists in the supporting for multiple input and multiple output (MIMO) op-
erations within the same 10 ms radio frame, facilitating high-speed communication. Each
10 ms frame is divided into 24 time slots, each with a duration of approximately 0.41667
ms. These slots can be aggregated or subdivided into sub-slots, allowing for efficient
multiplexing of data, control signals and synchronization information.
Figure 2.15: DECT-2020 frame structure (from [42]).
This structure enables multiple devices to transmit and receive data within the same frame
without interference.
The low mode-change time between receiving and transmitting
modes is a key factor in achieving this goal, with less than 1 ms radio layer latency in
a single link. In mesh topologies, DECT NR+ maintains low latency across radio links,
minimizing the end-to-end latency throughout the network.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
22
==PAGE:29==
2.6
Network Protocol Layers
2.6.1
Pysical Layer
The physical layer in DECT NR+ is responsible for the transmission of MAC PDUs (Proto-
col Data Units) through the Physical Control Channel (PCC) and the Physical Data Chan-
nel (PDC). These channels are defined by how they transfer information over the radio
interface within a single transmission packet. The physical layer carries out several cru-
cial functions to ensure reliable data transport. It detects errors on the physical channels
and indicates these errors to higher layers, and performs Forward Error Correction (FEC)
encoding and decoding. Hybrid ARQ soft-combining, rate matching of coded data to phys-
ical channels and mapping of coded data onto physical channels are also managed by
this layer.
Figure 2.16: Illustration of the DECT-2020 radio interface protocol architecture highlight-
ing the Physical layer (PHY) and its interface with the Medium Access Control (MAC)
layer. The circles between various layers and sub-layers represent Service Access Points
(SAPs) (from [42]).
Modulation and demodulation, frequency and time synchronization and radio character-
istics measurements are key functions that facilitate efficient data transmission.
The
physical layer also employs advanced techniques such as Multiple Input Multiple Out-
put (MIMO) antenna processing, transmit diversity (TX diversity) and beamforming to en-
hance performance [42].
The physical channels, PCC and PDC, utilize various modulation schemes including
BPSK, QPSK, 16-QAM, 64-QAM, 256-QAM and 1024-QAM. The multiple access scheme
is based on Time Division Duplex (TDD) combined with Frequency Division Multiple Ac-
cess (FDMA) and Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA). This scheme ensures non-
overlapping channels in the frequency domain and non-overlapping transmission slots
in the time domain. The modulation within transmitted packets is Orthogonal Frequency
Division Multiplexing (OFDM) with a Cyclic Prefix (CP).
DECT-2020 transmission packets consist of a Synchronization Training Field (STF), a
Data Field (DF) and a Guard Interval (GI). The STF creates a repetitive time domain pat-
tern for receiver gain, timing and frequency acquisition. The DF carries the Demodulation
Reference Signal (DRS), PCC and PDC, while the GI at the end of the packet facilitates
transmission-reception turnaround and prevents overlapping transmissions from adjacent
TDMA timeslots. It separates different transmissions, ensuring clear and efficient com-
munication.
The PCC identifies whether the packet is a Beacon or a Data transmission packet, and
the PDC carries the actual data.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
23
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.17: Message Structure in the Physical Layer (from [40]).
2.6.2
MAC Layer
The MAC layer in DECT NR+ manages several essential functions to ensure efficient
communication. It handles dedicated traffic channels (DTCH) and multicast/broadcast
traffic channels (MTCH) for higher layer data transfer. The MAC layer processes various
transport channels, including paging and broadcast (PCH/BCH), dedicated (DCH) and
random access channels (RACH). These transport channels are mapped to the Physical
Data Channel (PDC) within physical layer packets. The MAC layer also provides infor-
mation on used spatial streams (data streams transmitted and received) and the contents
of the Physical Layer Control Field to the physical layer, which is mapped to the Physical
Control Channel (PCC) of the physical layer packet.
Figure 2.18: MAC structure overview
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
24
==PAGE:31==
The MAC layer uses a 32-bit network ID, with the first 24 bits uniquely identifying a DECT-
2020 network and the last 8 bits selected locally to minimize collision with other networks.
This ID is periodically transmitted in a beacon frame, allowing other devices to detect
the network. The MAC layer offers services to upper layers, including data transfer and
radio resource allocation, and relies on the physical layer for data transfer services and
measurements. It supports various control functions, such as local radio control, paging
transmission control, broadcast control, random access control, beacon scanning con-
trol and connection configuration control. These functions are crucial for managing radio
resources, controlling paging and broadcast transmissions, scanning operations and con-
figuring connections.
In terms of transmission functions, the MAC layer handles paging and broadcast signaling,
control signaling, radio resource management, logical channel prioritization and mapping
between logical and transport channels. It also manages the multiplexing and demultiplex-
ing of MAC SDUs (Service Data Units) to and from transport channels, error correction
through hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ), and provides security through integrity
protection and ciphering [43]. Relay devices, or parent devices, are responsible for ra-
dio management within their clusters, using beacons to control radio resources. These
beacons inform child devices when it is safe to send and receive traffic. A RD in FT
mode (Fixed Terminal, analogous to a router) transmits periodic beacons to inform PTs
(Portable Terminals or leaf devices) of their random access allocations, which can lead to
scheduled allocations managed by the FT. Beacons also establish a common time base
between the FT and PT MAC layers. DECT NR+ employs a listen-before-talk mechanism
within random access to prevent transmission collisions [44].
2.6.3
DLC Layer
The Data Link Control (DLC) layer is responsible for the routing and transport service se-
lection for the MAC layer. It provides essential segmentation and packet routing functions,
ensuring that data is efficiently and accurately forwarded through the network. Routing
within the DLC layer operates in two primary modes: upward routing and downward flood-
ing. In upward routing, packets are forwarded to the parent device until they reach the
sink. For downward flooding, packets from the sink are forwarded to all child relays, and
relays continue forwarding to their child relays. If a relay has the destination device as a
direct child, it sends the packet only to that leaf (see Figure 2.19). This flooding mecha-
nism, which includes a hop limit for node-to-node communication, ensures resilience to
network changes, allowing leaf devices to move to other relays instantaneously. The DLC
architecture features a single routing service entity in each Radio Device (RD). Each RD
operating in Portable Terminal (PT) mode has a single DLC entity set for its radio link with
a Fixed Terminal (FT) mode RD. For an RD operating in both FT and PT modes (Relay
node) within a mesh cluster, it maintains one DLC entity set for each RD that has as-
sociated with it. Additionally, RDs have a DLC entity set for broadcast communication,
enabling comprehensive and flexible network connectivity [45].
(a) Upward Routing
(b) Downward Routing
Figure 2.19: DLC Network Routing (from [44]).
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
25
==PAGE:32==
2.6.4
CVG Layer
The Convergence (CVG) layer offers a suite of optional services along with a transparent
procedure that bypasses these services if necessary. It plays a crucial role in identifying
application layer data and is vital for application multiplexing, particularly when multiple
applications utilize the stack simultaneously. Supporting endpoint multiplexing, it is pos-
sible to direct traffic for different applications.
The CVG layer provides adaptation functions that bridge the application layer protocols
and the NR+ radio interface. It includes security services with features like ciphering and
integrity protection, as well as transmission services such as segmentation and reassem-
bly, re-transmission, flow control, lifetime control, duplicate removal and delivery order
services [45].
In relay nodes, the CVG layer is not engaged, as the relaying is managed by the lower
layers, bypassing the need for higher layer processing.
Figure 2.20: CVG architecture (from [45]).
2.6.5
Architecture Overall
Figure 2.21 depict an example of protocol architecture exploiting mesh topology and rout-
ing with IPv6 and non-IPv6 applications.
Figure 2.21: Illustration of overall protocol architecture for mesh networking ([45]).
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
26
==PAGE:33==
2.7
DECT NR+ Use Cases
DECT NR+ is well-suited for a variety of applications across different sectors. All the an-
alyzed features that the standard promises to fulfill make it a versatile solution for modern
industrial and IoT applications. The following section explore the key use cases where
DECT NR+ can be effectively applied.
• Smart Industries / Asset Tracking: DECT NR+ is at the forefront of revolutioniz-
ing industrial environments through its advanced capabilities in asset tracking and
Industrial IoT (IIoT). In today’s smart industries, the seamless wireless tracking and
locating of tools, equipment and inventory are indispensable. The dense network
topology of DECT NR+ efficiently supports numerous nodes, enabling comprehen-
sive and cost-effective asset tracking. Furthermore, its low latency feature ensures
real-time monitoring of critical assets, proactively enhancing worker safety by pre-
venting hazardous situations. This technology plays a pivotal role in Industry 4.0, the
era of industrial automation characterized by ultra-reliable low-latency IoT solutions
[40].
Figure 2.22: Example of DECT NR+ network topology supporting real-time asset tracking
and monitoring in smart industrial environments (from [40]).
• Smart Cities: DECT NR+ excels in smart city applications, providing real-time mon-
itoring and control for urban environments like airports, campuses and retail centers.
Its ability to support diverse applications with minimal deployment costs and robust
performance under high traffic conditions makes it an ideal solution for these set-
tings.
For example, smart street lights benefit from DECT NR+ with dynamic light con-
trol, significantly reducing energy consumption, while smart energy storage solu-
tions balance energy supply and demand to improve overall energy management.
Additionally, real-time diagnostics enable continuous monitoring for prompt issue
resolution and optimal operation.
Beyond street lighting, DECT NR+ supports other essential smart city applications
including environmental monitoring devices and surveillance cameras, all of which
can be integrated into a scalable city-wide network infrastructure. IoT in smart cities
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
27
==PAGE:34==
combats climate change and enhances urban living: traffic management systems,
for example, reduce congestion and emissions by optimizing traffic flow. Addition-
ally, parking space management solutions help efficiently locate available parking,
minimizing search time and reducing vehicle emissions.
Figure 2.23: DECT NR+ enabling real-time monitoring and control in smart cities, enhanc-
ing urban living with applications like dynamic street lighting and traffic management (from
[40]).
• Pro-Audio Applications: DECT NR+ brings significant advancements to profes-
sional audio applications, improving indoor radio performance, correcting errors ef-
fectively and supporting more users. These enhancements are crucial for PMSE
(Programme Making and Special Events) microphones used in touring bands, record-
ing studios, theaters and broadcasting. They also strengthen PMSE intercom sys-
tems, allowing for more users and flexible frequency management, perfect for dy-
namic environments like sports events and music festivals [46].
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
28
==PAGE:35==
3
Experimental Setup
This chapter outlines the experimental setup used in the study, detailing the hardware and
software tools employed, as well as the developed applications that enable device com-
munication. The hardware used in the experiments includes the nRF9161 Development
Kit (DK) and the Power Profiler Kit II, both developed by Nordic Semiconductor. These
devices provide a robust platform for testing and development.
The software tools include nRF Connect for Desktop, nRF Connect SDK and Visual Studio
Code (VS Code) with the nRF Connect for VS Code extension pack, also developed by
Nordic Semiconductor. These tools are essential for configuring and programming the
hardware.
Additionally, the chapter describes two applications: the Broadcast Application, a C-
programmed application enabling simple broadcast of DECT NR+ messages for testing,
and the Modem Shell Application, a .hex file functioning as a modem shell for the device,
used for various purposes such as ping-based range tests and single link throughput test-
ing. This setup ensures a transparent and reproducible methodology for the study.
3.1
Hardware Components
3.1.1
nRF9161 Development Kit
The nRF9161 Development Kit (DK) is a innovative hardware platform designed for de-
veloping applications on the nRF9161 System in Package (SiP). Notably, the nRF9161 is
the world’s first device to support DECT NR+, showcasing its advanced capabilities in the
field of wireless communication. This development kit includes all essential circuitry, such
as antennas and a Subscriber Identity Module (SIM) card holder, and provides develop-
ers access to all I/O pins and relevant module interfaces, making it a comprehensive tool
for development and testing.
The nRF9161 DK features antenna interfaces for both Long-Term Evolution (LTE) and
Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS). Importantly, DECT NR+ utilizes the same
onboard antenna as LTE, ensuring seamless integration and operation across different
communication protocols [47].
Figure 3.1: the nRF9161 DK.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
29
==PAGE:36==
Diving deeper into the nRF9161 System-in-Package (SiP), it is a low-power IoT solution
that integrates an Arm® Cortex®-M33 processor with advanced security features, a range
of peripherals and a Low-Power Wide-Area (LPWA) network processor. This LPWA net-
work processor is versatile, capable of operating as a 5G DECT NR+ device or as an LTE
modem, depending on the installed firmware. This ability further enhances its versatility
and applicability in diverse IoT scenarios. Key features of the SiP also include support for
the 1.9 GHz NR+ band and scalability to 3 Mbps bandwidth [48].
Figure 3.2: Block Diagram of the nRF9161 SiP (from [49]).
Application and LPWA network domains interact through the inter-processor communica-
tion (IPC) mechanism. The application processor is the system master and is responsible
for starting and stopping the NR+ device. The LPWA network processor enables the
clocks and power required for its own operation [50].
Figure 3.3: nRF9161 NR+ device functional overview (from [50]).
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
30
==PAGE:37==
3.1.2
Power Profiler Kit II
The Power Profiler Kit II (PPK2) is a tool for real-time power consumption measurement,
indispensable for evaluating the power efficiency of IoT devices. It can either supply
power to an external board or function as an Ampere Meter, measuring current from 500
nA to 1 A. The kit is compatible with nRF91 Series Development Kits (DKs) and includes a
desktop application for detailed measurement analysis. Key features of the PPK2 include:
• Variable power supply voltage (0.8 V to 5.0 V);
• Maximum current measurement of 1 A;
• High accuracy measurement down to approximately 200 nA;
• 100 kS/s sampling speed;
• USB communication for easy integration with other applications;
• Real-time current measurement display [51].
Figure 3.4: PPK2 board and cables.
Configuration setup for measuring current on the DK
In this project, the PPK2 was utilized to measure the power consumption performance
of the nRF9161 DK. The goal was to verify the actual power dissipation of the device
compared to traditional wireless communication methods. The PPK2 was used in Ampere
meter mode to measure the current on the nRF9161 DK while allowing the DK to be
powered from its USB. Specifically, the nRF9161 DK and the PPK2 were connected as
follows:
• PPK2 VIN (Power input for the Ampere meter) to P22 VDD_5V (Power source for
the DK);
• PPK2 VOUT (Power output for the Ampere meter) to P22 VDD_nRF (Power drain
for the DK);
• PPK2 GND to P22_GND;
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.5: PPK2 and nRF9161 DK connection.
After connecting the DK and the PPK2 to a computer using a micro-USB cable, the “Power
Profiler App” from “nRF Connect for Desktop” (discussed in the next section) was installed
to visualize the results. In the Power Profiler App, the Ampere Meter mode was selected
to perform the necessary measurements.
Figure 3.6: Typical configuration for measuring current on the DK (from [52]).
Figure 3.7: Configuration of my workstation.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
32
==PAGE:39==
3.2
Software Tools
3.2.1
nRF Connect SDK
The nRF Connect SDK is a comprehensive development environment provided by Nordic
Semiconductor, essential for developing applications on the nRF9161 System in Package
(SiP). It offers developers an extensible framework for building size-optimized software
for memory-constrained devices as well as powerful and complex software for more ad-
vanced devices and applications [53].
The application processor of the nRF9161 DK runs user-developed applications, while
the modem core runs pre-compiled modem firmware binaries provided by Nordic Semi-
conductor. To facilitate communication between the application and the modem, the nRF
Connect SDK includes the Modem library. This library provides a standard set of function
calls that applications use to interface with the DECT NR+ modem, allowing for smooth
and efficient communication between the two cores.
Figure 3.8: Communication stack of the nRF91 Series SiP (from [54]).
The communication stack of the nRF91 Series SiP, as illustrated above, depicts the mo-
dem firmware running on the modem core, with the Modem library providing the necessary
interface. At the top of this stack resides the user-developed cellular application, which
communicates through these layers to interact with the modem firmware. For the specific
case of DECT NR+, the Modem library is part of the SDK from release version v2.7.0,
which was released in June 2024.
3.2.2
nRF Connect for VS Code extension pack
The nRF Connect for VS Code extension pack is an essential tool for developers work-
ing with the nRF Connect SDK. This extension integrates seamlessly with Visual Studio
Code (VS Code), enabling a streamlined development experience for creating applica-
tions on Nordic Semiconductor devices. In particular, this extension provides an easier,
user-friendly graphical user interface (GUI) for building and configuring embedded sys-
tems projects based on the nRF Connect SDK. It integrates all necessary development
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
33
==PAGE:40==
tools into a single program, enabling developers to manage project files, connect devices
to a serial port and build and customize applications within the same Visual Studio Code
window [55]. Key features of the nRF Connect for VS Code extension pack include:
• Unified Interface: Simplifies workflow by enabling creation, building, flashing and
debugging of applications within a single interface.
• SDK Management: Easily manage nRF Connect SDK versions, including installa-
tion, uninstallation and setting the active version.
• Multi-Application Development: Develop multiple applications simultaneously with-
out needing a multi-root workspace.
• Device-tree Support: Provides syntax validation, highlighting, code completion and
the ability to add required properties for accurate hardware configuration.
• Memory Report: Analyzes and identifies memory distribution, aiding in efficient
memory management.
• Built-In Terminal: Connect to devices via serial ports or Real-Time Transfer (RTT),
facilitating easy device communication.
Figure 3.9: The nRF Connect for VS Code extension pack dropdown menu. The left panel
shows options for managing SDKs and supports multiple applications, broadcast_05_rx
and tx in this case, with their respective build configurations. The right panel provides
options to build, debug and flash applications, access the Device-tree Visual Editor, view
memory reports and connect to the device’s serial ports.
After creating an application, it is essential to set up a build configuration. This step com-
piles and links the application components, preparing it for deployment and execution.
After this, the specific app (if multiple apps are open) must be selected and flashed onto
the device (nRF9161 DK), in order to run it. If multiple devices are connected to the
computer, the target device must be chosen for flashing. The Broadcast application (dis-
cussed later) is developed in C and managed through VS Code and Nordic’s extension. It
comprises two applications, broadcast_05_rx and broadcast_05_tx. One is flashed onto
a device functioning as the transmitter, while the other onto a device functioning as the
receiver.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
34
==PAGE:41==
3.2.3
nRF Connect for Desktop
nRF Connect for Desktop is a versatile, cross-platform tool framework designed to sup-
port development on Nordic Semiconductor’s nRF devices. This powerful software suite
includes a variety of applications that assist in testing, monitoring, measuring, optimizing
and programming embedded systems projects. For this thesis project, three key applica-
tions within nRF Connect for Desktop were utilized: Programmer, Serial Terminal and the
Power Profiler.
Programmer
The nRF Connect Programmer is an essential application used for programming firmware
onto Nordic Semiconductor devices. The Programmer app’s main window displays both
the memory layout of the device and the file you want to work with, providing a user-
friendly interface for managing firmware updates. When the Programmer app is started,
the main window opens with the File Memory Layout and Device Memory Layout panels
empty.
• File Memory Layout Panel: This panel displays the memory layout for files added
to the Programmer app using the “Add file” option. Once a file is added, it can be
programmed onto the device. The firmware image file, typically a HEX file or a ZIP
file, needs to be selected.
• Device Memory Layout Panel: This panel shows the memory layout of the device.
It is possible to read the name, address range and size of a memory section by
hovering the mouse cursor over it. This feature becomes available after loading a
memory layout.
Figure 3.10: Example of the Programmer app. The File Memory Layout panel (on the
left) shows the layout of the file mosh-fmac-dect-0.1.8-nrf9161dk-uart-mdm-traces.hex,
while the Device Memory Layout panel (on the right) displays the memory content of the
selected device, programmed to operate with the Modem Shell Application. The orange
rectangle corresponds to the MBR section, while the green one to the Application section.
For this thesis project, in order to use the nRF9161DK with both the two applications,
different firmware files were needed:
• Broadcast Application: The file programmed onto the device for this application is
mfw-nr+_nrf91x1_1.0.0.zip. After adding this file and performing the “Write” opera-
tion to load it into the device’s memory, the next step is to “Flash” the C-programmed
application using the “nRF Connect for VS Code” extension, as detailed in the pre-
vious subsection.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
35
==PAGE:42==
• Modem Shell Application: The files used for this application are the modem firmware
mfw-nr+_nrf91x1_1.0.0-46.prealpha.zip together with the mosh-fmac-dect-0.1.8-nrf
9161dk-uart-mdm-traces.hex. Once these files are added and written to the device’s
memory, no additional operations are required to program the device. The device
will be ready to operate with all the functionalities provided by the application, which
can be accessed through the Serial Terminal app (to be discussed next).
It is important to note that all these files were developed by Nordic Semiconductor and
provided for this thesis project.
Serial Terminal
The nRF Connect Serial Terminal is a versatile, cross-platform terminal emulator designed
for serial port communications with Nordic Semiconductor devices using Universal Asyn-
chronous Receiver/Transmitter (UART) protocols. This tool is essential for configuring,
monitoring and interacting with virtual serial ports on Nordic devices [56]. To use the Se-
rial Terminal, after connecting the device to the computer using a USB cable, click the
“Connect to port” button to establish a connection with the selected serial port.
The Serial Terminal supports both logging output and console input:
• Logging Output: Particularly useful for applications like the Broadcast Application,
where monitoring the device’s output is crucial for debugging and performance as-
sessment.
• Console Input: Extensively used in the Modem Shell Application, allowing for real-
time interaction and debugging by inputting commands directly into the console.
Figure 3.11: Display of the Serial Terminal App.
Power Profiler
The nRF Connect Power Profiler is an app used to communicate with the Power Profiler
Kit II (PPK2) to obtain real-time current measurements of the nRF9161. You can select
one of the power supply modes for the PPK2, depending on your hardware setup:
• Source meter: In this mode, the Device Under Test (DUT) is supplied power by the
PPK2.
• Ampere meter: In this mode, the DUT is supplied power from an external source.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
36
==PAGE:43==
For the power consumption measurements of the device, the Ampere meter mode was
used. As shown in the figure below, once the PPK2 is selected (connected to the computer
and to the nRF9161 as detailed in the HW Components section, see Figure 3.6 and 3.7), it
is possible to select the number of samples per second to be recorded. The slider allows
selecting different values up to 100,000 samples per second (100 kHz). It can also be
specified how long the sampling should last (by default, it is set to run indefinitely).
Figure 3.12: Display of the Power Profiler App.
After pressing Start, the sampling continues until the specified sampling time is reached.
If set to run indefinitely, sampling will last until manually stopped. The window displays
values for the measurement from start to finish, including the average current measured,
the maximum current measured, the duration of the measurement and the total charge.
3.3
Broadcast Application
The Broadcast Application involves a straightforward broadcast of DECT NR+ messages,
intended for initial testing. This setup requires two nRF9161 Development Kits (DKs): one
for transmitting a counter value, needing only power and printing progress information,
and the other for receiving the counter value and requiring a terminal for printout.
Nordic Semiconductor has developed specialized firmware for operating the Low Power
Wide Area (LPWA) network processor using the DECT NR+ standard. This firmware
implements the physical layer (PHY) of the NR+ radio protocol stack, adhering to ETSI
specifications.
Currently, Nordic Semiconductor’s implementation covers only the PHY layer of the DECT
NR+ protocol, including basic transmission (TX) and reception (RX) operations. Network-
ing, meshing, MAC layer access control and external communication features are not
yet implemented and thus are not available for this application. The DECT NR+ PHY
firmware is a variant of the nRF91x1 firmware but is specifically optimized for a different
radio technology. Unlike the nRF91x1 firmware, which supports cellular operations and
the Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS), the DECT NR+ PHY firmware does not
include these features [57]. This distinction highlights the specialized nature of the DECT
NR+ PHY firmware, which is dedicated to NR+ radio protocol stack operations.
The firmware used to operate the Broadcast application is the mfw-nr+_nrf91x1_1.0.0.zip
file. As already mentioned, this file should be loaded into the “Programmer” app and
overwritten in the device’s memory. Afterward, the developed C application should be
flashed using Visual Studio Code (VS Code) along with the VS Code extension pack.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
37
==PAGE:44==
3.3.1
How the application works
The DECT NR+ PHY firmware operates through the DECT PHY interface, which sched-
ules radio operations executed by the DECT NR+ physical layer’s scheduler. Given the
nature of a radio scheduler, it allows radio operations to be executed at a specific future
time. Therefore, all radio operations within the DECT PHY interface are asynchronous,
with their completion signaled to the application via callbacks. Notably, all scheduling is
final, meaning that once an operation is scheduled, it cannot be unscheduled. These op-
erations can either be scheduled to execute at a future time or immediately if the radio
is currently idle. Each radio operation is associated with an application-defined handle,
which identifies the operation and is returned by the callback signaling the completion of
the operation. This handle remains opaque to all underlying layers, including the DECT
PHY interface [57].
Figure 3.13: Communication between the PHY API and the PHY Scheduler. The image
shows the ”scheduled operations”, which are sent by the application through the PHY
interface and received by the modem, which will schedule them for execution. Once
the modem completes an operation, it invokes the corresponding callback to notify the
application that the results are available for further processing.
The DECT physical layer (PHY) interface in the Modem library is used to control the DECT
NR+ PHY in the DECT NR+ PHY firmware. The DECT PHY interface offers three primary
radio operations:
• Transmission (TX)
• Reception (RX)
• RSSI Measurement
Each of these operations can be performed with various parameters. The completion
of a radio operation is signaled to the application by invoking the nrf_modem_dect_phy_
callbacks.op_complete callback function. This callback receives the same handle spec-
ified by the application when the operation was scheduled.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
38
==PAGE:45==
Transmission
The application schedules a transmission by calling the nrf_modem_dect_phy_tx() func-
tion. This function is called by the first device, which is responsible for transmission. The
operation is asynchronous, and the successful completion of the nrf_modem_dect_phy_tx()
function only indicates that the request was sent to the modem. The result of the operation,
whether successful or not, is signaled to the application via the nrf_modem_dect_phy_
callbacks.op_complete callback function. Any errors occurring during the scheduling or
execution of the operation are also returned through this callback.
Reception
The application schedules a reception by calling the nrf_modem_dect_phy_rx() function,
which is used by the second device, responsible for receiving. Similar to transmission, this
operation is asynchronous, and the completion of the nrf_modem_dect_phy_rx() function
indicates that the request was sent to the modem. During reception, data received on
the Physical Control Channel (PCC) and the Physical Data Channel (PDC) is forwarded
to the application via the nrf_modem_dect_phy_callbacks.pcc and nrf_modem_dect_
phy_callbacks.pdc callback functions, respectively. These callbacks handle incoming
data on the respective channels. Additionally, any CRC errors on the PCC and PDC are
reported to the application through the nrf_modem_dect_phy_callbacks.pcc_crc_err
and nrf_modem_dect_phy_callbacks.pdc_crc_err callbacks. Upon completion of the
operation, its result is signaled to the application through the nrf_modem_dect_phy_call-
backs.op_complete callback function, similar to the transmission process. Any errors oc-
curring during the scheduling or execution of the operation are also communicated via this
callback.
Figure 3.14: Simple data message transmit and receive. The functions in green concern
the first device (transmitter). The ones in blue concern the second device (receiver).
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
39
==PAGE:46==
3.3.2
What the application does
As already mentioned, the application performs a simple broadcast of DECT NR+ mes-
sages, primarily for initial testing purposes. This setup requires two nRF9161 DKs, where
one device acts as the transmitter (TX) and the other as the receiver (RX). The first device
transmits a counter value and only needs power to print progress information, while the
second one receives this value and requires a terminal for printout.
To implement this functionality, two distinct applications were created: broadcast_05_tx
for the transmitter and broadcast_05_rx for the receiver. Once started, the TX begins
sending packets on a hard-coded channel, and it is programmed to transmit four packets
per second. The receiver, on the other hand, listens on the same channel. To stop the
connection between the devices, a button on the DK can be pressed. If the button on the
transmitter is pressed, it stops sending messages. If the button on the receiver is pressed,
it stops receiving messages. Simple statistics about the communication are provided at
the end when a button is pressed on the receiver.
The RX accepts the first received counter value and then detects if there are any missed
messages between receptions, incrementing a counter for missed messages if any are
detected. Additionally, the RX calculates CRC errors using the pdc_crc_err callback and
prints basic data for each received message to show progress.
The data structures, functions and callbacks that will be present are defined in the Modem
Library, all provided by Nordic Semiconductor. Let’s now have a brief look into the code
of both the applications:
Variable Definitions and Communication Configuration
1
int EXIT = 0; // exit flag, set by button press
2
3
int previous_received = -1; // previous received message number
4
int missing_errors = 0;
5
int crc_errors = 0;
6
int received_ok = 0;
7
float rssi_average = 0;
8
int n = 0; // number of received messages
9
10
int txHandle = 1;
11
int rxHandle = 31400;
12
13
K_SEM_DEFINE(modem, 1, 1);
Listing 3.1: Definition of the main variables, including State Flags, Statistics Collection
and Semaphore for API Calls.
• The int EXIT = 0; variable is used in the button_handler function to set an exit
flag when a button is pressed:
1
void button_handler(uint32_t button_state , uint32_t has_changed)
2
{
3
EXIT=1;
4
}
This function is initialized in the main function using:
1
dk_buttons_init(button_handler);
This initialization ensures that when any button is pressed, the EXIT flag is set to 1.
Since the main loop condition (for both TX and RX) is while(EXIT == 0) (will be
seen later), pressing any button will stop the device.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
40
==PAGE:47==
• The variables previous_received, missing_errors, crc_errors, received_ok,
rssi_average, n are used for statistics collection. They are modified within call-
backs such as pdc, pdc_crc_err and pcc_crc_err and are utilized for the final
display of the communication performance. A capture of the communication output
will be provided later to demonstrate this.
• The variables txHandle and rxHandle are used in the functions modem_tx and modem_rx
respectively (will be seen later), serving as identifiers for API calls related to trans-
mission and reception operations. txHandle acts as an identifier for transmission
operations within the modem_tx function. It distinguishes individual transmission op-
erations, incremented after each transmission. When the value reaches 30000,
it wraps back to 1 to maintain a valid range of identifiers. rxHandle serves as an
identifier for reception operations within the modem_rx function. This ensures unique
tracking of reception operations.
• K_SEM_DEFINE(modem, 1, 1) defines a semaphore called modem with a maximum
count of 1 and an initial count of 1. The semaphore ensures that only one asyn-
chronous operation is performed at a time. The third argument specifies the initial
count, which is the number of units available when the semaphore is created. Here,
the initial count is 1, meaning the semaphore is initially available for use.
The following code defines some important parameters and data buffers used in both the
transmission and reception processes:
1
#define MCS
1
2
#define POWER
0xb
3
#define DATA_LEN 4
4
uint8_t _txData[DATA_LEN];
//data to be sent
5
uint8_t _rxData[DATA_LEN];
//received data
6
7
#define CARRIER 1677
Listing 3.2: Definition of the Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS), transmission power,
data length, data buffers and carrier frequency.
• MCS stands for “Modulation and Coding Scheme” and is a parameter that defines
the modulation and coding method used to transmit data in a wireless communica-
tion system. In simpler terms, it represents the technique used to convert digital data
into radio signals that can be transmitted over a radio channel. The MCS impacts
how much data can be fit into subslots/slots. Here, it is hardcoded to MCS 1.
• #define POWER 0xb defines the transmission power level. The value 0xb corre-
sponds to a power level of 13 dBm.
• #define DATA_LEN 4 defines the length of the data to be sent or received. The
length depends on the MCS defined above.
• The _txData and _rxData arrays store the data to be transmitted and the data that
has been received.
• #define CARRIER 1677 defines the carrier frequency used for the transmission and
reception.
Callbacks definition
The following callbacks have been previously defined in the system architecture (Figure
3.14) when explaining the overall application functionality. These callbacks handle various
events and data received during radio operations.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
41
==PAGE:48==
The op_complete callback function is invoked to signal the completion of a radio operation
to the application. This callback receives the handle specified by the application when the
operation was scheduled, along with the status, temperature and time. It also releases
the semaphore to indicate that the operation has completed.
1
void op_complete(const uint64_t *time, int16_t temperature , enum
nrf_modem_dect_phy_err err, uint32_t handle)
2
{
3
LOG_DBG("operation_complete_cb Status %d, Temp %d, Handle %d", err,
temperature , handle);
4
k_sem_give(&modem); //releases the semaphore , operation is completed.
5
return;
6
}
Listing 3.3: The op_complete callback function signals the completion of a radio operation
and releases the semaphore.
The pcc callback has also been defined earlier in the architecture discussion (Figure
3.14), where the reception process was explained. During reception, data received on
the Physical Control Channel (PCC) is forwarded to the application via the pcc callback
function. This callback handles incoming PCC data and logs relevant information such as
the header status and RSSI.
1
void pcc(
2
const uint64_t *time,
3
const struct nrf_modem_dect_phy_rx_pcc_status *status ,
4
const union nrf_modem_dect_phy_hdr *hdr)
5
{
6
LOG_DBG("pcc_cb phy_header_valid %d rssi_2 %d", status ->header_status ,
status ->rssi_2);
7
return;
8
}
Listing 3.4: The pcc callback function handles data received on the Physical Control
Channel (PCC), logging the header status and RSSI.
However, the most important and well-defined callback is the pdc callback. It is responsi-
ble for handling data received on the Physical Data Channel (PDC).
1
void pdc(
2
const uint64_t *time,
3
const struct nrf_modem_dect_phy_rx_pdc_status *status ,
4
const void *data, uint32_t len)
5
{
6
int rx_counter=0;
7
int32_t rx_rssi=calcRSSI(status->rssi_2 , 1);
8
9
memcpy(&_rxData , data, 4);
10
11
rx_counter = (_rxData[0]<<24) + (_rxData[1]<<16) + (_rxData[2]<<8) + (
_rxData[3]);
12
received_ok++;
13
if(previous_received >0 && rx_counter != previous_received+1){
14
missing_errors=missing_errors+(rx_counter -previous_received)-1; }
15
previous_received=rx_counter;
16
17
LOG_INF("RECEIVED DATA, %d, rssi_2 , %d, missed/crc errors , %d", rx_counter ,
rx_rssi , missing_errors);
18
}
Listing 3.5: The pdc callback function handles data received on the Physical Data Channel
(PDC), processes the data, updates statistics and logs the received message information.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
42
==PAGE:49==
When data is received, this callback extracts the first 4 bytes and stores them in the
_rxData buffer (with the memcpy function). It then extract the received counter value from
the buffer, which is converted to an integer value rx_counter that is used for tracking the
received message number. If there are any missed messages, it updates the error count.
Additionally, it logs the received data, RSSI and the number of missed and CRC errors
for every received message.
The LOG_INF function from the logger module is used to log messages to the console.
Unlike the printk() function, which waits until all bytes of the message are sent, the log-
ger module adds messages to a dedicated buffer. Each log message contains a source
ID, timestamp and severity level. The logger module is thread-safe and minimizes the
time needed to log the message. There are four severity levels available in the system;
the LOG_INF level is the third one and prints informational messages that require no ac-
tion. The timestamp format is hh:mm:ss.ms,us and represents the uptime since boot, as
measured by the system’s hardware clock [58].
To conclude the explanation of the callbacks used in the application, it’s essential to under-
stand their configuration and management through a specific structure. The nrf_modem
_dect_phy_callbacks structure is used to define and register the callback functions that
handle all the events and operations in the DECT physical layer. Here is the structure
definition:
1
struct nrf_modem_dect_phy_callbacks dect_cb_config = {
2
.init = init,
//DECT PHY initialization callback.
3
.op_complete = op_complete ,
4
.rssi = rssi,
//Callback to receive RSSI measurements.
5
.rx_stop = rx_stop , //Callback for nrf_modem_dect_phy_rx_stop.
6
.pcc = pcc, //Callback for control channel reception.
7
.pcc_crc_err = pcc_crc_err , //Callback for CRC failures on the PCC.
8
.pdc = pdc,
//Callback for data channel reception.
9
.pdc_crc_err = pdc_crc_err ,
//Callback for CRC failures on the PDC.
10
.link_config = link_config ,
11
.time_get = time_get ,
12
.capability_get = capability_get ,
13
.deinit=deinit
14
};
Listing 3.6: Structure defining callbacks for DECT PHY operations
This structure contains function pointers to callbacks responsible for initialization, data
reception and other critical aspects of DECT system operations. These callbacks are then
registered using nrf_modem_dect_phy_callback_set(&dect_cb_config); in the main()
function. Here is how the callbacks are registered:
1
err = nrf_modem_dect_phy_callback_set(&dect_cb_config);
2
if (err != 0)
3
{
4
printk("ERROR settings callbacks %d\n", err);
5
}
Listing 3.7: Snippet extracted from the main() function. It sets the DECT PHY callbacks
and if an error occurs during callback registration, an error message is printed.
By setting the modem callbacks for PHY operations before attempting other operations,
including PHY initialization with nrf_modem_dect_phy_init(), the system ensures proper
handling of all DECT PHY-related events and data. This setup is critical for the seamless
operation and management of the DECT NR+ communication system.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
43
==PAGE:50==
Message Transmission
The modem_tx(i) function is only present in the broadcast_05_tx application: it serves as
the main function responsible for message transmission as it calls the nrf_modem_dect_
phy_tx function, indicating that the transmission request was sent to the modem (Fig-
ure 3.14).
The primary purpose of the modem_tx(i) function is to prepare and initi-
ate the transmission of a message using the specified parameters, and then calls the
nrf_modem_dect_phy_tx function to start the operation.
1
void modem_tx(uint32_t i)
2
{
3
uint8_t tmp[DATA_LEN];
4
tmp[0] = (i >> 24) & 0xff;
5
tmp[1] = (i >> 16) & 0xff;
6
tmp[2] = (i >> 8) & 0xff;
7
tmp[3] = (i) & 0xff;
8
9
memcpy(_txData , tmp, sizeof(tmp));
10
struct phy_ctrl_field_common header = {
11
.header_format = (uint8_t)0x0,
//short header format , broadcast
12
.packet_length_type =
(uint8_t)0x0, //length given in subslots
13
.packet_length = (uint8_t) 0x01,
//1 subslot with MCS = 1
14
.short_network_id = (uint8_t)(0x0a & 0xff),
15
.transmitter_id_hi = (uint8_t) (0x0101 >> 8), //made up transmitter ID
16
.transmitter_id_lo = (uint8_t) (0x0101 & 0xff),
17
.transmit_power = POWER,
18
.reserved = 0,
19
.df_mcs = MCS
20
};
21
memcpy(&phyHeader.type_1, &header , 5);
22
23
// Setup the nrf_modem_dect_phy_operation_tx
24
struct nrf_modem_dect_phy_tx_params txOpsParams;
25
txOpsParams.start_time = 0; //send counter value immediately
26
txOpsParams.handle = txHandle;
27
txOpsParams.network_id = 0x0a;
28
txOpsParams.phy_type = 0;
29
txOpsParams.lbt_rssi_threshold_max = 0;
30
txOpsParams.carrier = CARRIER;
31
txOpsParams.lbt_period = 0;
32
txOpsParams.phy_header = &phyHeader;
33
txOpsParams.data = _txData;
34
txOpsParams.data_size = sizeof(tmp);
35
36
k_sem_take(&modem, K_FOREVER);
37
38
int err=nrf_modem_dect_phy_tx(&txOpsParams);
39
if(err!=0) LOG_ERR("TX FAIL %d", err);
40
if(txHandle==30000)txHandle=1;
41
else txHandle++;
42
}
Listing 3.8:
Function responsible for preparing and initiating the transmission of a
message using the specified parameters.
The function performs the following steps:
• Copies an integer i (passed as an input parameter to modem_tx) into a uint8_t
array tmp with a length of DATA_LEN. The array tmp is filled by extracting each byte
from the integer i.
• Copies the contents of the tmp array to the _txData array using memcpy.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
44
==PAGE:51==
• Sets up the parameters of the PHY header in the header structure, which includes
fields such as header_format, packet_length_type, packet_length, df_mcs and
so on.
• Initializes the txOpsParams structure with parameters for the transmission operation,
including start_time, handle, network_id, phy_type, lbt_rssi_threshold_max,
carrier, lbt_period, phy_header, data and data_size.
• Initializes the txOpsParams structure with parameters for the transmission operation.
The txOpsParams structure (or its pointer) will then be passed as an argument to the
nrf_modem_dect_phy_tx function.
• Calls k_sem_take(&modem, K_FOREVER) to wait for the semaphore before schedul-
ing the transmission.
• Calls nrf_modem_dect_phy_tx to schedule a data transmission with the given pa-
rameters and logs an error if the transmission fails. The txHandle is incremented
and reset if it reaches 30000 (see Listing 3.1).
The function modem_tx(i) is called in the main() function of the broadcast_05_tx appli-
cation. The main() function is as follows:
1
int main(void)
2
{
3
uint32_t i =1;
//send an increasing counter , start from 1
4
printk("START DECT SAMPLE\n");
5
dk_buttons_init(button_handler);
6
printk("Buttons init\t");
7
dk_leds_init();
8
printk("leds init\t");
9
10
nrf_modem_lib_init();
11
12
k_sem_take(&modem, K_FOREVER);
13
int err=0;
14
15
err=nrf_modem_dect_phy_callback_set(&dect_cb_config);
16
if(err!=0) {
17
printk("ERROR settings callbacks %d\n",err);
18
}
19
20
err=nrf_modem_dect_phy_init(&init_params);
21
if(err!=0) {
22
printk("ERROR initializing modem PHY %d\n",err);
23
return -1;
24
}
25
printk("DECT init started\n");
26
27
printk("Transmitting on channel %d \n", CARRIER);
28
29
dk_set_led_on(1);
30
printk("TX ROLE\n");
31
32
while(EXIT==0){
33
//TX ROLE, LOOP
34
k_msleep(250); //4 messages every second
35
36
modem_tx(i);
37
LOG_INF("TX %d\n", i);
38
39
i++;
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
45
==PAGE:52==
40
if (i == INT32_MAX)
41
{ i = 0;
42
LOG_INF("Sent integer value looped"); }
43
}
44
45
k_msleep(1000);
//messages may be in logging pipeline , wait a sec
46
printk("Button pressed... End of transmission\n");
47
printk("*********************************************\n");
48
printk("Transmitted messages %d\n", i);
49
50
return 0;
51
}
Listing 3.9: The main() function of the broadcast_05_tx application.
Initially, several components such as buttons and LEDs are initialized. Also the DECT
PHY interface in the Modem library requires explicit initialization. But, before initializing
the DECT PHY interface of the Modem library, the application must:
• Initialize the Modem library by calling the nrf_modem_lib_init() function, which
also turns on the modem core.
• Register callbacks for DECT PHY operations by calling the nrf_modem_dect_phy
_callback_set() function (as explained in Listing 3.7).
Afterwards, the application can initialize the DECT PHY interface by calling the nrf_modem
_dect_phy_init() function. Upon successful initialization, both the DECT PHY interface
and DECT NR+ physical layer in the modem are ready for operation. The function then
enters a while loop, where:
• it’s called the modem_tx(i) to transmit the message, logging the transmission count.
• it’s incremented the counter i. If i reaches INT32_MAX, it resets to 0 and logs this
event.
After exiting the loop, the function waits for 1 second to ensure all messages are pro-
cessed, prints the end of transmission message and returns the total number of transmit-
ted messages.
Message Reception
The modem_rx(rxMode, time_s) function is only present in the broadcast_05_rx applica-
tion: it serves as the main function responsible for message reception as it calls nrf_modem
_dect_phy_rx, indicating that the reception request was sent to the modem (Figure 3.14).
The primary purpose of modem_rx is to prepare and initiate the reception of messages us-
ing the specified parameters, and then calls the nrf_modem_dect_phy_rx function to start
the operation.
1
void modem_rx(uint32_t rxMode , int time_s)
2
{
3
// Setup the nrf_modem_dect_phy_operation_rx
4
struct nrf_modem_dect_phy_rx_params rxOpsParams={0};
5
rxOpsParams.start_time = 0; //start immediately
6
rxOpsParams.handle = rxHandle;
7
rxOpsParams.network_id=0;
8
rxOpsParams.mode = rxMode;
9
rxOpsParams.link_id = NRF_MODEM_DECT_PHY_LINK_UNSPECIFIED;
10
rxOpsParams.rssi_level = -60;
11
rxOpsParams.carrier = CARRIER;
12
rxOpsParams.duration = time_s*69120*1000;
13
rxOpsParams.filter.short_network_id = (uint8_t)(0x0a);
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
46
==PAGE:53==
14
rxOpsParams.filter.is_short_network_id_used = 1;
15
rxOpsParams.filter.receiver_identity = 0;
16
17
k_sem_take(&modem, K_FOREVER);
18
19
int err=nrf_modem_dect_phy_rx(&rxOpsParams);
20
if(err!=0) LOG_ERR("RX FAIL %d", err);
21
if(rxHandle==65000)rxHandle=31400;
22
else rxHandle++;
23
}
Listing 3.10: Function responsible for preparing and initiating the reception of messages
using the specified parameters.
The function performs the following steps:
• Sets up the parameters for the receiver operation in the rxOpsParams structure,
including fields such as start_time, handle (associated to rxHandle, see 3.1),
carrier and so on.
• Takes the semaphore using k_sem_take(&modem, K_FOREVER), blocking until it is
available. This ensures that only one asynchronous operation is performed at a
time.
• Schedules a reception by calling nrf_modem_dect_phy_rx with the given parame-
ters and logs an error if the reception fails. The rxHandle is incremented and reset
if it reaches 65000.
Incoming data received on the physical layer control and data channels is sent to the pcc
and pdc callbacks.
The main function of the broadcast_05_rx application is quite similar to the one of the
broadcast_05_tx application. The initialization part is the same, with the only differences
being in the while loop and the console printout of variables for performance evaluation.
Here the application starts listening for incoming messages on the specified channel,
repeatedly calling the modem_rx function.
1
while (EXIT == 0)
2
{
3
// RX ROLE, LOOP
4
dk_set_led_on(DK_LED1);
5
dk_set_led_on(DK_LED2);
6
7
// loop RX mode
8
modem_rx(NRF_MODEM_DECT_PHY_RX_MODE_SINGLE_SHOT , 2);
9
}
10
11
// messages may be in logging pipeline , wait a sec
12
k_msleep(1000);
13
printk("Button pressed... End of reception\n");
14
printk("*********************************************\n");
15
// CRC error causes a missed message , so missing errors includes also CRC
16
printk("Received messages %d\n", received_ok);
17
printk("Missed messages %d\n", (missing_errors - crc_errors));
18
printk("CRC errors
%d\n", crc_errors);
19
printk("RSSI_2 AVG
(rounded) %d\n", (int)rssi_average);
20
printk("****************EXIT**************************\n");
21
22
return 0;
Listing 3.11: Snippet of the main() function of the broadcast_05_rx application.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
47
==PAGE:54==
Final Output
Here it can be seen the Serial Terminal screens of the two devices, one in transmission
and the other in reception.
Figure 3.15: Output of the broadcast_05_tx application, showing the transmission of mes-
sages.
Figure 3.16: Output of the broadcast_05_rx application, showing the reception of mes-
sages.
3.4
Modem Shell Application
The Modem Shell Application, once the .hex file is flashed into the device’s memory,
enables various commands to be executed via the Serial Terminal. This application facil-
itates the configuration and management of the DECT NR+ network by providing a suite
of commands, each serving a specific function.
Before continuing, however, it is important to clarify the differences between the two ap-
plications. Although it is possible to define and use functionalities above the physical
layer with the Modem Shell Application —such as setting the device’s role (sink, relay,
or client) or using the ping or perf command— both the Broadcast and the Modem Shell
App. ultimately use the same DECT NR+ PHY layer on the modem core (the only layer
of the DECT NR+ stack implemented so far). The .hex application employs proprietary
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
48
==PAGE:55==
message formats, executing higher operations within the application itself, but not imple-
menting the standard DECT NR+ MAC or higher layers. This is achieved by allowing the
devices to perform basic PHY layer operations: listening when configured as a sink, and
sending using the PHY TX when configured as a client. The relay device combines these
operations, listening and forwarding any received messages.
Among the commands provided by the Application, the dect sett command enables the
user to set various device parameters, such as the role of the device (e.g., sink, relay,
client), transmission power, Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS), the beacon interval
and many others. This flexibility is crucial for adapting the device to different network
configurations and performance requirements.
Another important command is dect rssi_scan, which scans all available channels (from
1657 to 1677) to identify their current status. The scan results categorize channels as:
• Free: Indicating minimal interference from other devices, making these channels
optimal for initiating transmissions and establishing connections.
• Possible: Suggesting a moderate level of interference, where the channel may be
shared with other devices but is not heavily congested.
• Busy: Signifying significant activity from other devices, rendering these channels
unreliable for initiating new transmissions.
Furthermore, the dect beacon_start command initiates the transmission of beacon mes-
sages on a specified channel, facilitating network synchronization and device discovery.
The versatility of the Modem Shell Application (guaranteed by the above-mentioned com-
mands and others that will be mentioned later) allows it to be used in various scenarios,
creating multiple use cases. In the context of this thesis project, three primary use cases
were explored:
• DECT NR+ Network Creation: A DECT NR+ network was established with three in-
terconnected devices functioning as sink, relay and client (leaf). This setup demon-
strated the ability of the network to support multiple roles and maintain reliable com-
munication paths among the devices.
• Throughput Performance Testing: The dect perf command was employed to
measure the data rate of the communication between two devices. This testing
provided valuable insights into the network’s throughput performance, highlighting
the efficiency and reliability of data transmission under various configurations and
conditions.
• Ping Command Testing: The dect ping command was used to evaluate the net-
work’s latency and responsiveness. By sending ping messages between devices,
the round-trip time (RTT) was measured, offering a clear understanding of the net-
work’s latency characteristics and its suitability for time-sensitive applications.
3.4.1
DECT NR+ Network Creation
In this scenario, a mesh topology was created using three nRF9161 DKs, configured as a
sink, a relay and a leaf, respectively (as it was shown in Figure 2.11). Here, the process
of creating a DECT NR+ network with synchronization and device discovery capabilities
is illustrated.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
49
==PAGE:56==
Sink Configuration
The sink device is configured with the command:
1
dect sett -c 0 --b_dl_channel 0 --b_ul_channel 0 --b_name mosh_sink -s yes
This command sets the beacon broadcast channel, beacon downlink (DL) channel and
beacon uplink (UL) channel to the first free channel. It also sets the beacon broadcast
name to “mosh_sink” and enables the sink mode. The sink starts sending beacons on a
specific channel with:
1
dect beacon_start
This initiates beacon transmission on the chosen channel, which will be referred to as “X”
from now on.
Relay Configuration
The relay device is set up similarly with the following command:
1
dect sett -c 0 --b_dl_channel 0 --b_ul_channel 0 --b_name relay_beacon
This sets the relay’s beacon broadcast name to “relay_beacon” and selects the first free
channel for beacon, DL and UL transmissions. To synchronize with the sink and to gather
information about it, the relay scans for the sink beacon:
1
dect beacon_scan -c X
Now the beacon broadcast from “mosh_sink” is stored in the relay’s neighbor cache.
After detecting the sink’s beacon, the relay starts its own beacon transmission on another
channel, which will be referred to as “Y”, and adjusts its timing with “mosh_sink” beacon:
1
dect beacon_start –s mosh_sink
Finally, the relay enables synchronization and background scanning towards the sink:
1
dect beacon_relay -b mosh_sink
Returning to the sink console, once the channel on which the relay is transmitting beacon
messages has been identified, the same procedure executed on the relay is repeated.
The device scan for the relay beacon to gather information about it:
1
dect beacon_scan -c Y
This stores the beacon broadcast from “relay_beacon” into the sink’s neighbor cache.
Next, enable synchronization and background scanning towards the relay:
1
dect beacon_relay -b relay_beacon
In case synchronization needs to be stopped, it can be done with:
1
dect beacon_relay –stop
This ensures that the sink and relay devices are synchronized and can communicate
effectively, completing the network setup process.
Client/Sender Configuration
The client device is again initialized with the dect sett command, where various param-
eters are defined, such as the interval duration for synch/background scanning towards
the relay (set to be more frequent in order to detect better relay channel changes) and for
the keepalive messages of a connected client. Then the client scans for the relay beacon:
1
dect beacon_scan -c Y
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
50
==PAGE:57==
This command stores the beacon broadcast from “relay_beacon” into the client’s neighbor
cache, allowing the client to recognize the relay. The client device can then perform two
primary operations:
• Send data to the Internet/Sink via the relay: This is accomplished by transmitting
data using the following command:
1
dect client_rach_tx -b relay_beacon -d TAPARRA! -i
Here, “TAPARRA!” represents the data being sent. The relay handles the forwarding
of the data to the sink, ensuring that the messages reach their final destination.
• Enable connected client mode towards the relay: This mode maintains synchro-
nization with the relay beacon in the background, ensuring consistent communica-
tion. The client can then send data at regular intervals (every 10 secs in this sce-
nario), including additional information such as the modem temperature (formatted
in JSON), with the relay forwarding the data to the sink as required:
1
dect client_connect relay_beacon
2
dect client_send -d TAPARRA! -i -t 10 -c
Figure 3.17: Screenshots of the three device’s consoles: the Client (at the top), the Relay
(in the center), the Sink (at the bottom).
To summarize the entire setup, it can be said that the process involves several key steps:
both the sink and relay continuously transmit beacon messages using the dect bea-
con_start command, ensuring their presence is broadcasted on the network. They select
a free channel for sending these beacons, facilitating clear and uninterrupted communica-
tion. Device discovery is accomplished by executing the dect beacon_scan command on
the specified channel, allowing the relay to detect the sink and vice versa. Once a device
is discovered, its information is stored in the neighbor cache of the other DK. Addition-
ally, when the relay begins its beacon transmission, it adjusts its timing to align with the
sink’s beacon channel, ensuring synchronization. Following the initial scan, background
scanning and synchronization with the discovered device are maintained using the dect
beacon_relay -b ’name’ command.
Through these configurations and commands, a DECT NR+ network is established, en-
abling seamless communication and message forwarding from the client to the sink via
the relay.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
51
==PAGE:58==
Figure 3.18: Flow diagram illustrating the step-by-step commands used to configure the
sink, relay and client devices in a DECT NR+ network setup.
3.4.2
Throughput Performance Testing
In this scenario, a point-to-point topology was established using two nRF9161 DKs, con-
figured as a client and a server respectively, to assess the throughput performance of
the DECT NR+ network. The evaluation was conducted using the dect perf command,
which provides comprehensive metrics on data rate and efficiency during communication
between the devices.
Server Configuration
The server initiates by scanning a selected channel to determine its suitability for commu-
nication:
1
dect rssi_scan -c 1672
Subsequently, the server begins continuous reception on the chosen channel using:
1
dect perf -s -t -1 --channel 1672
The -t -1 flag signifies continuous RX mode, enabling the server to remain actively lis-
tening without time constraints.
Client Configuration
The client, on the other hand, focuses on achieving maximum throughput over a defined
period:
1
dect perf -c -t 12 --channel 1672
Here, the -t 12 parameter specifies a transmission duration of 12 seconds, during which
the client sends data at its maximum capacity.
The dect perf command offers extensive configuration options to tailor the testing en-
vironment. Parameters such as Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS), transmission
power, packet slot count and duration can be adjusted to optimize performance under
varying network conditions. Moreover, advanced options including Hybrid Automatic Re-
peat Request (HARQ) parameters can be adjusted for specific reliability requirements.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
52
==PAGE:59==
3.4.3
Ping Command Testing
In this scenario, a point-to-point topology was established using two nRF9161 DKs, where
one device acted as a client and the other as a server. The objective was to evaluate the
latency performance of the DECT NR+ network by assessing network responsiveness
using the dect ping command. This command measures the round-trip time (RTT) be-
tween devices by displaying the RTT upon receiving the ping response following each
ping request.
Server Configuration
To begin the evaluation, the server first scans a designated channel to assess its suitability
for communication:
1
dect rssi_scan -c 1677
Subsequently, the server initializes the ping server on the specified channel. This com-
mand sets up the server to respond to ping requests:
1
dect ping -s --channel 1677
Client Configuration
The client initiates basic ping testing to measure network latency:
1
dect ping -c --channel 1677
This command prompts the client to send ping requests to the server on channel 1677,
capturing RTT metrics for analysis. The dect ping command offers various configura-
tion parameters to customize testing conditions. For instance, it allows adjustment of
Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS), transmission power, packet slot count, and dura-
tion of packet transmission. Additionally, specific parameters such as the number of ping
requests sent or the interval between successive transmissions can be set for specific
requirements.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
53
==PAGE:60==
4
Test and Results
This chapter outlines the methodology used to conduct the tests, outlining the results
obtained (using the applications explained in the previous chapter) and evaluating the
performance of the DECT NR+ standard in terms of key metrics such as latency, coverage,
Packet Success Rate (PSR), data rate and power consumption. Here it is provided a
comprehensive analysis of the experimental findings, offering insights into the capabilities
and limitations of the DECT NR+ standard.
4.1
COVERAGE - PSR
4.1.1
Experimental methodology
To thoroughly evaluate the coverage and Packet Success Rate (PSR) of the DECT NR+
standard, a series of measurements were conducted in both outdoor and indoor environ-
ments. The outdoor tests took place in the park behind DTU Building 358 [59], while the
indoor tests were conducted in the 101 Building, in particular in the Canteen and in the
Library [60]. This variety of environments allowed for a comprehensive assessment of
the standard’s performance under different conditions. The experimental setup included
the ability to adjust various transmission power (TX power) levels using the Broadcast
application (which was used for this test, Section 3.3), changing the value of the macro
”POWER” (Listing 3.2). According to [43], it is possible to set the following TX levels:
Figure 4.1: Different Transmit Power values available.
The TX power levels tested were:
• 0x0 = -40 dBm (Minimum TX power)
• 0x4 = -12 dBm
• 0x7 = 0 dBm
• 0xb = 13 dBm
• 0xd = 19 dBm (Hardware maximum TX power)
According to Nordic’s guidelines, it is important to note that any value higher than 0xd
will still result in an actual transmission power of 19 dBm. During the measurements, the
TX device was kept stationary while the RX device was moved to various distances to
simulate different coverage scenarios. It was also measured the quality of the communi-
cation when the RX was moving from the maximum reached distance to the position of
the transmitter (and vice versa).
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
54
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.2: Transmitter device, kept fixed in the same position.
For each measurement, the PSR was calculated after establishing a connection where ex-
actly 1000 messages were exchanged. The PSR was determined by the ratio of correctly
received messages to the total number of messages sent, including missed messages
and those with CRC (Cyclic Redundancy Check) errors. Several important considera-
tions were taken into account during the measurements:
• All measurements were conducted without any obstacles between the two devices
to ensure clear line-of-sight conditions.
• Various physical obstructions significantly impacted performance. For instance, if a
person stood in front of the device, the receiver stopped receiving signals entirely.
• Placing the receiver on the keyboard of the computer caused the device to cease
functioning, due to interference. In this scenario, it failed to establish any connection
and could not display any messages, whether they were reception confirmations or
error notifications. However, when the device was positioned very close (within a
few centimeters) to the computer, it operated normally. The problem was specific to
the device being placed directly on top of the keyboard. For this reason, all measure-
ments were considered with the device placed 30-40 cm away from the computer
to avoid interference.
This setup ensured that the tests were conducted under consistent and controlled condi-
tions, allowing for a reliable evaluation of the DECT NR+ standard’s performance across
different power levels and environments. The following sections will present the detailed
results of these experiments.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
55
==PAGE:62==
4.1.2
Power = 0x0 (-40 dBm)
INDOOR Measurements
Figure 4.3: PSR with TX Power = 0x0 (-40dBm, Minimum Pwr) in an Indoor environment
OUTDOOR Measurements
Figure 4.4: PSR with TX Power = 0x0 (-40dBm, Minimum Pwr) in an Outdoor environment
INDOOR/OUTDOOR comparison
Figure 4.5: PSR Comparison with TX Power = 0x0 in Indoor/Outdoor scenarios
With such low transmission power levels, even minor changes in the device’s orientation
can significantly impact signal reception. For instance, if the transmitter (TX) and receiver
(RX) are perfectly aligned, the RX will successfully receive the signal. However, if the TX
is slightly tilted downwards, the RX may lose the signal and stop functioning. Regardless
of the position of the devices, with a power of -40 dBm it is not possible to establish a
connection beyond 30 cm distance.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
56
==PAGE:63==
4.1.3
Power = 0x4 (-12dBm)
INDOOR Measurements
Figure 4.6: PSR with TX Power = 0x4 (-12dBm) in an Indoor environment
PSR maintains nearly 100% up to around 20 meters, after which it experiences a rapid
decline, reaching 0% at about 30 meters.
OUTDOOR Measurements
Figure 4.7: PSR with TX Power = 0x4 (-12dBm) in an Outdoor environment
Similar to the indoor scenario, the PSR is high up to around 10 meters and then quickly
falls to 0% by 15 meters.
INDOOR/OUTDOOR comparison
Figure 4.8: PSR Comparison with TX Power = 0x4 in Indoor/Outdoor scenarios
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
57
==PAGE:64==
4.1.4
Power = 0x7 (0dBm)
INDOOR Measurements
Figure 4.9: PSR with TX Power = 0x7 (0dBm) in an Indoor environment
PSR remains high up to approximately 50 meters, but then drops sharply to 0% by around
65 meters.
OUTDOOR Measurements
Figure 4.10: PSR with TX Power = 0x7 (0dBm) in an Outdoor environment
At 0 dBm, the PSR holds steady until about 40 meters, then rapidly decreases, hitting 0%
by around 60 meters.
INDOOR/OUTDOOR comparison
Figure 4.11: PSR Comparison with TX Power = 0x7 in Indoor/Outdoor scenarios
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
58
==PAGE:65==
4.1.5
Power = 0xb (13dBm)
INDOOR Measurements
Figure 4.12: PSR with TX Power = 0xb (13dBm) in an Indoor environment
PSR remains near 100% for distances up to 100 meters, indicating excellent performance
over the measured range. After 100m, it was not possible to continue the measurements
cause it was not found an indoor place (with no obstacles) larger than 100m .
OUTDOOR Measurements
Figure 4.13: PSR with TX Power = 0xb (13dBm) in an Outdoor environment
PSR remains high up to around 100 meters, but then starts to decline, dropping to 0%
just beyond 120 meters.
INDOOR/OUTDOOR comparison
Figure 4.14: PSR Comparison with TX Power = 0xb in Indoor/Outdoor scenarios
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
59
==PAGE:66==
4.1.6
Power = 0xd (19dBm)
INDOOR Measurements
Figure 4.15: PSR with TX Power = 0xd (19dBm, HW Maximum Power) in an Indoor
environment
PSR remains near 100% for distances up to 100 meters, indicating excellent performance
over the measured range. After 100m, it was not possible to continue the measurements
cause it was not found an indoor place (with no obstacles) larger than 100m .
OUTDOOR Measurements
Figure 4.16: PSR with TX Power = 0xd (19dBm, HW Maximum Power) in an Outdoor
environment
PSR is nearly 100% up to around 160 meters, after which it falls off, reaching 0% at about
220 meters.
INDOOR/OUTDOOR comparison
Figure 4.17: PSR Comparison with TX Power = 0xd in Indoor/Outdoor scenarios
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
60
==PAGE:67==
4.1.7
Considerations on Indoor and Outdoor performances
Despite the absence of results for the 0xb and 0xd power levels, the overall performance
metrics indicate higher efficiency in indoor environments compared to outdoor settings.
Several factors could have a contribution to the enhanced performance observed in indoor
environments:
• Controlled Environment: Indoor settings provide a more controlled environment,
particularly in the absence of external elements such as wind, which can affect signal
strength and stability by moving the USB-C cable and other equipment.
• Signal Reflection and Multi-path Propagation: Indoor environments benefit from
signal reflections and multi-path propagation. These phenomena occur when sig-
nals bounce off walls and other surfaces, creating multiple paths for the signal to
reach the receiver. This can enhance the overall signal strength.
• Signal Directionality: Indoors, signals are often “channeled” or “directed” towards
the receiver due to the presence of walls and other structures. This directionality
helps maintain a stronger and more focused signal path. In contrast, outdoor envi-
ronments allow signals to propagate more diffusely, spreading out in all directions.
This widespread propagation results in reduced signal strength over distance as the
energy disperses into the broader environment.
4.1.8
Comparison of Device Movement Performance
Table 4.1: Performance Comparison of the Device in movement (for both Indoor and
Outdoor scenarios)
POWER (dBm)
1-MAX Indoor
MAX-1 Indoor
1-MAX Outdoor
MAX-1 Outdoor
0x4
39.0 %
54.2 %
45.0 %
52.0 %
0x7
56.5 %
66.9 %
65.9 %
83.5 %
0xb
-
-
55.3 %
74.8 %
0xd
-
-
69.0 %
69.3 %
1. Higher Stability in MAX-1 Measurements: Measurements taken while moving
from the maximum distance towards the transmitter (MAX-1) consistently show higher
performance compared to those taken while moving from close proximity to the max-
imum distance (1-MAX). This suggests that the device performs better when it starts
from the farthest point and moves into a region with a more stable and stronger sig-
nal. In contrast, starting from a close, stable position and moving towards a more
distant, unstable position likely results in deteriorating signal quality and reduced
performance.
2. Impact of Power on Stability: Connection stability improves with higher transmis-
sion power. Data for the 0x4 power level shows the lowest performance, indicating
that lower power settings are less effective in maintaining a stable connection during
movement. As transmission power increases to 0x7, performance metrics improve,
suggesting that higher power levels enhance the device’s ability to maintain a stable
connection while in motion.
3. Performance Ceiling: The packet success rate (PSR) generally does not exceed
70-75% in most cases, except for the MAX-1 outdoor measurement at power level
0x7, which reaches 83.5%. This ceiling suggests inherent limitations in the device’s
communication performance while moving, possibly due to environmental factors,
device sensitivity, or signal interference.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
61
==PAGE:68==
4.1.9
Comparative Analysis
INDOOR Measurements
Figure 4.18: PSR Comparison with different PW TX values
OUTDOOR Measurements
Figure 4.19: PSR Comparison with different PW TX values
Across all power levels and in both indoor and outdoor environments, the Packet Success
Rate (PSR) demonstrates excellent performance up to a certain critical distance. Beyond
this critical distance, there is a sharp drop in PSR, indicating a sudden and significant
decline in communication quality.
One possible reason for this performance drop at specific distances could be related to the
length of the packets being transmitted. In this experiment, each packet contains 32 bits
(4 bytes), represented by a single uint32_t variable. For future research, it would be inter-
esting to analyze how performance varies with different packet lengths. As the amount of
data (and thus the number of bits) transmitted increases, the likelihood of encountering a
bit error also increases, potentially degrading the PSR.
The maximum distance achieved during these measurements, with the highest transmis-
sion power, was 220 meters. This is a commendable result, especially when considering
that Wi-Fi routers operating on the 2.4 GHz band typically reach up to 90 meters (ap-
proximately 300 feet) outdoors [61]. However, DECT NR+ and Nordic Semiconductor
promise greater capabilities. Nordic Semiconductor has acknowledged that they have
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
62
==PAGE:69==
encountered issues with the 61 Development Kit on radio sensitivity, resulting in a range
that is significantly less than what they have observed with their lab device. They are
investigating the issue, but do not have clear data at the moment.
Despite these challenges, it is important to note that the maximum coverage offered by
DECT NR+ will likely be less than other IoT technologies such as LTE-M or NB-IoT. For
example, LTE-M and NB-IoT transmission range, in terms of maximum distance between
the tower and the IoT device, is approximately one kilometer in urban areas and approxi-
mately 10 kilometers in rural areas [62] [63].
4.2
Data Rate
4.2.1
Experimental methodology
To evaluate the data rate performance of the DECT NR+ standard, a series of measure-
ments were conducted in indoor environments, specifically in the 101 Building Canteen
and Library. The network utilized the Modem Shell Application to facilitate communication
between the devices, in particular the Throughput Performance Testing use case (Sub-
section 3.4.2) was used. The experiments were taken with a fixed transmission power
of 13 dBm for the client device, with the devices positioned at a fixed distance of 30-35
meters, ensuring excellent coverage performance given the TX power level.
In the experimental setup, one device always acted as a Server while the other acted
as a Client. The Modem Shell Application facilitated the ability to set various Modulation
and Coding Scheme (MCS) values ranging from 0 to 4. For each MCS value tested, the
number of slots that make up a packet was also increased, allowing for larger amounts of
data to be transmitted within the same packet. In fact, the slot number directly influences
the size of each packet in terms of bytes. All measurements were conducted over a fixed
12-second interval where the client device transmitted data continuously to the server.
The server displayed the amount of data correctly received relative to the total bytes sent
by the client, alongside the corresponding data rate from the server’s perspective.
It’s important to note that, for a given number of slots per packet, the number of packets
sent remained constant, regardless of the MCS. For instance, when the number of slots
per packet was set to 1, the client consistently sent 7490 packets, both with MCS = 0 or
with MCS = 4. Similarly, with 2 slots per packet, the client sent 7217 packets, and so forth.
The variation in MCS affected only the amount of data transmitted within each packet, not
the total number of packets sent.
Figure 4.20: The client (on the left) and server (on the right) devices connected to the
computer and positioned on a table, ready for the data rate performance tests.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
63
==PAGE:70==
The maximum number of slots per packet changed based on the MCS being considered.
For example, with MCS values of 0 and 1, the maximum number of slots was 8, while with
MCS value 4, the maximum number of slots was 4. The amount of bytes that can be sent
in each packet varied according to the number of slots in the packet, as illustrated in the
following figure.
Figure 4.21: Bits per subslot index with given modulation scheme (from [57])
In this table, the amount of data is expressed based on MCS/Subslot. However, the result
is the same because each slot that can be added or removed consists of 2 subslots. The
documentation uses subslots, whereas this application uses slots.
The objective of these measurements was to observe how the communication data rate
changes by varying two parameters:
• MCS (from 0 to 4)
• Number of slots in a packet
For every MCS value a table displays, with a specific number of slots, the total bytes sent,
the bytes per packet, number of packets sent and the data rates for both the client and
server. This setup ensured a systematic approach to testing the data rate capabilities of
the DECT NR+ standard, providing valuable insights into its performance under different
configurations and conditions. The following sections will present the detailed results of
these experiments.
4.2.2
MCS = 0
Figure 4.22: Data Rate (Kbps) vs. Number of Slots for Client and Server using MCS = 0.
4.2.3
MCS = 1
Figure 4.23: Data Rate (Kbps) vs. Number of Slots for Client and Server using MCS = 1.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
64
==PAGE:71==
4.2.4
MCS = 2
Figure 4.24: Data Rate (Kbps) vs. Number of Slots for Client and Server using MCS = 2.
4.2.5
MCS = 3
Figure 4.25: Data Rate (Kbps) vs. Number of Slots for Client and Server using MCS = 3.
4.2.6
MCS = 4
Figure 4.26: Data Rate (Kbps) vs. Number of Slots for Client and Server using MCS = 4.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
65
==PAGE:72==
4.2.7
Comparative Analysis
Figure 4.27: Table and Bar Graphs for Maximum Data Rate Achieved by Each MCS Value
for Both Client and Server.
Figure 4.28: Comparison of Server Data Rate (Kbps) vs. Number of Slots for different
MCS values. Each line represents the data rate performance for a specific MCS value (0
to 4) as the number of slots per packet increases from 1 to 8.
The comparison of data rates across different MCS values clearly indicates that higher
MCS values provide better performance (Figure 4.27). The maximum data rates achieved
for each MCS value illustrate the potential of DECT NR+ in various configurations:
• MCS = 0: Provides the lowest data rate, suitable for applications with minimal data
requirements.
• MCS = 1-2: Offer moderate data rates, suitable for applications with moderate data
requirements.
• MCS = 3-4: Provide the highest data rates, suitable for high-data-demand applica-
tions.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
66
==PAGE:73==
The comparison graph (Figure 4.28) also highlights that increasing the number of slots in
a packet (thus increasing the quantity of Bytes sent in a single packet) enhances the data
rate significantly, especially for higher MCS values (where for the same number of slots
more data is sent in a packet). This suggests that DECT NR+ can be effectively optimized
for different data requirements by adjusting the MCS and number of slots.
Disadvantages of Increasing the MCS
While increasing the Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS) values significantly enhances
data rates, it is essential to consider the potential disadvantages associated with higher
MCS values:
• Increased Bit Error Rate (BER): Higher MCS values use more complex modulation
schemes that are more susceptible to noise and interference. This can lead to an
increased bit error rate, potentially reducing the reliability of the communication.
• Reduced Range: Higher MCS values typically require a stronger signal, which can
limit the effective communication range. This means that while data rates are higher,
the devices may need to be closer to maintain a stable connection.
• Higher Power Consumption: Operating at higher MCS values often requires more
power to maintain signal quality and manage increased processing demands. This
can be a significant disadvantage in battery-powered IoT devices where energy ef-
ficiency is critical.
• Complexity and Cost: Implementing higher MCS values may require more so-
phisticated and costly hardware, increasing the overall system cost. This can be a
barrier for low-cost IoT applications.
Balancing Performance and Practicality
After evaluating the potential disadvantages of increasing the Modulation and Coding
Scheme (MCS) values, it is crucial to balance the need for higher data rates with practical
considerations such as reliability, environmental adaptability and security.
Balancing higher data rates with the reliability of the communication link is vital. Appli-
cations should be evaluated to determine the optimal MCS value that provides sufficient
data throughput while maintaining an acceptable error rate and communication range.
This balance ensures that the system remains robust and dependable, even in varying
conditions.
The adaptability of the DECT NR+ standard to different environmental conditions also re-
quires further exploration. Performance in high-interference environments or areas with
significant physical obstructions should be studied to ensure robust communication. Un-
derstanding how the standard behaves in real-world scenarios with diverse challenges
will help in fine-tuning its deployment strategies.
Security is an additional concern, especially with higher data rates and more complex
modulation schemes. Ensuring secure data transmission, particularly at higher MCS val-
ues, is critical to protect against potential vulnerabilities. Robust security measures must
be adopted to safeguard data integrity and privacy.
However, it is noteworthy that during the measurements conducted in this study, no degra-
dation in performance concerning data reception accuracy was observed. The data rate
on the client side (indicating the amount of data sent by the first device) was nearly iden-
tical to the data rate on the server side (indicating the amount of data correctly received
by the second device), regardless of the MCS used. This is evidenced by the fact that
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
67
==PAGE:74==
the data rate curves for the client and server displayed on the graphs for each MCS value
overlap and are indistinguishable from one another. This consistency in performance sug-
gests that, under the tested conditions, DECT NR+ maintains a high level of reliability in
data transmission even at higher MCS values.
Future research should explore under what conditions significant performance degrada-
tion in data reception accuracy might occur with increasing MCS. Identifying these con-
ditions would provide valuable insights into the operational limits of DECT NR+ and help
in developing strategies to mitigate potential issues, ensuring robust and reliable commu-
nication across various scenarios. Several other areas can further enhance the perfor-
mance and applicability of the DECT NR+ standard:
• Dynamic MCS Adaptation: Developing algorithms for dynamic adaptation of MCS
values based on real-time environmental conditions and communication quality could
optimize performance. This would allow the system to automatically adjust for the
best balance between data rate and reliability.
• Extended Range Testing: Conducting more extensive range testing in various real-
world scenarios, including urban, suburban and rural environments, would provide
a more comprehensive understanding of the standard’s capabilities and limitations.
• Energy Efficiency Studies: Investigating the energy efficiency of different MCS
values and slot configurations can help design low-power IoT solutions that do not
compromise on performance.
Evaluation of Nordic’s Key Feature: Data Rate up to 3.4 Mbps
Nordic Semiconductor highlights that the DECT NR+ standard supports data rates up to
3.4 Mbps, depending on the modulation scheme used [64]. However, the maximum data
rate observed during the experiments did not fully achieve this value. The closest results
(2.2Mbps), achieved with MCS 4, showed a significant increase in data rate but still fell
short of the 3.4 Mbps mark. Several factors, including hardware limitations, environmental
conditions and potential interference, could contribute to this discrepancy.
Despite not reaching the peak value, the observed data rates still demonstrated robust
performance, especially with higher MCS settings. The experimental data suggests that
while the theoretical maximum data rate of 3.4 Mbps is an attractive feature, real-world
applications often face numerous practical challenges that can affect performance. The
DECT NR+ standard, even without reaching the absolute peak rate, still offers competitive
and reliable data transmission capabilities suitable for various IoT applications.
4.3
Latency
4.3.1
Experimental methodology
The experimental setup for measuring latency was designed to closely mirror that used
for evaluating data rates. Measurements were conducted in indoor environments (101
Building Canteen and Library) with a fixed transmission power of 13 dBm for the client
device. The devices were positioned at a fixed distance of 30-35 meters, ensuring ex-
cellent coverage performance considering the TX power level. In this setup, one device
always acted as the Client, initiating communication by sending ping requests, while the
other acted as the Server, responding with ping replies. The Modem Shell Application
was used to establish these communications (in particular the Ping Command Testing
use case, Subsection 3.4.3) across varying Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS) val-
ues ranging from 0 to 4. For each MCS value, the number of slots that make up a packet
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
68
==PAGE:75==
was varied, thereby changing the total amount of data carried in each ping message. (in
the same way as shown in Figure 4.21, like the data rate measurements).
The objective was to observe how communication latency changes by varying:
• the MCS (from 0 to 4);
• the Number of slots in a packet.
Latency was evaluated using the Round Trip Time (RTT) metric obtained from ping mes-
sages. RTT measures the time taken for a signal to go from the client to the server and
back to the client. For every MCS value a table displays, with a specific number of slots,
the total amount of bytes per ping message, payload length and RTT needed to send a
ping request and wait for a ping response. Measurements were taken as follows: for each
pair (MCS, n_slot), a ping request was sent, and the RTT was measured upon receiving
the ping response. This process was repeated three times for each pair (MCS, n_slot).
The RTT shown for each pair is the arithmetic mean of the three RTT measurements. The
following sections will present the detailed results of these experiments.
4.3.2
MCS = 0
Figure 4.29: RTT (Round Trip Time) vs. Number of Bytes per packet using MCS = 0.
4.3.3
MCS = 1
Figure 4.30: RTT (Round Trip Time) vs. Number of Bytes per packet using MCS = 1.
4.3.4
MCS = 2
Figure 4.31: RTT (Round Trip Time) vs. Number of Bytes per packet using MCS = 2.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
69
==PAGE:76==
4.3.5
MCS = 3
Figure 4.32: RTT (Round Trip Time) vs. Number of Bytes per packet using MCS = 3.
4.3.6
MCS = 4
Figure 4.33: RTT (Round Trip Time) vs. Number of Bytes per packet using MCS = 4.
4.3.7
Comparative Analysis
Figure 4.34: Comparison of RTT (msec) vs. Number of Bytes per packet for different
MCS values. Each line represents the RTT performance for a specific MCS value (0 to
4) as the number of bytes per packet increases.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
70
==PAGE:77==
An interesting observation from the latency measurements is the linear behavior exhibited
by RTT for each MCS value. The RTT increases linearly with the number of bytes per
packet, as demonstrated in Figures 4.29 through 4.33 for MCS values 0 to 4. This linear
relationship allows for a straightforward calculation of the slope (m) of the regression line
representing RTT as a function of the number of bytes per packet. The slope indicates the
rate at which RTT increases with increasing packet size, providing a measure of latency
performance.
The slope of the regression line can be calculated using the linear regression formula for
the slope (m) of a line passing through a series of points (xi, yi):
m = n(∑xy) −(∑x)(∑y)
n(∑x2) −(∑x)2
where n is the number of points. Applying this formula to the RTT data, the slopes for
each MCS value were determined as follows:
• MCS = 0: m = 0.11348459127172401
• MCS = 1: m = 0.107799174729572
• MCS = 2: m = 0.10620516293926952
• MCS = 3: m = 0.10524140409728046
• MCS = 4: m = 0.10303709946052833
These results confirm the expected trend: as the MCS value increases, the slope de-
creases. A smaller slope indicates that the same amount of data can be transmitted in
less time, thereby improving latency performance. This reduction in the slope with higher
MCS values is consistent with improved efficiency and faster data transmission capabili-
ties.
Implications of Slope Values
The positive and less-than-one nature of these slopes indicates that, for a given MCS,
larger packets are sent proportionally faster than smaller packets. For instance, with
MCS = 1, a ping message of 103 bytes corresponds to an RTT of 82 ms, whereas a ping
message of 233 bytes (more than double the size) corresponds to an RTT of 96 ms (only
a 14 ms increase, which is a 17% increase in time). This efficiency in handling larger
packets highlights the advantage of higher MCS values in optimizing data transmission
times.
Figure 4.35: Table and Bar Graphs for Maximum Latency achieved by Each MCS Value
for the Client.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
71
==PAGE:78==
Compliance with URLLC Requirements
For DECT NR+ to meet Ultra-Reliable Low Latency Communication (URLLC) require-
ments, it must ensure end-to-end low latency (<50 ms on the application layer, <1 ms
on the radio interface) [39]. In our experiments, the RTTs observed were higher than the
threshold, particularly at lower MCS values. It is important to note that the ping message
communication used in the experiments can be considered at the application layer. The
higher-than-expected RTTs suggest that while DECT NR+ performs reliably, there may be
challenges in meeting the stringent URLLC latency requirements under certain conditions.
Further considerations on the results could focus on optimizing system parameters, ex-
ploring the impact of different environmental conditions on latency, and developing ad-
vanced algorithms for dynamic MCS adaptation to achieve better latency performance.
The robustness of DECT NR+ in maintaining low latency under various scenarios should
be further investigated to ensure it meets the stringent requirements of URLLC applica-
tions.
4.4
Power Consumption
4.4.1
Experimental methodology
To assess the power consumption of devices within a DECT NR+ network, an experimen-
tal set-up was configured with three devices designated as Sink, Relay and Client/Leaf.
The network utilized the Modem Shell Application to facilitate communication between
the devices. In particular, for this experiment, the DECT NR+ Network Creation use case
(Subsection 3.4.1) was used. Apart from the three nRF9161 DKs, The Power Profiler
Kit II (in order to measure the power consumption of each device accurately, Subsection
3.1.2) was also essential for the experimental set-up.
All three devices were configured with a fixed TX Power of 13 dBm and MCS set to 0. The
devices were strategically positioned at a fixed distance to ensure reliable communication
and effective measurement of power consumption. The distances were set as follows:
• The Client/Leaf was placed 30 meters from the Relay.
• The Relay was placed 30 meters from the Sink.
• The total distance between the Client/Leaf and the Sink was 60 meters.
In this configuration, the Client and Sink exchanged messages while the Relay continu-
ously managed the forwarding of these messages. The choice of a 20-30 meter distance
between devices was based on ensuring excellent coverage performance, given the fixed
transmission power of 13 dBm. This power level was selected to strike an optimal bal-
ance between coverage and performance without leading to excessive power consump-
tion. Using a high transmission power, such as 19 dBm, could result in increased power
dissipation by the devices, which is not desirable for power-saving objectives. The 13
dBm transmission power provides a compromise that maintains good performance while
managing power consumption effectively.
The primary objective of this experiment was to observe and compare the power con-
sumption of the three devices within the DECT NR+ network. Special attention was given
to the Relay device, as it was expected to have higher power consumption compared to
the Client due to its role in continuously forwarding messages. By analyzing the power
consumption data obtained from the Power Profiler Kit II, the experiment aimed to provide
insights into the power-saving capabilities of DECT NR+ and identify any potential areas
for optimization in terms of power usage across different network roles and configurations.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
72
==PAGE:79==
4.4.2
Sink Device Power Consumption Analysis
In this section is analyzed the power consumption of the Sink device within the DECT NR+
network based on the experimental data presented in Table 4.2. This analysis covers dif-
ferent operational phases including Idle, RSSI Scanning, Sending Beacons and Channel
Scanning.
Table 4.2: Power Consumption of Sink Device in Various Operational Phases
Action
Avg. Current (mA)
Max Current (mA)
Avg. Pwr (W)
Time (s)
Charge (C)
Idle
33.0
35.5
0.165
60.00
1.98
RSSI Scanning
36.8
40.2
0.184
42.21
1.55
Sending Beacons
51.6
107.8
0.258
20.00
1.03
Channel Scanning
61.0
64.2
0.305
4.00
0.24
The Idle phase refers to the period when the device is powered on and initialized but
no data transfer occurs between devices, nor are any channel scans performed. Dur-
ing this phase, the only command executed is dect sett, which is used to configure
specific device parameters. The messages displayed in the Serial Terminal during this
phase are merely confirmations of the successful changes made by the dect sett com-
mand. In this phase, the device’s average current consumption is 33.0 mA, with occa-
sional peaks reaching 35.5 mA. These peaks correspond to the output confirmations of
parameter changes. Additionally, for the purpose of analysis, a fixed time interval of 60
seconds was arbitrarily chosen to measure the duration of this phase across all three
devices being analyzed.
The RSSI Scanning phase begins after executing the dect beacon_start command.
This phase involves scanning all available channels (from 1657 to 1677) to determine
their status (Free, Possible, or Busy). The device will then start sending beacon mes-
sages on the first channel declared as free. Each channel is scanned for 2.01 seconds
(as shown also with the RSSI scan duration per channel, Figure 4.34), resulting in a total
scanning time of approximately 42.21 seconds for all 21 channels. During this phase, the
device’s average current consumption is 36.8 mA, with a noticeable dip to 31.7 mA when
the scan results are printed to the console. The average power during this phase is 0.184
W, resulting in a charge consumption of 1.55 C.
Following the RSSI scanning, the device enters the Sending Beacons phase, still initiated
by the dect beacon_start command, where beacon messages are transmitted on the
first available free channel. The device’s current consumption exhibits peaks of up to
107.8 mA, and these peaks directly correspond to the transmission of beacon messages,
as evidenced by the 2-second interval between peaks (matching the configured beacon
interval of 2000 ms, as can be seen in Figure 4.34).
The entire phase lasts approximately 20 seconds, as set by the dect sett --b_rx_rssi_
scan_bg_interval 20 command, which determines the periodic background RSSI scan-
ning interval. After the 20-second beacon transmission period, the device resumes scan-
ning some or all transmission channels for a variable duration. In fact, as mentioned in
Chapter 2, within a DECT NR+ network nodes continuously scan frequency channels to
find the one with the least interference, even while sending beacon messages. During this
scanning period, the device’s average current consumption is approximately 51-52 mA,
with peaks reaching 62-63 mA. Following the scan, the device resumes beacon transmis-
sion for another 20 seconds, and this cycle continues. Thus, after the dect beacon_start
command is issued, considering the initial RSSI scan, the repeated beacon transmission
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
73
==PAGE:80==
phases and the variable channel scanning periods, the device demonstrates an overall
performance with an average current consumption of approximately 49.1 mA and peak
consumption around 107 mA.
Finally, the Channel Scanning phase is triggered by the dect beacon_scan command,
during which the Sink device scans the specific channel used by the Relay for beacon
transmissions in order to discover it and obtain information about it. This phase lasts
approximately 4 seconds, with the device consuming an average current of 61.0 mA and
a maximum of 64.2 mA. The average power during this phase is 0.305 W, resulting in a
total charge consumption of 0.24 C.
Following the discovery of the relay, additional commands such as dect beacon_relay
-b relay_beacon will be issued on the sink side to enable synchronization and back-
ground scanning towards the relay. However, during this phase, as well as during the
reception of periodic messages sent by the client and forwarded by the relay to the sink,
the device’s performance remains unaffected. There are no recorded changes in current
consumption compared to the one observed during the beacon transmission and channel
scanning phases.
The average power dissipation is calculated using the formula P = IV , where the nRF9161
DK is powered by a USB connector providing 5V voltage [65]. Additionally, all specified
parameter values can be found in the image below, including the Beacon interval (set to
2000 ms), RSSI scan duration per channel (set to 2010 ms), RSSI background scanning
interval (set to 20 seconds) and the conditions required for a channel to be considered
free, possible or busy based on its RSSI value.
Figure 4.36: Serial Terminal output showing the configured parameters for the sink device.
4.4.3
Relay Device Power Consumption Analysis
Table 4.3: Power Consumption of Relay Device in Various Operational Phases
Action
Avg. Current (mA)
Max Current (mA)
Avg. Pwr (W)
Time (s)
Charge (C)
Idle
32.8
35.7
0.164
60.00
1.97
Channel Scanning
44.8
48.2
0.224
4.00
0.18
RSSI Scanning
36.9
40.4
0.185
42.21
1.56
Sending Beacons
49.2
107.6
0.246
20.00
0.98
Client Connected
49.7
181.3
0.249
20.00
0.99
Forwarding to Sink
54.1
181.1
0.271
20.00
1.08
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
74
==PAGE:81==
Figure 4.37: Visualisation of the current consumption results, validating the accuracy of
manually set parameters in four different cases: (a) RSSI scan duration per channel, (b)
RSSI total scan duration, (c) Beacon interval and (d) RSSI background scanning interval
(total beacon transmission interval).
The first four phases of the relay device’s operation closely resemble those of the sink
device, with one notable difference. During the Channel Scanning phase, the relay scans
the channel used by the sink for beacon transmissions to discover and obtain information
about the sink. This scanning occurs before beacon transmission (triggered by the dect
beacon_start command) and, despite having the same 4-second duration, consumes
less current, averaging 44.8 mA and peaking at 48.2 mA. In addition to these four phases,
two new moments can be identified during the operation of the relay.
When the client connects to the relay, initiated by the dect client_connect relay_beacon
command, there is a continuous exchange of keepalive messages between the client
and the relay.
During this phase, the average current consumption is 49.7 mA, only
slightly higher than during the beacon transmission phase (49.2 mA). This indicates that
the device’s performance is minimally impacted as it now handles additional message
exchanges. However, the current peaks reach up to 181.3 mA, corresponding to the
relay sending keepalive messages to the client. The interval between these peaks is ap-
proximately 8 seconds, matching the keepalive interval set by the command dect sett
--c_keepalive_secs 8. The duration of this phase is set to 20 seconds, aligned with the
beacon transmission period.
In the final phase, the relay forwards periodic messages from the client to the sink. The
average current consumption during this phase increases to 54.1 mA, with peaks reach-
ing 182.1 mA. These peaks occur both when sending keepalive messages and when
forwarding messages to the sink.
It is noteworthy that the power required for transmitting different types of messages varies
significantly. Typically, sending a beacon message results in a current peak of around
107-108 mA, whereas sending a standard message can cause peaks of 181-182 mA.
This discrepancy can be attributed to the different structures and byte lengths of these
messages. Beacon messages are generally used for synchronization and broadcasting
network information, present at the PHY (Layer 1) and MAC (Layer 2) layers, and do not
carry user data (SDU = 0), unlike other types of messages that do.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
75
==PAGE:82==
4.4.4
Client Device Power Consumption Analysis
The power consumption results for the client device align closely with those observed for
the other two devices, the sink and the relay, as presented in Table 4.4:
Table 4.4: Power Consumption of Client Device in Various Operational Phases
Action
Avg. Current (mA)
Max Current (mA)
Avg. Pwr (W)
Time (s)
Charge (C)
Idle
32.8
35.4
0.164
60.00
1.97
Channel Scanning
44.8
48.3
0.224
4.00
0.18
Client Connected
48.6
179.0
0.243
60.00
2.92
Sending Messages
49.5
181.8
0.248
60.00
2.97
During the Channel Scanning phase, initiated by the dect beacon_scan command, the
power consumption is almost identical to that of the relay, averaging 44.8 mA with a peak
of 48.3 mA.
In the phase where the client connects to the relay, the current peaks at approximately
179 mA every 8 seconds, corresponding to the keepalive messages. This pattern is again
very similar to what was observed with the relay device. Additionally, during the message-
sending phase, the current peaks at around 182 mA, aligning with the power consumption
characteristics noted for message transmissions destined for the sink.
4.4.5
Comparative Analysis
Figure 4.38: Average current (in mA) and Power (in W) consumption of the Sink, Relay
and Client devices during the entire duration of the experiment.
In this section, we present a comparative analysis of the average current and power con-
sumption of the three devices (Sink, Relay and Client) throughout the experiment. The
experiment lasted for 10 minutes during which all the commands analyzed earlier were
executed and the devices operated as described.
Figure 4.38 includes two bar graphs. The first graph illustrates the average current con-
sumption (in mA) of the Sink, Relay and Client devices. The Sink consumed 50.7 mA,
the Relay 53.1 mA and the Client 44.7 mA. The second graph depicts the average power
consumption (in W) of the three devices, with the Sink consuming 0.25 W, the Relay 0.27
W and the Client 0.22 W.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
76
==PAGE:83==
From these graphs, it is evident that the Relay device consumes more power compared
to the Sink and Client devices. This observation aligns with our expectations due to the
Relay’s role in continuously forwarding messages, as discussed in Chapter 2 (Section
2.3 - IoT and Wearables). The higher power consumption of the Relay is justified by
its critical function in the network. The Relay not only transmits its own beacons but
also forwards messages between the Client and Sink, requiring more energy to maintain
these additional communications. This operational overhead results in increased average
power consumption, making the Relay the most energy-intensive device among the three.
Power Consumption Comparison with Other Technologies
In order to have a better understanding of the obtained results, let’s now compare the
power consumption of the DECT NR+ network with other prevalent technologies such as
Wi-Fi (IEEE 802.11), NB-IoT and LTE-M.
Wi-Fi routers, on average, consume between 5 and 20 watts of electricity, depending on
the model and usage patterns [66]. Several studies have corroborated these findings.
For instance, in [67] it was analyzed the average power consumption of three different
access points (APs) in a private network setup where one station functioned as a server
and another as a client. The power consumption recorded for the three APs was 9W,
6W and 6W respectively. In [68] it was done the same for a specific AP across different
Wi-Fi standards (b/a/g/n/ac), to determine the most energy-efficient version. The results
ranged between 3.5W and 4.3W during active usage and about 2.3W to 2.4W during idle
periods.
Although these studies present varied results, it is evident that the average power con-
sumption in Wi-Fi technology is significantly higher compared to the one in DECT NR+
network. During the experiments, the DECT NR+ devices demonstrated an idle power
consumption of approximately 0.165W and an average power consumption of around
0.2-0.3W during active operation. This substantial difference highlights the energy effi-
ciency of DECT NR+ technology, which can be attributed to various power-saving tech-
niques employed by the standard (as explained in Section 2.5.3) such as routing and re-
transmitting packets directly into the radio stack level, and autonomous dynamic power
control of transmissions. It is also fair to underline that the power-saving feature which
involves relay devices sending beacon messages to manage radio resources and inform
leaf nodes when to listen or not, is not available because it belongs to the MAC layer,
which has not yet been implemented. Consequently, in the current application, beacons
are used solely for device discovery and synchronization, without additional information
such as those related to sleep mode.
While Wi-Fi is not designed with stringent power-saving features, NB-IoT and LTE-M are
explicitly developed for power-efficient communication, meeting the needs of IoT require-
ments. These technologies are tailored for the so called ”constrained devices”, that rely
on battery power without a permanent power source. Since these sensors usually only
need to transmit small measurement of data such as temperatures or coordinates in inter-
vals rather that delivering a constant data stream, they should be able to live for as long
as possible on one battery charge. And the reason is really simple: it is time-consuming
and expensive to replace the batteries on a regular basis after only a short runtime.
NB-IoT and LTE-M leverage Power Saving Mode (PSM) and extended Discontinuous
Reception (eDRX) to achieve low power consumption. PSM puts the device into a deep
sleep state to conserve energy, while eDRX allows developers to define the intervals at
which the device switches from idle to receive mode, ensuring it remains reachable from
the outside [69].
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
77
==PAGE:84==
In [70], a deeper look in the power consumption of devices connected to NB-IoT and
LTE-M networks is presented. The study analyzed three different scenarios: network au-
thentication and actual data transfer using HTTP and MQTT application protocols. The
power consumption during idle phases was approximately 0.16-0.18W, aligning closely
with our DECT NR+ results. During network authentication, the power consumption was
0.33W for NB-IoT and 0.39W for LTE-M; for data transfer phases, instead, power con-
sumption ranged between 0.4W and 0.5W, with a peak of 0.69W for data download using
HTTP over LTE-M. Obviously, these findings confirm that also NB-IoT and LTE-M con-
sume significantly less power than traditional cellular networks.
The power consumption of DECT NR+ settles therefore in the same range as NB-IoT
and LTE-M, emerging consequentially as a highly efficient alternative, suitable for appli-
cations necessitating long battery life and continuous operation such as industrial moni-
toring, smart home devices and other IoT applications. The ability to maintain low power
consumption without compromising performance underscores the effectiveness of DECT
NR+ in various deployment scenarios.
It is noteworthy that DECT NR+ does not use any features comparable to PSM (Power
Saving Mode) or eDRX (extended Discontinuous Reception). According to Nordic Semi-
conductor, the modem firmware will be improved in the future to enter a power-saving
state if the scheduled operations have sufficiently long gaps. Therefore, while the current
power consumption performance is already impressive, it is expected to improve further.
However, it is essential to consider that once the full DECT NR+ stack, including higher
layers like the MAC, DLC and CVG, will be fully implemented, there may be an increase
in power consumption due to additional overhead. The implementation of these higher
layers introduces more complex protocols and control mechanisms that require additional
processing power. Despite this, the physical layer is already highly optimized, and future
power-saving features will likely balance out the additional consumption.
Future work could focus on exploring the full potential of the standard once the sleep
mode and other power-saving features are implemented. It will be interesting to study
in detail the power consumption of a DECT NR+ network when the entire stack is fully
available, providing a comprehensive understanding of its efficiency and performance in
various real-world scenarios.
An additional comparison of current consumption during message transmission further
highlights the differences between DECT NR+ and these other two technologies. Using
the Online Power Profiler by Nordic Semiconductor [71], it was estimated that uploading
a 10B message in an LTE-M network consumes approximately 40.8mA over 27.2ms, and
35.3mA over 956.1ms in an NB-IoT network. These measurements were taken with a
TX power of 10dBm. The substantial time difference is due to the differing data rates
of the technologies: LTE-M supports up to 300/375 kbps, while NB-IoT supports up to
30/60 kbps [72]. With a TX power of 23dBm, LTE-M consumes 67.9mA, whereas NB-
IoT remains at 35.3mA . In comparison, DECT NR+ reaches peaks of 180-181mA during
message transmission with the same data length and a TX power of 13dBm. This higher
current consumption aligns with significantly shorter transmission times, supported by
data rates reaching up to 2.3Mbps, as demonstrated in previous sections.
Overall, the comparative analysis clearly demonstrates that DECT NR+ offers an alter-
native energy-efficient solution compared to NB-IoT and LTE-M and a way more optimal
option than Wi-Fi, making it a compelling choice for modern network applications that
prioritize power efficiency and sustainability.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
78
==PAGE:85==
5
Conclusion and Future Work
This thesis has explored the capabilities and performance of Device-to-Device (D2D) com-
munication within the context of 5G and beyond, focusing on the DECT NR+ standard.
Developed by the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), DECT NR+
is designed to meet the stringent requirements of 5G technology. Through a series of
detailed experiments and analyses, this study provides valuable insights into the practical
applications and limitations of DECT NR+ in real-world scenarios.
5.1
Key Findings
1. Distance and Coverage: The performance analysis of DECT NR+ in both indoor
and outdoor environments revealed a higher efficiency indoors, that can be at-
tributed to factors as controlled conditions, multipath propagation and signal direc-
tionality. The Packet Success Rate (PSR) was excellent up to a critical distance,
beyond which it sharply declined. This drop can also be likely related to packet
length, suggesting that longer packets increase the likelihood of bit errors, thereby
reducing PSR. The maximum observed range was 220 meters, which is impressive
but still less compared to other IoT technologies like LTE-M or NB-IoT. Nordic Semi-
conductor’s acknowledgment of issues with their nRF9161 Development Kit results
in a range significantly less than the one expected (around 600m), but also sug-
gests that there is room for improvement in radio sensitivity, which could potentially
extend the effective range of DECT NR+.
2. Data Rate Performance: Higher Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS) values
were shown to improve data rates significantly. The study found no degradation in
data reception accuracy with increased MCS values, indicating reliable data trans-
mission. The highest data rate observed was 2.2 Mbps, short of the theoretical
3.4 Mbps supported by DECT NR+. Factors such as hardware limitations and en-
vironmental conditions likely contributed to this discrepancy. Despite this, DECT
NR+ still offers robust performance, making it a competitive choice for various IoT
applications.
3. Latency Performance: The analysis of latency revealed a linear relationship be-
tween Round Trip Time (RTT) and packet size, with higher MCS values leading to
better latency performance. However, the observed RTTs exceeded the stringent
requirements of Ultra-Reliable Low Latency Communication (URLLC), particularly at
lower MCS values. This suggests that while DECT NR+ is reliable, meeting URLLC
standards may require further optimization. Investigating system parameters, en-
vironmental impacts and dynamic MCS adaptation could help reduce latency and
ensure compliance with URLLC requirements.
4. Power Consumption Performance: The analysis indicated that the Relay device
consumes more power than the Sink and Client devices due to its role in contin-
uously forwarding messages. When compared with other technologies like Wi-Fi,
DECT NR+ demonstrated significantly lower power consumption, especially during
idle and active operation. The similarity with NB-IoT and LTE-M showcases DECT
NR+ as a highly efficient alternative for applications requiring long battery life and
continuous operation. Future implementations of the complete DECT NR+ stack
and additional power-saving features are expected to enhance this efficiency fur-
ther, making it an even more attractive option for various IoT applications.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
79
==PAGE:86==
5.2
Future Work
Building on the findings of this thesis, several areas for future research and development
are suggested to enhance DECT NR+ communication technologies:
1. Packet Length Analysis: One possible reason for performance drops at specific
distances could be related to the length of the packets being transmitted. In this ex-
periment, each packet contained 32 bits (4 bytes), represented by a single uint32_t
variable. For future research, it would be interesting to analyze how performance
varies with different packet lengths. As the amount of data (and thus the number of
bits) transmitted increases, the likelihood of encountering a bit error also increases,
potentially degrading the Packet Success Rate (PSR). Additionally, exploring how
different packet lengths impact transmission efficiency and reliability could provide
deeper insights into optimizing DECT NR+ for various applications.
2. Maximum Indoor Coverage Exploration: Another area worth investigating is the
maximum indoor coverage supported by the DECT NR+ standard. If an indoor en-
vironment can be found that meets the requirements of the experiment conducted,
testing the coverage beyond 100 meters would be valuable. Alternatively, if direct
testing is not feasible, estimating the maximum coverage using more available data
could provide insights into the potential range of DECT NR+. This would help in a
better understanding of the limits and capabilities of the technology.
3. Dynamic MCS Adaptation: Developing algorithms for dynamic MCS adaptation
based on real-time environmental conditions and communication quality could op-
timize performance. This would allow the system to balance data rate and reliabil-
ity more effectively, while maintaining an acceptable error rate and communication
range.
4. Extended Range Testing: Conducting more extensive range testing in diverse real-
world scenarios, including urban, suburban, rural environments and areas with sig-
nificant physical obstructions, would provide a more comprehensive understanding
of DECT NR+’s capabilities and limitations. This could lead to more robust deploy-
ment strategies and improved performance in different settings.
5. Compliance with URLLC Requirements: To meet the stringent URLLC require-
ments, further optimization of system parameters and exploration of advanced al-
gorithms for latency reduction are necessary. Ensuring DECT NR+ can maintain
low latency under various scenarios will be crucial for its application in ultra-reliable
and low-latency communication environments.
6. Implementation of Power-Saving Features: DECT NR+ currently lacks power-
saving features like PSM (Power Saving Mode) and eDRX (extended Discontinu-
ous Reception). Nordic Semiconductor plans to enhance the modem firmware to
enable power-saving states during idle periods. Although the current power con-
sumption is already low, these improvements are expected to further enhance ef-
ficiency. However, the full implementation of the DECT NR+ stack may increase
power consumption due to additional overhead. Future research should investigate
the detailed power consumption of a fully implemented DECT NR+ network, focus-
ing on the impact of the complete stack on energy efficiency and performance in
various scenarios.
By addressing these areas, future research can significantly enhance the performance,
reliability, and applicability of DECT NR+ communication technologies, ensuring they re-
main competitive in the evolving landscape of 5G and beyond.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
80
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1]
M. A. Rossi. “The advent of 5G and the non-discrimination principle”. In: Telecom-
munications Policy 46 (2022), p. 102279. DOI: 10.1016/j.telpol.2021.102279.
[2]
EMnify. What Is 5G? Everything You Need to Know. (accessed: 10.06.2024). 2024.
URL: https://www.emnify.com/iot-glossary/5g.
[3]
Celona. 5G Bands Explained: How They Work & Why They Matter. (accessed:
10.06.2024). 2024. URL: https://www.celona.io/5g-lan/5g-bands.
[4]
Arrow Electronics. 5G frequency bands: 3 primary 5G bands and when to use them.
(accessed: 10.06.2024). 2024. URL: https://www.arrow.com/en/research- and-
events/articles/5g-frequency-bands-explained.
[5]
Celona. 4G versus 5G – A paradigm shift in mobile communications? (accessed:
10.06.2024). 2024. URL: https://www.emnify.com/blog/4g-versus-5g-connectivity.
[6]
F. Rinaldi, A. Raschella, and S. Pizzi. “5G NR system design: a concise survey of
key features and capabilities”. In: Wireless Networks 27 (2021), pp. 5173–5188.
[7]
O. Muhammad et al. “A Comprehensive Review of D2D Communication in 5G and
B5G Networks”. In: LC International Journal of STEM 4.3 (Sept. 2023), pp. 1–23.
[8]
D. P. Hadyanto, D. S. Novariana, and A. Wulandari. “Device-to-Device Communi-
cation in 5G”. In: Advances in Engineering Research. Vol. 209. 2021, pp. 651–654.
[9]
X. Lin et al. “Modeling, Analysis and Optimization of Multicast Device-to-Device
Transmissions”. In: submitted to IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. (2013). arXiv: arXiv:
1309.1518 [cs.NI].
[10]
X. Lin et al. “An Overview of 3GPP Device-to-Device Proximity Services”. In: IEEE
Communications Magazine 52.4 (2014), pp. 40–48.
[11]
X. Lin, J. G. Andrews, and A. Ghosh. “A comprehensive framework for device-
to-device communications in cellular networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1305.4219
(2013).
[12]
U. N. Kar and D. K. Sanyal. “A Critical Review of 3GPP Standardization of Device-
to-Device Communication in Cellular Networks”. In: SN Computer Science 1.37
(2020), pp. 1–18. DOI: 10.1007/s42979-019-0045-5.
[13]
R. Yin et al. “Decentralized Radio Resource Adaptation in D2D-U Networks”. In:
IEEE Internet of Things Journal 7.18 (2020), pp. 1–14. DOI: 10.1109/JIOT.2020.
3016019.
[14]
T. Doumi et al. “LTE for public safety networks”. In: IEEE Commun Mag 51.2 (2013),
pp. 106–112.
[15]
M. Höyhtyä, O. Apilo, and M. Lasanen. “Review of Latest Advances in 3GPP Stan-
dardization: D2D Communication in 5G Systems and Its Energy Consumption Mod-
els”. In: Future Internet 10.1 (2018), p. 3.
[16]
S. Y. Lien et al. “3GPP device-to-device communications for beyond 4G cellular
networks”. In: IEEE Commun Mag 54.3 (2016), pp. 29–35.
[17]
PhD Direction. Device-to-Device Communication in 5G Matlab. (accessed: 10.06.2024).
2024. URL: https://www.phddirection.com/device-to-device-communication-in-5g-
matlab/.
[18]
MathWorks. Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication for Public Safety in LTE. (ac-
cessed: 10.06.2024). 2016. URL: https : / / www . mathworks . com / content / dam /
mathworks/tag-team/Objects/d/90538_95058v00_LTE_Application_Note.pdf.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
81
==PAGE:88==
[19]
ETSI 3GPP. Universal mobile telecommunications system (UMTS); LTE; proximity-
based services (ProSe); (Release 13) Stage 2. Tech. rep. TS 23.303 V 13.3.0.
3GPP, 2016.
[20]
L. Oscar et al. D6.2.2 standardization and communication activity report (release
b) WP 6-Dissemination, standardization, and exploitation. Tech. rep. (accessed:
15.06.2024). FP7, 2015. URL: http://www.fp7moto.eu/wp-content/uploads/2015/
12/D6.2.2..pdf.
[21]
K. J. Zou et al. “Proximity discovery for device-to-device communications over a
cellular network”. In: IEEE Commun Mag 52.6 (2014), pp. 98–107.
[22]
3GPP. Overview of 3GPP Release 12 V0.2.0 (2015-09). Tech. rep. 3GPP, 2015.
[23]
3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP). RP-170295 Study on Further Enhance-
ments to LTE Device to Device, UE to Network Relays for IoT and Wearables. Re-
port. 3GPP, 2017. URL: http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/tsg_ran/TSG_RAN/TSGR_75/
Docs/RP-170295.zip (visited on 06/14/2024).
[24]
ETSI 3GPP. Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); User Equipment
(UE) radio transmission and reception; (Release 14), TS 36.102 V14.5.0. Tech. rep.
2017.
[25]
Alexander Pyattaev et al. “3GPP LTE Traffic Offloading onto WiFi Direct”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Wireless Communications and Networking Conference Workshops
(WCNCW), 2013 IEEE. IEEE. 2013, pp. 135–140.
[26]
Shahid Mumtaz and Jonathan Rodriguez. Smart Device to Smart Device Commu-
nication. Berlin: Springer, 2014.
[27]
Fiza Jameel et al. “A Survey of Device-to-Device Communications: Research Is-
sues and Challenges”. In: IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 20.3 (2018),
pp. 2133–2168.
[28]
Shahid Mumtaz, Kazi Mohammad Shahidul Huq, and Jonathan Rodriguez. “Direct
Mobile-to-Mobile Communication: Paradigm for 5G”. In: IEEE Wireless Communi-
cations 21.5 (2014), pp. 14–23.
[29]
Preeti Gandotra and Rakesh Kumar Jha. “Device-to-Device Communication in Cel-
lular Networks: A Survey”. In: Journal of Network and Computer Applications 71
(2016), pp. 99–117.
[30]
Jaganathan Logeshwaran, Nallasamy Shanmugasundaram, and Jaime Lloret. “Energy-
efficient resource allocation model for device-to-device communication in 5G wire-
less personal area networks”. In: International Journal of Communication Systems
36.13 (2023). R E S E A R CH AR T I C L E, e5524. DOI: 10.1002/dac.5524. URL:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/dac.5524.
[31]
Michael Haus et al. “Security and Privacy in Device-to-Device (D2D) Communica-
tion: A Review”. In: IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 19.2 (2017), pp. 1054–
1079.
[32]
Dominique Bonte, Michael Larner, and Adhish Luitel. DECT-2020 NR: A New 5G
IoT Standard. Tech. rep. ABI Research, 2021.
[33]
Nordic Semiconductor ASA. What Is DECT-2020 New Radio (NR) and How Big
a Deal Is It? (accessed: 24.06.2024). 2020. URL: https://blog.nordicsemi.com/
getconnected/what-is-dect-2020-new-radio-nr-and-how-big-a-deal-is-it.
[34]
ETSI. DECT-2020 New Radio (NR); Part 1: Overview; Release 1. Tech. rep. TS
103 636-1 V1.1.1. European Telecommunications Standards Institute, 2024. URL:
https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_ts/103600_103699/10363601/01.01.01_60/ts_
10363601v010101p.pdf.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
82
==PAGE:89==
[35]
M. D. Pérez-Guirao, T. Weisshaupt, and A. Wilzeck. DECT NR+: Unveiling the Es-
sentials of a New Non-Cellular 5G Standard for Verticals. Tech. rep. Ostfalia HAW,
Wirepas Oy, Sennheiser electronic GmbH & Co. KG, 2022.
[36]
5G Technology World. The First Non-Cellular 5G Standard: DECT NR. (accessed:
23.06.2024). 2024. URL: https://www.5gtechnologyworld.com/the-first-non-cellular-
5g-standard-dect-nr/.
[37]
ETSI. DECT. (accessed: 23.06.2024). 2024. URL: https://www.etsi.org/technologies/
dect.
[38]
Samson Technologies. Exploring the Benefits of the 1.9 GHz Band. (accessed:
23.06.2024). 2024. URL: https: // samsontech. com /blog /exploring - the - benefits -
of-the-19-ghz-band/.
[39]
Nordic Semiconductor. DECT NR: A Technical Dive into Non-Cellular 5G. (accessed:
24.06.2024). 2024. URL: https://devzone.nordicsemi.com/nordic/nordic-blog/b/
blog/posts/dect-nr-a-technical-dive-into-non-cellular-5g#mcetoc_1h19479t81.
[40]
Nordic Semiconductor. Introduction to DECT NR+. Nordic Tech Webinar, 15 June
2022. 2022. URL: https://devzone.nordicsemi.com/cfs-file/__key/communityserver-
discussions-components-files/4/Introduction-to-DECT-NR_2B00_.pdf.
[41]
Nordic Semiconductor. DECT NR. (accessed: 10.06.2024). 2024. URL: https://
www.nordicsemi.com/Products/Wireless/DECT-NR?.
[42]
ETSI. DECT-2020 New Radio (NR); Part 3: Physical layer; Release 1. Technical
Specification ETSI TS 103 636-3 V1.3.1 (2021-12). Sophia Antipolis Cedex, France:
ETSI, 2021. URL: https://www.etsi.org/standards-search.
[43]
ETSI. DECT-2020 New Radio (NR): Part 4 - MAC Layer. Version V1.4.1. Technical
Specification. 2023.
[44]
Nordic Semiconductor. Understanding DECT NR+: The first non-cellular 5G stan-
dard. Nordic Tech Webinar, 3 May 2023. 2023. URL: https://devzone.nordicsemi.
com/cfs-file/__key/communityserver-discussions-components-files/4/Understanding-
DECT-NR_2B00_-webinar.pdf.
[45]
ETSI. DECT-2020 New Radio (NR): Part 5 - DLC and Convergence Layers. Ver-
sion V1.4.1. Technical Specification. 2023.
[46]
DECT. Introduction to the standard. Webinar. 2023. URL: https://www.dect.org/
userfiles/Public/DF_DECT%20NRplus.pdf.
[47]
Nordic Semiconductor. nRF9161 DK User Guide. (accessed: 09.07.2024). 2024.
URL: https://docs.nordicsemi.com/bundle/ug_nrf9161_dk/page/UG/nrf91_DK/
intro.html.
[48]
Nordic Semiconductor. nRF9161 Product Information. (accessed: 09.07.2024). 2024.
URL: https://www.nordicsemi.com/Products/nRF9161.
[49]
Nordic Semiconductor. nRF9161 Documentation - Block Diagram. (accessed: 09.07.2024).
2024. URL: https://docs.nordicsemi.com/bundle/ps_nrf9161/page/blockdiagram.
html.
[50]
Nordic Semiconductor. DECT Page for nRF9161. (accessed: 09.07.2024). 2024.
URL: https://docs.nordicsemi.com/bundle/ps_nrf9161/page/dect.html.
[51]
Nordic Semiconductor. PPK User Guide Introduction. (accessed: 09.07.2024). 2024.
URL: https://docs.nordicsemi.com/bundle/ug_ppk2/page/UG/ppk/PPK_user_
guide_Intro.html.
[52]
Nordic Semiconductor ASA. PPK User Guide - Quick Start. (accessed: 24.06.2024).
2024. URL: https://docs.nordicsemi.com/bundle/ug_ppk2/page/UG/ppk/PPK_
user_guide_Quick_start.html.
[53]
Nordic Semiconductor. nRF Connect SDK. (accessed: 09.07.2024). 2024. URL:
https : / / www . nordicsemi . com / Products / Development - software / nRF - Connect -
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
83
==PAGE:90==
SDK?utm_term=sdk%20for%20matter&utm_campaign=M_ALL_GE_US&utm_
source=adwords&utm_medium=ppc&hsa_tgt=kwd- 1944774636920&hsa_grp=
144720084600&hsa_src=g&hsa_net=adwords&hsa_mt=b&hsa_ver=3&hsa_ad=
680036204613&hsa_acc=1116845495&hsa_kw=sdk%20for%20matter&hsa_cam=
18545141408&gad_source=1&gclid=Cj0KCQjwv7O0BhDwARIsAC0sjWMf7RJnaci5kgd6IAiPu9zzcJtV
62p7d_cXVPHL_JxJxJ2caAhb1EALw_wcB.
[54]
Nordic Semiconductor. Lesson 1 - nRF91 Series SiP. (accessed: 09.07.2024). 2024.
URL: https://academy.nordicsemi.com/courses/cellular-iot-fundamentals/lessons/
lesson-1-cellular-fundamentals/topic/lesson-1-nrf91-series-sip/.
[55]
Nordic Semiconductor. nRF Connect for Visual Studio Code. (accessed: 10.07.2024).
2024. URL: https://docs.nordicsemi.com/bundle/nrf-connect-vscode/page/index.
html.
[56]
Nordic Semiconductor. nRF Connect Serial Terminal. (accessed: 09.07.2024). 2024.
URL: https://docs.nordicsemi.com/bundle/nrf-connect-serial-terminal/page/index.
html.
[57]
Nordic Semiconductor. nRF Modem: DECT PHY. (accessed: 09.07.2024). 2024.
URL: https://docs.nordicsemi.com/bundle/ncs-latest/page/nrfxlib/nrf_modem/doc/
dectphy.html.
[58]
Nordic Semiconductor. Logger Module. (accessed: 09.07.2024). 2024. URL: https:
//academy.nordicsemi.com/courses/nrf-connect-sdk-fundamentals/lessons/lesson-3-
printing-messages-to-console-and-logging/topic/logger-module/.
[59]
Google Maps. Nørgaards Have. (accessed: 13.07.2024). 2024. URL: https://maps.
app.goo.gl/4R4DYo4niZcxNYcH7.
[60]
Google Maps. Nørgaards Have. (accessed: 13.07.2024). 2024. URL: https://maps.
app.goo.gl/wrem4JzeDNrfJPCy5.
[61]
Life Wire. What Is the Range of a Typical Wi-Fi Network? (accessed: 14.07.2024).
2024. URL: https://www.lifewire.com/range-of-typical-wifi-network-816564#:~:text=
A%20general%20rule%20of%20thumb,one%2Dthird%20of%20these%20distances..
[62]
AWS. LTE-M. (accessed: 14.07.2024). 2024. URL: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/
whitepapers/latest/implementing-lpwan-solutions-with-aws/lte-m.html#:~:text=NB%
2DIoT%20devices.-,Range%20and%20coverage,10%20km%20in%20rural%20areas..
[63]
AWS. NB-IoT. (accessed: 14.07.2024). 2024. URL: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/
whitepapers/latest/implementing-lpwan-solutions-with-aws/nb-iot.html#:~:text=or%
20cell%20tower.-,Range%20and%20coverage,NB%2DIoT%20supports%20indoor%
20coverage..
[64]
Nordic Semiconductor. Differences between DECT and DECT NR+. (accessed:
27.07.2024). 2024. URL: https://docs.nordicsemi.com/bundle/ncs- latest/page/
nrf/protocols/dect/index.html#differences_between_dect_and_dect_nr.
[65]
Nordic Semiconductor. Power supply. (accessed: 27.07.2024). 2024. URL: https:
//docs.nordicsemi.com/bundle/ug_nrf9161_dk/page/UG/nrf91_DK/hw_description/
nrf9161_power_supply.html.
[66]
energysage. How many watts does a wifi router use? (accessed: 28.07.2024). 2023.
URL: https://www.energysage.com/electricity/house-watts/how-many-watts-does-a-
wi-fi-router-use/.
[67]
Anthony Murabito. A Comparison of Efficiency, Throughput, and Energy Require-
ments of Wireless Access Points. Tech. rep. (accessed: 28.07.2024). University of
New Hampshire InterOperability Laboratory, 2009.
[68]
Gunnar P. Noordbruis. Energy efficient WLAN using WiFi standards b/a/g/n/ac on an
Archer C7 AC1750 access point. Bachelor thesis. First supervisor/assessor: dr. B.E.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
84
==PAGE:91==
van Gastel. Second assessor: prof. dr. M.C.J.D. van Eekelen. Computing Science:
Radboud University, June 2020.
[69]
1NCE. PSM and eDRX. (accessed: 28.07.2024). 2024. URL: https://1nce.com/en-
us/resources/news/blog/psm-and-edrx.
[70]
Viktoria Vomhoff et al. “NB-IoT vs. LTE-M: Measurement Study of the Energy Con-
sumption of LPWAN Technologies”. In: Second International Workshop on Green
and Sustainable Networking (GreenNet), IEEE ICC 2023. IEEE. IEEE, 2023, pp. 403–
408. DOI: 10.1109/ICCWKSHO57.2023.10283595.
[71]
Nordic Semiconductor. Online Power Profiler for LTE. (accessed: 28.07.2024). 2024.
URL: https://devzone.nordicsemi.com/power/w/opp/3/online-power-profiler-for-lte.
[72]
Nordic Semiconductor. LTE-M and NB-IoT. (accessed: 28.07.2024). 2024. URL:
https://academy.nordicsemi.com/courses/cellular-iot-fundamentals/lessons/lesson-1-
cellular-fundamentals/topic/lesson-1-lte-m-and-nb-iot/.
Exploring Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication in Cellular Technology: 5G and Beyond
85
==PAGE:92==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads Bygning 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://electro.dtu.dk/
