==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
A Data Annotation Tool to Support Analy-
sis of Self-Tracking Data
Vivien Váradi (s222737)
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract (English)
With more and more people performing some form of self-tracking for their personal
benefit, new user needs emerge continuously. Visualizing the data is often not enough,
and further support is desired in the form of extra information attached to the visu-
alizations.
The goal of this thesis is to develop a prototype that enables users to add an-
notations to their self-tracking data.
The prototype should support the creation,
persistence and display of annotations to facilitate self-reflection and offer new in-
sights. Furthermore, it should also explore other functionalities that become possible
with the use of annotations, such as filtering and comparison of custom time windows.
The developed prototype supports two types of annotations with the ability to
specify a custom text. This text can be used to signify an event that took place in the
user’s life, or to mark data for exclusion. The generated annotations can be saved to
the user’s computer and loaded back into the prototype, where new annotations can
be appended. The annotations are visualized next to the data to provide a convenient
overview, but the user also has the option of comparing different annotations and the
data within them.
The development was conducted in increments, during which one or two weeks of
prototyping was followed by a review session, where the progress was evaluated and
the direction adjusted. A comprehensive user evaluation was also planned to identify
possible areas for improvement and usability concerns.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract (Danish)
Med flere og flere mennesker, der foretager en form for self-tracking til egen fordel,
opstår der løbende nye brugerbehov. At visualisere dataene er ofte ikke tilstrækkeligt
og yderligere støtte i form af ekstra information knyttet til visualiseringerne kan være
nyttige.
Målet med denne afhandling er at udvikle en prototype, der gør det muligt for
brugerne at tilføje annoteringer til deres self-tracking data. Prototypen skal under-
støtte oprettelse, vedligeholdelse og visning af annoteringer for at lette selvreflek-
sion og tilbyde nye indsigter. Desuden skal den også udforske anden funktionalitet,
der bliver mulige med brugen af annoteringer, såsom filtrering og sammenligning i
brugerdefinerede tidsvinduer.
Den udviklede prototype understøtter to typer annoteringer med mulighed for at
angive en brugerdefineret tekst. Denne tekst kan bruges til at angive en begivenhed,
der fandt sted i brugerens liv, eller til at markere data for eksklusion. De genererede
annoteringer kan gemmes på brugerens computer og genindlæses i prototypen, hvor
nye annotationer kan tilføjes. Annoteringerne visualiseres ved siden af dataene for
at give et praktisk overblik, men brugeren har også mulighed for at sammenligne
forskellige annoteringer og dataene knyttet hertil.
Udviklingen blev gennemført i trin, hvor én eller to ugers prototyping blev efter-
fulgt af et review, hvor fremskridtene blev evalueret og retningen blev justeret. En
omfattende brugerevaluering var også planlagt for at identificere mulige forbedring-
sområder og uhensigtsmæssigheder knyttet til brugervenligheden.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com- puter
Science at The Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in fulfilment of the require-
ments for acquiring an M.Sc. in engineering. It corresponds to 30 ECTS points and
was started on the 22nd January 2024 and delivered on the 10th August 2024.
Kongens Lyngby, August 10, 2024
Vivien Váradi (s222737)
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like thank my supervisor, Jakob Eg Larsen for all of the invaluable help
he provided throughout this project.
His guidance during our countless meetings
and in-between helped shape the thesis, and I would not have gotten here without
him challenging my ideas and giving insights from a more experienced perspective.
Additionally, I appreciate his generosity in lending me a One Button Tracker, which
I could use to perform my own tracking and create test data for the project.
I must also express my gratitude to Thomas Blomseth Christiansen and the four
members of the Quantified Self community who kindly agreed to take part in a work-
shop, significantly shaping the direction of the project and providing feedback, based
on which we could set up the priority list for features and make sure that my explo-
ration is carried out in a direction is actually desired and will help people.
Lastly, I would like to thank my boyfriend for proofreading this thesis, as well as
supporting me throughout the entire journey.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract (English)
i
Abstract (Danish)
ii
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Goal of this Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Report Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
4
2.1
Annotating Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Workshop
7
3.1
Original Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Workshop Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Analysis
10
4.1
Personal Informatics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.2
One Button Tracker
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.3
Annotations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3.1
What is an Annotation? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3.2
What Makes Sense?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5
Experiment
18
5.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.3
Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:8==
Contents
vi
6
Design
21
6.1
Constructing Annotations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.1.1
Time Formatting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.1.2
Single Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.1.3
Time Frame Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.1.4
File Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
Displaying Annotations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.2.1
Line View . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2.2
Calendar View . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.2.3
Exclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.3
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7
Implementation
38
7.1
Local-first principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.2
Observable
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.3
Markwhen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
8
Evaluation
43
8.1
Initial Meeting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8.2
Trial Period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8.3
Follow-Up Meeting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
9
Discussion
45
9.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
10 Conclusion
48
A Workshop Notes
49
Bibliography
51
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The quest for self-knowledge is as old as humanity itself, rooted deeply in our desire
to understand and improve our lives. From the earliest days of philosophy, ancient
thinkers pondered the nature of self and consciousness.
As centuries passed, the pursuit of self-knowledge evolved from philosophical in-
quiries into more systematic approaches, and the rise of psychological research brought
empirical methods to the study of self-knowledge. While these were generally con-
ducted within an academic or clinical context, tools like questionnaires, surveys and
introspective methods also enabled individuals to explore their thoughts, emotions
and behaviors with greater precision.
Then the digital revolution arrived and transformed the landscape dramatically.
With the spread of smart devices and wearable technology, individuals now have un-
precedented access to tools that collect, analyze and visualize personal data. Smart-
phones, fitness trackers, smartwatches and various health apps provide a continuous
stream of data on physical activity, sleep patterns, heart rate and even mental well-
being.
So it is not a surprise, that today millions of people worldwide engage in
self-tracking, utilizing these tools to gain insights into their lives and make informed
decisions.
All the opportunities provided by technological advancements facilitated the for-
mation of ’Quantified Self’ - a movement by and for people interested in using tech-
nology to track and quantify various aspects of their daily lives.1 This tracking is
done to gain insights into personal behavior, health and performance, and ultimately
to improve these aspects of life.
However, the collected personal data might be relevant for purposes other than
individual assessment. Scientific research, for example, could greatly benefit from
having access to precise, detailed data on participants. This is something that leaders
in Quantified Self have assisted with, collaborating with scientists to advance research
by providing data.
That is how a novel self-tracking device named One Button Tracker (OBT) was
born. It is a small, discreet 3D-printed brick with a single button, accompanied by a
visualization prototype, which simplifies data collection and gives complete control to
the user over the data. The user can record personal data in the form of observations
by pressing the button on the device, and later transfer that data onto their computer
and view it in the web prototype. (See more in Chapter 4.)
1https://quantifiedself.com/
==PAGE:10==
1.1 Problem
2
After that it didn’t take long to realize the potential in personal data in a clin-
ical or health-related setting. As it has been shown before, our memories are often
unreliable, and there is no exception when it comes to self-reporting symptoms, be it
a physical or a mental illness. Having continuously recorded data makes it possible
to get a clearer picture about the patients symptoms[LEC17] while eliminating recall
bias[Are+21]. Furthermore, the process of self-tracking increases awareness about the
tracked phenomenon, providing an opportunity for easier behavioral change[Bel+22].
This could enable more eﬀicient and precise diagnostics and care within healthcare,
but could enhance the collaboration with for example a personal trainer as well.
1.1
Problem
Data collection is only the beginning of the journey toward self-knowledge. Visualiza-
tion tools play a crucial role in gaining insights, allowing individuals to see patterns,
trends, and correlations that might otherwise go unnoticed.
Visualizations trans-
form raw data into an accessible format, highlighting key aspects of personal metrics
such as health, fitness, and productivity, thereby enabling users to make informed
decisions.
Beyond visualizations, expanding data with contextual information can further
enhance its value.
Annotations, notes, and qualitative observations add depth to
quantitative metrics, enabling a more comprehensive understanding of the data. Ac-
cording to Choe et al. [CLS15], annotations help users interpret data by providing a
narrative or context that bridges the gap between abstract numbers and personal ex-
periences. This additional layer of information supports users in drawing meaningful
conclusions and fostering self-reflection.
Despite the value it can bring to data analysis, annotations remain a challenging
subject to navigate. The versatile nature of personal data and the unique needs of
individual users make it diﬀicult to design a one-size-fits-all annotation tool. Users
may seek to annotate data for various reasons, such as marking significant life events,
excluding anomalies, or highlighting areas of interest.
This diversity necessitates
flexible annotation systems that can accommodate different user requirements.
Research on personal data annotation is limited, and existing tools are relatively
scarce. Lupton [Lup20] highlights that while self-tracking technologies are widespread,
there is a significant gap in tools that allow users to effectively annotate and contex-
tualize their data. This gap presents an opportunity for exploration and innovation
in developing annotation systems that are user-friendly and adaptable to individual
needs.
1.2
Goal of this Thesis
The main goal of this thesis is to investigate the challenges and opportunities associ-
ated with the annotation of personal data within a self-tracking system. This consists
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Report Structure
3
of the design and implementation of various possible solutions and the discussion of
their advantages and disadvantages, but does not necessarily include a decision on
which one is the ’best’.
In this thesis, I will describe the development of a prototype for web platform,
which demonstrates ways to improve OBT’s existing interface and to extend its func-
tionalities with the possibility of data annotations. The main area of the exploration
is labeling individual observations or time windows within the tool and providing
users with a way to save it and then load it back the next time they use the visual-
ization prototype. Furthermore, this labeling is then used for the realization of data
exclusion as well, enabling the removal of incorrectly recorded data. And finally, at-
tempts are made at implementing comparison based on labels to provide more insight
into how different events during the day-to-day life influence the tracked phenomena.
The target audience includes individuals interested in learning more about them-
selves as well as experienced self-trackers with months or possibly years of data, such
as members of the Quantified Self community. Moreover, as mentioned previously,
health professionals could also benefit from having access to patients’ data, and ex-
tended with annotations it could provide a good starting point for diagnosis.
1.3
Report Structure
The thesis is organized into several chapters, each detailing a different aspect of the
project. It starts with Chapter 1, where the background and motivation behind the
project are explained and the goals are described.
Then Chapter 2 discusses the
related works and current knowledge of the field within personal data visualization
and annotation.
After these introductory chapters comes Chapter 3, where the workshop held
at the beginning is described in detail from the setup to the results that shaped
the direction of the project. Then Chapter 4 examines the theoretical background
related to personal informatics and self-tracking, and dives deeper into the nuances of
annotation. Chapter 5 details the experiment I conducted at the start for the purpose
of data collection, explaining the participants, methodology and findings.
The design is reviewed in Chapter 6, where screenshots are included of the devel-
oped visualizations and some low-fidelity prototypes, along with thorough explana-
tions of design questions and decisions. Chapter 7 contains implementation details,
introducing the frameworks and principles behind the project and the solution, then
a user evaluation was planned in Chapter 8 to assess the usability of the prototype.
The results of the project are evaluated in Chapter 9, along with details of possible
future developments, and it is followed by the conclusion in Chapter 10.
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in enhancing visualizations and
adding annotations for self-tracked personal data. This interest is due to the potential
of visualizations to transform raw data into meaningful insights that can facilitate
personal reflection, motivation, and behavior change.
But in order to create useful graphics for users, we need designs that support users’
preferences and motivation. Research by Huang explores the effects of different data
visualizations on exercise motivation in self-tracking applications, providing design
dimensions and suggestions for creating engaging user experiences[Hua+15][Hua22].
Similarly, Alrehiely et al. evaluated various visualization designs for personal health
data to understand how these designs impact users’ performance and preferences
when interacting with their self-tracked data[AEB18].
Choe et al.
explored how
Quantified-Selfers use visualizations and annotations to gain insights from their per-
sonal data. Their study identified various types of insights that users gained, such as
trends, comparisons, and correlations, and highlighted the role of visual annotations
in enhancing self-reflection and communication of insights[CLS15].
2.1
Annotating Data
A few theses have explored personal data visualizations, and here a few have been
selected, which address adding contextual data or annotations. Here we will discuss
their main findings and how they relate to my work.
Frølich [Frø18] wrote a thesis on the visualization of personal data time series
and attempted to include contextual data in some of developed the graphs.
He
experimented with adding quantitative and qualitative data to the visualizations,
such as pollen count or location data taken from other sources.
These aided the
discovery of patterns and correlations in the data, but it is not a flexible enough
solution for our problem, as it limits the additional data to these two categories.
Jónsson [Jón19] developed (among others) a calendar view depicting the amount
of self-tracking observations in a given hour. This graph supports adding annotations
by double-clicking on a cell. Then a pop-up opens as shown on Figure 2.1 where the
user can write into the text field and even invalidate any observations made in that
hour.
This is a flexible solution which allows users to add whatever notes they want to
the data, even enabling the exclusion of observations. However, it is not a complete
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Annotating Data
5
solution to the problems addressed in this paper, as the annotated time frame is
limited to a single hour, so there is no way to conveniently annotate multiple hours
or even days worth of data.
Raab [Raa20] experimented with a tablet-based solution, where the user could
make selections on a calendar view with the help of a stylus. The developed solution
supports multiple types of selections and it is highly flexible, even allowing drawing
shapes on the calendar (Figure 2.2).
This development produced promising results and solved many of the flexibility
issues from previously, but as the figure shows, it is similar in the sense that the cells
also contain an hour of data each, so it does not provide an opportunity to record
smaller time frames than that.
Finally, Olsen [Ols23] also made an attempt at including an annotation possibility
in her prototype. This solution is a bit different than the previous ones in the sense
that here the user has to select an area on the bar chart and can add a mood depicted
by an emoji and optional additional notes to it.
One aspect that is common among the above listed theses is that they all developed
a web-based independent solution, which means that opportunities within Observable
notebooks still remained unexplored.
Figure 2.1: Jónsson’s solution for annotation support on a calendar view. The cells
in the calendar represent an hour in a specific day, and clicking on them
brings up the pop-up shown.
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Annotating Data
6
Figure 2.2: Raab’s calendar view in draw mode, where the user can perform gestures
to select times for annotations. The colors correspond to predefined
categories.
Figure 2.3: Olsen’s solution for annotating data. The user can click on an area on
the graph, choose a emoji and optionally add notes to that particular
area.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 3
Workshop
Considering that there already exists a web-based solution for visualizing OBT data,
the main point for the thesis was to explore ways in which that solution could be
improved. And as users already utilize the tool in their everyday tracking, the best
option for making useful contributions was to ask said users about what they would
like to have.
In this chapter I’ll first write about the original idea behind the thesis, then
describe the conducted workshop and finally give details about the outcome, what
the users need and what were the items with the biggest priority.
3.1
Original Plan
At the start of the semester, we had a discussion with my supervisor about possi-
ble directions and ideas, as improving the web-based solution is a broad term that
required specifics.
The OBT and the accompanying data visualization prototype are currently pre-
pared to detect multiple press protocols e.g. short and long press or one, two and
three presses. This enables users to easily track multiple phenomena during the day
and differentiate between them on the visualizations.
However, these visualizations only show the observations as they were made, and
by just looking at it, it is diﬀicult to detect any possible correlations between the
different phenomena. After some deliberation, we decided to target this area of the
prototype for improvement, with the ultimate goal to visualize interrelations between
the phenomena so the user can uncover patterns to better understand their personal
data.
This was reflected in the original title of the project: ’A Data Visualization Tool
to Support Discovery of Relations in Multi-Phenomena Self-Tracking Data’.
3.2
Workshop Setup
My supervisor’s research is focused on Quantified Self, therefore he is in regular
contact with the community. This presented us with a unique opportunity to interview
advanced users of the OBT about their experiences and discover their needs.
==PAGE:16==
3.3 Results
8
Participants
Four experienced self-trackers, known for their active involvement in the Quantified
Self community and familiarity with the OBT and the accompanying Observable
notebook were invited to participate. Their expertise provided valuable insights into
the challenges and opportunities in self-tracking and data visualization.
Structure
The workshop was divided into three parts:
1. Individual interviews To gather personal experiences and expectations, each
participant was interviewed individually for about 10 minutes, focusing on their
specific interactions with the system. Here they got asked questions regarding
their current use of OBT, specific limitations they have encountered and desired
features or improvements they would like to see.
2. Group discussion To enable participants to build on each other’s insights,
a 20-minute open discussion was facilitated. Participants were encouraged to
react to each other’s feedback, identify common themes and brainstorm possible
solutions.
3. Summary The workshop concluded with a quick summary session, where key
insights and proposed features were reiterated.
Post-Workshop Analysis
Following the workshop, a review meeting was held with my supervisor to analyze
the collected feedback and refine the development roadmap.
We compared notes,
discussed the outcomes and set a priority list for features based on the feedback.
This was the pivotal point at which we agreed to abandon the original idea and title,
and explore directions that actual users requested.
3.3
Results
The video call turned out to be useful beyond expectations. The four participants
had good insights and suggestions, shaping the future direction of our project. The
notes taken during the workshop have been compiled into a clear form and can be
read in Appendix A.
One participant expressed the need for detailed annotations and filtering options,
such as tagging working sessions or coaching periods and excluding certain obser-
vations from the analysis. They highlighted their wishes of having custom interval
comparisons, moving averages, and the inclusion of regression trends were also men-
tioned for a possibility of deeper insights into the data.
==PAGE:17==
3.3 Results
9
Another participant focused on the flexibility of time windows and the ability to
label and filter events directly within the visualization tool, advocating for a more
interactive and customizable user experience. This included applying specific time
windows as filters and labeling events on the time series for easier reference.
Furthermore, the challenges of tracking multiple phenomena were highlighted,
particularly for Parkinson’s patients, and the possibility of incorporating data from
various devices and tracking absent events were mentioned.
Lastly, the need for
labeling periods to ignore was discussed, as the absence of data can be significant in
certain contexts.
Collectively, these inputs provided an excellent basis for creating a prioritized list
of desired features. After careful analysis, we identified three main features as the
most requested ones, and compiled a list in order of importance.
1. Annotations turned out to be the most important feature for exploration and
implementation, as nearly all of the participants had some kind of request for
labelling or tagging certain data points or time frames.
2. The second most requested feature was the ability to choose custom intervals
and filter or compare data based on them.
3. Finally, most of the people also mentioned an exclusion of some kind, whether
that is for not taking a single observation into account during analysis or mark-
ing a period for exclusion.
This list provided the foundation of this thesis and served as a guide during analysis
and implementation to make sure I was concentrating on the right things. It is going
to be detailed further in Section 4.3.
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 4
Analysis
In this chapter I’ll present the theoretical background relevant to the project, starting
with explaining personal informatics, then moving onto details on the One Button
Tracker and finishing with a section on annotations.
4.1
Personal Informatics
Li et al. defined personal informatics systems as ”.. those that help people collect
personally relevant information for the purpose of self-reflection and gaining self-
knowledge”[LDF10]. They derived a stage-based model of personal informatics sys-
tems composed of five stages and identified its main barriers and properties, which
can be seen on Figure 4.1 and are described in detail below.
1. The preparation stage is the first one, and takes place before data collection.
This stage consists of people’s motivation to collect personal information, and
determining what information they will record and how they will record it. The
barriers related to this stage are about choosing what information to collect and
the desired tool to use.
Figure 4.1: The five stages of a personal informatics system (preparation, collection,
integration, reflection, action) and their four essential properties (cas-
cading barriers, iterative, user-driven vs. system-driven, uni-faceted vs.
multi-faceted)[LDF10].
==PAGE:19==
4.1 Personal Informatics
11
2. The collection stage describes the time period in which tracking is being per-
formed and data is being collected. Barriers in this stage are usually mostly
caused by issues with the chosen tool or the people themselves losing motivation
or forgetting to track.
3. The middle stage is referred to as the integration stage, where the collected
data is prepared, combined and transformed, to make reflection easy for users.
Barriers often occur if the recorded data has a different format than the data
required for reflection.
4. The reflection stage is when users try to gain insights into the recorded phe-
nomenon. This can be achieved by looking at lists of the recorded observations
or by using visualisations. The main barrier during this stage is diﬀiculty to
explore and understand the data.
5. The action stage is the final one of the stage-based model. During this stage
people decide how to act based on the insights that were gathered during the
reflection stage. This way they are able to make adjustments to their behaviors
to reach a desired goal.
Additionally, the above listed stages possess the following four properties:
• Following the process of data collection through the stage-based model, it
quickly becomes visible that barriers cascade. It means that barriers in ear-
lier stages influence the later ones, for example problems in the collection stage
can result in poor datasets that are insuﬀicient for interpretation and reflection.
• Often in personal informatics systems there is not a single linear progression
through the stages, as people usually take a look at their data regularly, meaning
that the collection, integration and reflection stages are repeatedly executed.
This is labeled as the iterative quality of the stages.
• Each stage can be classified as user-driven or system-driven. When a stage is
user-driven, it is the user who needs to do the work e.g. they are the ones
manually recording observations, as opposed to a system-driven setup, where
for example the smart watch measures the steps taken.
• The last property relates to the different facets of people’s lives, such as work
life, home life or physical activity. In this regard, personal informatics systems
can be uni-faceted or multi-faceted. Currently most systems are uni-faceted,
meaning that the data collected is only about one facet of the person’s life. This
simplifies the collection and integration, but limits the types of information one
can understand about themselves.
In this project, the preparation and collection stages are already taken care of by
the One Button Tracker and the companion visualization prototype. However, the
collection stage cannot be entirely ignored, as recording annotations can be considered
==PAGE:20==
4.2 One Button Tracker
12
a part of data collection and thus fall under this stage.
So while designing and
developing annotation support, we have to make sure that we suﬀiciently support the
user in the process.
The integration stage is also somewhat relevant, as the newly recorded annotation
data needs to be integrated into the system.
We have to provide users with the
possibility to download their annotations made with the tool and upload them at the
next use, enabling them to append to it so they can have a single source of truth for
their data.
Taking everything into account it can be determined that the main focus of this
thesis lies within the reflection stage. It is impossible to completely eliminate the
user-driven aspect of it, as the user has to look at the data and reflect on it, but we
can strive to make the system take over as much of this burden as possible. It is
crucial to support the user with easily understandable visualizations that highlight
patterns. It is also here that the multi-faceted aspect comes into play, as extended
with annotations the visualizations can be made capable of showing the effects of
other facets of the user’s life, for example if the user is collecting data about mental
health symptoms and adds annotations for work or personal events.
Finally there is the action stage, with which this thesis does not concern itself,
but still has to support it. Due to the properties of the system, we will have to ensure
that we minimize the amount of barriers cascading to this stage.
4.2
One Button Tracker
The One Button Tracker, a device developed by TOTTI Labs1, provides the bulk of
the technical background of the project. It is a small, 3D-printed device that can
comfortably fit in a pocket or can be worn on the wrist or around the neck and as the
name suggests, it only has one button (Figure . This allows users to record data with
a single button press, simplifying the data collection process and reducing the barriers
associated with more complex tracking systems, such as applications on smartphones
that you have to open and navigate to perform tracking. When the button is pressed,
the timestamp of the press is saved in ISO8601 format, which makes it possible to
record precise data with high granularity including time zone data. Additionally it
stores the duration of the press in milliseconds, enabling the definitions of tracking
protocols at integration time.
That means that the user has the opportunity to
track multiple phenomena e.g. a mental health symptom and an intervention, and
differentiate between them at collection time by using short and long presses or one
press and two quick presses for one and the other. The data is saved in a .csv file
directly on the device (Figure 4.3), which the user can copy over to their machines
for further processing. This ensures that the user always has complete control over
their data, as there is no cloud solution or unexpected 3rd party tracking involved.
1https://tottilabs.com/
==PAGE:21==
4.2 One Button Tracker
13
Figure 4.2: The OBT device. The apparatus fits comfortably in a pocket, and the
button gives tactile feedback when pressed, making it easy to record
observations through clothing.
Figure 4.3: The data file produced by the OBT. The user can connect the device
to a computer with a cable.
==PAGE:22==
4.3 Annotations
14
After that the reflection stage is supported by a visualization prototype built in an
Observable notebook.2 These are interactive documents hosted by Observable that
are easy to share and don’t require extra setup. This notebook contains a visualization
for displaying all observations of the user and also some smaller graphs for statistical
insight. The mechanics and decisions behind Observable will be further explained in
Chapter 7.
The system is currently in use in various self-tracking projects within the quan-
tified self community, and have been part of clinical case studies exploring the ben-
efits of tracking in therapy[LEC17][LCE17]. It has been shown that the simple for-
mat of the device eliminates digital distractions and thus promotes consistent track-
ing[Rii+24].
4.3
Annotations
According to the Cambridge dictionary, an annotation is ”a short explanation or note
added to a text or image, or the act of adding short explanations or notes”.3 That
definition is obviously not specific to personal data annotations, but it is a decent
starting point, as we are looking to add notes or explanations to the data.
However, to effectively address the issue, we need to discuss what is considered to
be an annotation in this specific project and perform an analysis on the implementa-
tion possibilities.
4.3.1
What is an Annotation?
If we take a look at the workshop outcome in Section 3.3, we can see three main
requested features:
1. Labeling or tagging certain observations or time frames
2. Filtering or comparing based on custom intervals
3. Excluding data
Out of all of these, the first point is closest to the original definition and what
people usually associate with annotating something. But if we dive a bit deeper, we
may be able to unify the implementation requirements for all of them.
Taking the second list item, the desired functionality there is filtering and compar-
ison. In order to do that, the user needs a way to define custom intervals, that can
later be used for selection. Examples for these custom intervals during the workshop
included working sessions or coaching, but could be anything from work meetings to
vacation time. These are highly personal as each person will have needs to track dif-
ferent things based on their main collected data, so creating custom intervals should
2https://observablehq.com/documentation/notebooks/
3https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/annotation
==PAGE:23==
4.3 Annotations
15
be as flexible as possible. At this point it becomes clear that intervals are just labeled
time frames, thus circling back to the first item on the list.
As for the third list item, exclusion also requires the ability to select a time frame
or a specific observation and attach a note to it, to mark it as an undesired data
point.
Evaluating the priority list revealed that all of the features are based on the
same functionality: making selections and labeling them. Thus in the context of this
project, annotations can be defined as custom labels and notes attached to a user-
selected time frame or single observation. This is the base functionality that needs to
be implemented, on top of which persistence, filtering and comparison can be built.
4.3.2
What Makes Sense?
At first, I immediately started experimenting with possibilities of selections on a
graph, and I ended up chasing a solution that was not that useful. This is detailed
in Chapter 6. So to avoid further instances like this, I was suggested to carry out
an analysis on the types of annotations that could be relevant to the project and
determine what makes sense to implement and what does not.
The most important aspect that has to be remembered is the personalized nature
of the data. As we are visualizing personal data, user needs vary greatly on what
phenomena they are tracking and what insights they are interested in. This is where
annotations become highly relevant, because there is no one-size-fits-all solution to
cater to everyone’s needs.
Keeping all of this in mind, two distinct categories can be defined for annotations
based on the workshop outcome.
Single observation
One option that we have is to enable attaching notes to specific observations in the
data set. This lines up with some user requests from the workshop, as participants
mentioned the desire to exclude or annotate one data point at a time.
At first I had diﬀiculties imagining the reality of this option due to having a sig-
nificant amount of observations in a day (1̃00-200), so I did not really see a feasible
use-case for it. But discussing it with my supervisor, I found out that most of the peo-
ple have maybe a dozen observations per day, which is fundamentally different from
my case. Thus I could identify two main use-cases for single observation annotations:
• Exclusion Excluding data is highly important, and a feature that has not been
present in the system. Previously, if users made a mistake during tracking, they
had to dig into the .csv file and find the one mistake to delete among the lines
of ISO8601 dates, which is not exactly user-friendly. However, by enabling users
to make a selection on a visualization where they can clearly see at which time
each observation occurred and marking the selection for exclusion simplifies
this process. This eliminates the risk of them accidentally deleting correct data
==PAGE:24==
4.3 Annotations
16
points from the file, as with exclusion it does not actually get deleted, it will
just be marked and will not be displayed.
• Annotation When people have just a few observations during the day, it could
be over-complicated to add a time frame to describe what was happening when
a specific one was recorded.
Instead, it could be more comfortable to just
select the observation itself and attach a note describing that, for instance, the
user was in a meeting. It was also briefly mentioned by one participant during
the meeting, that they would like the ability to add new data outside of the
observations, e.g. mark a time when the patient took a medication. This could
also be explored under this use-case.
Time frame
The other option is selecting time frames for annotation, which was arguably the
most mentioned need among participants. This opens up numerous possibilities, so
a deeper analysis of possibilities is necessary.
The above described two use-cases are at play here as well, all types of time frames
could be used for both annotation and exclusion.
• Simple time frame These are characterized by a start date and an end date,
and the elapsed time between the two are considered to be included. This is a
highly versatile type, and could be used to signify various events, for example
vacation, not having access to/having forgotten the device, work, meetings or
any kind of social or personal event that the user thinks can be significant
for their tracked phenomena. Due to its versatility, we need to make sure to
implement a flexible solution, as the time frames can range in length from just
a few minutes or hours to even days.
• Box selection This is the solution I first started implementing in an attempt
to support selecting simple time frames in a day and also recurrence across days.
It was not a bad idea, but it had huge restrictions e.g. only being able to view
one week at a time or not being able to select one continuous time frame across
multiple days. Moreover, conducting this analysis revealed that its usefulness is
at best questionable, as there is a limited amount of things that people do in the
exact same time period during the week. It could be explored further to see if
some of the restrictions can be removed, but overall it sacrificed a considerable
amount of flexibility for little to no benefit so I decided to pursue other, more
useful solutions.
• Recurrence The repeating nature of certain events should also be taken into ac-
count when aiming for a highly flexible system. Above I have already described
an attempt at realizing recurrence to a certain degree, but in that instance it
turned out to be not beneficial. It is also quite diﬀicult to imagine a visualization
where the user could select a time frame and then specify recurrence parameters.
==PAGE:25==
4.3 Annotations
17
However, a form-like solution could be more appropriate for creating recurrent
annotations.
Conducting this analysis turned out to be eye-opening and gave me clear directions
in terms of the feasibility of different approaches. It became clear, that the most focus
should be put on annotating single observations and simple time frames, as these two
offer the most flexibility and are essential building blocks of more complex solutions
such as filtering or comparison.
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 5
Experiment
At the beginning of the project, I received an OBT device from my supervisor, which
provided an excellent opportunity to conduct a mini-experiment and generate a data
set for visualization testing. The experiment was designed according to the guidelines
presented by I. Scott MacKenzie[Mac13].
5.1
Participants
As the main goal was the generation of a dataset to support the development and
testing process and the project’s focus is not on data collection, I served as the sole
participant. That means that the participant is a person in her mid-twenties with an
extensive background in Computer Science and under considerable amount of stress
- this last part will be relevant in the next section.
It was never the intention to be able to achieve statistically significant results or
conclusions, the findings are entirely personal in nature and should be treated as such.
Regardless, the whole process from methodology to findings will be detailed for the
sake of completeness.
5.2
Methodology
The next step in designing the experiment was choosing what to measure. There was
one type of phenomena that instantly came to mind during consideration, and they
were body-focused repetitive behaviors, or BFRBs for short. BFRBs are stress-related
actions that individuals engage in subconsciously, such as nail biting, hair pulling or
skin picking. These behaviors often serve as coping mechanisms during periods of
stress or deep concentration, but don’t necessarily require clinical attention.
The selection of BFRBs as the primary focus of tracking was inspired by their fre-
quent occurrence in my daily life, primarily as responses to the pressures of academic
and professional commitments. Specifically, I identified nail biting, hair pulling and
cheek biting as the primary behaviors to track, as I perform those most frequently
and just those three add up to around 90% of my total behaviors. But for full trans-
parency, all types of BFRBs I performed during the experiment were recorded, I did
not exclude any of them.
==PAGE:27==
5.3 Findings
19
Given the OBT’s limitation to track only up to three distinct phenomena at a time,
I opted to record all BFRBs using the same protocol: a single button press. This
approach was justified by the primary research objective, which was to understand the
temporal dynamics of these behaviors rather than their specific nature. By treating
all BFRBs as a single category, I could concentrate on analyzing their frequency and
distribution over time, as the goal did not include discovering patterns and relations
between different types of BFRBs.
After all this preparation, the data collection phase could finally begin. I aimed
to keep the device on my person at all times, which turned out to be easier than
anticipated. That can be attributed to a few factors, namely the compact design of
the OBT or the fact that it was winter and I always had a pocket or a hoodie that
I could hide the device in. Then whenever I became aware of performing a BFRB,
I pressed the button one time, saving the timestamp. Therefore the generated data
is extensive and contains only a few hours of missing data, for example from during
workouts.
During tracking, it became evident that my BFRB frequency was significantly
higher than the average reported by other users of the OBT device, who typically
recorded a maximum of between 20 to 30 observations daily. In contrast, my record-
ings ranged from 60 to 200 daily observations, underscoring the severity and intensity
of my BFRBs.
A critical limitation encountered during the experiment was a known bug in the
OBT device, which restricted its memory capacity to approximately 1200 recorded
presses. Once this threshold was reached, the device required a complete reset to con-
tinue functioning. This technical constraint dictated the experiment’s duration, lim-
iting data collection to a two-week period. Despite this limitation, the data collected
was substantial enough to provide valuable insights and a good base for visualization
testing, so I chose not to continue after a reset had been performed.
5.3
Findings
The findings can be divided into two categories: personal or project-related.
Personal findings are insights into my own behavior and things I realized during
tracking. The first is definitely the exceptional number of my BFRBs, before then I
had not realized how much I do it. The device and the tracking process helped the
most in this regard, as I gradually became aware of a previously unnoticed action.
This awareness then began to present earlier, sometimes even as I was about to
perform a behavior, and this resulted in me being able to prevent the BFRB from
occurring in some instances.
The other significant finding in this category was that it wasn’t only stress that
resulted in a flare-up of occurrences.
While most of the BFRBs were performed
during work or academic pressure, many times it seemed to be a deep thinking state
that preceded the behavior instead of pure stress. And then there were times where
==PAGE:28==
5.3 Findings
20
I could not pinpoint any particular reason for an occurrence, as if it was performed
habitually.
On the other hand, project-related findings are closely associated with the charac-
teristics of the recorded data itself and what they mean for the visualizations. Firstly
we must discuss the significant difference between the daily amount of observations.
The things a user with less than 30 observations a day would want to do when it
comes to viewing or annotating it might be completely different than what I think
would make sense on my data with 100+ data points per day. One good example for
this is annotating single observations, which for my data is absolutely unreasonable
to remember a single one, whereas it could be a crucial feature for someone who has
around 10 observations per day. This is one big factor to consider during prototype
development, not to end up tailoring the visualizations to my own data, but rather
design with flexibility in mind.
Finally, the other finding relevant to the project comes from the data collection
period. While two weeks of data was enough to be able to test visualizations and
annotations adequately, it also substantially differs from the typical users’ data. As
I mentioned during the workshop description in Chapter 3, the ones using the cur-
rent system are mostly members of the Quantified Self community, who have been
performing self-tracking for months or even years. Comparing that to two weeks of
data, it is easy to see how it has to be taken into consideration during development.
Visualizations look completely differently depending on the amount of data in them,
and what looks like a perfect graph for my two-week data might be unreadable for a
larger dataset.
Both of the above are great reminders of the highly personal nature of self-tracking
data and promote to keep an open mind throughout the process.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 6
Design
In this chapter I’m going into details regarding the design of the solution, including
screenshots of the developed prototype. I’ll discuss different aspects of the result,
highlighting advantages and disadvantages or making proposals for a better solution.
It is divided into three main sections for clarity.
6.1
Constructing Annotations
First we will take a look at the components necessary for creating annotations, how
they got implemented and how they could be improved.
6.1.1
Time Formatting
Working with time in programming is always a delicate matter. There are significant
differences across the world when it comes to displaying dates and times, e.g. using
the 12 or the 24-hour format, which order the day, month and year are arranged in
etc. Not to mention the complexity the different time zones bring into the equation,
which truly makes it the programmer’s nightmare.
The OBT records the date and time of the observations in the ISO8601 format,
an example of which can be seen in Figure 6.11. It is a great choice, as it enabled
storing high granularity data with time zones included, which eliminates any ambigu-
ity. Furthermore, it is a standardized format, so all tools are expected to work with
it, generally all libraries have in-built methods of parsing and producing it. With the
OBT there is also no need for a more human-readable format, as users load the data
into the visualization prototype instead of examining the raw text files.
However, for the annotations we have to consider other formats as well for the
sake of human-readability. User cannot be expected to have to deal with time zones,
thus we have to make sure it is handled for them. As it will be detailed in Section
7.3, Markwhen was used for the construction and parsing of annotation files.
It
supports multiple date formats, so I prepared three minimal prototypes with different
formatting, to determine which one is the most suitable for this goal.
1Source of figure: https://blog.rsquaredacademy.com/handling-date-and-time-in-r/
==PAGE:30==
6.1 Constructing Annotations
22
Figure 6.1: Breakdown of the ISO8601 date formatting.
• Local date First I started experimenting with saving the local date in a read-
able format. This would be ideal for users for editing and creating outside of
the prototype, but the readable format has the unfortunate downside of lacking
support for including time zones. It is needless to say, that data without a
specified time zone is more or less unusable, as even just the switch between
summer and winter times would skew the data and the visualizations.
• UTC date I tried using moment.js2 to convert the selected times to UTC and
store it like that. It obviously suffers from the same limitation in Markwhen as
the above mentioned solution, as the parser is incapable of detecting the added
time zone. That means that it is an even worse solution than including the
local date, as not only do changes in the time zone render the visualizations
completely useless, but it is also confusing for users who will see a completely
different date in the file (most of the time) than expected.
Therefore after
identifying no further solutions, I concluded that sticking to the ISO string is
the way to go.
• ISO string As the attempts above have reinforced, including dates in the ISO
format really is the best option for the project.
It is capable of everything
we need, be it high granularity data or time zones, and it is widely supported
which makes working with it easier. This support means that we do not have
to include moment.js as a dependency, as the built-in D3 library in Observable
is capable of this conversion by default. The only downside is the readability
aspect, as the ISO string is arguably harder to read than any other format, and
it is still in UTC, even though at least there is the indication for the time zone
here, so the user has a chance of figuring out the ’actual’ date they specified.
With that, the first design decision of the project was completed. However, just
because with the time constraints of the project the ISO string turned out to be the
most feasible solution, it does not mean that it holds up as such in the grand scheme
2https://momentjs.com/
==PAGE:31==
6.1 Constructing Annotations
23
of things. In Section 7.3 I expand on my decision to use Markwhen, and propose
another way for when time is not scarce.
6.1.2
Single Selection
As it was outlined in Chapter 4, there are two types of selections we need to support
for annotation, the first of which is single observations. Here, we select one data point
in the dataset and attach some text to that exact date.
The first thing to tackle is finding the ideal way of selection, for which we have
two options: use a date selector, or select directly on the visualization. As at first I
had problems implementing the visualizations, I started out with the former.
That one was pretty quick to implement, as Observable has input components out
of the box. The one we need here is called Inputs.datetime. It is a simple selector,
which brings up a calendar view on click, and after selecting the date the user can
type in the hour and the minute.
It is a convenient option as it is implemented
in a user-friendly way, and it has one big advantage: it enables the user to select
any time, so they can not only attach annotations to existing observations but also
add a single momentary event at any point. On the other hand, it has two notable
disadvantages. The first is that the selector only lets you select the granularity up
to minutes, which means that you will not be able to annotate a specific observation.
If you have multiple observations in a minute, then the created annotation will be
applied for all of them. This might be desirable in some cases, but losing precision
like that could lead to unexpected results. The other disadvantage, and in my opinion
the more severe one, is that in order to annotate an observation this way, the user has
to first memorize the date of the data point they want to annotate, and then enter it
into the selector, which can lead to errors or multiple back-and-forth checking before
the process is completed.
The above mentioned problems can easily be solved by implementing the selection
on the visualization itself. Initially I ran into a few hardships while developing the
selection, that is one aspect in which Observable is not that flexible, but eventually I
got it working. The final look of the visualization can be seen on Figure 6.2.
The observations are visualized in a kind of calendar view, with the x axis rep-
resenting the date and the y axis the time. This makes it easy to see the temporal
characteristics of the observations, even though the two pictures depict vastly dif-
ferent datasets. The first image shows my dataset that I described in Section ??,
and underscores the extremity of my observation amount. In comparison, the second
image was made by using another person’s dataset that spans around 4 months and
contains half the amount of observations than mine. It is clear that they are very
different from each other, but it also emphasizes the need for the visualizations to
be as flexible as possible to support the most users. The two datasets are perfect for
showing that while for me it was hard to imagine a practical scenario for annotating a
single observation - for obvious reasons -, for others it can make perfect sense. Thus it
==PAGE:32==
6.1 Constructing Annotations
24
is important to keep in mind the diversity of user needs and not limit the interactions
based on our own imagination.
After the user has selected the desired observations, they will find a text field
under it in which they can type the description for the annotation. The text field is
also an inbuilt component in Observable under the name Inputs.text. Once there
is at least one character in the field, a button becomes visible which when clicked
prepares the entry for the created annotation. This preparation will be detailed in
Section 6.1.4.
6.1.3
Time Frame Selection
This is the other type of selection we need to support for personal data, where the
selection is defined by a chosen start and end date, and everything between that
two dates is considered to be a part of the time frame. This type of selection can
also be realized in Observable, as there is support for click-and-drag selections on
visualizations.
As already described in detail in Section 4.3.2, I first also tried to implement this
type of selection on the visualization shown on Figure 6.2. My original idea was to
let the user select a week, to not make the graph too cluttered, and make selections
on that, but it had multiple issues and in general was too restricting to be actually
useful.
Therefore I ended up scrapping it and coming up with a completely different
solution that is more flexible, even though it meant that I put recurrence support on
the backlog. I managed to implement the solution as shown on Figure 6.3.
Similar to the images in the previous section, the top one contains my data set and
the bottom one is the data set spanning 4 months. The smaller view on the top acts
as a filter, users can click and drag horizontally to make a selection on it, and only the
selected time frame will be shown on the bigger graph. As it could be predicted, the
filtering was not necessary for my data, but as we are normally dealing with months
or years of data, we need to make the selection as user-friendly as possible.
The visualization contains aggregated data over the days, so the user can quickly
see the trends and outlier days. By clicking and dragging horizontally, the user can
select a time frame for annotation, and can reset it anytime by clicking outside of
the selected area. When a selection is made, the start and end dates show up in
input fields under the visualization, so the users can adjust it to their liking. Finally,
similarly to the single selection, an annotation field is present where the user can type
in their custom text. This part of the notebook, to which I usually refer to as ’form’,
can be seen on Figure 6.4.
This makes the time frame selection convenient and flexible, as by adjusting the
amount of time shown on the visualization (or by using the date selector) the user can
select anywhere from a few minutes up to the entire length of the data set, allowing
for a great number of uses e.g. recording a meeting, a day of forgotten device or a
complete vacation even.
==PAGE:33==
6.1 Constructing Annotations
25
Figure 6.2: Final visualization for single observation selection. Each dot represents
one observation recorded on the One Button Tracker, the x axis con-
taining the year, month and day values and the y axis representing the
hours, minutes and seconds. Hovering over one dot brings up the exact
values of the axes in a pop-up.
==PAGE:34==
6.1 Constructing Annotations
26
Figure 6.3: Final visualization for time frame selection. On the x axis we can see
the date in daily granularity, and the y axis contains the aggregated
number of observation on a particular day. If the dataset spans a longer
time, the user can use the narrow graph on the top to select the amount
of time they want to view by clicking and dragging horizontally. This
filtering is demonstrated on the bottom picture. After that, they can
use the same gesture to select a time frame that they want to annotate.
==PAGE:35==
6.1 Constructing Annotations
27
Figure 6.4: The input fields under the visualization, providing more control over the
selection. The date fields are connected to the visualization, so anytime
the selection changes there, it gets reflected in the date selectors. Then
the user can type into the annotation field, and click the save button
once they are done.
6.1.4
File Construction
After a selection is made and annotated, we have to find a way to persist the data
somehow.
Note that the technical details and decisions behind Markwhen - the
formatting of the annotation file - will be detailed in Section 7.3. In this section I
will be describing the process behind converting the user input to entries for the text
file.
Before we get into it though, we have some things to consider. Having a save
button, as shown on Figure 6.4, is perfect and could be used for writing the data to
the file, right? Well, not exactly.
Consider a scenario: we release this tool to experienced members of the Quantified
Self community, who have been using the OBT for years. Suddenly, they want to
create annotations spanning at least the last few months, as far back as they can
reliably remember. They will want to create a bunch of annotations at once, but
saving them into separate files one by one is not the ideal solution. They don’t even
need to be a new user of the solution, if someone checks their data on a weekly
basis, they have plenty of things they could want to annotate at the same time. One
requirement we can derive from this example is that there needs to be a way to create
multiple annotations in one session and have the ability to export them into a single
file.
However, there is one more case to consider, and this one has to do with long-time
users of the prototype. The fact that we are working with personal data means that
it is evolving and growing continuously. People keep generating new observations
as time goes on, and if this prototype becomes a part of their lives, they will keep
generating annotations as well. We could, of course, just generate a new file every
time the user uses the prototype, but it is arguably more convenient for the them to
have every annotation in a single file, or in however many files they want. Therefore
another requirement is the ability to upload a previously created annotation file into
the prototype, append the newly created entries to it and offer it for download to the
==PAGE:36==
6.2 Displaying Annotations
28
user.
Keeping the identified requirements in mind, through endless trial and error, I
came up with the design visible on Figure 6.5. This was the first idea I had, but I
originally wanted to see if I could come up with a more sophisticated solution that
looks and functions better. I tried implementing a selector that would be populated
with the user’s selections and then they would be able to select the entries to include
in the file, but it did not work out for more than one reason.
1. First and foremost, the reactivity of Observable was very obviously not designed
for this scenario. I had to use several workarounds to get the data into the
selector, but the change was never instant, there was always at least one click
needed for the UI to refresh, which degrades user experience.
2. Another downside was caused by the selector itself, as the possibility of multiple
selections is not clearly indicated in its UI. By clicking on an item the user can
select it, but they have to hold Ctrl to make multiple selections, which might
not be intuitive for everyone.
3. And lastly, adding an extra selection step might cause confusion for the users,
as by clicking save on an annotation they would most likely expect it to be
automatically included.
Taking all of this into account, I decided to stick with the originally envisioned
solution.
It contains a text field, a button and two links, quite simple, although
the format could obviously be adjusted. When the user presses the save button, the
selected time and added note get formatted properly and automatically pasted into
the text field. If they go on and make another selection, it will get appended to the
field up to 10 rows. This limit is there for performance and easier editability, but the
ideal limit could be explored with user involvement.
By pasting the entries into a text field, users get the chance to make last-minute
corrections, e.g.
if they notice they made a typo.
Once they are satisfied, they
can click the submit button, which will make the download links visible.
As the
description states, the first link creates a new file, so if this is someone’s first time
creating annotations, they can click that.
Otherwise, if the user has uploaded a
previously created file, the second link will also show up, and there they can download
a file with the new content appended at the end of the previous entries. This provides
flexibility, as the user can decide how they want to store or possibly split their data.
6.2
Displaying Annotations
In this section we are going to take a look at my initial attempt at visualizing the
annotations, discuss possible issues, and finally I will showcase some of the low-fidelity
prototypes I sketched out as potential improvements.
For clarification, here I will refer to the graph shown in Figure 6.2 as calendar
view, and to the graph in Figure 6.3 as line view.
==PAGE:37==
6.2 Displaying Annotations
29
Figure 6.5: The final solution for concatenating selections and building the file. The
selected times from the visualizations get copied into the text field on
pressing the save button, where the user has an opportunity to adjust or
correct any mistake they may have made during selection. Once they are
satisfied, they can click the submit button to display the download links.
The first link will generate a new file from scratch, while the second one
will only appear if the user has uploaded a previous annotation file, in
which case the contents of the text field will be appended to the content
of it.
6.2.1
Line View
This time I will begin with introducing the line view, as that was the first one I
implemented for the annotation visualization. It can be seen on Figure 6.6.
It was properly challenging to get it working, even though I had some examples
from other notebooks, but it is visible that it is far from a perfect solution. Just
to mention one problem, the position of the annotations on the y axis is currently
hardcoded, so they can be too high or too low on other data sets.
To construct an ideal view, there are a few open design questions that could best
be answered by a combination of experimenting and involving users.
• Ideal placement As mentioned above, hardcoding the position is less than
ideal, and was only meant to be temporary so my progress is not blocked on
details like this. One solution that comes to mind is to get the maximum y
value and place the boxes above it to make sure it does not obstruct any data
points, which sounds like a decent option and could be tried out if I had more
time.
==PAGE:38==
6.2 Displaying Annotations
30
Figure 6.6: The experimental implementation for showing annotation on the line
view. The filled rectangles signify an annotated time frame and the
width corresponds to the length of time included.
The colorful text
with the dashed line signifies a single annotated observation.
• Overlap There is another aspect to placement, and it is about handling over-
lapping annotations. We have to think about this possibility, because while it
is not immediately intuitive, it is also not impossible for events to clash. Just
as an example, someone could have a meeting going on, but they get a very
stressful phone call in the midst of it that causes symptoms to flare. It would
make sense for the user to want to record that, but the in current state of the
visualization it is possible that one would completely cover the other.
• Clipping A quite significant flaw of the implemented solution can be visible
on the little green box containing ’party’ - or at least the part that fits into it.
Clipping of the titles are undesirable, but we also cannot just make the boxes
bigger to fit the text as the width of the box corresponds to the time the recorded
event took. And we cannot rely on limiting the number of characters for a
description, as the user can just edit the file outside of the tool. This scenario
can be way more common than one would initially think, just considering people
having months worth of data but also recording annotations for events that are
only a couple minutes or hours long. Those boxes would be a few pixels wide on
a bigger data set, which does not provide reasonable user experience. A good
solution to this is probably a mix of rethinking the placement and visuals of
the annotations and making it possible to zoom in and out on the graph. The
former could be for example to only indicate annotations with the colors and
the name would show up if the user hovers over it, while the latter would enable
viewing the data in a higher resolution similarly to Figure 6.3.
• Usefulness With all these issues in mind it is worth further consideration and
examination if this view brings enough value to the user.
Before all of the
above mentioned work is carried out, it would be beneficial to conduct another
workshop or user evaluation to collect feedback, because while the line view
may be able to capture long-term trends, the ability for detecting correlations
and deducing insights can be limited on aggregated data. In this regard, the
==PAGE:39==
6.2 Displaying Annotations
31
calendar view may be much more suitable.
6.2.2
Calendar View
After I got the annotations working on the line view, I spent some time transferring it
to the calendar view. The result can be seen on Figure 6.7. Obviously it suffers from
the same flaws as on the line view, and it is pretty clear that it needs modifications
to provide ideal insight.
As the annotations’ width is the only dimension indicating the length of time, it
is not suitable for this type of visualization. It is impossible to see the exact amount
of time that is included in an annotation, not even mentioning the single annotation
where I could not yet find a way to limit the length of the dashed line and connect it
to the annotation it belongs to.
Therefore I started brainstorming, and came up with two additional ways of solv-
ing these issues. I sketched them out in Figma3, they can be seen on Figure 6.8.
The solutions are similar to each other, and I would definitely conduct a user
evaluation before implementing any of them, to see which one is preferred or if they
have even better ideas.
The top one is more similar to the original implementation, but with the addition
of colored lines that signify the included time frame in a specific annotation. That
means, that we have to find an ideal time window to show, because if we show more
than two or three weeks at a time, there will not be enough space between the days
to place the lines. On the upside, this solves the overlapping issue to some degree,
as the lines are thin and we can fit a few next to each other. The maximum number
of lines overlapping would still need to be explored with users, because multiple ones
could be confusing.
However, on first glance, it is still diﬀicult to see which day a line belongs to, as
they are essentially between two days so it is not obvious. That is why I created the
second solution, shown on the bottom picture.
Here I scrapped the lines and instead I put colored rectangles on the visualiza-
tion, but with decreased opacity, so the data is visible through it. This eliminates
the ambiguity on what exactly is included in an annotation, while still supporting
overlapping.
Even though I kept the descriptions at the top of the graph in both instances,
it is worth considering to instead implement a hover or a click solution, where the
user will see the title of the annotation by hovering or clicking on the corresponding
box, to avoid clutter and overlapping labels on the top. It could also be a mixture
of both, only including fixed labels for longer annotation that span a day or more,
but employing hover for the rest. For further improvement it could also include a
highlight or outline when a rectangle is selected or hovered over, increasing overlap
support.
3https://www.figma.com
==PAGE:40==
6.2 Displaying Annotations
32
Figure 6.7: The experimental implementation for showing annotation on the calen-
dar view. Similarly to the previous one, the rectangles signify a time
frame and the text with the dashed line means a single annotation.
Arriving to the discussion of hovering, it is worth to mention the options we have
for single annotation display. In the first design, I kept the original idea with the
dashed line, while on the second one I highlighted the observation and the title would
be visible on hover or click. Both can be valid solutions, in my opinion the second one
produces less clutter and confusion if there are multiple in a day, but this is another
aspect that would need to be checked during a user evaluation.
All in all, there is a lot of work left on the calendar view, but once users are
asked, decisions are made and the ideal solution is implemented, this view could be
much more suitable for seeing the effects of everyday life on the data and discovering
correlations than the line view.
6.2.3
Exclusion
As excluding certain observations or time frames was a highly requested feature and
during analysis we found that it can also be considered a type of annotation, we have
to discuss them here. However, they work a bit differently from ’actual’ annotations.
They obviously need to be selected and saved just like the rest, however, we don’t
want to see them displayed on the graph. In fact, it’s the exact opposite, as when
something is marked for exclusion, it should be removed from the graph. In order for
this to work, we need to have a way to identify these annotations.
==PAGE:41==
6.2 Displaying Annotations
33
Figure 6.8: Designs for a more clear visualization of annotations, prepared in Figma.
In the first one the colorful lines indicate the included time in a time
frame, while in the second one a rectangle with decreased opacity in-
dicates the length. Here the single annotation display is changed, it is
signified by a bright dot that displays information on hover or click.
==PAGE:42==
6.3 Comparison
34
As a simple solution, I decided to dedicate a string to this option, so whenever
the user assigns that string as the annotation, the system will detect it and filter it
out. I chose ’exclusion’ for this purpose, as it is suﬀiciently self-explanatory and not
often featured in everyday speech. An example Markwhen file with exclusions can be
seen in Figure 6.9.
To demonstrate the functionality of the exclusion, a before-after comparison can
be seen on Figure 6.10. While this solution works well, users still might want to
see the exclusions displayed for clarification, or specify why they are excluding data
there. Not to mention that string comparison is error-prone due to typos, so a more
robust solution could be desired. The form on Figure 6.4 could for example contain
a checkbox the user could tick if they want the data to be excluded, so they would
still have the option to add a note to it. Under the hood it would still add a specific
string for easy filtering, but it would take the user error out of the equation.
6.3
Comparison
The last prioritized feature requested during the workshop was the ability to compare
custom time windows to each other. As it was determined during analysis, the basis
of this also lies in annotations, as that is how the user is able to create custom time
windows.
One requirement that came up during development is that a user can have multiple
annotations with the same name that they probably want to collectively compare to
another group. For example, they can create annotations for every meeting they have
at work, and then filter the data and see stats for how many annotations they have
during meetings. This also results in additional requirements for annotation creation,
as it would boost user experience if we offered already existing annotation titles to
the user as they type, to support their data analysis by not letting them forget about
what they names their time frames previously.
In order for this to work, I needed to implement a considerable amount of data
processing from extracting the annotation titles to filtering through all of the data.
Figure 6.9: An example annotation file with exclusion and other entries.
==PAGE:43==
6.3 Comparison
35
Figure 6.10: Comparison of the original dataset and the filtered one, where all ex-
clusions have been applied. The difference can be observed between
January 30th - 31st.
==PAGE:44==
6.3 Comparison
36
The result can be seen on Figure 6.11. As a disclaimer, the visualization comes from
the original OBT prototype, I just imported that one and processed the data for it.
As the figure shows, there are two dropdowns in which the user can select the
desired annotations to show. Every string that is present in the Markwhen file is only
shown once, even if there are multiple ’meeting’ entries, the dropdown will contain
it only once. When it is selected, the notebook filters and aggregates all the data
points that are within the time windows marked as meetings, and feeds it to the
visualization.
Here we also have to discuss the responsibility of the user. With the custom time
windows and comparing data, we are venturing into a territory where it is impossible
to make sure that the user always compares things or sees visualizations that make
sense. Obviously I included the total number of observations on display, and there
are a few statistics that could be almost universally useful across annotations e.g.
daily averages or average number of observations per annotation. But when it comes
to visualizations, it is diﬀicult to make sure the user is not shown something that is
completely uninformative, while at the same time not restricting other users’ options.
We simply cannot have complete control over what we show the user at this point.
For example, just to continue the previous idea, if someone is recording all of their
meetings at work as annotations, then showing the number of annotations per hour
graph is not going to be meaningful, as they are going to have some values during
working hours, but nothing else on it.
On the other hand, if someone records a
vacation spanning multiple days, comparing that to a work week on the graphs could
yield interesting insights into how stress - or lack thereof - influences the observations.
It is all highly personal, and the best we can do is try to supply the users with a wide
array of tools, while trusting that they will use them responsibly.
Another aspect to keep in mind here, is that we are lucky in the sense that the
users we consulted with are experienced self-trackers and likely will know what makes
sense to compare and what does not. Therefore we can conclude that in this case it is
better to provide support for versatile data analysis than limiting it, but the situation
could be entirely different, was our target user group a different demographic.
==PAGE:45==
6.3 Comparison
37
Figure 6.11: Custom filtering and comparison of annotations.
The dropdowns
above the visualizations contain every unique annotation the user has
previously made, and once they select one, the visualization will up-
date and contain the data within the annotation. It also displays the
total number of data points included, and other statistical metrics
could be shown here as well.
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 7
Implementation
In this chapter I am going to dive deeper into the systems and principles behind the
implementation, describing tools that I have used and analyzing their benefits and
drawbacks.
7.1
Local-first principle
Nowadays we do not even realize how much of our life is stored on the cloud, also
known as other people’s computers[Pea23]. This obviously supports a lot of aspects of
our lives e.g. collaboration or backups, but also means that we effectively do not have
control over our own data. It is on these notes that the movement named Local-first
was formed.
An independent research lab called Ink & Switch1 published a research article on
the topic[Kle+19], exploring if it is possible to get the best of both worlds in the form
of applications that treat the local copy of a document as the primary source while
still providing seamless collaboration and sync (illustrated on Figure 7.12).
They
identified seven main principles for local-first software that they would like to strive
for:
1. No spinners: your work at your fingertips In cloud apps, all data opera-
tions require communication with the server, which causes often visible delays.
On the other hand, in local-first apps all editing happens in the local file system
and synchronization can be performed in the background unobtrusively.
2. Your work is not trapped on one device Today it is one of the base
expectations of users to be able to use applications on multiple devices. With
cloud applications this is a given, but with the local-first approach other data
synchronization techniques have to be employed.
3. The network is optional Many modern tools have little to no support for
offline editing, which is highly inconvenient as people move through life and for
1https://www.inkandswitch.com/
2Source of figure: https://tripleodeon.com/2022/11/closing-the-gap-between-your-users-
and-their-data
==PAGE:47==
7.1 Local-first principle
39
Figure 7.1: The difference between the default architecture of today, and a local-first
architecture. On the first picture we can see that the ultimate source of
truth is in the cloud - far away from the user, and this requires internet
connection and continuous network calls while editing the file. On the
second picture, we can see the opposite - the source of truth is on the
user’s machine, while the cloud only contains a convenience backup.
==PAGE:48==
7.2 Observable
40
example travel on an airplane. Local-first apps could easily solve this problem
with editing local copies and synchronizing later when there is internet available.
4. Seamless collaboration with your colleagues Just like cloud apps, local-
first ones should also support real-time collaboration, which is probably the
biggest challenge among them all.
5. The Long Now Another aspect that has to be taken into account is the
accessibility of data on the long term. When we edit documents in a cloud
service, that document does not fully belong to us, and we could lose access to
it if the service is shut down. Local-first restores the user’s ownership of the
data, as they store everything locally and even if the tool used for editing is not
accessible, we will be able to open the data with another program.
6. Security and privacy by default The centralized database of cloud solu-
tions is an attractive target for attackers, and data breaches are unfortunately
alarmingly common. But attackers are not even necessarily needed, as cloud
providers can use your data however they see fit e.g. for personalized adver-
tisement. Therefore local-first systems could be a great alternative for people,
especially if there is sensitive personal data at stake.
7. You retain ultimate ownership and control Cloud apps have the power
to restrict user access, and this access is further limited by the API and the
interface, just to name a few. Whereas with locally stored documents, users can
do anything they want with it. This also means that some of the responsibility
is shifted to the user e.g. creating backups.
These considerations played a significant role in the creation of the OBT and the
Observable prototype, as self-tracking data is more often than not highly sensitive
medical or personal data. Extra care needs to be exercised on how it is created and
stored, and this is the main reason the OBT device is not connected to any network
but saves the data onto a local text file. This way the user retains complete control
and ownership, copying it only to where they want to, and while the file needs to be
uploaded into the Observable prototype for visualization, it is never stored there.
After careful consideration, this is the approach I took for the storage of the
annotations as well. The user can download the created annotations in a separate
file, and later upload it back up for visualization or to append new data to it. The
user has more responsibility this way, but it also comes with unconditional access,
security and privacy, which is crucial when it comes to personal data.
7.2
Observable
Observable is a relatively new framework focused on data visualization, promoting
interactivity and collaboration. It offers two ways of working, of which the original
==PAGE:49==
7.3 Markwhen
41
OBT prototype and my experimental one are built on a system called Observable
Notebooks3. Notebooks are pages comprised of cells that can include code, formatted
text or outputs like visualizations. It has its own visualization system built on D34
and is hosted by Observable so there is no extra setup required like when building
a website. It is capable of producing high-quality, interactive visualizations, and the
cells are reactive, meaning that data updates get propagated automatically into all
cells that depend on it.
These qualities no doubt played a big role in selecting the platform for OBT, and
in many ways it is very suitable for the project. Even though the relative newness
of Observable meant that often there were little to no resources when I got stuck
on a problem, it was still pretty intuitive to use and extremely good for producing
quick, small prototypes. Its collaborative features allow multiple users to work on
the same notebook simultaneously, facilitating teamwork and iterative development.
The version control system embedded in Observable also helps in tracking changes
and reverting to previous states if necessary.
While the platform supports HTML and SQL in the cells, the main language for
visualizations and processing is JavaScript.
It is widely used in web applications,
but due to fundamental differences from programming languages I am used to (e.g.
dynamic types) it was definitely not easy to get familiar with. However, the extensive
use of JavaScript also means that there is a vast ecosystem of libraries and resources
available, which can be leveraged to extend Observable’s capabilities.
One notable advantage of Observable is its emphasis on live coding and immediate
feedback. This real-time interaction allows for a more experimental approach to data
visualization, where changes can be instantly observed and iterated upon.
However, the platform’s newness also means that some advanced features and
customizations might be less documented or harder to implement compared to more
mature frameworks. Additionally, while Observable’s user interface is generally intu-
itive, there can be a learning curve associated with understanding its reactive model
and effectively organizing complex notebooks.
Overall, Observable provides a powerful and flexible environment for developing
interactive data visualizations, making it an excellent choice for projects like OBT.
Its strengths in interactivity, collaboration and ease of sharing align well with the
goals of rapid prototyping and iterative development, despite some challenges related
to its novelty and the learning curve associated with JavaScript.
7.3
Markwhen
Markwhen5 is a versatile tool designed for creating timelines and visualizing chrono-
logical data. Unlike traditional tools, Markwhen uses a simple text-based format to
3https://observablehq.com/documentation/notebooks/
4https://d3js.org/what-is-d3
5https://docs.markwhen.com/
==PAGE:50==
7.3 Markwhen
42
define events, making it highly accessible and easy to use for a wide range of users,
from beginners to experienced developers.
I got this tool recommended while considering options for saving and reloading
the annotations, and it turned out to be a good - but not perfect - fit for my needs.
Multiple options were considered, including .csv, .txt or .json files, but all of
them had weaknesses that made them not suitable for the purpose. Json files are
great for persistence as they are easy to parse and construct, but not very readable
for humans not working in technology. As we agreed with my supervisor that human-
readability and the possibility of editing outside the prototype should be considered,
this left .csv, .txt and Markwhen files as possibilities.
Raw or comma-separated text files perform well on both criteria, as they are two
of the most fundamental file types on a computer and every user has worked with
them to some degree. They are flexible, readable and can be opened and edited with
other programs, not just the Observable prototype.
However, there is one major
drawback: the flexibility means that there is no defined structure, therefore if we
intend to use them to contain points in time and time frames with descriptions we
have to construct it ourselves and implement parsing for it. It could be considered
for a more robust solution once we have clear requirements for a system, but for
prototyping a minimum viable product that is far too complicated.
That is where Markwhen comes into the picture; it strikes an ideal balance by
offering a lightweight, human-readable format specifically tailored for chronological
data. It has a web editor called Meridiem6, which visualizes entries on a timeline and
provides an editor as well where the user can create their own events and time frames.
But even more importantly, it comes with its own parser that can be imported into
Observable notebooks, so development can be focused on the prototype itself.
Still, even with all of the positives, it is far from perfect. It took a long process of
trial and error until I found the patterns the parser really recognizes, as some of the
example formats in their documentation simply do not work. This in itself wouldn’t
be a huge problem, but as I already outlined in Chapter 6, there are constraints in
the granularity of the dates in some cases. Markwhen seems to have been created
mainly with the goal of planning upcoming and future events, be it single or recurring,
and being able to visualize them on a Gantt-chart or a calendar. This is significantly
different from our use-case, where we need to add notes to past dates.
As it currently stands, the only format in which we can record high-granularity
dates in Markwhen is the ISO8601, which somewhat compromises human-readability.
None of the formats except the ISO supports specifying seconds or time zones. The
former might not be needed by all users, but it is certainly necessary for annotating
single observations as those are recorded with full granularity, while the latter would
be quite important in terms of preventing data loss if the user changes time zones.
As we can see, there is no perfect tool for this job as of now, but Markwhen feels
closest to an ideal one. Otherwise if there is less time constraint on the development
of a solution, implementing a custom .txt parsing could be the most beneficial.
6https://meridiem.markwhen.com/
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 8
Evaluation
This chapter describes the methodology planned for evaluating the progress made
during the project.
It is designed to gather comprehensive user feedback on the
prototype, focusing on usability, effectiveness, and areas for improvement. It consists
of three phases, one initial meeting, a trial period and a follow-up session.
8.1
Initial Meeting
In this part, another meeting would be conducted with the original participants in
Chapter 3. Here they would be prepared for the evaluation by being introduced to
the prototype and given a brief how-to on its usage. They would be able to ask any
question they have, and these questions would provide the main output for this phase,
as anything that is unclear to users after an explanation is a pointer for an area of
improvement. After everything is cleared up, they would be instructed to begin the
trial period.
8.2
Trial Period
Here the participants would be asked to use the prototype for a certain amount of
time e.g. a week or two, where they continue to perform self-tracking as usual, but
use the new prototype for creating annotations and exploring their data with the help
of the new features. In this regard, this would be considered a summative evaluation,
because in the context of this user test the prototype is a final developed product
that I would like to assess the quality of.
I would also aim to simulate a think-aloud test by asking participants to record
their thoughts, ideas and frustrations about the system while in use, so they won’t
forget them by the next meeting.
8.3
Follow-Up Meeting
Upon completion of the trial period, a follow-up meeting would be scheduled with
the participants. This meeting serves as a platform for an in-depth discussion of user
experiences and feedback regarding the prototype. They can share their opinions
==PAGE:52==
8.3 Follow-Up Meeting
44
and insights, and would be encouraged to engage in a discussion about potential
improvements.
Once this ideation phase is done, the next step is the informal evaluation. Here
I would finally show them the Figma designs showcased in Figure 6.8, purposefully
delayed to be the last item on the agenda to avoid introducing bias into the discussion
part. They would be able to give quick feedback on the low-fidelity prototypes which
would ensure that they could be adjusted to incorporate user wishes and needs before
developing any of them.
The evaluation is expected to provide useful insights into the prototype’s usability
and effectiveness, as well as highlight specific areas for improvement. Hopefully it
would result in clear requirements and direction for the future of the project.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 9
Discussion
Self-tracking is rapidly gaining traction among the people of today, and some of them
would like to see more personalized solutions for data analysis. However, personal
data annotation is a generally avoided topic due to the highly personal nature and
the complexity it brings. In this project a prototype was developed that aimed at
realizing annotation support for self-tracking data, as well as filtering, comparison
and exclusion.
The platform for development was Observable, which is a fantastic framework
for prototyping data visualizations, but in some aspects it over-complicated things
and posed several limitations. It is clear that it’s not meant for very complicated
projects, as at one point I actually seemed to have reached its performance capacity,
which means that further testing is necessary with bigger datasets, and performance
optimization methods need to be explored.
Selections were also a recurring diﬀicult topic, as in Observable, they are gen-
erally meant to influence the other visualizations in the same cell, just like how it
works in the time frame selection in Figure 6.3. However, in order to create annota-
tions, we have to extract the selection from the visualization, which turned out to be
more diﬀicult than expected. Regardless of there being one or two notebooks that
show examples of this, it was always a hassle to adjust and get it working on a new
visualization.
My biggest problem with it, and the one that makes me question if it is indeed
the ideal tool for something like this, stems from its reactivity. Reactivity in itself is
fantastic, and seeing changes instantly boosts user-experience, but when it comes to
waiting for user input, it is highly inflexible.
In the prototype, we have two types of users: those who use the notebook for
the first time and don’t have annotations yet, and those who already have a file they
created previously. Therefore it is intuitive, that we would make the annotation file an
optional input, so both could use the same prototype. Unfortunately, this is not how
it works in Observable. There is no way for us to use control flow statements to check
if a file has been uploaded or not, and execute the corresponding if branch. If a file
is marked as optional, then the execution of any cell that references said file will wait
until a file is uploaded, while if a file is required, cells will throw and error if it is not
present. This is immensely inconvenient, and results in basically having to duplicate
all cells that have to work with and without an annotation file. This duplication
could be observed on Figure 6.5, but it runs much deeper than having two separate
==PAGE:54==
9.1 Future Work
46
links for download. All of the underlying functions needed to be duplicated as well,
because if one cell is waiting for a file to be uploaded, then any cell referencing a cell
that’s waiting will have to wait as well. It is easy to see that this essentially doubles
the complexity and not sustainable in the long run. The best option is probably to
split it up into two separate notebooks, but it does not feel right either.
All of this doesn’t take away from the things Observable made easy, like creating
visualizations or handling user input. The project’s complexity would have been much
larger, had I needed to put together a complete web interface. There is probably
no tool in existence that would be perfect on all aspects, but it is always a part of
development to question the usefulness of tools when we are presented with hardships.
The development process itself went very well, most of the time we had a weekly
meeting with my supervisor, which always motivated me to make progress. Obviously,
as I had another course parallel to my thesis, at times it was hard to focus and
advance, but the meetings were very helpful as I could regularly bring up things that
were blocking me and I didn’t have to spend a lot of time stuck on a problem. Jakob
always guided me in the right direction and had great input on the progress. Holding
a workshop was somewhat of a shared idea, although the execution can completely
be attributed to Jakob and Thomas, who let me participate in one of their usual calls
and guided the participants. I also got a number of recommendations from them
regarding technologies and principles worth checking out.
As for the goals of the project, I can honestly say that I am satisfied with the
outcome. Every item on the priority list received attention and got resolved to some
degree. Annotations are supported and displayed, there is a possibility to exclude
data from being shown and statistics can be displayed and compared across different
annotations. Obviously, the solutions are not perfect and there is still a lot to do, but
that will be detailed in Section 9.1.
There is one aspect that is visibly lacking in the paper and that I wish could have
been addressed more thoroughly, and that is the evaluation described in Chapter
8. It only contains details about the plans for the evaluation, which is entirely due
to time constraints. There were some delays during development that resulted in
having to start writing as soon as it was done and not having the time to schedule
the evaluation.
This is my greatest grievance relating to the project, and the planned evaluation
needs to be the first item of priority when it comes to future work.
9.1
Future Work
As it’s been mentioned numerous times both in the previous section and in Chapter 6,
the future work depends heavily on what the users think about the project. However,
I still have various ideas on how to proceed with it, so I am going to outline them
here.
There is one important user experience aspect that needs to be worked on, and it
is the date format of the saved annotations. While the ISO string knows everything
==PAGE:55==
9.1 Future Work
47
we need, it is lacking in readability.
However, there is no other format that the
Markwhen parser recognizes and that has all the features we are looking for, so this
step would involve constructing a custom format and a parser for it.
The date selection for the annotations could also see some improvement, mostly in
the area of flexibility. There is one aspect that has not been addressed, and it is the
recurrent nature of events. People generally have a good amount of recurring events
in their lives, which would be tedious to add as annotations one by one. Markwhen
has some constructions for supporting the storage of recurring events, but its parser
would need to be tested on what exactly it detects as there were more than one
instances of documented formats not being recognized by it. And even when that is
figured out, some kind of user input will need to be configured for it.
Obviously, the visualizations can always be improved. They work well, but at this
stage they are just prototypes, so the axes and the ticks on them are not perfected
fully. For example the comparison view could offer even more insights by including
averages or other statistical values.
Furthermore, the original OBT notebook supports displaying different types of
tracking protocols, which have been ignored during this project, but would need to
be implemented for the sake of accuracy. In the current format, every button press is
counted as one observation, which can be misleading if a person uses multiple presses
to signify different types of phenomena.
And with that last point we arrived at the ultimate end goal of the project: en-
hancing the existing OBT prototype. For easier progress, all the development was
conducted in a separate notebook from the original, but ideally all of the function-
ality should be accessible from the same page. Some steps were already taken to
ensure compatibility during development, such as using the OBT’s data processing
package, but others like the above mentioned phenomena differentiation have been
ignored. However, there is one thing that definitely needs to be addressed before
this merge could happen, and it is the performance issue already discussed in the
previous section. It has to be ensured that the new developments don’t degrade the
performance.
These were just some of the more concrete ideas for improvement, there are still
a great number of other directions that could be taken based on user feedback and
needs.
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 10
Conclusion
This thesis explored the development of a prototype that enhances data visualizations
for self-tracked personal data by incorporating annotation capabilities. This aspect
is often ignored when it comes to data visualization, as it depends heavily on the
personal needs and tracked data of the user. It is arguably diﬀicult to develop an
annotation solution that is flexible enough for all user needs, and the project was
intended to bridge this particular gap.
Prior to development, a workshop was organized with users of the existing OBT
notebook to survey the wishes and needs, and to set up a prioritized list of desired
features to work on during the semester.
An experiment has been conducted to
generate test data for the development and an analysis carried out into the field of
personal informatics and annotations, to create a clear definition for what constitutes
an annotation in the scope of this project.
A prototype has been developed keeping the results of the previous stages in
mind, supporting the creation, persistence and display of annotations, allowing users
to customize their data analysis experience. This functionality enables users to mark
significant events, exclude certain data and compare different time windows, thus
offering a more comprehensive and personalized view of their data. By integrating
these capabilities, the prototype helps users engage in self-reflection and gain insights
that might not be apparent through visualization alone.
However, there are still a number of open questions, both regarding design and
functionality that remain unanswered. To address those, a follow-up evaluation has
been designed, meant for the participants of the original workshop. This evaluation
could not be performed due to the time constraints of the project, but it would shed
light on the usability of the prototype and how well user needs got met. This is
crucial before any further development can take place.
==PAGE:57==
APPENDIX A
Workshop Notes
Participant A
• Interested in tagging sessions for specific conditions to see how they affect ob-
servations
• Would like to delete mistaken observations
• Custom intervals to compare averages against each other, also save these be-
tween usages
• Maybe include trends and moving averages, possibly regressions
Participant B
• Compare average values with more flexible time windows
• Label the events right on the time series - currently they have to export the
visualization and annotate it with another program
• Attach a label to a timeline or single observation
• Find a time window with a specific length and put it on as a filter for every day
Participant C
• Would like to use it for background phenomena - tracking when someone takes
a medicine
• Relate data from other devices maybe
Participant D
• Label periods to ignore, to see if lack of data is meaningful or not
• Label specific observations
==PAGE:58==
A Workshop Notes
50
General Discussion
• Marking observation to exclude is suﬀicient, no need for actual deletion
• Connecting the data to the cloud to relate to others has deliberately not been
implemented for data security and with local-first principles in mind
• When it comes to labelling, there needs to be a way of discovering what labels
a user already used
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[AEB18]
Majedah Alrehiely, Parisa Eslambolchilar, and R. Borgo. “Evaluating
Different Visualization Designs for Personal Health Data.” In: (2018),
page 205. doi: 10.14236/EWIC/HCI2018.205.
[Are+21]
Ida-Marie T. P. Arendt et al. “Distinguishing between rumination and
intrusive memories in PTSD using a wearable self-tracking instrument: a
proof-of-concept case study.” In: The Cognitive Behaviour Therapist 14
(2021), e15. doi: 10.1017/S1754470X2100012X.
[Bel+22]
Tom H van de Belt et al. “Barriers to and Facilitators of Using a One
Button Tracker and Web-Based Data Analytics Tool for Personal Science:
Exploratory Study.” In: JMIR Form Res 6.3 (March 2022), e32704. issn:
2561-326X. doi: 10.2196/32704. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35230247.
[CLS15]
E. Choe, Bongshin Lee, and M. Schraefel. “Characterizing Visualization
Insights from Quantified Selfers’ Personal Data Presentations.” In: IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications 35 (2015), pages 28–37. doi: 10.
1109/MCG.2015.51.
[Frø18]
Johan Kristoffer Frølich. “Visualization and Navigation of Personal Data
Time Series.” Master’s thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2018.
[Hua+15]
Dandan Huang et al. “Personal Visualization and Personal Visual Ana-
lytics.” In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
21.3 (2015), pages 420–433. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2014.2359887.
[Hua22]
Xing Huang. “Data Visualization Design Strategies for Promoting Exer-
cise Motivation in Self-Tracking Applications.” In: Proceedings of the 40th
ACM International Conference on Design of Communication (2022). doi:
10.1145/3513130.3558981.
[Jón19]
Sigurbjörn Jónsson. “A Visualization Tool to Analyze and Enrich Per-
sonal Data.” Master’s thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2019.
[Kle+19]
Martin Kleppmann et al. “Local-first software: you own your data, in
spite of the cloud.” In: Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGPLAN Interna-
tional Symposium on New Ideas, New Paradigms, and Reflections on Pro-
gramming and Software. Onward! 2019. Athens, Greece: Association for
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
52
Computing Machinery, 2019, pages 154–178. isbn: 9781450369954. doi:
10.1145/3359591.3359737. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3359591.
3359737.
[LCE17]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Thomas Blomseth Christiansen, and Kasper Eskelund.
“Fostering bilateral patient-clinician engagement in active self-tracking of
subjective experience.” In: Proceedings of the 11th EAI International Con-
ference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare. Pervasive-
Health ’17. Barcelona, Spain: Association for Computing Machinery, 2017,
pages 427–430. isbn: 9781450363631. doi: 10.1145/3154862.3154918.
url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3154862.3154918.
[LDF10]
Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. “A stage-based model of personal in-
formatics systems.” In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’10. Atlanta, Georgia, USA: Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery, 2010, pages 557–566. isbn: 9781605589299.
doi: 10.1145/1753326.1753409. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/
1753326.1753409.
[LEC17]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Kasper Eskelund, and Thomas Blomseth Christiansen.
“Active Self-Tracking of Subjective Experience with a One-Button Wear-
able: A Case Study in Military PTSD.” English. In: Proceedings of the 2nd
Computing and Mental Health workshop at ACM CHI 2017. 2nd Comput-
ing and Mental Health workshop at ACM CHI 2017 ; Conference date:
06-05-2017 Through 11-05-2017. 2017.
[Lup20]
Deborah Lupton. “Data mattering and self-tracking: what can personal
data do?” In: Continuum 34 (2020), pages 1–13. doi: 10.1080/10304312.
2019.1691149.
[Mac13]
I. Scott MacKenzie. “Chapter 5 - Designing HCI Experiments.” In: Human-
computer Interaction. Edited by I. Scott MacKenzie. Boston: Morgan
Kaufmann, 2013, pages 157–189. isbn: 978-0-12-405865-1. doi: https://
doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-405865-1.00005-4. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780124058651000054.
[Ols23]
Liv Olsen. “A Interactive Visualization Tool Exploring Self-tracking Data
on Mental Phenomena.” Master’s thesis. Technical University of Denmark,
2023.
[Pea23]
James Pearce. I wrote a static web page and accidentally started a com-
munity. May 2023. url: https://localfirstweb.dev/blog/2023-05-
29-i-wrote-a-static-web-page.
[Raa20]
Jan-Eric Raab. “A Tablet and Stylus Based Approach For Data Visu-
alisation Interaction.” Master’s thesis. Technical University of Denmark,
2020.
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
53
[Rii+24]
Lisa Groenberg Riisager et al. “Snapping Out of It: How a Wearable for
Self-Tracking Assisted Psychotherapy Bridges the Gap Between Thoughts
and the World.” In: Extended Abstracts of the 2024 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI EA ’24. Association for Com-
puting Machinery, 2024. isbn: 9798400703317. doi: 10.1145/3613905.
3637112. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3637112.
==PAGE:62==
