==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Bridging the gaps in the building
industry through biomimetic
practices
Eliza Anna Grinberga
s223262
22. June, 2024
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
Preface
Through my studies at DTU, I have found passion and interest in various topics, mainly
related to the dynamic between architecture and engineering and the exploration of bi-
ologically inspired design. This thesis is a direct representation of my curiosity about
the possibilities of blending these fields, and it is with great pleasure that I present my
research on the topic of "Bridging the gaps in the building industry through biomimetic
practices".
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor Tim Pat McGinley, for
his support, guidance, and feedback throughout the research process. His expertise and
encouragement have been instrumental in shaping this thesis. I would also like to extend
my appreciation to the specialists interviewed throughout the study, Dr. Amanda Ras-
mussen, Dr. Torben Anker Lenau, and Dr. Petra Gruber, for their insightful discussions
and suggestions.
This Master’s Thesis represents a partial fulfillment of the graduation requirements for a
Master of Science in Architectural Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark.
The research project was conducted under the guidance of Associate Professor Tim Pat
McGinley at DTU. The author is credited with 30 ECTS points, and the project took
place from January 22, 2024 to June 22, 2024.
Eliza Anna Grinberga
June, 2024
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Throughout history, the collaboration between architects and engineers has been an es-
sential part of building design. As architecture evolves to meet new environmental and
functional requirements, the interdisciplinary collaboration between architects, engineers,
and various specialists becomes increasingly complex. Therefore, in the search for poten-
tial improvements, the integration of biological sciences into building design is explored.
Promising a supported approach to collaboration, involving biological sciences and new
interdisciplinary roles.
This thesis addresses the main difficulties of working in interdisciplinary teams through
the assessment of the implications that biological sciences leave on collaboration. Detailed
analysis reveals that the primary challenge in biomimetics and the integration of biology
in building design is the knowledge gap between the science and design fields. To bridge
this gap, the study proposes a new discipline: the bio-architect, aimed at supporting a
strong knowledge translation and integration.
This research emphasizes the importance of interdisciplinary collaboration and knowledge
transfer in adopting biomimetic approaches. The findings suggest that while biomimetics
holds significant promise for innovative and sustainable design, its success relies heav-
ily on overcoming communication and knowledge barriers between diverse disciplines.
This study provides a foundation for further research into supported interdisciplinary
collaboration and the practical application of biological knowledge in architecture and
engineering.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Interdisciplinary teams
4
2.1
Working in interdisciplinary teams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Practices and pitfalls in construction projects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Stages of collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Challenges in collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Connecting the dots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Biological thinking in the building industry
21
3.1
Nature-inspired design in practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Ways of working with biomimetics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Biomimetics as a link between architecture and engineering
27
4.1
The promise of biomimetics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Sharing the aspiration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Where scientific knowledge and design practices meet . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
The potential of biomimetics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
The helping hand beyond biomimetics
37
5.1
Building design that is rooted in biology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Supported knowledge exchange
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
The missing link
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Methodology
48
6.1
Design Science Research Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7
Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
51
7.1
Design and development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.2
Demonstration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.3
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
8
Conclusions
79
8.1
Further research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
References
81
iii
==PAGE:5==
List of Figures
Figure 1.1
Thesis guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Figure 2.1
Design-Bid-Build project delivery method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
Figure 2.2
Design-Build project delivery method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
Figure 2.3
Multi prime project delivery method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
Figure 2.4
Integrated project delivery method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
Figure 2.5
Joint venture project delivery method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
Figure 2.6
Phases of building design development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
Figure 2.7
Phases of building design development with BIM
. . . . . . . . . .
12
Figure 2.8
Summarized literature review [1, 3, 10–12, 22, 27–30] . . . . . . . .
15
Figure 2.9
Links between the challenging processes found in interdisciplinary
teams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
Figure 3.1
Design of St.Pancras International Terminal inspired by pangolin [32] 22
Figure 3.2
CH2 Building in Melbourne, Australia inspired by termite mounds
[32] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
Figure 3.3
The Hive project inspired by honeycombs [32] . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
Figure 3.4
BioTRIZ as a tool for biomimetics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
Figure 4.1
An illustrative material from the article "Unleashing the Future of
Architecture: Embracing Biomimicry" by Ar. Saran Kumar
. . . . . . . .
27
Figure 4.2
The Eastgate Center in Harare, Zimbabwe by Mick Pearce . . . . .
30
Figure 4.3
Phases of building design development with biomimetics
. . . . . .
31
Figure 4.4
The split between the disciplines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
Figure 4.5
The evaluation of potential improvements and challenges . . . . . .
36
Figure 5.1
An overview of hybrid concepts (McGinley et al., 2016) [44]
. . . .
38
Figure 5.2
livMatS Pavilion 2020-21 by ICD/ITKE/IntCDC, University of
Stuttgart [46] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Figure 5.3
Analogy between anatomical and building hierarchies (Aasprong,
2020) [47]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
Figure 5.4
Building Design Analysis Matrix (McGinley, n.d.) . . . . . . . . . .
42
Figure 5.5
An example of a sentence that contains the biological term, implicit
and explicit trade-offs, showcasing the opportunity of using contextual de-
scriptions (Kruiper et al., 2018) [51].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
Figure 5.6
Knowledge transfer supported with the use of trade-offs [51]
. . . .
45
Figure 6.1
Design Science Research Methodology process model [52] . . . . . .
49
Figure 7.1
Classification for theory appropriation in architecture [44] . . . . . .
52
Figure 7.2
Multi-dimensional theory appropriation model [44] . . . . . . . . . .
53
Figure 7.3
The different design levels and the legend used for further graphics .
55
Figure 7.4
The three levels in building design, visual material from an academic
group project at DTU
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
Figure 7.5
The three levels in biomimetic projects, visual material from the
Danish Neuroscience Center project by BIG architects [54] . . . . . . . . .
56
Figure 7.6
The three levels in research projects, visual material from the Der-
moid project by KADK students [55] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
Figure 7.7
Knowledge transfer rooted in a conceptual level
. . . . . . . . . . .
57
Figure 7.8
Knowledge transfer rooted in a technical level
. . . . . . . . . . . .
58
iv
==PAGE:6==
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 7.9
The middle ground of knowledge transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
Figure 7.10 The placement of a new discipline between the fields of biology and
architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
Figure 7.11 Characteristics of the disciplines involved in biomimetic building
projects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Figure 7.12 Relations between the involved disciplines and the identified place-
ment of the new role . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
Figure 7.13 Steps in the project process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Figure 7.14 Relations between the involved disciplines and bio-architect . . . . .
64
Figure 7.15 Distribution between different levels and disciplines, forming the
letter "H"
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
Figure 7.16 Characteristics of the disciplines involved in biomimetic building
projects introducing the bio-architect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
Figure 7.17 Balance between science and design-based disciplines
. . . . . . . .
75
Figure 7.18 Supported knowledge transfer through different approaches . . . . .
75
Figure 8.1
The relation between the different topics and challenges explored
throughout this study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
v
==PAGE:7==
1 Introduction
1
Introduction
Throughout history, architects and engineers have collaborated closely to develop and ex-
ecute building designs. However, as architecture evolves rapidly, expanding to meet new
environmental requirements and functionalities, the relationship between these disciplines
becomes increasingly complex [1]. Today interdisciplinary building project teams include
designers, architects, and engineers specializing in areas such as fire safety, systems engi-
neering, indoor climate, and materials and life cycle assessment [2]. Naturally, the blend
of all these disciplines comes with a certain level of difficulty and challenges. Additionally,
as lifestyles and personal needs change, there is a growing demand for sustainable solu-
tions. This evolution drives and motivates the involved disciplines to pursue innovation,
optimization, and overall improvements in building design [1].
The best way to discover innovative solutions is through interdisciplinary collaboration,
which brings diverse perspectives together [3]. However, this process is often met with
limitations and difficulties in collaboration and communication between fields. This is
where learning from nature becomes attractive. Biologically inspired design, though not
new, has gained traction with the accessibility of working with biomimetics, making bio-
logical sciences more inviting to non-biologists [4]. This approach offers the exploration of
innovative solutions by mimicking nature’s problem-solving and adaptation abilities, pro-
moting the exploration of sustainable practices [5]. Biomimetics further emphasizes the
need for strong interdisciplinary collaboration, facilitating a more engaged environment
that focuses on the need for diverse skills and specializations within the team [6].
Blending biology with building design is a promising and inspiring process, however, it
presents its challenges [7, 8]. The broad knowledge gap between biology, engineering, and
design makes translating principles found in nature into practical applications difficult
[9]. Although observing and learning from natural processes and organisms is fascinating,
because of the novelty that it introduces, it is equally challenging to apply these findings to
engineering while maintaining an accurate representation of the initial source of inspiration
[9].
Therefore, this thesis study aims to address the main challenge found in biomimetics to
support the integration and application of biological sciences in building design. Further
addressing the initial problem of interdisciplinary team collaborations.
1
==PAGE:8==
1 Introduction
1.1
Thesis outline
The thesis includes several chapters focusing on literature studies and analysis, to further
identify and explore the complications, issues, and challenges within both interdisciplinary
teams and the applications of biological knowledge. Aiming to further examine the poten-
tial solutions to the set thesis problem. The following list and Figure 1.1 provide a brief
overview of each section to present the general structure of the study and main subjects
in each chapter.
Chapter 2 includes a literature review and research of various processes and challenging
views regarding interdisciplinary collaborations in building projects. First, by looking
closely at the project outline and structure that affects the stages where disciplines in-
teract, then additional layers of complexity are presented as the underlying collaborative
issues. Concluding the chapter with the identified thesis problem.
Based on the literature review and the main findings in this chapter, these challenges have
been grouped into three categories: thinking patterns, background knowledge, and project
outline.
Chapter 3 introduces the idea of biological thinking, more specifically biomimetics, as
a great source of inspiration and innovation. This chapter includes a review of different
definitions, levels of application, and the process of biological knowledge being transferred
into engineering projects.
Chapter 4 provides an analysis of the implications of biomimetics on interdisciplinary
collaborations. It further investigates how a biomimetic approach to building projects
responds to interdisciplinary challenges identified in Chapter 2. Identifies the challenges
related to such an approach, highlights the existing gaps between biology, design, and
engineering, and finally indicates the potential improvements.
Evaluating the promises and challenges associated with biomimetics reveals that the iden-
tified gap can be summarized into knowledge transfer between the disciplines.
Chapter 5 extends the exploration of challenges found in biomimetics through a litera-
ture review of other examples showcasing supported integration of biological knowledge.
Emphasizing the need for supported interdisciplinary collaboration and knowledge trans-
fer.
Chapter 6 presents the chosen methodology for this thesis and introduces the further
structure of developing and evaluating the proposed solution to the thesis problem.
Chapter 7 presents the main findings of the study and introduces the evaluation and
development of the proposed solution. Lastly concluding, with the main findings and
identifying the gaps for further research.
2
==PAGE:9==
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1 | Thesis guide
3
==PAGE:10==
2 Interdisciplinary teams
2
Interdisciplinary teams
The building industry is an ever-changing field that requires involvement from various
specialists to reach new heights and discover breakthrough innovations that push the
development of our buildings further. The most important element of successful projects
and designs is the collaboration between specialists of different disciplines. However, that
is both the most crucial and the most challenging part of the journey [1, 10].
In this section, a literature study and review have been conducted to recognize the chal-
lenges and pitfalls of interdisciplinary teamwork in the building industry. First, looking
into the process of collaboration and links between different disciplines. Identifying the
cause of the challenges faced in the process.
2.1
Working in interdisciplinary teams
Over time the building industry has been forced to recognize the evolution of events and
adapt to new challenges and social needs. In the late 1800s architects and engineers were
praised for building beautiful and detailed Gothic cathedrals, they had the freedom of
material selection, time, and cost [1]. Through trial and error, the fundamental construc-
tion systems we know today were discovered. While the extravagant designs were greatly
appreciated, the expectation of comfort and function was left as secondary [1]. However,
today we are facing a completely different society and time. Where everything is adapt-
ing and moving at high speeds. Faster design concepts, better material selection, and
more functional solutions are crucial parts of our day-to-day life [1, 10]. It is mandatory
to ensure a comfortable indoor climate and protection from the external environment,
and constantly improve systems and technologies that lower the carbon footprint of our
buildings.
This high demand and expectations for building design have led to discoveries of new tools
and technologies that are now an essential part of the building industry [1]. Tools such
as 3D printing, artificial intelligence, computational design, programming, BIM (Building
information modeling), and many more. The direct outcome of this growth in knowl-
edge has led to the need for more diverse specializations in the building industry. That
translates directly into what we all know today as interdisciplinary teams consisting of
architects, designers, and various engineers responsible for different parts of the project,
such as fire safety, indoor climate, HVAC and systems, sustainability analysis, building
structure, and others. All these disciplines rely on each other to develop the building
project further [2]. It is an information exchange that circles back and forth, naturally,
this level of complex collaboration leads to friction and dysfunctions between involved
specialists.
Various studies and research on this process have been carried out, acknowledging the dif-
ficulties and importance of efficient collaboration for instance Olsen and Namara (2021)
emphasize how critical the need for well-established collaboration is to avoid creating
buildings that further harm our environment and lead to negative impacts [1]. The In-
stitution of Professional Engineers New Zealand et al. (2014) listed the benefits of such
collaboration, highlighting optimal seismic performances, cost-effectiveness, and improved
design and construction systems [11]. Bryant (2021) reviews a live example from a study
4
==PAGE:11==
2 Interdisciplinary teams
environment where improved personal performance has been observed in interdisciplinary
teamwork. The results of this test confirm how working with other disciplines is both
difficult and beneficial. While communication becomes complex, it also pushes the design
toward more innovative solutions [3].
2.2
Practices and pitfalls in construction projects
Plenty of research focuses on the importance of collaboration between different disciplines,
for example, Specht and Crowston (2022) performed a study that investigated the positive
impact that team diversity provided on project outcomes [12]. However, it is equally
important to understand the fundamental reasons behind inefficient workflows. As the
background of all collaborative processes, the outline of the project plan can hold a lot
of answers to why certain interactions are difficult to manage. For this reason, there
are different project delivery methodologies available, that can directly influence how
architects interact with engineering disciplines or other stakeholders. However, this can
also leave an impact on the risk assessment, budget, time estimations, and even the design
of the final project, meaning that it can’t be used as a universal solution to solve all
existing problems within interdisciplinary teams [13]. To further analyze and understand
the complexity of such collaboration this section presents a review of the positive and
negative outcomes for each project delivery method.
2.2.1
Design-Bid-Build (DBB)
Design-Bid-Build is the most common way of organizing projects. It relies on a linear
process between architects and contractors. Where first the architectural design is made,
then documentation of this design is bided and lastly, it lands in the hands of the con-
tractors who can respond with requests for changes [14, 15]. While this approach may
appear efficient and minimizes contractor involvement or edits, it lacks a foundation for
collaboration and often leads to miscommunication between parties. Consequently, design
issues are addressed during construction, making the project more time-consuming and
costly than anticipated.
Figure 2.1 | Design-Bid-Build project delivery method
5
==PAGE:12==
2 Interdisciplinary teams
2.2.2
Design-Build (DB)
Hale et al. (2009) have described this method as the opposite of the Design-Bid-Build
method where the key differences are present in the interactions between architects and
contractors. From the beginning, the project owner assigns either a leading contractor or
an architect team that further takes upon the task of developing all the documentation
needed and conducting early cost and time estimations. This way the responsibility shift
happens between the involved parties and the project owner can benefit from communi-
cating with only a handful of stakeholders [16]. This method is beneficial for its ability
to facilitate close collaboration between architects, engineers, and contractors. That way
some of the major design issues can be addressed earlier in the project development pro-
cess.
Leading to reliable cost and time estimates.
However, the project owner often
experiences minimal involvement in the process and faces difficulty relying on trust be-
tween the involved parties. [15]. Most design concepts and construction decisions are
assessed under the supervision of a chosen team, either contractor-led or architect-led,
where one party supervises and assigns tasks to the other. This can lead to misaligned
goals and visions for the project.
Figure 2.2 | Design-Build project delivery method
2.2.3
Multi-Prime (MP)
The difference between this approach and the previously mentioned design-build method
is the level of involvement from the owner’s side. In the multi-prime method, the owner
is responsible for signing different contracts with various professionals, for example, ar-
chitects, engineers, designers, and trade contractors. Similarly to Design-Bid-Build, it is
a linear process where limited interactions can happen between involved specialists. Most
of the communication and organization is being handled through the project owner [14].
This method seems to be the most appealing for the owner of the project because it pro-
vides full control of the outcome as well as the ability to push cost and time estimations
6
==PAGE:13==
2 Interdisciplinary teams
to their desires. However, this approach can become burdensome, requiring extensive
coordination between all contractors and placing significant stress and time constraints
on the disciplines involved in developing the building design.
Figure 2.3 | Multi prime project delivery method
2.2.4
Integrated project delivery (IPD)
There are notable similarities between the integrated project delivery (IPD) and design-
build methods, where collaboration is more prominent than in other approaches.
In
IPD, the project owner is equally responsible and involved from the beginning, working
alongside other parties. Instead of different phases and separate teams transferring tasks,
all disciplines agree to work as a collaborative team. This method has proven to be the
most efficient in terms of time, risk, and budget but it also requires strong management.
[17]. The most beneficial part of IPD is the ground for facilitating efficient collaboration
between specialists from a wide range of disciplines. The progression of the design closely
relies on information and input from other team members. However, now that the different
specialists have the opportunity to work in close collaboration, it reveals some challenges
and drawbacks. In such projects where the involvement and responsibilities are expected
to be similar or even equal from all involved disciplines, it creates a blurred line where
uncertainties and misalignment exist [18]. Even if the goal and common vision of the
project have been determined it doesn’t prevent different specialists from forming their
own decisions. That can lead to frustrations and friction, lack of trust and communication.
7
==PAGE:14==
2 Interdisciplinary teams
Figure 2.4 | Integrated project delivery method
2.2.5
Joint-Venture (JV)
There are some parallels between Joint Venture and Integrated project delivery, and
Design-Build methods where the effort of combining the skills and expertise of different
specialists is a key factor. In this case, individual teams of architects, contractors, and the
project owner still exist that are working under the same contract to work towards the
same goal and vision additionally splitting the associated risks and rewards. This method
is especially beneficial for smaller companies to combine skills and efforts to tackle larger
construction projects [15]. Although this method can limit risks and ensure fair earnings
among the involved parties, providing a secure business-focused agreement, it can be
challenging to maintain efficient collaboration and clear, structured information transfer.
Furthermore, the risk of multiple design iterations and disagreements can be seen as a
major drawback.
Figure 2.5 | Joint venture project delivery method
8
==PAGE:15==
2 Interdisciplinary teams
2.2.6
The missing links
Previously reviewed project delivery methods confirm that the level of collaboration and
efficiency in workflows directly influence time and cost estimations. Therefore, finding a
common language among all parties involved in the same building project is crucial. How-
ever, most methods do not facilitate such an environment. The most significant difference
between project delivery methods lies in how responsibility shifts among the involved par-
ties, proposing different approaches to project leadership and designating communicators
to ensure information translation between disciplines. While efforts focus primarily on or-
ganizing timelines, actual collaboration often takes a secondary role, potentially widening
the gap between disciplines further.
When using highly collaborative methods like Integrated Project Delivery (IPD) a large
portion of communication is relieved, because at the base of the method the team has
been introduced to the project as equally accountable. Hence, all involved parties are
reliant on each other and aim for clear communication. Though the idea and workflow
organization are clear, it reveals even more underlying issues of working in complex team
dynamics. Such as blurred lines of the specialist’s contribution, when the formed opinion
should be a mandatory requirement or rather professional contribution that can be argued
upon. It creates uncertainty and confusion when interacting with other disciplines.
2.3
Stages of collaboration
The previous section focused on commonly used project delivery methods to illustrate how
the project structure can influence interactions among stakeholders in a building project.
It is a greatly complex process of collaboration and communication between different
specialists with various loopholes of challenges faced in the different phases of the project.
To further analyze and highlight the existing issues in interdisciplinary teamwork a more
detailed process will be studied and compared to the workflows between disciplines when
using the Building Information Model (BIM).
2.3.1
Structure and organization
The process of design development for a construction project can be executed using var-
ious approaches influenced by project delivery methods, company policies, management
styles, and other factors. Despite these variations, the steps involved typically follow a
linear progression where interaction among specialists is essential. In this section, a sum-
marized project outline will be presented to illustrate the stages of design development
and highlight when interactions between different specialists occur.
Figure 2.6 showcases the overall construction project process through 6 stages of design
development.
It begins with the design brief, where the project outline is estimated.
This stage involves discussions on cost, timeline, client requirements, and setting com-
mon goals with the team to achieve the desired outcome. The following stages ease into
the development of the project. This includes the first conceptual design proposals, fol-
lowed by the preliminary design and final design development phases, where critical details
are refined with input from various specialists. These stages focus on the functional as-
pects, structural integrity, technical detailing, and visualization to provide comprehensive
9
==PAGE:16==
2 Interdisciplinary teams
documentation to the project owner and contractor. The project then moves into the
finalization stage, where all documentation, details, and plans are reviewed and approved
for implementation. This leads to the last stage, "build," where the project is realized
according to the approved plans and specifications.
Figure 2.6 | Phases of building design development
The design brief or outline of the project is where the initial conversation between the
project owner, project manager, and architect is facilitated to set the goals and criteria for
the design. Then moved into the conceptual design proposal, to communicate the vision,
functionality, and spatial design with the owner. These two first stages of the design
are challenging due to the pressure to make important decisions while having the least
amount of information, knowledge, and input from other team members. The underlying
issue with this approach alone is that most construction projects begin from scratch with
new analysis and research to define the scope [19, 20]. While plenty of excellent concepts
and examples already exist that could be used as a starting point or fitted to the new
project needs.
After careful discussions about the goals and aims of a building project, a conceptual
design proposal is made, this is where the first interdisciplinary challenges begin to occur
10
==PAGE:17==
2 Interdisciplinary teams
between the architects and structural engineers. The architect is responsible for com-
municating the architectural values of the proposed design and responding to input from
structural engineering teams. At this stage, crucial elements of the building design are be-
ing considered and discussed to find possible areas for optimization and improvement [21].
First initial solutions for the structural grid, column, and core placement are discussed
to follow the shape of the building organically. This conversation is most successful when
the architects and structural engineers work in close collaboration in a back-and-forth
loop until a sound conceptual design has been found.
The preliminary design stage comes with various levels of complexity. At this point, there
are more disciplines involved, all representing their values and specialty. There are active
discussions about the functionality of the building design and, the placement of different
operating systems and technical shafts. It’s a hands-on equal involvement to check out all
the criteria for a building such as regulations, fire safety and material selection, life cycle
assessment, and sustainability engineering [22]. One of the most complex processes that
relies on efficient collaboration between all disciplines is the design of the facade. Where
architects can push the visual appeal of the building, structural engineers ensure optimal
connection to the structural grid, and systems engineers look for the best conditions for
the indoor climate and usage of natural daylight. Ultimately these decisions are directly
linked to the project’s sustainability goals and environmental impacts [23]. Therefore,
the stages between preliminary design and final design development represent grey areas
where friction often occurs between the involved parties. Managing the complex design
process requires not only technical expertise but also clear and professional communica-
tion. Misalignment and misunderstandings are inevitable in such collaborations.
At the end of the project, the finalization stage marks a shift in responsibility from
the team of engineers and architects to the contractor team. During this stage, project
documentation is handed over and approved to commence the building phase.
2.3.2
BIM collaboration tools
In response to the disorganization observed in the detailed building design development
stages, there has been a growing demand for collaborative platforms and tools. Since the
early 2000s, technologies like Building Information Modeling (BIM) have rapidly evolved
and gained recognition for enhancing interdisciplinary building projects. The use of BIM
has notably improved how information is exchanged between different specialists and
design stages, enabling clear coordination and comprehensive assessment of designs from
various perspectives. [24].
Working in a 3D environment provides better opportunities to accurately estimate the
project’s costs, time, and performance [20]. Therefore, key stakeholders include not only
architects and engineers collaborating on the general design but also project owners,
clients, contractors, and project managers.
In addition to cost and time estimations,
working in a 3D environment offers benefits such as transparency, providing accurate vi-
sual representations, and detailed exports from the virtually built environment. This ca-
pability is particularly attractive for ensuring clear communication and alignment among
all involved parties.
11
==PAGE:18==
2 Interdisciplinary teams
Following the example mentioned in Section 2.3.1 regarding the complex angles and in-
formation management required for developing a building facade, the use of BIM tools
appears to resolve many of the challenges faced in this process. Working in a 3D environ-
ment allows different disciplines to perform simulations and analyses on various parts of
the building. This includes evaluating how changes in facade design can enhance daylight
penetration, improve exterior wall insulation properties, assess structural components,
and estimate materials more accurately [22]. Therefore, within a short time frame, var-
ious scenarios can be examined to push the most efficient and successful facade design
further into development. While some friction between disciplines is inevitable, clear in-
formation exchange and factual examples can alleviate concerns and provide validation
for necessary design changes.
As with any other collaborative tool that exists, there are pros and cons to each of them.
While there is a stronger connection between the design development and input from other
disciplines of the team, some of the underlying collaboration issues still transfer into the
process. Information sharing is only part of the difficulties for smooth collaboration, the
success of communication still depends on how well team members use the tools and
involve the opinions of other specialists [25]. Additionally, the development of the 3D
model requires specialized components that can be detailed by individual input, which
can further add stresses of performance to avoid clash detection and smooth translation
between systems.
Figure 2.7 | Phases of building design development with BIM
Figure 2.7 visualizes the design process and interactions between disciplines when using
BIM as a tool to support the integrated design process. Throughout the six defined project
stages the overlapping parts where interaction and collaboration with other disciplines
occur the gap stretches even further, while collaboration still exists as a major part of
the equation, the level of involvement is less evident. That could be explained by the
previously mentioned level of specialty needed to contribute to the development of the
3D model. Discussion and problem-solving between team members can have less impact
than analysis and estimations created with the digital tool. Additionally, the complexity
of individual contributions from each professional can be challenging to understand and
12
==PAGE:19==
2 Interdisciplinary teams
communicate effectively with other team members. This can lead to blurred lines and
uncertainties that may impact the involvement of other professionals in the project. [26].
2.4
Challenges in collaboration
Previous chapters take a look at the basis of working on a collaborative construction
project, and how we establish and enable interaction between different disciplines, to un-
derstand if the project outline is connected with the level of involvement and interactions
we experience. There are different methods used that can improve and facilitate a more
collaborative approach, additionally supporting the process with integration tools such
as BIM. However, It becomes evident that these methods can only relieve a part of the
difficulties faced in the process. There are even more complex angles to our work ethics
and personal contributions that are directly linked to our personalities, experiences, edu-
cational backgrounds, and even thinking patterns. This chapter is focused on a literature
review to identify the additional factors that can challenge efficiency in a collaborative
environment.
2.4.1
Identifying the stumbling blocks
Olsen and Namara (2014) emphasize how the beginning of disciplinary differences stems
from educational backgrounds. Architects and engineers are professionals who share the
common goal of problem-solving and design development, however, the educational envi-
ronment is drastically different [1]. That potentially can be viewed as the beginning of
such different thinking patterns. Examples of different approaches have been described
as architecture students being exposed to a lot of uncertainties and open-ended problem-
solving early in the design process, on the other hand, engineering students are introduced
to a more structured and linear problem-solving approach [1, 10]. Hence, when put into
the same project where collaboration needs to be a key process it can become difficult to
gauge and understand the other disciplines approach.
The differences between the academic project outcomes from each discipline are "open-
ended versus single-solution Problem-solving" [1]. Architectural projects often have open
boundaries and multiple solutions to address a given problem statement. Architects are
trained to be visionaries, considering aspects such as spatial design, user needs, build-
ing functions, and connectivity among others.
Their approach involves a high degree
of personal involvement and creativity. In contrast, engineers are trained to focus on
the technical and mathematical analysis of buildings. They work with building codes,
regulations, and constraints, and perform calculations to ensure structural integrity and
fulfillment of safety standards [1]. Together, architects and engineers bring complementary
skills to the project, combining creativity with technical expertise to achieve a balanced
and functional design solution. However, these differences can make the communication
gap wider and introduce misunderstandings.
Through practical analysis, Hurol (2014) identifies reasons that cause value conflicts be-
tween architecture and engineering disciplines. First, the differences in approach to design
stem from experiences and educational backgrounds. Highlighting the lack of a critical
view of existing buildings. Taking inspiration from designs that might have good values
and characteristics from an architectural viewpoint, but have failed to deliver the most
13
==PAGE:20==
2 Interdisciplinary teams
optimal structural design. It is important to make decisions that can lead to a build-
ing design that is both efficient and sustainable from all angles, and ensure optimized
structural solutions and highly functional spaces [27].
Between the two disciplines of architecture and engineering, the misalignment of goals and
value systems leads to communication difficulties. Where architects tend to defend the
user experience in the building, pushing for more aesthetic and functional solutions, while
engineering disciplines generally try to push safety guidelines, economically better solu-
tions, or a structural framework that interrupts the architect’s proposal [27]. Therefore,
Hurol (2014) underlines the importance of a more diverse knowledge base for architects.
Architects should be exposed to more practical insights into building design, that way
facilitating a better understanding when working with engineering disciplines and partic-
ipating in the discussion with more confidence and trust in proposed solutions [27].
Galaz-Delgado et al. (2021) conducted a bibliometric study, concluding that the most
common issue in collaboration between different disciplines is the lack of established com-
munication [28]. That includes clear information transfer, coordination between team
members, and explained description of each other’s roles. It is essential to facilitate an
atmosphere in a group setting where involved professionals can feel respected and included
in the process. There should be a common language and terms used to describe different
parts of the design process. Other challenges within collaboration are coordination, trust,
and role identification [28].
Figure 2.8 showcases an additional literature review on the topic of challenges faced in the
interdisciplinary team setting and lists some of the key findings as the reasoning behind
the complications of collaboration. Most of the identified challenges overlap with other
literature sources, therefore the findings are categorized in three tags: knowledge, thinking
patterns, and project outline.
14
==PAGE:21==
2 Interdisciplinary teams
Figure 2.8 | Summarized literature review [1, 3, 10–12, 22, 27–30]
2.4.2
Mapping the terrain of issues
Throughout Section 2 different processes and difficulties faced when working in close
collaboration with specialists from other disciplines have been explored. Along with the
discoveries some patterns and connections can be observed, therefore this section will
present an overview of some of the most common areas of conflict.
2.4.2.1
Thinking patterns
Thinking patterns and problem-solving approaches are often referred to as key differ-
ences between architectural and engineering disciplines. These differences are also the
most beneficial aspect of collaboration, as professionals from various fields can challenge
conventional methods and drive the design’s development forward. However, numerous
studies have analyzed how this relationship influences communication and mutual under-
standing among the involved parties [1, 3, 11, 29]. Because each discipline views building
design from such different perspectives, it can cause significant frustration. For architects,
the process is an experimental journey where various functions, personal experiences, and
15
==PAGE:22==
2 Interdisciplinary teams
spatial relations need to be integrated like pieces of a puzzle. The aim is to create a
solution that is attractive to both users and engineers who will further develop the de-
sign. On the other hand, engineering disciplines take a more analytical approach, basing
each decision on data and detailed assessments of the building’s spaces and systems. This
contract between the architect’s artistic approach and the engineer’s linear design devel-
opment can lead to misunderstandings and friction in the collaboration process. Some
other examples of such different thought processes are as follows:
• Architects view buildings through a person’s emotional and physical experience,
while engineers tend to focus on practical solutions and optimized technical details.
That way the argumentation for certain design choices can be drastically differ-
ent and while it seems like a straightforward discussion it can become difficult to
understand the other specialist’s view.
• Ways of thinking and approaching a building design can also be expressed in styles
of working. Architects are trained in design studios that are known to be creatively
challenging, chaotic, and heavily based on collaborative teamwork [1, 29]. It is a
closed-loop process where parts of the design can be redesigned at any stage of
the process. Meanwhile, engineering training is based on a logical and analytical
approach with a well-established structure and a clear plan of action. Therefore,
when these two disciplines now cross over and need to work towards a common goal
these approaches can easily be viewed as two different extremes.
• Engineering disciplines rely on analysis, graphs, calculations, and measurable pa-
rameters to understand the current state of the building design, while architects can
assess the building through visualized concepts, floor plans, and abstract sketches.
Fundamentally, It is a very different process and approach from each discipline and that’s
where creative versus analytical thinking meets and needs to be mediated to develop the
best possible solution.
2.4.2.2
Project outline
There are multiple ways to scope and view a project outline. As reviewed in the Section 2.3
It can begin with the underlying structure on when and how each team member interacts,
what information needs to be communicated, and forwarded, and how design choices
should be made collaboratively. Ultimately, the stresses around performing various design
iterations can be mediated by involving engineering disciplines earlier in the process and
developing the conceptual design already in collaboration between architects and engineers
[11]. Further, it is important to ensure that each involved discipline works towards a
common vision and that the project’s end goal has been communicated clearly [12, 22,
27]. As for any challenge faced in the process of working in complex team dynamics, each
difficulty can be viewed as a benefit, with no exception to this stumbling block. It should
be a team effort to evaluate each design choice to see how it aligns with the said goals
of the project, each input and viewpoint is a valuable addition for a better assessment.
Although the reality of it is more complex, some of the examples are:
• When it comes to a critical assessment of the design and functional decisions, archi-
tects tend to prioritize aesthetic solutions and physical experiences, influencing how
16
==PAGE:23==
2 Interdisciplinary teams
users interact with the building and ensuring the design can serve a deeper purpose.
However, for example, structural and systems engineers would prioritize structural
integrity, simplicity, and efficiency. That further can lead to frustrations between
the disciplines for prioritizing different design decisions that serve the purpose of
the project.
• The conflict of values can occur when a different design choice for the layout could
relieve the cost of structural elements in the building, but on the other hand, the
same layout could further push the sustainability goals of the project. Therefore
difficult mediation takes place and can cause friction.
• When working on the same project the architectural development of the building
design can be seen as more flexible in terms of iterations and changes even later in the
project. While engineering disciplines can be pressured into strict deadlines for the
analysis of the building and construction planning. The comparison of timelines and
expectations for deliverables can be grounds for misalignment and disagreements.
• In the initial design proposal and concept development phases often the team of
architects would be responsible for the decision making.
While that is just the
conceptual draft, it still sets the expectation of the project, however, the architect
alone can’t properly and objectively evaluate all the necessary engineering systems
and structural inputs. Highlighting the importance of facilitating interdisciplinary
group design discussions earlier in the process.
2.4.2.3
Knowledge
Lastly, one of the most common reasons for disagreements or difficulties in collaboration
is the baseline of each discipline: their knowledge and professional experience. Many
sources highlight that differences in expertise and professional backgrounds can lead to
misunderstandings and friction among team members [10, 11, 27, 29]. While that is the
most essential part of separating each individual and emphasizes the value of the con-
tribution to the team, it also provides grounds for both previously mentioned challenges
that stem from different thinking patterns and views. When coming from such different
educational backgrounds it can become difficult to fully comprehend the input and added
value of the opinions presented by other disciplines. It is unrealistic to expect specialists
to be over-saturated with information regarding every aspect of the building design, which
would significantly impact the performance level and quality of the professional contribu-
tion. However, some overlaps and better understanding could be implemented early on
in the educational process to highlight the importance and appreciation for working in
interdisciplinary teams. As an example:
• Disagreements between architects and engineers stem from the incorporation of
structural elements in the overall design concept of the building in a way that serves
the vision of the project.
Often architects lack a fundamental understanding of
structural engineering and practical knowledge about the execution of their designs,
while engineers rarely have a perception of design principles and theories. This way
the conversation around the implementation of two building systems in preliminary
design and construction can become extremely difficult.
17
==PAGE:24==
2 Interdisciplinary teams
• Architects and engineers come from very different environments where the commonly
used terminology can be discipline-specific, however, this makes it challenging to
understand each other and communicate with the same flow and high efficiency.
• Architectural education is built upon the history and theory of styles, forms, and
technologies throughout the evolution of architecture as a discipline.
Therefore,
architects are trained to recognize the various ways of developing buildings and ap-
proaching a design. On the other hand engineering disciplines are rarely exposed to
historical lessons about design concepts and architecture, that way the understand-
ing and appreciation for building design as a whole can be viewed so differently and
be easily misunderstood between the disciplines. This leads to misalignment within
values, for example, architects have a harder time understanding the complexity of
building analysis, while engineering disciplines are not as open to exploratory design
concepts because of the missing appreciation towards design.
2.5
Connecting the dots
The further we search for answers on how interdisciplinary teams are structured and
function as a unit, the further the root of difficulties can be discovered. Therefore, it is
essential to look for similarities, patterns, and pointers that indicate what is the essence
of the challenges faced in interdisciplinary teams.
Previously reviewed and researched sections reveal various challenges and processes con-
tributing to the difficulties of working within complex team dynamics. The outline of the
collaborative process is crucial in supporting quality and efficient teamwork. However,
it is important to consider how the stumbling blocks identified in Section 2.4.2, such as
thinking patterns, project outline, and knowledge, play significant roles as underlying
factors in these issues.
The organization and outline of a project dictate the timeline of when and how different
specialists interact and collaborate on various parts or stages of the building project. This
timeline significantly impacts the efficiency of collaboration. When other disciplines are
involved only at later stages, it can lead to numerous back-and-forth design iterations.
Additionally, the final design often deviates from the initial conceptual sketches, making
accurate cost and time estimations difficult [11]. Moreover, by examining the interactions
more closely, different disciplines can become very explicit and less open to mediating
their design choices, further complicating the navigation of building design development.
Additionally, thinking patterns, professional experiences, and background knowledge high-
light the emotional contribution and exchange of information. By how we receive and
deliver criticism and professional opinions, and how it is structured amongst the project
outline. Linking these concepts to the process of collaboration as a whole, and the feeling
of certainty that can be experienced throughout the project.
The beginnings of a building project are fulfilled with uncertainty as it is, there is a
need for information gathering and processing before decisions can be made and agreed
upon. It further requires supported interdisciplinary collaboration early in the design
development stages to navigate the conversation and development of the project in the
18
==PAGE:25==
2 Interdisciplinary teams
right direction from the start. When accounting for all the previously mentioned factors
it only becomes progressively more and more complex.
Figure 2.9 | Links between the challenging processes found in interdisciplinary teams
Figure 2.9 is a graphic representation showing the interconnections between different pro-
cesses. It places the project outline at the core of collaboration, illustrating the structure
of when and how team members interact. This framework resembles a sequence where
decisions must be made before proceeding to the next step. For instance, the general
structure of the building must be agreed upon before further developing the facade design.
When making such decisions the additional level of difficulty is presented with different
thinking patterns and background knowledge met by various specialists involved. These
differences create initial areas of disagreement and conflict, further linking to a sense of
uncertainty during decision-making.
Identifying the challenges of working in interdisciplinary settings is a complex task. There
is a sea of difficult processes, conflicts, inefficiencies, and personal contributions that
impact collaboration on building projects. All these challenges are interconnected, making
it even more difficult to achieve effective teamwork. However, in this study, the aim is to
address the following problems:
• The conceptual stages of building design development are not supported enough by
engineering disciplines.
• The late involvement in the design process of other disciplines can put additional
pressure on cost, time, and other project estimations, by requiring various major
design iterations.
• Each discipline has developed a completely different approach and thinking patterns,
that can challenge communication and shared values.
• There is a disbalance in design assessment due to different views of project goals
and outlines.
• Coming from such different educational backgrounds can become difficult to fully
comprehend the input and added value of the opinions presented by other disciplines.
• The background knowledge and terminology gaps between the specialists put a
strain on communication.
19
==PAGE:26==
2 Interdisciplinary teams
That can be further summarized and grouped into the following categories: thinking
patterns, background knowledge, and project outline.
The further focus of this thesis is to examine how biological thinking, specifically biomimet-
ics, addresses the interdisciplinary challenges presented. The study aims to determine
whether biomimetics can facilitate a link between disciplines and provide a more certain
outlook on the collaboration process. Assess how the use of biomimetic principles in build-
ing projects influences the involvement of various disciplines and whether it can facilitate
smoother information and knowledge exchange. The goal is to determine if this approach
can lead to stronger collaboration earlier in the process, support communication, and
improve the efficiency of "back and forth" design interactions.
20
==PAGE:27==
3 Biological thinking in the building industry
3
Biological thinking in the building industry
Using nature and biology as a source of inspiration in the building industry by no means
is a new concept. Still, due to evolving technologies, requirements, and ambitious sus-
tainability goals, the discussion of such ideologies being implemented in building design
has become more and more common. The use of biological principles in architecture is
widely recognized by the term biomimicry or biomimetics, however, today many different
definitions and levels of implementation exist, thus different specialists and practitioners
have varying interpretations of the use of biomimetics as a field of science in the building
industry [5]. In this section an overview of the diverse methodologies and ideologies used
will be carried out, highlighting the main similarities and differences between the terms.
3.1
Nature-inspired design in practice
At the core of the different definitions and applications of biology in the building industry,
the one common underlying principle is that the inspiration for the design is being drawn
from nature. It is a process that requires us to push even further the interdisciplinary
teamwork we know already.
Involve new professionals from the biology sciences and
rethink the ways we design buildings [4].
Using nature as a source of inspiration is
directly linked with innovative solutions and inventions that come from shared skills and
knowledge within the team.
The living organisms and nature around us are an ever-evolving chain of reactions to
environmental changes that are happening all the time. The beauty of drawing inspiration
from nature is that it aims to recognize how the organisms around us have solved problems
that could be reshaped and applied as solutions in our building designs [31]. However,
there rarely is a direct link or translation between biology and architecture and can be
difficult to acknowledge these principles that spark innovative solutions [9]. Hence, it
is very important to understand how to look for answers to such specific concepts. The
process of getting inspired can be divided into two general approaches: problem-based and
solution-based.
When working with a problem-based approach the first step is to define the issue that needs
to be resolved. Then simplify and scope the primary problem in that issue. That way there
are concrete principles, keywords, or functions that could be examined for solutions found
in natural organisms and systems. On the other hand, it can also be viewed through an
solution-based approach, where instead of looking for direct links for solutions the process
is more generalized and requires a wide range of research before inspiration can be found.
In addition to finding processes that are functional and intriguing, they also need to be
processed and reshaped into a tangible outcome [7].
These approaches are just the beginning of implementing nature-inspired designs.
It
helps to evaluate the process and narrow down the endless possibilities and amount of
information that exists in nature. Furthermore, there are three levels of implementation
in building design for each natural system and principle that differ in parts that are
imitated. Inspiration could be taken from the form or shape of an organism, it could also
be a mimic of a process found in nature, an observed behavior that is translated into a
building design, or lastly, the whole ecosystem could be mimicked and transferred from
21
==PAGE:28==
3 Biological thinking in the building industry
nature [31]. In all three levels, there is an even further division of possible imitation, such
as form, materials, construction, process, and function.
3.1.0.1
Organism level
At the organism level, a specific organism is mimicked, it could be through aesthetic
solutions focusing on the visual shape and form of the organism and translating that into
a building design. However, it is not limited to only visually resembling an organism
it could also mimic materials, structure, or the function of it [31]. As an example in
Figure 3.1 the design of St.Pancras International Terminal is inspired by the structure of
the flexible scales found on an animal called a pangolin [32]. Creating a building design
that can complement the function of railway paths more organically.
Figure 3.1 | Design of St.Pancras International Terminal inspired by pangolin [32]
3.1.0.2
Behavioural level
On a behavioral level, the inspiration comes from investigating how a specific organism
behaves, either on its own or in relation to its surrounding environment. Then these
processes are mimicked in buildings through different approaches. Either resembling the
way this organism builds and uses natural materials or zooming in to the core principles of
how it functions [31]. For example, Figure 3.2 the CH2 Building in Melbourne, Australia
is inspired by the way termites build their mounds with naturally developed temperature
regulation and passive ventilation [32]. Mimicking these functions into a building design
for an improved indoor climate.
Figure 3.2 | CH2 Building in Melbourne, Australia inspired by termite mounds [32]
22
==PAGE:29==
3 Biological thinking in the building industry
3.1.0.3
Ecosystem level
At the ecosystem level, a whole ecosystem is taken as the basis of inspiration. It inspects
the behavior of an organism on a larger scale, comparing it to the adjacent environment
and investigating the relations of other components and organisms involved [31]. This
level of nature-inspired design is usually applied to larger-scale projects with multiple
elements and parts to it, rather than a single structure. For example, shown in Figure 3.3
the studio Gianluca Santosuosso hive project is inspired by the function, structure, and
behavior of a beehive, introducing the concept of a new hybrid type of living space [32].
Figure 3.3 | The Hive project inspired by honeycombs [32]
3.2
Terminology
The previous section introduced different levels and ways of mimicking nature in building
designs, revealing how these approaches can lead to very diverse results. Therefore, it is
difficult to name all these principles under one definition, hence the reason for such diverse
terminologies. It is essential to understand when and what term is the most accurate and
how they differ.
Biomimicry. A more general and broader definition that describes the process of finding
inspiration from nature and mimicking these principles in building designs. It can be
carried through materials, structure, functional analysis, or visual effects. At the core of
its definition, it translates as innovation inspired by nature.
Biomimetics. Is defined as a more analytical approach to biologically inspired design.
Highlights the functional relationships and principles found in nature that can be trans-
ferred or even copied into the building design. A more scientific approach to nature-
inspired.
The International ISO standard ISO 18458:2015(en) the following definition describes
biomimetics: "interdisciplinary cooperation of biology and technology or other fields of
innovation with the goal of solving practical problems through the function analysis of bio-
logical systems (2.6), their abstraction (2.1) into models (2.15), and the transfer into and
application of these models to the solution" [6]. Where the definition itself highlights the
importance of working interdisciplinary between different fields of expertise like biology,
technology, and others.
Biomorphism. The term biomorphism or biomorphic design is used when the building
design closely represents forms and patterns found in nature. Includes organic shapes and
23
==PAGE:30==
3 Biological thinking in the building industry
enhances the visual flow of the design. Besides the visual aesthetic, there are no other
relationships with biological analogies.
Bionics.
A term used more commonly with biomechanical engineering.
Focused on
finding ways to replicate or replace a biological function through mechanically engineered
solutions.
Ecomimicry or ecomimetics. Is focused on eco-friendly solutions that are drawn from
nature and can represent functionality and relation to local conditions. It is a practice of
creating socially responsive and environmentally responsible technologies and innovations.
Organic design. Focused on creating a close replica of forms and structures found in
nature. Imitating the natural shapes of living organisms. Often can be focused on the
use of biodegradable and reusable materials.
These are some of the most commonly used terms and definitions when describing nature-
inspired designs. These definitions are used widely across different disciplines and sciences,
however, it is important to understand how they apply to building projects, architecture,
and engineering. The two very similar practices and terms of biologically inspired design
are biomorphism and organic design which focus more on the visual and aesthetic replica
of principles and organisms found in nature, mimicking shapes and forms. On the other
hand, bionics as a definition falls into a more technologically and mechanically driven
practice that can be used in product development and also in structural and tMEP sys-
tem engineering for buildings. With ecomimicry parallels can be drawn with any other
definition and practice because it’s a broader term that emphasizes sustainability and
ecofriendly solutions [5]. And lastly, the term biomimicry and biomimetics are known
to be commonly used in a general sense in architectural and engineering disciplines. It
includes all of the ideologies mentioned above and practices and can vary from one project
to another with different parts of nature imitated as the main focus. Therefore, further
in this research biologically inspired design will be referred to as "biomimicry".
3.3
Ways of working with biomimetics
As established in the previous section there is a difference between using nature as a source
of inspiration on a visual representation level or treating it like a science in engineering.
While both require knowledge and understanding of the principles and organisms found in
nature, it is significantly more difficult to investigate functional phenomena and translate
them into an engineering solution. This is where the biggest gap in differences between
engineering and biology can be observed. Biology as a science or discipline is always open-
ended with a lot of unknowns and unpredictable outcomes, on the other hand, engineering
is strictly based on predictions, analysis, and close-ended outcomes [33]. However, the
common ground is the search for answers and solutions that can be implemented to solve
given problems, and that is where biomimetics as a science can thrive.
When working with biomimetics one of the challenges is to work efficiently, every time a
new problem is defined new principles, discoveries, and innovations are developed through
a fresh start of research and analysis [4]. This iterative process highlights that not all
functions found in nature can be directly replicated in real-life designs. Therefore it’s a
24
==PAGE:31==
3 Biological thinking in the building industry
loop of discoveries, testing, and application. For this reason, it is important to look at
suggested ways to work with biomimetics, existing tools, and practices.
3.3.0.1
Theory of inventive problem solving
TRIZ or "Theory of inventive problem solving" is a problem-solving system developed in
Russia (1946), it is a collection of tools and techniques used in engineering even today.
To support the process of problem definition and solving. It suggests a creative process
of finding an existing solution and adapting it to another project, based on data and
research [34].
The tool essentially facilitates the transfer of inventions and solutions
between different fields of engineering, similar to the idea of biomimicry as a link between
engineering and biology [33]. Therefore, TRIZ as a methodology has been introduced as
one of the guidelines when working with biology, called BioTRIZ intending to support
the identification of functions found in nature and the transfer of them to engineering.
The drawback to using TRIZ as a support tool for biomimicry is that it operates based on
non-living and technical environments, while biology is both living and non-living systems
[4]. However, BioTRIZ incorporates different terminologies, representations, and defini-
tions for organisms and systems found in nature, furthermore supporting the extraction
of principles and analogies that can be applied to engineering problems in the building
industry.
The general idea of BioTRIZ is to recognize how problems and solutions we face are not
unique, they not only repeat across different sciences but also are already resolved by
the natural systems around us. Therefore by learning different patterns it can be applied
and reshaped into a specific problem. To do so, one of the first steps is to identify a
specific problem to examine further, then it needs to be simplified so that a generalized
version of that problem can be carried further [34]. With a standard problem identified a
function-oriented solution search can be performed.
In this phase of the process, a search engine called AskNature.org can be used. It provides
a platform where specific functional challenges can be searched for and matched with
organisms and systems found in nature that are known for solving the said issue. The
website is based on biomimicry taxonomy as the organizational and classification system,
meaning that these functions and phenomena found in nature are defined into represen-
tative functions and assigned to groups of related functions. The search results can be
used as a generalized solution or inspiration for further development, leading to further
investigations of biomimicry cases and design concept generation [35]. Lastly, reshaping
the initial simplified problem definition into a specific solution.
Figure 3.4 is a visual representation of the creative problem-solving process using BioTRIZ
methodology and biomimicry taxonomy as the primary tool.
25
==PAGE:32==
3 Biological thinking in the building industry
Figure 3.4 | BioTRIZ as a tool for biomimetics
As a summary of Section 3, the main findings and relevant key takeaways are summarized
below:
• Taking inspiration from biology can be expressed in different ways and levels of
implementation, therefore varying interpretations amongst specialists exist.
• While set terminologies and definitions exist, the idea of using nature as a source of
inspiration is still under development leading to certain discrepancies in applications
or views.
• Processes and principles found in nature cannot be directly resembled in the built
environment, therefore biomimetics explores this translation through abstraction
and transfer into engineering solutions.
• Bridging the gap between biology and engineering requires finding common ground
in knowledge and terminology.
26
==PAGE:33==
4 Biomimetics as a link between architecture and engineering
4
Biomimetics as a link between architecture and en-
gineering
When it comes to drawing inspiration from nature, various literature sources will em-
phasize the importance of interdisciplinary collaboration. How the best results and most
innovative solutions can be discovered when utilizing the knowledge of specialists across
a wide range of fields. There are existing guidelines and methodologies that suggest the
most efficient approach to implementing these scientific discoveries from biology into real-
world designs [7, 36]. Even the use of BioTriz, as introduced in Section 3.3, provides an
outline, suggesting how to transform, search and adapt these concepts. However, what
remains unclear is the direct link between the disciplines. How exactly is the collabora-
tion facilitated? Is it a truly interdisciplinary approach and does it address the identified
issues presented in this study?
This section will explore biomimetics through the lens of collaboration, examining its in-
fluence on the process and development of building design projects. Aiming to understand
the true nature of biomimetics.
4.1
The promise of biomimetics
The main driver for biomimetic applications to our everyday challenges is the belief that
nature has already solved or adapted to most of the challenges that we are facing in our
day-to-day lives. Nature has found ways to survive decades of environmental stresses and
respond by reorganizing its components to merge into today’s climate. In many ways,
nature can be seen as a powerful force and an excellent problem solver [7]. Therefore, it
is assumed that we can learn a lot from it, however, the biggest challenge is to learn how.
Figure 4.1 | An illustrative material from the article "Unleashing the Future of Architecture:
Embracing Biomimicry" by Ar. Saran Kumar
Biology is a science discipline that is the most familiar with processes and developments
happening in nature, on the other hand, engineers are the ones most familiar with the
complex technical challenges faced by humans. True innovation and tangible biologically
27
==PAGE:34==
4 Biomimetics as a link between architecture and engineering
inspired solutions can be created only when these disciplines cross paths and utilize the
exchange of knowledge. Hence, the reason that the core principle of biomimetics is defined
as a highly interdisciplinary collaborative work [6].
When it comes to building design, most literature sources address the increase in the
involved disciplines to research test, and implement concepts that are inspired by na-
ture. It brings together biologists, architects, designers, engineers, and material scien-
tists. Biomimetic approaches aim to facilitate the exchange of knowledge and expertise,
supporting the development of innovative concepts and solutions [7].
In addition to the promise of innovation, Biomimetics can be a motivator to achieve more
sustainable solutions. The approach of seeking inspiration from nature incorporates the
attributes of sustainability in itself [37]. Because these ideas and concepts are emerging
from the biological world. One of the major aspects of sustainability is the maintenance
of natural resources that help maintain the ecological balance [37]. Witch is exactly how
natural processes operate, therefore when taking these principles into engineered solutions
often these sustainable ideas and values are represented [8].
Other sources highlight the sustainability benefits of biomimetics as the development
of green products and systems, that account for protecting biodiversity and natural re-
sources. Conserving the natural habitat to our greatest ability and reducing the environ-
mental impacts on emissions and global warming [7].
Biomimetics is recognized for its innovative and interdisciplinary approach that can lead
to even further benefits such as environmentally responsible solutions. Very similarly it
applies to architecture as a design discipline. Where these living organisms and natural
phenomena are introduced into living spaces and functions [7]. At its baseline, biomimetics
promotes analysis of the living functions found in nature that can survive harsh conditions
and protect against the environment, ensuring long-term persistence. Finding parallels
with building designs promotes rethinking how architecture can become more functional
and inclusive, protect from the elements as well as provide safety and comfort [36].
In engineering disciplines, a common ground with biology lies in their shared focus on
problem-solving. Biology operates in an open-ended manner with numerous unknowns,
making it challenging to pursue answers linearly. In contrast, engineering thrives on data
and precise calculations, leading to predictable outcomes [38]. Despite these contrast-
ing approaches, both disciplines aim to explore ways to solve problems. Therefore, the
exchange of knowledge through biomimetic applications presents an opportunity to fuel
each discipline with a greater motivation to find innovative solutions.
Focusing solely on the definition and description of biomimetics in the building industry
presents a highly optimistic and inspiring outlook where interdisciplinary challenges can
be effectively addressed. It promises a more involved collaborative approach between the
disciplines, an approach that supports knowledge exchange between the different fields,
and a common goal within the team.
All these characteristics can help mediate the
difficulties of working in interdisciplinary teams, identified in Section 2. However, this
scenario is generalized and idealized, leaving room for debate and further exploration
of these factors. Thus, further sections aim to discover and understand how and when
biology influences interdisciplinary work.
28
==PAGE:35==
4 Biomimetics as a link between architecture and engineering
4.2
Sharing the aspiration
While empirical research comparing biomimetic project outlines to conventional building
project design phases is not widely investigated, existing literature explores biomimetic
applications in the building industry. Indicating, that the involvement of other disciplines
can be observed earlier in the design process. In the Section 2.3 a summarized conventional
project outline was evaluated, where the first initial design stages were executed by the
role of the architect. Later in the Section 2.4 the main complications of this approach
were analyzed. Discussing how early involvement from engineering disciplines could link
to more accurate time and cost estimations, support conceptual design proposals, reduce
the need for major iterations later in the process, and enhance certainty in early-stage
decision-making. Because of that, the use of biomimetic applications in building design
projects alone holds the potential to support interdisciplinary teams.
Therefore, this
section focuses on literature analysis aiming to investigate the collaboration processes
and timelines in biomimetic projects.
4.2.1
Literature analysis on the timeline of interdisciplinary collaborations
In the context of the fields of architecture, building construction, and civil engineering
AlAli et al. (2023) review how at the base of biomimetic application the abstraction and
application principles are researched, to be applied in various parts of the buildings such as
systems, processes, landscaping, layouts, structures, and facades [7]. Therefore, the first
initial project stages involve an interdisciplinary approach, to support the development of
potential implementation solutions.
Verbrugghe et al. (2023) outline how the biomimetic design process in architecture or
engineering begins with conceptualizing what the design should achieve. Using biomimetic
principles is not just a replication of external characteristics found in nature, but rather
an in-depth study and investigation [5]. Various design methods and principles guide
this search for inspiration, including bottom-up, top-down, design spiral, BioGen, and
others, each differing in their approach. These methods may start with biological research,
technical problem definition, exploration models, and more [5]. Verbrugghe et al. (2023)
highlight the key difference between traditional design approaches and biomimicry-based
ones, particularly in the concept generation phase. Designers usually look for solutions
within their field of expertise. However, due to limitations of educational backgrounds, it’s
not a common occurrence that design disciplines are educated in biology. Therefore, the
beginning of biomimetic projects requires biological knowledge support and engineering
expertise to transform these principles into designs [5]. When on the other hand more
conventional design approaches typically require such high interdisciplinary involvement
much later in the design stages where the discussion surrounds the first preliminary design
stages.
Biomimetic projects require intention behind the design, it is not a process that can be
done accidentally, unlike bio-inspired design where inspiration can be applied conceptually
[39]. Biomimetics is a carefully studied process of accurately carrying out the principles
found in nature through building design. Therefore it is crucial to facilitate high inter-
disciplinary involvement in the design process and explore early-stage development and
iterations [39].
29
==PAGE:36==
4 Biomimetics as a link between architecture and engineering
An example of biomimetics supporting the first initial stages of building design can be
reviewed in the Eastgate Center building by the architect M. Pearce in Harare, Zimbabwe,
where the approach to biological inspiration and translation into the building seemingly
represents how the biological phenomena are the starting point of each design choice.
The building was inspired by the principle of termite mounds and how they naturally
developed a ventilation system. Further, this knowledge was used as the basis of material
selection, structural element placement, and overall design choices [39]. Circling back, to
the process and stages of this biomimetic design, it is clear that biology played a significant
role in the development early on.
Figure 4.2 | The Eastgate Center in Harare, Zimbabwe by Mick Pearce
Le et al. (2018) introduced a process called the "Early-Biologisation approach" to improve
the acceptance of biomimetics in organizations. The biological aspects need to be explored
early on in the design process to ensure that the concept is evaluated properly, reveals
a fair representation, and clear reasoning. Further emphasizing how and if this solution
can address the identified issues [40].
Chayaamor-Heil and Vitalis (2021) highlight the differences between science and design
disciplines involved in building projects, explaining how architecture is not a discipline of
science, however, engineering and biology are [9]. Therefore the flow between the disci-
plines is harder to achieve than anticipated. Biology can rather be seen as the mediator
between the disciplines, where certain collaborations and shared goals can be explored
through biological inspiration in the early design stages.
Guzowski et al.(2022) adapted a six-step design process that evaluates the following bi-
ological concepts: biological function, biodiversity, and evolution. To support biological
terminology transfer into the design, a stronger biological accuracy and provide more
structure to the process of knowledge transfer [36]. The six stages are organized in a loop
to ensure the possibility of circling back to any given point. However, at the basis of the
process are the same principles reviewed in Section 3.3, identifying the problem, trans-
forming it, and then applying it to architectural concepts. This furthermore, showcases
how even before the concept development phase in building projects a huge amount of
research and interdisciplinary collaboration takes place. Reorganizing the linear building
design approach that we are familiar with in a more conventional project.
30
==PAGE:37==
4 Biomimetics as a link between architecture and engineering
4.2.2
The timeline
The previous chapter reviewed literature sources that indicate that the biomimetic project
outline can be different compared to a more conventional project. Incorporating biological
principles and knowledge into building designs seemingly requires more preparation and
knowledge exchange. For more innovative solutions it also demands extensive testing and
iterations. That leads to further questioning if the interdisciplinary involvement in the
early project stages can further relieve the design process? We can draw conclusions based
on existing research and literature reviewed in Section 4.2.1, additionally linking it back
to previously analyzed challenges found in interdisciplinary teams.
Figure 4.3 is a visual representation of how the interdisciplinary collaboration and in-
volvement with a biomimetic approach starts earlier in the design phases, compared to
the project outline reviewed in the Section 2.4, Figure 2.6. Based on the literature anal-
ysis, it is fair to conclude that engineering and biology disciplines are more involved in
the early stages of a project. During this phase, biological principles and phenomena
are explored to discover innovative applications for building design. These principles can
influence various aspects such as structural grids, design components, material selection,
or collective systems, affecting further design choices. However, the direct collaboration
between architecture, biology, and engineering remains unclear, as biological inspiration
cannot be directly translated into building design elements or concepts.
Figure 4.3 | Phases of building design development with biomimetics
A more collaborative approach earlier in the project could further be seen as a poten-
tial opportunity to relieve the interdisciplinary challenges presented in the Section 2.4.2.
Identifying a common goal and interest of a biomimetic approach early in the project can
provide additional support for the project outline ensuring that all disciplines and special-
ists are informed and equally involved. Furthermore, the interdisciplinary requirement for
biomimetic projects can help facilitate clear information and knowledge exchange where
each specialist can contribute to the conversation by adding valuable insights for a better
assessment of the biological principles.
These are strong arguments that potentially can hold a lot of importance over the further
teamwork dynamic. It aligns the team members and facilitates a shared aspiration or a
31
==PAGE:38==
4 Biomimetics as a link between architecture and engineering
clear goal. Testing and going through multiple design iterations in the earlier building
design development stages also can limit the need for more serious design changes later in
the process. However, it is also important to recognize and evaluate the difficulties that
can be experienced in such different approaches. For that reason, the following section
aims to review the potential gaps and challenges of biomimetic projects in the building
industry.
4.3
Where scientific knowledge and design practices meet
There are literature sources that explore the difficulties of using biology as a source of
inspiration in biomimetics [7, 9, 36, 41]. Naturally, opinions are divided. Some see the
beauty and potential of biomimetics as the future of sustainable building design, while
others argue that biologically inspired design needs significant refinement to be consid-
ered an applicable approach. Within the scope of this study, the goal is to find arguments
for both, to conduct a fair comparison and evaluation of further steps for improvement.
Previous sections explore the possibility of biomimetics addressing interdisciplinary chal-
lenges, however, certain complications hold great influence over interdisciplinary aspects
within diverse specialist building design teams.
4.3.1
Identifying the discipline
Vitalis and Chayaamor-Heil (2022) analyze the true complexity of working with scientific
concepts in a design-based field like architecture. How that can lead to further confusion
when using certain terminology and approaches [41]. Because biomimetic buildings are a
result of merging architectural design and biological science. This raises the question of
whether biomimetics can be considered a science and if biomimetic architecture should
also be classified as a science. However, a biomimetic approach does not always directly
translate biological sciences, making it debatable whether it can be called a science in the
first place [41].
Therefore, there is a need to redefine the roles and disciplines involved in biomimetic
building projects. It should also be clarified where biomimetics stands in the merging
of these disciplines.
We cannot rebuild the conventional approach to building design
development with the involvement of biology while maintaining traditional views and
associations with each discipline’s role.
Graeff et al. (2020) explored the lack of methodologies, tools, and guidelines for the role of
biology in biomimetic projects. The wide range of research focuses on tools and methods
developed for engineering disciplines to make biological knowledge accessible. However, it
leads to several limitations, for example, how to search for applicable biological phenom-
ena, the scientific language and terminology being difficult to assess to recognize relevant
information and understand biological information sources to fairly represent those ideas
in an engineering solution [42]. Hence the support and involvement of biologists is highly
necessary. Additionally, current methods and tools are primarily focused on translating
knowledge from biology to engineering. However, it is equally crucial for biology dis-
ciplines to receive support in translating information from engineering to biology [42].
Therefore, Graeff et al. (2020) addressed the need for supported knowledge exchange
32
==PAGE:39==
4 Biomimetics as a link between architecture and engineering
with the proposal of a new discipline called the "Biomimetician", which specializes in
supporting the communication between sciences.
4.3.2
Biomimetic architecture
Architecture can be recognized for advocating for humans and the built environment,
designed to facilitate emotional and physical well-being for its users. Therefore, navigat-
ing the balance between holistic designs and integrating biological concepts into living
spaces can pose challenges. As reviewed in Section 3.1, there are different levels of apply-
ing biological knowledge and inspiration to building designs. These range from abstract
and superficial approaches to more scientifically and mathematically grounded solutions,
where it’s possible to compromise and lose the value of architectural principles in trans-
lation [41].
With the growing awareness around environmental responsibility and the need for sus-
tainable solutions, biomimetic applications in building designs seem to be recognized as a
potential to discover a positive change in the current building industry. It puts additional
pressure on the architect to shift the focus from primarily surrounding the human bene-
fit and comfort, to what’s best for the environment [36]. While these ideas can co-exist
and be presented to the same level of importance in any building design, some of the
biomimetic examples can be very innovative and novel, making it difficult to evaluate the
architectural contribution and values.
The application of biomimetics in architecture often is explored through the implemen-
tation of an engineered component developed by seeking inspiration from nature, rather
than the building design as a whole representing principles and functions found in nature
[9]. True biomimetic building designs, which fully integrate biologically inspired design
principles into both spaces and functional solutions, are rarely found. More commonly,
biomimetic elements such as innovative materials, structural systems, aesthetic solutions,
or facade designs are integrated into buildings.
Chayaamor-Heil and Vitalis (2021) emphasize how easily biological knowledge can be ma-
nipulated into architectural designs with an example of various buildings being organized
in small subgroups, similar to penguins who stick close to each other in small huddles.
While it was not the initial design concept and reasoning for grouping these buildings,
after the found analogy this design choice was explained and justified through this idea
taken from nature [9]. Showcasing how the biological component can be intentionally en-
hanced by the architect to emphasize the link between the biological phenomena. Where
architectural design consists of elements that can be expressed through an analogy found
in nature, even though that was not a part of the primary design concept [9].
4.3.3
The interdisciplinary scales
Whether it is an intentionally designed component of the building or the unintentional dis-
covery of a design principle that mimics a biological phenomenon, one characteristic that
can be observed in literature sources is that none of the involved disciplines can "stand-
alone" [7, 9, 36, 42]. Biological concepts and knowledge cannot be directly implemented
without being translated into engineering, architectural designs cannot accurately rep-
33
==PAGE:40==
4 Biomimetics as a link between architecture and engineering
resent natural processes and biological characteristics without biological knowledge, and
engineering disciplines cannot properly analyze and evaluate a biological concept in a
building without the involvement of both other disciplines.
However, the interdisciplinary involvement could be argued upon. Architecture at its
core principles is a design-based discipline, on the other hand, biology and engineering
are science-based. It is nearly impossible to take a biological process and directly repli-
cate it in a building design [9]. Therefore, the engineer’s involvement is the most essential
link between the disciplines. Because the biomimetic solutions can truly be tested when
applying sciences, analyzing the nature of the discovery and impact to such implemen-
tation into buildings [7]. Only then can the biomimetic component become part of the
architectural design. Indicating that the interdisciplinary link and collaboration is much
closer between biology and engineering, architecture is the field of application, rather than
discovery. This division between the disciplines is represented in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4 | The split between the disciplines
4.3.4
The limitation of knowledge
Another layer of challenges arises when merging two distinct worlds. Biomimetic applica-
tions in buildings combine knowledge of nature and its biological processes with knowledge
of the built environment. This integration can add additional pressure on interdisciplinary
collaborations, requiring learning new terminologies and information to fully evaluate the
use of biology [9].
Each biomimetic project starts with explorations of biological phenomena to draw inspira-
tion from. This requires extensive research that needs to be conducted to first understand
the principles, and secondly to evaluate if the translation into the building design still
resembles the true biological principle. On top of that, most biological concepts require
biological knowledge to fully comprehend, which includes a new terminology that archi-
tects and engineers need to familiarize themselves with. This can further add more stress
on the time and budget constraints of projects, and add difficulties in communicating
in interdisciplinary teams. These challenges are common in biomimetics, therefore it is
important to recognize them as an additional layer of complexity and evaluate the impact
it leaves on collaboration.
34
==PAGE:41==
4 Biomimetics as a link between architecture and engineering
4.4
The potential of biomimetics
There are plenty of positive outcomes and influences from biomimetic applications. The
use of biological inspiration holds the potential to relieve a lot of the identified interdisci-
plinary challenges. However, there are more challenging aspects of biomimetics that are
identified in the Section 4.3. Biomimetic applications are especially successful with the
support of engineering disciplines, but there is an existing fine line of disciplinary col-
laboration that becomes difficult to manage when the efforts are moved into the building
design and the true representation of biology becomes harder to achieve. Additionally, the
complexity of such projects and the limitation of knowledge or shared processes between
other building projects require treating all projects as unique, where the information gath-
ering, research, and testing need to be done from scratch. That way once again, circling
back to time constraints and the pressure of uninformed decision-making. On top of that,
the limitation of knowledge exchange also exists within the different fields of science and
design practices.
Furthermore, the lack of guidelines and concrete methodologies can cause further confu-
sion between biomimetic approaches and implementations. The role of biological sciences
is seemingly different between various literature sources or case study analyses. It varies
between being the guiding link between other sciences and engineering disciplines or being
used as just an inspiration without a true understanding of deeper biological principles.
As well as being just a small part of the process, that needs a highly abstract translation
to become architectural [41].
The main areas of improvement or challenges with biomimetic application in building
projects are summarized as follows:
• Biology is a field of science, while architecture is a field of design, these fields can’t
blend naturally.
• With new knowledge, terminology, and approach the disciplinary roles in biomimetic
projects become unclear.
• Most commonly biomimetics in building projects is expressed as either conceptual
and architecture focused, or highly engineered, technical solutions.
• It is difficult to achieve and assess the true representation of biological principles in
building design, often information and values are lost through transition.
• Biological concepts transfer most effectively through engineering disciplines, however
further implementation into buildings cannot exist without design disciplines like
architecture.
• The search and filtering for biological information sources, further implementation,
and knowledge exchange is a complex, time-consuming process.
To provide a fair comparison and review of the implications of biomimetics on interdisci-
plinary collaboration Figure 4.5 evaluates side by side the problems identified in Section 2
with challenges and potentials identified in Section 4.
35
==PAGE:42==
4 Biomimetics as a link between architecture and engineering
Figure 4.5 | The evaluation of potential improvements and challenges
In Figure 4.5 the hatched areas represent the gaps that hold the potential to further
address interdisciplinary challenges and improve the application of biomimetics.
The
dashed lines represent the "grey" areas that can be interpreted differently either to relieve
the interdisciplinary challenges or add additional complications that impact collaboration
and can, therefore, be redefined and improved.
The existence of these gaps is not necessarily negative. Instead, they represent potential
areas for improving biomimetics. They suggest a need for a new approach that empha-
sizes interdisciplinary collaboration, addresses knowledge gaps, and facilitates a structured
approach to biomimetics. An approach that could serve as a mediator to ensure equal
involvement from various disciplines throughout the design process and stages.
36
==PAGE:43==
5 The helping hand beyond biomimetics
5
The helping hand beyond biomimetics
The built environment and nature share more similarities than we might acknowledge,
which explains why the integration of biology into the building industry is gaining trac-
tion. There are numerous benefits and innovations associated with the application of
biomimetics in traditional building projects. It fosters collaboration between disciplines,
promotes innovation, introduces novel approaches to building design, and drives the de-
velopment of sustainable materials and systems.
Various tools, methodologies, and research have covered the topic of biomimetics. From
examining the benefits of such approaches to investigating the knowledge transfer and
implementation into building designs.
However, despite the efforts the use of biology
sciences still hasn’t been fully developed and explored to its fullest potential. The ap-
plication of biomimetic principles in building design development alters the conventional
way of developing building designs, hence the reason it is met with a lot of challenges
that have been identified in the Section 4.3. Furthermore, this chapter aims to explore
research and concepts supporting the integration of biology to identify potential areas for
improvement that could alleviate some of the challenges. Additionally, it examines how
these challenges are being addressed.
5.1
Building design that is rooted in biology
As one of the closest examples of architecture being explored through biological principles
and definitions the idea of morphogenetics in architecture presents the concept to view
buildings as self-organizing. The main relevance of such methodology for this study can be
found in the research that presents the main characteristics and potential of such imple-
mentation in building design. Where the discussion involves the assessment of how these
biological principles translate into building designs and how they affect interdisciplinary
collaboration as well as calls for the need to re-frame the conventional disciplinary roles.
Morphogenetic architecture stems from a biological process- morphogenesis. In biology,
put in simple terms it looks at the growth and development of an organism, based on
the movement of cells and tissues, observing how it self-organizes into becoming a more
complex organism capable of a variety of functions [43]. This biological growth happens
from the genotype to phenotype [44]. By biological definitions, the phenotype is an individ-
uals or organisms observable traits, like physical appearance or characteristics. However,
the genotype is a set of genes in DNA that are responsible for those unique traits. This
development in biology is expressed as:
Genotype + Environment →Phenotype [44]
While this is knowledge that is deeply rooted in biology and processes found in nature,
a certain analogy allows us to apply this to building designs. If the building is analyzed
through the same approach it is possible to find similarities. For example, the phenotype
in architecture could be identified as the typology of the building, and the environment
where buildings exist and are being realized is similar to the environment where biological
organisms develop. Lastly, the genotype could be explained as "design genes" that develop
or self-organize into buildings[44]. Therefore, in morphogenetic architecture, the equation
37
==PAGE:44==
5 The helping hand beyond biomimetics
can be translated and presented as:
Architectural "Design genes" + Environment →Architectural typology
By exploring and implementing this idea into building designs, there is potential to
change the traditional understanding of architecture. Buildings could become adaptive
and responsive, and evolve with their user and environmental stresses.
This idea of
self-organizing buildings takes the concept of biological inspiration and biomimetics even
further. Instead of translating functions, materials, and phenomena of organisms found
in nature, it changes the architectural components, enabling us to focus on the develop-
ment or growth process in buildings [45]. With the application of such ideology, it is also
important to recognize that the architecture as we know and understand doesn’t have to
drastically change, It is rather focused on the design process as a whole.
Working with a set of predefined design genes and architectural typology can be especially
beneficial for the decision-making and modeling process, however, the biggest challenge
of morphogenetic architecture principles is the categorization of typology [44]. There are
endless ways to classify and categorize a building starting from its different components,
to its intended use and functions or even location, and environment. Therefore, this could
be one of the more difficult aspects of implementing the idea of genotypes into building
design.
McGinley et al. (2016) present the idea of supported knowledge transfer by identifying
Hybrid Concepts Figure 5.1. That aims to address the gap between biology and archi-
tecture by finding common ground and identifying the potential blend of knowledge [44].
This, however further highlights the true level of complexity that comes with merging
two different disciplines like biology and architecture, without a common middle ground
in terminology, concepts and principles such implementation is nearly impossible. Hence,
even with such hybrid concepts presented in the Figure 5.1 it is evident that they can’t
exist by themselves and require prior knowledge and understanding of biological concepts.
Figure 5.1 | An overview of hybrid concepts (McGinley et al., 2016) [44]
The framework of morphogenetic architecture suggests a different approach to building
development, the process of designing, and a way to classify and analyze architecture. For
that reason, assessing the effects of interdisciplinary collaboration is equally important.
How does such a framework alter the responsibilities of each role?
38
==PAGE:45==
5 The helping hand beyond biomimetics
McGinley (2015) emphasizes how the application of morphogenetic architecture principles
blurs the lines between the responsibilities of different roles. For instance, the architect
takes on the role of a host responsible for facilitating the exchange and translation of
information into design forms. Engineers, on the other hand, focus more on parametric
systems, organizing, and analyzing organic forms. Together, the design team becomes
more engaged from the project’s beginning, assessing context, environment, and typology-
based data or "design genes", which act as building blocks [43].
While it might seem that such ideas and biological concepts are not widely used and
practiced in building design today, there are real-life examples that embody the concept
of morphogenetics to some extent. In a practical approach, morphogenetic architecture
or engineering is explored through parametric design, which allows the manipulation of
the building design throughout different development stages and supports the complexity
of certain designs. It automates parts of the design process and uses parameters and
constraints to solve a defined problem. Additionally, tools such as BIM support the idea
of manipulating a design by managing elements, parts, and objects of the building that
are categorized in building components and can be reusable [43].
The ICD/ITKE University of Stuttgart is widely recognized for the most novel and in-
novative pavilion designs that are based on the exploration of biological concepts and
materials. These pavilions provide an example of morphogenetics by exploring and test-
ing computational tools and engineering principles to create architecture that behaves in
a biomimetic manner, adapting to environmental conditions and functional requirements
[46].
Figure 5.2 | livMatS Pavilion 2020-21 by ICD/ITKE/IntCDC, University of Stuttgart [46]
5.1.1
From biology to engineering
One of the more complicated aspects of morphogenetic architecture and the exploration
of architectural genotypes and phenotypes is the required knowledge base for understand-
ing and incorporating principles that heavily rely on a deep understanding of biological
sciences. Specialists in architecture or engineering often lack familiarity with this knowl-
edge and terminology, adding a layer of complexity to building projects. Therefore, it
39
==PAGE:46==
5 The helping hand beyond biomimetics
is beneficial to recognize valuable ideas from this approach and facilitate a transition in
concepts to make them more accessible and applicable across disciplines.
A concept this study will further focus on is the idea of identifying "design genes" or
building blocks. These can be represented through building components or functionalities.
Referring back to the idea of self-organizing buildings, these design genes could then be
used to support the developmental process of building projects.
To understand the potential of self-organizing buildings with parametric designs Aasprong
(2020) explores the relationship between engineering principles and biological concepts
and identifies "morphogens" or "design genes" as the basis of self-organizing buildings
that can further guide the development of the design.
Several analogies for different
categories were made, comparing biological concepts to building design.
Additionally
finding analogies from biology to architecture, structure, and MEP-related components
[47]. These analogies are showcased in Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3 | Analogy between anatomical and building hierarchies (Aasprong, 2020) [47]
McGinley and Krijnen (2022) highlight the benefit of a shared aspiration in an inter-
disciplinary setting and discuss how sustainability could be the meeting point. Certain
challenges stem from the lack of sustainability frameworks that support the integration
of various specialists involved in building projects. Therefore, the suggested solution lies
within a framework that supports the collaborative processes together with structured
building analysis [2].
By extending the BOT ontology (Building Topology Ontology) McGinley and Krijnen
(2022) classify building components and their spatial relationships between them such as
[2]:
• Project
• Site
• Building/ Outside
• Skin/ Outside
• Core/ Space
• Space/ Plenum
• Structures/ Services
• Space/ Stuff
40
==PAGE:47==
5 The helping hand beyond biomimetics
Architects work with spaces, the inside functions, and skin or facades, while structural
engineers are interested in load distribution and structural integrity. This relationship is
supported by the use of BIM. These two disciplines rely on each other and are affected
by changes requested by one or the other, requiring architecture or structure to adapt.
Services or MEP disciplines are focused on the indoor climate, daylight and heat distri-
bution in spaces, skin of the building, facade and all the services. Fire safety engineers
are working very closely with both the architectural and strucutral model to ensure safe
evacuation as well as structural fire safety. And that is linked back to the spaces, skin,
structure components. And lastly, geospatial engineers who mainly focus on the site [2].
McGinley and Krijnen (2022) analyze the interdisciplinary involvement, how it relates to
working in a shared 3D environment, the use of different tools, and the assessments that
impact other disciplines [2]. Further showcasing that interests between the disciplines
are highly linked and overlapping amongst different building components. However, the
information exchange could still be supported better and should lead to specialists being
more informed and collaborative, rather than highly individual views and analysis of the
building within each discipline [43].
This search for classification of building components and their relationships to involved
disciplines and building parts indirectly represents the idea of morphogenetics and "de-
sign genes" or building blocks. By representing components that can be organized and
combined to create a building.
5.1.2
Supported building analysis
The idea of suggesting a framework that supports the categorization of building compo-
nents and identifies "design genes" or building blocks has evolved into the development of
the Building Design Analysis Matrix (McGinley, n.d.). This matrix primarily focuses on
supporting the evaluation of building designs.
The Building design evaluation matrix Figure 5.4 is divided into a 4x4 grid that ex-
plores the building on various levels, angles, and concepts. It covers the overall design
parameters, as well as detailed building components. This matrix can be used as a tool
or a framework that provides structure and supports the design development process by
offering an overview of all the necessary components needed in a building. The main cate-
gories are root, space, concept, and product, that is then explored through function,
vertical, bounding, and horizontal systems or components.
41
==PAGE:48==
5 The helping hand beyond biomimetics
Figure 5.4 | Building Design Analysis Matrix (McGinley, n.d.)
There are two perspectives on using the Building Design Analysis Matrix, each offering
insights into how this evaluation framework can support building design development. One
process is analysis-based, where an existing building is analyzed to extract and organize
building information. The other process is design-led, aiming to develop a building design
project using the matrix as a guidance tool [48, 49].
This evaluation matrix, when used as an analysis tool for existing or under-development
building projects, provides a framework for analyzing and categorizing information stored
in a 3D model. It helps create data sheets that contain information about the building’s
components and the relationships between different parts, functions, or objects. These
data sheets offer an overview of the building’s elements, which can then be used as a
"catalogue" for new building design development or as a means to analyze the impact of
design changes. This approach leads to a more agile process for redesigning or improving
the design, allowing each iteration to be easily overseen and analyzed [48]. This catego-
rization of building components offers a fresh perspective on the design process and holds
significant potential if extended into a larger database. It suggests a design approach that
emphasizes the use of existing knowledge for more efficient work, potentially addressing
the issue of starting each project from scratch and supporting informed decision-making
early in the design development stages. With the design-led approach, the evaluation
matrix serves as the foundation for design development. Each building block facilitates
42
==PAGE:49==
5 The helping hand beyond biomimetics
discussions on which parts of the building to assess, making the process more guided and
providing a structured project outline [49].
To provide measurable criteria the Building Design Analysis Matrix can be assigned to
the Building Environmental Assessment Tools (BEATS). For example, the vertical com-
ponents are related to the ratio between the core of the building versus the usable space,
or the horizontal assessment connected to the total gross floor area. The assigned BEATS
can help shape the scope and impact of each decision made in the developmental process,
informing the design team of the possibilities to improve or compromise certain parts of
the building. With the addition of assessing it against the project’s sustainability and
overall goals (McGinley, n.d.).
While there is no evidence or testing regarding the impact on interdisciplinarity, such a
framework has the potential to support collaboration. As reviewed in Section 2.4.2 one of
the more challenging aspects of efficient and successful collaboration is the knowledge gap
between the disciplines. And the unknown perspectives of other specialists. Additionally,
in Section 5.1.1 there are mentions of unawareness between the disciplines when it comes
to edits and design iterations, and how they impact other roles of the team, even though
interests of different disciplines overlap throughout parts of the building [2]. By providing
a common ground for discussions across all disciplines, the framework holds the potential
to facilitate important conversations about various aspects of the building design early
in the development process. In the analysis approach, the impact of decisions can be
visualized through organized and sorted data sheets.
Alternatively, in the design-led
approach, the process can be organized and supported using the matrix as the foundation
for the design.
5.2
Supported knowledge exchange
The section above reviews the use of biology as a source of inspiration or analogy for
the way we organize buildings, their components, and the design process. It reveals the
idea that biology can become part of the building design and certain inspirations can
be used to support the design development process and provide an alternative structure.
Furthermore, this section aims to discover the additional tools that support the integration
of biological knowledge in the engineering field.
Some of the tools and approaches to biomimetics have already been analyzed and re-
viewed in Section 3.3, primarily focusing on applying biological inspiration to the engi-
neering field. However, this chapter aims to address the difficulties and challenges with
biomimetics identified in Section 4.3, particularly concerning knowledge transfer and ed-
ucational background gaps between disciplines.
Fayemi et al. (2017) mapped out a set of tools related to biomimetics, and aligned them
in the following categories [50]:
• Abstraction tools
• Transfer tools
• Application tools
43
==PAGE:50==
5 The helping hand beyond biomimetics
• Analysis tools
The Transfer tools category consists of tools that specifically aim to support the informa-
tion and knowledge transfer from biology. Tools such as previously reviewed Taxonomy in
Section 3.3, Inventive principles (IP) a definition of principles that are used to problem-
solving, further extended into a Contradiction Matrix that supports the designers to link
formalized problems to inventive principles. And Resources analysis, a tool that aims to
provide additional resources for the analyzed systems, that way supporting the designer
with a database of additional material that might not be recognized as useful at first [50].
As some of the most problematic aspects of biomimetics, Kruiper et al. (2018) list a few
reasons why the process of biological research can be inefficient and cost a lot of time.
Starting from the browsing of information sources, and then filtering the relevant data
that requires developing an understanding of the biological principles or terminologies.
Furthermore, the problematic processes are identified as [51]:
• Findability, highlights the inefficiency of searching for specific keywords associated
with biology. These terms do not naturally transfer between disciplines, often re-
sulting in either an overwhelming number of irrelevant sources that require filtering
or no search results at all.
• Recognizability, further emphasizes the challenge in the information filtering pro-
cess. Engineering disciplines are not equipped to effectively assess the credibility
and relevance of found information. This can lead to wasted time on valuable in-
formation getting overlooked and missed.
• Understandability, underlines the challenge of developing a deeper understanding
of biological systems or concepts even after valuable sources have been found and
filtered. This process can be time-consuming as engineers and other disciplines work
to extract valuable information from these sources.
Only a small portion of all the biological knowledge is accessible and is being used in
biomimetics. Most databases are populated by hand for example AskNature and therefore
are incredibly difficult to maintain and extend. Therefore, a big part of this process can
be relieved with computer-aided tools [51].
Existing computer-aided tools face challenges in mapping information between the biolog-
ical and engineering domains because of the differences in terminology between the two
fields, examples of these tools are listed as follows [51]:
• Natural Language for Relevant Biological Words (NLP)
• Scalable Search for systematic Biologically Inspired Design system (SEABIRD)
• Intelligent Biologically Inspired Design system (IBID)
Biomimetics often focuses on function-based search words or the transferring of functions
found in nature to engineering. However, in biological science sources, descriptions of
function, performance, or physical relations of biological principles and systems are not
common. Valuable information sources might get missed because the function-related
searches do not appear in the text. A common language between the fields of science does
44
==PAGE:51==
5 The helping hand beyond biomimetics
not exist, meaning that search words that could be directly found in biological sources
won’t simply transfer into engineering terms [51].
Due limitations of existing computer-aided tools in supporting information exchange in
biomimetics, particularly with function-related search terms, Kruiper et al. (2018) suggest
addressing this issue through the use of trade-offs.
In biology, trade-offs introduce a
biological term and then explain its context, including implicit and explicit trade-offs.
Linking this back to engineering, where biological terms may not be familiar to engineers,
describing their relationships can clarify their meaning and relevance [51]. An example is
showcased in Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5 | An example of a sentence that contains the biological term, implicit and explicit
trade-offs, showcasing the opportunity of using contextual descriptions (Kruiper et al., 2018)
[51].
The use of trade-offs can facilitate the knowledge exchange between the sciences, by
supporting analogical transfer making it easier to compare systems, characteristics, or
even functions based on their contextual properties [51]. This principle is visualized in
Figure 5.6 where the function-based search words lead to insufficient results that do not
support the engineer with its full potential, versus biology expressed in contextual form
or relations, that can be easier understood and transferred into engineering.
Figure 5.6 | Knowledge transfer supported with the use of trade-offs [51]
45
==PAGE:52==
5 The helping hand beyond biomimetics
Kruiper et al. (2018) further develop this principle into a framework that explores the dif-
ferent possible levels of abstraction and transfer into engineering-related concepts. Start-
ing from the biological information sources being recognized through trade-offs of certain
biological terms or concepts. Then with the support of computer-aided biomimetic tools
relevant data and sources are identified and gathered. The next steps include the abstrac-
tion and transfer of biological knowledge, testing, and implementation in an engineered
solution [51].
5.3
The missing link
The sections above reviewed different approaches to how biology can play a role in the
building industry, engineering, or design, besides the already identified and reviewed
biomimetic process. While great examples presented ways in which the integration of
biological knowledge can be supported and addressed, they also revealed the missing
links between the fields of biology and engineering.
Section 5.1 illustrates the challenges of implementing biological principles and knowledge
into building design. The lack of shared knowledge and understanding of biological ter-
minology representation prevents direct integration. revealing the gaps where research
and improvements can be implemented in engineering to bridge this gap. Additionally,
Section 5.1 highlights the deep-rooted impact of our understanding of buildings. Intro-
ducing new terminology or ideologies significantly influences not only our perspectives on
building design but also the entire design process. This means that any proposed change
to conventional building design practices affects more than just vocabulary or outcomes,
it also requires shifts in disciplinary roles, collaboration, and design approaches.
As a great example the building analysis matrix reviewed in Section 5.1.1 proposes a
framework for analyzing the building design through predefined "building blocks" that
support the structure of building design and analysis, provides the opportunity to have
a more agile approach to design, as well as facilitates a conversation between the dis-
ciplines over shared sustainability goals.
However, examining closer the idea of these
"building blocks" or "design genes" traces back to principles and processes found in nature
called morphogenetics. While such a matrix can be integrated into the process of de-
sign development and widely understood between various disciplines involved, ideas like
morphogenetic architecture seem highly abstract and therefore difficult to present in a
building design development.
Furthermore, the section Section 5.2 highlights the true level of complexity when it comes
to biology being used as a source of inspiration in engineering. It adds additional tasks and
responsibility to the involved disciplines to research, analyze, and apply knowledge that
comes from a completely different field of science. Currently, various tools and methods
aim to support this process, however, they are widely focused on the first initial phases
of research and knowledge gathering. This means that the next steps that translate these
ideas further into engineering are the least supported and leave additional weight on
disciplinary collaborations and design development.
There are various stumbling blocks when it comes to the integration of two fields of
science. To some extent, it can even become undesirable to work with biomimetics in
46
==PAGE:53==
5 The helping hand beyond biomimetics
building designs, due to various levels of complexity added and the limitation of supported
knowledge transfer. Additionally, it remains unclear how the roles of each discipline should
adapt and take upon more responsibilities or how the process as a whole should look so
that it supports the integration of biology. Should engineers and architects familiarize
themselves with biological knowledge to the point that a single person can be responsible
for the biological application of building design? Or rather develop a basic understanding
just so the transfer can happen in close collaboration?
While those are parts that remain unclear, the underlying issue is that with biomimetics
or other biological knowledge being applied in engineering, it is expected that through
collaboration and research, it is possible to blend the two environments, however, it is
nearly impossible to do without proper support and guidelines. Hence, the reason this
gap between the fields of science and design exists.
Most importantly, the implications of interdisciplinary collaboration need to be addressed.
Whether the responsibility shifts from various disciplines depending on the stage of the
project, or if the involved biology discipline needs to have an understanding of design or
engineering. The solution may rely on redefinition of disciplinary roles, or reshaping the
way we approach biomimetics. This means that we cannot implement biology and not
address the implications on the process of building design development, further expecting
that everything integrates seamlessly. As well as it cannot be expected that each involved
specialist adjusts their field of knowledge. Hence, a potential solution relies on the addition
of a new discipline, that can enhance the collaboration as a mediator, support the idea
transfer, supervise the implementation so that the solution remains true to the biological
inspiration, and relieve the knowledge gap.
47
==PAGE:54==
6 Methodology
6
Methodology
The thesis is focused on comprehensive literature reviews and analysis of similar stud-
ies examining challenges in interdisciplinary teams and the implementation of biology in
building design. Throughout the study, a deeper understanding and extensive knowl-
edge of the fundamental principles and concepts of biomimetics, biology as a science in
the building industry, and the implications of interdisciplinary collaboration have been
developed.
Initially, the study identifies interdisciplinary challenges and explores their underlying
causes. It then investigates how the application of biomimetics addresses these challenges.
Revealing the benefits and challenging processes related to the application of biology in
the building design. As a result, the potential to improve interdisciplinary challenges with
the support of biomimetics is recognized and proposed in this study with the introduction
of a new discipline. Focusing on the opportunity to support the knowledge gaps between
biology, engineering, and design, relieving the process of integrating biological concepts
into the building design.
To support the development of this study it is essential to use a methodology that struc-
tures the execution of the proposed solution. Allowing to balance theoretical research and
analysis with practical applications.
6.1
Design Science Research Methodology
Design Science Research (DSRM) is a research methodology that supports the creation
and evaluation of solutions that aim to solve identified problems and improve existing
practices. It involves a systematic process of problem identification, objective definition,
development of the solution, demonstration, and evaluation. The methodology follows a
six-step process presented in Figure 6.1 :
1. Identify the Problem and motivate
2. Define the Objectives of a solution
3. Design and Development
4. Demonstration
5. Evaluation
6. Communication
These steps will be further used to review and support the development of the proposed
solution aiming to evaluate the effectiveness of addressing the identified issues in this
study.
48
==PAGE:55==
6 Methodology
Figure 6.1 | Design Science Research Methodology process model [52]
6.1.1
Identify the problem and motivate
The problem and motivation behind this thesis study are described in the introduction.
Further evaluation and analysis of the problem are presented in Section 2. This thesis
acknowledges the importance of interdisciplinary collaboration in building design projects
and further investigates the reasoning for certain challenges met in the process. The main
problem identified is the lack of interdisciplinary support in the early design stages, that
furthermore stems from the organization of the project outline, knowledge gaps between
the disciplines, and different thinking patterns. Additionally, in Section 4 the involvement
of biological sciences in architecture is researched and reviewed to examine the influence on
interdisciplinary team collaboration. Revealing the potential of biomimetics and leading
to the main motivation for the study, to address these challenging gaps by introducing
a new discipline as the key role for supported communication, knowledge exchange, and
idea transfer between the science fields.
6.1.2
Define objectives of a solution
The objectives of the solution are explored in Section 4 where the potential and the
limitations of biomimetics are analyzed. In addition, the search for objectives is extended
in Section 5 where more examples of biology being used as a part of building design and
the tools that support that integration are studied. The main objectives of the solution
are listed as follows:
• Support the collaboration between the disciplines by revealing the challenge of
knowledge transfer between the fields of sciences.
• Facilitate the knowledge and idea transfer from biology into building design while
maintaining a true representation of the original inspiration source.
• Support the knowledge transfer and implementation through different levels of de-
sign, from conceptual ideas to highly engineered, technical solutions.
• Extend the ability to utilize various biological science information sources.
49
==PAGE:56==
6 Methodology
• Support the communication and involvement of various disciplines related to build-
ing design earlier in the design development process.
• Provide a clear understanding of the responsibilities of the role of each discipline.
• Relieve the time-consuming process of architecture and engineering disciplines search-
ing, understanding, and implementing biological knowledge into design solutions.
6.1.3
Design and development
The development of this proposed solution of introducing a new discipline is based on the
knowledge acquired throughout the thesis, literature analysis of relevant research, and
examination of a similar approach aiming to support biological knowledge transfer by
defying a new discipline. This step reveals the need and main characteristics of the new
discipline’s role.
6.1.4
Demonstration
The solution will be demonstrated through a review of requirements and a visualized
diagram of the implementation of the new role. Additionally, exploring how the discipline
will be integrated. Interviews with appropriate field specialists will be conducted and
used as a source of feedback to evaluate and improve the proposed solution.
6.1.5
Evaluation
The proposed solution of introducing a new discipline will be evaluated based on the
objectives and potentials identified throughout this study. Combined with the assessment
of how this solution addressed the identified problem and improved the interdisciplinary
collaboration and success of biomimetic projects.
6.1.6
Communication
To communicate the proposed solution the final step will be carried out through a con-
clusion and a discussion that summarizes the learnings throughout the thesis, the effec-
tiveness of the solution regarding the identified thesis problem, and further assessment of
the development of the solution. Lastly, addressing limitations and proposals for future
research.
50
==PAGE:57==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
7
Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
Throughout this study, the problems and main challenges within interdisciplinary collab-
oration in building design projects have been researched and investigated through various
aspects and influences. Furthermore, reviewing the applications of biomimetic approaches
in the design development process and its effects on interdisciplinary roles. This has led
to the identification of some of the key problems and areas of improvement, summarized
in Section 4 and listed in Figure 4.5. The following bullet points provide a summary of
some of the main findings identified:
• Working in an interdisciplinary team dynamic can be a challenging process on its
own, due to many layers of added complexity. From the timeline in building de-
sign projects that influence when and how different disciplines collaborate, to more
individual reasons like different thinking patterns and background knowledge.
• As a response to some of the interdisciplinary challenges biomimetics seems to be a
promising and inspiring way to improve the collaboration, timeline, and novelty in
building projects. However, it comes with challenges on its own, in some areas even
adding additional stresses.
• These researched issues throughout the thesis have been identified as the gaps be-
tween biology and building design. Addressing them holds the potential to support
the integration of biology and further relieve the interdisciplinary challenges.
• As the main reason for these existing gaps this study highlights the lack of supported
knowledge exchange, missing links between design and science-based disciplines,
lost values and ideas through abstraction and transfer into building designs, the
misleading interpretation of biological principles, and lastly the additional strain of
unknown terminology and principles.
Through the research of other examples and tools that explore the integration of biologi-
cal knowledge reviewed in Section 5 it becomes evident that these tools and frameworks
can only help mediate the difficulties around knowledge transfer in the first initial re-
search stages. Therefore, this thesis’s proposed solution focuses on the implications of
disciplinary roles. Identifying the skills, characteristics, and scope needed to shape a new
discipline.
Furthermore, this chapter is focused on introducing the solution, aiming to relieve some
of the problems stated above. Evaluate and assess the impact of additional disciplinary
support, review the potential benefits, and gather feedback for future improvements and
validation.
7.1
Design and development
As reviewed throughout this study it has become evident that most challenges related to
the integration of biology in building projects circle around the knowledge transfer from
one field of science to another. As with any challenge, it holds various levels of depth and
complexity. Knowledge gaps can be explained as simply as designers and engineers not
having experience and knowledge in biological terminology or research. Or that biology
51
==PAGE:58==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
is a field of science, the research and knowledge that biologists hold is therefore extremely
hard to abstract and then transfer into designs. Furthermore, the knowledge gaps can
also be explained as losing the source concept and information in the implementation
process into building designs, displaying an inaccurate representation of principles found
in nature, therefore defeating the purpose of biomimetics. It should not be just a light
form of taking inspiration from nature, but rather an in-depth process that requires ex-
tensive research and deep understanding in both directions, biologists understanding the
disciplinary roles of building design teams and supporting the knowledge integration, and
engineers understanding fundamental biological principles or at least some terminology
for further discussions.
By resolving the integration and exchange of knowledge between the disciplines, fields of
science, and design the process of working with biological concepts found in nature would
be supported and become more desirable. Furthermore, achieving a true representation
of source information, relieved communication between disciplines, and supported collab-
oration. McGinley et al. (2016) address the challenge of knowledge transfer through an
introduction to hybrid theory [44]. The relation between morphogenetic architecture and
the proposal of hybrid theories has already been reviewed in Section 5.1 in the context
of implementing biological knowledge into building design. However, this chapter aims to
examine closely the approach of uni-directional and multi-directional theory appropriation
in architecture [44].
As a response to the knowledge gaps discussed above McGinley et al. (2016) represent
and compare the different classifications for theory appropriation, in Figure 7.1. The
uni-directional theory refers to a linear approach where the knowledge transfer happens
in a single direction from theory to design applications, however, the translation is prone
to interpretation errors due to existing knowledge gaps. On the other hand, the multi-
directional appropriation proposes an approach with the integration of hybrid theory that
is a middle ground between architectural and biological theory. Where the initial source
of knowledge transfer is an already altered hybrid theory that is then transferred back to
architecture [44].
Figure 7.1 | Classification for theory appropriation in architecture [44]
As a potential issue, the connection and true representation of the original discipline and
source information can be lost, hence the need for a hybrid theory that can bridge the
gap and support the translation between the disciplines [44].
52
==PAGE:59==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
Figure 7.2 | Multi-dimensional theory appropriation model [44]
Figure 7.2 showcases the multi-dimensional theory appropriation model [44] that focuses
on the middle ground between the disciplines considering both directions and supporting
the knowledge transfer for biology and architecture. It is a more integrated approach
that considers various influences and feedback loops. While interpretation errors are still
possible this model aims to minimize the loss of the initial source information meaning
[44].
The idea of searching for a middle ground between biology and architecture has been ana-
lyzed and researched in various methodologies, frameworks, and tools reviewed throughout
the study. The knowledge transfer is commonly addressed through abstraction and imple-
mentation, supported by the search and sorting of information. However, the concept of
a hybrid theory proposes an approach where knowledge transfer is considered from both
directions. Meaning that not only biological theory is altered, but implications of archi-
tectural theory are addressed as well. While this approach provides a new and promising
perspective, this idea is also met with certain challenges for example:
• To be able to communicate and find a common ground from both disciplines without
losing the original intent it requires prior knowledge and understanding of the source
information.
• Biology is a science on its own and therefore cannot be simplified into terms that
are understood by designers and engineers, making it difficult to implement into
engineering practices regardless.
• The multi-dimensional model might oversimplify the complex relationships and feed-
back loops in architectural design, losing the true representation of source informa-
tion in the process.
• The proposed model does not provide clear metrics for evaluating the success of
knowledge adaptation. Without clear metrics, it becomes difficult to measure how
well an architectural design fulfills its intended purpose.
• Because this theory appropriation model has been explored through a small-scale
residential house with a clear typology and functional relations it is possible that
the model might struggle with scalability, particularly when applied to larger, more
complex architectural projects.
This further leads to the idea that instead of proposing that disciplines need to familiarize
themselves with unknown terminology and concepts, as well as become comfortable with
53
==PAGE:60==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
adapting this information. It would be only fitting to support it with involvement from a
discipline that can support this knowledge transfer bridge.
To understand how this knowledge gap can be supported with a disciplinary approach
it is important to understand the the different ways to communicate biological and ar-
chitectural knowledge transfer. Similar to the various types of biological inspiration and
definitions reviewed in Section 3 where biology can be used as a brief idea for new shapes
and visual representations in building design, or aim to closely resemble the functionality
and systems found in nature through building systems. This contrast of approaches and
results can be explained through different design levels. And further can be applied to
both disciplines.
Dade-Robertson (2020) explores the integration of biotechnologies in architecture through
the use of living materials and processes in design. Biological systems can inspire sustain-
able architectural practices by using self-assembling, self-healing, and adaptable materi-
als. Miscommunication between different design levels like conceptual architecture studio
work and the technically advanced and experimental side of building design can lead to
challenges related to the execution of the self-assembling and adaptable concepts [53].
The concept of self-growing and adaptable materials, and self-organizing architecture
present a new view and approach to architecture, similar to morphogenetics explored in
Section 5.1. While the novelty and ideas surrounding it seem exciting it is still associated
with unrealistic concepts due to the fundamental problem of lack of skills, knowledge,
and resources for architects to move these concepts beyond speculation [53]. Architects
often can be seen as visionaries because of ideas that are based on conceptual work. It
proposes an inspiring way to display architecture and looks for connections with biolog-
ical knowledge, using terms and ideas borrowed from biology, that have lost their true
connection to the original idea and meaning. This highlights the need to connect concep-
tual design work with research-based and technically detailed work. On the other hand,
highly technical and detailed concepts oftentimes lack the connection to more exploratory,
conceptual ideas [53].
7.1.1
The three design levels
To further explore the idea of supporting the identified knowledge gap, the relations
between disciplines will be evaluated through three levels of design. The high design level
represents the conceptually driven design work that is mostly produced in architectural
design studios, the low design level represents technically driven engineering work that
relies on details and execution, and the middle design level that exists in between and
represents a gradual blend between the upper and lower levels.
Figure 7.3 showcases the three design levels and their relations and positioning within each
other. In the context of the two fields of biology and architecture, each of the levels can
be applied to the appropriate discipline. This means that biologists have the knowledge
and skill sets to explore biology through different levels, while architects and engineers
are familiar with the different levels of architecture.
54
==PAGE:61==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
Figure 7.3 | The different design levels and the legend used for further graphics
There are different contexts for these three levels, it can be either discipline-specific in
architecture or focus on the blend between the biology and architecture disciplines. To
provide an example the following figures display how the different levels might be inter-
preted.
Figure 7.4 | The three levels in building design, visual material from an academic group
project at DTU
Figure 7.4 represents the three design levels as the stages of design development in building
projects. The low (technical) level consists of a detailed solution that supports the high
(conceptual) level with a proposed building frame. In the middle layers, the blend between
two levels is proposed as the preliminary design where both the architectural concepts
and technical details have been evaluated and integrated. The potential disconnect within
these levels has been explored in Section 2 looking through the design development phases
and acknowledging the potential disconnect from the initial design concept and final
detailed design.
55
==PAGE:62==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
Figure 7.5 | The three levels in biomimetic projects, visual material from the Danish Neuro-
science Center project by BIG architects [54]
Figure 7.5 provides an example of the three levels in a biomimetic project with the Danish
Neuroscience Center project by BIG architects. This project aims to mimic at a high
(conceptual) level the process found in brain folds, called Gyrification. Then transfer these
principles in the low (technical) level building design through the shape and connection of
different corridors and parts of the building that create these "folds" similar to Gyrification
found in biology. Bringing in the benefit of exposure to daylight, connected pathways,
and green pockets that further enhance the biodiversity and connection to nature [54].
There is a clear visual resemblance between the biological phenomena used as inspiration
and the execution of the project. However, the potential challenge of the knowledge gap
can be suspected in the representation of Gyrification as a biological process of forming
the characteristics of the brain folds and the relation of such processes in the building
design on a functional or technical level.
Figure 7.6 | The three levels in research projects, visual material from the Dermoid project
by KADK students [55]
And lastly Figure 7.6 provides an example of the three levels in research projects. For
this, a research collaboration between CITA, SIAL, RMITand Royal Danish Academy
students called "Dermoid" has been used as a reference. Where the research is focused
on the exploration of material simulation and its possibilities regarding architectural and
structural design. As a result, a structural frame system created with flexed plywood
56
==PAGE:63==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
parts was developed [55].
Compared to other examples introduced in the paragraphs
above, this case highlights the potential disconnect from the low (technological) level
to the high (conceptual) level. This research project mainly focuses on the execution
and technical evaluation of the materials, shape optimization, and computational design.
Testing its possibilities and digital design process. Leading to detailed, technical solutions
that resemble organic shapes found in nature.
However, what remains unclear is the
connection to the high (conceptual) level of this design.
7.1.2
The levels of knowledge transfer
To summarize the different ways in which these design levels are linked within each other
and the fields of science and design, varying in the emphasis on either strong conceptual
or technical connections are presented in the figures below. In Figure 7.7 two columns
are presented on the left side there are the design levels in biology, and on the right
architectural design levels. Both columns can be individually explored by the related
discipline. For example, biologists and scientists are knowledgeable about transferring
knowledge and practices between the three levels of biology, on the other hand, architects
and engineers are familiar with the architectural design levels and can therefore execute
knowledge and designs through them. This represents the two different extents and fields
of science and design. The arrows in between showcase the different scenarios for the
identified challenge of existing knowledge gaps (Figures 7.7, 7.8, 7.9).
Figure 7.7 | Knowledge transfer rooted in a conceptual level
Figure 7.7 showcases the scenario where knowledge transfer from biology into architectural
design has a strong connection to the initial source information or biological concept.
However, the link between the technical details and functions of this biological concept
is either left unexplored or disconnected from the functional relations and mechanisms
found in nature.
An example of this scenario would be an architectural design that
strongly resembles the biological systems used as an inspiration on a conceptual level,
however, lacks the fundamental principles, technical execution, and accuracy in functional
representation.
57
==PAGE:64==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
Figure 7.8 | Knowledge transfer rooted in a technical level
In Figure 7.8 the opposite scenario to Figure 7.7 is presented. Where the stronger knowl-
edge transfer link is happening on a low (technical) level, and therefore losing its connec-
tion to the original biological system source on a high (conceptual) level. As an example,
this could be observed in a highly detailed, technical engineering project, where detailed
functions found in nature have been precisely represented in the design system. How-
ever, the potentially lost value would be the missing link between the strong conceptual
background.
Figure 7.9 | The middle ground of knowledge transfer
This further leads to the question if there is a middle ground where these knowledge
transfer gaps can blend and be supported from both high and low levels. This has been
further highlighted in Figure 7.9 as the existing gap that holds the potential to support
this knowledge exchange and relieve the disciplinary difficulties by supporting the creation
of the middle design level. Where the conceptual and technical levels from both disciplines
meet and can be therefore transferred through translation.
7.1.3
The missing discipline
Graeff et al. (2020) propose a similar approach to support knowledge transfer through the
introduction of a new discipline called "biomimetician". Identifying the role and benefits
58
==PAGE:65==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
of a discipline focused on supporting biological knowledge transfer. Graeff et al. (2020)
emphasize how this new discipline should first have a vertical in-depth knowledge base in
biology, spanning the three levels from conceptual to technical approaches. And having a
horizontal understanding of how this information and knowledge can be implemented in
other fields [42].
However, the focus of this new discipline biomimetician has only been explored in the
context of the first initial stages. Aiming to support the search, recognizably, and under-
standing of certain biological data and information. While this is already a step further
in the direction of supported interdisciplinary collaboration and improved team dynamics
and roles. It also is important to acknowledge the limitations of this discipline to build a
better understanding of the requirements such a role should fulfill.
The main roles, characteristics, and traits of this introduced Biomimetician discipline are
summarized below [42]:
• As the scope of biological knowledge this discipline is familiarized with two fields:
ecology and phylogenetics.
• The discipline is positioned as the researcher in a group setting between designers
and engineers.
• The main scope of the discipline is to behave as a translator from the biological
sciences by searching and evaluating biological information.
• The main tools associated with biomimetician have been identified as: AskNature,
Life Principles, Trade-offs, SAPPhIRE, and other tools that aim to support the
search and recognition of biological principles.
• The discipline has strong background knowledge in biological science, terminology,
vocabulary, biological methods, and can support the formalization of relevant search
words.
What seems to be the missing process that this identified role as biomimetician doesn’t
aim to support, is the steps beyond recognizing and translating biological knowledge into
the field of design and engineering. The role of the biomimetician is rather focused on
biological science and therefore is limited to transferring knowledge horizontally only in
a single direction. Referring back to Figure 7.9 and the identified gap and ideas found in
previously reviewed hybrid theories it becomes evident that the main role of the discipline
supporting this knowledge gap should be able to transfer information in both directions.
Indicating that the missing piece is the understanding of both biological knowledge and
fundamental engineering or architectural principles. To not only support the recognizably
and understanding of biological principles but also support further design development in
later stages.
59
==PAGE:66==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
Figure 7.10 | The placement of a new discipline between the fields of biology and architecture
Furthermore Figure 7.10 identifies the ideal placement of the discipline needed to support
the knowledge transfer regarding the different levels and relationships between disciplines.
As the main characteristics this discipline aims to support the intersections and shared
knowledge between biology and architecture throughout the different design levels from
high to low. Therefore, rather than focusing on a single linear direction, this approach
addresses the need for finding a middle ground and meeting each discipline halfway.
Throughout the study, the search for a potential solution to the identified thesis problem
has been investigated, leading to the belief that the most efficient way to support this
knowledge gap in biomimetics is to redefine existing disciplinary roles or rather introduce
a new discipline, aiming to support both the knowledge transfer and the implementation
of biological principles. Additionally, this section aims to identify more specifically what
skills and characteristics hold the biggest value and benefit in such team dynamics. Some
of the key takeaways are summarized in a list below:
• Different tools, methods, frameworks reviewed in the study, and even the proposed
biomimetician discipline are targeted to support the search and abstraction of bio-
logical knowledge. Therefore, it is limited to the first initial research stages of the
project.
• The knowledge gap exists in both directions, meaning that not only engineering and
design disciplines require supported knowledge transfer, but biologists as well.
• It is difficult to achieve a strong connection between both high (conceptual) and
low (technical) levels. Leading to the belief that the knowledge transfer has to be
supported both vertically and horizontally.
• To further support the implementation of biological knowledge into a project, it is
essential to ensure that the source information is represented accurately. However,
that is not something that engineering and architecture disciplines are capable of
without prior biological expertise.
60
==PAGE:67==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
7.2
Demonstration
The previous section detailed the existing gap in knowledge transfer, aiming to identify
the potential area of solution. As a result, the general placement in the interdisciplinary
context and some characteristics of the new discipline have been identified. Therefore,
this section is focused on recognizing and demonstrating the details of the proposed disci-
plinary approach based on findings acquired throughout the study. To further emphasize
and validate the needed skills, background knowledge, and integration of the new disci-
plinary role interviews with appropriate field specialists are conducted.
7.2.1
Introducing the new discipline
At the beginning of the study Section 2 explores the differences between engineering and
architecture disciplines through different skills, training backgrounds, and ways in which
buildings can be assessed. The goal is to find a balance and complementary skills, this
is particularly relevant for developing and shaping a new proposed discipline. Therefore
Figure 7.11 provides a summary of some of the main traits and characteristics found
throughout the study that describe the disciplines involved in a biomimetic project: ar-
chitecture, engineering, and biology. Later in the study, the discussions in the conducted
interviews further build upon the profiles, shaping each discipline’s role, skills, and con-
tributions, to find complementary traits that are needed.
Figure 7.11 | Characteristics of the disciplines involved in biomimetic building projects
There are more traits, skills, and qualities associated with each field and discipline, how-
ever, Figure 7.11 aims to highlight the balance between design and science. To build a
profile of engineering and architectural disciplines some of the key values discovered in
Section 2.4 are used.
For architecture disciplines, the most complimentary traits and skills are design commu-
nication to a wide variety of stakeholders, and the practice of presenting their ideas. It
is equally important to visualize the concepts and vision of the project. Additionally,
the training of architects ensures a broad knowledge base that spans from a fundamental
understanding of building structures, materials and their properties, composition, artistic
skills, user experiences, social influences, and design skills. The study environment, studio
61
==PAGE:68==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
work, and scope of the projects are so versatile with no one correct solution, architects
are generally trained to work with an open-ended problem-solving approach.
On the other hand, engineering disciplines rely on data and factual information. There-
fore, the educational background and experiences aim to push a close-ended problem-
solving approach, where engineers are trained to be analytical and technically detailed.
As a result, most engineering disciplines can be recognized for their ability to explore inno-
vation and search for possible improvements and optimization. Making them an essential
role within the team, that provides the view of the practical and realistic application.
While these differences can be associated with communication challenges and knowledge
gaps, it is also the reason why such collaboration is so important and successful. Es-
sentially, architects are a part of a design field and therefore can support the conceptual
development of a building project, ensuring that different goals are achieved. However,
engineering disciplines are part of a science field and can execute the design through the
developmental stages to achieve a detailed and feasible project.
When biology becomes a part of the equation in a biomimetic building project, as re-
viewed in Section 4 it introduces the involvement of another science field. Some of the
main characteristics and traits found in the study and interviews that can summarize a
biologist’s discipline are analytical skills, the ability to execute research in technical de-
tail, and to successfully communicate the findings and research. Working with discoveries
and researching new information makes this discipline prone to working with uncertainty,
unknowns, and open-ended problem-solving.
Figure 7.12 | Relations between the involved disciplines and the identified placement of the
new role
Because biology and engineering are fields of science the success of the collaboration and
communication between the disciplines is believed to be more efficient. However, what
seems to be missing is another discipline similar to architecture that would complement bi-
ological science by sharing experience in both design and biology. Bridging the knowledge
gap and supporting the implementation of biology. Likewise, architects who work with
engineers, while architects cannot execute a conceptual design in full technical detail, can
support the process and development, providing feedback and professional inputs that help
shape the project. This means that this discipline potentially holds enough fundamen-
tal knowledge of biology and building design principles to provide support in knowledge
transfer and application. This explained correlation is represented in Figure 7.12 below
highlights the positioning of the new discipline within the team with a dashed line.
62
==PAGE:69==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
In addition, Figure 7.13 represents the area that is largely supported with tools, method-
ologies, frameworks, and even the biology-based biomimetician role. Showing that there
are existing solutions that aim to relieve the knowledge transfer and implementation in
the early research stages for biomimetic projects. However, the dashed lines in Figure 7.13
further emphasize that this knowledge gap exists beyond the search and understanding of
biological information. First, it is necessary to support the integration of this biological
information into design principles that can further be applied to building design and sys-
tems, then it is important to facilitate the knowledge exchange and feedback loop back to
the initial biological source information to validate that true representation is achieved.
Figure 7.13 | Steps in the project process
Therefore, it is fair to assume that the skill set compatibility within the interdisciplinary
team and the support in the identified processes that lack knowledge transfer can lead to
answering some of the challenges explored throughout the study. Figure 7.14 summarizes
the relationships between the involved disciplines and introduces the new discipline called
"bio-architect" as the linking part of the team. As the two fields of science biology and
engineering are placed at both ends of the diagram in Figure 7.14, the architect and the
"bio-architect" as the design-based disciplines have been placed as the linking part in the
middle. Where the initial knowledge exchange and collaboration happens in three areas.
First between the architect and engineer where the conceptual design ideas are evaluated
through technical and practical evaluation. Then between the biologist and bio-architect
where biological concepts are assessed and communicated in a biological context. And
lastly between the two design disciplines the architect and the bio-architect where a blend
of the two fields of science is proposed and communicated.
63
==PAGE:70==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
Figure 7.14 | Relations between the involved disciplines and bio-architect
This discipline is further placed among the three design levels reviewed in Section 7.1 to
compare and present the relations between the disciplines and highlight the supported
knowledge transfer. Figure 7.15 showcases the distribution between the levels and disci-
plines, spanning from the low (technical) levels to the high (conceptual) levels. Biologists
and engineers are placed vertically as the supportive discipline throughout the levels as
they hold the technical and analytical skills that can execute a concept into practical and
scientific detail. Additionally, the architect and bio-architect are placed in the middle
as the supportive discipline both vertically and horizontally. Indicating their ability to
first communicate with the related discipline throughout all design levels from a concep-
tual perspective. And secondly, bridging the knowledge transfer gap by facilitating the
conversation between biology and architecture.
Figure 7.15 | Distribution between different levels and disciplines, forming the letter "H"
7.2.2
Feedback and discussion
The idea of introducing a new discipline into biomimetic projects seems to address the
problems identified and potentially relieves some of the challenges related to knowledge
transfer and collaboration. To further gain a broader perspective and validate this pro-
posed solution three interviews and discussions with specialists from various fields have
been conducted. For this purpose the interviewed people have been selected strategically,
aiming to gain insights from different perspectives: biology, engineering, and architecture.
The overall scope of the interview has been organized into three main parts: introduction,
feedback, and questions. Where first the interviewed specialists are introduced to the
64
==PAGE:71==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
context of the conversation with a brief presentation of the thesis study. To do so the
overall research, scope, identified problems and key takeaways of the study have been
presented, further explaining the motivation and reasoning for approaching this identified
problem of the knowledge gap with a disciplinary solution. Lastly, the bio-architects role
and involvement in the interdisciplinary team setting is introduced.
After the introduction, the discussion revolves around the initial thoughts and feedback on
this solution by facilitating a conversation about personal opinions, views, and ideas. To
identify some of the potential and possible limitations that this solution might have. Fur-
ther, the interviewed person is presented with questions relevant to their field of expertise,
asking them to describe their discipline and name some of the skills and characteristics
commonly found within their discipline. The conversation aims to discuss some of the
key relations and contributions that each specialist provides in an interdisciplinary set-
ting when it comes to biomimetic building projects. Highlighting the potential gaps where
additional support might be needed.
The purpose of conducting these interviews is to gain a better understanding of the
knowledge transfer support that is needed for each involved discipline. How might that
look like and can the role of a bio-architect fulfill that?
To investigate the potential
benefits of this discipline and build a more detailed profile around it. Lastly, the insightful
conversations of these interviews provide more context into the requirements and details
of such a role, helping it shape into a tangible solution.
The three specialists interviewed:
• Participant 1: Dr. Amanda Rasmussen. Associate Professor, Plant Ecophysi-
ology, Faculty of Science, University of Nottingham. Dr. A. Rasmussen is a plant
scientist specializing in plant ecophysiology, with a deep understanding of biology
and biological processes. Her scientific and professional background combined with
her interest and diverse experience working with various disciplines provided valu-
able insights and discussions from the biologist’s perspective.
• Participant 2: Dr. Torben Anker Lenau. Associate Professor, Department of
Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark. Dr. T. A.
Lenau is an engineer with extensive experience in design and innovation, product
development, materials and manufacturing. He has a strong interest in biomimetics
and biologically inspired design, using nature as a source for technical solutions.
His educational background, expertise, and interests in both engineering and biol-
ogy provide a comprehensive engineering perspective on the interdisciplinary team
dynamic.
• Participant 3: Dr. Petra Gruber. Associate Professor, Biomimicry Research and
Innovation Center, The University of Akron. Dr. P. Gruber is an architect with a
passion for biology and biomimetic design, focusing on the research of spatial and
functional aspects of biological structures in architecture and the built environment.
She holds a wide range of experience in biomimetic projects, research, and working
in interdisciplinary teams with disciplines from biology, engineering, architecture,
and art. With her expertise and professional outlook she provides the architect’s
perspective with an interest in biomimetics.
65
==PAGE:72==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
Therefore, this section provides a summary of some of the key findings, conclusions, and
reflections gained throughout the interviews and discussions.
7.2.2.1
The benefit and the potential
In a conversation with Participant 1, the initial reaction to the introduced discipline was
met with a positive outlook, that further facilitated the conversation about the possible
directions for a bio-architect role. As an example from biology, Participant 1 introduced
the concept of "nature’s architects" like bees, termites, and other animals and organisms.
That has evolved throughout the years and decades, developing the build structures to
respond to environmental changes. Finding ways to be more responsive and adaptive,
building more efficiently and sustainably. A discipline that could understand these pro-
cesses, while also having a knowledge base in the fundamentals of building design could
potentially be the link that helps explore these natural principles, proposing a similar
approach to architecture.
The discussion with Participant 2 revealed some of the key differences between biological
and engineering disciplines that have been characterized. Both disciplines are a part of
science, therefore some common ground already exists. However, traditionally biological
disciplines are focused on research and discovering new knowledge, while engineering
disciplines are trained to solve problems and search for solutions. Participant 2 explains
how engineers have a resistance to biological terminology, and that might limit the possible
findings and interest in further exploring some concepts. For this reason, a clash between
biology and engineering is possible. Where engineers are limited to exploring potential
sources of ideas from biology to then apply their problem-solving skills, and on the other
hand a biologist might hold a lot of valuable knowledge and skills to find information, but
isn’t familiar with the possible application in a built environment. Therefore, a discipline
understanding these patterns from both perspectives would be a crucial part of supporting
collaboration.
A similar perspective appeared in the discussion with Participant 1 on the limitations
of idea generation when the conversation revolves around unfamiliar processes. Because
most architects and engineers do not have background knowledge in biology it isn’t easy to
think of concepts and generate ideas that take inspiration from nature. On the other hand,
biologists naturally don’t associate processes found in nature with engineered solutions in
building design. As a result, this new bio-architect role should be the supportive discipline
and facilitate the idea generation between the two languages of engineering and biology.
This would be particularly beneficial in a workshop setting, where creative and innovative
ideas could be generated.
On the other contrary, when the conversation of the bio-architect discipline was intro-
duced, Participant 3 highlighted the confusion in terminology and views among biomimet-
ics. Providing an example of whether biomimetic architecture is possible in the first place.
As she explained biomimetics is a combination of tools and products, that are used or
placed within architectural design. However, the idea of living architecture is not truly
architecture or biomimetics either. That it becomes something new, like bio-design that
still needs to be identified and detailed further. This idea developed into a discussion on
the possibilities and the potential profile of a supportive discipline that can bridge and
66
==PAGE:73==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
communicate the different fields of science and design, blending biology with architectural
design.
7.2.2.2
Understanding the discipline
When looking at the bio-architects role it is important to distinguish the technical skill
level and focus of the discipline. Whether this role is deeply rooted in architectural or
biological knowledge. When interviewing Participant 1 an interesting perspective was
proposed, questioning how much of biology should this discipline understand.
What
would the training look like and essentially what parts of biology should this discipline
familiarize with? The investigation throughout the thesis study suggests that the role of
the bio-architect should be both design-based and technically skilled, therefore it would
be unrealistic to require an extensive biological background. For this reason, Participant
1 suggests that if biologists are still part of the interdisciplinary team, an additional
biologist is not needed.
Therefore, the skills and understandings of the bio-architect
should be conceptual, enough to navigate information and look for inspiration.
However, it is difficult to assess how might that look in the context of the disciplinary
curriculum. In the discussion with Participant 1, the idea of plant and animal physiology
was introduced as the potential middle ground. This field of biology examines the physical
processes, functions, and activities within plants or animals. For example how plants sup-
ply water or how the heart pumps blood through the organisms. An education supporting
the learning of these principles would provide enough context and understanding for a
design-based discipline like the bio-architect to be able to facilitate ideas and communi-
cate processes found in nature to other disciplines. Promote evolutionary thinking and
interest in Ecophysiology, environmental physiology that studies how organisms found
in nature respond to environmental conditions, similar to the example of bees described
earlier.
In a conversation with Participant 2, the different approaches to problem-solving between
engineering and biology disciplines were highlighted. Emphasizing how engineers are more
likely to shape up the solution earlier in the process, focusing on detailed assessments
rather than searching for various concepts. That is because of the practical application
thinking. On the other hand, biology-based disciplines are familiar with working with
unknowns and feel more comfortable in an unpredictable environment. This led to further
questioning of the approach that this bio-architect role would bring If these differences in
approach could be supported and translated as well.
When discussing the area where additional interdisciplinary support would be necessary,
Participant 3 explains how the role of a translator between the disciplines and fields of
science is needed.
However, it is difficult to identify the educational background and
skills needed for this discipline as it should hold inherent knowledge from architecture/
engineering and biology, as well as knowledge in application space. For this reason, Par-
ticipant 3 emphasizes the importance of fundamental understanding and education in
architecture or engineering, which can be further expanded with the addition of biology.
The translator needs to have a set of basic tools within biology, architecture, and engi-
neering to support communication and to be capable of understanding information from
various sources in a short time frame.
67
==PAGE:74==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
7.2.2.3
The limitations and difficulties
While the overall idea of a complimentary discipline in a biomimetic project context,
discussed in these interviews seems to be appealing, there are certain limitations. In an
interview with Participant 1, some of the biggest obstacles discussed were the academic
background and real-life implementation of this role. Questioning if current study lines
and programs can be altered to accommodate this new discipline.
For this reason as an example, Participant 1 discusses the possibility of learning biology
in an interdisciplinary group setting, where it is not a prerequisite to have prior in-
depth knowledge of biology. She is the module convener of a third-year undergraduate
module at the University of Nottingham, called Plant Ecophysiology. This module builds
a fundamental understanding of how plants respond and adapt to soil conditions and the
impacts of environmental changes. The main learning objectives listed are to understand
these processes in nature and develop skills that help to communicate complex ideas
visually. As the learning objectives of this module seem to be fitting for the role of a bio-
architect, further conversation discusses the level of difficulty and scope of the module that
could potentially be altered with minor adjustments to be more inviting for disciplines
outside of biology.
A similar limitation that Participant 3 emphasizes relates to the educational background
of this bio-architects discipline. It is unclear how to scope the biological knowledge needed
for such a role as the information and biological principles are project-related. Therefore,
it should be enough to build skills for familiarizing and understanding the fundamentals
of biology and apply fast learning and communication in a project-specific environment.
Furthermore, in the field of biomimetics, biology as a part of architecture or biologi-
cal design is not widely implemented and practiced yet. Certainly, there are successful
companies, examples, employment, and the need for such specialists, but it is equally
important to have a "home discipline" in the first place. Than can then be complimented
with additional knowledge.
Outside of educational background as one of the key challenges Participant 2 provides
the perspective of a project owner or client working with a team of professionals and
carefully evaluating the potential benefit of the bio-architects role. Emphasizing that as
one of the requirements this new discipline needs to communicate the added value and
improvements that it provides. To further educate on the importance of working with
biomimetics and support that this role essentially brings into the interdisciplinary team.
Building upon the argument of the need for supported knowledge transfer, communication,
idea implementation, and collaboration between the fields of architecture and biology.
7.2.3
Details of the discipline
Throughout the study, background research, and feedback from the conducted interviews
the identified thesis problem has been explored through the implementation of biology
in the building design. This has led to the conclusion that while biology seems to be
a promising way of working interdisciplinary, it comes with certain stumbling blocks
related to knowledge exchange, transfer, and communication.
For this reason as the
potential solution, the search for a supportive discipline was proposed and named as the
68
==PAGE:75==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
bio-architect. This chapter summarizes the findings throughout the study and interviews
and lists some of the key details and characteristics of this discipline.
In the general sense of disciplinary fields between science and design, this bio-architect role
fits the most alongside architecture as a design discipline, skilled in conceptual thinking
and communication. However, as discovered before to bridge this knowledge gap and
support collaboration in both directions (from biology to architecture and vice versa) it
is necessary to acknowledge the need for analytical thinking, practical application, and
assessment. Traits that come from science-based disciplines. This further suggests that
the most appropriate environment for training is a flexible and adjustable curriculum.
Similar, to the ones offered in Technical University of Denmark for engineering students.
Figure 7.16 | Characteristics of the disciplines involved in biomimetic building projects in-
troducing the bio-architect
Figure 7.16 represents the main characteristics commonly found between the already
identified disciplines: architecture, engineering, and biology. Additionally introducing the
traits of the bio-architects discipline. The aim is to shape the role within this interdis-
ciplinary team that can support both the conceptual translation between biology and
architecture, and provide support in idea generation and exploration. While maintain-
ing a technical outlook of the process and application from a technical perspective. The
reasoning for these bio-architect characteristics is summarized as follows:
• Research communication. Similar to the biologists discipline a bio-architect should
be capable of communicating research, at least on a fundamental level, to support
the conversation between other disciplines. Orientate and search for biological infor-
mation sources, understanding the possible application and relevance within specific
projects.
• Innovation.
By understanding processes from both perspectives nature and the
built environment this discipline will be crucial support for idea generation and
innovation. Actively working on ways how to explore the implementation of biology
into building design.
• Broad knowledge base. Similar to the architect’s discipline which holds a broad back-
ground knowledge, the bio-architect’s role needs to be familiar with various processes
69
==PAGE:76==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
related to building design, conceptual and analytical thinking, and understanding
of processes found in biology.
• Close-ended problem solving. Because biology and architecture disciplines are devel-
oped and associated with an open-ended problem-solving approach, the role of the
bio-architect would be the complimentary discipline to engineering, looking for fea-
sible and realistic ways how uncertainty can be transferred into concrete solutions.
7.2.3.1
Educational background
One of the more difficult aspects of detailing this discipline is understanding the edu-
cational background and curriculum needed to support the development of such a role.
However, because of the familiarity found within other involved disciplines, the answer
likely relies on adjustments of an existing curriculum, rather than the development of a
new department. For this reason, the curriculum of relevant or similar programs is used
to understand the possibilities in already existing programs.
UIC Barcelona School of Architecture.
Master’s Degree in Biodigital Architecture.
Is
a 60 ECTS program offering studies that introduce cybernetic-digital and ecological-
environmental techniques, explored through parametric models and scripting. It blends
biology, organic forms, and ecology with machine learning, digital tools, and computa-
tional design. What is particularly attractive is the availability of studies for different
educational backgrounds, welcoming architects, engineers, biologists, and designers. The
curriculum of the studies is structured in four main areas where 10 ECTS are dedicated
to first learning about biology and information systems, and 30 ECTS are dedicated to
practical application in a studio environment. Leaving the last 10 ECTS for the final
Master’s thesis study [56]. The outline for this program is structured as follows:
• Introduction to Genetics and Biodigital Architecture (10 ECTS). Learning about
various topics for example fundamental knowledge about genetics, eco manipulation,
metaphysics, and computation.
• Information Systems (10 ECTS). Practical classes with the training of digital tools
and generative software.
• Genetic and Biodigital Architectural Design (30 ECTS). Studios and workshops
dedicated to research and design development.
• Master’s Thesis (10 ECTS)
While this program is not particularly suited for a bio-architect discipline as it offers spe-
cialization in digital tools, it does provide an outlook on the necessary components needed
in a curriculum that introduces novel ideas. There are equal parts of ECTS of classes and
seminars related to technical specialization within information systems or introduction to
genetics and biology. Further providing the biggest ECTS contribution to studio work
and workshops, emphasizing the importance of practical application. However, it is im-
portant to address that this program is within the design field, studying the introduction
and practical application of biodigital architecture.
A similar study environment and scope are offered at the Royal Danish Academy. Master’s
program in Computation in Architecture. It is a 2-year program that focuses on advanced
70
==PAGE:77==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
and generative modeling, living and bio-materials, and synthetic thinking. Structured
around project-based work and research with CITA: Centre for IT and Architecture.
The curriculum provides courses that introduce the fundamentals of computation, tactics
of materialization, application in architecture, and life cycle assessment [57]. This is a
research and technical skill-based study line that incorporates biology and heavily relies
on digital modeling and programming.
The exploration of biology comes within the
research for living materials such as mycelia, organic cellulose, and algae-based materials,
where students explore the properties and potential development of new bio-composites
by assessing their performance [57, 58].
A bit more of a different scope and education is offered at The UCL Bartlett School of
Architecture. Bio-Integrated Design (Bio-ID) MArch/MSc program. With a Master’s pro-
gram in bio-design, that combines biotechnology, advanced computation, and fabrication
into the built environment [59], thought in collaboration between the Bartlett School of
Architecture and Biochemical Engineering Department. This 2-year (150 ECTS) program
offers two different master’s degrees either in Architecture (MArch) or Sciences(MSc), pro-
viding the opportunity to explore this education from diverse backgrounds in architecture,
design, biology, engineering, and material science. The studies are structured through a
similar curriculum, that is diverse in perquisites. Either introduction to scientific meth-
ods, laboratory and environmental practices, or introduction to design practices, based
on the chosen master’s degree, essentially blending the two fields of science and design.
The first year of studies consists of 90 ECTS and follows a structure of:
• Module about the procedures and protocols necessary for laboratory work within a
bio-integrated design context and introduction to biological knowledge (7.5 ECTS)
• Computational skills (7.5 ECTS)
• Literature review, aimed to familiarize the student with research methodologies and
strategies (7.5 ECTS)
• Preliminary Design (15 ECTS)
• Design project development in a workshop environment (37.5 ECTS)
• Thesis report (15 ECTS)
Furthermore, the second year consists of a total of 60 ECTS that includes 15 ETC module
aimed at developing specialization and interdisciplinary skills in a year-long collaborative
project. And concluding the studies with a comprehensive thesis project of 45 ETCS.
As the general scope and interest of the program, it explores biologically integrated de-
sign through digital simulation, digital fabrication, and synthetic biology[59]. These are
specialized areas of biology and computational skills, preparing students with advanced
design thinking and technical skill background, through an interdisciplinary approach.
These educational programs address the need and potential of learning from nature, build-
ing the pathway of biological knowledge entering the built environment through architec-
ture. A common characteristic of the different university master’s programs is that they
provide an introduction to biology without specific prerequisites in biological sciences for
architecture and engineering students, making this a desirable and interesting educational
71
==PAGE:78==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
program for those who are intrigued by the innovation found in nature. Additionally, a
significant part of the curriculum supports the development of design thinking and explo-
ration in an interdisciplinary and creative workshop or studio setting. Blending technical
and design skills with practical application.
However, one of the limitations of these
curricula is the predefined specialization and focus on information systems, digital tools,
computational design, etc. While this branch in architecture does need support and spe-
cialists, it does not particularly address the requirements for the proposed bio-architect,
as the discipline aims to support knowledge transfer and communication between more
diverse topics, projects, and skills.
For comparison the Technical University of Denmark. MSc Eng in Architectural Engineer-
ing. is a two-year graduate program with a total of (120 ECTS) that aims to support the
development of engineering skills, design process, and innovation in a cross-disciplinary
project environment [60]. Currently, there are no study programs that support the ex-
ploration of biology within the built environment. However, the flexible and personalized
curriculum allows students to branch out into different interests and technical specializa-
tions. Supporting the development of a wide range of specialists with a diverse skill and
knowledge base. The curriculum is structured as follows:
• Polytechnical foundation courses (5 ECTS) supporting the development of innova-
tive thinking and problem-solving in an interdisciplinary setting.
• Program-specific courses (55 ECTS) that consist of a selection within innovation
courses, mandatory core competencies in advanced building design, building assess-
ment, information modeling (BIM), etc.
• Program-specific courses related to personal interests and chosen focus areas (30
ECTS), providing an extensive list of possible courses that fit within this category.
• Elective courses (30 ECTS) that span across the whole university and departments,
providing the opportunity to customize the study program according to personal
interests.
As suggested but not mandatory existing study lines include: indoor and energy, struc-
tures, arctic and extreme environments, systems design, digitization, BIM and computa-
tional design, materials and LCA, fire safety design, and acoustics [60].
Summarizing the findings on already existing programs and curriculum structures, it
is evident that out of the suggested universities, the Technical University of Denmark
offers the most personalized education. That allows students to explore their interests,
and build upon technical skills and communication in an interdisciplinary setting. All
of the traits and characteristics necessary within the bio-architect discipline education.
However, something that other reviewed universities offered as a strong foundation for
developing design thinking skills and supporting communication between disciplines is the
workshop or studio setting that facilitates a creative environment. Additionally, none of
the programs offer a more generalized introduction to biology, building upon the skills
needed to be comfortable within this field of science. Support the search, translation, and
implementation into design or engineering.
This further emphasizes that there are certain limitations in current study programs,
72
==PAGE:79==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
that could potentially support the development of a novel discipline like the bio-architect.
Therefore, an ideal scenario for this study program relies somewhere in between, taking
parts of different curricula and blending in into the development of a new or adjusted
master’s program.
7.2.3.2
The bio-architect’s discipline
To reflect the conclusions and findings of the previous paragraph and conducted inter-
views, the ideal curriculum, supporting the development of the new bio-architects disci-
pline requires a widely scoped program that focuses on the forming of skills and knowledge
in biology, design processes, fundamentals of engineering, and communication in an in-
terdisciplinary team.
While it does seem like a complex curriculum to structure, to ensure such a versatile knowl-
edge base, as reviewed in the example of the Architectural Engineering master’s program
that is offered at the Technical University of Denmark, such diversity and personalizing is
possible. Therefore, It will be used as the baseline of the educational background for the
bio-architects discipline, evaluating it through available courses and structure that DTU
offers, aiming to indicate the potential areas of adjustment. The main components of the
educational program needed:
• Engineering. As discussed in the previously conducted interviews and found in
this thesis study, a crucial part of this new bio-architect discipline is the fundamen-
tal understanding of engineering principles and technical assessment skills. For this
reason, courses related to building design, building performance assessment, evalua-
tion, indoor climate, and systems thought at DTU are essential. They combine the
understanding of the built environment, processes, and systems found in buildings
with analytical assessment and technical outlook skills on the feasible application.
• Innovation. As an underlying principle, this new bio-architects discipline needs to
be familiar with an outlook keen on the search for innovative solutions. Currently,
there are a few courses offered at DTU that support the development of these skills.
Most importantly, these courses for example "Innovation in Engineering" or "X-Tech
Entrepreneurship" are taught in a highly interdisciplinary team setting, that further
emphasizes communication and collaboration skills between disciplines.
• Biology. As discussed in the interview with Participant 1 it is not particularly
necessary to have a background in biological sciences to be able to explore and
communicate research in biology. However, there are certain principles, terminology,
and knowledge, that this discipline should be familiarized with to support the link
between different fields of science like biology and engineering. There are several
master’s education programs offered in biological sciences at DTU, therefore, it
is possible to develop a hybrid course, that could potentially blend architectural
engineering and biological science students into an interdisciplinary environment.
Aimed to support the development of a fundamental understanding of biological
processes and terminology.
• Design. In an interdisciplinary setting, the general scope and contribution that
this new bio-architect’s role needs to fulfill is not only the communication between
73
==PAGE:80==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
the two fields of biology and engineering but also the idea conceptualization and
execution into design principles. Currently, there are a few courses offered at DTU
that supports this idea for example "Agile Prototyping", "Advanced Building De-
sign", "Biologically Inspired Design", etc. However, what was commonly found in the
curriculum offered at other universities, was the studio and workshop setting, that
facilitates creative exploration, design thinking, and experimentation environment.
Therefore, this is the area that could be adjusted or emphasized in the current Ar-
chitectural Engineering curriculum, to provide the opportunity to practice, blend,
and apply the skills, specialization, and knowledge gained in other courses.
Therefore, if all these courses and the development of skills could be combined in a curricu-
lum offered as a new specialization for the Architectural Engineering master’s program,
the realization of the bio-architects discipline would be possible. It would include all of
the main components needed to prepare this discipline as the "translator" between biol-
ogy and architecture. Blending practices and knowledge from biology, architecture, and
engineering. Essentially supporting knowledge transfer, communication, idea generation,
and execution into feasible and innovative projects.
An Architectural Engineering educational program that offers specialization in biology
would ensure that this discipline is skilled in the following areas:
• Building design, assessment, and evaluation
• Biological principles and knowledge
• Design and conceptual thinking
• Fundamental principles of engineering
• Communication between the fields of science and design
7.3
Evaluation
Throughout the study, different objectives, values, and requirements for the proposed
solution were discovered and identified. This section provides a summary and evaluation
of the new disciplinary support with the integration of a bio-architect’s role.
7.3.1
The disciplinary scales
As reviewed in Section 4.3 the search for solutions inspired by nature and integration
of biology provides potential and benefits for supported collaboration within the build-
ing industry. However, that comes with a set of certain challenges related to knowledge
exchange and transfer. Within the involved disciplines in a biomimetic project such as
architects, engineers, and biologists, one of the commonly discussed reasons for stum-
bling across different challenges is the balance between the fields of sciences and design.
Because biology and engineering are part of two science fields, some form of common
ground already exists within skills, processes, and approaches.
Making it difficult to
achieve a supported collaboration between the involved design and architectural disci-
plines. Therefore, the involvement of additional design-based disciplines introduced as
74
==PAGE:81==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
the bio-architect, with fundamental background knowledge of both sciences engineering
and biology, the translation and communication become more equal and supported.
As a comparison to Figure 4.4 "The split between the disciplines" where this imbalance is
represented, Figure 7.17 showcases the placement of the new proposed discipline.
Figure 7.17 | Balance between science and design-based disciplines
7.3.2
Evaluation through other approaches
Across this thesis study, various approaches, methods, tools, and ideas on how to work
with biology in the building industry were reviewed and introduced as existing practices.
Figure 7.18 summarizes and evaluates the impact on different design levels with each
approach, compared to the proposed solution of disciplinary support.
Figure 7.18 | Supported knowledge transfer through different approaches
75
==PAGE:82==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
Biologically inspired design. As reviewed in Section 3 there are different levels and
terminologies when it comes to biologically inspired design. However, at the core of these
applications, the common underlying principle of biologically inspired design is to take
inspiration from nature. This is further represented in Figure 7.18, where this knowledge
transfer and implementation happens only on a conceptual level.
Taking the idea of
principles and phenomena found in nature and applying that into architectural design,
without in-depth assessment, functional representation, or details that link the design
back to the initial source information. An example representing this relation is the design
of St.Pancras International Terminal reviewed in Section 3, Figure 3.1 where the concept
of flexible scales found on an animal called a pangolin was directly implemented in the
visual facade design, mimicking the flexibility function by curving the building alongside
railways.
Biodigital architecture. As explored in Section 5.1 in the example of the ICD/ITKE
University of Stuttgart innovative pavilion designs that are created through computa-
tional tools in Figure 5.2. As well as the reviewed in the Biodigital Architecture master’s
program curricula in Section 7.2, biodigital architecture falls within the low (technical)
levels of design. Where biological concepts and knowledge are explored through detailed
assessments, analogies, and behavior principles, implementing those ideas into detailed
architectural designs that follow the initial functionality found in nature. That way con-
necting these two fields between the low levels of design. However, because of the deeply
analytical nature of these projects, the initial source information might not be represented
thoroughly beyond its behavior and function. Making the link between the biological in-
spiration not as strong.
Biomimetics. Out of all the approaches and applications that use biology as a part of
the equation, biomimetics has been analyzed and evaluated through this study the most.
In Section 3 review of the definitions encapsulates the nature of biomimetics, which is
explained as an analytical approach to biologically inspired design, solving practical prob-
lems through functional assessments of biological systems. This relation is further sum-
marized in the Figure 7.18, which showcases the connection between the inspiration found
in biological concepts and technically detailed solutions in architecture. As summarized in
Section 4.3, biomimetics is rather a component of building design, an engineered product
that is focused on the functional relation found in nature. This process begins with a
strong research background of phenomena and principles found in nature, which are then
represented in engineered solutions. However, because of the function and product-related
nature of this approach, the results lack a strong representation of biology beyond the
functionality.
Morphogenetic architecture. As the opposite approach to biomimetics morphogenetic
architecture is deeply rooted in biology, searching for analogies between the built environ-
ment and relations found in nature. Morphogenetic architecture is not limited to mimick-
ing a single function, behavior, or phenomena found in nature, but is rather focused on
the whole scene from the development of organisms, their response to the environment,
and the ability to adapt. Because of the complexity of biological sciences and the novelty
of these ideas in architecture morphogenetic architecture is explored on a conceptual level
and is often associated with a conceptual idea of "growing architecture". This process is
represented in Figure 7.18 as the connection between the low (technical) biological science
76
==PAGE:83==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
level and the high (conceptual) level of architecture, emphasizing the lack of supported bi-
ological knowledge translation into the architectural design. An example of this process is
reviewed in Section 5.1 discussing the parallels between architecture and biology through
design genes and biological components. However, because of the huge knowledge and
translation gap, the more we enter the realm of building design, the more distinct the
biological connection becomes.
Bio-architect. The different approaches to implementing biological knowledge and sci-
ences into building design showcase certain limitations in connecting these two fields. The
biggest difficulties are certainly related to knowledge transfer and the true representation
of initial information sources. For this reason, the proposed disciplinary approach with the
integration of the bio-architect’s role seemingly addresses the need for improvement and
support. As represented in the Figure 7.18 and explored in Section 7.3 the involvement
of this new discipline not only supports the knowledge transfer between all of the levels
of design and fields of science and design but also ensures the possibility of a feedback
loop to assess the connection to the source information. Initially, this new discipline acts
as a translator between biology and architecture, with a widely scoped specialization in
both building design principles and fundamental knowledge in biological sciences. Bridg-
ing the gap between these two fields, supporting collaboration and communication, and
facilitating the exploration of innovative ideas.
7.3.3
Fulfilling the initial requirements and objectives
As the conclusion of Section 4.3 the areas of potential improvements were identified. This
further turned into the list of objectives and requirements needed to be fulfilled by the
proposed solution of the new bio-architects discipline.
Objective 1: Support the collaboration between the disciplines by revealing the challenge of
knowledge transfer between the fields of sciences. To achieve this objective an educational
background that ensures the development of both design and technical skills, with an
additional specialization in biology is fundamental.
A discipline like the bio-architect
would be the most suited to fulfill this role, essentially supporting the collaboration in an
interdisciplinary team between biology, engineering, and architecture as the mediator or
middle ground.
Objective 2: Facilitate the knowledge and idea transfer from biology into building design
while maintaining a true representation of the original inspiration source. By combining
the skills and knowledge from building design and biological sciences the bio-architect
holds the knowledge and understanding of processes found in each field. Therefore, pro-
viding a feedback loop ensures that the representation and principles found from the
source information are accurate and fulfilled to their full potential.
Objective 3: Support the knowledge transfer and implementation through different levels of
design, from conceptual ideas to highly engineered, technical solutions. The bio-architect’s
discipline can be explained in an analogy to the architect’s discipline. Architects are widely
scoped specialists who are skilled in design communication and development in building
design.
However, architects commonly are not trained and skilled in engineering and
therefore rely on this collaboration to execute their designs. Similarly, the bio-architects
77
==PAGE:84==
7 Improved interdisciplinary collaboration
discipline does not have the advanced skills and education to execute a project at their
low (technical) levels, nevertheless, they are the key communicator between the different
levels. Therefore, successful interdisciplinary collaboration and involvement from the bio-
architects discipline can support the development and implementation through all levels,
from conceptual to technically detailed.
Objective 4: Extend the ability to utilize various biological science information sources.
Because architectural and engineering disciplines are limited in biological knowledge it
is difficult to research biological concepts and filter relevant information. On the other
hand biology disciplines are not familiar with the processes related to building design
and therefore, making it difficult to evaluate the relevant information that can potentially
be applied. For this reason, a discipline familiar with processes, tools, and information
found in both fields can support the research and application, utilizing various information
sources and evaluating the possible implementation.
Objective 5: Support the communication and involvement of various disciplines related to
building design earlier in the design development process. The involvement of biological
sciences and the search for inspiration in nature influences both the disciplinary dynamic
in an interdisciplinary building design team and the timeline of how the projects are
executed. Adding more emphasis on the first initial conceptual design and development
stages, exploring analogies and principles found in biology, and emphasizing the need for
collaboration and specialized support. Because the bio-architect’s discipline can address
the biggest strain of working with biology, through supported knowledge transfer, the idea
of biology playing a role in the building design becomes more desirable and achievable,
introducing even more benefits beyond the supported timeline.
Objective 6: Provide a clear understanding of the responsibilities of the role of each dis-
cipline. Working with biology involves a lot of new variables and skills needed to ex-
plore the sources and information. Without the additional disciplinary support as the
bio-architect’s discipline, the roles and responsibilities of the other involved disciplines
become unclear. Therefore, introducing a new discipline that can support the process,
search, and implementation of biological knowledge, allows other disciplines to focus on
their specialization and contribution to the team.
Objective 7: Relieve the time-consuming process of architecture and engineering disci-
plines searching, understanding, and implementing biological knowledge into design solu-
tions. While this objective cannot be reached fully, as well as assessed objectively, the
support of the bio-architect discipline does hold the potential to provide some flexibility
and efficiency when working with new biological principles or phenomena. Because this
discipline holds background knowledge in fundamental biological sciences, it also helps
develop skills to orientate and filter biological information sources with a better judgment
of relevance.
78
==PAGE:85==
8 Conclusions
8
Conclusions
This study set out to analyze interdisciplinary collaboration in building projects, revealing
challenges related to differing thinking patterns, project outlines, and background knowl-
edge. These difficulties can impact the efficiency of collaboration and even the success of
the projects. Therefore, as a promising approach to improved interdisciplinary collabora-
tion, the integration of biology is introduced, offering a new perspective and innovation
in building projects.
Through the exploration of biomimetics, the potential to mediate the identified challenges
was recognized. First, the application of biology emphasizes and facilitates more involved
participation from the disciplines that rely on specializations and skills collectively found
within the team.
This further influences the timeline of the projects, supporting the
interdisciplinary collaboration early in the developmental design stages.
Additionally,
the involvement of biology and the idea of searching for inspiration in nature boosts the
motivation for more innovative concepts and sustainable solutions.
Despite the positive influence that biomimetics have on interdisciplinary collaboration,
certain difficulties related to knowledge exchange and transfer impact the accessibility
and interest to work with biological sciences in building design. Existing methodologies,
tools, and frameworks aim to support this knowledge gap, however, throughout the study,
various limitations were discovered. These findings led to the motivation to develop a new
discipline called bio-architect that could translate and support communication between
the fields of sciences. As the general scope of this new role, the bio-architect blends design
practices with a fundamental understanding of engineering and biological sciences.
By addressing the primary challenge of knowledge transfer, the introduction of a bio-
architect can make the incorporation of biology into building design more feasible and
advantageous, supporting more innovative, sustainable, and efficient design practices, ulti-
mately improving the way interdisciplinary teams approach and execute building projects.
While interdisciplinary collaboration between architects and engineers presents various
challenges, the implementation of biomimetics and biological sciences offers a promising
approach to overcoming some of these obstacles. Furthermore, the relationship between
the different topics and challenges explored throughout this thesis has been represented
in Figure 8.1, highlighting the process leading up to the development of a new discipline.
79
==PAGE:86==
8 Conclusions
Figure 8.1 | The relation between the different topics and challenges explored throughout
this study
8.1
Further research
This study identifies the general scope, skills, and characteristics needed for the bio-
architect discipline to address the challenge of knowledge transfer. To further validate
the potential improvements that this solution brings, gain feedback, and assess the details
of this role, interviews with specialists of various backgrounds were conducted. However,
due to the time frame of the study and the novelty of this proposed solution, the implemen-
tation into an interdisciplinary setting was not executed and observed. Therefore, further
studies of the integration and application of the new discipline’s role is suggested. Ad-
ditionally, scoping the suggested curriculum with a more precise division between ECTS
and mandatory courses for this study line.
80
==PAGE:87==
References
References
[1]
Clare Olsen and Sinéad Mac Namara. Collaborations in Architecture and Engineering 2nd edi-
tion. 2nd ed. 2021. isbn: 978-1-00-301817-9. doi: 10.4324/9781003018179. url: https://www.
taylorfrancis.com/books/9781003018179.
[2]
Tim McGinley and Thomas Krijnen. “A framework for meta-disciplinary building analysis”. In:
2022. url: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/363579368_A_framework_for_meta-
disciplinary_building_analysis.
[3]
Martin Bryant. “Learning Spatial Design through Interdisciplinary Collaboration”. In: (2021). doi:
10.3390/land10070689. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2073-445X/10/7/689.
[4]
Julian F.V Vincent et al. “Biomimetics: its practice and theory”. In: Journal of The Royal Society
Interface (2006). doi: 10.1098/rsif.2006.0127. url: https://royalsocietypublishing.org/
doi/10.1098/rsif.2006.0127.
[5]
Nathalie Verbrugghe, Eleonora Rubinacci, and Ahmed Z. Khan. “Biomimicry in Architecture: A
Review of Definitions, Case Studies, and Design Methods”. In: Biomimetics (2023). doi: 10.3390/
biomimetics8010107. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2313-7673/8/1/107.
[6]
ISO 18458:2015(en) Biomimetics — Terminology, concepts and methodology. 2015. url: https:
//www.iso.org/obp/ui/en/#iso:std:iso:18458:ed-1:v1:en.
[7]
Mariam AlAli et al. “Applications of Biomimicry in Architecture, Construction and Civil Engi-
neering”. In: Biomimetics (2023). doi: 10.3390/biomimetics8020202. url: https://www.mdpi.
com/2313-7673/8/2/202.
[8]
Lazaara Ilieva et al. “Biomimicry as a Sustainable Design Methodology—Introducing the ‘Biomimicry
for Sustainability’ Framework”. In: (2022). doi: 10.3390/biomimetics7020037. url: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2313-7673/7/2/37.
[9]
Natasha Chayaamor-Heil and Louis Vitalis. “Biology and architecture: An ongoing hybridization
of scientific knowledge and design practice by six architectural offices in France”. In: Frontiers
of Architectural Research (2021). issn: 20952635. doi: 10.1016/j.foar.2020.10.002. url:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2095263520300704.
[10]
Clare Olsen and Sinéad Mac Namara. Collaborations in architecture and engineering. Routledge,
2014. isbn: 978-0-415-84061-3. url: https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/dtudk/reader.
action?docID=1687399.
[11]
New Zealand Institute of Architects, New Zealand Registered Architects Board, and. “Improving
Collaboration Between Architects and Engineers”. In: (2014).
[12]
Alison Specht and Kevin Crowston. “Interdisciplinary collaboration from diverse science teams can
produce significant outcomes”. In: (2022). Ed. by Sergi Lozano. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0278043. url: https://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0278043.
[13]
Mollaoglu-Korkmaz Sinem, Lipika Swarup, and Riley David. “Delivering Sustainable, High-Performance
Buildings: Influence of Project Delivery Methods on Integration and Project Outcomes”. In: Journal
of Management in Engineering (Jan. 2013). doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)ME.1943-5479.0000114. url:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/276977897_Delivering_Sustainable_High-
Performance_Buildings_Influence_of_Project_Delivery_Methods_on_Integration_and_
Project_Outcomes.
[14]
Ellis. The Ultimate Guide to Choosing the Best Project Delivery Method. 2022. url: https://www.
autodesk.com/blogs/construction/best-project-delivery-method/.
[15]
Autodesk. Your essential guide to collaborative project delivery methods.
[16]
Darren R. Hale, Pramen P. Shrestha, and George Edward Gibson. “Empirical Comparison of
Design/Build and Design/Bid/Build Project Delivery Methods”. In: Journal of Construction En-
gineering and Management (2009). doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0000017. url: https:
//www.researchgate.net/publication/275337075_Empirical_Comparison_of_DesignBuild_
and_DesignBidBuild_Project_Delivery_Methods.
81
==PAGE:88==
References
[17]
Simon A. Adamtey. “A Case Study Performance Analysis of Design-Build and Integrated Project
Delivery Methods”. In: International Journal of Construction Education and Research (2019).
doi: 10.1080/15578771.2019.1696903. url: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
337596666 _ A _ Case _ Study _ Performance _ Analysis _ of _ Design - Build _ and _ Integrated _
Project_Delivery_Methods.
[18]
Amanda Fish. “Integrated project delivery: the obstacles of implementation”. Department of Archi-
tectural Engineering and Construction Science College of Engineering. Manhattan, Kansas: Kansas
State University, 2011.
[19]
Sebastian Macmillan et al. “Mapping the design process during the conceptual phase of building
projects”. In: (2002).
[20]
Chao Chen and Llewellyn Tang. “Development of BIM-Based Innovative Workflow for Architecture,
Engineering and Construction Projects in China”. In: International Journal of Engineering and
Technology (2019). doi: 10.7763/IJET.2019.V11.1133. url: http://www.ijetch.org/index.
php?m=content&c=index&a=show&catid=99&id=1336.
[21]
State Library New South Wales. Understanding the building design and construction phases. url:
https://www.sl.nsw.gov.au/public-library-services/people-places/understanding-
building-design-and-construction-phases.
[22]
Naveen Kumar Muthumanickam et al. “Multidisciplinary design optimization in Architecture, En-
gineering, and Construction: a detailed review and call for collaboration”. In: (2023). doi: 10.
1007/s00158-023-03673-y. url: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/s00158-023-03673-y.
[23]
Saviz Moghtadernejad, Saeed Mirza, and Luc Chouinard. “Façade Design Stages: Issues and Consid-
erations”. In: Journal of Architectural Engineering 25(1):04018033 (2019). doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)
AE.1943-5568.0000335.
[24]
Drivensteel. Building Information Modeling. 2022. url: https://www.drivensteel.com/Building_
Information_Modeling.htm.
[25]
Erika Poirier, Daniel Forgues, and Sheryl Staub-French. “Understanding the impact of BIM on
collaboration: a Canadian case study”. In: (2017). doi: 10.1080/09613218.2017.1324724.
[26]
Eva-Charlotte Forgues et al. “A Framework for Improving Collaboration Patterns in BIM Projects”.
In: 2016. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-46771-9_5.
[27]
Yonca Hurol. “Ethical Considerations for a Better Collaboration Between Architects and Structural
Engineers: Design of Buildings with Reinforced Concrete Frame Systems in Earthquake Zones”.
In: Science and Engineering Ethics (2014). doi: 10.1007/s11948- 013- 9453- 4. url: http:
//link.springer.com/10.1007/s11948-013-9453-4.
[28]
Eduardo I. Galaz-Delgado et al. “Problems and Challenges in the Interactions of Design Teams
of Construction Projects: A Bibliometric Study”. In: (2021). doi: 10.3390/buildings11100461.
url: https://www.mdpi.com/2075-5309/11/10/461.
[29]
Burkay Pasin. “Rethinking the Design Studio-Centered Architectural Education. A Case Study at
Schools of Architecture in Turkey”. In: The Design Journal (2017). doi: 10.1080/14606925.2017.
1352656. url: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/14606925.2017.1352656.
[30]
Einar Loktu. “Early stage Collaboration in Architecture and Engineering”. PhD thesis. Denmark:
DTU Department of Civil Engineering, 2019. url: https : / / findit . dtu . dk / en / catalog /
5d3d8339d9001d32f558c126?single_revert=%2Fen%2Fcatalog%3Fq%3Deinar%2Bloktu%26show_
single%3Doff%26utf8%3D%25E2%259C%2593.
[31]
Mwila Isabel Nkandu and Halil Zafer Alibaba. “Biomimicry as an Alternative Approach to Sus-
tainability”. In: Architecture Research (2018). doi: DOI:10.5923/j.arch.20180801.01.
[32]
Ela Cestar. Biomimetic patterns in architectural design. 2023. url: https://moss.amsterdam/
2020/09/23/nature-does-it-better-biomimetic-patterns-in-architectural-design/.
82
==PAGE:89==
References
[33]
Julian Vincent. “TRIZ as a Primary Tool for Biomimetics”. In: Research and Practice on the Theory
of Inventive Problem Solving (TRIZ). Ed. by Leonid Chechurin. 2016. isbn: 978-3-319-31780-9. doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-31782-3_13. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-
31782-3_13.
[34]
the Mind Tools Content Team. TRIZ a Powerful Methodology for Creative Problem Solving. url:
https://www.mindtools.com/amtcc5f/triz.
[35]
M. A. Shaharuzaman et al. “Conceptual Design of New Bio-inspired Automotive Side Door Impact
Beam”. In: International Journal of Engineering and Advanced Technology (2020). doi: 10.35940/
ijeat.C5328.029320. url: https://www.ijeat.org/wp- content/uploads/papers/v9i3/
C5328029320.pdf.
[36]
Mary Guzowski et al. “A Biology-Architecture Collaboration: Integrating Biological Concepts with
a Bio-Inspired Design Process”. In: (2022).
[37]
Torben A. Lenau and Akhlesh Lakhtakia. Biologically Inspired Design: A Primer. Synthesis Lec-
tures on Engineering, Science, and Technology. Springer International Publishing, 2021. isbn: 978-
3-031-00963-1. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-02091-9. url: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/
978-3-031-02091-9.
[38]
Julian F.V. Vincent. “Biomimetics in architectural design”. In: Intelligent Buildings International
(2016). doi: 10.1080/17508975.2014.911716. url: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/
10.1080/17508975.2014.911716.
[39]
Virginia Hammond. “Utilizing Biomimicry to Design Sustainable Architecture”. Architecture Un-
dergraduate Honors Theses. UniversityofArkansas,Fayetteville, 2024.
[40]
Nguyen-Truong Le, Joachim Warschat, and Tobias Farrenkopf. “An Early-Biologisation Process to
Improve the Acceptance of Biomimetics in Organizations”. In: Advanced Computational Methods
for Knowledge Engineering. Ed. by Nguyen-Thinh Le et al. Series Title: Advances in Intelligent
Systems and Computing. Springer International Publishing, 2018. isbn: 978-3-319-61910-1. doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-61911-8_16. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-
61911-8_16.
[41]
Louis Vitalis and Natasha Chayaamor-Heil. “Forcing biological sciences into architectural design:
On conceptual confusions in the field of biomimetic architecture”. In: Frontiers of Architectural
Research (2022). doi: 10.1016/j.foar.2021.10.001. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S2095263521000753.
[42]
Eliot Graeff, Nicolas Maranzana, and Améziane Aoussat. “Biological Practices and Fields, Miss-
ing Pieces of the Biomimetics’ Methodological Puzzle”. In: Biomimetics (2020). doi: 10.3390/
biomimetics5040062. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2313-7673/5/4/62.
[43]
T. McGinley. “A morphogenetic architecture for intelligent buildings”. In: Intelligent Buildings
International (2015). doi: 10.1080/17508975.2014.970120. url: http://www.tandfonline.
com/doi/abs/10.1080/17508975.2014.970120.
[44]
Tim McGinley et al. “Suburban Mutations: Towards the Multi-Dimensional Appropriation of Sci-
ence in Architecture”. In: 2016. url: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/311454828_
Suburban_Mutations_Towards_the_Multi- Dimensional_Appropriation_of_Science_in_
Architecture.
[45]
Tim McGinley, Andrew Fotia, and Brett Abroe. “From Hopeful Monsters to Morphogenetic Pro-
totypes”. In: Architectural Theory Review (2015). doi: 10.1080/13264826.2016.1177563. url:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13264826.2016.1177563.
[46]
Prof. A. Menges and Prof. Dr.J. Knippers. ICD/ITKE Research Pavilions: livMatS Pavilion 2020-
21. 2021. url: https : / / www . itke . uni - stuttgart . de / research / icd - itke - research -
pavilions/livMatS-pavilion-2020-21/.
[47]
Nikolai Skorpe Aasprong. “BioDigital Architecture System”. PhD thesis. Lyngby, Denmark: Tech-
nical Unierity of Denmark, 2020.
83
==PAGE:90==
References
[48]
Anna Marleen Dietrich et al. Master Class: Architectural Engineering, Building analysis report.
Course final report. 2023.
[49]
Josepha Schmidt, Katharina Stumpfig, and Felix Lindemann. Master Class: Architectural Engi-
neering, Design Approach report. Course final report. 2023.
[50]
P E Fayemi et al. “Biomimetics: process, tools and practice”. In: Bioinspiration & Biomimetics
(2017). doi: 10.1088/1748-3190/12/1/011002. url: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/
10.1088/1748-3190/12/1/011002.
[51]
Ruben Kruiper et al. “Towards a Design Process for Computer-Aided Biomimetics”. In: (2018).
doi: 10.3390/biomimetics3030014. url: http://www.mdpi.com/2313-7673/3/3/14.
[52]
Ken Peffers et al. “A Design Science Research Methodology for Information Systems Research”. In:
Journal of Management Information Systems (2007). doi: 10.2753/MIS0742-1222240302. url:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.2753/MIS0742-1222240302.
[53]
Martyn Dade-Robertson. Living Construction. 1st Edition. 2020. isbn: ISBN 9781138363038.
[54]
Bjarke Ingels Group. Danish Neuroscience Center, Aarhus, Denmark. 2020. url: https://big.
dk/projects/danish-neuroscience-center-4121.
[55]
Royal Danish Academy. Dermoid. 2010. url: https://royaldanishacademy.com/en/case/
dermoid.
[56]
UIC Barcelona School of Architecture. Master’s Degree in Biodigital Architecture. University web-
site. url: https://www.uic.es/en/estudis-uic/architecture/masters-degree-biodigital-
architecture#home.
[57]
Royal Danish Academy. Computation in Architecture Master’s Programme. University website.
url: https://royaldanishacademy.com/en/master-computation-in-architecture/about-
programme.
[58]
Mette Ramsgaard Thomsen. “Computational design logics for bio-based design”. In: Architectural
Intelligence (2022). doi: 10.1007/s44223-022-00015-8. url: https://link.springer.com/10.
1007/s44223-022-00015-8.
[59]
London’s Global University. Bio-Integrated Design (Bio-ID) MArch/MSc. Bio-Integrated Design
(Bio-ID) MArch/MSc. url: https : / / www . ucl . ac . uk / bartlett / architecture / study /
postgraduate/bio-integrated-design-bio-id-marchmsc.
[60]
Technical University of Denmark. Master’s degree in Architectural Engineering. University website.
url: https://studieinformation.dtu.dk/english/master-of-science-in-engineering/
architectural-engineering/programme-specification.
84
