==PAGE:1==
DTU Food
Masters Thesis
Masters of Science in Applied Chemistry, MSc.Eng.
Optimisation of Sample Preparation for the
Determination of Elements in Fats and Oils Using
ICP-MS
Author
Maria Hansen
s183876
Supervisors
Heidi Amlund
Katrin L¨oschner
July 26, 2024
 
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This master’s thesis is the project that will conclude my ﬁfth and ﬁnal semester of
my master’s degree in Applied Chemistry at the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU).
The project commenced in February of 2024 and corresponds to 30 ECTS points.
The thesis was submitted on July 26th, 2024.
The inspiration for this topic stems from personal interest in ICP-MS as a method for
analysing the content of heavy metals and/or trace elements in a variety of samples.
The topic of edible oils was presented to me by my supervisors and served as an
opportunity for me to learn more about analytical chemistry, method development
and optimisation of already existing techniques.
Name
Signature
Date
Maria Hansen
s183876
Mina Hansen
267 2024
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis explores the optimisation of sample preparation methods for the determi-
nation of trace elements in edible oils using ICP-MS. The main objective is to anal-
yse trace metals such as lead (Pb), cadmium (Cd), nickel (Ni), arsenic (As), copper
(Cu), iron (Fe), and antimony (Sb) in selected oil samples. This research contributes
to the ﬁeld by optimising existing analytical techniques for better eﬃciency in trace
element analysis in edible oils. The study employs multiple preparation methods,
including microwave digestion, ultrasound assisted extraction, L-cysteine hydrochlo-
ride extraction and extraction induced by emulsion breaking, to assess their eﬃcacy
in terms of extraction. Microwave digestion was e↵ective but highlighted challenges
with repeatability and the heat sensitivity of the samples, particularly for ﬁsh oil,
which exhibited high reactivity to heat and pressure. Ultrasound assisted extraction
showed potential but faced issues with phase separation. The L-cysteine hydrochlo-
ride method was limited by reagent purity, necessitating high-purity reagents for
future studies. The emulsion breaking methods yielded the most promising results,
with heat and centrifuge techniques providing good repeatability but low recovery
on all elements except Pb.
Overall, the research underscores the importance of
sample preparation in trace element analysis of edible oils and suggests that further
optimisation of these methods could improve accuracy and reliability.
II
==PAGE:4==
Resum´e
Dette speciale udforsker optimering af prøveforberedelsesmetoder til bestemmelse
af sporsto↵er i spiselige olier ved hjælp af ICP-MS. Fokus er p˚a analyse af ele-
menter som bly (Pb), cadmium (Cd), nikkel (Ni), arsen (As), kobber (Cu), jern
(Fe) og antimon (Sb) i udvalgte olieprøver.
Denne forskning bidrager til feltet
ved at optimere eksisterende analytiske teknikker for højere e↵ektivitet af analyse
af sporsto↵er i spiselige olier. Studiet anvender ﬂere forberedelsesmetoder, herun-
der mikrobølgeovns foraskning, ultralydsassisteret ekstraktion, L-cystein hydrochlo-
rid ekstraktion og ekstraktion ved emulsionsbrydning, for at vurdere deres e↵ek-
tivitet. Foraskning var e↵ektiv, men fremhævede udfordringer med gentagelighed
og varmefølsomhed af prøverne, især for ﬁskeolie, som udviste høj reaktivitet ved
høj varme og tryk. Ultralydsassisteret ekstraktion viste potentiale, men stod over
for problemer med faseadskillelse. L-cystein hydrochlorid metoden var begrænset
af reagensets renhed og vil kræve høj renhed for reagenser til fremtidige studier.
De mest lovende resultater blev opn˚aet med metoder baseret p˚a emulsionsbrydning,
hvor varme- og centrifugeteknikker gav god gentagelighed, men lav genﬁnding af
alle elementer undtagen Pb.
Samlet set understreger forskningen vigtigheden af
prøveforberedelse i analyse af sporsto↵er i spiselige olier og antyder, at yderligere
optimering af disse metoder kunne forbedre nøjagtigheden og p˚alideligheden.
III
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
The completion of this study could not have been possible without the expertise of
my supervisors, Senior Researcher Heidi Amlund and Lector Katrin L¨oschner. Their
continual encouragement and guidance throughout this project have made this an
enjoyable experience for me and have inspired me to further work within this ﬁeld
of research. Furthermore, I would like to thank Birgitte Koch Herbst for her help
and advice within the lab. She has been central support in planning the experimen-
tal work and has always been approachable for answering questions regarding the
project.
A special thanks must go to my family and loved ones for their endless support and
reassurance throughout this project.
A ﬁnal thanks go to the Research Group for Analytical Food Chemistry at DTU
National Food Institute for the use of their laboratory, chemicals, and ICP-MS
facilities.
IV
==PAGE:6==
Acronyms
CPS Counts per Second.
CRM Certiﬁed Reference Material.
CYS L-cysteine Hydrochloride Extraction.
DHA Docosahexaenoic Acid.
EDTA Ethylenediaminetetraacetic Acid.
EIEB Extraction Induced by Emulsion Breaking.
EIEB-C Emulsion Breaking by Centrifuge.
EIEB-H Emulsion Breaking by Heat.
EPA Eicosapentaenoic Acid.
EU European Union.
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization.
ICP-MS Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry.
MUFA Monounsaturated Fatty Acid.
NRC National Research Council Canada.
PET Polyethylene Terephthalate.
PT Proﬁciency Testing.
PUFA Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid.
QC Quality Control.
V
==PAGE:7==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 0
rpm Revolutions per Minute.
TAG Triacylglycerols.
UAE Ultrasound Assisted Extraction.
WHO World Health Organization.
VI
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
2.1
Fatty Acid Naming and Numbering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1
Cavitation Phenomena Illustrated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Mechanism of Chelation Between L-cysteine and Elements . . . . . .
17
3.3
O/W Emulsion with the Stabilisation of a Surfactant . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1
Fish Samples after High Heat in the Microwave
. . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Sample after Ultrasound Assisted Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Sample after L-cysteine Hydrochloride Extraction . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4
Results from the L-cysteine Hydrochloride Extraction . . . . . . . . .
39
5.5
Samples after Emulsion Breaking by Heat and Centrifuge . . . . . . .
40
7.1
Microwave Sample and DORM-5 Sample after Digestion
. . . . . . .
57
VII
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
2.1
Known Limits for the Elements Analysed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.1
The Compositions of the Prepared Standard Solutions
. . . . . . . .
23
4.2
The Composition of the Standard Row. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Overview of the Oils
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Testing of the Fish Oil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
Extractions Induced by Emulsion Breaking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1
Results from the Microwave Digestion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
QC Results for Emulsion Breaking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
PT Results for Emulsion Breaking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4
Results from the Extraction Induced by Emulsion Breaking . . . . . .
44
5.5
LOD for All Methods and Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.6
LOQ for All Methods and Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.7
Limitations and Advantages for Each Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.1
Concentrations Found in All Oils by Microwave Digestion . . . . . . .
58
7.2
QC and DORM-5 Results for Microwave Digestion
. . . . . . . . . .
59
7.3
Dilution Factors of Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
VIII
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
II
Resume
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . III
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IV
Acronyms
V
List of Figures
VII
List of Tables
VIII
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Thesis Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Edible Oils
5
2.1
Lipids and Fatty Acids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Physical Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Elements of Interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Principle of Methods
13
3.1
Microwave Assisted Pressure Digestion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Ultrasound Assisted Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
L-cysteine Hydrochloride Extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Extraction Induced by Emulsion Breaking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
ICP-MS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Analysis Method
21
4.1
Reagents, Standards, and Blanks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Mapping of Samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Microwave Assisted Pressure Digestion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.1
Dilution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
1
==PAGE:11==
4.3.2
Optimisation of Sampling and Sample Amount . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.3
Fish Oil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
Ultrasound Assisted Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
L-cysteine Hydrochloride Extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.6
Extraction Induced by Emulsion Breaking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.6.1
By Centrifuge, EIEB-C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.6.2
By Heat, EIEB-H . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.7
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Results & Discussion
32
5.1
Microwave Assisted Pressure Digestion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Ultrasound Assisted Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
L-cysteine Hydrochloride Extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4
Extraction Induced by Emulsion Breaking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.5
Comparison of Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.6
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Conclusion
51
References
56
7
Appendix
57
7.1
Appendix I
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.2
Appendix II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.3
Appendix III
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Fats and oils constitute essential components of the human diet, providing concen-
trated energy sources and serving as carriers for fat-soluble vitamins and bioactive
compounds. They are either products of natural origin or industrialised products
modiﬁed in order to obtain the desired properties. In particular, vegetable oils have
been found to beneﬁt cholesterol levels, making them a preferred product in the
culinary world (Llorent-Mart´ınez et al., 2011). However, the quality and safety of
fats and oils are increasingly scrutinised due to the potential presence of contami-
nants, including heavy metals, which can pose signiﬁcant health risks to consumers
(Knochen and Morales, 2015).
Heavy metals and trace elements are mostly naturally occurring elements that are
not biodegradable and are often highly toxic to humans, especially when the expo-
sure is prolonged over time. They can enter the food chain through various pathways,
including industrial activities, agricultural practices, and environmental pollution.
Fats and oils have the potential to accumulate signiﬁcant levels of trace elements
during production, processing, and packaging. Furthermore, they might come from
the soil, environment, and genotype of the plants used for the oil. Therefore, the
safety of these products is important to examine (Gonz´alez-Torres et al., 2023).
However, the quantiﬁcation of trace metals in oil samples is challenging to perform.
Direct measurement is not possible because of the products’ low concentration levels
and high viscosity. Therefore, sample preparation is essential and should be applied
to the oils before the determination step. Many di↵erent methodologies have been
proposed in the literature to ﬁnd the safest and most e↵ective preparation. In recent
years, varying innovative extraction methods have been researched and suggested,
such as the use of ultrasonic waves, forming and breaking of an emulsion, and
3
==PAGE:13==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 1
liquid-liquid extraction using a strong chelating agent (Kara et al., 2015, Adolfo
and Nascimento, 2023, Chen et al., 2023).
1.1
Thesis Statement
The thesis aims to analyse a selection of elements (Pb, Cd, Ni, As, Cu, Fe, Sb) in
some carefully selected oil samples. The assays are performed by varying sample
preparation techniques, followed by detection using ICP-MS. The methods that
will be investigated include microwave digestion, ultrasound assisted extraction,
L-cysteine hydrochloride extraction, and extraction induced by emulsion breaking.
These methods will be compared by examining the recovery found and the simplicity
with which the procedures were carried out. Furthermore, the quality of the results
will be assessed by inspecting triplicates, blanks, and reference materials. The results
obtained will be compared to those found in the literature.
4
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
Edible Oils
In this chapter, fats and oils will be introduced and explained. The production
and the chemical composition of the products will be detailed to give an overview
of potential sources of contamination. The elements analysed in this thesis will be
presented, and the relevant legislation will be deﬁned.
2.1
Lipids and Fatty Acids
Both fats and oils belong to the biopolymer group known as lipids. These com-
pounds are primarily deﬁned by their solubility, as they are relatively insoluble in
aqueous solutions and highly soluble in non-polar solvents. Additionally, they can
be distinguished by their state: lipids that are solid at room temperature are termed
fats, while those that are liquid at room temperature are termed oils (Gani and Ash-
war, 2021). Chemically, lipids are deﬁned as triglycerides of fatty acids, which are
the basic components of larger lipid compounds and are composed of a hydrocarbon
chain with a methyl and a carboxyl group at either end. The majority of fatty
acids have an even number of carbons, and the length of the carbon chains can
range broadly. Additionally, fatty acids vary in number, type, and location of the
double bonds. Those containing no double bonds are referred to as saturated. The
addition of one double bond is characterised as monounsaturated (MUFA) and with
two or more double bonds as polyunsaturated (PUFA). The double bonds within
the fatty acids determine many physical properties of the products, including the
state at which the lipid is found, either solid or ﬂuid. They can be either cis or
trans conformation, and the presence of a cis double bond results in a greater bind,
which impedes the fatty acids from aligning or packing, resulting in a more ﬂuid
state, making oils more liquid or fats softer at room temperature. A vast majority
of fatty acid double bonds occur in the cis conformation (Lichtenstein, 2023).
5
==PAGE:15==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 2
PUFAs are a class of fatty acids that include ! −6 (omega-6) and ! −3 (omega-3)
fatty acids. This terminology comes from the location of the double bonds within
the hydrocarbon chain. Fatty acids in which the ﬁrst double bond from the methyl
end of the chain occurs at the sixth carbon are referred to as ! −6; if it occurs at
the third carbon, they are referred to as ! −3 (Lichtenstein, 2023). An illustration
of the naming system can be seen in Figure 2.1. The ! −3 fatty acid is a precursor
for the long-chain products docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid
(EPA), which are known for their health beneﬁts and are predominantly present in
ﬁsh oils (Tarantino and Finelli, 2016). One of the main disadvantages of PUFAs is
their low oxidative and thermal stability due to higher chemical reactivity. The rate
of oxidation of such fatty acids drastically increases with a greater number of double
bonds present; this is due to higher electron density and stability of the chemical
bond, making them less stable than the monounsaturated acids (H˘ad˘arug˘a et al.,
2016).
MUFAs are a class of fatty acids characterised by the presence of a single double
bond in their acyl chain. The location of this double bond is denoted akin to PUFAs,
with !−. One of the most common MUFAs is oleic acid, in which the ﬁrst double
bond from the methyl end of the chain occurs at the ninth carbon, referred to as
! −9. This fatty acid is typically found in olive oil and is known for its beneﬁcial
e↵ects on heart health. Due to the presence of only a single double bond, these
compounds are more stable when exposed to heat and are less prone to undergo
oxidative reactions, which decreases the quality of the oils and potentially forms
harmful compounds (Lichtenstein, 2023).
Figure 2.1: Numbering and naming of fatty acids illustrated by linoleic acid. (A) shows the
Greek numbering of the carbons, with the terminal methyl group being numbered
as !. (B) shows the numbering of the carbons with the double bonds at the 9th
and 12th carbon in the linoleic acid structure. However, Linoleic acid is an omega-
6 fatty acid since the ﬁrst double bond occurs at the 6th carbon from the terminal
methyl group, as seen from (C) numbering. The ﬁgure is inspired by Figure 4.2 in
Coultate, 2016.
6
==PAGE:16==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 2
The lipids found in fats and oils consist largely of mixtures of triglycerides and
three fatty acids. Triglycerides are deﬁned as esters of the trihydric alcohol glyc-
erol (propane-1,2,3-triol), and they are often referred to as Triacylglycerols (TAGs).
Simple triglyceride molecules have three identical fatty acid residues, whereas mixed
triglycerides are those containing more than one species of fatty acids (Coultate,
2016). Simple triglycerides are rare in nature, whereas the mixed species make up
the bulk of the naturally occurring. The physical properties of TAGs are determined
by the speciﬁc fatty acids which are found on the glycerol molecule and the actual
position the fatty acids occupy (Lichtenstein, 2023).
Lastly, phospholipids are composed of two fatty acids esteriﬁed to the ﬁrst (sn-1)
and second (sn-2) carbon in the glycerol molecule. A polar group is further esteriﬁed
to the third (sn-3) carbon via a phosphate bond. Phospholipids are amphipathic,
meaning that they have both hydrophobic and hydrophilic domains in the molecule.
The two fatty acids confer hydrophobic properties, and the polar group is hydrophilic
(Lichtenstein, 2023).
In edible oils and fat, phospholipids play a crucial role in
the stability and quality of the products.
They a↵ect the stability by chelating
metal ions, thereby decreasing oxidative processes. The metal ions are catalysts
for oxidative reactions, and by binding to the phospholipids, these reactions can be
prevented or slowed down (Nzai and Proctor, 1998).
2.1.1
Physical Properties
Oils possess many important physical properties that are determined by their lipid
composition. The properties that are most signiﬁcant to this study will be explained
to facilitate a deeper understanding of the behaviour of the samples.
Viscosity is a measure of a ﬂuid’s resistance to ﬂow. It plays a crucial role in the
culinary and industrial applications of oils and fats. Several factors inﬂuence vis-
cosity, including the length of the fatty acid chains and the degree of unsaturation.
Oils with longer fatty acid chains tend to be more viscous, while those with more
double bonds, and thus a higher degree of unsaturation, generally have lower vis-
cosity. The trend in viscosity is mainly due to the fact that every double bond
in a cis conﬁguration causes a kink in the straight chain, making the MUFAs and
PUFAs unable to pack as tightly as saturated fatty acids. Furthermore, there is a
close relationship between the viscosity and the temperature, and an increase in the
temperature of vegetable oils causes a reduction in their viscosity. The increase in
temperature tends to increase molecular motion, meaning the molecules can slide
7
==PAGE:17==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 2
over each other, making the liquid less viscous (Toscano et al., 2012).
The smoke point is the temperature at which the oils begin to smoke continuously.
This smoke is an indication of a chemical breakdown of the fat into glycerol and
fatty acids. The critical temperature is greatly dependent on the content of fatty
acids; however, the degree of unsaturation has a minimal e↵ect. The biggest impact
comes from the chain length. Oils containing short fatty acids have a lower smoke
point than oils with predominantly longer-chain fatty acids. Products which have
a higher smoke point are more applicable for heat, which is an important property
in sample preparation as many include higher temperatures to extract the elements
from the organic matrix (Guillaume et al., 2018).
Lastly, emulsions are colloidal systems of two immiscible liquids, one dispersed in
the other, the continuous phase. They can be deﬁned as either water-in-oil (W/O)
if the water droplets are dispersed in the oil phase or oil-in-water (O/W) if the
oil droplets are dispersed in the aqueous phase. Furthermore, microemulsions are
thermodynamically stable mixtures with nanoscale droplets. These types of emul-
sions form spontaneously and appear transparent or translucent. In contrast, typical
emulsions are kinetically stable with larger microscale droplets that require mechan-
ical energy to create and most commonly appear opaque. Emulsiﬁed systems usually
have a milky appearance due to the large droplet size that favours light scattering.
These systems do not form spontaneously as they are thermodynamically unstable.
The types of fatty acids in the oil inﬂuence its emulsiﬁcation properties. Oils with
a higher content of monounsaturated fats, like oleic acid, tend to emulsify better.
Furthermore, oils that naturally contain phospholipids can emulsify more e↵ectively
because phospholipids act as natural emulsiﬁers (Coultate, 2016).
In closing, these products vary in chemical composition, and this variation deter-
mines their physical properties and behaviour when exposed to speciﬁc temperatures
and pressures.
8
==PAGE:18==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 2
2.2
Elements of Interest
Even though oils have many health beneﬁts for humans, there is a risk of the products
being contaminated. The factors that inﬂuence contamination are the soil, water,
air, animals, humans (and the tools they use), as well as the process of production
carried out obtaining them. The presence of heavy metals is one type of chemical
contamination. This group of elements is not biodegradable and is highly toxic to
humans, especially when the exposure is prolonged over time. Traces of heavy metals
have been found in vegetables, meat, or milk due to mobility and bioaccumulation in
water points. Depending on the type of heavy metal or the chemical and biochemi-
cal reactions in which it is involved, the health concerns may vary. They can range
from organ damage to di↵erent types of cancer. Besides the contamination from soil
and processing of the food items, exposure can also come via migration from food
packaging (Gonz´alez-Torres et al., 2023). In the following sections, the elements
of interest will be introduced and explained. Not all are classiﬁed as heavy met-
als, but they are still of great importance to human health and the quality of the oil.
One of the elements related to the migration phenomenon is antimony (Sb). Sb is
a catalyst used in the polymerisation reaction for the formation of containers that
tend to decompose in this process. It is, therefore, referred to as a degradation prod-
uct. However, it tends to be volatile and found at very low levels in food products.
More recent studies agree that Sb is the element that most easily migrates among
all substances from polyethylene terephthalate (PET) to water through leaching. In
addition to the physical-chemical properties of the container, other factors will inﬂu-
ence the migration of chemical components to food. One such factor is the character
and nature of the food. Liquids or fatty foods, when in contact with the container,
are most likely to be a↵ected by migration due to their solubility power, solidifying
the importance of analysing oils and fats for the presence of Sb (Gonz´alez-Torres
et al., 2023).
Cadmium (Cd), arsenic (As), and lead (Pb) are commonly known as toxic heavy
metals. Cd is one of the most toxic heavy metals, alongside Pb. It is associated with
di↵erent minerals distributed in nature; however, humans have contributed to its
dispersal through mining and metallurgical activities. Some of the possible health
e↵ects from prolonged exposure may be kidney, lung, bone, stomach, and prostate
toxicity problems, as well as developing metabolic syndrome and cancer. In veg-
etable oil production, its presence is thought to have originated from the organic
solvents used in the oil extraction process. Pb can be found in edible vegetable
9
==PAGE:19==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 2
oils as a consequence of environmental contamination, reﬁning processes, transfer
during transport, or the packaging process. It is a heavy metal that accumulates in
the body and alters the cell metabolism since it can displace calcium and zinc in the
body, making it a precursor of di↵erent harmful e↵ects on human health (Gonz´alez-
Torres et al., 2023). Arsenic contamination in vegetable oils occurs primarily due
to its presence in the environment, especially in regions with high levels of natural
arsenic in the soil or water. Chronic exposure to As can lead to severe health issues,
including skin lesions, developmental defects, cardiovascular diseases, neurotoxicity,
and an increased risk of cancer (Hussain et al., 2019).
Copper (Cu), nickel (Ni), and iron (Fe) in oils are often referred to when talking
about the quality of the oil. They are precursors for the catalytic oxidation of edible
oils and fats, even at trace levels, giving them an essential role in the oxidation of the
product. Even though these elements are viewed from a quality standpoint, there
are certain concerns regarding the health of the consumers. Among other harmful
e↵ects on the body, high exposure to Cu can cause neurodegenerative disorders,
such as Wilson’s disease. An overexposure of Fe, even in trace amounts and for
prolonged periods, can cause severe risk for human health, such as Parkinson’s,
Huntington’s, and Alzheimer’s disease (Gonz´alez-Torres et al., 2023). The health
e↵ects of Ni exposure include allergic reactions, skin rashes, and, in severe cases,
respiratory issues and increased cancer risk. Studies have shown that the levels of Ni
in oils like olive, sunﬂower, and soybean oils can vary. Still, consistent monitoring
is essential to ensure they remain within safe limits (Hussain et al., 2019).
10
==PAGE:20==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 2
2.3
Legislation
To understand the signiﬁcance of analysing oils and further solidify the importance
of this work, the current legislation for the concentrations of the elements of interest
is essential to investigate. The current regulations are introduced and summarised
in Table 2.1. Here, the European Union (EU) limits are compared to those set by
the Chinese and Spanish governments.
Table 2.1: Toxicity thresholds established in current national and international legislation for
the elements of interest, expressed in mg/kg. The table is inspired by Table 2 in
Gonz´alez-Torres et al., 2023, and regulations have been conﬁrmed to be up to date
with current legislation.
Elements
EU Regulation
(2021/1317 & 2021/1323)
China
(GB/T23347-2021)
Spain
(RD 308/1983)
Cd
N/A1
N/A
N/A
Pb
0.1
0.1
0.1
Cu
N/A
0.1
0.4
Fe
N/A
3.0
10
As
N/A
N/A
0.1
Ni
N/A
N/A
N/A
Sb
0.042
N/A
N/A
1Rapeseed 0.15 mg/kg and sunﬂower seeds 0.50 mg/kg, however, the maximum levels do not
apply to tree nuts or oilseeds for crushing and oil reﬁning
2For plastic materials intended to come into contact with food
Table 2.1 shows that several regulations establish the maximum level for the pres-
ence of Pb in edible vegetable oils at 0.10 mg/kg and is the only maximum level
presented that all three regulations agree upon. Regarding the limits given for Cu
and Fe, these threshold concentrations in oil only refer to quality criteria. Cu and
its alloys, such as brass or bronze, must not be used in storage or transport tanks
and circuits that come into contact with oils, such as hoses, pipes, valves, etc. Given
the current absence of regulation of toxicity for Cu in the EU, the values given in
this study are the limits issued by Chinese government for olive oils and olive po-
mace (0.1 mg/kg) and the values given by the Spanish regulations for the rest of
the vegetable oils (0.4 mg/kg). These limits provide a point of reference for the
concentrations found in this work (Gonz´alez-Torres et al., 2023).
Similar to Cu, Fe currently lacks speciﬁc international legislation for edible vegetable
11
==PAGE:21==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 2
oils, as it is considered an accelerator of oxidation processes. Although the current
limits refer to consumer protection, the maximum permissible levels are marked as
quality criteria for oils. The limits reported in this work are those from Chinese
regulations in the case of olive oils established at 3.0 mg/kg and the Spanish leg-
islation, which established 10 mg/kg as the maximum permissible limit for Fe in
edible vegetable oils. There is no speciﬁc legislation for oils regarding the maximum
limit of Cd allowed for consumption through the ingestion of edible oils. However,
in 2010, the joint FAO/WHO expert committee on Food Additives proposed a max-
imum tolerable monthly intake of 25 µg/kg. As for most of the other elements of
interest, Sb has no speciﬁc regulation when it comes to vegetable oils. However,
the EU set a maximum limit of migration of Sb at 0.04 mg/kg for plastic materials
intended to come into contact with food (Gonz´alez-Torres et al., 2023). For As and
Ni, no regulations have been made concerning vegetable oils. However, because of
the severe health e↵ects, it could be important to look at the concentrations that
are present in certain products.
12
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 3
Principle of Methods
Due to the oily matrices, these samples pose a complex chemical composition, high
organic load, and di↵erent viscosities, making them diﬃcult to analyse through typi-
cal methods. The preparation of a sample for detection is often the rate-determining
step of an analysis, making it an essential part of the laboratory work. In this con-
text, di↵erent sample preparation techniques are going to be introduced to give an
overview of the state-of-the-art methods and explain the principles of the techniques
explored in this work. All ﬁgures were prepared using BioRender.
3.1
Microwave Assisted Pressure Digestion
Microwave digestion is a sample preparation technique used to break down complex
matrices and convert them into a solution suitable for analysis, such as by Induc-
tively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS). The basic principle behind
microwave assisted sample preparation is acid digestion. By means of acid digestion,
the sample is destroyed or dissolved by the use of acids, and only the elements of
interest will remain in the solution. This destruction of the sample matrix transfers
samples into analysable liquid, which is essential for the following analytical pro-
cess, as the equipment requires a clear particle-free solution (“Microwave Digestion
— Anton Paar Wiki”, n.d.).
Microwaves are a form of electromagnetic radiation with frequencies ranging from
300 MHz to 300 GHz. In microwave digestion systems, typically, frequencies around
2.45 GHz are used. The electromagnetic energy is converted into heat energy, which
results in high-speed heating rates. The rate at which the samples are heated can-
not be reproduced with conventional heating. Conventional heating is deﬁned as
the heat coming from the outside and entering the sample via convection currents.
13
==PAGE:23==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 3
This type of heating results in a very hot vessel wall. In contrast, the microwaves
pass through the microwave vessel wall and heat the reaction mixture on a molec-
ular basis by interaction with the molecules (“Microwave Digestion — Anton Paar
Wiki”, n.d.). In general, materials can transmit, reﬂect, and absorb microwaves.
Microwaves do not a↵ect the reﬂective material because they are reﬂected by it, and
an example of this species is the metals or elements present in the sample. Absorp-
tion occurs when the material partially or completely absorbs the microwaves. This
absorption occurs in water, nitric acid (HNO3), or other polar liquids. When an
absorbent material is exposed to a microwave source, its temperature will increase
mainly due to the interaction of waves with the matter. These polar molecules rotate
rapidly under the alternating electric ﬁeld of the microwaves, causing friction and
thus heating the sample. This rotation is also referred to as dielectric heating. As
each molecule is responsible for the heating due to the interaction with microwaves
mentioned above, the dissipation of heat is considered uniform and localised (Mello
et al., 2014).
In addition to the heating properties of the microwaves, this technique for sample
preparation utilises high pressure to break down the sample matrix.
Microwave
digestion is typically performed in closed vessels made of materials like Teﬂon or
quartz. These vessels can withstand high pressures and temperatures. The closed
environment allows for the build-up of pressure, which raises the boiling point of
the digestion solvents. This rise in pressure enables the sample to be heated to
higher temperatures, enhancing the digestion process. Under these conditions, even
samples considered hard to be digested can be decomposed in less time (Mello et al.,
2014).
Wet digestion generally involves the use of concentrated acids to decompose organic
and inorganic matrices.
When digesting organic samples, such as oils, oxidising
acids (mainly HNO3) are used to obtain a solution that is suitable for subsequent
analysis. The closed vessels allow the use of high temperature and pressure, which
subsequently results in more eﬃcient oxidation of organic compounds. The matrix
of the organic samples will ideally decompose to CO2 and H2O by the action of
the oxidant reagents. The gaseous products will cause an increase in pressure in
the decomposition vessel, which will challenge the maximum pressure load of the
instrument. Therefore, the maximum sample load will depend on the amount of
total carbon in the sample, which for oils is about 80% of the product. Furthermore,
the reactivity of the organic samples with oxidising agents at elevated temperatures
14
==PAGE:24==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 3
is an important safety aspect of using the digestion method. Organic substances
with double bonds and polyunsaturated structure, as well as glycerol esters, are
known to be highly reactive with HNO3 as the oxidising agent. Because of these
conditions, alternative methods for sample preparation of oils have been developed
and investigated in the literature (M¨uller et al., 2014, Fecher et al., 2014).
3.2
Ultrasound Assisted Extraction
One of the methods used for sample preparation of oils is referred to as ultrasound
assisted extraction (UAE). This method applies intense, high-frequency ultrasound
energy to liquids, producing both chemical and physical reactions. This technique
works on the principle of cavitation. Ultrasonic waves generate vibrations, which in
turn can create voids that transfer energy to solid particles. In addition, cavitation
bubbles grow closer to the sample surface and collapse at a higher amplitude. This
energy disrupts the cell walls and other structures in the sample matrix, increasing
the permeability and facilitating the release of target compounds into the extrac-
tion solvent. This phenomenon is achieved using either an ultrasound probe or an
ultrasound bath, which operate at 20 kHz and 40 kHz frequencies, respectively (Thi-
lakarathna et al., 2023). The cavitation phenomena lead to high shear forces, and
the collapse of these cavitation bubbles generates intense local energy in the form
of shock waves, microjets, high temperatures and pressure. These shock waves help
break down larger droplets into nanodroplets, creating a ﬁne dispersion of one phase
within another, forming a microemulsion. Figure 3.1 shows the cavitation phenom-
ena in more detail. The mechanical e↵ects of cavitation improve the penetration of
the solvent into the sample matrix, enhancing the dissolution and mass transfer of
the analytes (Chemat et al., 2017).
Furthermore, UAE utilises the properties of the chosen solvent. The principle behind
the technique explored in this work is the creation of a microemulsion and the use
of a strong chelating agent, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA). The solvent
binds to the metal ions creating a metal-EDTA complex, which thereby extracts
them from the sample matrix. The eﬃciency of this formation will increase with an
increasing pH, as EDTA requires a certain pH for each metal ion. This metal-EDTA
complex maintains the stability of the nanodroplets by binding the metals that could
otherwise destabilise the emulsion. The creation of this microemulsion is referred
to as being detergentless, meaning that no surfactant is required for the formation.
The combination of strong chelating solvent and the cavitation phenomenon created
15
==PAGE:25==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 3
by the ultrasonic bath has shown promising results in the literature (Kara et al.,
2015).
Figure 3.1: Cavitation is the formation of vapour bubbles in a liquid when it is subjected
to rapid changes in pressure due to ultrasound waves.
These bubbles form in
low-pressure regions and collapse when they move to higher-pressure areas, often
causing a shock wave. The arrows represent the pressure that forms the bubbles,
and in each step, it is seen how the ”jet” begins to form, resulting in an implosion
which generates intense local energy.
3.3
L-cysteine Hydrochloride Extraction
The use of L-cysteine hydrochloride for metal extraction has been demonstrated in
the literature to give a more eﬃcient and environmentally friendly alternative to
already existing methods (Chen et al., 2023). The principle behind this method is
chelation, which involves the formation of multiple bonds between a single chelating
agent (ligand) and a metal ion. The ligand typically has several donor atoms that
can form coordinate bonds with the metal ion, creating a ring-like structure known
as a chelate complex. The metal ion will act as a Lewis acid, meaning that it serves
as an electron pair acceptor, and the ligand will act as a Lewis base, an electron pair
donor. Many ligands are organic molecules that contain atoms such as oxygen and
nitrogen, which are capable of donating a pair of electrons to form the coordinate
covalent bond with metal ions. The stability of these complexes is attributed to
the chelate e↵ect, which results from the multiple bonding sites of the ligand that
increase the entropy and favour the formation of the complex (Miller et al., 2014).
The type of extraction solution is vital for the method, as it must have a high aﬃnity
for metal ions, low-fat solubility, and biocompatibility. L-cysteine hydrochloride is
a hydrochloride salt form of L-cysteine, an amino acid that contains a thiol (-SH)
16
==PAGE:26==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 3
group, which is essential in protein synthesis and various metabolic functions. This
compound is used in a variety of applications due to its chelating, reducing, and
antioxidant properties. It can chelate metal ions through its thiol group, which is a
strong nucleophile that can form stable chelate complexes. The metals in edible oils
can be present in free form, as organic molecules or as part of organic complexes.
The L-cysteine added to the oil will displace the metals of the organic structures,
making their transference to the aqueous phase possible as free ions through liquid-
liquid extraction. This type of extraction is a separation process where the solute
is transferred from one liquid phase to another based on its solubility in the two
immiscible or partially miscible liquids. L-cysteine hydrochloride has a high water
solubility, and the hydrochloride creates an acidic environment that helps with the
protonation of the thiol group, enhancing the reactivity of the metal ions. Further-
more, the low pH makes the C↵connected with the primary amine more prone to
dehydrogenation reaction, resulting in protonation of the carbonyl group on the car-
boxyl group. Then, an unstable enol structure intermediate is formed, which is more
conducive to the chelation of metal elements (Chen et al., 2023). In conclusion, this
method promises a rapid and green process for the extraction of elements in edible
oils. In Figure 3.2, the di↵erent steps in the extraction are explained and displayed.
Figure 3.2: The di↵erent steps in the chelation between the L-cysteine hydrochloride and the
elements in the edible oils. The ﬁrst tube seen from the left shows how the elements
and solvent are placed after weighing. The yellow phase represents the oil phase,
and the blue phase represents the aqueous phase. The second tube shows how the
elements and solvents mix during magnetic stirring. The last tube displays how the
metals are transferred from the oil phase to the aqueous phase after centrifugation.
The chelation has occurred here, as the thiol groups have formed a complex with
the elements. Figure inspired by Figure 3 in Chen et al., 2023.
17
==PAGE:27==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 3
3.4
Extraction Induced by Emulsion Breaking
This approach is based on the formation and breaking of an emulsion, which will
transfer the analytes from the oil sample to the aqueous phase. It is generally car-
ried out by vigorously mixing the oily sample with an aqueous extractant solution
containing an acid, such as HNO3, and a surfactant to create the emulsion. Through
this procedure, the contact area between the extraction solution and the sample will
increase signiﬁcantly, enhancing the transference of the analytes from the organic
to the aqueous phase. Once the extraction is completed, the emulsion is broken by
heat or centrifugation, which results in a phase separation. Afterwards, the aqueous
phase containing the extracted metals can be collected using a micropipette and
analysed using an analytical instrument such as ICP-MS (Adolfo and Nascimento,
2023).
As previously mentioned, the principle behind this method is the formation of stable
emulsions. It will require energy to form them, either by vigorous manual mixing
or by mechanical agitation. Moreover, the emulsions tend to separate into di↵erent
components after a certain period of time. The addition of a surfactant can increase
the stabilisation of the emulsions. This stabiliser is an organic substance which has
a non-polar hydrophobic tail and a hydrophilic head, also referred to as having an
amphiphilic character. Surfactants have the ability to reduce the interfacial tension
between aqueous and oil phases. This reduction is achieved by the surfactant ad-
sorbing on the oil/water interface, where the hydrophilic head remains immersed
in the aqueous phase, and the non-polar tail group orients to the oil phase, which
helps with forming emulsions with smaller droplets (Adolfo and Nascimento, 2023).
Figure 3.3 illustrates how the surfactant helps stabilise the emulsion and visualises
how the surfactant is oriented within the emulsion.
The breaking of the emulsion is one of the most fundamental steps of this method.
The separation allows for the collection of the aqueous phase, which reduces the
possible interferences from the organic matrices. In general, the destabilisation of
the emulsiﬁed systems results in two phases: an upper organic phase containing
the sample matrix and a lower aqueous phase containing the extracted elements.
However, a third phase can also be formed.
This formation happens when the
extraction solution containing surfactant is too concentrated. Due to the di↵erence
in density, this surfactant-rich phase usually migrates to the bottom of the tube.
18
==PAGE:28==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 3
Figure 3.3: An oil-in-water (o/w) emulsion stabilised by a surfactant. This mixture typically
consists of oil droplets dispersed in a continuous aqueous phase, with surfactant
molecules aligning at the oil-water interface. The non-polar hydrophobic tail ori-
ents to the oil phase and the hydrophilic head is immersed in the aqueous phase,
which reduces the interfacial tension between the two phases, thereby stabilising
the emulsion. In the ﬁgure, oil droplets are shown dispersed in the aqueous phase,
and the orientation of the surfactant is displayed on two of these droplets.
The fundamental step of breaking the emulsion can happen in one of two ways. Heat-
ing of the samples will a↵ect the stability of the emulsions by altering the interfacial
tension, reducing the adsorption of the emulsiﬁer at the interface and decreasing
the viscosity of the organic phase. Furthermore, the emulsion breaking process will
be accelerated due to an increase in the kinetic energy of the droplets, which will
intensify the droplet collision frequency, resulting in coalescence. Centrifugation is
a mechanical separation process. Here, the lower-density component tends to move
toward the rotation axis of the centrifuge, and the higher-density component moves
away. This results in a clear phase separation because the oil droplets are forced
even closer, resulting in the rupture of the interfacial layers, consequently breaking
the emulsion (Adolfo and Nascimento, 2023).
The extraction destabilisation of emulsiﬁed systems has attracted the attention of
researchers due to its remarkable advantages, such as simplicity, speed, low cost of
sample preparation, and high sensitivity and accuracy. The innovative approach
19
==PAGE:29==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 3
to the extraction of metals from edible oils has been investigated in recent years,
and impressive results have been reported in the literature (Adolfo and Nascimento,
2023).
3.5
ICP-MS
Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry, also referred to as ICP-MS, is a
commercial analytical technique developed in the early 1980s for the determination
of trace, minor, and major elements in almost every analytical ﬁeld. This method
of analysis has many strengths, including wide elemental coverage, high sensitivity,
low background signals, and fast analysis times. The fundamentals of this technique
are made up of multiple distinct parts (Wilschefski and Baxter, 2019).
First, the sample is typically nebulised to introduce it as an aerosol. Larger droplets
are removed from the gas stream by a spray chamber, and the remainder of the
smaller droplets are swept into the central channel of the argon plasma. The argon
(Ar) is contained in a quartz tube called a torch, which is placed in the centre
of a cooled copper coil, through which a high-power and high-frequency electric
current is passed. The electric current causes collisions between the free electrons
and Ar atoms, creating an intense magnetic ﬁeld. The collisions produce ions and
more electrons until a stable, high-temperature plasma is formed. The plasma dries,
decomposes, vaporises, and atomises the aerosol. The produced positively charged
ions are extracted into the vacuum system via a pair of interface cones. Electrostatic
lenses keep the ions focused in a compact ion beam as they pass through the vacuum
system to the ﬁnal chamber, where the mass spectrometer and detector are housed.
By far, the most common mass analyser used in the ICP-MS is the quadrupole.
Here, a combination of direct current and alternating current is used to create an
electric ﬁeld that can separate the ions based on their mass/charge ratio (m/z). For
a given voltage setting, only one m/z is stable, and the quadrupole scans rapidly
across the mass range, passing each mass to the electron multiplier detector, which
counts and stores the total signal for each mass, creating a mass spectrum (Agilent,
2005).
20
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4
Analysis Method
4.1
Reagents, Standards, and Blanks
Reagents, standards, and reference materials were available in the laboratory or
bought by commercial suppliers. They were not further puriﬁed. The MilliQ water
was obtained from an in-house laboratory water ﬁltration and processing system
(Merck, Milli-Q Reference).
CRM, QC and PT Material
A Proﬁciency Testing (PT) material was prepared by spiking rapeseed oil with a
spiking solution made from standards from SCP Science (1000 µg/L in 4% HNO3)
of 2 mg/kg Ni, 0.05 mg/kg Cd and 0.15 mg/kg Pb diluted in EtOH. 20 mL of the
spike solution was added to 800 mL rapeseed oil and stirred for 30 minutes using
magnetic stirring. The ﬁnished PT material was kept at room temperature. Since
no Certiﬁed Reference Material (CRM) of oil was available in the laboratory, the
ﬁsh protein, DORM-5, certiﬁed from National Research Council Canada (NRC),
was used for the quality control of the extraction. The CRM was spiked with all
elements of interest at concentrations 113 mg/kg Fe, 0.44 mg/kg Ni, 3.3 mg/kg Cu,
13.3 mg/kg As, 0.148 mg/kg Cd, 0.0062 mg/kg Sb and 0.058 mg/kg Pb. Further-
more, a Quality Control (QC) material was used, obtained from FAPAS and made
up of vegetable oil to match the sample matrix. The QC material was spiked with
concentrations 875 µg/kg Fe, 459 µg/kg Cu, 804 µg/kg As and 218 µg/kg Pb.
Microwave Digestion
Concentrated (67-69%) PlasmaPURE nitric acid (HNO3) was obtained from SCP
Science. The blanks prepared consisted of 4 mL HNO3 and 1 mL MilliQ water. The
solvent was added to the blanks before analysis in a comparable concentration to the
21
==PAGE:31==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 4
acid concentration found in the samples. The blanks were pressure digested in the
microwave and treated as a sample for further diluting and detecting. Three blanks
were prepared, and were analysed before the samples. The role of the blanks was
to trace sources of artiﬁcially introduced contamination. A CRM and QC material
was used to ensure the quality of the results. To check the method’s repeatability,
triplicates of the sample were made.
UAE
EDTA was obtained from SIGMA Life Science, and a 0.01 M solution was made by
diluting 0.372 g of EDTA in 100 mL MilliQ water. The pH was adjusted to 8 by
using a bu↵er solution made of [NH4]2CO3 adjusted to pH 10.9 using NH3. Further-
more, the QC material was prepared as a sample to quality control the recovery of
the extraction method. Only the QC material was used since the CRM was only
applicable for microwave digestion. Two blanks consisting of the solvent used were
also added to calculate the LOD and LOQ for the method and to trace possible
contamination. Triplicates were made to check the repeatability.
CYS
The L-cysteine hydrochloride was obtained from Merck Millipore Corporation, and
a 5% solution was acquired by diluting 5 g in 100 mL of MilliQ water in a measuring
ﬂask. The blanks consisted of 5 mL of the solvent and were treated as the samples.
Two blanks were made to calculate the LOD and LOQ of the method, and only the
QC material was included to calculate the recovery of the method. Triplicates of
the samples were made to check the repeatability.
EIEB
20% v/v HNO3 was obtained by diluting concentrated (67-69%) PlasmaPURE
HNO3 from SCP Science.
The dilution was achieved by diluting 30 mL of the
concentrated acid in 70 mL of MilliQ water. For the ﬁrst and second extraction,
a Triton X-114 surfactant from SIGMA found in the laboratory was used. For the
third extraction, a newly obtained Triton X-114 from Merck Millipore was used.
Deﬁnitions of the di↵erent extractions can be seen in Table 4.5. For all extractions,
the solution of acidiﬁed surfactant was made by diluting 12 g of Triton X-114 in 100
mL of the 20% HNO3, resulting in a solvent of 12% w/v surfactant. Blanks consisted
of the solvent, and it was decided to include two blanks so the LOD and LOQ of
the method could be calculated. A PT material was included for the second and
third extraction and the QC material was used in all extractions. Both materials
22
==PAGE:32==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 4
were included to calculate the recovery of the elements. As for the aforementioned
methods, the repeatability of the extraction technique was checked by running trip-
licates of the samples.
Standard Row and Internal Standard
A standard row and internal standard had to be prepared for all methods used for
sample preparation. The standards were obtained from SCP Science and were all
PlasmaCAL Single Element Calibration Standards, 1000 µg/mL in 4% HNO3. A
single-element standard was used for each of the seven trace elements. For the inter-
nal standard, Rh, Bi, and In (1-10 mg/L) were chosen to correct for possible matrix
di↵erences or instrument errors.
The standards were prepared using the same procedure for all methods of extrac-
tion, which will now be explained for future reference. The internal standard was
prepared from a stock solution with a concentration of 1000 mg/L of In, Bi, and Rh.
First, a dilution with a concentration of 10 ppm was produced by adding 0.1 mL
of each element, followed by 9.7 mL of solvent. From this, the ﬁnal dilution of the
internal standard was made by taking 0.1 mL of the 10 ppm solution and adding 9.9
mL of solvent, resulting in a concentration of 100 ppb for the samples and standard
curve.
The standard row was made by preparing both a high and low dilution. The high
dilution was created from a diluted mixture of the stock solutions of the elements,
and the low dilution was derived from the high dilution. Details regarding the quan-
tity of each standard and the type of standard used for each dilution are provided
in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: The compositions of the prepared standard solutions used to prepare the standard
row. The colours seen are set to match the dilutions presented in Table 4.2. The acid
solution consisted of 2% HNO3. The standard added to the 1st dilution consisted
of 0.5 mL of all elements analysed, resulting in a mix of 3.5 mL standards, meaning
that 6.5 mL of acid solution would need to be added to achieve a dilution of 10 mL.
Dilutions
Type of standard
Standard [mL]
Acid solution [mL]
1st Dilution
Standard
0.5
6.5
High Dilution
1st dilution
0.1
9.9
Low Dilution
High dilution
0.1
9.9
From the high and low dilutions, the standard row could be prepared. Each standard
23
==PAGE:33==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 4
mix consisted of the elements analysed, the internal standard, and the solvent (2%
HNO3); each added in varying volumes to achieve a di↵erent concentration in every
standard. The amount added to each standard, as well as the concentration, can
be seen in Table 4.2. To assess the sensitivity of the instrument throughout the
analysis, it was decided to use Std. Mix 7 as a check standard, necessitating the
preparation of a larger volume of this standard. Due to the unknown concentrations
within the samples, a broad standard row was created ranging from 0 µg/L to 25
µg/L.
Table 4.2: The amount of each element added to the standard curve.
The yellow ”LOW”
stands for the low dilution, and the blue ”HIGH” stands for the high dilution seen
in Table 4.1, and is the one referred to as ”Std. Mix” in the table. The solvent
consisted of 2% HNO3, and the composition of the internal standard is explained
in the text and consisted of a mix of Rh, In and Bi. All units are given in µL, and
the total volume and concentration of the standard are given in the last two rows
of the table. Std. Mix 7 was used as a check standard, explaining why the volume
is bigger than the other standards.
Dilution Mixture
LOW
Name
Std. Mix 1
Std. Mix 2
Std. Mix 3
Std. Mix 4
Std. Mix 5
Std. Mix 6
Std. Mix [µL]
0
100
200
500
1000
2000
Solvent [µL]
9900
9700
9500
8900
7900
5900
Internal Std. Mix 100 ppb/[µg/L]
100
100
100
100
100
100
Total Volume [µL]
10000
10000
10000
10000
10000
10000
Concentration [µg/L]
0
0.05
0.1
0.25
0.5
1
Dilution Mixture
HIGH
Name
Std. Mix 7
Std. Mix 8
Std. Mix 9
Std. Mix 10
Std. Mix [µL]
200
100
200
500
Solvent [µL]
39200
9700
9450
8900
Internal Std. Mix 100 ppb/[µg/L]
400
100
100
100
Total Volume [µL]
40000
10000
10000
10000
Concentration [µg/L]
2.5
5
10
25
24
==PAGE:34==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 4
4.2
Mapping of Samples
Samples were selected following an extensive literature review conducted during the
initial weeks of the project. Based on previous research, an overview of the most
commonly analysed oils and the most widely consumed products was created. To
keep the number of samples manageable within the scope of the project, the decision
was made to focus on liquid edible oils. The literature indicated that the container
material can signiﬁcantly a↵ect the concentration of Sb. To investigate this, the
decision was made to compare sunﬂower and rapeseed oil from both a glass and
plastic container. Furthermore, these two oils were chosen based on their popularity
in the Danish market.
Extra virgin olive oil and pomace olive oil were tested to analyse the signiﬁcance of
the oil’s manufacturing. Pomace oil is made by extracting the remaining oil from
the pulp after the ﬁrst press. The main di↵erence between the two products is the
number of steps in the production. Whereas virgin olive oil is cold-pressed and un-
reﬁned, pomace oil has to go through reﬁnement, which gives it a longer production
process (Miralles, n.d.). Based on the high levels of trace metals in nut oils found
in previous research, an analysis of walnut and hazelnut oil was included. Fish oil
was chosen to represent a product from an animal source, allowing for a comparison
of element concentrations between animal and vegetable oils. More speciﬁcally, ﬁsh
oil refers to M¨ollers Tran, which is composed of cod liver oil. Lastly, soybean and
frying oil were chosen. Soybean was selected based on ﬁndings in previous research,
and frying oil was included due to its availability in Danish grocery stores. Frying
oil is a mixture of rapeseed and sunﬂower oil and is especially popular because of
the opportunity to reach high temperatures.
In Table 4.3, all the samples analysed are presented, as well as the brand, material,
colour of the container, and country of origin. The samples are numbered based on
the order in which they were analysed.
25
==PAGE:35==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 4
Table 4.3: Overview of the oils analysed in this work. The table is divided into the sample
numbers given in the analyses, the brand, type of container, colour of container,
and country of origin. Fish oil is a cod liver oil, and frying oil is a mix of rapeseed
and sunﬂower oil.
Sample no.
Type
Brand
Container
Colour
Country
1
Fish (Cod liver)
M¨oller’s Trans
Glass
Green
Norway
2
Hazelnut
Clearspring
Glass
Black
Italy
3
Walnut
Clearspring
Glass
Black
Italy
4
Soybean
Golden Turtle
Plastic
Clear
Netherlands
5
Pomace Olive
Font Olivia
Plastic
Clear
Spain
6
Extra Virgin Olive
Font Olivia
Glass
Black
Spain
7
Frying
Salling
Plastic
Clear
Poland
8
Rapeseed
Salling
Glass
Clear
Denmark
9
Sunﬂower
Urtekram
Glass
Black
Denmark
10
Rapeseed
Salling
Plastic
Clear
Poland
11
Sunﬂower
Salling
Plastic
Clear
Hungary
4.3
Microwave Assisted Pressure Digestion
The samples were ﬁrst analysed using the popular method of microwave assisted
pressure digestion on the Anton Parr Multiwave 7000 to create a point of reference.
This method of extraction was used multiple times, and a few changes were made to
optimise the technique. The general procedure will now be explained, with further
optimisation explained in later sections.
Before weighing the samples, the oils were shaken to ensure that the aliquot taken
was representative of the entire product. To facilitate the weighing process, a small
amount of each product was transferred to a 25 mL plastic vial. 0.3 g of each sample
was weighed out to prevent a pressure increase in the microwave. All samples were
weighed into a tared glass vial with plug-in caps.
After the weighing, 1 mL of MilliQ water and 4 mL of concentrated HNO3 were
added to each vial. The vials were added to a stand, which was placed into a liner,
where 155 mL of HNO3 solution mix was added. The mix consisted of 900 mL
of MilliQ water and 30 mL of concentrated HNO3. The liner was added to the
microwave. After 50 minutes, the process was ﬁnished, and the liner was removed
26
==PAGE:36==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 4
from the microwave. After digestion, all samples were transferred to a tarred 50 mL
plastic container, diluted to 20 mL with MilliQ water, and shaken well to ensure
that they were thoroughly mixed. Lastly, 1 mL of all digested samples were weighed
to ﬁnd the density. The digested samples were then added to the autosampler and
analysed using ICP-MS.
4.3.1
Dilution
Since the ICP-MS instrument is made of metal, and the samples contain a high
concentration of acid after the digestion, the samples required diluting. The con-
centration of the trace elements in the samples was unknown, and based on the
literature read, the levels found were dependent on where the samples were from.
So, it was decided to dilute the samples ﬁve times and ten times to ensure that the
concentrations were within the standard curve.
The solvent that was used for the dilution was 2% HNO3 made from concentrated
acid and MilliQ water. For the ﬁve times dilution, 0.1 mL of internal standard, 2
mL of pressure-digested sample, and 7.9 mL of the solvent were added to the vial. In
the same way, ten times dilution was made by adding 0.1 mL of internal standard, 1
mL of sample, and 8.9 mL of solvent. All the dilutions were made in 25 mL plastic
vials with caps, which were shaken well after all components were added. The vials
were numbered and labelled with the sample name as well as how diluted the sample
was.
4.3.2
Optimisation of Sampling and Sample Amount
After the ﬁrst analysis of all samples, it was decided that the importance of the
sampling should be tested. This experiment involved taking three di↵erent aliquots
of the oils, ensuring the bottle was shaken before each aliquot was poured. Addi-
tionally, the subsamples were shaken again before weighing and transferring 0.3 g
to the 25 mL plastic tubes, which was done to ensure that the oils were well mixed.
During this extraction, the only aim was to analyse the hazelnut, walnut, and ﬁsh
oil and make ﬁve subsamples of each.
Two di↵erent racks were prepared in the microwave to investigate the e↵ect of
varying sample weights.
The ﬁrst rack contained 0.3 g of each sample and was
subjected to the same food program used in the initial analysis. This program,
which reached a maximum temperature of 250°C, constrained the sample size due to
27
==PAGE:37==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 4
high-pressure warnings from the instrument, which stopped the digestion if higher
sample amounts were used.
To explore the possibility of increasing the sample
weight, it was decided to try the EPA3052 program, which went to 180◦C and was
recommended by the Anton Parr manual for oily or organic samples. Here, 0.5 g of
the sample was weighed out because of the lower temperature employed.
4.3.3
Fish Oil
Based on previous analysis, it was decided to digest only the ﬁsh oil using the
EPA3052 program. Here, di↵erent amounts of sample and acid were used to examine
the importance of the solvent used. The amounts were chosen based on what was
found in the literature, as di↵erent methods of digestion have been reported. The
contents of the vials can be seen in Table 4.4, and duplicates were made of each mix.
Table 4.4: Table of the amount of sample given in grams and solvent used for testing the ﬁsh
oil. Acid refers to concentrated HNO3.
Weight [g]
Solvent
0.3
4 mL acid
0.3
4 mL acid + 1 mL MilliQ water
0.5
5 mL acid
0.5
6 mL acid
0.5
7 mL acid
4.4
Ultrasound Assisted Extraction
The method was inspired by the article from Kara et al., 2015, with some modiﬁ-
cations made. First, 3 g of sample (of hazelnut, walnut, and ﬁsh oil) was weighed
into a centrifuge tube, and 2 mL of 0.01 M EDTA solution adjusted to pH 8 was
added. The tubes were capped and shaken vigorously to ensure an even distribution
of the samples. Before sonication, the samples were vortex-mixed and then added
to the ultrasonic bath. Here, they were treated for 30 minutes before being added
to the centrifuge for 10 minutes at 4000 rpm to separate the organic phase from the
aqueous phase.
The upper and lower phases were separated. The organic phase was discarded, and
the aqueous phase was analysed. It was estimated that from the 2 mL of aqueous
28
==PAGE:38==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 4
phase prepared, around 1 mL could be extracted to ensure that no organic phase
was removed. A dilution of the aqueous phase was then carried out by taking 1
mL of the extracted sample, 0.1 mL of internal standard, and 3.9 mL of 2% HNO3,
which was made from concentrated acid and MilliQ water. This dilution gave an
internal standard concentration of 2 ppb, which was corrected in the software for the
ICP-MS instrument. The diluted samples were then transferred to the autosampler
and analysed.
4.5
L-cysteine Hydrochloride Extraction
The Chen et al., 2023 article was used for inspiration; however, some changes were
made. 0.5 g of every sample were weighed into a plastic tube with a round bottom.
2 mL of 5% L-cysteine hydrochloride solvent was added to the tubes, followed by
mixing the sample well using a vortex mixer. The tubes were then transferred to a
water bath at temperature 50◦C with magnetic stirring. Small magnets were added
to the tubes to ensure the stirring, and the mixtures were left for 5 minutes. The
tubes were then added to the centrifuge for 10 minutes at 4000 rpm.
After the centrifuging, 1 mL of the aqueous was taken out with a micropipette
and transferred to a 25 mL plastic tube with a red cap. During the ﬁrst run, the
samples were diluted ﬁve times by adding 0,1 mL of internal standard and 3.9 mL
of 2% HNO3, resulting in an internal standard concentration of 2 ppb.
For the
second extraction, the samples were diluted ten times. Therefore, 0.1 mL of internal
standard and 8.9 mL of the acidic solvent were added to 1 mL of the extracted
sample, ensuring an internal standard concentration of 1 ppb. The diluted samples
were then transferred to the autosampler of the ICP-MS for analysis.
29
==PAGE:39==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 4
4.6
Extraction Induced by Emulsion Breaking
Two di↵erent methods for breaking the emulsion were tested: centrifuge and heat.
Based on the results obtained, two methods of extraction were performed, and im-
provements were made. The di↵erent extractions are summarised in Table 4.5 to
give an overview of the optimisation.
Table 4.5: Shows the di↵erent extractions performed. For the ﬁrst extraction, only the cen-
trifuge method was performed, whereas the following two extractions were done
with both centrifuge and heat. Furthermore, the type and preparation date of the
solvent varied.
First Extraction
Second Extraction
Third Extraction
Method
Centrifuge
Centrifuge & Heat
Centrifuge & Heat
Triton X-114
Available in laboratory (SIGMA)
Available in laboratory (SIGMA)
Newly bought (Merck)
Solvent
Made 1 month before extraction
Made on the day of extraction
Made on the day of extraction
4.6.1
By Centrifuge, EIEB-C
The following method was based on the principles found in the He et al., 2014 article.
First, 3 g of oil (hazelnut, walnut, and ﬁsh oil) was measured into a 25 mL plastic
tube with a red cap. Second, 2 mL of the acidic Triton X-114 solution was added
to the tube and mixed vigorously using a vortex mixer, creating an emulsion. The
mixture was then transferred to a roller mixer for 20 minutes where it was agitated
to improve the extraction of the analytes. Afterwards, the tubes were transferred to
the centrifuge, where they were centrifuged at 5900 rpm until the emulsion broke.
The breaking would show a clear phase separation between the organic and aqueous
phases. A clear separation was observed after 15 minutes. 1 mL of the lower aqueous
phase was collected with the aid of a micropipette.
Because of the high concentration of acid (20%) in the solvent, the sample was
diluted ten times using MilliQ water in order to lower the concentration to 2%.
The dilution was carried out by adding 1 mL of the sample, 0.1 mL of the internal
standard, and 8.9 mL of MilliQ water, ensuring a concentration of 1 ppb of the
internal standard. The diluted sample was then transferred to the autosampler of
the ICP-MS instrument, and the analysis was carried out.
30
==PAGE:40==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 4
4.6.2
By Heat, EIEB-H
The method was slightly modiﬁed from that found in the Bakircioglu et al., 2013
article in order to compare it to the centrifuge method. First, 2 g of sample was
weighed into a 25 mL plastic tube with a red cap. Second, 2 mL of the 12% acidiﬁed
Triton X-114 was added. The samples were shaken vigorously before being vortex-
mixed to ensure a stable oil-in-water emulsion. The mixed samples were then added
to a water bath and heated at 80◦C until the emulsion broke. The phase separation
of the organic and aqueous phases was observed after 45 minutes, and the samples
were removed from the water bath. 1 mL of the aqueous phase was collected using
a micropipette.
A ten-times dilution was carried out by adding 8.9 mL of MilliQ water to lower
the concentration of the acid, and 0.1 mL of internal standard was also included in
all the samples. The diluted samples were then transferred to the autosampler and
analysed.
4.7
Analysis
After dilution and extraction of the samples, they were added to the autosampler
of the ICP-MS. The detection and analysis were done with a Thermo Scientiﬁc
iCAP TQ. In addition to the samples, the acid used for the dilutions (2% HNO3)
was also added to the autosampler as a cleaning solution. The associated computer
program was told in what order to run the samples and which gas to run the samples
with. Additionally, all the elements to be analysed were noted, and the contents and
concentration of the internal standard were added. Arsenic was run with oxygen to
avoid spectral interferences. For Fe, Ni, and Sb, helium gas was used as a collision
gas to avoid polyatomic interferences. The remaining elements were run in Single
Quad mode with no cell gas, since no interferences are known for these elements. For
the microwave digestion, the order of the samples was identical to the order in Table
4.3 with a rinse and check standard after every 10th sample. The dilutions were
run consecutively, meaning that the 5-times dilution of a sample was followed by
the 10-times dilution of the same sample. For the remaining methods, the hazelnut
samples were run ﬁrst, followed by the walnut and ﬁsh. A rinse and standard check
were run after every 10th sample. The concentration of each analyte in the standard
curve was noted, and the dilution factor of all samples was added. Following the
detection, the results could be treated and analysed.
31
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 5
Results & Discussion
In this work, the concentration levels of various elements (As, Cd, Cu, Fe, Sb, Ni, and
Pb) in multiple edible oil samples were analysed using ICP-MS following microwave
digestion, ultrasound assisted extraction, L-cysteine hydrochloride extraction, and
extraction induced by emulsion breaking procedures. This section will analyse and
review the results of the methods introduced. The main ﬁndings for each technique
will be discussed and compared to the articles of inspiration. The techniques will
be compared, and an overview of each method will be given. Lastly, considerations
on how to improve the methods in the future will be explored.
Of the analysed elements, Cd, Ni, As, and Sb were below LOD or LOQ for the
majority of methods and samples; therefore, these results will not be presented in
the following sections. The quality of the results was determined by checking if the
samples were within the standard curve and the R-value was at least 0.999. For
each method, the measured values for either the reference, QC, or PT material were
compared to the declared values to conﬁrm a complete extraction and recovery of
all elements. The concentrations found in the blanks were analysed to ensure that
the samples were not contaminated during extraction, and the Relative Standard
Deviation (RSD) value was calculated for the triplicates to assess repeatability.
In the following sections, only the relevant results for the quality assurance will
be presented. Concentrations below the LOD/LOQ will be noted as ”<LOD” or
”<LOQ”
32
==PAGE:42==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
5.1
Microwave Assisted Pressure Digestion
The initial extraction method evaluated was microwave digestion. All oils under-
went analysis using this technique, serving as a point of reference for subsequent
methods. Various sample quantities and digestion programs were investigated. A
complete digestion was achieved using the Food program, reaching 250 ◦C, and 0.3
g of sample. The digested samples and QC material exhibited three distinct colours:
a transparent upper layer, a central blue layer, and a lower yellow layer. Further-
more, upon digestion, the DORM-5 reference material displayed only one colour,
characterised by a blue hue. Pictures of the digested samples and reference material
are displayed in Figure 7.1 in Appendix I. Following the initial analysis of all oils, it
was decided to proceed with hazelnut, walnut, and ﬁsh oils due to their elevated Fe,
Cu and Pb concentrations. Additionally, ﬁsh oil exhibited a notable sensitivity to
high temperatures, making it a particularly interesting sample for further analysis.
This sensitivity may highlight the potential challenges encountered when preparing
oil samples using high heat and pressure. All results for this analysis of the sam-
ples can be seen in Appendix II, but no optimisation of the technique had yet been
carried out. Subsequently, the selected samples underwent further analysis follow-
ing the optimisation of the extraction technique through various approaches. The
outcomes of these extractions will now be detailed.
Following the initial analysis of all samples, various initiatives were made to en-
hance the obtained results. During the optimisation of the sample quantities, dif-
ferent digestion protocols were employed, as detailed in section 4.3.2. Speciﬁcally,
the EPA3052 program was tested with 0.5 g of sample. However, the ﬁsh samples
started to burn, and the lids detached from the tubes, which illustrated the impor-
tance of sample weight. The observed charring is shown in Figure 5.1a. Due to the
lids detaching, these samples were discarded to prevent cross-contamination from
a↵ecting the results. Further exploration of the EPA3052 program was conducted
by performing the extractions described in 4.3.3 to assess the impact of varying acid
amounts. The results illustrated in Figure 5.1b show that the oil samples exploded
in the microwave, causing severe burning and detachment of a majority of the tube
lids. Consequently, it was concluded that increasing the sample amount was not
feasible, and all further digestions were carried out by using 0.3 g of oil and the
Food program.
33
==PAGE:43==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.1: The pictures display how the ﬁsh samples burned/exploded during heating at dif-
ferent settings.
(a) shows the result after using 0.5 g of the sample using the
EPA3052 program (180◦C) with 4 mL concentrated HNO3 and 1 mL MilliQ wa-
ter. (b) shows the samples after the experiment explained in Table 4.4 where the
amount of acid was changed using the EPA3052 program.
The results from the experimentation with the ﬁsh oil can be attributed to its lipid
composition, as no burning or charring was observed for the other oils digested. Fish
oil is renowned for its high content of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids, speciﬁcally the
PUFAs eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), which are
highly sensitive to heat and oxidation. When exposed to high temperatures, they
can break down, forming harmful free radicals. Furthermore, ﬁsh oil has a relatively
low smoke point, meaning it begins to smoke and degrade at lower temperatures,
especially when compared to many plant-based oils (Guo, 2009).
Moreover, an improvement of the sampling technique was implemented based on the
results from the initial analysis of all the oils. The high RSD observed among the
triplicates (see Table 7.1 in Appendix II) contrasted with the positive results for the
reference and QC material, which indicated that the method itself was accurate (see
Table 7.2 in Appendix II). It was therefore concluded that the samples may not be
as homogenised as they appear and that the sampling would have to be optimised
to achieve acceptable results for repeatability. The result of this optimisation can
be seen in Table 5.1. Here, the mean concentrations for the hazelnut, walnut, and
ﬁsh oil can be seen with the standard deviation between the triplicates. To further
34
==PAGE:44==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
look at the repeatability of the extraction, the RSD percentage was calculated.
Table 5.1: The mean concentration of each trace element is shown with its standard deviation
(n=3). The concentration is in mg/kg. Furthermore, the repeatability is shown as
the RSD. The LOQ for Fe is 0.174 mg/kg, for Cu 0.010 mg/kg and for Pb 0.002
mg/kg. The LOD for Fe is 0.0523 mg/kg, for Cu 0.003 mg/kg and for Pb 0.001
mg/kg.
54Fe (M-SQ-KED)
63Cu (M-SQ-N/A)
208Pb (M-SQ-N/A)
Conc [mg/kg]
RSD
Conc [mg/kg]
RSD
Conc [mg/kg]
RSD
Hazelnut
0.248±0.0351
14%
0.165±0.0102
6%
0.0418±0.002
5%
Walnut
0.549±0.233
42%
0.0647±0.0538
83%
0.006±0.003
49%
Fish
<LOQ
0.0165±0.004
23%
0.003±0.002
71%
From the results shown in Table 5.1, signiﬁcant variations in trace element concen-
trations were observed among the hazelnut, walnut, and ﬁsh samples. Hazelnut oil
exhibited notably higher levels of trace elements such as Cu and Pb compared to the
other samples. This disparity reﬂects the varying concentrations found in di↵erent
types of oils. Based on the concentrations presented in Table 5.1, it was concluded
that the improvement of the sampling technique did not enhance the RSD between
the triplicates, as otherwise expected. The hazelnut samples showed the best re-
sults, especially for Cu and Pb, compared to the results for walnut- and ﬁsh oil.
However, this could be explained by the higher concentrations found in hazelnut oil.
The proximity of the concentrations found in the walnut and ﬁsh samples to their
respective LOD and LOQ likely inﬂuenced the repeatability between triplicates, as
evidenced by higher RSD values. In the literature, di↵erent sample amounts and
acids have been used to achieve a complete digestion. The weight of the sample
ranges from 0.2 g to 1 g, and the acids are mostly nitric acid (HNO3) and hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2). All articles report a diﬃcult sample matrix; however, they all
achieve digestion without any major obstacles. As seen in this section, the lipid
composition of the oils has a major inﬂuence on the behaviour of the oil in the
microwave, and the sample types analysed in the articles are mostly di↵erent from
the ones presented in this paper.
It was observed that many of the articles found are of older date and that newer
articles regarding this matter propose di↵erent methods. These results not only
illustrated how complex the sample matrix was but also how necessary the sample
preparation was. It also solidiﬁed the importance of ﬁnding another technique of
extraction for these intricate samples.
35
==PAGE:45==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
5.2
Ultrasound Assisted Extraction
The ﬁrst method that was compared to microwave digestion was ultrasound assisted
extraction (UAE). After the samples were sonicated, they all appeared cloudy, with
two phases beginning to form, and a detergentless microemulsion was achieved.
When centrifuged, a complete phase separation was observed. Here, an upper or-
ganic phase and a lower aqueous phase, which contained the extracted elements, was
noted. However, a thick white layer between the two phases was also seen, which
impeded the separation process, as it clung to the outside of the micropipette used
for extraction. The diﬃcult separation resulted in fractions of the solid layer getting
into the extracted samples. In Figure 5.2, these layers can be seen in the hazelnut
oil, but it was also observed for the walnut and ﬁsh oil. Filtration of the samples
was not carried out as it was believed that the ﬁlters available in the laboratory
would be too small to ﬁltrate the white layer, but the issue could be tested in future
work.
Figure 5.2: Hazelnut sample after UAE. The ﬁgure shows the white solid layer (orange arrow)
that occurred after the ultrasound bath between the upper oil phase and lower
aqueous phase.
Despite the white layer getting into the aqueous phase, it was decided to analyse the
samples. From the results, a low sensitivity on the internal standard for all the sam-
ples was observed. Furthermore, a small CPS found in the samples indicated that
there was no signal. This could imply that the fractions of the white layer clogged
the injection valve since the results from the standard curve, which were analysed
36
==PAGE:46==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
before the samples, gave a signal. It was decided to take a closer look at the samples
and instrument, and it was observed that the autosampler of the ICP-MS had not
taken out equal amounts of sample from each tube, and the remaining samples had
a volume that ranged from 2 mL to 5 mL, meaning that the autosampler had not
even drawn up certain samples. This observation further reinforced the suspicion
that a clogging had taken place.
Based on these results, it was decided to attempt to further dilute the samples
by adding additional solvent to all the tubes. 2 mL of solvent was added to each
tube, and they were analysed using the Agilent 8900 ICP-MS due to issues with
the sample introduction tube detaching on the iCAP TQ. However, because of the
di↵erence in volume, the dilution factor varied, and the ﬁnal volumes for the sam-
ples were not recorded before analysis. Ultimately, the results from this experiment
were used solely to observe whether further dilution could lead to better outcomes.
Here, it was seen that the internal standard had improved and that all samples now
produced a signal, indicating that the samples would need to be more diluted to
correct for the white layer. However, due to the challenges faced, it was impossible
to analyse the results from this experiment conclusively, and no concentrations can
be presented.
In the literature used for inspiration (Kara et al., 2015), no white layer is mentioned.
Here, the authors similarly note that the aqueous phase was the upper layer, which
does not correspond with what was observed in this study. However, this discrepancy
may be attributed to unclear language in the article. The main di↵erence is the
types of oil that are analysed. The thickness of the white layer varied from sample
to sample, with the most prominent layer being seen in the hazelnut sample. This
observation could indicate that the lipid composition of the oils a↵ects the formation
of the solid, as the layer appeared to be fat, meaning that the oil may have emulsiﬁed
during the treatment with heat and vigorous mixing. When comparing the oils lipid
proﬁle, it was observed that hazelnut oil is high in monounsaturated fatty acids,
speciﬁcally oleic acid, which could explain why it is more emulsiﬁed than the other
samples (FDC, 2019). In the article, they also analyse cod liver oil; however, they do
not make the same observation. It is, therefore, uncertain what caused these solid
layers to form; however, as previously mentioned, further dilution showed promising
results. Based on the diﬃculty of separating the aqueous phase from the organic,
and the timeframe of the project, it was concluded not to continue with this method
and instead explore other means of extraction.
37
==PAGE:47==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
5.3
L-cysteine Hydrochloride Extraction
An easy way of extracting the elements in edible oils was proposed, using L-cysteine
hydrochloride extraction. Here, two layers were observed after extracting and cen-
trifuging the samples.
An upper oil phase and a lower aqueous phase with the
extracted elements, as seen in Figure 5.3. Between the two layers, a small white
layer, like the one observed in the UAE method, was seen. However, it was hy-
pothesised that because the sample size was smaller (0.5 g), this solid layer did not
pose the same challenge as for the other method, and it was possible to extract the
aqueous phase without the white solid getting on the micropipette. Any white layer
that got into the extracted aqueous phase was corrected for by diluting the sample
ten times. When consulting the study of inspiration, a similar white layer was not
observed or noted. As was concluded in the UAE method, the lipid composition of
the oils had a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the solid forming; however, in the article, they
do not mention which oils were analysed, so it was not possible to directly compare
the observations for this method.
Figure 5.3: Hazelnut sample after L-cysteine extraction. The ﬁgure shows a tiny white solid
layer (orange arrow) that occurred after heating for ﬁve minutes with stirring
between the upper oil phase and lower aqueous phase. A white magnet is seen in
the bottom of the tube, which was used for stirring.
Two blanks were made and treated as a sample to calculate a LOD and LOQ for the
method and to quality control the extraction method. Here, it was observed that
the CPS for the blanks was the same as that of the samples, and the concentration
was equally much higher than ﬁrst anticipated. Furthermore, it was noticed that
38
==PAGE:48==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
the concentration in all the samples was the same, which did not align with previous
results or expectations. These results indicated that the solvent used for extraction
might be contaminated with the elements of interest or not pure enough, and it was
decided to analyse the solvent. This experiment was carried out by making two
samples of 1 mL of solvent and diluting it ten times with 2% HNO3. No extraction
technique was used on these samples, and they were each analysed three times by
the ICP-MS. The results can be seen in Figure 5.4, where the concentrations in the
solvent, the sample, and the blank are plotted against each other to visualise the
di↵erence. Only the elements above the LOD/LOQ are shown.
Figure 5.4: Graph of the concentration of the di↵erent elements found in the solvent (blue),
the extracted samples (yellow), and the extracted blanks (orange).
The x-axis
is in mg/kg, and the y-axis shows the element and the setting in which it was
analysed on the ICP-MS. The other elements analysed were under LOD/LOQ. The
concentrations shown are mean concentrations, and error bars show the standard
deviation (for solvent, the n=6, sample the n=3, and the blank n=2). It should
be noted that the concentration of Pb in the solvent and blank were below LOQ.
In the ﬁgure, a particular trend is noted among the results. The results found for the
concentration of Pb in the solvent and the blank were below LOQ; however, they are
included to solidify the trend further. For all elements presented, the concentrations
found in the blank and the solvent were surprisingly similar.
Additionally, the
sample concentration plotted is an average calculated from the concentrations found
in the hazelnut, walnut and ﬁsh samples.
Here, the error bars display that the
di↵erence between these samples was insigniﬁcant, showing that the levels seen in
all samples were unexpectedly similar.
These results indicated that the solvent
39
==PAGE:49==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
may not have been pure enough for this extraction method. In the article used for
inspiration (Chen et al., 2023), they do not see the same issue, and the L-cysteine
hydrochloride used is noted as being 98% pure from Sigma-Aldrich. Furthermore,
they also note that all reagents used are of the highest purity.
The L-cysteine
available in the laboratory does not have the same puriﬁcation label, which could
explain the results. In conclusion, a new solvent would be required to continue the
development of this method. However, achieving this within the project’s time frame
would not be possible, and it was decided to continue with other sample preparation
methods.
5.4
Extraction Induced by Emulsion Breaking
The last method of extraction explored in this study was emulsion breaking. Here,
both centrifuge and heat for breaking the emulsion were investigated (shortened
EIEB-C and EIEB-H, respectively). The resulting division of the organic phase and
aqueous phase can be seen in Figure 5.5.
(a) Hazelnut
(b) Walnut
(c) Fish
Figure 5.5: In all pictures, the left tube is the samples extracted using the EIEB-C method,
and the right tube is the sample extracted using the EIEB-H method. For both
methods, the oil is the upper phase, and the aqueous phase is the lower layer. For
the EIEB-H method, a middle third phase is observed, which is thought to be the
surfactant. The yellow arrow points to the oil phase, the light blue arrow points
to the surfactant phase, and the orange arrow points to the aqueous phase in the
EIEB-H method.
40
==PAGE:50==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
For both methods, the upper layer was oil, and the lower layer was the aqueous phase
with the extracted elements. For the EIEB-H method, a third middle phase was
seen, which was thought to be the surfactant. Moreover, a clear colour di↵erence is
observed between the two methods, especially for the ﬁsh oil, which appears darker
for the EIEB-H method. This divergence could be credited to the heat sensitivity, as
these samples were heated to 80◦C. A micropipette was used to collect the aqueous
phase, which was notably more challenging for the EIEB-H method as the phase
separation was not as clear as with the EIEB-C method. It was possible to heat the
samples again if the extraction of the acidic lower phase was not acceptable. Then,
the phases separated again, and it was possible to extract the layer more easily. It
was feasible to collect 1 mL of the aqueous phase for both methods to ensure that
the organic phase was not collected.
The obtained lower phase was then diluted ten times. Here, it was observed that for
the EIEB-H hazelnut sample, a white precipitate appeared after the diluted sample
had been left for a few days before analysis. Based on this, it was concluded that
the samples extracted using EIEB-H had to be analysed on the day of the extraction
to prevent this. It was not possible to ﬁltrate the sample as the ﬁlter would clog.
Furthermore, the sample was centrifuged to investigate whether it was possible to
extract the sample without the precipitate; however, the solid layer would go to the
top of the sample, posing the same challenge as for the UAE method, with fractions
of the solid clinging to the micropipette.
When comparing these ﬁndings to the articles used for the development of these
sample preparation methods (He et al., 2014, Bakircioglu et al., 2013), similar ob-
servations were made for the EIEB-C method. However, di↵erent results were seen
for the EIEB-H method. Here, it was noted that three phases would appear upon
emulsion breaking: upper organic phase, middle aqueous phase, and lower surfactant
phase. It was resolved whether the bottom layer seen in this work was the aqueous
phase by taking the pH value, as this phase would have to be acidic because of the
solvent used. A pH of roughly 3 was observed, leading to the conclusion that the
lower phase was the aqueous. When consulting the Bakircioglu et al., 2013 article,
it became evident that the surfactant used in this study did not act as the one used
in the literature. It was not noted how long the samples were heated before a phase
separation was seen, so it could be theorised that the samples seen in Figure 5.5
were not heated for a suﬃcient amount of time, and the emulsion breaking had not
been completed. However, the samples were heated for 45 minutes, and no change
41
==PAGE:51==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
in the phase separation was seen after 20 minutes, leading to the conclusion that the
emulsion breaking had taken place. Furthermore, the concentration of the solvent
was di↵erent in this work. To make a clearer comparison between the EIEB-H and
EIEB-C methods, the solvent made for the EIEB-C method (12% Triton X-114) was
also used in the EIEB-H method. The Bakircioglu et al., 2013 article reported using
a solvent containing 7% Triton X-114, meaning that the solvent used in this work
contained a higher concentration of surfactant. It was noted in section 3.4 that a
third phase may appear if the extraction solvent contains a too-high concentration
of surfactant. However, as for the article, it is reported that the third surfactant
phase will migrate to the bottom of the tube because of its density. In Figure 5.5c,
it is observed that the surfactant phase is beginning to move to the bottom of the
tube. It could be theorised that if the sample were left for some time, the surfactant
would go to the bottom.
The recovery of the elements was determined using QC material and spiked rapeseed
oil. These results can be seen in Table 5.2 and 5.3. Here, the results are divided
based on the extraction method, and by the extraction number deﬁned in Table 4.5.
Table 5.2: A quality control material was extracted and analysed as a sample for both methods.
The QC material was a spiked vegetable oil which had the measured concentrations
of Fe (875 µg/kg), Cu (459 µg/kg), As (804 µg/kg), and Pb (218 µg/kg). The
concentration found in the analysed sample is shown in mg/kg. The table is divided
based on the method of extraction and the di↵erent extractions deﬁned in Table 4.5.
54Fe (M-SQ-KED)
63Cu (M-SQ-N/A)
75As — 75As.16O (M-TQ-O2)
208Pb (M-SQ-N/A)
Conc [mg/kg]
Recovery
Conc [mg/kg]
Recovery
Conc [mg/kg]
Recovery
Conc [mg/kg]
Recovery
EIEB-C
First extraction
0.306
35%
0.198
43%
0.756
94%
0.141
65%
Second extraction
0.478
55%
0.270
59%
1.09
135%
0.163
75%
EIEB-H
Second extraction
0.517
59%
0.253
55%
0.215
27%
0.207
95%
Third extraction
0.521
60%
0.235
51%
0.176
22%
0.202
93%
Table 5.3: The spiked rapeseed oil (PT material) was extracted and analysed as a sample for
the second and third runs. It was spiked with 2 mg/kg Ni, 0.05 mg/kg Cd, and 0.15
mg/kg Pb. The table is divided into the method used for extraction (EIEB-C or
EIEB-H) and the di↵erent extractions deﬁned in Table 4.5.
60Ni (M-SQ-KED)
111Cd (M-SQ-N/A)
208Pb (M-SQ-N/A)
Conc [mg/kg]
Recovery
Conc [mg/kg]
Recovery
Conc [mg/kg]
Recovery
EIEB-C
Second extraction
1.40
70%
0.0364
73%
0.214
142%
Third extraction
0.610
30%
0.0155
31%
0.0967
64%
EIEB-H
Second extraction
1.33
67%
0.0327
65%
0.167
111%
Third extraction
1.99
99%
0.0489
98%
0.248
165%
42
==PAGE:52==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
The time sensitivity of the solvent was investigated in the ﬁrst and second extrac-
tion. When comparing the results obtained, the outcomes presented for the EIEB-C
method in Table 5.2 indicate that preparing the Triton X-114 solvent on the day
of extraction improved recovery. It was observed in the laboratory that the solvent
changed colour over time, shifting from a clear to a yellow liquid. This change could
indicate that the acidic environment was breaking down the surfactant, resulting in
low recovery of the elements. During the ﬁrst extraction, the PT material was not
included, and the EIEB-H method was not explored. Based on these results, it was
decided that the solvent should be prepared on the day of extraction.
Further optimisation was carried out by changing to a newly purchased reagent.
The Triton X-114, which was already available in the laboratory was suspected to
have expired, which could lead to poor extraction. This theory was explored in the
third extraction, as seen in Table 4.5. However, changing to a newly purchased
solvent did not have a signiﬁcant e↵ect on the results. In Table 5.3, an increase in
recovery was only observed using the EIEB-H method. For both methods, it was
noted that only the results for Pb in the QC material prepared with EIEB-H were
within the acceptable area (80-120%). However, no results for the third extraction
of the QC material are shown for the EIEB-C method, due to the sensitivity of the
internal standard being low in these samples. The recovery of Pb found in the PT
material was much higher than desired for a majority of the extractions; however,
this discrepancy could be attributed to the di↵ering concentrations at which the
two materials were spiked. The PT material was spiked at a lower concentration
than the QC material, leading to a larger margin of error. The results for the other
elements of interest (Fe and Cu) show that for both methods, the recovery was
approximately half of what was expected. Based on these observations, it can be
concluded that the extraction of both sample preparation methods was not complete.
These results do not correspond to the results found in the literature. In the He
et al., 2014 article, the oils were spiked with all elements of interest at concentrations
10 µg/L, 50 µg/L and 100 µg/L. Here, they found satisfactory results for all elements
analysed, with a recovery between 87-108%. A comparable procedure was carried
out in the Bakircioglu et al., 2013 article. Here, the oil samples were spiked with 10
µg/L and 40 µg/L of the elements of interest, and the recovery for all elements was
situated between 96% and 109%. The main di↵erence was that the concentrations
used for recovery calculations in this work were much higher than in the articles,
and the oils had recently been spiked. Given more time, it could be investigated if
43
==PAGE:53==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
spiking the oils analysed with lower concentrations would yield better results.
Despite the unsatisfactory recovery found with the QC and PT material, it was still
relevant to look at the concentrations found in the samples. In Table 5.4, the mean
concentrations with the standard deviation can be seen, along with the calculated
RSD percentage. The table is divided into the method of extraction and the time
of extraction, similar to Table 5.2 and 5.3.
Table 5.4: Shows the mean concentrations of the trace elements above LOD/LOQ, with its
standard deviation (n=3). Mean concentrations are given in mg/kg. Furthermore,
the RSD percentage is shown. The table is divided based on the method used for
extraction (EIEB-C or EIEB-H) and the di↵erent extractions explained in Table
4.5. The concentrations found in the analysed samples are shown in mg/kg and the
recovery in percentage. LOD for the methods can be seen in Table 5.5, and LOQ
can be seen in Table 5.6.
54Fe (M-SQ-KED)
63Cu (M-SQ-N/A)
208Pb (M-SQ-N/A)
Conc [mg/kg]
RSD
Conc [mg/kg]
RSD
Conc [mg/kg]
RSD
EIEB-C
First extraction
Hazelnut
<LOQ
0.0350±0.0141
40%
0.0277±0.010
35%
Walnut
0.293±0.0124
4%
0.0102±0.002
18%
<LOD
Second extraction
Hazelnut
<LOQ
0.0393±0.0002
1%
0.0282±0.0002
1%
Walnut
0.412±0.007
2%
0.0119±0.0003
3%
<LOD
Third extraction
Hazelnut
<LOQ
0.0391±0.001
2%
0.0290±0.0005
2%
Walnut
0.412±0.001
0%
0.0116±0.0002
2%
<LOD
EIEB-H
Second extraction
Walnut
0.249±0.003
1%
0.0115±0.00003
0%
<LOQ
Third extraction
Hazelnut
0.135±0.009
7%
0.0363±0.002
4%
0.0324±0.001
3%
Walnut
0.282±0.007
3%
0.0137±0.002
17%
<LOQ
Here, it was observed that repeatability had improved signiﬁcantly compared to the
microwave technique. Furthermore, as for the QC and PT results, it could also be
concluded that the Triton X-114 solvent should be made on the day of extraction as
it could not be reused from previous extraction days since it will a↵ect the repeata-
bility. No e↵ect was seen with the newly bought Triton X-114. The results for the
ﬁsh oil are not shown, as the concentrations were below LOD/LOQ for all elements.
Comparing the two remaining oils, it was noted that the hazelnut oil had a higher
concentration of Cu and Pb, and the walnut oil had the highest concentration of
Fe. From the results, it could also be concluded that the EIEB-H method had a
higher sensitivity since fewer samples were below LOD/LOQ. The repeatability was
better for the EIEB-C method; however, the results for the majority of the EIEB-H
samples had a low RSD. Both methods of emulsion breaking had limitations and
44
==PAGE:54==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
advantages but did show promising results as an alternative to microwave digestion.
The sample preparation was simpler for the EIEB-C method; however, the results
for the quality control were better for the EIEB-H method. The results for both
methods indicated that the repeatability had improved and that the issues with
homogenising the samples were not seen using this method.
In conclusion, this method showed great potential as an alternative to microwave
digestion; however, within the project’s timeframe, further optimisation was not
possible.
5.5
Comparison of Techniques
All the results for the methods examined in this study have now been presented and
can be seen in the tables previously displayed. As can be seen, the concentration
of the elements di↵ered between oil type and sample preparation procedures. All
methods explored varied in their simplicity and the time it took to extract the met-
als from the organic sample. It was only possible to present results for the EIEB
method and the microwave method, as the other extractions posed challenges that
could not be solved within the timeframe of this study. To provide a clearer under-
standing of the di↵erences and similarities found in each method, the results and
observations will now be compared.
In general, the results presented cannot be considered deﬁnitive, as each method en-
countered speciﬁc obstacles that were not solved in this work. Consequently, it was
not possible to compare the concentrations to the established legal limits. However,
common to both sample preparation techniques was that the highest concentra-
tion found was for Fe with levels between 0.248-0.549, 0.293-0.412, and 0.135-0.282
mg/kg found in the microwave digestion, EIEB-C and EIEB-H methods respec-
tively, with the highest concentration found in the walnut oil. Furthermore, the
maximum concentrations of Pb (0.0418, 0.0290, and 0.0324 mg/kg for microwave
digestion, EIEB-C, and EIEB-H, respectively) and Cu (0.165, 0.0393, and 0.0363
mg/kg for microwave digestion, EIEB-C, and EIEB-H, respectively) were found in
the hazelnut oil for all methods. The most signiﬁcant di↵erence in concentration
between the methods was for Cu, with a notably higher concentration observed us-
ing microwave digestion. This discrepancy could be attributed to the poor recovery
of the EIEB method, resulting in incomplete extraction. However, the same oils
consistently showed the highest and lowest concentrations across all methods. A
45
==PAGE:55==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
common limitation in all sample preparations was that no deﬁnitive conclusions can
be drawn. Nevertheless, the results provide an indication of which oils exhibited the
highest concentrations.
The microwave, which was used as a point of reference, showed signiﬁcant limita-
tions, as the repeatability was low, and the ﬁsh oil burned in the high heat. However,
other issues were found with the alternative methods which were investigated. To
better compare the extraction techniques, the LOD and LOQ for each method were
calculated based on the blanks. Because of the low signal and internal standard in
the UAE method, it was not been possible to calculate the limits. The results for
the remaining methods can be seen in Table 5.5 and 5.6. An explanation of the
calculations performed can be seen in Appendix III.
Table 5.5: Shows the LOD calculated for each method used for extraction.
The LODs are
calculated from the blanks in each analysis. Concentrations of each element are given
in mg/kg, and results for the microwave extraction, the L-cysteine Hydrochloride
extraction, EIEB-C, and EIEB-H are shown.
Fe [mg/kg]
Ni [mg/kg]
Cu [mg/kg]
As [mg/kg]
Cd [mg/kg]
Sb [mg/kg]
Pb [mg/kg]
Microwave
0.0523
0.0281
0.003
0.001
0.00003
0.0005
0.001
L-cysteine
0.172
0.007
0.0151
0.004
0.001
0.001
0.0325
EIEB-C
0.0782
0.002
0.002
0.003
0.001
0.002
0.003
EIEB-H
0.004
0.001
0.003
0.0002
0.0001
0.0002
0.002
Table 5.6: Shows the LOQ calculated for each method used for extraction. The LOQs are
calculated from the blanks in each analysis. Concentrations of each element are given
in mg/kg, and results for the microwave extraction, the L-Cysteine Hydrochloride
extraction, EIEB-C, and EIEB-H are shown.
Fe [mg/kg]
Ni [mg/kg]
Cu [mg/kg]
As [mg/kg]
Cd [mg/kg]
Sb [mg/kg]
Pb [mg/kg]
Microwave
0.174
0.0936
0.0104
0.004
0.0001
0.002
0.002
L-cysteine
0.573
0.0232
0.0503
0.0136
0.002
0.002
0.108
EIEB-C
0.261
0.008
0.007
0.009
0.004
0.006
0.0113
EIEB-H
0.0122
0.003
0.009
0.001
0.0002
0.001
0.006
The LOD is the smallest concentration of an analyte that can be reliably detected,
but not necessarily quantiﬁed, by an analytical procedure. It indicates the sensi-
tivity of the method to detect the presence of the analyte. Meanwhile, the LOQ
is the smallest concentration of an analyte that can be quantitatively determined
46
==PAGE:56==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
with suitable precision and accuracy. It indicates the method’s ability not just to
detect but also to quantify the analyte with acceptable reliability. From the calcu-
lated LOD and LOQ, the following can be concluded. EIEB-H had the lowest value
for almost all elements, indicating that this method was the most sensitive. This
method was comparable to the well-established microwave extraction, making it a
good alternative to this method when looking at the sensitivity. When analysing the
elements of interest (Fe, Cu and Pb), the L-cysteine method had the highest values,
making it the least sensitive. However, it was also concluded that the impurity of
the solvent had a signiﬁcant e↵ect on the measured concentrations in the blanks.
The di↵erent sample preparation techniques di↵ered in the speed and simplicity
at which the extractions were completed. The microwave digestion technique had
many steps, and the digestion impeded the speed of the sample preparation. The
alternative methods that were explored di↵ered from digestion as they were simpler
and, in general, faster. L-cysteine had few and rapid steps. However, the magnetic
stirring at 50 ◦C limited the number of samples that could be extracted at a time
since the water bath only had room for 15 samples in one extraction. UAE had room
for more samples during extraction and was a fast sample preparation technique.
However, the white solid phase made the extraction of the aqueous phase diﬃcult,
and this technique was, therefore, not as simple as compared to the other methods.
The same was observed for EIEB-H, as the third surfactant phase made the phase
separation less clear. Furthermore, the heating until the emulsion breaking step
took longer than expected. Lastly, the EIEB-C technique was fast and simple, and
it was easy to collect the aqueous phase because of the clear phase separation. This
further solidiﬁes how di↵erent the techniques were in speed and simplicity and also
shows that each method had certain limitations and advantages.
A table has been constructed to give a better overview of the ﬁndings, limitations,
and advantages of each method. Here, not only was the speed of the sample prepa-
ration technique taken into account but the results presented in previous sections
and the observations made in the laboratory were also considered. Table 5.7 shows
each method as well as the conclusions made based on the ﬁndings in this work.
47
==PAGE:57==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
Table 5.7: Limitations and advantages listed for each method based on the ﬁndings presented
in the text. Microwave stands for microwave assisted pressure digestion, UAE refers
to the ultrasound assisted extraction, L-cysteine is the L-cysteine hydrochloride
extraction and EIEB is short for extraction induced by emulsion breaking.
Method
Limitations
Advantages
Microwave
Risk of explosion
Low sample amount
Bad repeatability
High recovery on QC and reference
No separation of phases needed
UAE
Clogging of injection valve
Impeding of separation process
Rapid method
L-cysteine
Contamination of solvent
White layer
Extraction of few samples at a time
Rapid and simple method
EIEB-C
Low recovery on all elements except Pb
Time sensitive solvent
Good repeatability
Simple method
No heat for heat sensitive oils
Clear phase separation
Easy separation process
EIEB-H
Low recovery on all elements except Pb
No clear phase separation
Precipitate over time
Time sensitive solvent
Possibility of burning heat sensitive oils
Good repeatability
Simple method
Low LOD/LOQ
From this, it can be concluded that no deﬁnitive technique has been identiﬁed to be
e↵ective in the laboratory where this study was conducted. Each of the investigated
extractions demonstrated potential as a viable alternative to microwave digestion;
however, they all presented limitations that required further method optimisation,
which would not have been possible within the allotted timeframe.
The results
provide insight into which methods yield the most promising outcomes, and with
further improvement in future work, these methods could become viable options for
treating edible oils.
48
==PAGE:58==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
5.6
Future Work
Based on the results obtained, there are potential changes that could be made for fur-
ther analysis. First and foremost, it was noted that in the literature, the microwave
digestion technique gave satisfactory results for many di↵erent oils. In Min Lao
et al., 2023, they investigate a di↵erent sample matrix (aquatic products); however,
they make many comparable observations in developing a more eﬃcient digestion
technique for complex samples. Here, they similarly used the EPA3052 program to
digest the samples, and a mixture of HNO3 and H2O2 was used to digest the sam-
ples. Furthermore, they introduce the possibility of improving sample preparation
by predigesting the samples overnight. For future work, it could be investigated
whether predigestion and H2O2 could improve the results for repeatability seen for
the oil samples.
In order to improve the ultrasound assisted extraction technique, further investiga-
tion must be made. The Kara et al., 2015 article used for inspiration was recreated
almost identically, but similar obstacles were not met in the literature. It could be
investigated whether it would be possible to ﬁltrate the aqueous phase to prevent
the solid layers from entering the ICP-MS and improve the results. Furthermore,
the further dilution of the samples did show promising results, so it should be ex-
amined whether diluting the samples ten times instead of ﬁve would solve the issue.
In Bakircioglu et al., 2013, ultrasound was also used to extract the elements from
the samples. Only 0.1 g of the sample was used, and the extraction was carried out
using acid instead of EDTA. A similar technique could be interesting to investigate,
and the possibility of this approach improving the method explored, especially since
a smaller sample amount was used, and it was observed in the L-cysteine method
that the white solid layer may be dependent on the amount of oil.
Lastly, the
literature reports the use of many di↵erent solvents for UAE. Besides EDTA and
acid, the use of Lipase has also been proposed so it could be investigated whether the
solvent could be optimised and if the white solid layer still forms with other solvents.
L-cysteine hydrochloride extraction was not continued based on the purity of the
extraction solvent. For future work, a new and pure solvent would have to be pur-
chased. The method showed great potential as a rapid and green alternative to
other sample preparation techniques, so it could be beneﬁcial to investigate this
method further with a new l-cysteine. The emulsion breaking technique showed the
biggest potential with what was available in the laboratory and within the time
frame. The phase separation in the EIEB-H method would have to be improved
49
==PAGE:59==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 5
to make the extraction of the aqueous phase easier. In the literature, good results
have been reported on centrifuging the samples after heating. Therefore, it could
be interesting to test whether this would improve the phase separation and to see if
the surfactant phase would migrate to the bottom of the tube because of its density.
Furthermore, to investigate the challenges regarding recovery, spiked samples could
be made, as done in the literature, to inspect the sensitivity of the recovery of the
quality control materials. Lastly, the other oil samples should also be investigated
and extracted using the di↵erent techniques to examine whether the di↵erent sam-
ples can be treated with di↵erent methods, as the results have shown that the lipid
composition of the oils a↵ects how the sample behaves during treatment.
50
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The measurement of trace elements in edible oils poses a great challenge due to their
viscosity and sample matrix, further solidifying the importance of sample prepara-
tion. From the results obtained in the laboratory and the data presented in this
work, the following conclusions can be made. Microwave assisted pressure digestion
was used to extract the elements from all the samples, serving as a point of refer-
ence for the other methods explored in this work. From the results obtained, it was
decided to focus on hazelnut, walnut and ﬁsh oil because of the high concentrations
of Fe, Cu and Pb found. The remaining elements (Ni, As, Sb and Cd) were be-
low LOD/LOQ for a majority of the samples. Furthermore, ﬁsh oil displayed high
sensitivity to the high heat and pressure used in this method. Burning and even
exploding were observed when attempting to optimise the extraction by increasing
the sample or acid amount used. The results obtained showed good recovery of all
elements by use of a QC and reference material. However, the repeatability found
between the triplicates was unsatisfactory. These ﬁndings highlighted the impor-
tance of ﬁnding an alternative technique for these complicated samples.
Alternative methods of extraction were explored. Ultrasound assisted extraction
(UAE) was found to be a fast method. However, the formation of a white solid
layer between the organic oil phase and the aqueous phase with the extracted el-
ements made the separation of the phases diﬃcult as fractions of the white layer
clung to the micropipette and got into the aqueous phase. These fractions resulted
in poor sensitivity of the internal standard and low CPS for the samples, and a
clog of the injection valve was suspected. Further dilution of the samples showed
promising results; however, an optimisation of the method was not carried out due
to the diﬃcult phase separation. L-cysteine hydrochloride was used to achieve a
rapid and green extraction of the elements. However, the reagent available in the
51
==PAGE:61==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 6
laboratory was found to be impure as the concentration of elements in the blank
and solvent was high. It was concluded that a high-purity L-cysteine would have to
be acquired, which was not possible within the timeframe of the project. It can be
concluded that the most promising results were obtained through the use of emul-
sion breaking (EIEB) either by heat (EIEB-H) or centrifuge (EIEB-C). Here, good
repeatability was achieved for both methods; however, a low recovery was found
for all elements except Pb. Separating the phases was found to be complicated for
the EIEB-H method, as a third surfactant phase was observed between the upper
organic phase and lower aqueous phase. Furthermore, samples treated with heat
began to precipitate over time, resulting in the samples needing to be analysed on
the day of extraction. The highest sensitivity was found for the EIEB-H method,
with the lowest LOD and LOQ for the majority of the elements.
In closing, further optimisation of all methods would have to be carried out in future
work to perfect a technique for extracting elements in edible oils. Challenges and
unsatisfactory results were met for the methods explored in this work; however,
promising outcomes for the EIEB method showed that alternative techniques could
be the future for analysing these complicated samples.
52
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
Llorent-Mart´ınez, E., Ortega-Barrales, P., Fern´andez-de C´ordova, M., Dom´ınguez-
Vidal, A., & Ruiz-Medina, A. (2011). Investigation by ICP-MS of trace
element levels in vegetable edible oils produced in Spain. Food Chemistry,
127(3), 1257–1262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2011.01.064
Knochen, M., & Morales, G. (2015, February). Edible fats and oils. In M. De
La Guardia & S. Garrigues (Eds.), Handbook of Mineral Elements in Food
(1st ed., pp. 573–586). Wiley. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118654316.ch24
Gonz´alez-Torres, P., Puentes, J. G., Moya, A. J., & La Rubia, M. D. (2023). Com-
parative Study of the Presence of Heavy Metals in Edible Vegetable Oils.
Applied Sciences, 13(5), 3020. https://doi.org/10.3390/app13053020
Kara, D., Fisher, A., & Hill, S. (2015). Extraction of trace elements by ultrasound-
assisted emulsiﬁcation from edible oils producing detergentless microemul-
sions. Food Chemistry, 188, 143–148. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.
2015.04.057
Adolfo, F. R., & Nascimento, P. C. D. (2023). Extraction Induced by Emulsion and
Microemulsion Breaking for Metal Determination by Spectrometric Methods
– A Review. Critical Reviews in Analytical Chemistry, 53(6), 1374–1392.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10408347.2021.2023352
Chen, X., Zhou, M., Wang, Y., Zhang, J., & Tian, W. (2023). A rapid and green
method for the simultaneous extraction and determination of copper, arsenic
and lead in edible oil. Food Chemistry Advances, 3, 100495. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.focha.2023.100495
Gani, A., & Ashwar, B. A. (Eds.). (2021). Food biopolymers: Structural, functional
and nutraceutical properties. Springer International Publishing. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-27061-2
Lichtenstein, A. (2023). Lipids (fats and oils). In Encyclopedia of Human Nutrition
(pp. 291–300). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-821848-8.00013-
5
53
==PAGE:63==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 6
Tarantino, G., & Finelli, C. (2016). Lipids, Low-Grade Chronic Inﬂammation and
NAFLD. In Handbook of Lipids in Human Function (pp. 731–759). Elsevier.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-63067-036-8.00028-7
H˘ad˘arug˘a, D. I., ¨Unl¨usayin, M., Gruia, A. T., Bir˘au (Mitroi), C., Rusu, G., &
H˘ad˘arug˘a, N. G. (2016). Thermal and oxidative stability of Atlantic salmon
oil (Salmo salar L.) and complexation with -cyclodextrin. Beilstein Journal
of Organic Chemistry, 12, 179–191. https://doi.org/10.3762/bjoc.12.20
Coultate, T. P. (2016). Food : The chemistry of its components (6th edition, Vol. 2016).
Royal Society of Chemistry.
Nzai, J., & Proctor, A. (1998). Phospholipids determination in vegetable oil by thin-
layer chromatography and imaging densitometry. Food Chemistry, 63(4),
571–576. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0308-8146(98)00043-0
Toscano, G., Riva, G., Foppa Pedretti, E., & Duca, D. (2012). Vegetable oil and fat
viscosity forecast models based on iodine number and saponiﬁcation number.
Biomass and Bioenergy, 46, 511–516. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.
2012.07.009
Guillaume, C., De Alzaa, F., & Ravetti. (2018). Evaluation of Chemical and Physical
Changes in Di↵erent Commercial Oils during Heating. 2(6), 2–11.
Hussain, S., Rengel, Z., Qaswar, M., Amir, M., & Zafar-ul-Hye, M. (2019). Arsenic
and Heavy Metal (Cadmium, Lead, Mercury and Nickel) Contamination in
Plant-Based Foods. In M. Ozturk & K. R. Hakeem (Eds.), Plant and Hu-
man Health, Volume 2: Phytochemistry and Molecular Aspects (pp. 447–
490). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-03344-6 20
Microwave Digestion — Anton Paar Wiki. (n.d.). Retrieved July 6, 2024, from https:
//wiki.anton-paar.com/en/microwave-digestion/
Mello, P. A., Barin, J. S., & Guarnieri, R. A. (2014, January). Chapter 2 - Microwave
Heating. In ´E. M. d. M. Flores (Ed.), Microwave-Assisted Sample Preparation
for Trace Element Analysis (pp. 59–75). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-444-59420-4.00002-7
M¨uller, E. I., Mesko, M. F., Moraes, D. P., Korn, M. d. G. A., & Flores, ´E. M. M.
(2014, January). Chapter 4 - Wet Digestion Using Microwave Heating. In
´E. M. d. M. Flores (Ed.), Microwave-Assisted Sample Preparation for Trace
Element Analysis (pp. 99–142). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-
444-59420-4.00004-0
Fecher, P. A., Schlemmer, G. C., & Schoeberl, K. S. (2014, January). Chapter 12
- Safety Aspects, Quality Control, and Quality Assurance using Microwave-
54
==PAGE:64==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 6
Assisted Sample Preparation Systems. In ´E. M. d. M. Flores (Ed.), Microwave-
Assisted Sample Preparation for Trace Element Analysis (pp. 345–384). El-
sevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-59420-4.00012-X
Thilakarathna, R. C. N., Siow, L. F., Tang, T.-K., & Lee, Y. Y. (2023). A review
on application of ultrasound and ultrasound assisted technology for seed oil
extraction. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 60(4), 1222–1236. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s13197-022-05359-7
Chemat, F., Rombaut, N., Sicaire, A.-G., Meullemiestre, A., Fabiano-Tixier, A.-S.,
& Abert-Vian, M. (2017). Ultrasound assisted extraction of food and natural
products. Mechanisms, techniques, combinations, protocols and applications.
A review. Ultrasonics Sonochemistry, 34, 540–560. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ultsonch.2016.06.035
Miller, D. D., Li, T., & Liu, R. H. (2014, January). Antioxidants and Phytochemicals.
In Reference Module in Biomedical Sciences. Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.
1016/B978-0-12-801238-3.00236-1
Wilschefski, S., & Baxter, M. (2019). Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrome-
try: Introduction to Analytical Aspects. Clinical Biochemist Reviews, 40(3),
115–133. https://doi.org/10.33176/AACB-19-00024
Agilent. (2005). ICP-MS Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry A Primer.
Miralles, M. (n.d.). Olive Pomace And Extra Virgin Olive Oil [Section: Gourmet].
Retrieved July 22, 2024, from https : / / treurer . com / en / blog - olive - oil -
culture/gourmet-en/di↵erences-between-olive-pomace-and-olive-oil/
He, Y.-M., Chen, J.-J., Zhou, Y., Wang, X.-J., & Liu, X.-Y. (2014). Extraction
induced by emulsion breaking for trace multi-element determination in edible
vegetable oils by ICP-MS. Anal. Methods, 6(14), 5105–5111. https://doi.org/
10.1039/C4AY00218K
Bakircioglu, D., Kurtulus, Y. B., & Yurtsever, S. (2013). Comparison of extraction
induced by emulsion breaking, ultrasonic extraction and wet digestion pro-
cedures for determination of metals in edible oil samples in Turkey using
ICP-OES. Food Chemistry, 138(2-3), 770–775. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodchem.2012.10.089
Guo, M. (2009). LIPIDS AND LIPID RELATED FUNCTIONAL FOODS. In Func-
tional Foods (pp. 161–196). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1533/9781845696078.
161
FDC, U. D. o. A. (2019). FoodData Central by U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Retrieved July 24, 2024, from https://fdc.nal.usda.gov/index.html
55
==PAGE:65==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 6
Min Lao, Y., Lan Qu, C., Zhang, B., & Jin, H. (2023). Development and validation of
single-step microwave-assisted digestion method for determining heavy met-
als in aquatic products: Health risk assessment. Food Chemistry, 402, 134500.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2022.134500
56
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 7
Appendix
7.1
Appendix I
(a) Oil Sample
(b) DORM-5
Figure 7.1: The pictures display the three layered colour of the oil samples after digestion in
picture (a). Picture (b) shows the single colour seen for the reference material
(red square) characterised by a blue hue. Digestions were carried out with 0.3 g of
sample and the Food program which reached 250 ◦C.
57
==PAGE:67==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 7
7.2
Appendix II
Table 7.1: Mean concentration (n=3) in mg/kg found for all oils using microwave digestion as
the sample preparation technique. The table is further divided into how diluted to
samples were before analysis, as concentrations were unknown. Samples were both
diluted 5 times and 10 times with 2% HNO3. The LOD and LOQ for the microwave
digestion method can be seen in Table 5.5 and 5.6, respectively.
54Fe (M-SQ-KED)
63Cu (M-SQ-N/A)
208Pb (M-SQ-N/A)
Dilution
Conc [mg/kg]
RSD [%]
Conc [mg/kg]
RSD [%]
Conc [mg/kg]
RSD [%]
FISH
5x
0.184±0.0425
23%
<LOD
0.004±0.001
17%
10x
0.185±0.0380
21%
0.004±0.001
20%
HAZELNUT
5x
0.282±0.009
3%
0.0152±0.005
30%
0.0375±0.003
9%
10x
0.299±0.022
7%
0.0322±0.002
7%
0.0377±0.003
8%
WALNUT
5x
0.647±0.0332
5%
<LOD
0.002±0.0002
11%
10x
0.660±0.0957
15%
0.003±0.0005
15%
SOYBEAN
5x
<LOQ
<LOD
<LOD
10x
POMACE
5x
0.199±0.0714
36%
0.0143±0.003
22%
<LOD
10x
0.198±0.0538
27%
0.0279±0.002
9%
OLIVE
5x
<LOQ
<LOD
<LOD
10x
FRYING
5x
<LOQ
<LOD
0.003±0.001
31%
10x
0.003±0.001
32%
RAPESEED GLASS
5x
<LOQ
<LOD
<LOQ
10x
SUNFLOWER GLASS
5x
<LOD
<LOD
<LOD
10x
RAPESEED PLASTIC
5x
<LOD
<LOD
<LOD
10x
<LOQ
SUNFLOWER PLASTIC
5x
<LOQ
<LOD
<LOD
10x
58
==PAGE:68==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 7
Table 7.2: Results for QC material and DORM-5 reference material found for microwave di-
gestion extraction for the results seen in Table 7.1. Results are from before the
optimisation of sampling, and the DORM-5 was diluted both 10 and 50 times, as
seen in the names ”10x” and ”50x”. The declaration limits for DORM-5 are given
to be 113 mg/kg Fe, 0.44 mg/kg Ni, 3.3 mg/kg Cu, 13.3 mg/kg As, 0.148 mg/kg
Cd, 0.0062 mg/kg Sb and 0.058 mg/kg Pb. Declaration limits for the QC material
is given to be 875 µg/kg Fe, 459 µg/kg Cu, 804 µg/kg As and 218 µg/kg Pb.
54Fe (M-SQ-KED)
60Ni (M-SQ-KED)
63Cu (M-SQ-N/A)
Conc [mg/kg]
Recovery %
Conc [mg/kg
Recovery %
Conc [mg/kg]
Recovery %
QC
0.841
96%
No data
0.532
116%
DORM-5 10x
122
108%
0.352
80%
3.42
104%
DORM-5 50x
117
104%
0.338
77%
3.64
110%
75As, 75As.16O (M-TQ-O2)
111Cd (M-SQ-N/A)
121Sb (M-SQ-KED)
208Pb (M-SQ-N/A)
Conc [mg/kg]
Recovery %
Conc [mg/kg]
Recovery %
Conc [mg/kg]
Recovery %
Conc [mg/kg]
Recovery %
QC
0.714
89%
No data
No data
0.211
97%
DORM-5 10x
14.2
107%
0.159
108%
0.006
95%
0.0657
113%
DORM-5 50x
13.6
102%
0.156
106%
0.006
98%
0.0752
130%
59
==PAGE:69==
Optimisation of Sample Preparation
Chapter 7
7.3
Appendix III
Calculation of the LOD and LOQ
LOD was calculated as,
LOD = 3 · Std. Deviation of the Mean of Blanks
(7.1)
And LOQ was calculated as,
LOQ = 10 · Std. Deviation of the Mean of Blanks
(7.2)
First, the dilution factor for each method was calculated and can be seen in Table
7.3. The dilution factors were found to recalculate the unit of the found LOD/LOQ
from µg/L to mg/kg. It was diﬃcult to ﬁnd the density of the oils because of their
viscosity; therefore, it was assumed that 1 g of oil was equal to 1 mL, making the
dilution factors an estimate for the L-cysteine hydrochloride, EIEB-C and EIEB-H
methods. For microwave digestion, the density of the digested samples was found.
Table 7.3: Dilution factor for each method used to calculate the LOD/LOQ, to go from µg/L
to mg/kg. The dilution factors were found based on the ﬁrst dilution made when
adding the solvent to the oil samples, and the second dilution of the aqueous phase
before analysis.
Method
Dilution Factor
Microwave Digestion
333
L-cysteine hydrochloride
110
EIEB-C
16.7
EIEB-H
22.5
Based on equations 7.1 and 7.2 as well as Table 7.3 the LOD and LOQ were calcu-
lated for each method by ﬁrst ﬁnding the limits in µg/L and then multiplying by
the dilution factors to get the limits in mg/kg. The results can be seen in Table 5.5
and 5.6.
60
