==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master’s Thesis
Appearance Modelling of Structural Colours in
PV Modules
Daniel Henriksen
August 4, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Contents
i
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
List of Figures
v
List of Tables
vii
Abbreviations
viii
List of Symbols
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Report Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Background
4
2.1
Reflectance and Transmittance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Refractive Indices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Measurement Setups
11
3.1
Sample Descriptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Pigments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.2
Encapsulants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.3
Mini-modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.4
PV Cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Reflectance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
Measurement Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.2
Encapsulant Reflectance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Transmittance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.1
Measurement Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
i
==PAGE:3==
4
Scaling Factors
33
4.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Ray Tracing Simulation
43
5.1
Motivation and Simulation Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.1
Definition of Material Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.1.2
Determining Refractive Indices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2
MATLAB Data Extraction and Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.3
Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Conclusion
58
6.1
Recommendations for Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.2
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
References
61
Appendix
64
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
As the world aims to transition toward renewable energy sources and away from
those that are carbon-intensive, coloured photovoltaic (PV) panels are becoming
increasingly popular, particularly in urban areas. One newer method for colour-
ing PV panels—mixing structural colour pigments into the encapsulant layer—
currently has no method for determining the exact appearance of the final module
based on the included pigments. This necessitates assembling the complete panel
in order to see its appearance, which, particularly for manufacturers who aim to
offer a wide variety of colours, can be incredibly inefficient with regards to time,
money, and materials.
This thesis presents two possible solution methods for finding the final appearance
of these PV modules after experimentally determining reflectance and transmit-
tance data on the appropriate materials. First, a simple correlation model is used to
find scaling factors that can be applied to the near-normal reflectance spectra of the
pigments to numerically achieve the near-normal reflectance spectra of the final
modules. Second, the optical simulation software suite Ansys Zemax OpticStudio
is used to model PV modules and their components. The simulations output the
near-normal reflectance and transmittance of each system and these results were
then validated using experimentally determined data.
Results for the first solution method show that the scaling factors are dependent on
wavelength and incapable of being generalized to all or even a subset of the consid-
ered colour families. This means that it is necessary to construct the final module
to determine the scaling factors, which defeats the purpose. However, results for
the simulation approach are much more promising. The individual components of
the final modules were successfully simulated and validated against experimental
data. Where these results did not exactly match, suggestions for improvement
were offered. Finally, despite the complete simulations of the final modules not
functioning as desired, further research ought to be able to improve those results,
as well.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Sune Thorsteinsson, Markus Babin, and
Nanna Lysgaard Andersen, without whom it would not have been possible to
conduct this project. All of their expertise in photovoltaics and optics provided a
wealth of knowledge that I am extremely grateful they were willing to share when-
ever necessary. Particularly, Markus Babin’s continued guidance while working in
the lab and assistance troubleshooting numerous simulation issues was incredibly
valuable.
I would also like to thank my family and my partner for their much-appreciated
patience and support.
iv
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
1
Copenhagen International School with its distinct blue facade, some
panels of which are coloured PV modules [18]
. . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
The path of a light ray (including internal reflections) . . . . . . . .
7
3
Pigments printed on the colour card on white backgrounds (top)
and black backgrounds (bottom)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Encapsulant samples for transmittance measurements fanned out
after cutting (black encapsulant not included in measurements) . .
13
5
Image of the mini-module with smooth glass and the BrRe encapsulant 15
6
Diagram depicting the reflectance measurement setup (not to scale)
16
7
Diagram of the light trap setup (not to scale)
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
8
Visible light spectra of all measured colour swatches . . . . . . . . .
20
9
Filtered Green Pearl data plotted against the unfiltered data
. . . .
21
10
Comparison of raw intensity spectra for both setups . . . . . . . . .
23
11
Reflectance spectra from the backsheet and light trap methods for
the TR TPO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
12
Reflectance spectra of all encapsulants as measured in the light trap
setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
13
c-Si reflectance from Aspnes and Studna [4] compared with mea-
sured PV cell reflectance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
14
Reflectance of the TR-Sm and TR-Sa mini-modules . . . . . . . . . .
27
15
Reflectance of all mini-modules (smooth glass on the left and sati-
nated on the right)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
16
Diagram depicting the transmittance measurement setup (not to scale) 29
17
All encapsulant transmittance spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
18
Flowchart of the calculation process to find scaling factors
. . . . .
34
19
Raw and smoothed reflectance data for the set of colour swatches .
36
20
Normalized reflectance data for the set of colour swatches
. . . . .
37
21
Normalized reflectance data for the set of mini-modules
. . . . . .
37
22
Graphical representation of the calculated scaling factors . . . . . .
38
23
Original smoothed reflectance spectra compared with scaling factor
spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
24
An exploded near-isometric view of a shaded model of a mini-
module in Zemax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
25
A comparison of the original TR transmittance dataset with 480 data
points against the culled data set with only 100 data points . . . . .
46
v
==PAGE:7==
26
Refractive indices from the internal reflections method and the
method without internal reflections for the TR TPO
. . . . . . . . .
49
27
Refractive indices of all TPOs, accounting for the first two internal
reflections
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
28
Refractive indices for the PV cell
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
29
Zemax simulation results for Pilkington Optiwhite reflectance (left)
and transmittance (right) compared with existing data . . . . . . . .
53
30
Simulated PV cell reflectance plotted against experimental data
shown previously . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
31
A comparison of laboratory (left) and simulation (right) results for
reflectance of all TPOs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
32
A comparison of laboratory (left) and simulation (right) results for
transmittance of all TPOs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
33
TR-Sm simulated and experimental reflectance spectra
. . . . . . .
57
A.1 Reflectance spectrum of the bare black backsheet . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.2 Refractive indices of the bare black backsheet calculated from ex-
perimental reflectance data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.3 Reflectance spectrum of the Black Control colour swatch
. . . . . .
65
vi
==PAGE:8==
List of Tables
1
Pigment naming conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Encapsulant naming conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Mini-module naming conventions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Scaling factor statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Statistics regarding the application of the scaling factors (units are
percentage points) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
RMS error and maximum error for all four formulae . . . . . . . . .
48
vii
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
PV photovoltaics
IEA International Energy Agency
BIPV building-integrated PV
AOI angle of incidence
TPO thermoplastic polyolefin
EVA ethylene-vinly-acetate
Go Solar Gold
TerD Terracotta Dark
TR Transparent
GrD Green Dark
GrL Green Light
BrRe Brown Red
c-Si monocrystalline-silicon
2BB 2-busbar
POE polyolefin elastomer
Sm smooth glass
Sa satinated glass
ARC anti-reflective coating
LDLS laser-driven light source
OAP off-axis parabolic
CLS correction light source
Zemax Ansys Zemax OpticStudio
API applicationprogramminginterface
NSC Non-Sequential Component
RMS root mean square
MM mini-module
CS colour swatch
BRDF bidirectional reflectance distribu-
tion function
viii
==PAGE:10==
List of Symbols
λ wavelength
R total reflectance
Rs reflectance (s-polarized light)
Rp reflectance (p-polarized light)
Rstd totalreflectance(calibrationofstan-
dard material)
Rλ,lt total reflectance (sample, light trap
setup)
Rλ,bs totalreflectance(sample, backsheet
setup)
R′
λ normalize total reflectance
R′
λ,MM normalized total reflectance (MM)
R′
λ,CS normalized total reflectance (CS)
Rλ smoothed total reflectance
Rnew newly calculated total reflectance
Rexp experimentallydeterminedtotalre-
flectance
zλ total reflectance (from scaling fac-
tors)
I intensity of light
Ir intensity of light (reflected)
Ii intensity of light (incident)
n3 refractive index (third medium)
nair refractive index (air)
nglass refractive index (glass)
nTPO refractive index (TPO)
θi angle of incidence
θt angle of refraction
ϵ molar absorption coefficient
c molar concentration
l optical path length
ϕ radiant flux (sample)
ϕdark radiant flux (dark room)
ϕref radiant flux (Spectralon sample)
ϕlt radiant flux (empty light trap)
ϕbs radiant flux (bare backsheet)
ϕblck radiant flux (Black Control colour
swatch)
ϕCS radiant flux (correction source)
ϕi radiant flux (LDLS)
ϕS radiant flux (sample, LDLS on)
ϕcal radiant flux (sample, CLS on)
τ total spectral transmission
ix
==PAGE:11==
It intensity of light (transmitted)
A absorption
n refractive index
ni refractive index (initial medium)
nt refractive index (next medium)
n1 refractive index (first medium)
n2 refractive index (second medium)
n2,ir refractive index (second medium,
considering internal reflections)
ymin minimum totalreflectance(control)
ymax maximum totalreflectance(control)
SFλ scaling factor
µSFλ average scaling factor
σSFλ scaling factor standard deviation
V coefficient of variation
µD average difference
σD average difference
x
==PAGE:12==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
As the world continues to feel the repercussions of climate change, both com-
mercial industries and governing agencies seek to transition away from carbon-
intensive electricity generation and towards renewable technologies, one of which
is solar energy. According to research conducted on the development of the re-
newable energy market in the EU, solar energy has seen a growth rate of 40-50%
per year and is the fastest growing energy sector in the world [8]. Many countries
worldwide aim to continue growing the share of their energy that is generated by
solar energy, too, in order to reach ambitious goals of lowering carbon emissions
within the next couple of decades.
Within solar energy, there are many different technologies, but solar photovoltaics
(PV) specifically has grown at a remarkable rate recently. According to the 2023
World Energy Outlook from the International Energy Agency (IEA), annual de-
ployment of solar PV increased seven-fold over the last decade [15].
With PV panels covering an ever-increasing number of fields, roofs, and building
facades, there will always be concerns about their aesthetics. One attempt combat
this issue, particularly in urban areas, has been to use coloured modules that blend
into their surroundings more effectively. These are generally used as building-
integrated photovoltaics (BIPV), where they replace a part of the building envelope
in order to provide both power and structure. Projects using these coloured PV
modules have been undertaken all over Europe [14].
Figure 1: Copenhagen International School with its distinct blue facade, some
panels of which are coloured PV modules [18]
1
==PAGE:13==
Logically, with the rise in PV panel installation, there has been an incredible
increase in PV panel manufacturing as well, with it seeing a ten-fold increase over
the last decade [15]. The more panels that are manufactured, the more important
it is to be particular about design specification so that wastage of time, energy,
materials, and money are as limited as possible.
For manufacturers aiming to offer a high degree of customize-ability, and therefore
a very wide range of panel colors, this becomes a problem. For some coloration
techniques, there is currently no way to precisely predict how a coloured panel
will look once finished. In order to know the appearance of the panel accurately, it
then becomes necessary to make test samples for every color, which is inefficient
on many levels.
One newer way to manufacture coloured PV modules is to mix structural colour
pigments into the panel encapsulants. The aim of this thesis is to, considering this
method of colouring panels, relate the optical properties of the pigments to the
appearance of the final coloured PV module using two different approaches. The
first solution method will be to use laboratory measurements on sample reflectance
to find scaling factors that can be used to convert the reflectance spectra of the
pigments to those of the final PV modules. The second approach will be to create
an optical model that is based on laboratory optical measurements to relate the
final appearance of the coloured PV modules to the optical properties of their
constituent materials.
1.2
Report Structure
The report for this thesis is structured to have six sections, the first of which is this
introduction.
Section 2 details theoretical background behind the major optical laws that are im-
portant to this project and also provides a subsection discussing existing literature
on some of the materials and methods that will be used later on.
Section 3 offers a detailed description of the experimental measurement setups
used to gather near-normal reflectance and transmittance data on a variety of
samples. The nature and origin of the samples in this project are also presented
before results from the measurement process are shown and discussed.
For Section 4, an explanation and analysis of the first solution method is delineated.
This section describes the theory behind the scaling factors, then walks through
2
==PAGE:14==
the calculation of these factors and a discussion of their re-application to the
experimental data.
In Section 5, the second solution method—optical modelling using Ansys Zemax
OpticStudio—is discussed in detail. This includes, but is not limited to, a brief
description of ray tracing and the MATLAB code used to communicate with the
simulation software, as well as an extensive dialogue on defining the simulated
materials in Zemax’s Materials Catalogue. Finally, the results are compared with
the experimental data presented in Section 3.
In Section 6, suggestions for further research are offered and a final conclusion for
the report summarizes the preceding sections.
3
==PAGE:15==
2
Theoretical Background
The purpose of this section is to the lay the theoretical foundation for concepts
that are central to this project and provide an overview of existing research into
the same field.
The first subsection deals with optical reflectance and transmittance, covering the
Fresnel Equations, Snell’s Law, and the Beer-Lambert Law. The second subsec-
tion expands on reflectance and transmittance to discuss near-normal incidence
reflectance as a function of refractive indices. While wider angles of incidence
are also important to providing a comprehensive interpretation of the appearance
of a PV module, considering both near-normal and broader angles of incidence
is extremely work-intensive. Therefore, to preserve a manageable workload, this
project only investigates near-normal incidence. Now, finally, the third subsection
here offers a summary of existing PV module colouration techniques as defined
by IEA and looks into research on some of the materials and strategies employed
in this project.
Note that, while this section provides important theory for the major optical laws
that are central to this report, more theoretical background is interspersed through-
out this paper where necessary.
2.1
Reflectance and Transmittance
Reflectance and transmittance are fundamental quantities in optical sciences and
are used to understand how light interacts with materials. Both have coefficients—
the reflectance coefficient, R, and the transmittance coefficient, T—which are de-
fined below in Equations 1 and 2.
R = Ir
Ii
(1)
T = It
Ii
(2)
These coefficients are measures of the intensity of light that is reflected off of or
passes through a surface, where Ir refers to the intensity of light that is reflected, Ii
refers to the intensity of light that is incident, and It is the intensity of light that is
4
==PAGE:16==
transmitted. The quantities R and T are between 0 and 1. For materials that do not
absorb light, reflectance and transmittance can be added together to account for
the complete intensity of the incident light. However, if the materials do absorb
light, then a third quantity known as absorption, A, must be included such that
the following equation is true.
1 = R + T + A
(3)
Now, there are many optical laws that govern the relationships between material
properties and reflectance, transmittance, and absorption, but the three that are
most central to this thesis are the Fresnel Equations, Snell’s Law, and the Beer-
Lambert Law.
First of all, the Fresnel Equations are used to describe how light is reflected and
transmitted at the boundary between one medium and another. Upon hitting a
border between two media, rays of light will split into two parts. One part is
reflected by the boundary back into the first medium and the second part of the
ray will transmit past the boundary into the second medium. For light that is
unpolarized, two equations for reflectance must be used to consider the fact that
about half of the irradiance in the group of light rays will oscillate parallel to the
plane of incidence while the other half will oscillate perpendicularly.
Rs =

nicosθi −ntcosθt
nicosθi + ntcosθt

2
(4)
Rp =

ntcosθi −nicosθt
nicosθi + ntcosθt

2
(5)
The s subscript (s-polarized) denotes the light that is propagating parallel to the
plane of incidence while the p subscript (p-polarized) denotes that which is per-
pendicular. Meanwhile, ni is the refractive index of the initial medium and nt is
the refractive index of the medium into which the light is transmitted. Finally, θi
is the angle of incidence (AOI) of the light and θt is the angle that the refracted ray
makes to the surface normal of the boundary [13]. Note that, when the angle of
incidence is 0◦(normal incidence), Equations 4 and 5 will simplify to one equation
to calculate the total reflectance, R.
5
==PAGE:17==
R =

ni −nt
ni + nt

2
(6)
However, when dealing with non-normal angles of incidence, the total reflectance
for light is described as follows.
R = 1
2

Rs + Rp

(7)
Now, when the light traverses the boundary between the media, Snell’s Law (Eqn.
8) describes how the angle at which the rays are refracted is related to the angle of
incidence and the refractive indices of the two materials.
ni sin (θi) = nt sin (θt)
(8)
As the rays travel through any medium, though, some portion of their energy
will be absorbed by the molecules of the medium and converted to heat. The
Beer-Lambert Law, defined in Eqn. 9, is used to find this absorption, A.
A = log10
Ii
It
= −log10T = clϵ
(9)
Where the last version of the equation is used to find the absorption of a solution.
In this equation, ϵ is the molar absorption coefficient of the solution, c is the molar
concentration, and l is the optical path length. This is partially why the angle of
transmission, as determined by Snell’s Law, is important—it will help to define
the optical path length and therefore allow determination of absorption.
These laws are fundamental to understanding the way light propagates through
any optical system, including PV optical stacks. As this thesis aims to describe
and interpret reflectance and transmittance of light through various PV modules,
a number of these equations will be central to analysis conducted in later sections.
2.1.1
Refractive Indices
Refractive indices are fundamental material parameters in optics, as they describe
the ratio between the speed of light in a vacuum relative to any given medium
[13]. As seen previously, they can also be used to determine by how much light
6
==PAGE:18==
is refracted when crossing a boundary between two materials and are therefore
essential for the ray-tracing simulations this project employs. In lieu of measuring
refractive index directly, and because reflectance data is necessary anyway, the
calculation method described below was used to determine refractive indices for
all relevant materials.
As can be seen in Eqns.
4, 5, and 6, refractive indices are closely related to
reflectance. In order to determine the exact equations that govern this relationship
in a system that includes some internal reflections, a diagram of three different
media and one light ray can be seen below in Fig. 2.
Figure 2: The path of a light ray (including internal reflections)
When measuring reflectance with an integrating sphere, like in this project, the
intensity of measured light will be more than just the light reflected at the first
boundary, R12. For materials that are not completely absorbant, any given light ray
will be partially transmitted (T12) through the first boundary, partially reflected
off the back boundary (R23), and then partially transmitted once again through the
front boundary (T21). Therefore, the reflectance measured will be in accordance
with Eqn. 10 (assuming no absorption).
R = R12 + (T12 ∗R23 ∗T21)
(10)
7
==PAGE:19==
More and more terms could be added to this equation to increase accuracy, since
the light ray will continue being partially reflected and transmitted in a similar
fashion. However, since the intensity of the light is split between reflectance and
transmittance at each boundary, the contribution from terms accounting for the
later ray segments becomes increasingly negligible.
At each material boundary, the portions of light that are reflected and transmitted
also follow optical laws. For example, for the first interface, Eqns. 11 and 12 are
true at normal incidence [13].
R12 =

n1 −n2
n1 + n2

2
(11)
T12 =
 
2n1
n1 + n2
!2
(12)
Applying those equations to the other boundaries, accounting for different refrac-
tive indices, and combining with Eqn. 10 yields an equation that solves for the
total reflectance, R, in terms of the refractive indices of the system while factoring
in the first two internal reflections, R23 and R21.
R =

n1 −n2
n1 + n2

2
+


 
2n1
n1 + n2
!4
∗

n2 −n3
n2 + n3

2

(13)
Since they occur at the same boundary, T12 and T21 can be calculated using the
same equation. Now, Equation 13 is relatively complex and difficult to re-arrange
algebraically, meaning that numerical solvers are often used if, for example, R and
n1 are known while n2 is not.
If it is desirable to experimentally determine the refractive index directly, though,
there are a variety of methods that can be used depending on the material in ques-
tion [22]. For ordinary liquids, it is possible to determine refractive indices using a
hollow prism, a spectrometer and a sodium lamp, and a detailed understanding of
Snell’s Law. Again alongside a hollow prism, a refractometer and a laser can also
be used to determine n for liquids. A similar method can be employed for both
isotropic and anisotropic transparent solids [7]. For the purposes of this project,
it was sufficient to use the calculation method described in this section, but for
8
==PAGE:20==
further research it would certainly be useful to directly measure refractive indices
and compare them with the calculated indices obtained here.
2.2
Literature Review
In a 2019 summary of existing coloured BIPV technologies, IEA described five
different customization techniques employed to produce coloured or textured
BIPV modules [14]. They are:
• Anti-reflection coatings on solar cells (c-Si)
• Coloured and or semi-transparent PV-active layers (thin film, OPV)
• Special solar filters as layers, coatings or interlayers with colours or patterns
• Coloured polymer films (encapsulant, backsheet)
• Modified front glass by printing, coating or alternative finishing
This thesis aims to deal with the fourth category listed above—BIPV products
which employ coloured polymer films in their construction to enhance their final
appearance. More specifically, this project deals with modules that use coloured
thermoplastic polyolefin (TPO) encapsulants.
Existing literature on structural colours mixed into PV module encapsulants is
scarce. Including structural colours in TPO encapsulants is a new practice and,
while the tactic of creating coloured PV modules is better recorded up until this
point [14], coloured TPO encapsulants still lack extensive research.
A 2019 study by Adothu et al. notes that TPO is a non-crosslinking material, and
the purpose of the study was to establish its characteristics and evaluate it as a
possible PV encapsulant. Most importantly to this project, Adothu et al. used
a UV/Vis spectrophotometer to determine the reflectance and transmittance of a
quartz glass/TPO/quartz glass sandwich sample over a wavelength range of 200-
900 nm, which comfortably covers the visible light spectrum that will be used
in this thesis (380-750 nm). Overall, the study determined that TPO is a viable
encapsulant material after it was shown to outperform commonly-used ethylene-
vinyl-acetate (EVA) in important tests such as UV degradation analysis and a 180◦
peel adhesion test [2].
It is important to note that adding pigments to TPO is already an established
practice, especially in the automotive industry, though it is not necessarily done
9
==PAGE:21==
for appearance. Car manufacturers wish to keep vehicle interiors cooler by using
pigmented TPOs to reflect or absorb certain spectra so that the light does not have
a chance to raise the surface temperature of black interior parts [12].
Modelling PV modules and components is also already an established practice,
but again, not for appearance.
Much more commonly, it is done to evaluate
thermal characteristics of the system or understand its electrical performance [24]
[1] [26] [16]. These models commonly use numerical methods or software such
as MATLAB Simulink, and often use experimental data for validation, as will be
done in this project.
When modelling optical systems in general, though, ray tracing simulations are
a very widespread tool used in the design and evaluation of these apparatuses.
Ansys Zemax OpticStudio, which is used in this thesis, is an established software
that has already been used to conduct ray tracing simulations on a very wide
variety of systems, from holographic optical elements [9] to beam-down solar
concentrators [27].
10
==PAGE:22==
3
Measurement Setups
The purpose of this section is to describe where the data used in calculating
scaling factors and defining the simulation parameters comes from. Two primary
experiments were conducted in an optical lab to determine the transmittance and
near-normal reflectance of the samples relevant to this project.
This section begins with a description of the pigments, encapsulants, and mini-
modules that were measured in the lab. It discusses where the materials were
sourced from, the different layers present in the mini-modules, and naming con-
ventions that will be used from here onward.
The second subsection focuses on the near-normal reflectance measurements that
were taken on the pigment colour swatches, encapuslants, a PV cell, and mini-
modules. The laboratory setup is described and calculations using the raw data as
well as final results for reflectance of all samples are presented. The final subsection
deals with transmittance in a very similar manner.
3.1
Sample Descriptions
3.1.1
Pigments
The most basic of the three material categories used in this project are the pigments.
From Merck KGaA, they are commonly used in automotive coatings, architectural
applications, and foods, plastics, and cosmetics [17].
An extensive color card
provides an overview of the following pigment series: Iriodin™, Miraval™, Col-
orstream™, Pyrisma™, and Biflair™. These are known as "effect pigments" which,
according to the American Society for Testing and Materials, are defined as "flaky
or platy structures that impart a directional light reflectance, scattering, absorp-
tion, or optically variable appearance to the substrate in or on which they are
applied" [5]. Each individual pigment was printed on the color card on both a
black and a white background, on squares roughly 4-by-4 cm.
These small squares, herein referred to as "colour swatches", were only used for
near-normal reflectance measurements—the cardstock used for the base of the
color card is completely opaque. An image of some of these color swatches can be
seen below (Fig. 3).
11
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3: Pigments printed on the colour card on white backgrounds (top) and
black backgrounds (bottom)
The mini-modules, discussed in more detail later, were made prior to the beginning
of this thesis and only include the pigments presented in Table 1. In this table,
the naming conventions that will be used for the duration of the report for the
pigments can be found. In the event that the conventions below are not used, it
will be self-evident what is being referred to.
Color Card Name
Shortened Name
Iriodin 305 Solar Gold
Gold
Pyrisma M30-58 Ambercup Orange
Orange
Iriodin 7235 Ultra Rutile Green Pearl
Green
Pyrisma T30-21 Color Space Red
Space Red
Colorstream F10-51 Lava Red
Lava Red
Table 1: Pigment naming conventions
3.1.2
Encapsulants
The encapsulants were provided by Lenzing Plastics GmbH & Co KG. They
are thermoplastic polyolefin (TPO)—a non-crosslinking material—with pigments
mixed in that vary from sample to sample. Not many specifics are still known
about these samples from when they were manufactured, such as the exact con-
centration of the pigments inside, nor precisely which pigments, aside from the
main colour-providing ones, were included.
12
==PAGE:24==
The dimensions of the encapsulant samples differ between the encapsulant re-
flectance and transmittance measurements. For the transmittance measurements,
there are 7 samples, all 15.5 x 5 cm, and all are depicted below after they had been
cut from their larger rolls (Fig. 4).
Figure 4: Encapsulant samples for transmittance measurements fanned out after
cutting (black encapsulant not included in measurements)
For the reflectance measurements, readings were taken on two different samples.
The first sample consists of a 6 x 6 cm square of encapsulant and an 8 x 8 cm square
of black backsheet laminated together between two 11 x 11 cm pieces of release
film, which were later peeled off. The second sample consists of only the square
of encapsulant laminated between the pieces of release film. The laminator was
set to an evacuation time of 780 seconds and a press time of 1300 seconds, and
all samples were laid out together between two sheets of glass on the laminator
bed. Though the encapsulants are not heavily structured on their surfaces, this
lamination step was undertaken in order to ensure uniform smoothness, which
should also better mimic the structure they possess once laminated inside the
mini-modules.
Each encapsulant was labeled for the purposes of identification and the naming
conventions, as well as which colour-providing pigments are present in each
encapsulant, can be found below in Table 2.
13
==PAGE:25==
Colour-
providing
Pigment
Encapsulant
Name
Abbreviated
Name
Iriodin 305
Solar Gold
Solar Gold
Go
Pyrisma
M30-58
Ambercup
Orange
Terracotta Dark
TerD
N/A
Transparent
TR
Iriodin 7235
Ultra Rutile
Green Pearl
Green Dark
GrD
Iriodin 7235
Ultra Rutile
Green Pearl
Green Light
GrL
2 / 1: Pyrisma
T30-21 Color
Space Red /
Colorstream
F10-50 Lava
Red
Brown Red
BrRe
Table 2: Encapsulant naming conventions
Note that the TR encapsulant does not have any noteworthy colour-providing
pigment, but reflectance and transmittance data were still taken for this sample
because it could be used as a control. Also, note that the BrRe encapsulant has
a 2-to-1 mix of Space Red and Lava Red in order to provide it with a brown-red
colour. It is the only encapsulant with more than one colour-providing pigment.
3.1.3
Mini-modules
There are 12 different mini-modules, so-called because they are comprised of only
one solar cell. The construction of these mini-modules is listed below and an image
of one of the mini-modules can be seen in Fig. 5. Furthermore, the abbreviated
name of each mini-module, whether or not it has smooth or satinated glass, and
which encapsulant it possesses can be found in Table 3.
14
==PAGE:26==
• Low-iron float extra clear glass from Petraglas or satinated glass (30 x 20 cm,
3.2 mm thickness)
• Lenzing Plastics TPO (as described previously) (30 x 20 cm, 0.5 mm thickness)
• one monocrystalline-silicon (c-Si) 2-busbar (2BB) PV cell (15 x 15 cm, 0.5 mm
thickness)
• UV-cutoff polyolefin elastomer (POE) encapsulant (30 x 20 cm)
• black backsheet (30 x 20 cm)
Figure 5: Image of the mini-module with smooth glass and the BrRe encapsulant
Encapsulant
Smooth or
Satinated Glass
Abbreviated
Name
BrRe
Smooth
BrRe-Sm
GrL
Smooth
GrL-Sm
GrD
Smooth
GrD-Sm
TR
Smooth
TR-Sm
TerD
Smooth
TerD-Sm
Go
Smooth
Go-Sm
BrRe
Satinated
BrRe-Sa
GrL
Satinated
GrL-Sa
GrD
Satinated
GrD-Sa
TR
Satinated
TR-Sa
TerD
Satinated
TerD-Sa
Go
Satinated
Go-Sa
Table 3: Mini-module naming conventions
Six of the mini-modules have smooth glass, while the other six have satinated
glass, but are otherwise the same as their smooth glass counterparts.
15
==PAGE:27==
3.1.4
PV Cell
Reflectance measurements were also taken on one of the 2BB c-Si PV cells in order
to have data to use to calculate the refractive index of the cell for the simulation.
Established data for c-Si could have been used and an anti-reflective coating (ARC)
in the simulation program could have been applied, but the laboratory data should
provide a more accurate representation than approximating the system. This is not
to say there is no uncertainty in these measurments, though—obtaining reflectance
and transmittance data of an isolated layer of ARC and an isolated layer of c-Si
could have provided a way to reliably account for both layers independently.
3.2
Reflectance
3.2.1
Measurement Setup
Figure 6: Diagram depicting the reflectance measurement setup (not to scale)
In order to understand the appearance of the mini-modules to the naked eye,
calculate scaling factors, and be able to reproduce their spectra in a simulation, it
was first necessary to measure their near-normal reflectance. At the same time,
16
==PAGE:28==
reflectance of the encapsulants and the relevant colour swatches were also taken.
The measurement methodology for all three systems was the same and a simple
diagram of the measurement setup can be seen above in Fig. 6.
The broadband beam of light is produced by an Energetiq EQ-99X laser-driven
light source (LDLS), which is then redirected and collimated (prior to hitting the
mirror in Fig. 6) using three off-axis parabolic (OAP) mirrors and an aperture.
Between two of the OAP mirrors, there is also a long-pass UV filter which block
wavelengths shorter than 320 nm. The mirror depicted above then redirects the
filtered, collimated light into the entrance port of a 2" integrating sphere. This
entrance port is 4◦from the surface normal of the sample, making this a measure-
ment of near-normal reflectance. The sphere has an opening on the bottom, which
is positioned over the sample being measured.
When the light is reflected off the sample, the specular component either remains
in the integrating sphere to measure the total intensity of reflections or, if the
plug is removed, exits the integrating sphere, which allows for measuring only
the intensity of diffuse reflections.
The integrating sphere is connected to an
OceanOptics QE65000 spectrometer via a 600 µm optical fiber cable.
The sample under the integrating sphere can either be a colour swatch, an encap-
sulant piece, or a mini-module. As previously mentioned, the colour swatches
and mini-modules are ultimately completely opaque, but the encapsulants are
transparent and therefore require a different setup, which is discussed in detail in
the next subsection.
For each reflectance measurement, one measurement was acquired at three differ-
ent locations on the sample and these three spectra were then averaged in order to
mitigate any measurement noise in the system. For the spectrometer, a two second
integration time was used and five scans were taken to average. In order to control
for any existing background light, a dark measurement was taken and subtracted
from the averaged spectra. For the mini-modules, care was taken to avoid cap-
turing measurements where the opening of the integrating sphere was positioned
over the busbars. Once the flux had been measured by the spectrometer for the
colour swatches and mini-modules, Equation 14 was used to find reflectance for
each sample at each wavelength.
R =
ϕ −ϕdark

ϕre f −ϕdark

∗
1
Rstd
(14)
17
==PAGE:29==
Where ϕ is the radiant flux of the sample as measured by the spectrometer and
ϕdark is the radiant flux of the dark measurement. Meanwhile, ϕre f represents the
radiant flux data taken from measuring a puck of LabSphere Spectralon certified
reflectance standard in the same setup and Rstd represents provided calibration
reflectance data (in decimal form) for the Spectralon sample [6]. Note that the
encapsulant reflectance measurements required a slightly modified equation de-
pending on their setup.
Equation 14 is derived from Equation 1. The numerator represents the intensity of
light that is reflected by the sample and the denominator is the intensity incident
on the sample.
The surface of the Spectralon puck that is used to obtain ϕre f, though, can be a
source of error. If it has been scratched or is dirty, then ϕre f will deviate from the
expected values. This would yield higher sample reflectance values because the
gap between the Spectralon flux and the dark measurement flux would decrease.
However, upon a close eye inspection, the surface of the Spectralon puck seemed
smooth and free of debris.
There are also possible sources of error in the positioning of the mirror and the
integrating sphere. If the incident beam of light is misaligned with the input port of
the integrating sphere, the difference between the dark and sample measurements
may decrease, resulting in more noise in the final reflectance results. Perhaps more
importantly, though, the incident beam must be aligned properly with the port
on the bottom the integrating sphere to ensure that none of the beam remains in
the sphere instead of falling on the sample. If a portion of the beam is reflected
off the bottom interior surface of the sphere, then the signal that the spectrometer
measures will be considerably higher than it should be, voiding the accuracy of
the measurements.
3.2.2
Encapsulant Reflectance
As mentioned above, the encapsulants transmit some of the incoming light to
the media behind them, necessitating a slightly different measurement setup and
calculation method in order to isolate the reflectance.
The first method that was attempted involved including a light trap behind the
sample in order to attempt to minimize light reflecting into the integrating sphere
from the medium behind the sample. In this case, two plates of black felt fixed to
thin metal plates were placed between the sample and the table, with the top plate
18
==PAGE:30==
possessing a 2.5 cm diameter hole, over which the sample and integrating sphere
were placed. A detailed diagram of this setup is shown below in Fig. 7.
Figure 7: Diagram of the light trap setup (not to scale)
The light has a 4◦angle of incidence and the blocks are 2.5 cm high. The hole at
the bottom of the 2" integrating sphere is 1 cm in diameter and the hole in the top
felt-covered plate is 2.5 cm. The felt is not a perfect absorber, but the light has a
non-zero angle of incidence and the hole in the top plate is of a fixed width, which
should prevent the light from returning to the interior of the integrating sphere.
This is important because if the light manages to re-enter the sphere, then it
contributes to the spectrometer reading, therefore lessening the quality of the
data. Using simple trigonometry and assuming that the bottom surface does not
scatter the incident light, the beam reflects off the bottom plate and reaches the
bottom of the sphere 0.35 cm from where it exited. The port at the bottom of the
sphere is not small enough to avoid some of this light re-entering, but in reality,
the felt on the bottom plate should scatter and absorb the incident light quite
well. Still, this will be further discussed in connection with the results from these
measurements.
In the second method, the encapsulant samples were laminated onto a black
backsheet.
In this scenario, some of the light reflecting off the backsheet will
re-enter the integrating sphere, but three measurements were taken at different
locations on a bare backsheet sample and averaged to use as a control. Similarly,
in the light trap method, a measurement with the source on and no sample in place
was taken to understand whether or not the light trap is effective. Ultimately, the
backsheet reflectance and light trap reflectance spectra were taken into account
when calculating reflectance for those setups.
See Eqns.
15 and 16 below to
19
==PAGE:31==
understand how Eqn. 14 was adjusted according to the setup methodology.
Rλ,lt =
ϕ −ϕlt

ϕre f −ϕlt

∗
1
Rstd
(15)
Rλ,bs =
ϕ −ϕbs

ϕre f −ϕbs

∗
1
Rstd
(16)
Where Rλ,lt is the reflectance of the sample as measured in the light trap setup, ϕlt
is the radiant flux from the light trap measurement with no sample in place, and
the other variables are the same as before. Similarly, Rλ,bs is the reflectance of the
sample as measured with the backsheet setup and ϕbs is the average radiant flux
from the three measurements on the bare backsheet.
3.2.3
Results
Colour Swatches
First ofall, thereflectancespectraofallmeasuredblack-backgroundcolourswatches
can be seen below in Fig. 8.
Figure 8: Visible light spectra of all measured colour swatches
Instead of using ϕdark, the equation used to calculate the reflectances graphed
20
==PAGE:32==
above used ϕblck, which is the radiant flux spectrum obtained from a measurement
on the bare black background colour swatch (see the Appendix Fig. A.3 for a
graph of this sample’s reflectance spectrum). This allows for the spectra of the
pigment to be isolated completely from the reflectance of the card on which they
were printed. Also, immediately prior to graphing, the data was put through a
Savitzky-Golay filter (window length of 50 and polynomial order of 3) to reduce
noise that carried through from the data measurement process. Savitzky-Golay
filtering is a common technique based on applying a polynomial of a degree
defined by the user to a dataset, then replacing every data point by the value
determined by this fit polynomial [11]. An example, with the Green (Green Pearl)
pigment plotted against its unfiltered data, can be seen in Fig. 9. It is apparent
that the filtered data follows the trend of the original data extremely closely, while
flattening sporadic data around, for example, 380 nm and 410 nm.
Figure 9: Filtered Green Pearl data plotted against the unfiltered data
Now, colours in the visible spectrum correspond to certain wavelengths as follows
[10]:
• violet @ 400 nm and below
• blue @ 450 nm
• cyan @ 500 nm
21
==PAGE:33==
• green @ 550 nm
• yellow @ 580 nm
• orange @ 600 nm
• red @ 650 nm and above
If the data presented in Fig. 8 is reliable, each colour swatch should exhibit high
reflectance around the wavelengths corresponding to their visible colour.
For
example, the Lava Red colour has its highest wavelengths in the range of 600-750
nm and, to the naked eye, it appears mostly red with some orange. Meanwhile,
Green Pearl has high reflectance just before 550 nm and another peak around 420
nm. This indicates that the pigment will appear mostly green with some violet or
dark blue.
Overall, the colour swatch reflectance data appears very logical. The filter applied
adequately smooths data without losing a meaningful amount of information, and
the final spectra all show high reflectance around the wavelengths corresponding
to their visible colours.
However, as with any measurement methodology, there are still possible sources of
error. For example, unlike with all other samples, only one location on each colour
swatch was measured, because the swatches are not large and were assumed to
have high uniformity. This could cause reflectance to be lower overall if the one
measured location had a blemish or dirt, whereas such an issue would have less
impact for the other samples, because readings were taken at three locations and
then averaged.
Encapsulants
Moving on, the encapsulant data was taken with two different methods, as dis-
cussed above. In order to determine which method would provide more reliable
data, the raw intensity spectra of the dark (ϕdark), bare light trap (ϕlt), and bare
backsheet (ϕbs) spectra were examined and a comparison is presented below in
Fig. 10.
First and foremost, if the light trap worked as well as expected, then its intensity
spectrum should match closely with the dark spectrum.
The direct light that
passes through the integrating sphere should be absorbed by the black felt and
whatever small portion is reflected should be contained in the trap itself.
22
==PAGE:34==
Figure 10: Comparison of raw intensity spectra for both setups
Clearly, though, the light trap spectrum depicted in Fig. 10 matches much more
closely with the backsheet spectrum than that of the dark measurement. Part of
this may be due to the light from the LDLS not being perfectly collimated or rays
scattering off air molecules. It is impossible to avoid some amount of diffuse light,
and as the beam travels through the integrating sphere, the diffuse light will be
measured by the spectrometer. This, though, is probably not the main source of
the discrepancy.
From the simple trigonometry calculation for the light trap, it was seen that some
of the light beam will be reflected back up into the integrating sphere if the felt
does not scatter and absorb it sufficiently. Based on the results in Fig. 10, the
felt does not perform adequately, and would therefore need to be replaced with a
more suitable material, or the distance between the bottom port and the bottom
plate would need to be increased to a minimum of 7.15 cm. Furthermore, if the
integrating sphere was misaligned with the incoming light beam, then a portion of
the direct beam may have hit the interior surface of the integrating sphere instead
of exiting into the light trap. Regardless, it is clear that the light trap did not
function as intended. And, since the base intensity of both setups is higher than
that of the dark measurement, it is necessary to adjust Eqn. 14 to Eqns. 15 and 16.
Using those equations with the data measured from each setup yields two sep-
arate reflectance spectra. A comparison for the TR TPO after applying the same
23
==PAGE:35==
Savitzky-Golay filtering as before can be seen below in Fig. 11.
Figure 11: Reflectance spectra from the backsheet and light trap methods for the
TR TPO
Compared with Figure 2a in Adothu et al. [2], the TR TPO light trap reflectance
spectrum matches well with their single layer TPO laminate results for wave-
lengths above 450 nm. One possible explanation for the higher reflectance here
at lower wavelengths could be that the TPO used by Adothu et al. is of slightly
different composition than the TPO used in this project. Thermoplastic polyolefins
are a family of polymers and, while Adothu et al. cite their material as 0.5 mm
thickness Quentys BPO-8828F from Borealis Polyolefine GmbH, the exact TPO
used here is unknown. Since the higher values are seen in both the light trap and
backsheet method, it is likely a property of the TPO itself and not the measurement
or calculation strategy.
For the backsheet method, the results in Fig. 11 suggest that the TPO transmits
practically 100% of the incident light at wavelengths between 500-725 nm. How-
ever, as will be seen in the next subsection on transmittance measurements and as
can be seen in Adothu et al. Fig. 2a, this is not the case. The only way to achieve
zero reflectance in Eqn. 16 is for ϕ to equal ϕbs, meaning the reflected light from
the encapsulant laminated onto the backsheet is equivalent to the reflectance of
the bare backsheet.
24
==PAGE:36==
Considering this, it is likely that Eqn. 16 is incorrect. The backsheet refractive
index was calculated to be 2.2-2.8 (see Appendix Fig. A.2) and, as discussed later,
the TPO refractive indices are all higher than that of air, as well. This causes
the reflectance of the backsheet in the encapsulant-backsheet sample to be lower
than that of the bare backsheet in air.
Therefore, Eqn.
16 is over-estimating
the contribution of the backsheet to the total intensity spectrum reported by the
spectrometer when measuring the encapsulant-backsheet samples.
Overall, despite the issues with the light trap not functioning as well as desired,
the TR TPO results from that setup match existing literature and are therefore
deemed more reliable than the backsheet setup. Furthermore, a quick calculation
(from rearranging Eqn. 6) to determine the refractive index of the TR encapsulant
based on the reflectance at higher wavelengths and the refractive index of air (nair)
yields the following results.
nTR = nair +
√
R
nair −
√
R
= 1 +
√
7.5%
1 −
√
7.5%
= 1.75
(17)
The refractive index of the TR TPO (nTR) should be close to 1.5-1.6 [21], as encapsu-
lant materials are index-matched to the front glass (nglass is commonly 1.5-1.6) of PV
modules to minimize reflectance at the boundary between the two layers. While
the value from the quick calculation method is slightly outside the expected range,
the more extensive calculation method discussed in Subsection 2.1.1 can be used
to achieve more accurate results, which will be presented later on in Subsection
5.1.2.
A graph of the spectra of all the encapsulants measured with the light trap method
can be viewed in Fig. 12. Unsurprisingly, the trends in each encapsulant spectrum
match those found in the spectra of their pigments. Most interesting is the BrRe
encapsulant, which is comprised of a 2:1 mix of Space Red and Lava Red. The
combination of the two yields very high reflectance at higher wavelengths corre-
sponding to yellow, orange, and red. But, the presence of the Space Red pigment
in particular affords the encapsulant with higher reflectance at lower wavelengths
as well.
25
==PAGE:37==
Figure 12: Reflectance spectra of all encapsulants as measured in the light trap
setup
PV Cell
The measured reflectance of the PV cell itself can be seen below in Fig. 13 plotted
against known values for mono-crystalline silicon (c-Si) at the same wavelengths.
The PV cell has an anti-reflective coating (ARC) on it, which should lower the
reflectance considerably when compared to bare c-Si. Based on the results in Fig.
13, this is exactly what happens. Ostensibly, the ARC is not as strong at lower
wavelengths, accounting for the fact that the reflectance of the PV cell in the 380-
400 nm range is much closer to that of c-Si than anywhere else in the visible light
spectrum. The trend of the two materials still matches, however.
26
==PAGE:38==
Figure 13: c-Si reflectance from Aspnes and Studna [4] compared with measured
PV cell reflectance
Mini-modules
Finally, it is important to assess the reflectance of the mini-modules. First, it is
most instructive to analyze the data of the transparent TPO modules since they are
the simplest of the samples. A graph of the TR-Sm and TR-Sa reflectances can be
seen in Fig. 14. Note that, once again, the same Savitzky-Golay filtering as with
the colour swatches and encapsulants has been applied.
Figure 14: Reflectance of the TR-Sm and TR-Sa mini-modules
27
==PAGE:39==
This data, that of the encapsulants, and that of the PV cell, are of particular
importance because they will be compared with simulation outputs later on in
order to assess whether or not the simulation results are viable.
For now, though, comparing the two spectra indicates reliable results from the
reflectance measurement process for the mini-modules.
First of all, the trend
of both mini-modules matches a combination of the TR TPO data from Fig. 11
and the PV cell reflectance from Fig. 13. The reflectance spectra of the TR-Sm
and -Sa mini-modules are predicated on the materials the modules are composed
of, so the fact that the trends of spectra of the final stacks match those of the
raw materials indicates that the measurements are reliable.
Furthermore, PV
modules with satinated glass ought to have lower reflectance than those with
smooth glass, as the texturing helps to trap more of the light. This phenomena is
indeed demonstrated in Fig. 13 and also Fig. 15 below, which presents graphs of
the all mini-module spectra.
Figure 15: Reflectance of all mini-modules (smooth glass on the left and satinated
on the right)
With the mini-modules with coloured encapsulants, the trend in the spectra of
the final stack depends much more heavily on that of the colour swatch than the
PV cell. Comparing Figure 15 with Fig. 8 makes this apparent. Meanwhile, the
default reflectance of the PV cell and TPO causes each mini-module to have a base
reflectance of around 16%. And as seen in Fig. 15, the -Sa mini-modules have
the same trend as their -Sm counterparts, but generally lower reflectance by a few
percent.
In conclusion, measurements of the colour swatches, encapsulants, PV cell, and
28
==PAGE:40==
mini-modules yielded sensible results when compared with literature where pos-
sible. For the encapsulants, the light trap method was deemed more reliable and
the data from that strategy will therefore be used for the remainder of the project.
3.3
Transmittance
3.3.1
Measurement Setup
Transmittance measurements were also taken, though only for the encapsulants,
since they are the only translucent samples. A simple system diagram can be seen
below in Fig. 16.
Figure 16: Diagram depicting the transmittance measurement setup (not to scale)
In this setup, a 6" integrating sphere is used and the encapsulant sample is fixed
to the front port, while a correction light source (CLS) is attached to the top port
of the sphere and the spectrometer is attached to a side port. The spectrometer is
the same as was previously used for reflectance measurements and the CLS is an
OceanOptics DH2000 halogen-deuterium lamp, connected via a 400 µm optical
fiber cable. The LDLS is also the same as previously used.
29
==PAGE:41==
After entering through the port covered by the encapsulant, some of the light
from the LDLS will bounce back toward the input port and transmit through
the sample, thus escaping the system entirely. In order to account for this, the
CLS is necessary, in accordance with a two-source method delineated by Optronic
Laboratories [23]. Presented in the same article is Eqn. 18, which is also used in
this project to calculate transmittance.
τt (λ) = ϕCS (λ) ∗ϕS (λ)
ϕi (λ) ∗ϕcal (λ)
(18)
Where:
• ϕCS is the flux measured with the LDLS off, the CLS on, and no sample in
place over the input port
• ϕi is the flux measured with the LDLS on, the CLS off, and no sample in place
• ϕS is the flux measured with the LDLS on, the CLS off, and a sample over
the input port
• ϕcal is the flux measured with the LDLS off, the CLS on, and a sample in place
• τ is the total spectral transmission of the sample at a given wavelength
30
==PAGE:42==
3.3.2
Results
Figure 17: All encapsulant transmittance spectra
Upon taking all the measurements described above and performing the calculation
present in Eqn. 18 for all wavelengths, the transmittance spectra of all six non-black
encapsulants were obtained and are presented above in Fig. 17.
As a point of reference to make sure the measurement and calculation method
produces sensible results, the TR TPO spectrum can be analyzed. First of all, based
on its appearance to the naked eye, it should exhibit very high transmittance across
the visible light spectrum, and indeed, the spectrum presented above confirms
that. Second, the spectrum measured here can be compared with the results found
by Adothu et al.
in their Figure 2a.
For both their single- and double-layer
TPO laminates, the transmittance remains around 90% for the whole visible light
spectrum [2], which is in accordance with Fig. 17 above.
Due to the apparent reliability of the results for the TR TPO, the results for the five
other encapsulants should also be trustworthy. Furthermore, a simple logic check
can be conducted on their spectra to provide further confidence. The GrD and
GrL encapsulants appear very transluscent and almost colorless to the naked eye,
which should and does correspond to a relatively flat, high transmittance graph
across the visible wavelengths. Meanwhile, the other three samples appear more
opaque and colourful, which should and does correspond to a lower transmittance.
31
==PAGE:43==
One possible source of any error could be that the encapsulant samples used for
the transmittance measurements were only just barely large enough to cover the
input port of the 6" integrating sphere. If the sample did not cover the whole of the
port, then some light from the LDLS would be allowed into the sphere without first
passing through the encapsulant and losing some of its intensity due to reflections
at the boundaries. This would also affect the amount of light that bounces back
from the interior of the integrating sphere and exits through the front port. Once
again, the light would not have to travel through the encapsulant, so none of the
intensity would be reflected back into the sphere. Overall, this sample size issue
would likely over-estimate transmittance, since the intensity of light entering
directly from the LDLS would likely outweigh the portion directly exiting the
sphere.
Another possible source of error could be that the method used to fix the encap-
sulant samples to the sphere may have slightly blocked the front port. In this
case, light would be prevented from entering into the sphere, therefore under-
estimating the transmittance of the sample. However, as with the positioning of
the samples themselves relative to their size, care was taken to avoid this issues,
and the apparent accuracy of the results shows it.
32
==PAGE:44==
4
Scaling Factors
4.1
Motivation
With the over-arching goal of this project being to determine a way to relate the
spectral response of a given coloured PV module to that of the pigment used in
its encapsulant, it was determined that pursing a simpler correlation model to
find that relationship would be beneficial before moving on to a more complex
simulation-based method. If such a calculation worked, then it would save time
spent on constructing and validating a model with many input parameters to
verify. Therefore, in this section, a calculation method used to find "scaling factors"
will be explained.
The motivation for finding scaling factors is to ideally determine a wavelength-
independent scaling factor that could be applied to the measured near-normal
reflectance spectrum of a given colour swatch to find the near-normal reflectance
spectrum of a PV module constructed using an encapsulant with that pigment
in it. This, of course, is only viable if the new desired PV module is constructed
using a very similar encapsulant and PV cell, since those are the components most
responsible for determining reflectance. While that may seem like a significant
limitation, if this method were to work then it would allow module manufacturers
to make one "control" module with any desired construction and use it to determine
the scaling factor for that make-up.
For example, if a module were made from the exact same materials tested here
(2BB mono-Si solar cells, Petraglas, Lenzing Plastics TPO, UV-cutoff POE, and
a black backing sheet) where the TPO was colored with the Ambercup Orange
pigment, then the module’s scaling factor could be determined using the method
described below. Then, the colour swatch reflectance data of any other pigment
could be measured, the scaling factor could be applied to it, and the manufacturer
would know the reflectance spectra of the finished coloured PV module (within a
certain margin of error) without having to construct and measure an entirely new
module. If a universal scaling factor is not found, it may also be possible to group
the pigments by scaling factor, which would also be useful.
33
==PAGE:45==
4.2
Methodology
In order to begin this process, the most simple coloured mini-modules available
were considered: TerD-Sm, GrD-Sm, GrL-Sm, and Go-Sm. This was to provide a
proof-of-concept before moving on to systems that would have an assumed higher
degree of complexity. As justfied above, these calculations were done in batches
where all systems with the most similar construction were considered. Therefore,
the six other mini-modules with satinated glass are excluded initially, as well as
the smooth glass module whose encapsulant has a blend of two different colour-
providing pigments.
Furthermore, the TP-Sm module was excluded because
there were no colour-providing pigments in its encapsulant and it was used for
normalizing the other reflectance datasets later on.
Prior to properly beginning the calculations, the raw data obtained from the lab
measurements was smoothed using Excel’s built-in exponential smoothing option
and a damping factor of 0.6. The purpose of this was to attempt to eliminate any
noise and make important trends in the data clearer.
To provide an overview, a workflow diagram of the calculation method that will
be discussed can be seen in Fig. 18.
Figure 18: Flowchart of the calculation process to find scaling factors
The first step was to normalize the experimental reflectance data for each of the four
mini-modules previously mentioned and their corresponding colour swatches
(Ambercup Orange, Solar Gold, and Green Pearl). The mini-module data was
normalized against the TP-Sm module. For the colour swatches, the reference
was the Black Control, since the data used here was taken from the swatches
where the pigments were printed over the black background, not the white one. A
common method of normalization known as "min-max normalization" (Eqn. 19)
was utilized to attempt to bring all values between 0 and 1 by determining where
they lie relative to the minimum and maximum of the corresponding reference
material.
34
==PAGE:46==
R′
λ = Rλ −ymin
ymax −ymin
(19)
Where R′
λ is the newly normalized datapoint and Rλ is the original (smoothed)
reflectance at the wavelength in question, ymin is the absolute minimum reflectance
across all wavelengths for the control material, and ymax is the absolute maximum
for the control material across all wavelengths. For example, using Eqn. 19 to find
the normalized reflectance of the TerD-Sm mini-module at a wavelength of 381.20
nm yields the following equation and value.
R′
381.20 = 18.18% −16.33%
19.23% −16.33% = 0.638
(20)
This process can be repeated for all wavelengths of all samples for the mini-module
family (normalizing relative to TR-Sm) and the colour swatch family (normalizing
relative to the Black Control colour swatch), yielding values presented below in
the Results and Discussion section.
Next, the normalized value for the mini-module, R′
λ,MM, is then divided by the
normalized value for the corresponding colour swatch, R′
λ,CS. The resulting value
is the scaling factor (SFλ) by which R′
λ,CS must be multiplied by in order for it to
equal R′
λ,MM. Again, using the example of the TerD colour family, the calculation
at a wavelength of 381.20 nm is as follows.
SF381.20 =
R′
381.20,TerD−Sm
R′
381.20,Orange
= 0.638
0.608 = 1.049
(21)
As with the normalization calculation, this scaling factor formula in Eqn. 21 is
then repeated for the entire range of wavelengths. Once that has been done, the
scaling factors are reapplied at each wavelength to the normalized colour swatch
values and the normalization is reversed according to Eqn. 22.
zλ = R′
λ,CS ∗SFλ ∗

ymax −ymin

+ ymin
(22)
Where, instead of being the original reflectance datapoint at the relevant wave-
length, zλ is the reflectance (as a percentage) at that wavelength as determined by
applying the scaling factor to the normalized colour swatch reflectance. Important
35
==PAGE:47==
characteristics of the relationship between Rλ and zλ are shown below throughout
the Results and Discussion section.
4.3
Results and Discussion
As seen below in Figure 19, the Excel exponential smoothing method used on the
colour swatch reflectance data produced smoothed datasets that match in trend
and very nearly in value with their raw counterparts. With a higher damping
factor, the smoothed data would match less well, particularly through wavelength
spans where the raw data has a slope with a higher magnitude. The same tactic
was applied to the mini-module data, where it was equally successful.
Figure 19: Raw and smoothed reflectance data for the set of colour swatches
Now, while the min-max normalization method is designed to produce results
within the range of 0 to 1, that does not happen for all of the colour swatches or
mini-modules, as can be seen in Figures 20 and 21 below. This is because, at a cer-
tain wavelength, the sample being normalized may have a higher reflectance than
the maximum reflectance of the sample it is being normalized against. In many
instances with all colour swatches and the TerD-Sm and Go-Sm mini-modules, this
is the case. And similarly, the TerD-Sm mini-module exhibits negative normalized
36
==PAGE:48==
reflectance from about 430-500 nm because the raw reflectance at each datapoint
in that range is less than the absolute minimum raw reflectance of the reference
dataset (consider the numerator of Eqn. 19 and Fig. 15 from Sub-subsection 3.2.3).
This could be due to the fact that the absorption for that wavelength range for the
TerD encapsulant is greater than the maximum absorption of the TR encapsulant.
Figure 20: Normalized reflectance data for the set of colour swatches
Figure 21: Normalized reflectance data for the set of mini-modules
37
==PAGE:49==
Now, as explained previously, the normalized mini-module reflectance was di-
vided by the relevant normalized colour swatch reflectance at each wavelength to
yield a dataset of scaling factors for each pigment. A graph of the scaling factors
can be found below in Figure 22.
Figure 22: Graphical representation of the calculated scaling factors
Scaling factors closer to 1 indicate that the R′
λ,MM and R′
λ,CS are close in value,
whereas a smaller scaling factor implies that R′
λ,CS is higher than R′
λ,MM at that
wavelength. Since nearly all of the scaling factors are smaller than 1, it is clear
that, for the vast majority of wavelengths, the raw pigments have higher reflectance
than the mini-modules, which is sensible. Additionally, since most SFλ values are
close to zero, it can be stated that R′
λ,CS is considerably larger than R′
λ,MM for most
of the colour families at most wavelengths. This is also evident in Figs. 20 and 21.
From Figure 22 and from the equations used to derive it, it is clear that the factors
are wavelength-dependent. Though there are some bands of wavelengths where
the scaling factor stays relatively constant, the Gold, Light Green, and Dark Green
colour families all see meaningful change in SFλ around 380-450 nm, and the
Orange colour family continues changing beyond that—until roughly 540 nm.
The scaling factors in these ranges also demonstrate high uncertainty.
This is
particularly evident in the Gold and Orange color families, where the scaling factor
38
==PAGE:50==
graph is obviously erratic while the R′
λ,CS and R′
λ,MM graphs are not. However, for
the wavelengths where the normalized reflectances are higher, the trends become
much more confident. Considering Eqn. 21, these results are due to the fact that
slight changes in R′
λ,CS and R′
λ,MM when their values are close to zero will create
much more significant changes in the ratio of the two than if R′
λ,CS and R′
λ,MM
experience small changes while having higher values.
However, SFλ can be averaged over the wavelength range to create a single factor
(µSFλ) for each color family that is potentially wavelength independent and the
standard deviation (σSFλ) of each data set can be found, as seen in Table 4.
Colour Family
Orange
Gold
Light Green
Dark Green
µSFλ
0.060
0.418
0.131
0.089
σSFλ
0.482
0.097
0.084
0.079
V
7.988
0.233
0.640
0.891
Table 4: Scaling factor statistics
The σSFλ value gives some indication of how well the shape of the two R′
λ spectra
match each other. A very small σSFλ relative to µSFλ demonstrates that the SFλ
values are clustered more closely, which can only be the case if the ratio between
R′
λ,MM and R′
λ,CS is relatively constant. Analyzing the coefficient of variation (V) of
each color family, which is defined in accordance with Eqn. 23, makes this even
clearer.
V = σSFλ
µSFλ
(23)
Colour families with a higher cofficient of variation, such as Dark Green and
particularly Orange, have a large spread in their SFλ values. From a practical
standpoint, this indicates that the spectra of some pigments more than others
are affected by the additional materials present in the final mini-module stack.
The spectra of the Light Green and especially Gold pigments, as indicated by
V, are more similar in trend to the spectra of their corresponding mini-modules.
Color families with lower V could be said to be more wavelength independent,
while families with higher V are more wavelength dependent. Overall, however,
the lowest coefficient of variation (0.233 for the Gold family) is still too high for
applying µSFλ to the colour swatch spectrum to yield an accurate version of the
39
==PAGE:51==
mini-module spectrum.
The scaling factors for the measured samples do not
function well independent of wavelength.
Continuing with the wavelength-dependent factors, though, by using Eqn. 22
and comparing zλ to the original smoothed data, Rλ, results in the graph below
in Figure 23. Values for the average difference, µD, and the difference standard
deviation, σD, can be found in Table 5.
Figure 23: Original smoothed reflectance spectra compared with scaling factor
spectra
Colour Family
Orange
Gold
Light Green
Dark Green
µD [%]
0.164
0.695
0.049
0.052
σD [%]
0.087
0.441
0.026
0.025
Table 5: Statistics regarding the application of the scaling factors (units are
percentage points)
The difference between the two datasets at each wavelength was taken, then aver-
aged over all wavelengths to attain µD, and σD represents the standard deviation
of these differences for each colour family. None of the averages are above even
40
==PAGE:52==
three-quarters of a percentage point and all the standard deviations are within half
a percentage point, indicating that this method of finding the scaling factors does
work reasonably well.
Unsurprisingly, based on Figure 23, the Gold colour family had the largest average
difference at 0.695%, largely due to the deviations shown from a wavelength of
around 500 nm onwards. As a matter of fact, it seems that the difference between
zλ and Rλ increases as reflectance increases for each color family. Relative to the
other two samples, the GrD-Sm and GrL-Sm mini-modules each had a very low
µD, and it is clear from the graph that the scaling factor-calculated spectra match
very closely with the original spectra. Those two samples also remain at a lower
reflectance across all wavelengths, never rising above 19%. Meanwhile, the TerD-
Sm and Go-Sm spectra match at lower reflectances, but the deviations become
greater and greater above a reflectance of roughly 20%. One possible reason for
this could be due to the non-linearity of the relationship between the two reference
samples—TR-Sm and the Black Control colour swatch.
It may also be that this method is inaccurate for samples that possess a wide
range of reflectances over the visible light spectrum. The difference between the
minimum and maximum reflectance of both green, smooth-glass mini-modules is
smaller than that of the TerD-Sm sample and even more clearly smaller than that
of the Go-Sm sample.
Overall, it is likely only viable to determine scaling factors with this method for
samples that have relatively low reflectance and do not have extreme variation in
reflectance across the visible light spectrum. While an average difference of 0.695%
for the Go-Sm mini-module is still reasonable, it is not as low as for the other three
modules that were tested—all of which have lower maximum reflectance and a
lower difference between minimum and maximum reflectance across the visible
light spectrum. Additionally, based on the data presented in Figure 22 and Table
4, the samples cannot be grouped by scaling factor. This may still be possible, it
would just be necessary to create and measure more mini-modules with the same
construction and different colour-providing pigments to have a wider dataset and
provide a more conclusive result.
The scaling factors are wavelength-dependent and vary between colour families
such that one scaling factor cannot be applied to all colour families, nor can the
scaling factors necessarily be used to group colour families in a useful manner.
Due to this, a manufacturer would still need to construct a panel using the desired
coloured encapsulant, then measure the spectral response of the final sample and
41
==PAGE:53==
the pigment to determine the scaling factor. While this process would likely be
accurate for determining said factors, needing to construct the final module defeats
the purpose. The results from the method presented in this section strongly suggest
that it is necessary to progress to an optical simulation in order to properly address
the issue this project is attempting to solve.
42
==PAGE:54==
5
Ray Tracing Simulation
In this section, the second solution method will be described in detail. A short in-
troduction to the simulation tool—Ansys Zemax OpticStudio—will be provided,
and a detailed explanation of the simulation setup will be given. Included in this
setup description will be the results from determining the refractive indices of
the PV cell and the encapsulants, as mentioned earlier in Section 2.1.1. Further-
more, this section includes an overview of the functionality of the accompanying
MATLAB code that was used to run the simulations and extract data.
Finally, results from the discussion will be presented and discussed, including
spectra from simulating the PV cell on its own, each individual TPO encapsulant,
the mini-module front glass, and the full mini-modules themselves.
5.1
Motivation and Simulation Setup
Ansys Zemax OpticStudio (Zemax) is simulation software often used to design
and optimize optical systems. Investigating inside the software suite demonstrates
that it offers a wide range of functionalities for optics, including thermal analysis,
colorimetry, ray tracing, integration with CAD software, and automation of tasks
via ZOS-API.NET—an application programming interface that can access code
from other common software such as MATLAB or Mathematica.
Of all of Zemax’s capabilities, the most important to this project are ray tracing
and the program’s ability to integrate with MATLAB. Zemax offers sequential
and non-sequential ray tracing simulations, where sequential ray tracing forces
rays to interact with surfaces on a pre-defined path while non-sequential simula-
tions allow rays to reflect, transmit, or be absorbed by media in any order. The
non-sequential option gives a more realistic representation of the way light will
propagate through a system, as actual light rays are not necessarily confined to
a predetermined interaction sequence. Therefore, the non-sequential simulation
tool will be used here.
The fact that Zemax can also communicate with MATLAB is useful for addressing
one shortcoming of the software. In ray tracing simulations where data is desired
for a wide range of wavelengths, such as the use case for this project, it is important
to be able to simulate as many rays as desired. Unfortunately, Zemax only handles
24 rays at a time, likely due to a necessity to control complexity and computation
time. Using ZOS-API allows for wavelengths to be fed to Zemax in batches of 24
43
==PAGE:55==
automatically, providing data for as wide of a range as is desired. More precise
logistics of this will be discussed in Subsection 5.2.
Broadly speaking, the goal of the simulation is to reproduce the near-normal re-
flectance spectra seen in the laboratory data for the mini-modules. If the simulation
spectra closely match the experimentally-determined spectra, then it would be safe
to assume that data from the simulation for other modules of similar construction
would be reliable. Therefore, a manufacturer would not need to construct the
whole module to assess its appearance for near-normal incidence, but rather just
collect optical data on the materials and run a quick simulation. This would save
time, money, and materials.
To that end, the simulation for the mini-modules uses the following general con-
struction. An exploded view of the system from the program’s Non-Sequential
Component (NSC) Shaded Model function can be seen in Fig. 24 to better under-
stand the layout.
Figure 24: An exploded near-isometric view of a shaded model of a mini-module
in Zemax
44
==PAGE:56==
From left to right, the shapes visible in Fig. 24 are as follows.
• Detector Rectangle for reflectance (orange)
• Source Ellipse—one blue ray is used for the layout and can be seen propagat-
ing in the positive Z direction through all the materials before terminating
on the rear detector rectangle
• Glass layer
• TPO layer
• PV cell layer
• Detector Rectangle for transmittance (white)
When simulations are being run, the glass, TPO, and PV cell are back-to-back
as they would be in a real system, and the source ellipse is positioned 3 mm in
front of the glass layer. Meanwhile, the reflectance detector rectangle stands 6 mm
behind the source ellipse and the transmittance detector lies 0.1 mm behind the
back surface of the PV cell. The thicknesses of the glass, TPO, and PV cell all match
the dimensions of the real mini-modules, as detailed in Subsection 3.1.3.
Each layer of material is a cylindrical volume with a radius of 100 mm. This
dimension is not especially important, it just needs to be large enough such that
any ray segments with significant intensity undergoing internal reflections in the
material do not exit out the sides of the layer. Also, the detector rectangles are 100 x
100 mm squares. Once again, this is not of critical importance, they simply must be
large enough and close enough to the model such that reflected or transmitted rays
do not go past them. Since the incidence angle for all rays onto the glass layer is a
shallow 4◦and the detectors are placed very near the sample, the aforementioned
dimensions will suffice.
5.1.1
Definition of Material Properties
Prior to performing the ray tracing, however, the optical properties of the glass,
TPO, and PV cell must be defined. When the software suite is installed, it comes
with a pre-loaded catalogue of optical materials ranging from glasses to coatings
to some metals. The materials used in these simulations, however, do not exist in
the pre-loaded catalogue, so it is necessary to create them. When defining new
materials, Zemax takes input data for transmission and refractive indices.
45
==PAGE:57==
For transmittance, Zemax simply takes a maximum of 100 data points—of the
format wavelength [nm] - transmittance [decimal] - material thickness [mm]—
across any desired wavelength range and linearly interpolates between them if
the simulation covers wavelengths for which data is not explicitly given. For all
materials, the full 100 data points were used in the import data. When inputting
each material into the simulation itself, the thickness must be the same as the
material thickness defined for each point in the transmittance data otherwise the
data will be unreliable.
The transmittance of the PV cell is zero for all wavelengths in the visible range,
but the transmittance data for the TPOs had to be culled from the 480 data points
obtained in the measurement workflow down to 100. This was done by selecting
100 wavelengths evenly distributed between 380 nm and 750 nm at roughly 3.75
nm intervals. As an example, a comparison of the full spectrum of data against
the culled set for the TR TPO is presented below in Fig. 25.
Figure 25: A comparison of the original TR transmittance dataset with 480 data
points against the culled data set with only 100 data points
As seen above, the method chosen to manually select 100 data points from the
original data set yields a new data set whose trend closely follows that of the
original. The differences will undoubtedly be sources of error in the simulation
results, but based on how well the two curves fit together, the error attributed to
46
==PAGE:58==
this discrepancy will likely not be large.
Now, the dispersion characteristics for each material are defined by fitting the user-
provided refractive index data to one of the four following dispersion equations
[3].
• Schott:
n2 = a0 + a1λ2 + a2λ−2 + a3λ−4 + a4λ−6 + a5λ−8
(24)
• Sellmeier 1:
n2 −1 =
K1λ2
λ2 −L1
+
K2λ2
λ2 −L2
+
K3λ2
λ2 −L3
(25)
• Herzberger:
n = A + BL + CL2 + Dλ2 + Eλ4 + fλ6, where L =
1
λ2 −0.028
(26)
• Conrady:
n = n0 + A
λ + B
λ3.5
(27)
In all of the above, n is the refractive index at a certain wavelength, λ is the wave-
length in micrometers, and all other terms are coefficients that Zemax determines
upon being fed refractive index data. These equations have a minimum number
of input data points required in order to return a good fit (6-15 depending on
the formula), but that is no issue in this application. As previously mentioned,
the measurement and calculation procedure used to determine reflectance (and
therefore refractive indices) for the TPOs and PV cell used in the simulation gave
480 data points within the desired range of wavelengths.
When using the "Glass Fitting" function to fit refractive index data to one of the
four dispersion formulae, Zemax provides a diagnostic summary of the fit process
after it is performed. In order to determine which dispersion formula would be
used to model the TPO samples, the root mean square (RMS) error and maximum
error were taken from the summaries for each formula when importing the TR
TPO data and compared below in Table 6.
47
==PAGE:59==
Formula
RMS Error
Maximum Error
Schott
0.010806
0.058884
Sellmeier 1
0.004131
0.011780
Herzberger
0.012741
0.091386
Conrady
0.029666
0.231590
Table 6: RMS error and maximum error for all four formulae
The RMS error denotes the root mean square fit error between refractive indices
generated by the equation once coefficients have been determined and the original
user-provided data. The maximum error represents the largest difference between
the Zemax-calculated refractive indices and the input data [3]. Since the Sellmeier
1 formula exhibited the lowest RMS and maximum errors, that was the formula
used when implementing all TPO refractive index data. When defining the PV
cell, the Schott formula was used.
For the glass in the simulation, Pilkington Optiwhite, a low-iron extra clear float
glass, was chosen due to its very high transmission and low reflectance [19]. These
are a common characteristics of front glass on PV modules, since for the purpose of
generating as much power as possible, it is desirable that as much of the incident
light as possible reaches the PV cells.
The refractive index and transmittance
data for the glass came from research accessed via refractiveindex.info [25]. The
transmittance data was put through the same workflow as the TPO samples for
selecting 100 wavelengths. For the refractive index data, the same RMS error and
maximum error assessment was done, and it was found that the Schott formula
provided the best fit.
In summary, the materials used in the simulations for this project were not already
defined in Zemax. In order to define them, the software requires transmission
data and refractive index data. The experimental transmittance data discussed
earlier was used to define the transmission characteristics of each material, and
the experimental reflectance data was used to calculate refractive indices for each
material, which were then imported into Zemax as well. For more explicit results
regarding the refractive index calculations, see the following subsection.
5.1.2
Determining Refractive Indices
A Python script was created to iteratively solve the equation for the TPO refractive
indices accounting for two internal reflections presented in Sub-subsection 2.1.1.
48
==PAGE:60==
The code used the reflectance data from the light trap method, as that was deemed
the more reliable of the two strategies.
The program begins with an initial guess of n2,ir = 1.5, where "ir" stands for
"internal reflections". Then, using nair = 1, it calculates the reflectance at each
wavelength (Rnew) before comparing the newly calculated reflectance with the
expected value from the unfiltered experimental data (Rexp). The minimize function
from the SciPy library is then called to find the value of nTPO that yields the smallest
difference between Rnew and Rexp while keeping the value of nTPO between 1 and
3. When the final value is found, it was stored, and the program moved on to the
next wavelength.
TPO refractive indices were also calculated without considering internal reflec-
tions, by rearranging Eqn. 11 from Sub-subsection 2.1.1 to solve for n2, where
n1 = nair.
R12 =

n1 −n2
n1 + n2

2
→n2 =
nair

−
√
R −1

√
R −1
(28)
Figure 26: Refractive indices from the internal reflections method and the
method without internal reflections for the TR TPO
Of course, the solution to Eqn. 28 will change depending on whether the negative
49
==PAGE:61==
or positive root of the reflectance. However, taking the positive solution yields
refractive indices under 1, while the negative root solution gives results much
closer to the expected range.
A comparison of n2,ir and the negative root n2
solution from Eqn. 28 for the TR TPO can be seen above in Fig. 26.
The n2,ir solutions are within the expected range of 1.5-1.6 for the majority of
the wavelengths.
Meanwhile, the n2 solutions are above the expected range,
suggesting that the method of accounting for the first two internal reflections in
the TPO is more accurate than not accounting for any internal reflections at all.
The higher refractive indices in the wavelength range of 380-450 nm are a result
of the higher reflectance in that band, which is previously discussed.
This Python method was used for all other TPOs as well, and a graph of the results
is presented in Fig. 27.
Figure 27: Refractive indices of all TPOs, accounting for the first two internal
reflections
The trends in the refractive index plot for each TPO match those in the reflectance
plots, which should be the case since refractive indices are closely dependent on
reflectance. Across all TPO samples, the lower bound is around 1.55 for TerD,
while the highest refractive index lies around 2.55 with the Go sample. There are
seemingly anomalous slight peaks at around 480 nm and 520 nm, as well, but these
are just a result of the filtering process and should not seriously impact simulation
50
==PAGE:62==
results. Similarly, each dataset demonstrates a slight turn upward toward the end
of the wavelength range, but this is a boundary artifact from the filtering and also
should not acutely impact the simulation [20].
Having a refractive index higher than 1.5-1.6 results in a larger reflectance at the
glass-TPO boundary, with refractive indices further from 1.5-1.6 resulting in higher
and higher reflectances. Since the apparent colour from each module depends on
the wavelengths of light that are reflected by the TPO, where the pigments are
mixed in, it is perfectly sensible that the TPOs have higher refractive indices at the
wavelengths corresponding to their apparent colours.
The refractive indices for the PV cell were determined using Eqn. 28. In actuality,
the system is comprised of two layers—an ARC on top of the cell itself—and could
therefore likely be represented more accurately using an equation accounting for
the layers. However, using the aforementioned equation should provide a rea-
sonable approximation regardless. Refractive indices for the PV cell are presented
below in Fig. 28.
Figure 28: Refractive indices for the PV cell
Once determined, the refractive indices for the TPOs and the PV cell can be
imported into the Zemax Materials Catalogue for use in the simulations.
51
==PAGE:63==
5.2
MATLAB Data Extraction and Processing
The purpose of the MATLAB code is two-fold—first of all, to feed the Zemax
simulation batches of 24 rays at different wavelengths and second of all, to extract
results for the direction and intensity of each ray segment once the rays have been
traced.
The code defines 120 evenly-distributed wavelengths between 380 nm and 750
nm, then takes the first group of 24 wavelengths and defines rays with an intensity
of 1 originating at the Source Ellipse in the simulation and propagating in a direc-
tion dependent on the angle of incidence (AOI). For these near-normal incidence
simulations, AOI was set equal to 4◦, since that was the angle of incidence in the
laboratory setup. The rays propagate nearly along the Z axis, but slightly offset in
the y-direction by sin (AOI) and in the Z-direction by cos (AOI).
In accordance with natural light having its power relatively evenly split between
two polarizations, the MATLAB script forces Zemax to simulate each batch of 24
wavelengths twice—once with rays that have their electric field oriented along the
x-axis, and once more for rays that have their electric fields oriented along the y-
and z-axes as required by the AOI.
The rays are allowed by the code to split at each interface into reflected and
refracted segments, with a maximum of 100 segments per ray. Zemax keeps track
of which ray segments hit which surface with what intensity and the MATLAB
script draws this information out of the simulation, specifically noting which ray
segments hit the Detector Rectangles for reflections and transmissions. There are
5 batches of 24 wavelengths, each with two polarization states, resulting in a total
of 240 rays being simulated for each sample.
To calculate the final reflectance, the data points for both polarizations of the ray
segments that hit the reflection Detector Rectangle are summed and divided by
two at each wavelength, in accordance with Eqn. 7 from Subsection 2.1. The same
process is used to calculate the transmittance at each wavelength, just using the
intensity of the segments that hit the transmission Detector Rectangle instead.
5.3
Results and Discussion
Pilkington Optiwhite
To validate the code and Zemax settings, a simpler system with only one cylindrical
52
==PAGE:64==
volume of Pilkington Optiwhite glass was used, since this is a material with well-
documented properties. For this simulation and all subsequent simulations of
one layer, the reflection and transmission detectors were kept 0.6 mm in front of
and 0.2 mm behind the sample, respectively. Graphs comparing results from the
simulation to known values are depicted in Fig. 29.
Figure 29: Zemax simulation results for Pilkington Optiwhite reflectance (left)
and transmittance (right) compared with existing data
Both the reflectance and transmittance spectra are close to established values, with
the reflectance spectrum having a particularly close fit. This is expected, since as
many datapoints as possible were provided to Zemax when defining Pilkington
Optiwhite.
For the transmittance, the trend is the exact same between the two datasets, though
the values are consistently around 4% lower for the simulated results. Considering
that reflectance matches as well as it does, these results imply that Zemax may at-
tribute more absorption to the material than is realistic. The discrepancy may also
be attributed to detector placement, as Zemax seems extremely particular about
where detectors are located. By experience through the whole simulation process,
it was found that reflectance and transmittance can differ by a few percent each
when detectors are moved even just 0.1 mm. In any case, the simulated results
for both reflectance and transmittance agree quite well with established values,
suggesting that the MATLAB code and simulation settings function properly.
53
==PAGE:65==
PV Cell
Prior to simulating the complete mini-modules, each TPO and the PV cell were
simulated alone in a similar setup the one for Pilkington Optiwhite. Figure 30
below shows reflectance results for this process for the PV cell.
Figure 30: Simulated PV cell reflectance plotted against experimental data shown
previously
As with the glass before it, the PV cell simulated reflectance matches extremely
well with the reflectance of the experimental data. This further indicates the reli-
ability of the MATLAB code and simulation settings and can be attributed to the
same as before—refractive indices for as many wavelengths as possible were fed
to Zemax when defining the PV cell. Note, again, that the transmittance of the cell
is zero for all wavelengths in the visible range.
Encapsulants
Now, Figures 31 and 32 document a comparison between laboratory results and
simulation results for both reflectance and transmittance of the TPOs.
For the results in Fig. 31, the reflectance of each TPO in the simulation is generally
slightly lower than that of the laboratory measurements. Furthermore, the trends
in the lab data are suppressed in the Zemax results, where graphs often miss
inflection points between increasing and decreasing reflectance. For example, the
Go lab data has inflection points around 400 and 610 nm, whereas the simulated
Go exhibits reflectance that only increases over the whole wavelength range.
54
==PAGE:66==
Figure 31: A comparison of laboratory (left) and simulation (right) results for
reflectance of all TPOs
Figure 32: A comparison of laboratory (left) and simulation (right) results for
transmittance of all TPOs
The first point of contention above may be cause by the fact that the simulation
uses 4◦AOI when casting rays from the Source Ellipse and the laboratory data
was taken at the same AOI, but the refractive index data used to define each TPO
is predicated on a calculation at normal incidence. This simplification results in
lower refractive indices, which brings the values closer to 1, ultimately yielding
lower reflectance. Because the actual angle of incidence was not very far from
normal, however, the error is not very large.
The second point could be due to the dispersion formula used to model each
TPO. Though the Sellmeier 1 dispersion formula gave the lowest RMS error and
55
==PAGE:67==
maximum error for the TR sample, it may not be the case that it does so for the
other five TPOs. Higher polynomial equations, such as the Herzberger formula,
would likely provide better representations of the TPOs that have more complex
reflectance spectra, like Go, GrL, and BrRe.
Regarding the transmittance comparison in Fig. 32, it can be said that the simu-
lation results over-estimate the transmittance of the Go, BrRe, and TerD encapsu-
lants. However, the TR, GrL, and GrD results match reasonably well between the
lab and simulation graphs.
One potential reason for any small discrepancies is likely due to the fact that,
as previously discussed, Zemax only accepts transmittance data for 100 distinct
wavelengths and linearly interpolates between the two nearest points for the rest
of the data.
Despite the apparent success of selecting 100 evenly distributed
wavelengths in Fig. 25, it may be beneficial to prioritize selecting wavelengths for
which the transmittance has a high slope. So, the resulting data set would have
clustered data in wavelength bands that show slopes with higher magnitudes, and
fewer data points for ranges where the slope is more stable. This would likely
result in a more accurate representation of the lab data trends in the simulation
results.
The TPOs that have higher transmittance than they should in the simulation are
also those whose reflectance data deviates most from the lab results. This is likely
again due to the dispersion equation issues with the reflectance results. Zemax
uses the Fresnel Equations to determine reflected and refracted ray directions and
intensities at each boundary and these equations, in turn, heavily rely on refrac-
tive indices. If the provided data refractive index data is not accurate, neither the
transmittance nor the reflectance will be perfectly correct.
Mini-modules
However, the TR TPO simulation results matched quite well with the labora-
tory data, so the TR-Sm mini-module was simulated in an attempt to provide a
proof-of-concept. Results comparing the simulated reflectance to the experimental
reflectance are shown in Fig. 33
While the transmittance (not pictured) does remain zero when simulating the
whole TR-Sm mini-module, the simulated reflectance not only differs from the
experimental results by about an order of magnitude for lower wavelengths, but it
begins to oscillate with greater and greater amplitude as the wavelength increases.
56
==PAGE:68==
Figure 33: TR-Sm simulated and experimental reflectance spectra
This simulation was run using the same MATLAB code as previously, and the
same Zemax simulation file, only with the glass and PV cell layers included as
defined in Subsection 5.1. Considering the accuracy of the simulated results for
the components of the mini-module, the Zemax output ought not to differ by such
a considerable margin in both trend and value. The exact source of this problem
is as yet unknown, but it is likely not an issue with the materials as they are
defined in the Materials Catalogue nor the MATLAB code—it is probably caused
by some deeper simulation setting in Zemax. If the issue were resolved and the
simulated spectrum were found to match the experimental spectrum for the TR-Sm
mini-module, then it would be worthwhile to simulate the other mini-modules,
including those with satinated glass.
Overall, for simulating each component of the mini-modules, Ansys Zemax Op-
ticStudio offers promising results. If the unknown issue with the optical stack
were resolved and the TPO results were improved as discussed above, it is highly
likely that the simulation could be used to accurately reproduce the near-normal
reflectance spectra of the mini-modules. This would provide a reliable tool for
manufacturers to use when aiming to see the near-normal optical response of their
full modules without physically constructing them. Furthermore, the simulation
method could be expanded to include more angles of incidence by adjusting the
MATLAB script. Doing so would enable a user to see the reflectance spectrum of
a simulated mini-module for a wide range of incidence angles, thus giving a more
comprehensive understanding of the optical response of the module.
57
==PAGE:69==
6
Conclusion
6.1
Recommendations for Future Research
Upon looking at a PV module, it is apparent that the appearance changes depend-
ing on the viewing angle due to the iridescence of the system. Because of this, when
scientifically assessing the optical response of PV modules and their constituent
materials, it is very valuable to consider cases where the angle of incidence varies
as widely as possible. In order to keep the workload manageable, this project only
considered appearance for the near-normal incidence angle of 4◦, but, to obtain
a comprehensive relationship between the optical response of the pigments and
the full modules, future research ought to incorporate a range of larger angles
of incidence. This can be accomplished by assessing the bidirectional reflectance
distribution function (BRDF) of each sample with an appropriate measurement
setup, and by varying the projection angle of the source ellipse in Zemax.
While the Zemax simulation offers very promising results for each individual
component of the final PV module stack, it remains necessary to resolve the issue
preventing Zemax from simulating the full module. Judging from the accurate
results for each material, whatever the issue is, it ought to be eminently solv-
able and reliable results should be obtainable from the Zemax tool. Furthermore,
any research carrying on with this approach should investigate the proposal pre-
sented in Subsection 5.3 to fix the Zemax representation of some of the coloured
encapsulants by adjusting the dispersion formulas when importing their data.
If the Zemax simulations do provide an accurate representation of the final module
appearance, it is still necessary to go one step further in relating those results to
the raw pigments. To set the simulation up, it is still necessary to manufacture
the encapsulants and acquire their reflectance and transmittance spectra. Ideally,
one would be able to measure the pigments themselves, correlate that to their
appearance in the encapsulants depending on the type of encapsulant and the
concentration of the pigment, input this data into Zemax, and simulate the final
module. This is not possible, though, without further research into the relationship
between the pigments and the raw encapsulants, which would be necessary to
truly solve this problem.
This project considered smooth and satinated glass, but due to the shortcomings
of each solution method on the simpler smooth glass systems, the satinated glass
modules were not properly investigated. Considering the fact that many other
58
==PAGE:70==
types of glass can be used in PV modules, another enriching avenue of research
would be to incorporate different glasses into the simulation tool and assess their
impact on these systems with effect pigments mixed into their encapsulants. The
reliable data collected here for the satinated glass mini-modules could provide a
starting point for such research.
6.2
Conclusion
The overarching aim of this thesis was to correlate the optical properties of struc-
tural colour pigments to the final appearance of PV modules that incorporate these
pigments in their encapsulants. Two different approaches were pursued in an at-
tempt to address this—a simpler correlation model based on calculating scaling
factors to be applied to the reflectance spectra of each raw pigment, and a more
complex computerized simulation model of the full PV modules.
Prior to engaging with either solution method, near-normal angle of incidence
reflectance and transmittance data was taken for a number of relevant materi-
als. For reflectance, the most important measured materials were the pigments
themselves, which had been printed on small "colour swatches", the encapsulants
into which these pigments were mixed, and the final mini-modules that were con-
structed using the pigmented encapsulants. Meanwhile, transmittance data was
taken only for the encapsulants, as the other samples were ultimately opaque.
The first solution method attempted to find wavelength-independent scaling fac-
tors for the reflectance spectra of the pigments that could be used to predict the
reflectance spectra of the final PV modules. While scaling factors were successfully
calculated, they were shown to be wavelength-dependent and specific to each of
the colour families for which they were determined. The wavelength dependent
scaling factors could be used to provide a reasonable prediction of the reflectance
of the final modules, but since they were not able to be generalized, needing to
construct the final module to determine the scaling factors for each colour family
defeats the purpose.
The second solution method sought to use the experimental data to model each
individual component of the final PV module—the PV cell, the encapsulant, and
the front glass—before combining each part into a simulation of the whole. Us-
ing the experimental reflectance data on encapsulants and a PV cell of the type
used in the complete modules, refractive indices were determined for these mate-
rials, while the front glass indices were found in a database. Combined with the
59
==PAGE:71==
transmittance data taken experimentally (or again located in a database), these re-
fractive indices were used to define and simulate each material on its own in Ansys
Zemax OpticStudio. The reflectance and transmittance of each material matched
the experimental results, with room for minor improvement. But, combining the
layers to simulate the final PV stack resulted in an anomalous error which should
be fixable with further investigation.
Despite the fact that neither solution method was as successful as desired, the
simulation tool in particular still proved very promising and therefore warrants
more investigation. Furthermore, additional research that incorporates a wider
variety of incidence angles would certainly be beneficial in order to provide a more
comprehensive representation of the relationship between the optical properties
of the pigments and those of the final PV modules.
60
==PAGE:72==
References
[1]
Nuruddeen Abdullahi, Chitta Saha, and Robert Jinks. “Modelling and per-
formance analysis of a silicon PV module”. In: Journal of Renewable and Sus-
tainable Energy 9.3 (May 2017), p. 033501. issn: 1941-7012. doi: 10.1063/1.
4982744. eprint: https://pubs.aip.org/aip/jrse/article-pdf/doi/
10.1063/1.4982744/14010579/033501\_1\_online.pdf. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1063/1.4982744.
[2]
Baloji Adothu et al. “Newly developed thermoplastic polyolefin encapsu-
lant–A potential candidate for crystalline silicon photovoltaic modules en-
capsulation”. In: Solar Energy 194 (2019), pp. 581–588. issn: 0038-092X. doi:
https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . solener . 2019 . 11 . 018. url: https :
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0038092X19311089.
[3]
Ansys, Inc. Ansys Zemax OpticStudio 2023 R1 User Manual. Version R1. https:
//www.zemax.com. 2023.
[4]
D.E. Aspnes and A. Studna. “Dielectric functions and optical parameters of
Si, Ge, GaP, GaAs, GaSb, InP, InAs, and InSb from 1.5 to 6.0 eV”. In: Phys. Rev.
B 27 (Jan. 1983). Accessed via refractiveindex.info. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.
27.985.
[5]
ASTM International. Paint and Coating Testing Manual: 15th. Edition of the
Gardner-Sward Handbook. Ed. by Joseph V. Koleske. Version 15th. Ed. https:
//www.astm.org/mnl17-2nd-eb.html. 2012.
[6]
Markus Babin et al. “Dependency of IAM Losses in Colored BIPV Products
on the Refractive Index of Colorants”. English. In: 38th European Photovoltaic
Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition (2022), pp. 583–588. doi: 10.4229/
EUPVSEC20212021-4BO.4.2.
[7]
Jay D. Bass and Donald J. Weidner. “Method for measuring the refractive
index of transparent solids”. In: Review of Scientific Instruments 55.10 (Oct.
1984), pp. 1569–1573. doi: 10.1063/1.1137611.
[8]
Piotr Bórawski et al. Development of renewable energy market in the EU with
particular regard to solar energy. 2019. url: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:199742495.
61
==PAGE:73==
[9]
Han-Hsiang Cheng and Xiaochaoran Tian. “An advanced ray-tracing model
for multi-color holographic optical elements”. In: Holography, Diffractive Op-
tics, and Applications IX. Ed. by Yunlong Sheng, Changhe Zhou, and Liangcai
Cao. Vol. 11188. International Society for Optics and Photonics. SPIE, 2019,
p. 1118817. doi: 10.1117/12.2537762. url: https://doi.org/10.1117/12.
2537762.
[10]
Encyclopaedia Britannica. The Psychology of Colour. Accessed: 2024-07-28.
2024. url: https://www.britannica.com/science/color/The-psychology-
of-colour.
[11]
Neal Gallagher. “Savitzky-Golay Smoothing and Differentiation Filter”. In:
(Jan. 2020). doi: 10.13140/RG.2.2.20339.50725.
[12]
Ça˘gla Giri¸sken et al. “Development and performance evaluation of cool
black surface on thermoplastic polyolefins via incorporation of non-near
infrared absorptive pigments”. In: Journal of Applied Polymer Science 139.44
(2022), e53078. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/app.53078. eprint: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/app.53078. url: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/app.53078.
[13]
Eugene Hecht. Optics. 5th. Boston: Pearson, 2023.
[14]
International Energy Agency. COLOURED BIPV Market, Research and De-
velopment. Technical Report IEA-PVPS T15-07. Paris, France: International
Energy Agency, 2019. url: https://www.iea-pvps.org/.
[15]
International Energy Agency. World Energy Outlook 2023. Available at https:
//www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2023. Paris, France:
International Energy Agency, 2023.
[16]
Durgesh Kumar et al. “A simplified simulation model of silicon photovoltaic
modules for performance evaluation at different operating conditions”. In:
Optik 204 (2020), p. 164228. issn: 0030-4026. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijleo.2020.164228. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0030402620300620.
[17]
Merck Group. Effect Pigments. Accessed: 2024-07-21. 2024. url: https://
www.merckgroup.com/en/expertise/effect-pigments.html.
[18]
Our Campus - Copenhagen International School. Accessed: 2024-07-02. url:
https://www.copenhageninternational.school/about/our-campus/.
62
==PAGE:74==
[19]
Pilkington. Pilkington Optiwhite. Accessed: 2024-07-21. 2024. url: https :
//www.pilkington.com/en/us/products/product-categories/special-
applications/pilkington-optiwhite.
[20]
Michael Schmid, David Rath, and Ulrike Diebold. “Why and How Saitzky-
Golay Filters Should Be Replaced”. In: ACS Measurement Science Au 2.2
(2022), pp. 185–196. doi: 10.1021/acsmeasuresciau.1c00054. url: https:
//pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsmeasuresciau.1c00054.
[21]
Atif Shamim et al. “A facile approach to determine the unknown refractive
index (n) and extinction coefficient (k) of novel encapsulant materials used
in back contact PV modules”. In: Applied Physics A 124.542 (2018). doi: 10.
1007/s00339-018-1974-x. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00339-018-
1974-x.
[22]
Shyam Singh. “Refractive Index Measurement and its Applications”. In:
Physica Scripta 65 (Feb. 2006), p. 167. doi: 10.1238/Physica.Regular.
065a00167.
[23]
Alan Tirpak and Dr. Richard Young. Accurate Transmission Measurements of
Translucent Materials. Accessed: 2024-07-19. Nov. 2008. url: https://www.
photonics.com/Articles/Accurate_Transmission_Measurements_of_
Translucent/a32297.
[24]
G.N. Tiwari, R.K. Mishra, and S.C. Solanki. “Photovoltaic modules and
their applications: A review on thermal modelling”. In: Applied Energy 88.7
(2011), pp. 2287–2304. issn: 0306-2619. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2011.01.005. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0306261911000080.
[25]
Robert Edward Treharne. “RF Magnetron Sputtering of Transparent Con-
ducting Oxides and CdTe/CdS Solar Cells”. Doctoral thesis. Durham Uni-
versity, 2011. url: http://etheses.dur.ac.uk/3310/.
[26]
A. Virtuani, D. Strepparava, and G. Friesen. “A simple approach to model the
performance of photovoltaic solar modules in operation”. In: Solar Energy
120 (2015), pp. 439–449. issn: 0038-092X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
solener.2015.07.045. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0038092X15004168.
[27]
Xiudong Wei et al. “Ray tracing and simulation for the beam-down solar
concentrator”. In: Renewable Energy 50 (2013), pp. 161–167. issn: 0960-1481.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2012.06.029. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960148112003801.
63
==PAGE:75==
Appendix
Figure A.1: Reflectance spectrum of the bare black backsheet
Figure A.2: Refractive indices of the bare black backsheet calculated from
experimental reflectance data
Figure A.1 shows the raw reflectance (Rλ,bs) spectrum of the bare backsheet, which
was important in the backsheet method of the encapsulant reflectance measuring
process. These values were calculated using ϕbs and Eqn. 16 from Sub-subsection
3.2.2. Additionally, Figure A.2 shows the raw refractive indices (nbs) of the same
64
==PAGE:76==
bare black backsheet, which were calculated from the reflectance spectrum using
the rearranged version of Eqn. 6 seen as Eqn. 17 in Sub-subection 3.2.3.
Meanwhile, Figure A.3 shows the reflectance spectrum of the Black Control colour
swatch, which was used in Subsection 4.2 to normalize the other colour swatch
measurements. Note that this reflectance was calculated using an unadulterated
Eqn. 14.
Figure A.3: Reflectance spectrum of the Black Control colour swatch
65
