==PAGE:1==
Technical University
of Denmark
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal
Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus
Recovery
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
Master thesis
Authored by:
Marta Gamón Ramón ­ s236923
Supervised by:
Lisbeth M. Ottosen
Huilin Li
July, 2024
==PAGE:2==
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after
Phosphorus Recovery
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Marta Gamón Ramón
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Brovej,
Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://sustain.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Foreword
This project has been prepared over five months (30 ECTS points) at the Department of
Environmental and Resource Engineering in DTU Sustain, at the Technical University of
Denmark for the Master in Industrial Engineer and Management.
This master thesis is part of the project: ”Towards sustainable waste management and cir­
cular construction: Eco­friendly bricks derived from municipal sewage sludge after phos­
phorus recovery”. The project has been carried out in three differentiated parts: One
related to the electrodialysis experiment, comparing the sludge from two different waste
treatment plants and changing some parameters (Mireia Brisa, 2024). The second one,
the analysis of the pellets from Avedore WTTP (Sundas Mahmood, 2024). And the third,
the current paper, the development of bricks from sewage sludge before and after phos­
phorus recovery.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the treated areas.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Lisbeth M. Ottosen and Huilin Li, my supervisor and co­supervisor
during the realization of this thesis at Technincal University of Denmark(DTU), for giving
me the opportunity of working on this investigation and for their guidance provided during
the development of the project. Also, I would like to thank Ebba Cederberg Schnell for the
way she patiently taught us how to carry out all the experiments and Emilia Anna Worck
Topp for always being there to solve any doubt in the laboratory and conducting the ICP
experiments.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This master thesis falls within the framework of the project: ”Towards sustainable waste
management and circular construction: Eco­friendly bricks derived from municipal sewage
sludge after phosphorus recovery”, where three different projects have been developed.
This document discusses the possibility of the development of bricks from sewage sludge
before and after phosphorus recovery. The work on some characterization experiments
has been done as a team as there were useful data for all three projects, as well as
collaboration with Mireia Brisa to obtain the EDS­treated SS.
During the development of the project, different experiments have been carried out to try to
reach a screening of the possibility of using sewage sludge bricks as a substitute for clay
in certain construction materials. Different percentages of clay replacement have been
tested (10% and 30%) using the SS collected from Lynetten’s WWTP in Copenhaguen,
as well as different firing temperatures (1020ºC, 1030ºC and 1040ºC). Moreover, pellets
before and after phosphorus recovery have been compared, to know whether both can
be considered for construction materials from this initial approach.
For this analysis different experiments have been carried out, such as, digestion, water
content, leaching, porosity and density calculations, microscope analysis, among others.
With the analysis and comparison of the results, it could be said that the results obtained
are a good starting point for the use of SS as a partial substitute for the limited resource of
clay for building materials, as they respect the standards and regulations existing to date.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
iv
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
WWTP ­ Wastewater treatment plant
SS ­ Sewage sludge
EDS ­ Electrodialytic separation
EDS­SS ­ Sewage sludge treated by electrodialytical separation
SSA ­ Sewage sludge ash
EDS­SSA ­ Sewage sludge ash treated by electrodialytical separation
DS ­ Dry solids
P ­ Phosphorus
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical Framework
3
2.1
Construction materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Wastewater treatment plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Sewage sludge studies and possible applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Heavy metals in sewage sludge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Methodology
8
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Characterization of sludge and clay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Production of bricks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4
Characterization on pellets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.5
Electrodialytical process for phosphorus recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Results
24
4.1
Characterization of sludge and clay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2
Production of SS pellets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3
Characterization on pellets with SS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.4
Production of EDS­treated SS pellets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.5
Characterization on EDS­treated pellets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.6
Comparison of SS and EDS­SS pellets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
5
Discussion
60
6
Conclusions
62
A Appendix
66
A.1 Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
A.2 Characterization of sludge and clay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
A.3 Electrodialysis experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
A.4 Production of bricks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
A.5 Characterization on pellets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
A.6 Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
In the current context of the search for sustainable solutions to environmental challenges,
the transition to a circular economy is an imperative. The efficient management of lim­
ited resources and the reuse of waste in innovative ways become crucial to ensure the
long­term viability of our environmental system. In this context, the present project is
framed within the vision of a circular construction, where it seeks to transform a com­
mon by­product of wastewater treatment, sewage sludge, into a valuable and sustainable
resource for the building sector.
The adoption of new materials in the construction sector is not without its challenges.
Rigorous evaluations of their performance, safety, and cost­effectiveness are necessary.
Additionally, the industry must adapt to new techniques and construction processes that
incorporate these materials. Collaboration among researchers, architects, and builders is
essential to overcome these obstacles and accelerate the transition to more sustainable
construction.
The innovative approach of this project lies in the transformation of sewage sludge into
raw material to produce bricks, an essential material in construction. The project not only
seeks to solve the waste management problem, but also contributes to the mitigation of
natural resource extraction and promotes more sustainable practices in the construction
industry. Moreover, sewage sludge can be a resource for the phosphorus extraction, being
an essential and limited resource. Using electrodialytic separation, P can be recovered,
as well as heavy metal separation. This investigation will explore the development of
bricks from Lynetten’s WWTP SS before and after phosphorus recovery, assessing their
technical feasibility. The figure 1.1 shows the diagram of the process followed during the
overall project.
Figure 1.1: Flow diagram of the project, obtained from DTU Sustain
The management of wastewater treatment by­products, such as sewage sludge, poses
significant challenges in terms of environmental impact, sustainability, and resource man­
agement. By transforming this by­product into a viable building material, it aims to mitigate
the environmental impacts associated with its conventional disposal, while reducing the
demand for natural resources and promoting a circular construction. This study will have
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
1
==PAGE:9==
to consider the possible technical challenges to be faced, as well as the different regula­
tions and standards in the use of waste.
The aim of this investigation is to, in a first approach, analyze the properties of the bricks
and the significant differences by replacing different percentages of clay by sewage sludge,
0%, 10% and 30% of clay substitution, and the influence of different firing temperatures:
1020ºC, 1030ºC and 1040ºC. A second approach of the study is a comparison between
the SS pellets and the EDS­treated SS pellets, as a material of clay substitution. The
initial sample will need to be characterized in water content, carbonate, ignition loss, as
well as heavy metals content, between other experiments.
The pellet production will carry out two phases, one using the raw sewage sludge, chang­
ing the amounts of clay substitution and firing temperatures, and the other one, with the
sewage sludge after phosphorus recovery. Different parameters will be measured and an­
alyzed, in order to attempt a possible composition of the brick, such as porosity or density.
With the results obtained experimentally in the laboratory and the research throughout the
project, it will be possible to analyze the influence of the different characteristics and the
different measurements. In this way it will be easier to determine which parameters are
significant in the brick making process and which are not important to be considered.
The expected outcome of this project is the screening of an innovative and sustainable
process to produce bricks from sewage sludge, with the best possible characteristics for
construction, meeting constraints and with an emphasis on phosphorus recovery. The
project will provide knowledge of resource recovery and brick production, as well as prac­
tical skills in the application and operation of process technologies and sample charac­
terization, including the ability to perform detailed analysis of the physical, chemical, and
structural properties of the materials obtained. Training in experimental design, analysis
of experimental data and interpretation of results will also be extended. The envisaged
objective is to contribute to moving towards a more circular and sustainable construction,
while addressing environmental challenges and fostering innovation in resource manage­
ment.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
2
==PAGE:10==
2
Theoretical Framework
In this chapter, the research conducted on pollution in the construction sector is pre­
sented, along with a brief summary of the wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) from
which the samples for the experiment were obtained. Additionally, existing studies on
sewage sludge and its potential uses have been reviewed, as well as the importance of
monitoring the presence of heavy metals.
2.1
Construction materials
The construction sector is one of the largest consumers of natural resources and a major
contributor to environmental pollution. From the extraction of raw materials to the produc­
tion and transportation of construction materials, every stage of the process significantly
impacts the environment. The extraction of resources such as sand, gravel, and stone can
lead to landscape degradation, loss of biodiversity, and water body contamination. Ad­
ditionally, the production of construction materials like cement and steel generates large
amounts of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, a greenhouse gas that contributes to climate
change.
To illustrate this with some data, the 2023 report from the International Energy Agency
(IEA) states that ”the operations of buildings account for 30% of global final energy con­
sumption and 26% of global energy­related emissions, with 8% being direct emissions
in buildings” [2]. At the UN Climate Change Conference (COP27), it was concluded that
the buildings and construction sector ”was responsible for around 37% of energy and
process­related CO2 emissions in 2021” [23]. An article by the UN further indicates that
in 2022, the materials used in building construction accounted for approximately 9% of
total CO2 emissions from energy consumption. Moreover, it is anticipated that the use of
primary resources will double by 2060, with steel, concrete, and cement being the main
contributors to greenhouse gas emissions [22].
One of the most critical challenges facing the construction sector is the scarcity of raw
materials. Natural resources are not infinite, and the growing demand for construction
materials is leading to the over­exploitation of these resources. In the document pub­
lished by the EU COM/2017/0490, a list of 27 critical raw materials in the EU in 2017
is highlighted [36]. This situation not only increases costs and uncertainty in the supply
chain but also exerts unsustainable pressure on the environment. The search for sustain­
able alternatives has become essential to ensure the long­term viability of the construction
industry.
Innovation in sustainable construction materials is a crucial response to these challenges.
Research and development of new materials that can replace or complement traditional
ones are fundamental to reducing environmental impact and mitigating resource scarcity.
Materials such as recycled concrete, fly ash bricks, and biocomposites made from agricul­
tural and urban waste are gaining attention for their potential to reduce CO2 emissions[41].
For instance, in Denmark, projects have been carried out using these new materials. In
Horsens, Odense, and Copenhagen, three residential properties were built using 80 to
90% recycled materials [40]. An article published by State of Green reveals that ”40%
of Denmark’s total waste originates from construction activities and the sector constitutes
30% of Denmark’s CO2 emissions.” Consequently, the Danish government has approved
new legislation requiring the implementation of recycling plans for buildings [29].
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
3
==PAGE:11==
2.2
Wastewater treatment plant
Research on metal concentrations in sewage sludge from various regions worldwide have
revealed significant variability, primarily due to the different characteristics of the wastew­
ater. Consequently, each wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) needs an individual study
to assess its appropriateness for its use as fertilizer, as the pollution levels fluctuate de­
pending on the location [30]. This is why in the project, two different WTTP have been
analyzed: Avedøre and Lynetten, from which the results and analysis of this paper are
about.
The following illustrations obtained from BIOFOS represent the flow diagrams of Avedøre’s
and Lynetten’s WWTP. For example, in Avedøre they do not dewater the sludge before
it goes to the digester, which causes that the concentration of total solids is low. This
differences in the treatment of sludge could lead to variations in the results obtained for
the pellets. After the Bio­P tank in Avedøre there is no pumping station and no addition
of iron salt. In Lynetten there are two extra previous steps before the digested sludge,
an equalization tank, which provides hydraulic and pollutant load buffering [32] and an
addition of polymers before the pre­dewatering.
For the current experiment, the samples are taken from the digested sludge.
Figure 2.1: Flow diagram of Lynetten’s WWTP, obtained from BIOFOS
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
4
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: Flow diagram of Avedøre’s WWTP, obtained from BIOFOS
2.3
Sewage sludge studies and possible applications
According to the EurEau research [10], “approximately 20­25 kg of dry solids (leftovers
when all water is removed) are produced per person per year in Europe”. According to
the survey carried out by EurEau [9], approximately the total production of sludge a year
is 8.7 million tons DS: almost half of it is destinated to agriculture, a quarter to incineration
and the rest of it to landfill, recultivation and land reclamation and other destinations. The
major disposal option for sewage sludge is a land application [28][38][13], but the volume
of sewage sludge has increased considerably during the years. This increase leads to
the question, Could it be used for something else apart from fertilizers?
As it has been said before, a quarter of the SS produced in a year is incinerated. There
are numerous studies about the use of the SSA for brick production. One of them makes
an approach as a possible substitute for clay “in sintered bricks, tiles and pavers, and as
a raw material for the manufacture of lightweight aggregate, as well as used to form high
density glass–ceramics” [7]. The current paper will be mainly based on the study by L.M.
Ottosen on “Sewage sludge ash as resource for phosphorus and material for clay brick
manufacturing” [26]. Some of the highlights of this article were that at a firing temperature
of 1000ºC, the EDS­SSA bricks had porosity and density as commercial bricks. Also,
both the SSA and the EDS­SSA changed the brick material from yellow to red. In this
project, the experiments will be also done on small­scale brick discs of 2 cm of diameter,
called pellets from now on. As demonstrated in the study of Torres et al. (2009) [31] ,
“they were a useful screening tool for selecting the best mixtures composition when incor­
porating wastes”. SSA can also be a potential use as a substitution of fine aggregate in
prefabricated concrete blocks [6], in this case a 15% substitution study is reached and the
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
5
==PAGE:13==
study reveals that this replacement improves block characteristics such as compressive
strength [5].
In another study, it was shown that bricks containing over 30% sludge were not advisable
for use as they were fragile and prone to breaking even with careful handling, although
they met the technical standards. They showed that a high amount of clay substitution by
sludge had a big effect on pore structure of the clay bricks, causing uneven and poor sur­
face textures. They conclude that sludge bricks of the studied nature were “only suitable
for use as common bricks, which are normally not exposed to view, and not for facing
bricks, because of poor surface texture and finishing” [17]. For this reason, the following
study has been carried out with clay replacement of 10% and 30% proportions of sewage
sludge.
Also, as reflected in the journal of Cleaner Production, “the use of sludge in concrete
and mortars mixes is usually associated with a reduction in their strength compared to
mixtures without sludge.” However, even so, the results of the obtained products were
“stable and their durability, while lower than that of the control samples, still qualified them
for applications in construction” [15].
A publication from the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) investigated the “pos­
sibility of using 10% of sewage sludge by weight in pavement base layers.” A soil stabi­
lization technique was used from the improvement of the residue properties and possible
use of conventional additives and the results showed that there was a potential to be used
in the pavement industry [18]. In the conference paper by Mehrdadi, N. and Haghollahi,
A., the results of their investigation were that “2000 tons of soil in Tehran could be saved
with using sewage sludge as constructions material” [20].
All these studies are very promising but there is one important factor to consider. One
of the problems generated by the incineration of sewage sludge is the emission of CO2
into the atmosphere during this practice. Given that the results of these studies in rela­
tion to brick production are optimistic, the question arises: Why not carry out the same
experiment but with raw SS, avoiding the incinerator?
2.4
Heavy metals in sewage sludge
Construction materials can be a significant source of indoor air quality contamination. In
this study, it is important to consider that sewage sludge (SS) may contain heavy metals
that require removal or control for their use in construction. Heavy metals have a high
atomic mass and toxicity to living organisms, causing environmental and atmospheric
pollution. When mixed with certain components, they can become very toxic. Citing
elements from the article [21]: “A few of the most frequent heavy metals that contami­
nate the environment include mercury, cadmium, arsenic, chromium, nickel, copper, and
lead.” Some of the adverse effects include, for example, “Lead can affect many biochem­
ical processes such as calcium inhibition and reaction with proteins”, which can lead to
cardiovascular, nervous, and circulatory system issues, or cadmium inhalation linked to
respiratory problems [25].
For these reasons, it is important to analyze the presence of these heavy metals in sewage
sludge to understand the quantities of these elements being dealt with. Some studies
reveal the occurrence of certain metals such as As, Cd, Cr, Cu, Hg, Ni, Pb, Zn, and
mainly Phosphorus [27]. The appearance of phosphorus in this material is very promising
as it appears on the list of critical raw materials in the EU [36].
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
6
==PAGE:14==
Some of the principal sources of these elements in sewage sludge could be pipe corrosion
and runoff water from fields and roads, as well as waste from domestic and industrial sec­
tors [8]. In the EU, according to the Council Directive 91/271/EEC, 92% of toxic pollutants
in wastewater come from the pharmaceutical and cosmetics sectors [35].
It is worth noting that despite the presence of these elements, some studies have shown
that “the content of heavy metals in sewage sludge does not exceed the permissible stan­
dards for agricultural purposes” [34]. Also, in the article from V Karius and K Hamer, it is
reflected that at a temperature of 1050º C thermal treatment of harbour sediments led to
an immobilization of most trace contaminants” [37].
The European Union Directive set limits on sewage sludge application on soil for 7 metals:
Cd, Cr, Cu, Pb, Hg, Ni, and Zn. Several European countries such as Denmark, impose
additional limits for pollutants other than metals [30].
In the European Union Directive 86/278/EEC the limits of maximum soil concentrations
of the mentioned elements can be found. These limits are exposed in the table in the
appendix, both for Europe and Denmark. Denmark is the country with the most stringent
limits in all elements [11].
This EU directive only has regulations of the limits of heavy metals for soils or for its use in
agriculture, but there are no regulations when talking about the use in the building sector
of construction materials with waste or sewage sludge incorporation. The Danish and
European regulations have standards for the use of waste for construction motives for
roads, foundations etc. but not for hazardous materials as the sewage sludge could be
considered. In the Danish regulation, there are three categories with different limits of
heavy metals and anions, controlled by the total and leached concentrations [3]. These
limits can also be found in the appendix A.49.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
7
==PAGE:15==
3
Methodology
In this chapter, the step­by­step procedure carried out for each of the different experiments
is explained. First, the initial treatment of the sewage sludge samples is described. Once
treated, the necessary experiments for their characterization of SS and clay can begin,
which are: water content, organic content, carbonate, digestion, anions, leaching and
laser diffraction. The procedure for the manufacturing of the bricks is also explained, along
with the experiments conducted on them: porosity, density, leaching and microscope.
Finally, the electrodialysis process is briefly explained.
3.1
Materials
As mentioned before, all the work has been done with samples collected from two different
wastewater treatment plants Avedøre Spildevandscenter BIOFOS and Lynetten, both in
in Copenhagen, Denmark in February 2024 [4]. This paper will focus in the samples
collected from Lynetten.
The clay was ready for use when sampled for this investigation. The clay was collected
from Egernsund ­Wienerberg and it is for making red bricks with an addition of 6­7% sand
[39].
Figure 3.1:
Collecting samples from
Avedøre
Figure 3.2:
Collecting samples from
Lynetten
The collected sewage sludge samples have been stored in a refrigerator at a temperature
of 5ºC. As it is digested sludge it maintains a fairly liquid composition. That is why for
its use in the experiments it is necessary to start with the step of centrifuging the residue
in order to obtain a more solid sludge, suitable for bricks manufacturing. The time in the
centrifuge machine has been of 15 minutes at a speed of 3500 rpm. As it is shown in the
figures 3.3 and 3.4 the difference between the sludge before and after the centrifuge step
is very appreciable.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
8
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.3: Sewage sludge before
centrifuge
Figure 3.4:
Sewage sludge after
centrifuge
In the figure 3.5 the sludge obtained after the water removal is observed. The amount of
solid that remains is very small compared to the amount introduced before centrifugation,
that is why measurements have been taken before and after each step. The water residue
is disposed of in containers provided for its use.
Figure 3.5: Sewage sludge obtained before and after the water removal
The next step was to place the residue on a petri dish and leave it in the fume hood for 24
hours to reduce the remaining water content. After this time it was placed in the oven at
a temperature of 105°C to further reduce the excess of water content. In the figures 3.6
and 3.7 the difference is quite remarkable.
Figure 3.6: SS after the centrifuge ma­
chine
Figure 3.7: SS after 24 hour in the oven
at 105ºC
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
9
==PAGE:17==
In the table A.1 the difference of weight between each of these steps can be highly appre­
ciated. The first column shows the quantity of sewage sludge after the centrifuge machine,
the second column is the quantity after 24 hours inside the fume hood, the third after 24
hours in the oven at 105ºC and the last one, the difference between the burnt SS and the
SS after centrifuge, without the weight of the petri dish.
Once all the sewage sludge needed for characterization and pellets was burnt, it was
crashed. Initially, it was crashed by hand with a mortar, but after carrying out the different
characterization experiments and starting the production of pellets, it was found that the
particles were too thick. This is explained in more detail in the section 4.2. Because of
this, it was decided to use the crashing machine to obtain finer particles that would mix
better with the clay in the production of pellets. For this purpose, 60 grams of sludge were
fed into the machine for 30 seconds at a speed of 1100 rpm.
As for the clay, it was crashed in the mortar by hand and filtered with a 500 micron wire
mesh filter.
Figure 3.8: Clay crashed and filtered
Figure 3.9: Clay being filtered
3.2
Characterization of sludge and clay
In order to analyze in detail the materials used for the construction of the bricks, different
characterization experiments have been carried out on both the clay and the sewage
sludge. During all experiments a proper waste management has been carried out for
each residue. In this section the explanation of the process for each experiment is found
and in the section 4 the results of each of them are exposed.
3.2.1
Water content
The first experiment carried out is the analysis of water content in clay and liquid sewage
sludge. The moisture level holds significant importance in electrodialytic soil remediation,
as the electric current flows through the soil alongside its solution.
Three samples of each are weight before and after drying them at 105ºC during 24 hours.
In the appendix A may be found the data of this weights. Once this data is obtained, the
percentage of water content found in each of the samples is calculated with the following
equation:
%watercontent = m(wetsample) −m(drysample)
m(wetsample)
∙100
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
10
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.10: Water content experiment
Figure 3.11: Water content experiment
3.2.2
Organic content
In this section the organic content experiment will be explained. The organic material is
almost equivalent to the result of ignition loss at 550ºC and organic material plus carbonate
at 950ºC. In a soil contaminated with heavy metals, the heavy metals will largely react with
the organic material present in the soil and become bound within this fraction.
The process begins by placing the crucibles in a 550˚C furnace for 30 minutes (or 1 hour
if the furnace is cold) to eliminate any dirt present. Afterwards, the crucibles are cooled
down in a desiccator using a pincer.
Figure 3.12: Crucibles in
the 550ºC oven
Figure
3.13:
Crucibles
cooling down
Next, the crucibles are weighed on an analytical balance with the help of a pincer. Fol­
lowing this, 2.5 grams of the sample are carefully weighed into each crucible using the
same analytical balance. These loaded crucibles are then subjected to a 1­hour heating
cycle at 550˚C in the furnace. After heating, the crucibles are once again cooled down in
a desiccator and then re­weighed to determine any changes in weight due to the heating
process.
Subsequently, the crucible containing the samples from the 550˚C heating step is sub­
jected to a further heating cycle at a higher temperature of 950˚C for 1 hour. Once again,
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
11
==PAGE:19==
the crucibles are cooled down in the desiccator and re­weighed to assess the impact of
the higher temperature treatment on the contents.
The percentage of organic content will be calculated using the following formula:
% organic content =
(mbefore furnace −mafter furnace
mbefore furnace
)
× 100
3.2.3
Carbonate
This experiment allows to calculate the carbonate content in the samples, determined by
volume by the reaction with hydrochloride acid. For its measurement a Calcium Carbonate
Content Chamber will be used.
Figure 3.14: Calcium Carbonate Con­
tent Chamber
One gram of the sample being analyzed is measured and placed inside the chamber.
Then 20 ml of 1M HCl into a small plastic beaker are added. With the lid closed and
tighten with the screws and the valve fully closed, the content in the chamber is shaken
so that it mixes with the sample. To ensure that the reaction is completely done, the
chamber is placed in the shaking table for 10 minutes. After this, the carbonate content
can be obtained.
To calculate the results the following formula is used:
CaCO3% = A × 100
B
Where A are the grams of CaCO3 in the sample and B are the grams of soil.
3.2.4
Digestion
For the digestion experiment a microwave GO is needed, following the American Standard
method to determine possible acid­soluble metal found in the clay or the crashed sewage
sludge. For the measurement of theses metals ICP is used.
The procedure starts weighing 0,5 grams of dry sample placing them into teflons vessels,
adding 10 ml of Nitric acid in the fume cabinet. Once they are filled and correctly closed
they are placed in the carousel of the microwave with the method ”Digestion EPA3051A”
during 20 minutes. Once the run is completed, they are filtered with vacuum suction
through a 0,45 µm inside the fume cabinet. The quantity obtained is mixed with distilled
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
12
==PAGE:20==
water in a 50 ml volumetric flask and poured in a 20 ml plastic vial for ICP measurement
after being pre­treated, according to Danish standard (DS 259, 2003) [1].
The following images show the teflons vessels used with the 10 ml dispenser of HNO3
and the microwave during the process.
Figure 3.15: Digestion experiment
Figure 3.16: Digestion experiment
The results of ICP are received in mg/L so they have to be converted into mg/kg, for
this the following formula is used for the digestion results, where A is the mg/kg of each
element:
mg/kg = A × 0.05
0.5 × 10−3
As explained in the article [33], there are different indices to measure metal pollution
levels. In this case, it is interesting to apply the geoaccumulation index, as explained
in [14]. This index is a tool used in environmental studies to assess soil and sediment
contamination by heavy metals. It allows determining the degree of contamination of a
specific metal in relation to its natural concentration in the environment. It is calculated
with the following formula:
Igeo = log2
(
Cn
1.5 · Bn
)
where Cn is the measured concentration of the metal in the soil or sediment, and Bn is
the background concentration of the metal in the soil or sediment. The obtained value is
interpreted on a scale of 7 levels.
The geochemical background value in the Earth’s crust was obtained from the article [12].
3.2.5
Anions
The anions analysis will show the primary soluble anions that can be found in both the
clay and crashed SS.
For its procedure 10 grams of dry sample are weighed in 50 ml plastic vials, adding 25 ml
of distilled water with the help of a volumetric pipette. This bottles are placed for 24 hours
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
13
==PAGE:21==
in the shaking table. After 15 minutes of rest the pH and conductivity has to be measured
for each sample.
Figure 3.17: Shaking table
Figure 3.18: Conductivity and pH mea­
surement
Then the same method of vacuum suction used for digestion is repeated and the samples
are saved for ICP and IC.
Figure 3.19: Vacuum filter
The results of IC and ICP are received in mg/L so they have to be converted into mg/kg,
for this the following formula is used for the anions results, where A are the mg/kg of each
element:
mg/kg = A × 0.025
10 × 10−3
3.2.6
Leaching
The leaching experiment will help identify how much of toxic substances,such as heavy
metals, and how mobile are these toxic substances in the samples.
For its procedure, 10 grams of clay or SS are weighed on an analytic balance and 100 ml
of distilled water are added using a volumetric pipette, as shown in the image.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
14
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.20: 100 ml volumetric pipette Figure 3.21: Plastic vials in the shaking
machine
The samples are placed on the shaking table for 24 hours. Then they have to stand for
15 minutes for measuring the pH and conductivity. After this, the samples are filtered with
vacuum suction through a 0,45 µm inside the fume cabinet and saved in 20ml plastic vials.
The samples are saved for IC and ICP experiments.
The results of IC and ICP are received in mg/L so they have to be converted into mg/kg,
for this the following formula is used for the leaching results, where A are the mg/kg of
each element:
mg/kg =
A × 0.1
10 × 10−3
3.2.7
Laser diffraction
The laser diffraction experiment is used to measure the size of the particles of the samples
used in the pellets, the clay and the crashed sewage sludge. The equipment used are
the machines Mastersizer 2000 and Hydro 2000SM.
Figure 3.22: Laser diffraction machine
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
15
==PAGE:23==
The procedure starts with the sample preparation. Half teaspoon is added into a 20ml
plastic vial and filled up with 0.005M Natriumpyrofosfat. It has to be well mixed until the
moment it has to be added into the machine.
The mastersizer has to be changed into the unit for wet measuring, the stirrer is attached
and water is added slightly below the edge. The stirring is turned up to 3000 rpm for 10
seconds for cleaning, then it is flushed and closed. This is repeated three times before
the first measuring and between every sample.
The software is started in the Mastersizer 2000 program, following the next steps, ex­
plained in the folder next to the machine: Click on File in the main menu, click on new,
write the sample name, click on measure, choose start SOP and choose Wet­soil SOP.
For measuring the sample, water has to be added to the stirrer, then the stirrer is turned
up to 1600 rpm, water is filled up to 2 cm from the edge. In the software press start to
align the machine and add drops of the sample until the laser obscuration is 3,5% and
press start. Then the measuring in the software will start.
The curve of the sample is correct when it has only one peak, if not it has to be repeated.
3.3
Production of bricks
In this section, the methodology followed for the productions of bricks will be explained. As
mentioned in the Introduction, the pellets have been produced with different percentages
of clay replacement and burned at different temperatures. The next table shows what
quantities of clay and SS will be needed to make the pellets:
Table 3.1: Quantities for brick production
Replacement
Clay (g)
SS (g)
Reference
­
15
­
With % replacement
10%
13,5
1,5
30%
10,5
4,5
Seven pellets for each composition will be produced, three to analyze porosity and density,
three for leaching and one for microscope.
The clay and the SS need to be prepared a day before the pressing. In little boxes the
dry material is mixed with distilled water, leaving the mixture for 24 hours for the water to
penetrate the dry material (Fig.3.23)(Fig.3.24). The amount of dry material and water has
to be noted, this data is found in the appendix (Fig.A.19)(Fig.A.26).
Passed 24 hours the mixture is divided into small balls with a weigh between 2.2 and 2.5
grams (Fig.3.25). These balls were pressed by hand using a pellet press, as it can be
seen in the image (Fig.3.26). Two papers are placed in bottom and top of the press so the
mixture does not get stuck. After pressing the pellets, they are weighed on the analysis
balance and placed on a tile with stickers indicating their proportion and the temperature
at which they will be burnt. They will all be first burnt at 105ºC for 24 hours (Fig.3.28), after
this time they are placed in a desiccator to cool down and weighed again on the analysis
balance, as well as their height and width in three different times with a caliper (Fig.3.30).
Then they have to be burned at the temperature to which they are to be subjected, being
1020ºC, 1030ºC or 1040ºC, in a Nerbertherm laboratory furnace (Fig.3.31). Passed 24
hours they are again weighed on the analysis balance and measures are taken of the
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
16
==PAGE:24==
height and width three times. After all this process, they are kept in small pillboxes for
their further characterization (Fig.3.32). All these data can be found in the tables in the
appendix (A.4.1). The following images show the different steps of the process.
Figure 3.23: Step 1. Mixture of clay
and SS
Figure 3.24: Step 2. Mixture rest 24
hours
Figure 3.25: Step 3. Preparation of
the balls
Figure 3.26: Step 4. Pressing pel­
lets
Figure 3.27: Step 5.
Pellets pre­
pared
Figure 3.28: Step 6. Pellets in the
oven at 105ºC
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
17
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.29: Step 7. Pellets after
24h at 105ºC
Figure 3.30: Step 8. Pellets being
measured
Figure 3.31: Step 9. Pellets after
24h at 1030ºC
Figure 3.32: Step 10. Pellets saved
in pillboxes
3.4
Characterization on pellets
3.4.1
Porosity/Density
As explained in the point 3.3 the first three pellets are for analyzing the porosity and density
of the material. The porosity will tell how porous and fragile the material is and its ability
to take up or absorb water. By finding the density of the material, the dry mass and the
mass of water in the open pores can be calculated at different conditions.
For this experiments, the materials that have been used are a vacuum pump and a tech­
nical balance that allows to weight under water.
The first step is to weigh the sample in case of weight loss due to movement in the pill
boxes. After this, the samples will be placed in a mesh separating with flanges each pellet
to know which one is which, as shown in the figure 3.33. The meshes will be placed in
a desiccator with lid and tap, connected to the vacuum pump and pumped it down for 24
hours. The next day the distilled water is passed into the desiccator with the help of a hose
and the under pressure in the desiccator until the water level is 3 cm above the samples.
It will be closed for 1 hour. After 1 hour the tap has to be opened and the sample has to
rest for another 24 hours (Fig.3.34). Passed the night, each sample will be weighed first
under water on an analytical balance and then over water, after being dried with a cloth
(Fig.3.35).
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
18
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.33: Samples in the mesh
Figure 3.34: Samples in the vacuum
Figure 3.35: Sample being measured
Once all the data is obtained, calculations can be done using the following equations,
where mssd represents the mass of the sample over water after the vacuum, msw is the
mass of the sample in water after the vacuum and m105 is the mass of the sample before
the experiment.
Volume of the sample (m3) = mssd −msw
ρw
Volume of the open pores (m3) = mssd −m105
ρw
Open porosity of the sample = Volume of the open pores (m3)
Volume of the sample (m3)
Dry density
( kg
m3
)
= m105
V
Solid density
( kg
m3
)
=
m105
V −V openpores
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
19
==PAGE:27==
Density of the sample
( kg
m3
)
= mssd
V
Water Solids Ratio = mssd −m105
m105
The tables with the data for each of the weights and the results for each sample can be
found in the appendix (A.5.1)(A.5.2).
3.4.2
Leaching
For the leaching in the pellets the same procedure as the one describe in section 3.2.6
will be followed.
The difference will only be found in the first and last steps. As mentioned, the pellets
3,4 and 5 are the ones saved for leaching. For its analysis they have to be crashed in a
mortar. The quantities used have been 1,2 grams of pellet crashed and 12 ml of distilled
water added with the help of a volumetric pipette, so a solid ratio of L/S 10 was achieved,
unlike other studies that use a ratio of 2 [3].
Once the mixture is done, they will be placed in the shaking table for 24 hours and then
conductivity and pH will be measured.
Figure 3.36: Pellets being
crushed
Figure 3.37: Samples for
leaching
Figure 3.38:
Samples in
the shaker
For the filtering, it will be done using a syringe with a 0,45 µm filter and the samples will
be saved in plastic vials for ICP and IC.
The results of IC and ICP are received in mg/L so they have to be converted into mg/kg,
for this the following formula is used for the leaching results, where A are the mg/kg of
each element:
mg/kg = A × 0.012
1.2 × 10−3
3.4.3
Microscopy
For the microscope analysis of the pellets, the Nikon SMZ25 microscope has been used.
The pellet is placed on a petri dish and the height of the microscope is controlled with the
control panel for a correct visualisation of the pellet surface. They have been observed
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
20
==PAGE:28==
with a magnitude of 30x and 60x, which indicates how many times the lens increases the
size of the object.
Figure 3.39: Microscope experiment
For the visualization on the computer, the program NIS­Elements is used. In acquisition
controls, in control settings, the resolution, color and exposure can be adjust. The images
have been taken with an exposure of 200 ms.
3.5
Electrodialytical process for phosphorus recovery
As mentioned in the introduction, one of the objectives of this work is to compare pellets
made from raw sewage sludge with those made from sludge treated with electrodialysis
for possible phosphorus recovery.
For the realisation of pellets with treated sludge it is necessary to carry out the electro­
dialysis process for the recovery of phosphorus.
In this case, obtaining the data from the work done simultaneously by Mireia Brisa [19],
it was decided to use the treated sludge from Lynetten’s 5­day experiment run at 10 mA.
This decision was made due to several factors. Among them it is worth mentioning that
in the previous experiments carried out in the above mentioned thesis with the Lynetten
samples, a higher amount of sewage sludge solid sample was obtained at the end of the
experiment, compared to Avedøre. On the other hand, the 5­day experiment was chosen
because it was the one with the highest phosphorus recovery. The following image shows
the experiment already built and running.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.40: Experiment EDS
The phosphorus recovery takes place by a three compartment cell with a electrodialytic
separation technique, explained in more detail in [19]. In this case, 400 g of Lynetten’s
sewage sludge were placed in the middle chamber with a stirrer continuously working. The
chambers in the sides are the electrolyte chambers, separated from the middle one by one
anion exchange membrane and a cathode exchange membrane. In the side chambers
there is a constant electrolytes circulation of 500 ml of 0.01 M of Sodium Nitrate with the
help of pumps. As explained in [16], the pH values in the chambers have to be maintained
between values of 1 and 2, adjusting them by adding 1:1 HNO3. The following images
show the membranes used, the suspensions and the construction of the chamber.
Figure 3.41: Membranes used in EDS
Figure 3.42: Electrolytes used in EDS
Figure 3.43: Chambers for EDS
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
22
==PAGE:30==
In the beginning and in the end of the experiment, 20 ml of the + electrolyte and 20 ml
of the ­ electrolyte are taken for IC and ICP measurements. During the five day duration
of the experiment some parameters had to be controlled daily: the voltage, the current,
pH(+), pH(­) and pH of the sample, as well as the conductivity of the sample. 20 ml of
the suspension was measured and reintroduced to the chamber after measurement and
if adjustments had to be done it was measured again to make sure it was controlled. The
data of these measurements can be found in the results section 4.4.
At the end of the experiment, the samples were filtered and taken into IC and ICP mea­
surements. The sludge used in the experiment is kept for the production of the pellets.
The same process as explained in the section 3.1 is carried out. The treated SS is cen­
trifuged, the solid part is kept and left in the oven for 24 hours to reduce the water content,
after this it is crashed in the crashing machine and ready to be used for the pellet manu­
facturing.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
23
==PAGE:31==
4
Results
This section presents all the results obtained from the experiments conducted. Initially,
the detailed characterization of the clay and sewage sludge (SS) is presented, evaluating
their fundamental properties. Following this, the results of brick production are described,
including those made with SS and those incorporating sludge treated through electrodialy­
sis (EDS­SS). The results of the electrodialysis experiment are also presented, providing
information on the effectiveness of the treatment applied to the sewage sludge and its
impact on the quality of the produced bricks. Finally, a comparison of the SS and EDS­
treated SS pellets is carried out. In order to facilitate the analysis of the read outs, graphs
have been prepared to allow an easy visualisation and understanding of the data. Tables
with data that do not appear in this section can be found in the appendix.
4.1
Characterization of sludge and clay
4.1.1
Water content
In the following table is reflected the calculated percentage of water content found in each
of the samples. An average of the three samples is made, taking into account the possible
error. The raw data can be found in the table in the appendix A.2.
Table 4.1: Water content of clay and SS
Sample
% Water content
#0252 clay
1,34 ± 0,1%
#0316 Lynetten liquid
98,34 ± 0,02%
As can be seen, the clay does not have a lot of water content but the sample of sewage
sludge has a very high quantity of it, as it has been directly measured from the bucket
samples. This is why, the sample is centrifuged and burnt at 105ºC, in order to reduce
this water excess.
4.1.2
Organic content
After carrying out the organic content experiment, the formula presented in 3.2.2 is applied
to obtain its value in percentage. These values are represented graphically to be able to
visually analyze the differences and the data can be found in A.4.
Observing the graph, it can be seen that at a temperature of 950ºC a higher percentage of
organic matter is eliminated, since at a higher temperature more elements are removed
and not only those of organic matter, as happens at a temperature of 550ºC. In any case,
it can be seen that the difference is very low. The difference between the clay and the
Lynetten sewage sludge sample is noticeable, with the clay having very low levels of
organic matter, while the sewage sludge has very high values between 60 and 65 %.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
24
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.1: % of organic content at 550ºC and 950ºC
4.1.3
Carbonate
Once the psi CO2 of each of the samples is read, the grams of CaCO3 can be obtained
using the standard series. Using the following plot and formula, and knowing the psi, the
grams of CaCO3 can be obtained.
Figure 4.2: Standard curve for carbonate, obtained from DTU Sustain
Using the obtained formula y=6x the grams of CaCO3 are calculated, these results are
reflected in the following table:
Table 4.2: % of CaCO3
Sample
Read psi CO2
g of CaCO3
CaCO3 %
#0252 clay A
0
0
0
#0316 Lynetten A liquid
0,1 ± 0,06
0,02 ± 0,01
1,7 ± 0,96 %
As it can be seen, the levels of CaCO3 in the clay samples are null, and in the raw sewage
sludge are barely perceptible with very low values which allows to assume that carbonate
levels do not affect the pellets manufacturing.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
25
==PAGE:33==
4.1.4
Digestion
The results obtained in digestion are analyzed with IC and ICP. Once the results are
received, they have to be converted into mg/kg units as explained in the methodology
part. Once these units are available, an average with its error is made for each of the three
times analyzed in each sample. On the one hand, heavy metals have been analyzed,
being: Arsenic, Cadmium, Chromium, Copper, Lead and Zinc. On the other hand, those
elements that present significant quantities have also been studied, being in this case
the following: Aluminium, Calcium, Iron, Potassium, Magnesium, Sodium, phosphorus,
sulphur appear and Iodine. The heavy metals data and the values of the elements with
significant quantities can be found in the tables in the appendix A.2.3.
In relation to the mentioned elements it can be observed that for the case of aluminium,
the clay shows much higher values than the sewage sludge sample. On the other hand,
for the rest of the elements analyzed, the sewage sludge shows much higher values. The
three elements with the highest mg per kg are calcium, iron and phosphorus, the first two
of which also show significant values for the clay. The other elements have lower but also
significant amounts that would be interesting to take into account for future studies.
Figure 4.3: Elements in digestion
If the heavy metals are now analyzed, it can be seen that their values are not very high.
Only copper and zinc stand out, showing values of 212 mg/kg and 921 mg/kg respectively,
much higher than the other elements, which are between 0 and 30 mg/kg.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
26
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.4: Heavy metals in digestion
As mentioned in the methodology section, the geoaccumulation index is calculated for the
concentrations of the different heavy metals. In the following table it is shown the category
to which the different elements belong and its description.
Table 4.3: Geoaccumulation Index
Element
Geochemical
Background
Value (mg/kg)
Geoaccumulation
Index (mg/kg)
Category
Description
As
12,7
­3,13
Igeo ≤0
Practically
uncontaminated
Cd
0,1
2,43
2 < Igeo≤3
Moderately to
heavily
contaminated
Cr
67,3
­2,34
Igeo ≤0
Practically
uncontaminated
Cu
22,5
2,66
2 < Igeo≤3
Moderately to
heavily
contaminated
Pb
21
0,1
Igeo ≤0
Practically
uncontaminated
Zn
65,4
3,23
3 < Igeo≤4
Heavily
contaminated
It can be seen that the element more contaminated in the SS is the Zinc, as it can be seen
it has also the highest concentration, followed by Copper and Cadmium, even though
Cadmium has lower concentrations than Lead.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
27
==PAGE:35==
4.1.5
Anions
As mentioned in the methodology, the pH and conductivity of the samples are measured
in the anions experiment (A.9).
These data have been plotted graphically, in the first graph it can be seen the pH of both
clay and sewage sludge samples. The pH of the clay remains at levels between 8 and
8,5 and the sewage sludge has lower levels, between 6 and 6,5 (Fig.4.5a). In the case of
conductivity, the opposite is true. The clay shows very low levels, close to 0, and for the
sewage sludge, values of between 10 and 14 mS/cm are obtained (Fig.4.5b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5: pH (a) and Conductivity (b) of the SS samples in Anions
In the same way as for digestion, in this case the elements and heavy metals that ap­
pear after performing the anion experiment are analyzed(A.10)(A.11). The elements that
present characteristic amounts in the sewage sludge for this case are the same as for
digestion, adding in this case silicon. It can be seen how high quantities of potassium,
sodium and sulphur appear, and also phosphorus (Fig.4.6a). In the case of heavy metals,
the presence of Zinc in the sewage sludge with amounts between 7 and 8 mg/kg should
be highlighted (Fig.4.6b).
(a)
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
28
==PAGE:36==
(b)
Figure 4.6: Elements (a) and heavy metals (b) of the SS samples in Anions
The IC experiment is also carried out in order to analyze the amount of chloride, nitrate
and sulphate in the sewage sludge samples (A.12). The following quantities are obtained,
where a high amount of chloride can be seen.
Figure 4.7: IC results for anions
4.1.6
Leaching
As in the previous case for anions, in the leaching experiment the pH and conductivity
levels of the samples are also measured, as shown in the following graphs. All the data
obtained can be found in the appendix A.2.5.
As can be seen, the pH values are quite similar to those obtained with the Anions exper­
iment, the Ph of the clay being higher than that of the sewage sludge (Fig.4.8a). On the
other hand, in the case of conductivity, it can be seen that the levels in the sewage sludge
are lower than those obtained in the anion experiments (Fig.4.8b). This is due to the fact
that in this experiment the sample is mixed with 100 ml of distilled water, while in the anion
experiment 25 ml are added, so the more water is added, the lower the conductivity levels
obtained.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
29
==PAGE:37==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8: pH (a) and Conductivity (b) of the SS samples in Leaching
In leaching, the elements have been analyzed by ICP and two graphs have been made,
one for the sewage sludge and the other for the clay, as this way the quantities for each
of the two samples can be better appreciated. In this case, the elements analyzed were
calcium, potassium, magnesium, sodium, phosphorus and silicon.
In the case of sewage sludge, high amounts of potassium and sodium can be observed,
but also phosphorus and silicon are present. In the clay, the presence of calcium and
sodium is notable, but low in comparison with the values obtained for the SS.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: Elements present in Lynetten SS sample(a) and clay(b) in Leaching
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
30
==PAGE:38==
In terms of heavy metals, the amount of copper and zinc is higher in comparison with the
other elements.
Figure 4.10: Heavy metals in Leaching
In a similar way to the results of IC for anions, it can be appreciated a higher quantity of
chloride in the sewage sludge sample, with a slightly higher quantity than the obtained
with anions.
Figure 4.11: IC results for leaching
4.1.7
Laser diffraction
As explained in the methodology the laser diffraction experiment measures the size of the
particles of the samples. In this occasion, the samples that have been measured are the
crashed clay and the crashed sewage sludge. At first the experiment was done with the
sewage sludge crashed by hand but as explained later, the pellets that were build with
this sample were not uniform and were easily broken. Therefore, the experiment was
repeated with the sample used in the final pellets, i.e. the sewage sludge crashed in the
machine.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
31
==PAGE:39==
To analyze this data, the outcome is taken from the result analysis report generated by
the Mastersizer 2000 program. This reports can be found in the appendix A.2.6.
Analyzing the sewage sludge sample (#0316 Lynetten), 10% of the particles are smaller
than 10,369 μm, a 50% of the particles are smaller than 89,596 μm and 90% of the parti­
cles are smaller than 318.96 μm.
In the case of clay (#0252 Egersund), the following results are obtained. A 10% of the
particles are smaller than 3,969 μm, a 50% of the particles are smaller than 116,597 μm
and 90% of the particles are smaller than 388.904 μm. These data can be appreciated in
the following graph, showing the curve of the volume percentage according to the particle
size.
Figure 4.12: Analysis of the size of the clay sample
Looking at the difference in particle size between clay and sewage sludge, it could be said
that sewage sludge is more uniform as there is less difference between particles below 10
and below 90, although they are very similar to clay. This makes sense as it is easier to
obtain similar sizes by machine cracking than by hand cracking, as is the case with clay.
As explained in the next section, the pellets were originally made from the SS sample
crashed by hand. In order to analyze the differences with the SS crashed on the machine,
the experiment was also carried out on the SS crashed by hand. The following graph
shows the values obtained for this sample. A 10% of the particles are smaller than 15,505
μm, a 50% of the particles are smaller than 52,296 μm and 90% of the particles are smaller
than 196,216 μm. It can be seen that the smallest size recorded is larger than the one
recorded with the SS crashed on the machine.
Figure 4.13: Analysis of the size of the sewage sludge sample crashed by hand
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
32
==PAGE:40==
The experiment has also been carried out on the EDS­treated SS, obtaining the following
values: A 10% of the particles are smaller than 74,208 μm, a 50% of the particles are
smaller than 180,967 μm and 90% of the particles are smaller than 435,545 μm. The
size of these particles is bigger than the size of the non treated SS. This could be due to
differences in the use of the crashing machine.
4.2
Production of SS pellets
As explained in section 3.3, the production of pellets is carried out in a number of different
steps. It is worth mentioning one of the complications encountered in the production of
pellets with sewage sludge.
Initially, sewage sludge crashed by hand was used, the particles of which were not uniform
in size. After mixing the sludge, clay and water and leaving it to stand for 24 hours, it was
observed that the sludge had absorbed most of the water, so the mixture was not uniform
and was too dry. After trying to make pellets with this mixture, they did not look good
because the clay and the sludge did not unify well, the differences could be perceived
and the pellets broke easily. This can be seen in the image, where the difference between
the clay and the sludge as well as the broken shape of the pellet can be easily observed
without the aid of a microscope.
Figure 4.14: Production of Pellets with
hand­crashed SS
After this first attempt, it was decided to repeat the experiment, this time using sewage
sludge previously crashed in a crashing machine, where the results are as shown in the
pictures of section 3.3.
Another problem that was encountered was that some of the samples had dried out too
much because the amount of water added was not enough, so for two of the samples 0.2
grams of sludge and 2.7 grams of clay had to be added. This quantity was calculated to
respect the 10% proportion of SS and clay.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
33
==PAGE:41==
4.2.1
Analysis of proportions of pellets with raw SS
This section it has been based on the data obtained after measuring the height and width
of each of the pellets, before and after being burnt. Each pellet was measured three
times from different points, and it has been decided to average these three measurements
(A.4.1).
For this analysis, different graphs have been prepared that allow the differences between
the different parameters to be observed in a simple way.
The graphs represent the difference in height and width, respectively, between each of
the 7 pellets made from the Lynetten sample with a sewage sludge proportion of 10% and
30% at the three different temperatures, as well as the clay. For the graphs it has also
been done the average between the 7 pellets, taking into account the error between the
values.
In relation to the height, approximately the highest are the ones burnt at 1040ºC and the
smallest are burnt at 1030ºC. In the case of the pellets with a proportion of 30%, the
height does not seem to be determined by the temperature (Fig.4.15a). Looking at the
width data, those burnt at 1020°C are the widest and those burnt at 1040°C the thinnest.
Also, the graph does represent marked differences due to temperature. At 1020ºC they
have the greatest width, followed by those at 1040ºC and the thinnest those at 1030ºC
(Fig.4.15b).
If these these data is compared with those obtained for the pellets made only with clay,
it can be seen that in both #0252 and #0316 with 10% of proportion the pellets burned
at 1040ºC are the ones with the highest height, followed by 1020ºC and last at 1030ºC.
In the case of 30%, it can be observed that the height in those made with clay is much
higher. For the width, it is very clearly observed that those pellets made of #0316 both
with the proportions of 10% and 30% are much more wither than those made with clay.
(a)
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
34
==PAGE:42==
(b)
Figure 4.15: Height (a) and width (b) of the SS pellets
Other data to be analyzed is the percentage of firing mass loss, calculated from the differ­
ence in weight of the pellets, before being introduced into the oven at 105ºC, i.e. as soon
as they are manufactured and after having been burnt at the corresponding temperature.
It is calculated using the following formula:
Firing mass loss (%) = mbefore firing −mafter firing
mbefore firing
Once the data for each pellet has been obtained (A.25), the average of the seven pellets
for each of the temperatures and proportions is taken, always taking into account the error.
These data are represented in a bar chart to analyze the differences. The graph shows
the differences between the different proportions, the higher the proportion, the greater
the loss. This is due to the fact that sewage sludge has a higher amount of water content
as well as organic matter, which causes it to lose a higher amount of mass when burned.
Figure 4.16: Firing mass loss(%)
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
35
==PAGE:43==
In relation to the temperature difference it is not influential. In the graph, the trend can be
seen with the help of the scatter lines for each ratio. For the clay tends to decrease with
increasing temperature, with the 10% proportion it does not show very significant changes
and with the 30% proportion it loses more mass at the temperature of 1030ºC.
4.3
Characterization on pellets with SS
It is convenient to analyze the results of the pellets with the raw sewage sludge in order
to see how they vary according to the parameters and thus determine the best ones for
the further experiments with the treated sludge.
4.3.1
Porosity and Density
As explained in the section 2.4.1, from this experiment the weights of the pellets in and
out water are obtained for the later calculations using the equations given. With this the
open porosity and the density of the pellets can be analyzed.
The results of these equations are exposed in the appendix (A.32)(A.33). Each exper­
iment has been done three times for the same temperature and proportion to reduce
experimental errors. Analyzing this data it can be seen which parameters offer the most
correct porosity and density for the pellets. For its representation, the average between
the three values is calculated, taking into account the error.
As can be seen in the tables in the appendix, one of the pellets presents erroneous values
and should therefore be discarded or an approximation of the result should be made
(A.15). In this case it has been chosen to put an approximate result in order not to disturb
the analysis of the other parameters, always taking this into account.
Once all the data made sense, it was decided to create a graph to compare the results.
First, the density of the pellets in the vacuum water saturated is analyzed. As can be
seen, the data tend to decrease the higher the proportion of sewage sludge. With only
clay, the data are around 2200 kg/m3, with a proportion of 10% the values are around
2000 kg/m3 and with 30% they are less than 2000 kg/m3.
On the other hand, if the data are analyzed taking temperatures into account, it can be
seen that in the case of clay, temperature is not a determining factor for density. On
the other hand, when clay is replaced by sewage sludge, differences can be seen. With
the 10% proportion, the density is higher the higher the temperature and with the 30%
proportion, between 1020ºC and 1030ºC, very slight differences are perceived, but there
is a higher density at 1040ºC.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
36
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.17: Density of the pellets
The values obtained for dry density and solid density have been analyzed in order to
compare them with the standards for brick construction. The following tables and graphs
show these calculated values.
In the case of the dry density, a similar trend to that obtained for the density of the samples
is observed. The density decreases as the proportion of substituted clay increases and
in relation to temperature it increases but only slightly.
Figure 4.18: Dry density of the pellets
For the case of solid density, values around 2600kg/m3 are observed, the higher the
proportion, the lower the density, as well as the higher the temperature, the lower the
density. A non­conformity can be observed for the values with a proportion of 30% at
a temperature of 1030ºC, which could refer to a failure in carrying out the experiment,
obtaining higher values than in the rest of the cases, not following the aforementioned
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
37
==PAGE:45==
trend. In any case, this is not a cause for concern since, as mentioned above, all the
values are around the same amount of 2600kg/m3.
Figure 4.19: Solid density of the pellets
In the case of porosity, the opposite is observed, the porosity increases with the higher
the proportion of sewage sludge. In the case of clay, the porosity values are between
20% and 30%, with a proportion of 10% they are between 30% and 40% and with 30%
between 40% and 50%. In relation to temperature, the higher the temperature, the lower
the porosity levels. As in the previous case, between the temperatures of 1020ºC and
1030ºC there is a smaller difference in the values, but they do change at 1040ºC.
Figure 4.20: Open porosity of the pellets
This indicates that it may be appropriate to carry out the following experiments at 1020ºC
and 1040ºC, as these are the temperatures with the greatest differences.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
38
==PAGE:46==
4.3.2
Leaching
As explained above, from the pellet leaching experiment the toxicity of the pellets can
be analyzed, as well as their pH and conductivity, the tables in the appendix show their
values (A.36).
In order to analyze the pH levels of the different pellets and to see if differences are
observed, the values have been plotted graphically, differentiating the proportions and
temperatures (Fig.4.21a). It can be seen that the pH values decrease as the proportion of
sewage sludge increases. Differences can also be seen depending on the temperature:
at 1030ºC the highest Ph levels are obtained, being these very close to those obtained at
1020ºC, and the lowest at 1040ºC.
In relation to the conductivity, it does not seem that the temperature influences its value
since, if the graph is observed (Fig.4.21b), the values do not seem to follow a pattern.
On the other hand, it can be seen that the proportion of sewage sludge has an influence
on the conductivity values. The higher the proportion, the lower the conductivity of the
pellets.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.21: Ph (a) and Conductivity (b) of the SS pellets in Leaching
In the same way as in leaching for the samples, the IC and ICP results are analyzed for
those characteristic elements and heavy metals. In the case of the elements, the following
have been analyzed: Calcium, Potassium, Silicon, Sulphur and Iodine.
In some cases it can be seen that the error is very large so that the mean across the three
samples may not be characteristic, this should be taken into account.
Three graphs have been made representing the amount of mg/kg of the elements per
temperature. The first graph shows pellets made with 10% substitution (Fig.4.22), the
second graph shows pellets made with 30% substitution (Fig.4.23) and the last graph
shows pellets made only with clay (Fig.4.24).
The three graphs show that the element with the highest quantity is calcium, followed
by potassium, sulphur, silicon and iodine. As a general rule, it seems that the different
burning temperatures do not influence the quantity of element present in the pellet. In
some cases, changes according to the temperature can be seen, but as can be seen in
the table with the values in the appendix (A.37), this happens in those cases where the
error is very high, as for example in potassium at 1030ºC in 30% pellets, or at 1040ºC in
clay. So this phenomenon will be ignored, as it is possibly a sample error.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
39
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.22: Elements in leaching pellets 10%
Figure 4.23: Elements in leaching pellets 30%
Figure 4.24: Elements in leaching pellets 0%
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
40
==PAGE:48==
Looking now at the heavy metals, it can be seen that also approximately the same amounts
of the same elements are obtained. For arsenic amounts between 0.6 and 0.7 mg/kg for
the three proportions are obtained, for chromium about 0.1 mg/kg and for zinc about 0.5
mg/kg. The rest of the elements show values very close to zero. In the case of pellets with
a proportion of 30% (Fig.4.25b), a possible error is observed for zinc at the temperature
of 1030°C, as its value is well above the average. As can be seen, it has a high error of
0.39 mg/kg, so the data is probably erroneous.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.25: Heavy metals in 10% pellets (a) and 30% pellets (b) in leaching
Similar values are obtained for the heavy metals with only clay, as it can be seen they
have the same order As>Cr>Zn>Cd, with approximately the same mg/kg.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.26: Heavy metals in leaching pellets 0%
In the following graphs, the results for IC experiments are represented A.39. It can be
seen that the anion with the highest amount is sulphate, with values between 150 and
250 mg/kg. Nitrate values are close to zero and chloride values are between 50 and
100 mg/kg. There may also be some mistakes, for example in the chloride with 30% at
1030ºC, which has a very high error and for the clay at 1040ºC.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.27: IC in 10% pellets (a), 30% pellets (b) and 0% pellets (c) in leaching
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
42
==PAGE:50==
4.3.3
Microscopy
As explained in the methodology, the different pellets have been analyzed under the mi­
croscope, with magnitudes of x30 and x60. The following pictures show the enlarged
appearance of the different pellets.
Pellets with 100% of clay at different firing temperatures:
Figure
4.28:
#0252
1020ºC
Figure
4.29:
#0252
1030ºC
Figure
4.30:
#0252
1040ºC
Pellets with 10% of SS at different firing temperatures:
Figure 4.31:
10% #0316
1020ºC
Figure 4.32:
10% #0316
1030ºC
Figure 4.33:
10% #0316
1040ºC
Pellets with 30% of SS at different firing temperatures:
Figure 4.34:
30% #0316
1020ºC
Figure 4.35:
30% #0316
1030ºC
Figure 4.36:
30% #0316
1040ºC
In the different pictures you can see the different particles that appear in the pellets. It can
be seen how in the 100% clay pellets there is more uniformity as it has not been mixed
with any other material such as SS in the other pellets. There are also small fissures in
the 10% and 30% pellets that perhaps do not appear in the only clay pellets, and it could
be said that they are larger in the 30% pellets.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
43
==PAGE:51==
4.3.4
Colour
If all pellets, with their different burning temperatures and their different proportions of
clay substitution, are put together in the same table, as shown in the picture, significant
differences in the colour of the pellets can be seen.
Figure 4.37: Colour of pellets
In all cases it can be seen that as the proportion of sewage sludge increases, the colour
of the pellets darkens, becoming darker and browner. It can be seen that the lightest
coloured pellet is the one made only with clay and differences can also be seen between
pellets made with different sewage sludge. It can be seen that the pellets made with the
samples taken in Lynetten are darker than the ones made with Avedøre.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
44
==PAGE:52==
4.4
Production of EDS­treated SS pellets
As explained in the methodology, the experiment of electrodialysis is carried out for the
phosphorus recovery from the sludge and this sludge is used for the manufacturing of
bricks.
After analyzing the data obtained from the pellets of raw sewage sludge it was decided to
carry out the next experiments with both 10% and 30% of clay substitution and with the
firing temperatures of 1020ºC and 1040ºC. These two temperatures were chosen because
they showed results with greater differences than those at 1030ºC which were very similar
to those at 1020ºC.
The quantity of sewage sludge obtained from one experiment is shown in the following
table.
Table 4.4: Quantity of EDS­treated SS in grams
Sample
After centrifuge
After 24 hours at 105ºC
Crashed
EDS­treated SS
66,71
8,2
8,12
As 7 pellets of 4 different combinations of proportions and temperatures have to be done,
12 grams of sewage sludge will be needed in total. The EDS­treated SS has been taken
from two experiments of 5 days at 10 mA from Lynetten’s sample.
The table in the appendix shows the parameters that were measured on each day of the
experiment. The duplicated days are those on which adjustments were made. The 17/05
5ml of 1:1 HNO3 were added to the catholyte and 1 ml to the anolyte, the 18/05 1ml of
1:1 HNO3 was added to the catholyte and the 19/05 3,5ml of 1:1 HNO3 were added to the
catholyte. This way the pH was always between the values of 1­2.
The volumes of electrolytes after taking out the experiment are also exposed in a table
in the appendix. These suspensions are filtered in 20 ml plastic vials and taken into ICP
measurement.
Once all this data is obtained and ICP results are done, the mass balance and the ex­
traction rate of the significant elements is analyzed. In this case, as the main focus is on
the possibility of the production of pellets after phosphorus recovery, the phosphorus will
be the only element analyzed. For doing this, as explained in [19], the mass balance is
obtained by dividing the total amount of mg of phosphorus obtained in the EDS­treated
SS by the mg of phosphorus obtained in the raw SS. The extraction rate is obtained by
dividing the mg of phosphorus obtained in the end sample of the anolyte by the total mg
of phosphorus in the EDS­treated SS. The following tables show the results of the cal­
culations for raw SS and EDS­treated SS. The raw data can be found in the appendix
A.3.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
45
==PAGE:53==
Table 4.5: Total mg of phosphorus
mg of P in raw SS
mg/kg of P
32524,17
g of sludge
13,27
mg/l
160,14
ml of liquid
386,88
Total mg of P
493,47
mg of P in EDS­treated SS
Anode electrode
0,01
Cathode electrode
0,01
Stirrer
0,42
An membrane
1,74
Cat membrane
6,65
Start +
0
Start ­
0
End +
132,22
End ­
1,9
End M
55,35
End digestion
125,15
Total mg of P
323,44
Table 4.6: Mass balance and extraction rate of P
MASS BALANCE
65,54%
EXTRACTION RATE
40,88%
For this experiment the mass balance is below the recommended range (80%­120%).
Despite this result, this SS has been used for the production of pellets.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
46
==PAGE:54==
4.4.1
Digestion of the EDS­treated sludge
As explained, after the EDS experiment, the sewage sludge is kept for the manufacturing
of the pellets. Also some of these crashed SS is kept for digestion analysis, so it can be
seen how these particles react to the high concentration of acid (A.7)(A.8).
The elements that have been plotted are those who have quantities higher than 0. These
elements are: Aluminium, Barium, Calcium, Iron, Potassium, Magnesium, Manganese,
Sodium, phosphorus, Silicon, Sulfur, Strontium, Titanium and Iodine. In the graph, it can
be appreciated the high quantities of Iron and phosphorus that are found in the sample
(Fig.4.38a).
For heavy metals, those that stand out are Zinc and Copper, also Lead and Chromium
but in lower magnitudes (Fig.4.38b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.38: Elements (a) and heavy metals (b) in digestion for EDS­treated SS
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
47
==PAGE:55==
As in the raw SS, the geoaccumulation index is calculated for the concentrations of the
different heavy metals in the EDS­treated SS. In the following table it is shown the category
to which the different elements belong and its description.
Table 4.7: Geoaccumulation Index EDS­SS
Element
Geochemical
Background
Value (mg/kg)
Geoaccumulation
Index (mg/kg)
Category
Description
As
12,7
0
Igeo ≤0
Practically
uncontaminated
Cd
0,1
0,6
0 < Igeo ≤1
Uncontaminated
to moderately
contaminated
Cr
67,3
­2,58
Igeo ≤0
Practically
uncontaminated
Cu
22,5
1,79
0 < Igeo ≤1
Uncontaminated
to moderately
contaminated
Pb
21
0,3
0 < Igeo ≤1
Uncontaminated
to moderately
contaminated
Zn
65,4
0,47
0 < Igeo ≤1
Uncontaminated
to moderately
contaminated
It can be seen that the element with highest geoaccumulation Index is Copper, even
though Zinc has higher concentration. The SS is practically uncontaminated when talking
of Arsenic and Chromium.
4.4.2
Analysis of proportions of EDS­treated pellets
If analyzed in the same way as in the previous case with raw SS pellets, the following
results are obtained for the pellets made out of the EDS treated sewage sludge (A.4.2).
Starting with the analysis of the height of the pellets, it can be seen that the 30% pellets
have a higher height than the 10% pellets at both temperatures. It can also be seen
that the temperature does not have a significant influence on the height of the pellets
(Fig.4.39a).
On the other hand, the width is greater in those pellets with a proportion of 10%, in contrast
to the previous case with the heights. For the change of temperatures the same occurs,
it does not seem to influence the width of the pellets (Fig.4.39b).
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
48
==PAGE:56==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.39: Height (a) and width (b) of the EDS­treated SS pellets
Regarding the firing mass loss, it can be seen that in the same way, the temperature has
no influence on it. For the proportions, it can be seen that there is a higher loss in those
pellets with a 30% substitution, which makes sense as the more sewage sludge the higher
the water content which will reduce the size when passing through the oven.
Figure 4.40: Firing mass loss (%)
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
49
==PAGE:57==
4.5
Characterization on EDS­treated pellets
4.5.1
Porosity and Density
After the pellets are made, the experiment is carried out to analyze their porosity and
density. The values can be found in A.5.2.
Regarding the open porosity, it can be seen in the graph how the pellets with a lower
proportion of sewage sludge have a lower porosity than those with a higher proportion. It
can also be seen how the porosity tends to decrease with temperature.
Figure 4.41: Open porosity (%)
If the dry density is analyzed, it can be seen that pellets made with a higher proportion of
sludge have a lower density. A slight trend can also be seen in relation to temperature,
as the temperature increases, the density increases.
Figure 4.42: Dry density (mg/kg)
Finally, in relation to solid density, the same is true as in the previous case. The higher
the proportion of sludge, the lower the density. In the case of 30% substitution, there is
no change in density due to temperature, but in the case of 10%, the density increases
with increasing temperature.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
50
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.43: Solid density (mg/kg)
4.5.2
Leaching
In the same way as for the pellets with raw sewage sludge the toxicity of the pellets and
the Ph and conductivity are analyzed, the following table shows their values. In this case,
the media with the error has been done for the three samples taken. The starting values
can be found in the appendix A.5.2.
Analyzing the pH, it can be seen that it has a different trend for each of the proportions.
For 10% it decreases as the temperature increases and in the case of 30% it increases
as the temperature increases. The pellets with 10% of substitution have higher levels of
pH than the ones with 30% (Fig.4.44a). In the case of conductivity, it can be seen that for
both ratios it tends to decrease as the temperature increases, with higher conductivity for
those pellets with 30% substitution (Fig.4.44b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.44: pH (a) and Conductivity (b) of the EDS­treated SS pellets in Leaching
The way the elements react is analyzed in IC and ICP. As seen in the previous case of the
pellets made with the non treated SS, when analyzing the elements and heavy metals,
there are some data that may be erroneous as they may affect the average and create a
very high error. In order to avoid these errors in this case, it has been decided to eliminate
directly before analyzing the graphs those data that affect the result and show non­uniform
values. In this case the elements that show significant quantities are: Aluminium, Calcium,
Potassium, Sodium, phosphorus, Silicon, Sulfur, Vanadium and Iodine.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
51
==PAGE:59==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.45: Elements of 10% (a) and 30% (b) EDS­treated SS pellets in leaching
Looking at the graphs it can be seen that there is a high quantity of Calcium released at
1020ºC in both pellets of 10% and 30% proportion. Silicon quantity is also significant,
followed by sodium and potassium but in less magnitude (Fig.4.45a)(Fig.4.45b).
Regarding heavy metals, in both 10% and 30% proportions the quantity of lead followed
by arsenic are the highest in comparison with the rest of the elements, but they are all
less than 0,5 mg/kg.
(a)
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
52
==PAGE:60==
(b)
Figure 4.46: Heavy metals of 10% (a) and 30% (b) EDS­treated SS pellets in leaching
Analyzing the anions obtained in the leaching experiment, there is a high quantity of sulfate
both in the pellets of 10% and 30% proportions burned at 1020ºC, higher in the pellets of
10%. Chloride and Nitrate have similar values for both proportions and temperatures.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.47: IC of 10% (a) and 30% (b) EDS­treated SS pellets in leaching
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
53
==PAGE:61==
4.5.3
Microscopy
EDS­treated pellets have also been analyzed under the microscope. The following im­
ages show the results obtained with the support of the program.
EDS­treated pellets with 10% of SS at different firing temperatures:
Figure 4.48:
10% EDS #0316
1020ºC
Figure 4.49:
10% EDS #0316
1040ºC
EDS­treated pellets with 30% of SS at different firing temperatures:
Figure 4.50: 30% #0316 1020ºC
Figure 4.51: 30% #0316 1040ºC
4.5.4
Colour
Significant differences in colour can also be seen in the case of pellets made from treated
SS. As in the case of the pellets with raw SS, it can also be seen here that the colour
darkens the higher the proportion of SS. It may not be clearly visible in the image, but to
the naked eye a slight darkening can be seen in the pellets burned at 1040ºC compared
to those burned at 1020ºC.
Figure 4.52: Colour of EDS­treated pellets
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
54
==PAGE:62==
The differences in the colours at each stage of the pellet manufacturing process can also
be analyzed. At first, the freshly made pellets have a very dark, almost black colour
due to the freshly centrifuged sewage sludge after the electrodialysis process (Fig.4.53).
The second image (Fig.4.54) shows how the colour becomes lighter after 24 hours in
the oven at 105ºC, with a greater difference between the proportions of 10 and 30%.
The last image shows the pellets already burnt at 1040ºC, which have the reddish colour
mentioned above (Fig.4.55).
Figure 4.53: EDS pellets before 105ºC
oven
Figure 4.54: EDS pellets before 1040ºC
oven
Figure 4.55: EDS pellets after 1040ºC
oven
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
55
==PAGE:63==
4.6
Comparison of SS and EDS­SS pellets
Once all the results have been obtained and analyzed for both raw SS and EDS­treated
SS samples and pellets, a comparison between these data can be carried out to analyze
possible differences or significant changes to be taken into account.
The results to be compared are: the digestion for the SS samples, the firing mass loss,
the porosity and density and the elements and heavy metals in leaching.
It must be taken into account that in the pellets made with raw SS, the experiment was
carried out with three different temperatures but it was seen that there were no significant
differences between the temperatures of 1020ºC and 1030ºC. This is why for the pellets
with EDS­treated sludge the experiment was carried out only with the temperatures of
1020ºC and 1040ºC. For this comparative analysis it will only be taken into account these
last two temperatures, as well as the data obtained with pure clay.
4.6.1
Digestion
As it has been exposed earlier, the experiment of digestion is carried out in both the raw
sewage sludge and in the sewage sludge after EDS treatment for phosphorus recovery,
as well as for the clay. The following graph shows the amount of mg/kg of some elements
when they react with the acid in the digestion experiment.
Figure 4.56: Comparison of elements in digestion
It can be seen that in all of the analyzed elements, the raw SS has higher quantity than
the EDS­treated SS. The elements that stand out from the rest are Calcium, Iron and
phosphorus. It can also be seen that the clay has higher quantity of Aluminium that both
SS and higher Calcium quantity than the EDS­treated SS. It also shows a high quantity
of Iron. The most important thing to note in this graph is the difference between the
phosphorus values, as it makes sense that the EDS­treated SS has less phosphorus
than the raw SS, as it has been recovered.
The heavy metals can also be compared. The clay has very low values of heavy metals.
For both raw SS and EDS­treated pellets, it can be seen that Zinc and Copper have higher
values than others, so the behaviour is similar in both. It is remarkable to say that Zinc
values are much more higher in the SS pellets than in the EDS­treated SS.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
56
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.57: Comparison of heavy metals in digestion
4.6.2
Firing mass loss
The following graph shows the values for the firing mass loss for both pellets with raw SS
and with EDS­treated SS and the pellets with 100% of clay.
It can be seen that there is not much difference between the different pellets, maybe the
EDS ones have slightly higher values, but nothing remarkable. The difference is seen
in the change of SS proportion, as higher the proportion, higher is the firing mass loss.
Something significant that can be seen is the difference of both pellets with the clay firing
mass loss, which is normal as the SS has more organic content that disappears after the
oven.
Figure 4.58: Firing mass loss comparison (%)
4.6.3
Porosity and density
Analyzing the porosity, it can be seen that the firing temperature only has influence in the
pellets with raw SS, but in the EDS and clay it doesn’t. Also, as higher the proportion is,
higher the percentage of porosity and it is higher in the EDS­treated pellets than in the
raw pellets. The pellets with 100% of clay are the ones who show the lower values of
porosity.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
57
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.59: Open Porosity comparison (%)
It happens in the opposite way for the dry density. It can be seen that as in the previous
case, the pellets with raw SS are more influenced by the changes in temperature, whereas
the pellets with EDS­SS do not change in a significant way. For the first ones, as higher
the temperature is, higher the dry density. The pellets with clay present the highest values
of dry density and as higher the proportion of SS is, lower are the values of dry density.
The pellets with raw SS have higher values than the ones with EDS­SS.
Figure 4.60: Dry density comparison
For solid density, the results are quite different than for dry density. Although it also hap­
pens that as higher the proportion is, lower the values of solid density are, there is quite
a difference between the pellets of raw SS and the EDS­SS. For the raw SS pellets the
solid density increases with the temperature, and it has low values for the 30% pellets.
In the EDS­SS pellets it decreases as the temperature increases, but there is not much
difference between the 10% and 30% proportions. The values for the clay pellets are
between the high and low proportions.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
58
==PAGE:66==
Figure 4.61: Solid density comparison
4.6.4
Leaching
In the leaching experiments, different elements have been analyzed, depending on the
quantities they showed. Analyzing the graphs presented for both pellets, it will mentioned
which are the elements with the greatest quantities, in descending order. It is obtained
that for the raw SS pellets the order for heavy metals is: As > Cr > Zn > Cd, with Cu and
Pb almost zero. For EDS­treated pellets, the order would be: Pb > As > Zn > Cu = Cd
= Cr. The magnitude of Pb in the latest one is around 0,5 mg/kg, while in the raw SS
pellets is 0. In the raw SS pellets the magnitude for As is around 0,6 mg/kg and in the
EDS­treated pellets it is around 0,4 mg/kg.
For the other elements, in the raw SS pellets the order is: Ca > K > Si >= S > Y, while in
the EDS­treated pellets the order is: Ca > Si > Na > K > S > Al > P. In both cases, the
highest element is Calcium, but in the raw SS pellets it has a magnitude of 250 mg/kg
and for the EDS­treated pellets, 180 mg/kg. For potassium, the magnitude is also higher
in the raw SS pellets, being 100 mg/kg and 40 mg/kg in the treated ones. For the Silicon
it happens the opposite way, is higher in the treated pellets with 80 mg//kg and 60 mg/kg
in the non treated ones.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
59
==PAGE:67==
5
Discussion
After analyzing the results obtained from the various experiments conducted, it is crucial
to highlight the observed differences and significant data that have emerged throughout
the process. These differences not only underscore the inherent variability in the prop­
erties of bricks made with different proportions of SS and varying firing temperatures but
also provide a foundation for evaluating their large­scale viability. The significant data
identified, such as porosity and density levels, the reaction of different elements to ex­
ternal factors and atmospheric agents, among others, offer valuable insights that could
guide future studies and optimizations in the production of sustainable bricks.
When comparing both pellets, it can be seen that the electrodialysis does influence the
pellets in the elements released in the leaching experiment. For the same elements the
values have different magnitudes and some elements, such as, Pb, As, Ca or K, that
have higher quantities in ones, have low in the others (4.6.4). It should also be noted
that in both pellets, there is an amount of calcium of around 200mg/kg. In heavy metals,
there are also differences in the order of magnitudes released. Something notable ob­
served in the figures 4.24, 4.22 and 4.23, is that there is no difference between pellets
with SS and pellets with only clay in the mg/kg released for the different elements. They
release approximately the same quantities for the same elements, following the same
order: Ca>Si>K>S>Y.The same happens for heavy metals (Fig.4.25)(Fig.4.26). Also it
can be seen that the firing temperature does not influence the quantities released. In any
case, it can be said by looking at the data that the values of heavy metals in both pellets
are not high and would not affect the atmosphere.
It is important to be aware of the possible regulations in the use of sewage sludge for
different applications. As said in the section 2.4 there are no applicable regulations about
the use of SS in construction materials, this is why the mentioned regulation BEK no
1480 of 12/12/2007, is used for comparison as a first starting point, as well as the EU
directive for heavy metals in soils. If the obtained values for digestion in raw SS and EDS­
treated SS are compared with the limits of heavy metals in soils established by the EU
directive, except Copper, all of them are below the lower concentration limit established
in Denmark. For the Danish regulation for construction, the results to be compared are
the ones obtained with leaching for the pellets. According to the leaching tests for both
SS pellets and EDS­treated SS, all heavy metals comply with the category 1, i.e. they
are not considered pollutant so there are no restrictions for its use. If they were classified
in category 2 or 3, they would be polluted so their applications would be limited. It is
important to remind that hazardous waste is not covered by this order, as there are no
current existing regulations.
Along the same lines, comparing the results obtained in the digestion experiments be­
tween SS and EDS­SS, it can be seen how the SS values of both the elements analyzed
and the heavy metals are much higher in some cases. For example, in the case of the
elements analyzed (Fig.4.56), it should be noted that in the SS all elements exceed the
concentrations by at least twice as much as in the EDS­SS. The high amounts of cal­
cium, iron and phosphorus in SS should be noted. In the case of heavy metals (Fig.4.57)
only copper and zinc differ in significant measures from the rest, as explained in [42] this
could be related with the variable quality of influent rainwater such as weather conditions,
among others and the used treatment technology, for example, the time of keeping of
sewage, operational treatments, etc. The concentration of these two elements is much
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
60
==PAGE:68==
higher in the SS than in the EDS­SS. This is easily seen with the help of the geoaccumu­
lation index calculation, where it can be seen that in the SS there are heavy metals such
as Cd, Cu and Zn that have higher toxicity level scales, whereas in the EDS­SS they all
have a moderately low contamination. This fact is important to mention as it can be seen
that after the phosphorus recovery experiment with electrodialysis not only the amount
of phosphorus present in the SS is reduced, but also the amount of other elements and
heavy metals that can be toxic.
If now the obtained values for both pellets are compared with the values obtained in the
sewage sludge ash study [26], it can be observed clear differences. In the case of the
firing mass loss in the SSA pellets, the higher the proportion of clay substituted, the mass
loss decreases, contrary to what happens with raw sewage sludge, which increases with
the proportion (Fig.4.58). There is also a significant difference in the magnitude of the
values, with ash values between 6 and 12%, whereas in the case of raw SS and EDS­
treated SS, the values are between 30 and 45%, for the clay they are around 20%. As
explained above, this difference in magnitude is due to the organic matter in SS, which
does not appear in SSA pellets because it has been previously incinerated to convert it into
ash. There is no significant difference between 1020ºC and 1040ºC firing temperatures
for firing mass loss.
A comparison of element concentrations shows that the SSA and EDS­SSA concentra­
tions are much higher than the SS and EDS­SS concentrations. Most of the elements are
twice as high in mg/kg, except for S, which is higher in SS. The higher presence of Zinc
in SSA stands out.
Porosity is the basic technical index of the brick, which affects almost all properties of
the brick, including strength, thermal conductivity, corrosion resistance, thermal shock
resistance, etc. That is why it is one of the important aspects to take into account in
this study. If the levels of porosity, dry density and solid density of the SSA pellets are
compared to those of SS, they do not differ much, respecting in both cases the levels
established by the construction standards in Denmark, presented below. Talking about
porosity, the firing temperature does not affect the EDS­SS pellets but it does in the SS
pellets, where the open porosity decreases with 1040ºC (Fig.4.59). It is higher in EDS­SS
pellets and it increases with the proportion of 30%. In a similar way happens with the dry
density (Fig.4.60), the changes in temperature only affect the SS pellets, but in this case,
the dry density has higher values at 1040ºC. It is higher the smaller the substituted portion
is: 0%>10%>30%. Finally, solid density has the closest values to the standard with the
10% SS pellets at 1020ºC (Fig.4.61).
When producing bricks, it is important to take into account the standards used in clay
brick construction. For this purpose, the standards for bricks in Denmark obtained from
[24] have been taken as a reference. The values for solid density, dry density and porosity
are compared. The values of solid density are 2650 kg/m3, for dry density between 1400­
1800 kg/m3 and porosity values are between 30­50%. Now looking at the values obtained
for pellets with raw SS, for the solid density values are around 2620­2660 kg/m3, the dry
density values are between 1400­2000 kg/m3 and the open porosity is between 26­50%.
In the case of EDS­treated pellets, the solid density is between 2570­2660 kg/m3, the dry
density between 1200­1700 kg/m3 and the open porosity between 38­53%. For a more
precise analysis, it could be said that the pellets that come closest to the standards are
those made with a 10% substitution, although those made with 30% are also within or
close to the values.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
61
==PAGE:69==
6
Conclusions
The research conducted in this project was to analyze the potential for transforming sewage
sludge into a valuable resource for the construction industry. The study revealed that the
incorporation of SS in brick production in proportions of 10% and 30% can produce ma­
terials with acceptable properties for construction. The porosity, dry density, and solid
density of the bricks produced were within the acceptable ranges for construction stan­
dards in Denmark.
The elements released during leaching shows that clay and SS pellets, release similar
quantities of elements, with notable differences only in some heavy metals, suggesting
that firing temperature as well as SS substitution does not significantly impact these re­
leases. When comparing SS and EDS­SS pellets, it can be seen that the electrodialysis
has influence in the elements released in the leaching experiment, with different mg/kg.
Current regulations on the use of sewage sludge in construction materials are limited, but
the results indicate that the heavy metals present in the pellets comply with the Danish
and EU existing standards.
Moreover, the electrodialytic separation process not only facilitated the recovery of phos­
phorus, an essential but limited resource but also reduced the content of heavy metals
and other potentially toxic elements in the SS, as it could be seen thanks to digestion
experiment. This dual benefit enhances the environmental sustainability of the process,
making it a promising solution for waste management and resource recovery.
This positive result not only validates the quality of the experimental process, but also
establishes a solid basis for future studies related to brick strength, as it goes hand in
hand with porosity levels. Future research should focus on further refining the production
process, optimizing the proportions of SS and firing temperatures to enhance the prop­
erties of the bricks. Collaboration with wastewater treatment plants could also facilitate
the integration of this process on a larger scale, ensuring that the sludge is pre­treated
and minimizing additional waste, as could be the residue of contaminated water left after
centrifuging the sludge.
In conclusion, this project is a promising starting point in the study of the feasibility of using
sewage sludge in brick production, both in its raw form and after phosphorus recovery.
This innovative approach contributes to the goals of reaching more sustainable construc­
tion practice. The outcomes of this study could be the foundation for future advancements
and large­scale applications in the production and durability of building materials.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
62
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
[1] Dansk Standard DS 259:2003. Water testing ­ determination of metals in water, soil,
sludge and sediments ­ general principles and guidelines for determination by flame
atomic absorption spectrophotometry, 2023.
[2] International Energy Agency. Tracking clean energy progress 2023, 2023. Accessed:
May 2024.
[3] L.J. Belmonte, L. M. Ottosen, G. M. Kirkelund, P. E. Jensen, and A. P. Vestbø.
Screening of heavy metal containing waste types for use as raw material in arctic
clay­based bricks. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 25:32831–3284,
2016.
[4] BIOFOS. https://biofos.dk/.
[5] F. Baeza Brotons, P. Garcés Terradillos, O. Galao Malo, and J. Payá Bernabeu.
Valorización de cenizas de lodo de depuradora como componente de hormigones
para prefabricados. Revista ALCONPAT, 5(1):44–57, 2015.
[6] M.T. Pérez Carrión, F. Baeza Brotons, P. Garcés Terradillos, O. Galao Malo, and
J. Payá Bernabeu. Potential use of sewage sludge ash as a finde aggregate re­
placement in precast concrete blocks. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2013.
[7] S. Donatello and C. R. Cheeseman. Recycling and recovery routes for incinerated
sewage sludge ash (issa). Waste management, 33(11):2328–2340, 2013.
[8] B. Duan, W. Zhang, H. Zheng, C. Wu, Q. Zhang, and Y. Bu. Disposal situation of
sewage sludge from municipal wastewater treatment plants (wwtps) and assessment
of the ecological risk of heavy metals for its land use in shanxi, china. Int. J. Environ.
Res. Public Health, 14(7):823, 2017.
[9] EurEau. Europe’s water in figures: An overview of the european drinking water and
waste water sectors, 2021.
[10] EurEau. Waste water treatment ­ sludge management, 2021.
[11] Directorate­General for Environment European Commission. Support to the evalua­
tion of the sewage sludge directive – final implementation report. Publications Office
of the European Union, 2022.
[12] Y. Guan, C. Shao, and M. Ju. Heavy metal contamination assessment and parti­
tion for industrial and mining gathering areas. Environmental Research and Public
Health, pages 7286–7303, 2014.
[13] W. Konig and N. Peschen. Sewage sludge production in europe ­ framework condi­
tions for sludge disposal. ZKG International, 49:A26–A26, 1996.
[14] V. Kumar, S. Pandita, A. Sharma, V. Sharma, M. Sharma, and A. Cerda. Combina­
tion of contamination indices and ecological risk assessment index for evaluation of
pollution level in sediments. Heavy metals in the environment, pages 99–117, 2021.
[15] Ś. Lesław, C. Bartłomiej Michał, and K. Piotr. The potential of raw sewage sludge in
construction industry. Journal of Cleaner Production, 200:342–356, 2018.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
63
==PAGE:71==
[16] Huilin Li and Gunvor Marie Kirkelund. Pulsed stirring for energy efficiency improve­
ments during electrodialytic extraction of as, cd, cr, cu, pb, and zn from municipal
solid waste incineration fly ash and air pollution control residue.
Separation and
Purification Technology, 290:120835, 2022.
[17] A.G. Liew, A. Idris, C. H K Wong, A. Aziz Abdul Samad, M. Johari Megat Mohd Noor,
and A. M Baki. Incorporation of sewage sludge in clay brick and its characterization.
International Solid Waste Association, 22(4):226–33, 2004.
[18] L.C. Lucena, J.F.T. Juca, J.B. Soares, and M.G. Portela.
Potential uses of
sewage sludge in highway construction. Journal of Materials in Civil Engineering,
26(9):04014051, 2014.
[19] Mireia Brisa Martin. Closing the loop: Phosphorous recovery from sewage sludge
by electrodialysis for sustainable resource management. Master’s thesis, Technical
University of Denmark, 2024.
[20] N. Mehrdadi and A. Haghollahi. Feasibility of using sewage sludge as construction
materials. Progress in Environmental Science and Technology, pages 2220–2225,
2009.
[21] S. Mitra, A. J. Chakraborty, A. M. Tareq, T. B. Emran, F. Nainu, A. Khusro, A. M.
Idris, M. U. Khandaker, H. Osman, F. A. Alhumaydhi, and J. Simal­Gandara. Impact
of heavy metals on the environment and human health: Novel therapeutic insights
to counter the toxicity. Journal of King Saud University, 34(3):101865, 2022.
[22] United Nations. Construction sector emissions report, 2022. Accessed: May 2024.
[23] United Nations. Un climate change conference (cop27), 2022. Accessed: May 2024.
[24] Anders Nielsen. Building materials: Basic properties. Polyteknisk Forlag, 2000.
[25] A.O. Oteyola and F.A. Ola­Oladimeji. Heavy metal contamination from construction
materials. Ecological and Health Effects of Building Materials, page 113–131, 2021.
[26] L. M. Ottosen, I. M.G. Bertelsen, P. E. Jensen, and G. M. Kirkelund. Sewage sludge
ash as resource for phosphorous and material for clay brick manufacturing. Con­
struction and Building Materials, 249:118684, 2020.
[27] Singh S., Kaur H., Dhanjal D. S., Angurana R., Kapoor D., Katoch V., Sharma D.c,
Ramamurthy P. C., and Singh J. Effect of heavy metals in sewage sludge. Microbial
Technologies in Industrial Wastewater Treatment, pages 1–18, 2023.
[28] S. Simranjeet, K. Harry, D. Daljeet Singh, A. Ruby, K. Dhriti, K. Vaidehi, S. Dhriti,
R. Praveen C., and S. Joginder. Effect of heavy metals in sewage sludge. Microbial
Technologies in Industrial Wastewater Treatment, pages 1–18, 2023.
[29] State of Green. New danish law to increase repurpose rates of construction materi­
als. https://stateofgreen.com/en/news/new-danish-law-to-increase-repurpose-rates-of-
construction-materials/, 2024. Accessed: May 2024.
[30] C. Hernández Sánchez, Á. Gutiérrez, J. Manuel Galindo, D. González­Weller, C. Ru­
bio, C. Revert, A. Burgos, and A. Hardisson. Heavy metal content in sewage sludge:a
management strategy for an ocean island. Rev. salud ambient., 17:3–9, 2017.
[31] P. Torres, H.R. Fernandes, S. Olhero, and J.M.F. Ferreira. Incorporation of wastes
from granite rock cutting and polishing industries to produce roof tiles. J. Eur. Ceram.
Soc., 29:23–30, 2009.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
64
==PAGE:72==
[32] Trity Environ Solutions. Equalization tank. https://trityenviro.com/equalization-tank.
html, 2024. Accessed: May 2024.
[33] M. Tytla. Assessment of heavy metal pollution and potential ecological risk in sewage
sludge from municipal wastewater treatment plant located in the most industrialized
region in poland—case study. Environmental Research and Public Health, 2019.
[34] Malwina Tytła. Assessment of heavy metal pollution and potential ecological risk
in sewage sludge from municipal wastewater treatment plant located in the most
industrialized region in poland. Int J Environ Res Public Health, 16(13):2430, 2019.
[35] European Union. Council directive 91/271/eec of 21 may 1991 concerning urban
wastewater treatment, 1991.
[36] European Union. Communication from the commission to the european parliament,
the council, the european economic and social committee and the committee of the
regions on the 2017 list of critical raw materials for the eu, 2017. Accessed: May
2024.
[37] K Hamer V Karius. Ph and grain­size variation in leaching tests with bricks made of
harbour sediments compared to commercial bricks. Int J Environ Res Public Health,
278(1­3):73–85, 2001.
[38] X. Wang, T. Chen, Y. Ge, and Y. Jia. Studies on land application of sewage sludge
and its limiting factors. J. Hazard Mater, 160:554–8, 2008.
[39] Egernsund
wienerberger.
https://www.egernsund.com/om­egernsund­
wienerberger/at­bygge­med­tegl/om­tegl.html.
[40] World Green Building Council.
The recycled houses.
https://worldgbc.org/case_
study/the-recycled-houses/, 2024. Accessed: May 2024.
[41] L. Zhang.
Production of bricks from waste materials.
Construction and building
materials, 47:643–655, 2013.
[42] T. Zubala, M. Patro, and P. Boguta. Variability of zinc, copper and lead contents
in sludge of the municipal stormwater treatment plant. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int.,
24(20):17145–17152, 2017.
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
65
==PAGE:73==
A
Appendix
A.1
Materials
Sample
After centrifuge
After 24 hours
After 24 hours at 105ºC
Difference
Lynetten bucket 1
519
406,94
23,05
495,95
602,57
439,29
154,28
448,29
608,71
469,96
169,87
438,84
556,44
398,5
159,61
396,83
289,15
184,36
19,04
270,11
Table A.1: Quantity of SS in grams
A.2
Characterization of sludge and clay
A.2.1
Water content
Sample
Glass
Glass­wet
Glass­dry (24 h at 105ºC)
#0252 clay A
19,37
26,64
26,55
#0252 clay B
19,62
29,97
29,81
#0252 clay C
19,17
28,06
27,95
#0317 Avedore A liquid
61,45
102,67
62,14
#0317 Avedore B liquid
57,41
99,6
58,12
#0317 Avedore C liquid
62,61
105,94
63,31
#0316 Lynetten A liquid
46,06
105,22
48,05
#0316 Lynetten B liquid
62,63
119,16
64,5
#0316 Lynetten C liquid
45,4
112,19
47,59
Table A.2: Water content of clay and SS
A.2.2
Organic content
Sample
Nr
Crucible
Sample
m before furnace
550ºC
950ºC
#0252 clay A
302
18,3516
2,5112
20,8628
20,82
20,77
#0252 clay B
307
17,911
2,5933
20,5043
20,45
20,41
#0252 clay C
309
18,3821
2,574
20,9561
20,91
20,86
#0316 Lynetten A
216
17,869
2,5418
20,4108
18,82
18,80
#0316 Lynetten B
219
19,1838
2,5226
21,7064
20,13
20,11
#0316 Lynetten C
220
19,7373
2,5184
22,2557
20,68
20,66
Table A.3: Measures for organic content
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
66
==PAGE:74==
Sample
% Organic content 550ºC
% Organic content 950ºC
#0252 clay
1,92 ± 0,09%
3,67 ± 0,05%
#0316 Lynetten liquid
62,57 ± 0,04%
63,52 ± 0,05%
Table A.4: % of organic content
A.2.3
Digestion
Sample
#0252
#0316
Element
Media (mg/kg)
Al
11728,75 ± 347,94
4120,38 ± 109,66
Ca
8379,61 ± 211,58
34616,5 ± 300,93
Fe
17791,16 ± 425,4
37016,05 ± 439,3
K
1691,92 ± 65,45
4941,33 ±250,02
Mg
2750,83 ± 67,24
8793,28 ±841,92
Na
224,34 ± 3,59
3514,26 ±177,16
P
270,81 ± 0,04
35616,51 ±351,76
S
91,82 ± 4,33
10193,73 ±129,43
Y
122,54 ± 0,11
100,87 ±0,17
Table A.5: mg/kg of elements in digestion of SS
Sample
#0252
#0316
Element
Media (mg/kg)
As
2,19 ± 0,27
2,18 ± 0,33
Cd
0,13 ± 0,13
0,81 ± 0,08
Cr
20,94 ± 0,51
19,97 ± 0,66
Cu
12,13 ± 0,24
212,91 ±7,55
Pb
11,75 ± 0,41
33,68 ±1
Zn
47,55 ± 1,07
921 ±70,25
Table A.6: mg/kg of heavy metals in digestion
Element
Media (mg/kg)
Al
2878,62 ± 159,64
Ba
165,02 ± 17,64
Ca
1085,87 ± 1,4
Fe
20363,53 ± 0
K
968,21 ±50,92
Mg
735,77 ± 58,12
Mn
62,77 ± 7,19
Element
Media (mg/kg)
Na
334,05 ± 35,51
P
13526,69 ± 267,57
S
4139,98 ± 189,76
Si
194,85 ± 9,09
Sr
47,46 ± 3,14
Ti
72,83 ± 20,34
Y
101,77 ± 0,29
Table A.7: mg/kg of elements in digestion for EDS­treated SS
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
67
==PAGE:75==
Element
Media (mg/kg)
As
0 ± 0
Cd
0,23 ± 0,02
Cr
16,84 ± 2,13
Cu
116,57 ± 12,33
Pb
38,67 ±8,4
Zn
136,17 ± 13,31
Table A.8: mg/kg of heavy metals in digestion for EDS­treated SS
A.2.4
Anions
Sample
Amount (g)
Ph
Conductivity (mS/cm)
#0252 clay
10
8,26 ± 0,02
0,28 ± 0,04
#0316 Lynetten crashed
10
6,16 ± 0,01
12,05 ± 0,98
Table A.9: pH and conductivity for Anions
Sample
#0252
#0316
Element
Media (mg/kg)
Al
104,52±46
5,54 ±5,16
Ca
116,27 ± 17,81
362,39 ±15,3
Fe
50,52 ± 31,23
42,11 ± 19,9
K
22,37 ± 11,51
2308,19 ±145,05
Mg
12,63 ± 6,31
403,96 ± 8,56
Na
28,06 ± 1,57
2577,61 ± 165,58
P
1,78 ± 0,47
813,78 ± 7,89
S
11,96 ± 0,05
1671,03 ± 98,89
Si
157,05 ± 100,21
56,06 ± 11,15
Y
2,64 ± 0,04
2,36 ± 0
Table A.10: mg/kg of elements in anions of SS
Sample
#0252
#0316
Element
Media (mg/kg)
As
0± 0
0,57 ± 0,04
Cd
0,01±0,01
1,17 ± 0,15
Cr
0,09 ±0,053
0,21 ± 0,01
Cu
0,06 ± 0,014
2,3 ±0,034
Pb
0,04 ± 0,018
0,05 ±0,03
Zn
0,17 ± 0,08
7,53 ±0,56
Table A.11: mg/kg of heavy metals in anions
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
68
==PAGE:76==
#0316
Sample
Media (mg/kg)
Chloride
661,89± 67,83
Nitrate
54,91 ± 13,66
Sulphate
21,91 ± 1,17
Table A.12: IC results for anions
A.2.5
Leaching
Sample
Amount (g)
Ph
Conductivity (mS/cm)
#0252 clay
10
8,51 ± 0,02
0,12 ± 0
#0316 Lynetten crashed
10
6,54 ± 0,02
4,44 ± 0,03
Table A.13: pH and conductivity for Leaching
Sample
#0252
#0316
Element
Media (mg/kg)
Ca
202 ± 0,57
424 ± 7,2
K
21,85 ± 4,58
3414,56 ±40,08
Mg
8,036 ± 0,35
509,26 ±19,06
Na
59,16 ± 1,25
3626,55 ±45,06
P
5,9 ± 0,8
1727,78 ±38,43
S
23,64 ± 1,34
2061,99 ±23,03
Table A.14: mg/kg of elements in leaching
Sample
#0252
#0316
Element
Media (mg/kg)
As
0,2± 0,04
0,6 ± 0,06
Cd
0±0
0 ± 0
Cr
0,03 ±0,01
0,14 ± 0,01
Cu
0,1 ± 0,01
3,14 ±0,13
Pb
0 ± 0
0 ±0
Zn
0,17 ± 0,04
7,99 ±0,17
Table A.15: mg/kg of heavy metals in leaching
Sample
#0252
#0316
Element
Media (mg/kg)
Chloride
42,25± 3,69
764,94± 70,24
Nitrate
75,64 ± 16,01
91,64± 4,17
Sulphate
73,5± 8,89
66,79± 1,39
Table A.16: IC results for leaching
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
69
==PAGE:77==
A.2.6
Laser diffraction
Figure A.1: Report laser diffraction for sewage sludge
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
70
==PAGE:78==
Figure A.2: Report laser diffraction for clay
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
71
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.3: Report laser diffraction for hand­crashed sewage sludge
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
72
==PAGE:80==
Figure A.4: Report laser diffraction for EDS­treated sludge
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
73
==PAGE:81==
A.3
Electrodialysis experiment
Date
Voltage
Current
pH (+)
pH (­)
pH (M)
mS/cm
16/05/2024
2,7
10
1,77
1,86
8,01
8,33
17/05/2024
4,2
10
2,17
9,18
8,12
6,03
17/05/2024
2,9
10
1,71
1,24
7,98
5,92
18/05/2024
3,4
10
1,51
2,54
4,09
3,67
18/05/2024
3,2
10
1,58
1,81
4,37
3,64
19/05/2024
4
10
1,56
7,27
3,27
3,33
19/05/2024
3,4
10
1,53
1,39
3,2
3,21
20/05/2024
3,3
10
1,49
1,72
2,32
3,73
21/05/2024
3,4
10
1,56
1,93
2,47
3,13
21/05/2024
3,5
10
1,57
1,91
2,48
2,97
Table A.17: Parameters from EDS experiment
Volume
When cleaning membranes
When cleaning electrodes
Cathode
82 ml
66 ml
Anode
82 ml
67 ml
Stirring
86 ml
­
Volume
In electrolytes
Electrolyte +
460 ml
Electrolyte ­
490 ml
Middle
440 ml
Table A.18: Volumes when cleaning
A.4
Production of bricks
A.4.1
With raw Sewage Sludge
Temperature
Sample
Replacement
Clay (g)
Sludge (g)
Water (g)
1020ºC
#0252
0%
15
0
3,83
#0316
10%
13,5
1,5
4,91
#0317
10%
13,5
1,5
5,42
#0316
30%
10,5
4,5
6,36
#0317
30%
10,5
4,5
6,48
1030ºC
#0252
0%
15
0
3,71
#0316
10%
13,5
1,5
4,93
#0317
10%
13,5
1,5
4,95
#0316
30%
10,5
4,5
7,23
#0317
30%
10,5
4,5
6,44
1050ºC
#0252
0%
15
0
3,53
#0316
10%
13,5
1,5
6,07
#0317
10%
13,5
1,5
5,93
#0316
30%
10,5
4,5
6,41
#0317
30%
10,5
4,5
6,49
Table A.19: Quantity of sludge and water used for the pellets
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
74
==PAGE:82==
Temperature
1020ºC
Sample
Nº
Weight ball
Weight pellet
10% #0316
1
2,44
2,3587
2
2,37
2,3122
3
2,38
2,2806
4
2,23
2,1464
5
2,5
2,426
6
2,46
2,4015
7
2,5
2,4472
30% #0316
1
2,37
2,3069
2
2,47
2,3932
3
2,44
2,3586
4
2,4
2,3656
5
2,5
2,4595
6
2,5
2,4763
7
2,49
2,4539
#0252
1
2,4
1,9418
2
2,3
2,23
3
2,2
1,9203
4
2,3
2,0082
5
2,41
2,034
6
2,28
1,9287
7
2,14
1,9029
Table A.20: Weight of pellets before oven at 1020ºC
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
75
==PAGE:83==
Temperature
1030ºC
Sample
Nº
Weight ball
Weight pellet
1
2,48
2,3773
2
2,32
2,2428
3
2,42
2,2948
4
2,24
2,1537
5
2,51
2,3577
6
2,46
2,3053
10% #0316
7
2,43
2,3442
1
2,36
2,2391
2
2,32
2,215
3
2,51
2,3751
4
2,48
2,418
5
2,35
2,2405
6
2,44
2,3602
30% #0316
7
2,37
2,3149
1
2,35
2,06
2
2,26
2,157
3
2,31
2,1518
4
2,41
2,2714
5
2,46
2,3145
6
2,49
2,379
#0252
7
2,34
2,2848
Table A.21: Weight of pellets before oven at 1030ºC
Figure A.5: Measures after 105ºC for 1020ºC pellets
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
76
==PAGE:84==
Temperature
1040ºC
Sample
Nº
Weight ball
Weight pellet
1
2,52
2,334
2
2,47
2,4223
3
2,51
2,4
4
2,47
2,3581
5
2,51
2,3131
6
2,52
2,269
10% #0316
7
2,51
2,3608
1
2,47
2,4314
2
2,51
2,4069
3
2,51
2,4418
4
2,44
2,4085
5
2,43
2,4455
6
2,36
2,4564
30% #0316
7
2,48
2,4578
1
2,41
2,2935
2
2,29
2,2237
3
2,45
2,3469
4
2,27
2,194
5
2,51
2,3286
6
2,51
2,4385
#0252
7
2,52
2,4185
Table A.22: Weight of pellets before oven at 1040ºC
Figure A.6: Measures after 105ºC for 1030ºC pellets
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
77
==PAGE:85==
Figure A.7: Measures after 105ºC for 1040ºC pellets
Figure A.8: Measures of pellets after 1020ºC
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
78
==PAGE:86==
Figure A.9: Measures of pellets after 1030ºC
Figure A.10: Measures of pellets after 1040ºC
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
79
==PAGE:87==
Temperature
1020ºC
1030ºC
1040ºC
Sample
Media
10 % #0316
4,25 ± 0,1
4,09 ± 0,09
4,53 ±0,07
30% #0316
4,48 ± 0,05
4,53 ± 0,06
4,53 ± 0,04
#0252
3,43 ± 0,06
3,64 ±0,05
3,81 ± 0,07
Table A.23: Height of the pellets
Temperature
1020ºC
1030ºC
1040ºC
Sample
Media
10 % #0316
18,4 ± 0,1
18,15 ± 0,12
17,92 ±0,12
30% #0316
18,11 ± 0,02
17,39 ± 0,07
17,47 ± 0,05
#0252
18,84 ± 0,15
19,07 ±0,05
18,76 ± 0,11
Table A.24: Width of the pellets
Temperature
1020ºC
1030ºC
1040ºC
Sample
Media
10 % #0316
30,6 ± 0,1%
30,6 ± 0,1%
29,8 ±0,1%
30% #0316
44,4 ± 1,0%
45,8 ± 0,1%
43,4 ± 0,1%
#0252
21,5 ± 0,1%
20,1 ±0,1%
19,6 ± 0,1%
Table A.25: Firing mass loss (%)
A.4.2
With EDS­treated Sewage Sludge
Temperature
Sample
Replacement
Clay (g)
Sludge (g)
Water (g)
1020ºC
#0316
10%
13,5
1,5
5,9
#0316
30%
10,5
4,5
6,44
1040ºC
#0316
10%
13,5
1,5
4,98
#0316
30%
10,5
4,5
6,85
Table A.26: Quantity of sludge and water used for the EDS pellets
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
80
==PAGE:88==
Temperature
1020ºC
Sample
Nº
Weight ball
Weight pellet
10% #0316
1
2,41
2,08
2
2,5
2,32
3
2,25
2
4
2,37
2,22
5
2,37
2,075
6
2,38
2,21
7
2,37
2,094
30% #0316
1
2,43
2,33
2
2,37
2,24
3
2,22
2,14
4
2,27
2,18
5
2,41
2,34
6
2,4
2,33
7
2,46
2,38
Table A.27: Weight of EDS­treated pellets before oven at 1020ºC
Temperature
1040ºC
Sample
Nº
Weight ball
Weight pellet
10% #0316
1
2,42
2,32
2
2,4
2,26
3
2,35
2,21
4
2,45
2,35
5
2,48
2,4
6
2,48
2,36
7
2,39
2,3
30% #0316
1
2,42
2,3
2
2,4
2,24
3
2,28
2,18
4
2,35
2,23
5
2,37
2,28
6
2,45
2,36
7
2,32
2,23
Table A.28: Weight of EDS­treated pellets before oven at 1040ºC
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
81
==PAGE:89==
Figure A.11: Measures after 105ºC for 1020ºC EDS­treated pellets
Figure A.12: Measures after 105ºC for 1040ºC EDS­treated pellets
Figure A.13: Measures of EDS­treated pellets after 1020ºC
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
82
==PAGE:90==
Figure A.14: Measures of EDS­treated pellets after 1040ºC
Temperature
1020ºC
1040ºC
Sample
Media
10 % #0316
4,1 ± 0,08
4,17 ±0,02
30% #0316
4,55 ± 0,08
4,51 ± 0,04
Table A.29: Height of the pellets
Temperature
1020ºC
1040ºC
Sample
Media
10 % #0316
18,56 ± 0,11
18,44 ±0,06
30% #0316
18,15 ± 0,05
17,9 ± 0,03
Table A.30: Width of the pellets
Temperature
1020ºC
1040ºC
Sample
Media
10 % #0316
32± 0,29%
31,2 ± 0,17%
30% #0316
46 ± 0,2%
46,5 ± 0,17%
Table A.31: Firing mass loss (%)
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
83
==PAGE:91==
A.5
Characterization on pellets
A.5.1
With raw sewage sludge
Porosity and Density
Figure A.15: Measures of pellets for porosity and density
Sample
Open porosity
#0252 0 % 1020ºC
27 ± 0%
#0316 10% 1020ºC
39 ± 0%
#0316 30% 1020ºC
49 ± 0%
#0252 0 % 1030ºC
27 ± 0%
#0316 10% 1030ºC
38 ± 1%
#0316 30% 1030ºC
49 ± 0%
#0252 0 % 1040ºC
26 ± 0%
#0316 10% 1040ºC
35 ± 0%
#0316 30% 1040ºC
44 ± 0%
Table A.32: Porosity of the pellets
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
84
==PAGE:92==
Figure A.16: Calculations for porosity
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
85
==PAGE:93==
Figure A.17: Calculations for density
Sample
Density(kg/m3)
#0252 0% 1020ºC
2195,44 ± 1,62
#0316 10% 1020ºC
2003,4 ± 5,41
#0316 30% 1020ºC
1827,73 ± 1,52
#0252 0 % 1030ºC
2192,39 ± 3,65
#0316 10% 1030ºC
2034,77 ± 1,26
#0316 30% 1030ºC
1838,48 ± 2,38
#0252 0 % 1040ºC
2208,09 ± 3,28
#0316 10% 1040ºC
2070,84 ± 0,73
#0316 30% 1040ºC
1907,17 ± 2,47
Table A.33: Density of the
pellets
Sample
Dry density(kg/m3)
#0252 0% 1020ºC
1925,48 ± 3,2
#0316 10% 1020ºC
1610,73 ± 8,56
#0316 30% 1020ºC
1338,04 ± 2,8
#0252 0 % 1030ºC
1921,6 ± 4,85
#0316 10% 1030ºC
1664,51 ± 0,85
#0316 30% 1030ºC
1346,42 ± 3,55
#0252 0 % 1040ºC
1950,75 ± 5,77
#0316 10% 1040ºC
1723,25 ± 1,64
#0316 30% 1040ºC
1468,05 ± 3,4
Table A.34: Dry density of the pel­
lets
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
86
==PAGE:94==
Sample
Solid density(kg/m3)
#0252 0% 1020ºC
2637,53 ± 1,36
#0316 10% 1020ºC
2652,17 ± 1,79
#0316 30% 1020ºC
2622,04 ± 3,15
#0252 0 % 1030ºC
2635,19 ± 2,62
#0316 10% 1030ºC
2639,55 ± 4,01
#0316 30% 1030ºC
2650,74 ± 3,09
#0252 0 % 1040ºC
2626,73 ± 1,07
#0316 10% 1040ºC
2641,4 ± 2,08
#0316 30% 1040ºC
2617,42 ± 3,44
Table A.35: Solid density of the pellets
Leaching
Sample
Amount (g)
Ph
Conductivity (mS/cm)
#0252 0 % 1020ºC
1,2
10,81±0,03
0,22±0,01
#0316 10% 1020ºC
1,2
10,68±0,03
0,18 ± 0,01
#0316 30% 1020ºC
1,2
10,48±0,04
0,13 ± 0,01
#0252 0% 1030ºC
1,2
10,88±0,03
0,22 ± 0
#0316 10% 1030ºC
1,2
10,75±0,04
0,18 ± 0,01
#0316 30% 1030ºC
1,2
10,56±0,02
0,13 ± 0,01
#0252 0% 1040ºC
1,2
10,78±0,07
0,23 ± 0,02
#0316 10% 1040ºC
1,2
10,62 ± 0,03
0,19 ± 0
#0316 30% 1040ºC
1,2
10,28 ± 0,07
0,11 ± 0,01
Table A.36: pH and conductivity for Leaching in pellets
Temperature
1020ºC
1030ºC
1040ºC
Element
Sample
Media
Ca
#0252
260,03 ± 6,91
259,98 ± 4,6
250,46 ±3,96
10 % #0316
214,89 ± 13,03
212,29 ± 7,55
216,02 ±12,1
30 % #0316
150,75 ± 13,47
178,24 ± 10,69
135,42 ±11,85
K
#0252
61,36 ± 29,62
74,26 ± 46,73
211,13 ±129,38
10 % #0316
12,21 ± 2,38
87,45 ± 33,82
105,51 ±25,94
30 % #0316
56,73 ± 35,9
184,89 ± 154,45
77,98 ±6,13
S
#0252
67,38 ± 2,1
61,08 ± 1,07
44,78 ±1,86
10 % #0316
72,72 ± 3,64
57,96 ± 2,23
50,05 ±2,94
30 % #0316
51,72 ± 5,92
66,42 ± 6,12
38,36 ±4,61
Si
#0252
65,58 ± 1,55
69,4 ± 0,94
72,52 ±0,49
10 % #0316
55,82 ± 0,72
55,17 ± 0,42
58,13 ±1,12
30 % #0316
43,06 ± 2,05
41,89 ± 1,36
40,76 ±1,46
Y
#0252
10,25 ± 0,04
10,39 ± 0,01
10,17 ±0,09
10 % #0316
10,42 ± 0,02
10,27 ± 0,05
10,12 ±0,04
30 % #0316
10,25 ± 0,05
10,24 ± 0,03
10,17 ±0,06
Table A.37: Elements in leaching for pellets
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
87
==PAGE:95==
Temperature
1020ºC
1030ºC
1040ºC
Element
Sample
Media
As
#0252
0,64 ± 0,02
0,6 ± 0,05
0,7 ±0,04
10 % #0316
0,62 ± 0,04
0,64 ± 0,02
0,6 ±0,04
30 % #0316
0,61 ± 0,01
0,57 ± 0,09
0,56 ±0,04
Cd
#0252
0,03 ± 0
0,02 ± 0
0,01 ± 0
10 % #0316
0,03 ± 0
0,02 ± 0
0,02 ± 0
30 % #0316
0,02 ± 0
0,02 ± 0
0,02 ± 0
Cr
#0252
0,09± 0,01
0,1± 0,01
0,07± 0,01
10 % #0316
0,09± 0,01
0,09± 0,03
0,05± 0,01
30 % #0316
0,07± 0,01
0,08± 0,02
0,07± 0,02
Cu
#0252
0 ± 0
0± 0
0 ±0
10 % #0316
0 ± 0
0± 0
0 ±0
30 % #0316
0 ± 0
0± 0
0 ±0
Pb
#0252
0 ± 0
0± 0
0 ±0
10 % #0316
0 ± 0
0± 0
0 ±0
30 % #0316
0 ± 0
0± 0
0 ±0
Zn
#0252
0,03± 0
0,04± 0
0,03± 0
10 % #0316
0,04± 0
0,04± 0,01
0,03± 0
30 % #0316
0,03± 0,01
0,42± 0,39
0,03± 0
Table A.38: Heavy metals in leaching for pellets
Temperature
1020ºC
1030ºC
1040ºC
Sample
Media
Chloride
#0252
56,7 ± 27,7
62,2 ± 39,6
189,8 ±122,3
10 % #0316
12,3 ± 2,1
80,4 ± 32,1
87,2 ±21,5
30 % #0316
49,1 ± 31,6
272,8 ± 246,7
65,7 ±3,5
Nitrate
#0252
15,1 ± 0,2
14,9± 0,1
15,8 ± 0,2
10 % #0316
14,9 ± 0,1
15,7 ± 0,3
16 ± 0,2
30 % #0316
14,8 ± 0,3
47,1 ± 32,6
15,9 ± 0,2
Sulfate
#0252
241± 5,8
195,6± 2,4
146,9± 4,6
10 % #0316
247,6± 11,8
193,2± 5,1
164,3± 9,1
30 % #0316
174,8± 17,6
234,9± 26,2
128,8± 14,5
Table A.39: Anions in leaching for pellets
A.5.2
With EDS­treated sewage sludge
Porosity and Density
Sample
Open porosity (%)
#0316 10% 1020ºC
40 ± 0,2
#0316 30% 1020ºC
53 ± 0,4
#0316 10% 1040ºC
38 ± 0,1
#0316 30% 1040ºC
51 ± 0,2
Table A.40: Open porosity of the EDS pellets
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
88
==PAGE:96==
Sample
Dry density(kg/m3)
#0316 10% 1020ºC
1580,29 ± 7,16
#0316 30% 1020ºC
1209,96 ± 4,9
#0316 10% 1040ºC
1631,01 ± 5,86
#0316 30% 1040ºC
1250,46 ± 2,6
Table A.41: Dry density of the EDS pellets
Sample
Solid density(kg/m3)
#0316 10% 1020ºC
2634,94 ± 6,56
#0316 30% 1020ºC
2574,44 ± 27,18
#0316 10% 1040ºC
2651,06 ± 5,46
#0316 30% 1040ºC
2574,82 ± 7,67
Table A.42: Solid density of the EDS pellets
Leaching
Sample
Amount (g)
Ph
Conductivity (mS/cm)
#0316 10% 1020ºC A
1,2
10,82
0,12
#0316 10% 1020ºC B
1,2
10,76
0,12
#0316 10% 1020ºC C
1,2
10,82
0,16
#0316 30% 1020ºC A
1,2
10,1
1,08
#0316 30% 1020ºC B
1,2
9,28
0,07
#0316 30% 1020ºC C
1,2
9,29
0,07
#0316 10% 1040ºC A
1,2
10,52
0,1
#0316 10% 1040ºC B
1,2
10,56
0,11
#0316 10% 1040ºC C
1,2
10,15
0,08
#0316 30% 1040ºC A
1,2
9,45
0,61
#0316 30% 1040ºC B
1,2
10,28
0,17
#0316 30% 1040ºC C
1,2
10,66
0,12
Table A.43: pH and conductivity for Leaching in EDS pellets
Temperature
1020ºC
1040ºC
Sample
Media
10 % #0316
10,8 ± 0,02
10,41 ±0,13
30% #0316
9,56 ± 0,27
10,13 ± 0,36
Table A.44: pH for Leaching in EDS­treated pellets
Temperature
1020ºC
1040ºC
Sample
Media (mS/cm)
10 % #0316
0,13 ± 0,01
0,1 ±0,02
30% #0316
0,41 ± 0,34
0,3 ± 0,15
Table A.45: Conductivity for Leaching in EDS­treated pellets
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
89
==PAGE:97==
Temperature
1020ºC
1040ºC
Element
Sample
Media
Al
10 % #0316
7,79 ± 0,3
10,12 ± 4,13
30 % #0316
21,75 ± 2,94
11,58 ± 6,09
Ca
10 % #0316
182,94 ± 10,74
111,31 ± 9,12
30 % #0316
84,29 ± 4,08
87,71 ± 25,14
K
10 % #0316
37,47± 6,81
22,54± 2,71
30 % #0316
28,15± 8,02
37,7± 11,36
Na
10 % #0316
38,09 ± 0,51
50,47 ± 6,94
30 % #0316
37,39± 0,61
50,91± 12,33
P
10 % #0316
0,93 ± 0,24
7,18± 2,96
30 % #0316
24,42 ± 6,02
16,21 ± 7,25
S
10 % #0316
36,12± 3,31
15,94± 0,36
30 % #0316
20,84± 1,3
10,78± 4,42
Si
10 % #0316
74,07± 0,79
80,07± 16,92
30 % #0316
43,13± 2,01
101,86± 0
V
10 % #0316
2,17± 0,01
1,37± 0,03
30 % #0316
1,9± 0,01
1,36± 0,02
Y
10 % #0316
9,34± 0,05
9,9± 0,03
30 % #0316
9,66± 0,09
9,77± 0,08
Table A.46: Elements in leaching for EDS pellets
Temperature
1020ºC
1040ºC
Element
Sample
Media
As
10 % #0316
0,41 ± 0,09
0,37 ± 0,08
30 % #0316
0,27 ± 0,04
0,28 ± 0,08
Cd
10 % #0316
0,03 ± 0
0,04 ± 0
30 % #0316
0,04 ± 0
0,04 ± 0
Cr
10 % #0316
0,05± 0,02
0,06± 0,01
30 % #0316
0,02± 0,01
0± 0
Cu
10 % #0316
0,05 ± 0,01
0,04 ± 0,02
30 % #0316
0,03± 0,02
0,04± 0
Pb
10 % #0316
0,34 ± 0,01
0,53± 0,05
30 % #0316
0,46 ± 0,03
0,35 ± 0,04
Zn
10 % #0316
0,12± 0,01
0,11± 0
30 % #0316
0,11± 0
0,11± 0,01
Table A.47: Heavy metals in leaching for EDS pellets
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
90
==PAGE:98==
Temperature
1020ºC
1040ºC
Sample
Media
Chloride
10 % #0316
43, 27 ± 4,58
34,65 ± 1,65
30 % #0316
38,48 ± 5,56
43,01 ±6,49
Nitrate
10 % #0316
22,6 ± 0,33
23,94 ± 0,28
30 % #0316
23,03 ± 0,6
28,34 ± 4,54
Sulfate
10 % #0316
120,94± 9,72
58,24± 0,85
30 % #0316
65,54± 3,72
47,78± 11,02
Table A.48: Anions in leaching for EDS pellets
A.6
Standards
Element
EU limits (mg/kg)
Danish limits (mg/kg)
UCL
LCL
UCL
LCL
Cd
3
1
3
0,5
Cu
140
50
140
40
Pb
300
50
300
40
Ni
75
30
75
18
Zn
300
150
300
100
Cr
­
­
­
40
Table A.49: Limit concentrations of heavy metals in soils, obtained from the EU Directive
86/278/EEC
Where UCL is Upper concentration limit and LCL is Lower concentration limit.
Figure A.18: BEK 1480 of 12/12/2007 limits
From Waste to Resource:
Sustainable Brick Manufacturing from Municipal Sewage Sludge before and after Phosphorus Recovery
91
==PAGE:99==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
https://sustain.dtu.dk/
