==PAGE:1==
Master of Science
Master’s thesis in Engineering Acoustics
Inference of the Acoustic Impedance
of Locally Reacting Materials using
Physics-Informed Neural Networks
Author: Sturla Njarðarson
(s222676)
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Cheol-Ho Jeong
Co-supervisors: Yuanxin Xia, Allan Peter Engsig-Karup, Nikolas Borrel-Jensen.
ECTS: 30
DTU Elektro
Department of Acoustic Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 352
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This thesis attempts to employ the relatively novel method of Physics-Informed Neu-
ral Networks (PINNs) to solve the age-old problem of estimating the acoustic surface
impedance of materials. The thesis assumes locally reacting, flat surfaces, which apply
to porous absorbers commonly used to treat spaces acoustically. To achieve this, a loss
function is designed to train the PINN comprising three terms: a data term containing
a sparse number of points of the steady-state pressure field in the frequency domain
sampled from the vicinity of the sample’s surface, a PDE term derived from the ho-
mogeneous Helmholtz equation, and finally, an adaptive boundary condition loss, that
simultaneously regularizes the model while learning the underlying impedance condition.
The second two losses are trained via randomly sampled points near the sample and on
its surface. The system is tested in simulated environments of an infinite baffle, an
infinite corner (flush mounted in the corner between 3 infinite planes), and a sound-hard
shoebox room, where it was tested on a single absorber specimen of dimensions (lx,ly,lz)
= (1,1,0.05) m, with flow resistivity of σ = 41, 000 Pa s m−2. Impedance curves for the
absorber were generated via Miki’s model. The system was successfully able recover the
acoustic properties of the absorber specimen tested with a noticeable anomaly at the
lowest frequency of 100 Hz. A robustness-to-noise test revealed a high sensitivity to
noise at frequencies below 500 Hz. A comparison between clean and noise datasets re-
vealed a more significant relative phase error induced at low frequencies than high ones
due to the same SNR, explaining the frequency-dependent noise sensitivity. Further
exploration of the system’s capability to approximate the sound field at the edges and
corners of the absorber revealed this as a weakness of the system. Finally, these results
are discussed, followed by proposed paths forward to aid the identified limitations of the
system.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Section for Acoustic Technology, Department of Electrical
and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment of the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Working on my master’s thesis over the past six months has been humbling. Despite
facing challenges, it has been an immensely fulfilling journey. I hope it captures the
interest of those who read it.
Kongens Lyngby, 20th July 2024
Sturla Njarðarson
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I want to dedicate this thesis to my friends and family: my parents, siblings. I want
to give special thanks to my girlfriend, who has stood by my side on my academic
journey over the last five years through thick and thin. I want to thank the professors
and other people at DTU who have facilitated an exciting and well-curated study line
on engineering acoustics.
I want to give special thanks to my supervisor, Cheol-Ho
Jeong, for suggesting the thesis topic and guiding me through this research process.
Furthermore, I would like to give special thanks to my co-supervisor, Yuanxin Xia, for
our valuable conversations during the final months of the process.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
PINN
Physics-Informed Neural Network
ISO
International Organisation for Standardisation
ML
Machine Learning
AI
Artificial Intelligence
GD
Gradient Descent
SGD
Stochastic Gradient Descent
MLP
Multi-layer Perceptron
mMLP Modified Multi-layer Perceptron
BEM
Boundary Element Method
HPC
High Performance Computing
DNN
Deep Neural Network
JIT
Just-in-time
CPU
Central Processing Unit
API
Application Programming Interface
SNR
Signal-to-noise Ratio
PDE
Partial Differential Equation
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
List of Symbols
Mathematical symbols
Symbol
Description
ˆ·
estimator of ·
Im{·}
Imaginary part operator
∥·∥p
p-norm
Re{·}
Real part operator
n
Normal unit vector
j
Imaginary unit
C
Set of complex numbers
R
Set of real numbers
∇
Gradient operator
∇2
Laplace operator
Physical symbols
Symbol
Description
Units
α
Absorption coeﬀicient
−
r
Position vector
m
u
Particle velocity vector
m−1
ω
Angular frequency
Hz
ρ0
Density of air
kg m−3
ζn
Normalized normal impedance condition
−
c
Speed of sound in air
m s−1
==PAGE:12==
x
Abbreviations
f
Cyclic frequency
Hz
k
Wavenumber
m−1
lx, ly, lz
Dimensions of a box shape
m
p
Sound pressure
Pa
t
Time
s
un
Normal component of the particle velocity
m s−1
x, y, z
Cartesian coordinates
m
Zn
Normal impedance condition
Pa s m−3
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Abbreviations
vii
Contents
xi
Introduction
1
1
Literature Review
3
1.1
ISO standardised measurement methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Free-field and In-situ methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Machine learning based approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Physics-Informed Neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theoretical Framework
7
2.1
The linear acoustic equations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Harmonic sound waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Reflection, absorption, and impedance at boundaries – A plane wave per-
spective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Pourous absorbers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.1
Delaney-Bazley-Miki model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5.1
Multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5.2
PINNs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5.3
Spectral Bias and sinusoidal activation functions . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5.4
Modified MLP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5.5
Pirate net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Optimisation of neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Methods
17
==PAGE:14==
xii
Contents
3.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Optimization problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Network architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
Loss function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6
Optimization strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.7
Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.8
Computational framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Experiments and results
29
I
Architectures and optimisation strategies
31
4.1
Varying the network architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Baseline model training dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Baseline model and nondimensionalisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
II
Evaluation of the Baseline System
39
4.4
System tested in the presence of reflective surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.5
System tested in a sound hard shoebox room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.6
Robustness to noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.7
Predicting the sound field close to edges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
Discussion
57
Conclusion
61
Appendices
63
Appendix A Nondimensionalisation
65
Appendix B Example training dynamics
69
Appendix C Datasets
73
Bibliography
75
==PAGE:15==
Introduction
The term impedance originated from electromagnetic circuit theory and was first coined
by Oliver Heaviside at the end of the 19th century while working on transmission lines.
Heaviside noted that the general resistance operator in harmonically driven circuits was
a complex number comprising a real component known as resistance and an imaginary
component known as the reactance [1].
Given its usefulness, impedance has been generalised to other domains, including
acoustics and mechanics [2]. In acoustics, the notion of impedance is associated with
many related concepts. The most general is the specific acoustic impedance, which de-
scribes the opposition to acoustic motion at a point and is given as a ratio of the pressure
and particle velocity. Another is the surface impedance, which lumps the impedance at
each surface point into a single complex value and is given as a ratio of the average
pressure and the volume velocity of the surface [3]. In any case, acoustic impedance
describes the behaviour of acoustic waves when travelling in a medium or interacting
with a boundary.
It is common to rely on the absorption coeﬀicient to control sound fields in enclosed
spaces, an energy-based measure which does not provide information about phased re-
flections at boundaries and can be computed directly from the impedance. Hence, the
complex impedance provides a complete description of the boundary conditions imposed
by the surface [4], and allows the prediction of both the amplitude and the phase of re-
flected and transmitted waves at the boundary. This data is especially relevant in the
low-frequency design of acoustic systems, such as architectural spaces and car cabins,
where acoustic modes are sparsely spaced in frequency [3, 5].
This thesis proposes a method to estimate the normal impedance boundary condition
imposed by a squared locally reacting porous absorber. For this task, a neural network
paradigm for solving partial differential equations is utilised, dubbed Physics-Informed
Neural Networks (PINNs), which has gained significant attention among researchers in
recent years [6, 7]. Specifically, it explores the ability of PINNs to accurately estimate
the surface impedance of the absorber specimen (referring to the normal impedance
boundary condition that would be measured if the absorber were infinite), given a sparse
set of measurement points of the steady-state pressure field above the surface. From this
data, a PINN is employed to approximate the pressure field in a volume domain above
and on the surface of a squared absorber sample. The underlying boundary condition
imposed by the surface is simultaneously learned to match the PINN approximation.
This study focuses on single frequencies ranging from 100–2,000 Hz. The suggested
method’s accuracy and feasibility are evaluated in controlled simulated conditions utilis-
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
ing Boundary Element Method (BEM) simulations with COMSOL Multiphysics. Simu-
lations are carried out in a free field (defined in this thesis as a non-enclosed environment)
and a sound-hard shoebox-shaped room. A parameter grid search is used to establish
a baseline architecture, which is then tested under various acoustic conditions, followed
by noise robustness tests. Finally, the system’s capability to predict the sound pressure
at the edges and corners, where edge diffraction phenomena exist, is assessed.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Literature Review
1.1
ISO standardised measurement methods
The reverberation chamber method, defined in ISO 354 [8], is a standardised approach
for determining the absorption coeﬀicient α(ω). In this method, several reverberation
time measurements are averaged in a reverberation chamber with and without an ab-
sorptive sample in the room. The absorption coeﬀicient α(ω) is then derived by solving a
system of equations using the averaged reverberation time and Sabine’s formula, which
inherently assumes a perfectly diffuse sound field within the reverberation chamber –
a rough approximation, as evidenced by Nolan et al. in [9]. Their study introduced a
wavenumber-based technique to evaluate sound field isotropy (diffusivity) in enclosures,
revealing that an absorber’s presence diminishes the sound field’s effective isotropy. This
finding was further validated and visualised in [10]. Moreover, common issues like diffrac-
tion at the edges of the absorbing specimen can result in non-sensical absorption coef-
ficients exceeding unity (i.e., α > 1). These inadequacies result in poor repeatability
of results across different laboratories, as shown in a round-robin test performed in [11].
Furthermore, this method solely provides the random incidence absorption coeﬀicient,
which is unsuitable for phased reflection calculations.
The impedance tube method is formalised in ISO 10534-2 [12]. In this method, a small
material specimen is mounted on one end of a rigid cylindrical tube, and a loudspeaker
unit is mounted on the other. The tube is then probed by two microphones at two
insertion points along its length. Under the assumption that only plane waves propa-
gate in the tube, information about reflected and incident plane waves can be deduced
from the transfer function between the two microphones, from which the normal surface
impedance of the test specimen is obtained.
As this method relies on plane waves, its validity breaks down in the high-frequencies,
as the tube modes will be excited. At low frequencies, the spacing of the microphones
sets a limit, as the microphone spacing becomes negligible compared to the wavelength,
causing high sensitivity to phase errors. The standard recommends a microphone spacing
of at least 5% of the wavelength of the lowest frequency of interest. This method is highly
accurate in its valid frequency range and is often used as a reference to other methods, as
stated in [13]. However, this method lacks flexibility, as it can only measure cylindrical
samples which fit on one end of the impedance tube.
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Literature Review
1.2
Free-field and In-situ methods
In the literature, many methods have been proposed to measure and estimate the acous-
tic impedance of materials. Brandão et al. [13] did a large-scale analysis of the body of
work done in the field since the middle of the last century, as they reviewed 79 confer-
ence papers on the topic of which 64 were directly related to in-situ measurements. In
their paper, the authors noted that methods based on mathematical formulations of the
acoustic field around impedance surfaces have gained the most attention in the literature,
ranging from simple plane-wave models (similar to the impedance tube method) [14] to
complex spherical models that account for edge diffraction [15]. Furthermore, they em-
phasised the importance of in-situ (Latin for on-site) applications, i.e. measurements
in medium-to-highly reverberant spaces, such as those typically found in day-to-day
life, such as oﬀices, theatres, classrooms, and car cabins to name a few. Furthermore,
the authors criticised the lack of a standard benchmark for method validation, as some
researchers used the two-microphone method as proposed by Allard and Sieben [14],
while others used impedance tube measurements [12] as a reference. Finally, they sug-
gested a round-robin test to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the many methods
developed in the past decades.
In a paper from 2022, Brandão and Fernandez-Grande [16] analysed the edge diffrac-
tion effect on finite squared porous absorbers as described by Thomasson in [17]. This
effect results from diffraction due to abrupt changes in boundary conditions at the ab-
sorber’s edges. Using a two-dimensional Fourier transform, they examined the sound
field in the wavenumber domain and compared theoretical expressions with numerical
simulations. They found that by including both propagating and evanescent waves in
the sound field, the model provides absorption coeﬀicient estimates minimally affected
by sample size.
1.3
Machine learning based approaches
Machine learning (ML) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) have exploded in popularity in
recent years, with an exponentially growing number of papers published in the ”ML+AI”
categories in arXiv each month [18].
In a recent paper, Zea et al.
[19] employed a deep residual network to learn a
mapping between a single-layer 12×12 pressure grid placed 2 cm above squared absorber
samples, flush-mounted in an infinite-baffle. To enable the learning of this mapping, they
generated a large dataset of pressure spectra above absorbers with varying side lengths,
thicknesses, flow resistivities, and source positions. In this way, the researchers hoped to
learn to mitigate the finite-size effect by learning patterns in the data. The researchers
showed improved or equal performance compared to the two-microphone method [14],
with significant improvements for small absorbers and low frequencies.
==PAGE:19==
1.4 Physics-Informed Neural networks
5
In a 2023 M.Sc. thesis by Xia [20], experiments were conducted similar to those
in this thesis but in a 2D enclosed environment.
Xia assigned two different normal
impedance conditions to the various boundaries of the 2D enclosure and excited the
sound field with a point source. PINNs with sinusoidal activation functions were then
employed to learn an implicit representation of the pressure field near the enclosure
boundaries. The underlying boundary conditions were then inferred by employing auto-
matic differentiation to compute the particle velocity normal to each surface via Euler’s
equation of motion. The surface impedance of each surface in the 2D structure was cal-
culated as an average of the specific impedance at selected points. The study examined
various collocation strategies and sound-field sampling configurations within the 100-300
Hz frequency range.
Notable findings from this research included the best performance achieved when the
sound source was placed in the middle of the 2D enclosure, and improved performance
was obtained by increasing the number of sampled data points in the sound field.
1.4
Physics-Informed Neural networks
Since the release of [7] by Raissi et al. in 2019, PINNs have emerged as a novel paradigm
for solving partial differential equations (PDEs) and have garnered significant attention
in the scientific computing and machine learning communities. These neural network
models are designed to incorporate the underlying physical laws and governing equations
into the learning process, allowing the use of sparse sensor data to estimate full physical
fields. Since then, many improvements have been made in physics-informed machine
learning. In a paper from Wang et al. from 2023 [6], various algorithms and strategies
to successfully train PINNs are proposed, many of which are used in this thesis.
==PAGE:20==
6
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical Framework
2.1
The linear acoustic equations
The sound field in a fluid characterised by the static pressure P0 and equilibrium density
ρ0 are well described by two variables: the acoustic pressure and particle velocity. The
total pressure in such a medium follows the relation,
ptot(r) = P0 + p(r),
(2.1)
where p(r) denotes acoustic perturbations at point r = (x, y, z), imposed by an acoustic
source, representing deviations from the equilibrium pressure within a small-medium
volume due to compression or rarefaction. If we assume that p ≪P0, and ρ ≪ρ0, where
ρ is the maximal change in density due to the acoustic wave p, we can derive a model
of how sound travels in space and time in the form of,
∇2p(r) −1
c2
∂2p(r)
∂t2
= 0,
(2.2)
which is known as the linearised wave equation, and is derived from the conservation
of mass, the conservation of momentum and by assuming that acoustic phenomena are
adiabatic, meaning that no local exchange of heat between neighbouring regions occurs
due to this process [3]. The term c in (2.2) denotes the speed of sound in the medium,
given in ideal gases by,
c2 = γRT,
(2.3)
where γ is the ratio of the specific heat of the medium at constant pressure to that at
constant volume, R is the ideal gas constant, and T is the absolute temperature [2, 3].
The particle velocity ur is a three-dimensional vector that describes the local velocity
of the centre of mass of a small element of the medium at point r. The particle velocity
and pressure can be related via Euler’s equation of motion,
∇p(r) + ρ0
∂ur
∂t = 0
(2.4)
which is derived from the conservation of momentum. Together, (2.4) and (2.2) form a
complete description of any sound field, and therefore, they are important in the field
of acoustics [3].
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Theoretical Framework
If we assume time harmonic solutions of the form p = p(r)ejωt, (2.2) can be rewritten
as,
∇2p + k2p = 0
(2.5)
where k =
ω
c is the wavenumber, often referred to as the spatial frequency as it has
the units of m−1, equation (2.5) is known as the Helmholtz equation. Similarly (2.4)
becomes,
ur = −
1
jωρ0
∂p
∂r.
(2.6)
The solutions to these harmonic form equations represent the steady-state response at
each point in frequency and space, meaning that transient effects are excluded from the
solution. The harmonic forms of these equations are used to calculate the steady-state
normal specific impedance [3],
Zn = p
un
,
(2.7)
where,
un = ur · n,
(2.8)
is the particle velocity in the direction of the unit normal vector n. It is important to
note that these derivations inherently assume that the acoustic system of interest abides
by the LTI assumptions, meaning they are linear and time-invariant. In practice, these
assumptions are fragile but are often approximately true.
2.2
Harmonic sound waves
A propagating wave oscillating at the angular frequency ω in three-dimensional space
can be described by the general expression,
˜p(r, t) = p(r)ejωt,
(2.9)
where p(r) is the spatially dependent complex amplitude of the wave, at position r =
(x, y, z) in Euclidean space, and t denotes time. If the sound field p(r) exhibits symme-
tries, such as in the case of planar or spherical waves, (2.9) can be used to compactly
describe the spatially varying sound field by replacing the term p(r) with the appropriate
closed form function. For plane waves, p(r) takes the form
p||(r) = Ae−jk·r,
(2.10)
where A denotes the amplitude of the wave and k = (kx, ky, kz) denotes the wave number
vector which encodes the direction of propagation, which follows the relation,
k2 = k2
x + k2
y + k2
z,
(2.11)
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Reflection, absorption, and impedance at boundaries – A plane wave perspective
9
and k = ω
c is the wave number in the medium in which the wave is contained, char-
acterised by the speed of sound c. Similarly, for spherical waves, we can replace p(r)
with
p◦(r) = Ae−jk|r|
|r|
.
(2.12)
Although such idealised sound fields do not exist in nature, they are often helpful ap-
proximations in practical calculations and are widely used in acoustics.
2.3
Reflection, absorption, and impedance
at boundaries – A plane wave
perspective
Let us consider a plane wave at incidence angle θi at a flat boundary between two acoustic
media Ω1 and Ω2. When the wave collides with the boundary between the media Γ1,2
part of the wave gets specularly reflected at angle θr such that,
sin θi = sin θr,
(2.13)
while part of the wave is refracted at an angle θt, which is obtained from Snell’s law,
c2
c1
= sin θt
sin θi
,
(2.14)
where c1 and c2 denote the speed of sound in Ω1 and Ω2 respectively. Let us denote
the incident, reflected and transmitted pressure waves as pi, pr and pt respectively. The
geometry of such a reflection is shown in Fig. 2.1. The continuity of pressure dictates
that,
pr + pi = pt.
(2.15)
Ω2
Ω1
Γ1,2
θi θr
θt
Figure 2.1. Refraction of a planar wavefront colliding with the boundary Γ1,2.
From (2.13), (2.14) and (2.15), we can deduce that the boundary condition at Γ1,2
depends on the ratio of the speeds of sound in the different media. Let us define the
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Theoretical Framework
pressure reflection coeﬀicient as defined by the ratio between the reflected and incident
waves,
R = pr
pi
,
(2.16)
which is generally a complex and frequency-dependent quantity. Now, the continuity
of particle velocity normal to Γ1,2 enables us to write an expression for the reflection
coeﬀicient at oblique incidence,
R(θi) =
Z2
Z1 cos θi −1
Z2
Z1 cos θi + 1,
(2.17)
where Z1 and Z2 denote the specific wave impedance of the two media [21]. If Ω1 is
taken to be air, (2.17) becomes
R(θi) = ζn cos θi −1
ζn cos θi + 1,
(2.18)
where ζn = Z2
ρc has been defined as the normal specific impedance at Γ1,2 normalized to
the specific impedance of air. The reflection coeﬀicient and the specific impedance at
the boundary have a one-to-one relationship. Now, from the reflection coeﬀicient, we
can define the absorption coeﬀicient, which represents the fraction of energy absorbed
at the boundary Γ1,2 as,
α = 1 −|R|2 .
(2.19)
Due to the magnitude of the operation, no phase information is included in the absorp-
tion coeﬀicient, meaning that the absorption can be computed from the reflection coeﬀi-
cient but not vice versa. We now have a framework that connects reflection, impedance,
and absorption at boundaries, which will be used throughout this thesis.
2.4
Pourous absorbers
Porous absorbers consist of fibrous materials that form complex microstructures with
small pockets of air distributed throughout the material in various shapes. This structure
allows sound waves to pass through the material. As they do, sound energy is dissipated
into heat through viscous friction at the boundaries between the fibres and air pockets.
These materials are typically used as acoustic treatments in rooms.
As these systems are complex and microscopic, to model their behaviour mathemat-
ically, acousticians tend to use approximations to derive simple analytical methods that
describe the parts of them that they care about. One such approach is modelling the
absorber as an equivalent fluid, in which case the simple mathematical analysis as listed
in Section 2.3 applies. This approach is known as the equivalent fluid model and is used
throughout this thesis.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Pourous absorbers
11
A further simplification commonly made is that porous absorbers are locally reacting.
The logic behind this assumption is that if we consider porous absorbers as equivalent
fluids, the speed of sound in a layer of the porous absorber is much higher than in air;
therefore, even for oblique incidence, the propagation direction inside the material is
normal to the surface due to refraction. This means that the reaction of the material
due to excitation at any one point in its surface is independent of other points. This
assumption simplifies analysis considerably [21].
2.4.1
Delaney-Bazley-Miki model
Delaney and Bazley [22] introduced an empirical model for calculating the characteristic
acoustic impedance and propagation constants of porous absorbers based on a series of
impedance tube measurements. This model is based on a single parameter: the sample
flow resistivity σ. Miki [23] noted that their proposed model predicted non-realisable
impedances in some cases and proposed an alternative fit which abides by conservation
laws. Miki’s model gives,
Zc(f) = Rc(f) + jXc(f),
(2.20)
where Zc denotes the characteristic impedance of the material consisting of the resistance
term Rc and reactance term Xc given by,
Rc(f) = 1 + 0.070
 f
σ
!−0.632
,
Xc(f) = −0.107
 f
σ
!−0.632
.
(2.21)
The propagation constant of the material is then given by,
γ(f) = α(f) + jβ(f),
(2.22)
where,
α(f) = ω
c0

0.160
 f
σ
!−0.618
,
β(f) = ω
c0

1 + 0.109
 f
σ
!−0.618
.
(2.23)
From these quantities, the normal impedance of the material when mounted on a sound-
hard surface can be shown to be,
Zn(f) = Zc coth(γl),
(2.24)
The model has been empirically shown to be valid in the frequency range defined by,
0.01 < ρ0f
σ
< 1,
(2.25)
where ρ0 is the density of air, for materials with porosity ∼1, which is true for most
purpose-built porous absorbers [21].
==PAGE:26==
12
2 Theoretical Framework
2.5
Neural networks
Multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) are universal function approximators in the asymptotic
limit [24]. Any function can be approximated given a single-layer network with suﬀi-
cient neurons. In practice, however, we are constrained computationally to finite-sized
networks, which limits the expressivity of the resulting approximations.
Given a finite-sized network, finding the weights that optimally approximate an objec-
tive function is a challenge. The current standard method for searching for the optimal
parameters consists of randomly initialising the parameters according to some initial-
isation scheme and using an iterative gradient descent scheme to minimise the norm
between the model’s output and a target (known as a loss function). Such optimisation
problems are often non-convex and challenging to solve in practice. To aid this, two
common strategies are used for inducing biases given prior domain knowledge of the
underlying function: regularisation and the inherent inductive bias via network design
[25].
Regularisation penalises the loss function by adding a weighted norm for the model’s
weights. This biases the solution space towards a specific weight distribution, depend-
ing on which norm is used and the magnitude of the weight given to it. For example,
ℓ1 regularisation promotes sparsity in the model weights, while ℓ2 regularisation pro-
motes Gaussian distributed weights [26]. Examples of inducing bias through design are
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), which are biased towards learning spatial corre-
lations through the use of the convolutional operation, and Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs), which are suited for time-series data through the use of recurrence [25]. Choos-
ing a structure with an indicative bias that drives the model to converge towards the
desired solution can determine the success of training deep neural nets.
2.5.1
Multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs)
The perceptron was introduced by Rosenblatt in 1958 [27] and was inspired by biological
learning mechanisms. Rosenblatt’s perceptron can be described by,
A = σ
 n
X
i=1
wixi + b
!
,
(2.26)
where A is known as the perceptrons activation, σ is the Heaviside step function, and
the argument term is a linear combination of n inputs xi and n weights wi with an
added constant b, dubbed the bias term. In modern-day deep learning, it is common to
replace the function σ with various non-linear functions (known as activation functions)
depending on the network purpose and to organise m perceptrons in n sequential lay-
ers. Such networks are referred to as multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) [28]. In such a
network, each perceptron is known as a neuron. Generally, each layer in an MLP can
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Neural networks
13
be represented by
A(l) = σ(l) 
W(l)A(l−1) + b(l)
,
(2.27)
where A(l) is a vector containing the activations corresponding to the l-th layer, σ(l)
denotes the activation function of the layer, W(l) denotes the weight matrix associated
with the connections between the l −1-th layer and the l-th layer and b denotes the
biases of the l-th layer. For the 0-th layer, the following holds,
A(0) = x,
(2.28)
where x is a vector containing the network inputs. The entire network can be written
as an input-output function of the form,
fθ(x) = f (m) ◦f (m−1) ◦· · · ◦f (1) ◦f (0)(x),
(2.29)
where θ represents the learnable parameters, comprising the weights and biases of the
network, and f (l) is the transformation function of the l-th layer given by the relationship
in (2.27), that is,
f (l) 
A(l−1)
= σ(l) 
W(l)A(l−1) + b(l)
.
(2.30)
2.5.2
PINNs
Physics-informed neural Networks (PINNs) have recently emerged as a paradigm for
solving forward and inverse problems by combining observed data with knowledge of
the underlying physics governing those data. Introduced by Raissi et al. in [7], present
a method for solving partial differential equations (PDEs) using multi-layer perceptrons
(MLPs). These networks are trained on loss functions that measure the discrepancy
between the network’s outputs and known data points, such as initial conditions or
measured data.
The network is then biased towards satisfying the underlying PDE
by computing the PDE residual at sampled points within the solution domain (using
automatic differentiation) and adding this to the loss function as a regularizer. A similar
loss term can be added to enforce boundary conditions or other physical priors. These
terms are then combined as a weighted sum,
L = λDLD + λRLR + λBCLBC
(2.31)
where the sub-indices denote data, PDE residual and boundary condition, respectively,
and the λ terms are weight multipliers used to balance the different terms. This loss
is then minimised using gradient-based methods.
It is important to note that this
framework implements soft constraints on each loss term and does not guarantee exact
solutions.
==PAGE:28==
14
2 Theoretical Framework
2.5.3
Spectral Bias and sinusoidal activation functions
It has been shown that despite their expressivity, neural networks are inherently biased
towards learning low-frequency functions [29]. Sitzman et al. [30] introduced a novel
strategy to solve this problem using sinusoidal activation functions and a specific ini-
tialisation scheme. It is worth noting that if the network’s output layer is linear, the
output will be a linear combination of basis functions composed of sinusoids, where the
model’s weights control angular frequencies, and the biases are phase shifts. As such,
these networks are similar to a Fourier series. This approach is used in this thesis for all
neural networks.
2.5.4
Modified MLP
The modified MLP was proposed by Wang et al. in [31] to address gradient flow patholo-
gies in PINNs experienced when solving various PDEs. The network architecture is
similar to that of regular MLPs, with the added encoder blocks
U = σ (W1x + b1) and V = σ (W2x + b2) .
(2.32)
As seen from the expressions, the encoder blocks are auxiliary single MLP layers with
weights and biases. Then, the transformation function of each layer of the network from
l = 1, 2, . . . , L can be written as,
f (l)(A(l−1)) = σ

W(l) ·

A(l−1) ⊙U +

1 −A(l−1)
⊙V

+ b(l)
(2.33)
where the A(0) is given by the inputs of the networks as in (2.28), and ⊙denotes point-
wise multiplication. This way, the two encoder networks map the input variables to a
latent feature space. These features are then used as a multiplicative mask at the end of
each layer, except for the last (linear) layer. This architecture has been shown to yield
better accuracies than standard MLPs in solving PDEs [6].
2.5.5
Pirate net
Pirate nets were introduced by Wang et al. in [32] as an alternative architecture that
allows the training of deep PINNs. The key idea behind these networks is the addition
of adaptive residual connections, which allow the network to gradually deepen during
training and help mitigate vanishing and exploding gradient problems, typically seen in
deep PINNs. Like modified MLPs, Pirate nets utilise the two encoders, U and V as
==PAGE:29==
2.6 Optimisation of neural networks
15
described in (2.32). The model then comprises n blocks given by,
f (l)
=
σ

W(l)
1 x(l) + b(l)
1

(2.34)
z(l)
1
=
f (l) ⊙U +

1 −f (l)
⊙V
(2.35)
g(l)
=
σ

W(l)
2 z(l)
1 + b(l)
2

(2.36)
z(l)
2
=
g(l) ⊙U +

1 −g(l)
⊙V
(2.37)
h(l)
=
σ

W(l)
3 z(l)
2 + b(l)
3

(2.38)
x(l+1)
=
α(l)h(l) +

1 −α(l)
x(l),
(2.39)
where (2.39) is the output of the l-th block. After the input features have been sent
through each block, the network is terminated by a simple linear output layer without
activation. Fig. 2.2 shows the flow diagram of such a network. The residual connections
α(l) are initialised to zero, such that at the start of training, each block can be simplified
to an identity mapping.
The original paper included a random Fourier feature embedding of the inputs as
an initial step to mitigate the frequency bias of neural networks. However, sinusoidal
activation is used in this thesis instead to achieve a similar effect, as discussed in 2.5.3.
×
+
Dense
Layer
Dense
Layer
Dense
Layer
Dense
Layer
Dense
Layer
×
Inputs
U
V
α
×n
Output
Layer
Output
Figure 2.2. Flow diagram of Pirate net. The dashed border represents a single block (adapted
from [32]).
2.6
Optimisation of neural networks
Differentiable programming is a programming paradigm that allows a numerical com-
puter program to be differentiated via automatic differentiation, enabling eﬀicient com-
putations of the gradients of complex computational graphs [28]. This enables gradient-
based parameter optimisation schemes which utilise gradient descent (GD). This algo-
rithm takes advantage of the well-known result from calculus that the gradient of a
==PAGE:30==
16
2 Theoretical Framework
smooth multivariate function points toward the steepest ascent. GD can be described
by the simple update formula,
θi+1 = θi −η∇f(θi)
(2.40)
where θi denote the model parameters at step i, η denotes a chosen ”step-size” and f is
a multivariate objective function of the parameters.
In the case of non-convex optimization problems, gradient-descent has the potential
to get stuck in local minima. Various methods have been proposed to solve this problem,
including mini-batch and stochastic gradient descent [25].
These methods introduce
randomness to each update step, which can help the algorithm escape local minima
during training.
A popular variant of gradient descent is used in this thesis, named the Adam optimiser
(derived from ”adaptive moments”) [33]. This method is based on the simple addition
of utilising exponentially weighted running averages of the first and second moments of
the gradients, which effectively adapts the learning rate of each parameter in theta in
each iterative step. This optimiser is widely used in the literature to optimise neural
networks, including PINNs [6, 25, 28].
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
3.1
Problem statement
This section loosely introduces the problem that this thesis aims to solve. A squared
sample of a locally reacting porous absorber material with dimensions
(lx, ly, lz) = (1, 1, 0.05) m
(3.1)
with the flow resistivity of σ = 41, 000 Pa s m−2 in a thin rigid frame is considered, see
Fig. 3.1. The objective is to determine the normal specific acoustic impedance Zn at
the sample’s surface when mounted on a sound-hard backing. We can write the normal
impedance condition in its normalized form as,
ζn = 1
ρc
p
un
.
(3.2)
where p is the pressure, un is the component of the particle velocity normal to the surface,
and ρc is the characteristic impedance of air.
lx = 1 m
ly = 1 m
lz = 0.05 m
n
Impedance surface
Source
Figure 3.1. A sketch of the porous absorber test specimen used in this study. The sides of
the sample are assumed to be rigid. The source, marked in red, is a point source placed one
meter above ground level. The vector marked n shows the normal direction of the surface.
As measurements on the surface itself modify the material’s acoustic properties, di-
rect measurements of ˆζn are impractical. Hence, we are constrained to measuring points
above and around the surface and from these data, from which we must deduce the
underlying boundary condition ζn. The collected data will contain mixed information
==PAGE:32==
18
3 Methods
about the incident and reflected waves. In non-free field scenarios, additional reflections
from surrounding boundaries will contaminate the obtained data, resulting in complex
sound fields consisting of many superimposed reflections.
This work considers these
measurements in the frequency domain, i.e., as solutions to the Helmholtz equation
representing the steady-state pressure response at each measurement point.
To address this problem, Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) are proposed
as a way to combine data-driven methods with physical priors. The objective is to use
a PINN to approximate the steady-state pressure field at specific frequencies within a
confined domain on and above the sample’s surface. The Helmholtz equation and the
assumption of a uniform normal impedance (due to the locally reacting condition) are
incorporated as physical priors to guide the PINN’s training process.
The desired attributes of such a system are:
• The system should use sparsely sampled data points. This is the case since acquir-
ing densely spaced measurement points gets expensive in practice.
• The system should be invariant to the external sound field (as long as the impedance
surface is adequately excited, such that reflections from the sample reach the mea-
surement locations with a reasonable signal strength).
• The system should be robust to measurement noise. This includes phase deviations
between microphones, background, and coordinate noise.
x
y
z
A(1)
1
A(1)
2
A(1)
3
A(1)
4
A(1)
m
...
A(2)
1
A(2)
2
A(2)
3
A(2)
4
A(2)
m
...
. . .
A(n)
1
A(n)
2
A(n)
3
A(n)
4
A(n)
m
...
Re{ˆp}
Im{ˆp}
Inputs
Hidden layers
Output
layer
Figure 3.2. A sketch of an MLP, which implements a generic mapping of the form in (3.3).
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Optimization problem
19
3.2
Optimization problem
This section formalises the loosely introduced problem mathematically as an optimiza-
tion problem. Let ˆpθ denote a neural network parameterized by its learnable parameters
θ, which takes as inputs coordinates in three-dimensional space and returns two values:
the real and imaginary components of the pressure at the input coordinates, i.e.,
ˆpθ : R3 7→C
(3.3)
see the sketch in Fig. 3.2. We would like to find a set of parameters θ⋆such that ˆp⋆
θ
closely approximates the sound field in the specified reconstruction domain Ω, i.e.
ˆpθ⋆(r) ≃p(r)
∀r ∈Ω
(3.4)
where p denotes the underlying pressure field, and r denotes coordinates in R3. This
domain includes a volume above and on the surface of the absorbent sample of interest
and specified measured pressure points. Given such a function, we could get point-wise
estimations of the normal impedance on the sample’s surface by utilising Euler’s equation
of motion as stated in (2.4). As previously mentioned, a uniform normal impedance value
applies to the whole surface due to the locally reacting assumption.
For a fixed frequency, the problem at hand is formulated as an optimization problem
described by,
θ⋆, ζ⋆
n = arg min L

θ, ˆζn

(3.5)
where θ are the model parameters and, ˆζn =
h
Re
nˆζn
o
, Im
nˆζn
oi
is an estimator of
the normal impedance on the surface of the sample normalized to the characteristic
impedance of air, and L is a loss function which measures the discrepancy between the
estimated parameters and the true values they are approximating.
If we can find estimators ˆθ, ˆζn that effectively minimize L, we can assume that a
close approximate solution to (3.5) is reached. For such a set of parameters, ˆpθ can be
taken as a functional approximate representation of the pressure field in a small locale
above this absorber, while ˆζn can be taken as the underlying normal impedance of the
absorbing sample, hence solving our inverse boundary value problem.
3.3
Datasets
All datasets used in this thesis were created using simulations with the Pressure Acoustics
BEM module of COMSOL Multiphysics® [34], a widely used numerical physics solver.
It was deemed interesting to test the framework in three acoustic conditions,
(a) Sample is placed on an infinite sound-hard baffle, referred to as the ”infinite baffle”
dataset.
==PAGE:34==
20
3 Methods
Figure 3.3. Sketch of the three different simulation setups. (a) The sample is mounted on an
infinite sound hard baffle. (b) the sample is snuggly mounted in an infinite sound hard corner.
(c) the sample is placed in the middle of the floor of a sound-hard shoebox room. The red
dots denote the point sources, placed 1 meter above ground level in all setups, while the grey
shaded area highlights the impedance surface.
(b) Sample is placed tightly in an infinite sound-hard corner, referred to as the ”infinite
corner” dataset.
(c) Sample is placed on a floor inside a sound-hard shoebox room, referred to as the
”shoebox room” dataset. The dimensions of this room are lx = 3.14 m (width),
ly = 4.38 m (length) and lz = 3.27 m (height), resulting in a volume of ∼45 m3.
A sketch of each simulation setup is shown in Fig. 3.3. All setups place a point source
at z = 1 meter above ground level aligned with the sample’s centre in the xy-plane
to excite the sound field. Dataset (a) provides a simple controlled environment where
the effects of wave phenomena such as edge diffraction are distinguishable, representing
a ”free-field” condition. Datasets (b) and (c) gradually add complexity by including
reflective surfaces. The latter is considered to check the validity of the system in-situ.
All simulations were done in the frequency domain. Therefore, the obtained solutions
represent the steady-state response of the sound field in each environment. The scope
of frequencies is restricted to,
f ∈{100, 250, 500, 1000, 2000} Hz,
(3.6)
given the project’s time constraints, this was considered to span a wide enough range
to probe the system’s frequency-dependent capabilities while keeping simulation times
reasonably low, as solving the Helmholtz equation gets computationally expensive at
high frequencies. In terms of wavelengths, this spans a range of ∼3.43 m – 17 cm in
ambient room conditions (which are assumed). Miki’s model is used to generate the
impedance values at each frequency, using σ = 41, 000 as the flow resistivity parameter,
an example taken from Miki’s paper [23]. The resulting complex impedance curve in the
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Network architectures
21
frequency range 100–2000 Hz can be seen in Fig. 3.4, along with the calculated sound
absorption curve as computed by (2.19).
125
250
500
1k
2k
Frequency (Hz)
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
Normalized Impedance
Real Impedance
Imaginary Impedance
Absorption
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Absorption Coeﬀicient
Figure 3.4. Acoustic characteristics of the porous absorber considered.
For datasets (a) and (b), a minimum mesh size of 2.5 cm was used for all simulations,
which is approximately 1/6th of the maximal wavelength considered (2000 Hz), following
the example of [16]. Dataset (c) was generated using the HPC cluster offered by DTU due
to its heavy computational load at higher frequencies [35]. For dataset (c), the minimum
mesh size was adapted to each frequency at 1/4th of the wavelength, as modelling the
room was computationally expensive. Furthermore, for dataset (c), results were not
yielded at 2,000 Hz; therefore, the study is truncated at 1,000 Hz for this dataset. For
the impedance surface, the ”user-defined” option in COMSOL was set according to the
curves in Fig, while all other surfaces were set to sound hard. 3.4.
Data was extracted in rectangular grids above the sample’s surface to construct the
final datasets. The absolute value of the pressure in a measurement grid placed 1 cm
above the absorber can be seen in Appendix C
3.4
Network architectures
Three neural net architectures were considered in different experiments throughout this
thesis,
• Multi-layer perceptron (MLP).
• Modified multi-layer perceptron (mMLP).
• PirateNets.
==PAGE:36==
22
3 Methods
To combat the inherent spectral bias of DNNs, modifications are made on each of these
architectures based on the work of Sitzman et al. as introduced in [30], that is, sinusoidal
activation functions of the form,
σ(x) = sin(ω0x),
(3.7)
are used in each layer, where ω0 = 30, except for the last layer, which is kept linear. The
weights of the network follow the initialization scheme introduced by [30]; that is, the
first layer is initialized due to,
wi ∼U

−1
nin
, 1
nin

,
(3.8)
and other layers follow,
wi ∼U
 
−
s
6
nin
/ω0,
s
6
nin
/ω0
!
,
(3.9)
where nin denotes the number of input features in a specified layer. For the encoding
layers of the mMLP and PirateNet (3.8) is used.
3.5
Loss function
The loss function design is perhaps the most critical part of the design process of the
algorithm, as this effectively decides how the model balances the fidelity to the observed
data while complying with the underlying physical priors. This section introduces an
adaptive loss function designed first to fit the known data and Helmholtz PDE prior,
while the constant impedance prior is gradually incorporated as training progresses.
The loss function L comprises three weighted terms,
L = λDLD(xD; θ) + λRLR((xΩ, xB); θ) + γ(i)λBLB(xB; θ, ˆζn).
(3.10)
The terms in front of the individual loss functions act as multipliers and follow elaborate
adaptive schemes detailed in section 3.6. The first term in (3.10) measures the mean
squared error of the observed data and the predictions of our model,
LD =
1
ND
ND−1
X
k=0
ˆpθ(xD
(k)) −g(xD
(k))

2 ,
(3.11)
where xD denotes the measured data points and g(xD) denotes measured data of the
pressure field at those coordinates. The second term measures the mean squared error
of the PDE residual at two sets of sampled points,
LR =
1
NΩ+ NB
NΩ+NR−1
X
k=0
R
h
ˆpθ

(xΩ, xB)(k)i
2 ,
(3.12)
==PAGE:37==
3.6 Optimization strategies
23
where
R[p] = ∇2p + k2p
(3.13)
is a PDE residual operator derived from the homogeneous Helmholtz equation and xΩ
denotes sampled (collocation) points in the domain of interest, and xB are collocation
points constrained to the sample’s surface. Finally, the third term is given by,
LB = 1
NB
NB−1
X
k=0
B
h
ˆpθ(x(k)
B )
i
−ˆζn

2 ,
(3.14)
where
B[p] = 1
ρc
p
−
1
jωρ ∂p
∂r ·n
(3.15)
is a boundary condition operator which calculates the normalized normal specific impedance,
derived from (3.2) and Euler’s equation of motion (2.4). This loss function, therefore,
measures the mean squared error between the implicit representation pθ and our mea-
sured data, the Helmholtz equation, and the discrepancy between the boundary condi-
tion inferred from pθ and our estimator ˆζn.
Since we are dealing with a complex formulation, each loss term implicitly contains
two terms: the real and imaginary parts, omitted from the notation for simplicity. How-
ever, this means that in practice, there are six terms in the loss, each with its weight
multiplier.
3.6
Optimization strategies
In all experiments in this thesis, the Adam optimizer is used for gradient-descent opti-
mization. Two separate instances are used for the model weights θ and the impedance
estimator ˆζn. This way, the gradients of the loss, as stated in (3.10) w.r.t. θ, are sent
to the model weight optimizer. In contrast, the gradients of the unweighted boundary
condition loss w.r.t. ˆζn are sent to the impedance optimizer. The weight and impedance
optimizers are then sequentially updated at each training step. The assumption is that
if all of the terms in the loss function (3.10) approach zero, we can assume that,
pθ ≃p,
ˆζn ≃ζn.
(3.16)
This implies a solution to the optimization problem stated in (3.5) has been reached.
For the model parameters, an exponential decaying learning rate schedule using
1,000 transition steps and a decay rate of 0.9 is used, as recommended per [6], while
the learning rate for the impedance coeﬀicients uses a constant schedule to maintain
flexibility throughout training.
==PAGE:38==
24
3 Methods
Non-dimensionalization
In all experiments in this thesis, unless otherwise stated,
input and output features, i.e. the coordinates x, y, z and the real and imaginary parts
of the pressure data, are normalized to the range [0,1] by shifting and scaling the data.
Such operations on PDEs are known as non-dimensionalization. Non-dimensionalized
modifications to the Helmholtz equation and Euler’s equation of motion are derived in
Appendix A.
Batch training
At each training step, three classes of points are passed through the
network: data points xD, domain points xΩand boundary points xB. Mini-batch training
with random shuffling is used for the data points, where ND = 32 data points are used in
each step. For collocation points in the domain and on the boundary, random sampling
drawn from a uniform distribution is used, which is constrained to the reconstruction
volume for the domain points. For the boundary, points are constrained to the boundary
itself. The number of collocation points used are set to NΩ= 128 and NB = 64 in all
experiments in this thesis. Random sampling of collocation is recommended by Wang
et al. [6], who note that random sampling introduces regularization effects and lowers
memory and computational costs for each training step compared to full batch training,
improving the capacity for generalization and inhibiting overfitting to the PDE residuals.
Gradient-based loss balancing
PINNs use unconventional ways to enforce priors on
the solution space, i.e. by adding regularization terms that rely on model outputs and
their gradients. Therefore, care must be taken to balance the different loss terms to allow
gradient-based optimizers to converge effectively. To balance the various terms in (3.10),
an adaptive balancing strategy based on balancing the ℓ2 norms of the gradients of each
loss term is used, as introduced in [31] and [6]. In this scheme, the global loss weights
are initialized to 1.0 and updated every 1,000 training steps (starting at initialization).
At each update step, estimates of the global weights are computed by,
ˆλi =
1
6
P
j∈{D,R,B} ∥∇θLj(θ)∥2
∥∇θLi(θ)∥2
for i ∈{D, R, B},
(3.17)
where the numerator computes a mean over the norms of the gradients w.r.t. all loss
terms (3 due to the real and imaginary parts, respectively), and the denominator denotes
the norm of the gradients w.r.t. the loss corresponding to that weight. The weights are
then updated due to the following running average formula,
λnew = αλold + (1 −α)ˆλnew ,
(3.18)
which is employed to combat stochastic effects due to the gradient norms being evaluated
on mini-batches. The parameter α controls how much the new estimate gets weighted
at every update and is set to 0.9 in all experiments in this thesis.
In this way, the gradient signals sent to the optimizer from each loss component
are relatively similar in magnitude, allowing for simultaneous optimization of each loss.
==PAGE:39==
3.6 Optimization strategies
25
Without this strategy, a time-consuming manual approach, such as a grid search ap-
proach, is needed to balance the terms. A further upside to this is that periodically
updating these weights throughout training maintains a good gradient balance as train-
ing progresses. An alternative adaptive method was tested for this purpose proposed in
[36]. However, this was ultimately deemed unreliable, which will be further discussed in
section 4.7.
Boundary condition strategy
A further balancing technique is presented for the
boundary condition loss to avoid overfitting to the initial value of ˆζn at the early stages,
which is initialized to ˆζ(0)
n
= 0 + 0j. This allows the model to ignore the impedance
estimator during the early stages of training, allowing the first gradient descent steps to
focus on the data and PDE residual losses. This is achieved by the use of an exponential
decay function at every training step (i) based on the other two losses, i.e.
γ(i) = C exp

−a
b

L(i)
D + L(i)
R

,
(3.19)
where i is the iterative index, a controls the ”steepness” of the exponential decay curve,
and b = L(0)
D + L(0)
R
is used to normalize the curve to the start at
1
ea, to maintain a
similar effect across different models and datasets, as these values were found to vary
significantly. This way, the boundary loss has a minimal impact on the optimization of
the model weights θ during the initial stages of training. As training progresses, the term
L(i)
D + L(i)
R is iteratively minimized, eventually reaching a value close to zero, making the
expression gradually approach C. This allows the weight optimizer to focus on fitting
the data and PDE losses in the early stages of training. In contrast, the boundary loss
gradually takes effect as training progresses. In later stages of training, C acts similarly
to traditional regularization weights. C and a are set to 1e-3 and 1, respectively, in
all experiments in this thesis, which was found to facilitate fast convergence and good
results. Fig. 3.5 shows a graph of this proposed weighting strategy.
b
LD + LR
0
1
ea
C
γ
Figure 3.5. Visualisation of the weighting curve used to gradually introduce the boundary
condition loss during the initial training steps. See equation (3.19).
==PAGE:40==
26
3 Methods
3.7
Metrics
To quantify the overall error between predicted and ground truth complex values, the
relative ℓ2 error is used,
Relative ℓ2 Error = ∥ˆy −y∥2
∥y∥2
.
(3.20)
Here, ∥·∥2 is equivalent to the complex magnitude operation. The relative ℓ1 norm is
used in percentages to quantify discrepancies between single numbers,
Relative ℓ1 Error = ∥ˆy −y∥1
∥y∥1
× 100 %..
(3.21)
In equations (3.20) and (3.21), y and ˆy denote the ground truth and estimated values,
respectively.
3.8
Computational framework
The experimental framework was built in the Python programming language utilizing
JAX [37], a numerical computing library created by Google engineers, which provides
features such as automatic differentiation of computational graphs, optimized just-in-
time (JIT) compilation of functions for different hardware such as CPUs and GPUs,
and automatic vectorization and parallelization of scalar functions. These features make
JAX well-suited for machine learning applications.
Fig. 3.6 shows the finalised system’s simplified signal flow diagram. To generate
random batches, the PyTorch [38] data loading framework was employed. The Equinox
[39] library was used to construct deep neural networks, which are built on top of JAX
and provide a simple API to create complex autodifferentiable functions, such as neural
networks. For gradient-based optimization, the Adam optimizer from the Optax library
was used [40], who additionally offer a simple API for learning rate scheduling. The
implemented Python framework is available at https://github.com/alruts/zpinn.
==PAGE:41==
3.8 Computational framework
27
Batch
Generator
ˆpθ(x, y, z; θ)
∂
∂z
∂2
∂x2
∂2
∂y2
∂2
∂z2
1
LD(θ)
LR(θ)
LB(θ)
λD
γλB
λR
+
L(θ)
ˆζn
Figure 3.6. Flow diagram of the computational pipeline to compute the loss function. The
blue round nodes represent the differential operators used to derive the various losses, which
are weighted and summed to form the total loss function. The green blocks represent trainable
modules, which are updated via gradient descent.
==PAGE:42==
28
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Experiments and results
This section presents a series of studies using the proposed framework. The chapter
is split into two sections. The first focuses on the framework’s machine learning as-
pect, investigating different model architectures to establish a baseline architecture for
the following experiments. In this section, the effect of non-dimensionalisation is in-
vestigated. The second section challenges this baseline system to identify its strengths
and limitations. The system is tested in different acoustic conditions, followed by a
robustness-to-noise test using the infinite baffle dataset. Finally, the system’s ability to
predict the pressure close to the edges of the sample is investigated.
In all experiments presented, the number of data points per training step is set
to ND = 32, while the domain and boundary collocation points are set to NΩ= 128
and NB = 64, respectively, one realisation of such a training batch is shown on Fig.
4.2. All experiments use a fixed random seed for reproducibility. As this method has
a stochastic element (due to stochastic mini-batch gradient descent scheme), a fixed
random seed of 42 is used throughout all experiments. Furthermore, all experiments
truncate the number of training steps to 40,000, allowing each model ample time to
converge while keeping training times reasonable. All models were trained on a Windows
laptop employing an AMD RYZEN PRO 5 CPU, with typical training times of 20-30
minutes, depending on the network architecture, using JIT-compiled training loops.
In all experiments (except otherwise stated), the sound field of each environment as
described in section 3.3, are sampled in triple-layer 13 × 13 measurement grids with the
spacing ∆xy = 5 cm between adjacent measurement positions in the xy-plane, placed at
z = 1, 3 and 6 cm above the sample’s surface, with each layer spanning an aperture of
x, y ∈[−0.3, 0.3] m, as depicted in Fig. 4.1. This measurement setup is not intended to
be realistic (although such a measurement scheme is realizable using a robot arm with
a microphone attached) but rather to investigate if the system operates as intended and
to enable a systematic study of the system. The edges of the sample are purposefully
left out of this dataset, as the system was found to provide limited accuracy in these
areas, which is further detailed in section 4.7.
This triple-layer setup takes inspiration from [15, 16, 41], who use double-layer con-
figurations to probe the sound field above the absorber. Since the PINN framework can
eﬀiciently handle arbitrary data points, a third layer is added in hopes of improving
performance at low spatial frequencies, taking inspiration from impedance tube mea-
surements.
==PAGE:44==
30
4 Experiments and results
−0.3
0.0
0.3
x (m)
−0.3
0.0
0.3
y (m)
1 cm
3 cm
6 cm
z - lz (cm)
Impedance surface
Reconstruction domain
Layer 1
Layer 2
Layer 3
Figure 4.1. Default experimental setup. The measurement grid consists of a 3-layer setup,
placed in the middle of the sample at 1, 3 and 6 cm from the sample’s surface in the z-direction.
The spacing in the xy-plane is ∆xy = 5 cm, which results in 13×13 point grids using spanning
an aperture of x, y ∈[−0.3, 0.3] meters.
−0.5
0.0
0.5
x (m)
−0.5
0.0
0.5
y (m)
0.00
0.05
0.11
z (m)
Impedance surface
Domain points
Boundary points
Data points
Figure 4.2. One realisation of a randomly sampled batch with 128 domain points, 64 bound-
ary points and 32 data points.
==PAGE:45==
Part I
Architectures and
optimisation strategies
==PAGE:46==
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Varying the network architecture
33
4.1
Varying the network architecture
In this experiment, the infinite baffle dataset was used as a controlled environment to
choose a suitable PINN architecture to use as a baseline model for further experiments.
This dataset is selected as it is the most straightforward setup with no reflections from
neighbouring surfaces (except reflections due to the infinite rigid backing and diffraction
from the edges). A parameter sweep was conducted on the three architectures considered
in this thesis, as listed in Table 4.1. Each model is then rated on how well it predicts the
true underlying impedance of the sample by cumulating the relative ℓ2 error between
the true and predicted complex impedances over each frequency, that is,
Total relative ℓ2 error =
X
f
ˆζn(f) −ζn(f)

2 ,
f ∈{100, 250, 500, 1000, 2000} Hz
(4.1)
Table 4.1. Summary of Experimental Grid Search Variables. Note: For the PirateNet archi-
tecture, each layer implicitly contains three linear units.
Parameter
Values
Number of hidden layers (MLP, mMLP)
2, 3, 4
Number of hidden layers (PirateNet)
1, 2, 3
Features per hidden layer
8, 16, 32
Model
MLP, mMLP, PirateNet
Fig. 4.3 shows the results of this parameter sweep depicting the total relative ℓ2
errors yielded by each model in a grid, where greener hues represent better performance
and red hues denote bad performance. The figure reveals that the MLP and modified
MLP architectures perform relatively well when configured with 16-32 neurons per layer,
achieving similar results across 2-4 layers.
However, the modified MLP consistently
outperforms the standard MLP under all parameter combinations and shows a consistent
increase in performance per doubling of neurons.
For the PirateNet architecture, each ”layer” implicitly contains three linear layers,
making this the most computationally expensive architecture.
Despite the extra pa-
rameters, the results show unreliable performance for this architecture. Adequate per-
formance is reached in some cases, but at 32 neurons, it fails to converge to accurate
solutions in all cases in this study. However, for 16 neurons and three layers, the model
converges to a low error. Given these inconsistencies, the PirateNet architecture was
disregarded as an unappealing choice for the baseline model.
Given this evidence, the mMLP is chosen as the baseline model, as this is the most
attractive option despite its slightly higher computational cost due to the additional
forward passes required by the U and V encoders and the associated vector operations.
As there is no significant variation in the total ℓ2 error in the parameter range of 16-32
==PAGE:48==
34
4 Experiments and results
neurons and 2-4 layers, a medium-sised network employing three layers and 16 neurons
is chosen as the baseline model to be used in the rest of the experiments presented in
this thesis.
4
8
16
32
Features
mMLP/2
mMLP/3
mMLP/4
Pirate/1
Pirate/2
Pirate/3
MLP/2
MLP/3
MLP/4
Model / Layers
0.235
0.075
0.042
0.042
0.261
0.074
0.043
0.041
0.153
0.105
0.040
0.039
0.383
0.215
0.113
2.714
0.276
0.156
0.076
0.883
0.202
0.098
0.056
1.592
0.924
0.101
0.080
0.063
3.664
1.910
0.064
0.081
1.623
3.715
0.076
0.096
0.1
1
Total relative ℓ2 error
Figure 4.3. Total relative ℓ2 error for each model considered in this experiment. Green hues
represent lower errors, while red hues represent higher ones, as indicated by the color bar. The
lowest result is highlighted underlined.
4.2
Baseline model training dynamics
The convergence dynamics of the estimator ˆζn are depicted in Fig. 4.4. This figure
shows the values of the impedance estimator, normalised by their true targets for each
frequency, as a function of training steps during the training of the baseline model. These
normalised curves are shifted by a constant to avoid visual overlap and hence only show
the relative differences in their shapes rather than their absolute positions. To quantify
the convergence of each curve, the relative ℓ1 errors are displayed below.
Analyzing the training dynamics, the real part of the impedance initially overshoots
its target and then slowly converges, whereas the imaginary part does not exhibit such
an overshoot. Instead, the imaginary part initially moves in the opposite direction to
the target at high frequencies, but it quickly reverses direction and reaches the target
without noticeable overshoot.
The results indicate that all parameters eventually reach low relative errors, except
for the real part of the impedance at 100 Hz, which is overestimated by approximately
10% and shows minimal improvement after around 12,000 training steps. In contrast,
all other parameters reach errors of around 1% relative error or lower. However, it is
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Baseline model and nondimensionalisation
35
worth noting that the highest error in estimating the imaginary part is also seen at 100
Hz.
A detailed example of training dynamics is included in Appendix B, which displays
the different training curves, and adaptive weighting as functions of training steps.
0
1
2
3
ˆζn / ζn with offsets
Real Part
100 Hz
250 Hz
500 Hz
1000 Hz
2000 Hz
Target values with offsets
0
1
2
Imaginary Part
0
10000
20000
30000
0.001
0.100
10.000
Relative Error (%)
0
10000
20000
30000
0.01
1.00
100.00
Training Step
Figure 4.4. Convergence of the real and imaginary parts of the estimator ˆζn normalised by
the target value ζn, where each curve is offset by a constant to avoid visual overlap. It is
seen that the 100 Hz curve takes the longest to reach a steady value. The relative errors are
computed without offsets. It is seen that all values reach approx 1% relative error or lower,
except for the real part at 100 Hz, which plateaus at ∼10%.
4.3
Baseline model and
nondimensionalisation
A further study was made to determine the effectiveness of the nondimensionalisation
as presented in section 3.6. In this experiment, the baseline model, i.e., a modified MLP
==PAGE:50==
36
4 Experiments and results
comprising three layers, each with 16 neurons, is tested in the infinite baffle dataset with
and without nondimensionalisation.
Fig. 4.5 compares the absorptive sample’s true acoustic properties and the estimated
properties as predicted with and without nondimensionalisation. In this case, no signif-
icant differences are seen between using and not using this method, as both methods
show good compliance with the true underlying impedance and computed absorption
coeﬀicient.
However, in correspondence to previous results, both approaches fail to
accurately predict the real part of the impedance at 100 Hz.
This is further confirmed in Fig. 4.6 which compares the relative ℓ1 error in percent-
ages with and without nondimensionalisation. At the low frequencies from 100-500 Hz,
not using nondimensionalisation yields slightly better accuracies for the real impedance,
while the effect is reversed at 1 kHz and 2 kHz.
For a more robust estimate of the effectiveness of this algorithm, an averaging over
several random seeds and datasets should be conducted. However, these initial results
show little to no improvement in final errors.
1.6
1.8
2.0
Re{ζn}
Impedance (Real)
With
Without
True
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
Im{ζn}
Impedance (Imaginary)
With
Without
True
125
250
500
1k
2k
Frequency (Hz)
0.0
0.5
1.0
α
Absorption Coeﬀicient
With
Without
True
Figure 4.5. Comparisons between the true and predicted acoustic properties for dataset (a)
(sample placed in an ”infinite baffle”) with and without using nondimensionalisation.
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Baseline model and nondimensionalisation
37
0.10
10.00
Impedance (Real)
With
Without
0.10
1.00
Relative Error (%)
Impedance (Imaginary)
With
Without
125
250
500
1k
2k
Frequency (Hz)
0.10
1.00
10.00
Absorption Coeﬀicient
With
Without
Figure 4.6. Relative ℓ1 percentage errors between the true and predicted acoustic properties
for dataset (a) (sample placed in an ”infinite baffle”) with and without using nondimensional-
isation.
==PAGE:52==
38
==PAGE:53==
Part II
Evaluation of the Baseline
System
==PAGE:54==
==PAGE:55==
4.4 System tested in the presence of reflective surfaces
41
4.4
System tested in the presence of
reflective surfaces
This section presents a study where the algorithm is challenged with reflective surfaces,
by using the infinite sound hard corner dataset, as described in section 3.3. The batch
configuration is kept as described at the beginning of Chapter 4. This study assesses the
system’s performance in the presence of reflective surfaces, which produce an asymmetric
sound field, which might have implications for the applicability of the system in outdoor
applications.
The results of this experiment are shown in Figures 4.7 and 4.8. The results indi-
cate comparable performance with this dataset as those yielded with the infinite-baffle
dataset, where all parameters reach relative errors under 1%, except for the real part of
the impedance at 100 Hz, which still yields a relative error over 10%.
1.6
1.8
2.0
Re{ζn}
Impedance (Real)
Predicted
True
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
Im{ζn}
Impedance (Imaginary)
Predicted
True
125
250
500
1k
2k
Frequency (Hz)
0.0
0.5
1.0
α
Absorption Coeﬀicient
Predicted
True
Figure 4.7. Comparisons between the true and predicted acoustic properties for the ”infinite
corner” dataset.
==PAGE:56==
42
4 Experiments and results
125
250
500
1k
2k
Frequency (Hz)
0.10
1.00
10.00
Relative Error (%)
Real
Imaginary
Absorption
Figure 4.8. Relative ℓ1 percentage error between the true and predicted acoustic properties
for the ”infinite corner” dataset.
4.5
System tested in a sound hard shoebox
room
This section presents a study where the algorithm is challenged with the shoebox room
dataset, or dataset (c) described in section 3.3. This study assesses the system’s perfor-
mance in a reverberant enclosure, which might have implications for the applicability of
the system in-situ. Here, data at 2,000 Hz is unavailable due to failed attempts to run
simulations at such a high frequency. It should be noted that anomalies that appear
at 1,000 Hz are expected to be due to errors in the BEM solution used to generate the
dataset. Therefore, the results for this frequency should be interpreted with caution.
Figures 4.9 and 4.10 show the results of this experiment. We see the most significant
error at 100 Hz, where the real and imaginary impedance errors land at ∼3 %. The model
then shows consistent improvement with frequency, falling below 1% error at 500 Hz.
However, an exception to this trend is seen at 1,000 Hz, where significant errors appear.
This is attributed to faults in the BEM simulation, which require further investigations
and are omitted due to time limitations.
==PAGE:57==
4.5 System tested in a sound hard shoebox room
43
1.0
1.5
Re{ζn}
Impedance (Real)
Predicted
True
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
Im{ζn}
Impedance (Imaginary)
Predicted
True
125
250
500
1k
Frequency (Hz)
0.0
0.5
1.0
α
Absorption Coeﬀicient
Predicted
True
Figure 4.9. Comparisons between the true and predicted acoustic properties for the ”shoebox”
dataset, where the sample placed in the centre of a soundhard shoebox-shaped room.
==PAGE:58==
44
4 Experiments and results
125
250
500
1k
Frequency (Hz)
1.0
3.0
10.0
20.0
50.0
100.0
Relative Error (%)
Real
Imaginary
Absorption
Figure 4.10. Relative ℓ1 percentage errors between the true and predicted acoustic properties
for the ”shoebox” dataset, where the sample placed in the centre of a soundhard shoebox-
shaped room.
4.6
Robustness to noise
In this experiment, the system’s robustness to noise is assessed by training it with three
versions of the infinite baffle dataset, each containing varying noise levels. Three different
signal-to-noise ratios are imposed on the data with the values of,
SNR ∈{20, 30, 40} dB.
(4.2)
The following procedure is followed at each distinct frequency f to add noise to the data
1. Compute the mean power of all data points by,
Psignal = E
h
|S(f)|2i
(4.3)
where |·| denotes the complex magnitude operator, and S(f) is a vector containing
the data.
2. Compute the noise power corresponding to a given SNR by,
Pnoise = Psignal
10
SNR
10
(4.4)
3. To each data point, add a randomly generated complex vector N(f) = an + jbn,
drawn from two independent normal distributions, an, bn ∼N

0,
q
Pnoise
2

, such
that
Snoised(f) = S(f) + N(f).
(4.5)
==PAGE:59==
4.6 Robustness to noise
45
Figures 4.11–4.13 show predicted impedance and computed absorption coeﬀicients
at each SNR. The system shows robust behaviour at 500 Hz and above, where the noise
only has a minimal effect on accuracy; however, below this frequency, the system exhibits
a rapid decline in performance, especially at 100 Hz, which resultes in very high relative
errors. At 100 Hz, the system fails to estimate the real part of the impedance for all
SNRs; however, at 40 dB SNR, the imaginary impedance is well estimated to a ∼1%
relative error. However, as the SNR decreases to 30 and 20 dB, the imaginary impedance
misses its mark with substantial relative errors.
The 250 Hz estimate is also noticeably affected but to a smaller extent.
As we
move to 500 Hz and above, highly accurate estimates are available at all SNRs, with all
acoustic properties being estimated with below ∼1% error, and only minimal effects are
seen per 10 dB decrease in SNR.
1
2
3
Real Impedance
SNR 20 dB
SNR 30 dB
SNR 40 dB
True
125
250
500
1k
2k
Frequency (Hz)
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Relative Error (%)
Figure 4.11.
Comparisons between the true and predicted real part of the normalised
impedance for the ”infinite baffle” dataset with various SNR.
==PAGE:60==
46
4 Experiments and results
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
Imaginary Impedance
SNR 20 dB
SNR 30 dB
SNR 40 dB
True
125
250
500
1k
2k
Frequency (Hz)
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Relative Error (%)
Figure 4.12. Comparisons between the true and predicted imaginary part of the normalised
impedance for the ”infinite baffle” dataset with various SNR.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Absorbtion coeﬀicient
SNR 20 dB
SNR 30 dB
SNR 40 dB
True
125
250
500
1k
2k
Frequency (Hz)
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Relative Error (%)
Figure 4.13. Comparisons between the true and predicted absorption coeﬀicients of the
normalised impedance for the ”infinite baffle” dataset with various SNR.
==PAGE:61==
4.6 Robustness to noise
47
To investigate the underlying reasons for the high sensitivity to noise at low frequen-
cies, a statistical analysis of the effect of the noise on the relative ℓ1 phase error between
adjacent microphones in the z-plane is carried out. For simplicity, adjacent microphone
pairs in the top and bottom layers of the measurement grid are considered, as detailed
in section 4, as these provide the largest separation in the z-direction, with a spacing
of 5 cm. This results in a total of 13 × 13 = 169 investigated microphone pairs. The
relative phase error imposed by the different SNRs is then computed by using the clean
phase difference of each microphone pair as a reference and comparing it against the
noised datasets.
Fig. 4.14 shows the statistical information of the relative phase errors at each fre-
quency and each SNR in the form of a box-and-whiskers graph. The coloured boxed
areas represent the lower and upper quartiles, the vertical lines denote the median val-
ues, and the whiskers indicate the lower and upper ranges of the data within 1.5 times
the interquartile range. The overlayed grey points on the plot represent individual data
points in each collected dataset.
It is observed that the relative phase error rapidly trends down with increased fre-
quency.
As expected, every 10 dB reduction in SNR (corresponding to a factor 10
increase in noise power) significantly increases relative phase errors.
To further showcase the downward trend of this quantity as a function of frequency,
Fig. 4.15 shows the median relative phase error plotted against frequency in a log-log
plot. In the figure, the shaded areas denote 95% confidence intervals. The downwards-
sloping linear trend of these lines suggests an inverse power law relationship between the
median relative error between the microphone pairs and frequency.
This information explains the rapid deterioration of the system’s robustness to noise
at low frequencies. As frequency decreases, the relative noise errors between data points
rapidly increase, effectively destroying valuable information about the spatial character-
istics of the sound field. This data will incorrectly condition the PINN.
==PAGE:62==
48
4 Experiments and results
100
250
500
1k
2k
Frequency (Hz)
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Relative phase error (%)
SNR (dB)
20
30
40
Figure 4.14. A box-and-whiskers plot showing the distributions of the relative ℓ1 phase error
in the recorded pressure between clean and noised microphone pairs. The shaded box areas
represent the lower and upper quartiles. The vertical lines denote the median values, while
the whiskers indicate the lower and upper ranges of the data within 1.5 times the interquartile
range. Note that both axes of the figure are logarithmic.
==PAGE:63==
4.6 Robustness to noise
49
100
250
500
1k
2k
Frequency (Hz)
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
40
100
300
1000
Relative phase error (%)
SNR (dB)
20
30
40
Figure 4.15. The median ℓ1 phase error expressed in percentages between adjacent micro-
phones in measurement planes separated by ∆z = 5 cm, showing a downward trend with
frequency. The solid lines indicate median values, and the shaded area denotes a 95% confi-
dence interval. Note that both axes use logarithmic spacing.
==PAGE:64==
50
4 Experiments and results
4.7
Predicting the sound field close to edges
−0.5
0.0
0.5
x (m)
−0.5
0.0
0.5
y (m)
1 cm
3 cm
6 cm
z - lz (cm)
Impedance surface
Reconstruction domain
Layer 1
Layer 2
Layer 3
Figure 4.16. Expanded setup. The measurement grid consists of a 3-layer setup, placed in
the middle of the sample at 1, 3 and 6 cm from the sample’s surface in the z-direction. The
spacing in the xy-plane is ∆xy = 5 cm, which results in 21 × 21 point grids using spanning an
aperture of x, y ∈[−0.5, 0.5] meters.
This section presents a study that aims to assess the proposed system’s ability to predict
the sound field at the sample’s edges, which is purposefully omitted in other sections, as
this was found to be a limitation of the system throughout its development.
The dataset for this experiment follows a similar configuration as described in 4, with
each measurement plane expanded to an aperture of x, y ∈[−0.5, 0.5] m, resulting in
a total of 21 × 21 = 441 sampled points for each plane. The baseline model acquired
from section 4.1 is then trained on this dataset to approximate the sound field in a
cubed volume that encompasses the surface of the sample and the measured data points,
resulting in a (1×1×0.11 m domain). This section uses the absolute error as the metric;
that is,
Absolute Error = |y −ˆy|
(4.6)
where ˆy denotes the estimated quantity and y is the reference. This metric is chosen over
the relative ℓ1 error to avoid error explosions as the reference solution passes through
zero.
The resulting approximated pressure, particle velocity, and impedance fields on the
sample’s surface at 500 Hz can be seen in Figs, 4.17–4.19,
==PAGE:65==
4.7 Predicting the sound field close to edges
51
Figure 4.17. Comparison between the BEM reference solution and the PINN prediction for
the real and imaginary pressure fields p on the sample’s surface at 500 Hz.
Figure 4.18. Comparison between the BEM reference solution and the PINN prediction for
the real and imaginary normal velocity fields un on the sample’s surface at 500 Hz.
==PAGE:66==
52
4 Experiments and results
Figure 4.19. Comparison between the BEM reference solution and the PINN prediction for
the real and imaginary normal specific impedance fields p/un on the sample’s surface at 500
Hz.
On the sample’s surface, it is seen that the model generally approximates the BEM
reference solution well, with consistent exceptions close to the edges and corners. It is
further observed that wavy patterns emerge in the absolute error plots, likely due to the
sinusoidal activation functions of the PINN model.
To further highlight the errors at the edges, Fig. 4.20 shows a trace of the complex
magnitudes of the pressure |p| along a diagonal from the bottom left corner to the upper
right corner of the sample, as predicted by the PINN, alongside reference solution, which
are then compared via the relative ℓ1 error. The figure reveals two similar error lobes at
each corner of the sample, indicating the model’s failure to predict the pressure at the
edges accurately. When observing the errors, a symmetric pattern with two prominent
’lobes’ at the edges is seen, followed by smaller ripples when approaching the centre.
In Figs. 4.22 and 4.23, the sound field in the reconstruction domain is probed in a 2D
slice in the xz-plane fixed at y = 0 ranging from one edge of the absorber to its centre
point, whereas Fig. 4.21 shows the real and imaginary absolute errors between the PINN
prediction and the reference solution. In each figure, black dots indicate points in the
measurement grid. These figures reveal that the PINN accurately predicts the pressure
inside most of this domain slice, except the sample edges. Here, we see regions of error
close to the edge for both real and imaginary parts, which quickly decay as we move
away from the edge. When observing the error plots, it is interesting to note that even
though the region of high error include four measurement points, the model still fails to
predict them with the same accuracy as in the rest of the domain.
==PAGE:67==
4.7 Predicting the sound field close to edges
53
This investigation underlines the failure of the system to predict the sound field at
the edges of the sample. These failures are likely due to an inadequately sampled sound
field close to the edges of the absorber, where rapid spatial variations occur due to
diffraction.
1.0
1.5
Absolute pressure (Pa)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Diagonal distance (m)
0
2
4
6
Relative Error (%)
PINN prediction
BEM Reference
Figure 4.20. A comparison between the PINN prediction and the reference solution of the
magnitude of the complex pressure in a diagonal trace form the bottom left corner of the
sample to the upper right corner.
==PAGE:68==
54
4 Experiments and results
Figure 4.21. A 2D slice of the absolute error between the predicted and reference real and
imaginary pressure fields. The slice is located in the xz-plane at y = 0 of the reconstruction
domain as shown in Fig. 4.16, tracing the sample along its edge (starting at x = −0.5 m) to
its centre located at (x = 0 m).
Figure 4.22. A 2D slice of the real part of the predicted and reference pressure fields. The
slice is located in the xz-plane at y = 0 of the reconstruction domain as shown in Fig. 4.16,
tracing the sample along its edge (starting at x = −0.5 m) to its centre located at (x = 0 m).
==PAGE:69==
4.7 Predicting the sound field close to edges
55
Figure 4.23. A 2D slice of the imaginary part of the predicted and reference pressure fields.
The slice is located in the xz-plane at y = 0 of the reconstruction domain as shown in Fig.
4.16, tracing the sample along its edge (starting at x = −0.5 m) to its centre located at (x = 0
m).
==PAGE:70==
56
==PAGE:71==
Discussion
The modified MLP architecture resulted in robust and accurate solutions, which agrees
with the findings of [31, 42]. However, the PirateNet architecture was found to be un-
reliable, which is in contrast with the findings of the original PirateNet paper, where
the authors achieved state-of-the-art performance on a series of benchmark problems,
outperforming the modified MLP. However, it must be noted that this thesis employs
a slightly modified version of the PirateNet architecture. The original paper used hy-
perbolic tangent activations and transformed the input features using random Fourier
features, making direct comparison challenging.
The nondimensionalization of the governing equations did not improve the perfor-
mance of the baseline model, as similar results were obtained regardless of its application.
This makes these experiments inconclusive regarding the necessity of this step. However,
as this study was conducted with a single combination of random seed, model architec-
ture, and dataset, a general claim cannot be made about the overall utility of this strat-
egy. A likely explanation for this is that this step is redundant since the gradient-based
loss-balancing strategy effectively handles feature imbalances.
While developing the computational framework used in this thesis, an alternative
loss-balancing strategy based on a method proposed by [36] was initially tested, which
uses gradient descent optimisation to balance the loss terms during training dynamically.
This method was sensitive to the weight loss initialisation. In this case, nondimension-
alisation helped maintain the loss values at a relatively similar scale, simplifying the
selection of appropriate initial values. Although this method yielded promising results
in some cases, it was ultimately deemed unreliable and replaced by the gradient-based
loss-balancing method used throughout this thesis.
The results yielded with the two free-field datasets (the ”infinite baffle” and ”infinite
corner” datasets) showed that the framework struggles to accurately estimate the real
part of the impedance at the lowest frequency of 100 Hz.
A potential explanation
is related to material properties, where at low frequencies, the imaginary part of the
impedance is much larger than the real part. However, further research is necessary to
draw definitive conclusions about this anomaly, as the evidence presented in this report
is insuﬀicient to make concrete statements.
Apart from this anomaly, the study demonstrates that estimating the surface impedance
of the locally reacting sample is feasible in free-field, both with and without reflective
walls, given zero-noise measurement data.
The ”infinite baffle” dataset was then used to test the system’s robustness to noise.
==PAGE:72==
58
Discussion
Here, the accuracy rapidly deteriorated below 500 Hz, which aligns with the findings of
[16]. The third layer was added to the system’s design for this purpose; however, the
maximal spacing of 5 cm was likely not enough to extend the performance to 100 Hz.
Perhaps following recommendations of the impedance tube standard [12] of including
a spacing that spans at least 5% of the wavelength of the lowest frequency of interest,
∼17 cm at 100 Hz could extend the frequency range of validity of this framework. This
a topic of future research.
Interestingly, in the case of the shoebox room dataset, the real part of the impedance
at 100 Hz shows a significant error reduction when compared to the ”free-field” datasets
(a–b); that is, with an improvement from ∼10% to ∼3%.
Furthermore, it is noted
that in this case, the real impedance is slightly underestimated, whereas in previous
experiments, it was overestimated. This suggests that the framework is extensible to
in-situ measurement environments.
Regarding the failure to accurately predict the sound field at the sample’s edges, it is
hypothesised that this might be improved by a more elaborate sampling strategy close
to the edges and corners. This might be in densely spaced regular grids or irregular
configurations. Another strategy would include another prior on the solution space in
the form of a loss function, which would encourage the model to include diffraction
phenomena at hard edges. These topics are ideas for future research.
Several areas for future research are recommended:
• Testing on different absorbers: It would be interesting to test the method
on other locally reacting materials, such as other porous absorbers with different
thicknesses, side lengths, and flow resistivities, to challenge the system further and
test its limitations.
• Sources of errors due to sampling strategies: This includes researching op-
timal sampling strategies to ensure accurate reconstruction in areas of diffraction
at abrupt impedance changes, such as edges and corners, or to increase the frame-
work’s validity to lower frequencies in the presence of noise. Two paths forward
are proposed for improving the performance at the edges,
– a revised sampling strategy to effectively capture information about rapid
spatial frequencies that occur locally close to edges,
– modifying the loss function with another physical prior to encourage it to
include diffraction phenomena.
To extend the model’s validity at low frequencies, the aforementioned method of
including more measurement layers that extend further into the z direction is a
suggested approach.
For practical measurements, finding a theory that provides the minimum number
of sampling points needed to acquire the acoustic impedance accurately in each
case would be of great interest.
==PAGE:73==
Discussion
59
• Practical testing and frequency parametrization: Testing the method with
real-life data would be of great interest. This thesis utilized controlled simulation
data at single frequencies, which is computationally expensive for dense frequency
simulations. However, real-life data allows the acquisition of dense frequency res-
olution cheaply; acquiring many measurement positions, in this case, is costly,
hence underlining the importance of finding optimal sampling strategies. Future
research could involve training a model with frequency as an additional parame-
ter, enabling the inference of continuous frequency-dependent impedance curves
at each spatial point. This is feasible if dense frequency data is available.
• Boundary condition strategy: Conducting a comprehensive hyperparameter
sweep using the boundary condition balancing strategy introduced in Section 3.6
could improve training times. This investigation was omitted in this work due to
time constraints.
• Coordinate noise: This thesis does not consider the effect of coordinate noise,
but this is inevitable in practical applications. It would be advisable to research
the implications of such noise.
• Extended reaction: Extending the model to be able to handle extended reaction
materials would be of great interest, as this would be able to capture the impedance
of a broader range of materials with angle-dependent impedances.
Addressing these areas will allow future work to build on the current research, leading
to more accurate and practical models for sound field prediction.
==PAGE:74==
60
==PAGE:75==
Conclusion
A PINN-based framework was presented to estimate the surface impedance of a finite-
sized absorber in three different acoustic conditions: in an infinite baffle, an infinite
corner and the centre of a sound-hard shoebox-shaped room, at five logarithmically
spaced frequencies in the range of 100-2,000 Hz. The framework was successfully em-
ployed in each tested condition, with anomalies at 100 Hz for the free field datasets: the
infinite baffle and the infinite corner. Improved performance at this frequency was found
for the Showbox room dataset; however, an anomaly appeared at 1,000 Hz, which was
attributed to a failure in the employed BEM model.
The system’s robustness to noise was investigated at three different signal-to-noise
ratios. This was followed by a statistical analysis of the frequency-dependent relative
phase noise between adjacent microphones in the z-plane.
This analysis revealed a
power-law relationship between this quantity and increased frequency, explaining the
system’s increasing sensitivity to noise at lower frequencies.
Finally, the system’s ability to accurately predict the pressure field at the sample’s
edges and corners was examined, revealing this as a weakness.
Although the presented framework provided great accuracy in various acoustic condi-
tions, these findings highlight its strengths and limitations. Future work should address
the identified anomalies and weaknesses to enhance the system’s accuracy and robustness
in practical applications.
==PAGE:76==
62
==PAGE:77==
Appendices
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX A
Nondimensionalisation
The nondimensionalisation of governing differential equations has been found to improve
PINN training convergence significantly, as stated by Wang et al. in [6]. As a result, a
method is proposed for scaling the Helmholtz and normal impedance equations so that
their features can be normalized into an arbitrary interval. This is accomplished by
shifting and scaling each feature in the input and output space of the complex pressure
function to be approximated by the PINN. Consider the three-dimensional homogeneous
Helmholtz equation,
(∇2 + k2)p = 0,
(A.1)
where ∇2 is the three-dimensional Laplacian operator in Cartesian coordinates, repre-
sented by the coordinate vector r = (x, y, z), k = 2πf
c
is the wave number, and
p = (Re{p(r)} + j Im{p(r)})e−j2πft
(A.2)
is the complex harmonic pressure at frequency f.
To nondimensionalize (A.1) we
reparametrize the coordinate system (x, y, z), the frequency f, and pressure p by in-
troducing the following parameters,
ξ = x −x0
xc
⇒
x = ξxc + x0,
(A.3)
η = y −y0
yc
⇒
y = ηyc + y0,
(A.4)
ν = z −z0
zc
⇒
z = νzc + z0,
(A.5)
φ = f −f0
fc
⇒
f = φfc + f0,
(A.6)
Re{ψ} = Re{p} −a0
ac
⇒
Re{p} = Re{ψ}ac + a0,
(A.7)
Im{ψ} = Im{p} −b0
bc
⇒
Im{p} = Im{ψ}bc + b0,
(A.8)
where x0, y0, z0, f0, a0, b0 ∈R serve as shifting operators, while the xc, yc, zc, fc, ac, bc ∈R+
serve as scaling operators. This way, each of these scalars can be arbitrarily set so that
the reparametrized features are normalized to a specified range. Note that the real and
imaginary parts of the pressure are parametrized separately so that they can be scaled to
similar ranges to encourage equal convergence to both values during training. We need
to find a relation between each nondimensional and dimensional differential operator to
==PAGE:80==
66
Appendix A Nondimensionalisation
express differential equations in terms of our nondimensional variables. Let us take ξ as
an example. From (A.3) we have,
∂ξ
∂x = 1
xc
(A.9)
Now, by the chain rule, we have,
∂
∂x = ∂
∂ξ
∂ξ
∂x = 1
xc
1
∂ξ.
(A.10)
It is now apparent that the relationship between the n-th derivative operator for dimen-
sional and nondimensional variables is of the form,
 ∂
∂x
!n
=
 ∂
xc
1
∂ξ
!n
= 1
xn
c
∂n
dξn.
(A.11)
This general result applies to any parameter in (A.3)–(A.8). From this result, we can
write down the Laplace operator in our reparametrized space as
∇2 =
 1
x2
c
∂2
∂ξ2 + 1
y2
c
∂2
∂η2 + 1
z2
c
∂2
∂ν2
!
(A.12)
Using (A.6), the wavenumber can be written in its reparametrized form as
k = 2π(φfc + f0)
c
(A.13)
It is apparent that both the real and imaginary parts of the left-hand side of (A.1) need
to be equated to zero for the PDE to be satisfied. To simplify implementation, these
parts are split into two, which yields a system of two identical equations,



(∇2 + k2)(Re{ψ}ac + a0) = 0,
(∇2 + k2)(Im{ψ}bc + b0) = 0.
(A.14)
Because the equations are of the same form, it will be suﬀicient to demonstrate the
reparametrisation of one, and the other will follow. To parameterize these equations in
terms of our nondimensional variables, we expand as follows,
∇2(Re{ψ}ac + a0) + k2(Re{ψ}ac + a0) = 0.
(A.15)
Distributing the Laplace operator into the left bracket eliminates the constant a0,
ac∇2 Re{ψ} + k2(Re{ψ}ac + a0) = 0.
(A.16)
Using the result from (A.11) and expressing k in terms of φ from (A.6), we get
ac
 1
x2
c
∂2
∂ξ2 + 1
y2
c
∂2
∂η2 + 1
z2
c
∂2
∂ν2
!
Re{ψ}
+
 2π(φfc + f0)
c
!2
(Re{ψ}ac + a0) = 0,
(A.17)
==PAGE:81==
Appendix A Nondimensionalisation
67
which expresses the real part of the Helmholtz equation (A.1) in terms of the nondimen-
sional variables defined in (A.3)–(A.8). As a final step to avoid division by the scaling
constants, the equation is multiplied by x2
cy2
cz2
c
ac
 
y2
cz2
c
∂2
∂ξ2 + x2
cz2
c
∂2
∂η2 + x2
cy2
c
∂2
∂ν2
!
Re{ψ}
+x2
cy2
cz2
c
 2π(φfc + f0)
c
!2
(Re{ψ}ac + a0) = 0.
(A.18)
Similarly, we can write down an equation for the imaginary part
bc
 
y2
cz2
c
∂2
∂ξ2 + x2
cz2
c
∂2
∂η2 + x2
cy2
c
∂2
∂ν2
!
Im{ψ}
+x2
cy2
cz2
c
 2π(φfc + f0)
c
!2
(Im{ψ}bc + b0) = 0.
(A.19)
We have now completely expressed the system in (A.14) using our reparameterized
nondimensional features, which can readily be implemented as a loss function for PINNs.
Similarly, we want to enforce a generalized impedance boundary condition, thus we
need a nondimensional representation of the normal impedance Zn, which is formed by
the pressure and normal velocity components at the surface. To achieve this, let us
consider Euler’s equation of motion in general form.
ur = −
1
jωρ0
∂p
∂r.
(A.20)
If we define the normal impedance in terms of the incoming velocity to the surface, we
get
un = −
1
jωρ0
∂p
∂r · −n.
(A.21)
Restricting our scope to surfaces whose normal is in the +z direction yields,
un =
1
jωρ0
∂p
∂z.
(A.22)
Now, to write these terms of nondimensional features, let us split ∂p
∂z into its real and
imaginary components,
un =
1
jωρ0
∂
∂z (Re{p} + j Im{p}) .
(A.23)
Now plugging in the nondimensionalized features from (A.3)–(A.8), and using the result
from (A.11) yields,
un =
1
j2π(φfc + f0)ρ0
1
zc
∂
∂ν (Re{ψ}ac + a0 + j(Im{ψ}bc + b0)) .
(A.24)
==PAGE:82==
68
Appendix A Nondimensionalisation
The constants b0 and a0 can be omitted as they will be eliminated by the differential
operator, which results in the simplified equation,
un =
1
j2π(φfc + f0)ρ0
1
zc
 
ac
∂Re{ψ}
∂ν
+ jbc
∂Im{ψ}
∂ν
!
.
(A.25)
Finally, the nondimensionalized normal specific impedance boundary condition can be
formalized by,
Zn = p
un
=
(Re{ψ}ac + a0) + j (Im{ψ}bc + b0)
1
j2π(φfc+f0)ρ0
1
zc

ac
∂Re{ψ}
∂ν
+ jbc
∂Im{ψ}
∂ν
,
(A.26)
which completes the nondimensionalisation of the differential equations used in this
work.
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX B
Example training dynamics
This chapter contains all dynamically updated values during a single training loop when
a PINN is trained with data from the infinite baffle dataset at 500 Hz. This includes
training losses and adaptive weights; I refer to chapter 3 for more details.
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
Step
10−3
10−1
101
Value
Boundary Loss LB
Imaginary
Real
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
Step
10−6
10−4
10−2
Value
Data Loss LD
Imaginary
Real
==PAGE:84==
70
Appendix B Example training dynamics
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
Step
10−6
10−4
10−2
100
Value
PDE Loss LR
Imaginary
Real
0
5000
10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000 40000
Step
0.4
0.6
0.8
Value
BC Weights λB
Imaginary
Real
==PAGE:85==
Appendix B Example training dynamics
71
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
Step
100
200
300
Value
Data Weights λD
Imaginary
Real
0
5000
10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000 40000
Step
100
101
102
Value
PDE Weights λR
Imaginary
Real
==PAGE:86==
72
Appendix B Example training dynamics
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
Step
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
Value
γ Weights
Imaginary
Real
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
Step
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
Value
Impedance L1 Error ˆζn −ζn
Imaginary
Real
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX C
Datasets
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
x (m)
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
y (m)
100 Hz
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
x (m)
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
250 Hz
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
x (m)
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
500 Hz
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
x (m)
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
y (m)
1000 Hz
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
x (m)
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
2000 Hz
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure C.1. Absolute pressure of the pressure at 1 cm above example with a resolution of 5
cm in the x and y directions for the ”infinite baffle”.
==PAGE:88==
74
Appendix C Datasets
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
x (m)
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
y (m)
100 Hz
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
x (m)
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
250 Hz
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
x (m)
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
500 Hz
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
x (m)
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
y (m)
1000 Hz
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
x (m)
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
2000 Hz
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
0.5
1.0
1.5
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure C.2. Absolute pressure of the pressure at 1 cm above example with a resolution of 5
cm in the x and y directions for the ”infinite corner”.
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
x (m)
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
y (m)
100 Hz
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
x (m)
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
250 Hz
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
x (m)
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
y (m)
500 Hz
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
x (m)
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
1000 Hz
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
6
8
10
12
14
2
4
6
8
10
12
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Figure C.3. Absolute pressure of the pressure at 1 cm above example with a resolution of 5
cm in the x and y directions for the ”shoebox” .
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[1]
C. Donaghy-Spargo and A. Yakovlev, “Oliver Heaviside’s electromagnetic theory,”
en, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences, vol. 376, no. 2134, p. 20 180 229, Dec. 2018. doi: 10.1098/
rsta.2018.0229.
[2]
W. M. Leach, Introduction to electroacoustics and audio amplifier design, eng, 3rd.
Dubuque, Iowa.: Kendall/Hunt Pub. Co., 2003, OCLC: 53172782.
[3]
F. Jacobsen and P. M. Juhl, Fundamentals of general linear acoustics. Chichester,
West Sussex, United Kingdom: John Wiley & Sons Inc, 2013.
[4]
B. Mondet, J. Brunskog, C.-H. Jeong, and J. H. Rindel, “From absorption to
impedance: Enhancing boundary conditions in room acoustic simulations,” en,
Applied Acoustics, vol. 157, p. 106 884, Jan. 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.apacoust.
2019.04.034.
[5]
M. R. Schroeder, “Statistical parameters of the frequency response curves of large
rooms,” Journal of The Audio Engineering Society, vol. 35, pp. 299–306, 1987.
[6]
S. Wang, S. Sankaran, H. Wang, and P. Perdikaris, “An expert’s guide to training
physics-informed neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08468, 2023.
[7]
M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Physics-informed neural net-
works: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involv-
ing nonlinear partial differential equations,” Journal of Computational Physics,
vol. 378, pp. 686–707, 2019.
[8]
“Acoustics – Measurements of sound absorption in a reverberation room,” Inter-
national Organization for Standardization, Geneva, CH, Standard, May 2003, ISO
354:2003(E).
[9]
M. Nolan, E. Fernandez-Grande, J. Brunskog, and C.-H. Jeong, “A wavenumber
approach to quantifying the isotropy of the sound field in reverberant spaces,” en,
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 143, no. 4, pp. 2514–2526,
Apr. 2018. doi: 10.1121/1.5032194.
[10]
M. Nolan, S. A. Verburg, J. Brunskog, and E. Fernandez-Grande, “Experimental
characterization of the sound field in a reverberation room,” en, The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 145, no. 4, pp. 2237–2246, Apr. 2019. doi:
10.1121/1.5096847.
==PAGE:90==
76
Bibliography
[11]
M. Nolan, M. Vercammen, C.-H. Jeong, and J. Brunskog, “The use of a reference
absorber for absorption measurements in a reverberation chamber,” Sep. 2014.
[12]
“Acoustics – Determination of sound absorption coeﬀicient and impedance in
impedance tubes – Part 2: Transfer-function method,” International Organization
for Standardization, Geneva, CH, Standard, Nov. 1998, ISO 10534-2:1998(E).
[13]
E. Brandão, A. Lenzi, and S. Paul, “A Review of the In Situ Impedance and
Sound Absorption Measurement Techniques,” en, Acta Acustica united with Acus-
tica, vol. 101, no. 3, pp. 443–463, May 2015. doi: 10.3813/AAA.918840.
[14]
J. F. Allard and B. Sieben, “Measurements of acoustic impedance in a free field
with two microphones and a spectrum analyzer,” The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, vol. 77, no. 4, pp. 1617–1618, Apr. 1985. doi: 10.1121/1.
392008. eprint: https://pubs.aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/77/4/1617/
12021688/1617\_1\_online.pdf.
[15]
M. Tamura, “Spatial Fourier transform method of measuring reflection coeﬀicients
at oblique incidence. I: Theory and numerical examples,” en, The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, vol. 88, no. 5, pp. 2259–2264, Nov. 1990. doi: 10.
1121/1.400068.
[16]
E. Brandão and E. Fernandez-Grande, “Analysis of the sound field above finite
absorbers in the wave-number domain,” en, The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, vol. 151, no. 5, pp. 3019–3030, May 2022. doi: 10.1121/10.0010355.
[17]
S.-I. Thomasson, “On the Absorption Coeﬀicient,” en, Acta Acust. united with
Acust, 1980.
[18]
M. Krenn et al., “Forecasting the future of artificial intelligence with machine
learning-based link prediction in an exponentially growing knowledge network,”
Nature Machine Intelligence, vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 1326–1335, Oct. 2023. doi: 10.
1038/s42256-023-00735-0.
[19]
E. Zea, E. Brandão, M. Nolan, J. Cuenca, J. Andén, and U. P. Svensson, “Sound
absorption estimation of finite porous samples with deep residual learning,” en,
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 154, no. 4, pp. 2321–2332,
Oct. 2023. doi: 10.1121/10.0021333.
[20]
Y. Xia, Neural Impedance Boundary – Integrating Physical Equations and Neural
Networks for Acoustical Property Inference, Master’s thesis, DTU, Building 352,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark, Aug. 2023.
[21]
T. J. Cox and P. D’Antonio, Acoustic absorbers and diffusers: theory, design and
application, 3rd. Boca Raton: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis, CRC Press is an
imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, and informa business, 2017.
[22]
M. E. Delany and E. N. Bazley, “Acoustical Characteristics of Fibrous Absorbent
Material,” en, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 48, no. 2A,
pp. 434–434, Aug. 1970. doi: 10.1121/1.1912158.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
77
[23]
Y. Miki, “Acoustical properties of porous materials. Modifications of Delany-Bazley
models.,” en, Journal of the Acoustical Society of Japan (E), vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 19–
24, 1990. doi: 10.1250/ast.11.19.
[24]
K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe, and H. White, “Multilayer feedforward networks are
universal approximators,” en, Neural Networks, vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 359–366, Jan.
1989. doi: 10.1016/0893-6080(89)90020-8.
[25]
C. M. Bishop and H. Bishop, Deep Learning: Foundations and Concepts, en. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2024. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-45468-4.
[26]
S. Theodoridis, Machine Learning: A Bayesian and Optimization Perspective, 2ed,
eng. Elsevier, 2020.
[27]
F. Rosenblatt, “The perceptron: A probabilistic model for information storage and
organization in the brain.,” en, Psychological Review, vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 386–408,
1958. doi: 10.1037/h0042519.
[28]
M. Nielsen, Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Determination Press, 2015.
[29]
N. Rahaman et al., On the Spectral Bias of Neural Networks, en, arXiv:1806.08734
[cs, stat], May 2019.
[30]
V. Sitzmann, J. N. P. Martel, A. W. Bergman, D. B. Lindell, and G. Wetzstein, Im-
plicit Neural Representations with Periodic Activation Functions, en, arXiv:2006.09661
[cs, eess], Jun. 2020.
[31]
S. Wang, Y. Teng, and P. Perdikaris, Understanding and mitigating gradient
pathologies in physics-informed neural networks, 2020. arXiv: 2001.04536.
[32]
S. Wang, B. Li, Y. Chen, and P. Perdikaris, Piratenets: Physics-informed deep
learning with residual adaptive networks, 2024. arXiv: 2402.00326.
[33]
D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, 2017. arXiv:
1412.6980 [cs.LG].
[34]
COMSOL AB, COMSOL Multiphysics® v. 6.2, https://www.comsol.com, Stock-
holm, Sweden, 2023.
[35]
DTU Computing Center, DTU Computing Center resources, 2024. doi: 10.48714/
DTU.HPC.0001.
[36]
Z. Xiang, W. Peng, X. Liu, and W. Yao, “Self-adaptive loss balanced Physics-
informed neural networks,” en, Neurocomputing, vol. 496, pp. 11–34, Jul. 2022.
doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2022.05.015.
[37]
J. Bradbury et al., JAX: Composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs,
version 0.3.13, 2018.
[38]
A. Paszke et al., “Automatic differentiation in pytorch,” 2017.
[39]
P. Kidger and C. Garcia, “Equinox: Neural networks in JAX via callable PyTrees
and filtered transformations,” Differentiable Programming workshop at Neural In-
formation Processing Systems 2021, 2021.
==PAGE:92==
78
Bibliography
[40]
DeepMind et al., The DeepMind JAX Ecosystem, 2020.
[41]
J. Hald, W. Song, K. Haddad, C.-H. Jeong, and A. Richard, “In-situ impedance
and absorption coeﬀicient measurements using a double-layer microphone array,”
en, Applied Acoustics, vol. 143, pp. 74–83, Jan. 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.apacoust.
2018.08.027.
[42]
X. Karakonstantis, D. Caviedes-Nozal, A. Richard, and E. Fernandez-Grande,
“Room impulse response reconstruction with physics-informed deep learning,” en,
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 155, no. 2, pp. 1048–1059,
Feb. 2024. doi: 10.1121/10.0024750.
[43]
J. Allard and Y. Champoux, “In situ two-microphone technique for the measure-
ment of the acoustic surface impedance of materials,” Noise Control Engineering
Journal, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 15–23, 1989.
[44]
E. Brandão, A. Lenzi, and J. Cordioli, “Estimation and minimization of errors
caused by sample size effect in the measurement of the normal absorption coeﬀi-
cient of a locally reactive surface,” en, Applied Acoustics, vol. 73, no. 6-7, pp. 543–
556, Jun. 2012. doi: 10.1016/j.apacoust.2011.09.010.
[45]
E. Brandão, E. Tijs, A. Lenzi, and H.-E. De Bree, “A Comparison of Three Meth-
ods to Calculate the Surface Impedance and Absorption Coeﬀicient from Mea-
surements Under Free Field or in situ Conditions,” en, Acta Acustica united with
Acustica, vol. 97, no. 6, pp. 1025–1033, Nov. 2011. doi: 10.3813/AAA.918482.
