==PAGE:1==
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
Master Thesis
DTU
Computer Science and Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
Master Thesis
August, 2024
By
Georgios Minadakis
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cusВӯ
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Computer Science and Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000Вӯ0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000Вӯ00Вӯ0000Вӯ000Вӯ0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000Вӯ0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000Вӯ00Вӯ0000Вӯ000Вӯ0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Algorithms, Department
of Computer Science and Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of programming.
Georgios Minadakis Вӯ s212898
Signature
Date
ii
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Georgios Minadakis, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
Inge Li GГёrtz, Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
I am deeply grateful to my supervisor and professor Inge Li GГёrtz for her constant guidВӯ
ance and support throughout my master thesis journey. Her knowledge and passion for
algorithms inspired me to face my biggest computer science challenge, algorithms.
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1
Introduction
3
2
Energetic Bellman Ford Overview
5
2.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
How Energetic Bellman Ford Works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Difference from Classic BellmanВӯFord
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Graph Representation and Input
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Disregarding Negative Cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.6
Complexity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.7
Energetic BellmanВӯFord Proof of correctness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.8
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.9
Energetic BellmanFord Pseudo code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Energetic Dijkstra
11
3.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
How Energetic Dijkstra Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Difference from Classic Dijkstra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Potential function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Graph Representation and Input
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.6
Complexity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.7
Proof of correctness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.8
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.9
Energetic Dijkstra Pseudocode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Result Comparison of energetic BellmanFord and energetic Dijkstra
15
4.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.3
Analysis and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5
New algorithm to find minimum energetic Вӯ distance cost paths (MED)
21
5.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
How MED works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3
Graph representation and input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.4
Disregarding negative cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.5
Complexity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.6
Proof of Correctness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.7
Proof by Induction MED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.8
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.9
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6
Few words about the implementation of the algorithms
27
6.1
Programs implemented: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.2
Programs description: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
iv
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:7==
7
Summary
29
Bibliography
31
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
The constantly growing market of electric vehicles increase the need of designing and
developing more efficient and optimized algorithms for electric vehicle routing.So this
masterвҖҷs thesis project aims to contribute to the optimization of pathfinding algorithms
for electric cars, through the development and refinement of algorithms designed to find
the optimal energetic routing for a car to reach a destination by respecting the constraint
of the total battery capacity that vehicle has.
To attain this goal, the modification of two classic shortest path algorithms BellmanFord
and Dijkstra was needed. Pseudocodes of these modified algorithms are shown in this
paper [1]. The authors of this paper include the pseudo codes for the implementation of
the modified BellmanFord which they call energetic BellmanFord and the modified Dijkstra
which they call energetic Dijkstra and both of these algorithms aims to solve the minimum
energetic cost a vehicle needs to traverse a directed graph with positive and negative
edge weights, without negative cycles.
Through this thesis, the energetic BellmanFord and energetic Dijkstra implemented into
python code with complexity time of O(V * E) and O(m+n log n), respectively. Further the
design and implementation of a new algorithm called MED is presented. This algorithm
created to solve a sub problem of minimum energetic cost problem. There are cases that
exist two or more minimum energetic cost paths with the same cost, but one of those paths
is way longer in terms of distance. For that reason MED, finds the minimum energetic path,
and if two paths are optimal then choose the one which is shorter in terms of distance.
MED algorithm has a running time of O((V + E)logV).
By testing and analysis, the execution time of energetic BellmanFord and energetic DijkВӯ
stra will be compared for specific types of graphs to uncover the strengths and limitations
of each algorithm.
The python codes for the algorithms will be included, the code for generating and testing
potential functions, as well as a framework. This framework is responsible to take as
input graphs and algorithms and execute each algorithm 200 times per graph, to extract
the average execution time.
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The keep growing electric vehicle market, ignited the need to design and implement algoВӯ
rithms for optimizing electric vehicle routing to increase energy efficiency. Electric vehicles
contain a battery which has a total battery capacity that we are going to refer to it as B. B
is a big constraint in terms of calculating the most energetic efficient path a car has to take
to reach its destination. It is known that electric cars can charge its battery in conditions
where the car is driven in downhill roads while the battery is depleted in all other scenarВӯ
ios. In respect to B and the chargeВӯdischarge of the battery we have two more constraints.
The battery can not be charged and exceed B and if car needs more than B to reach its
destination, then the path is invalid. In addition while the car is getting charged, it is not
possible to charge the car more than the battery can contain.
There are two classic shortest paths algorithms BellmanFord and Dijkstra which are going
to be the base of the research. The authors of this paper[1]: modified those algorithms
and provided pseudo codes called energetic BellmanFord (eВӯBellmanFord) and energetic
Dijkstra (eВӯDijkstra). They take advantage of the classic shortest path problem, and inВӯ
fuse those algorithms with the electric vehicle constraints that mentioned above to give a
solution to the electric vehicle routing problem.
The primary objective of this research is to implement eВӯBellmanFord and eВӯDijkstra to
prove its correctness and analyze their running time on different graphs. By conducting a
comparative analysis of these algorithms on the same set of graphs and bench marking
their running times, this thesis aims to identify performance characteristics. The impleВӯ
mented eВӯBellmanFord and eВӯDijkstra will be included in this research and a framework
will be included too which purpose is to get the average running time of each algorithm
by using the same set of graphs.
In addition the design and implementation of a new algorithm will be presented called MED
algorithm. This algorithm aims to solve a subproblem that occurred during the research
of the minimum energetic cost paths. There are cases that more than one optimal path
to a destination node will be found, and MED will decide which one to keep based on the
actual khm distance.
Through the analysis of running time, the comparison of the results and the optimization,
of the energetic BellmanFord and energetic Dijkstra, this thesis aims to enhance the efВӯ
ficiency of route planning for electrical vehicles. With ultimate goal to contribute to the
evolution of sustainable transportation in the modern urban landscape.
In the following chapters, this thesis aim to delve into the methodology employed to imВӯ
plement those algorithms, the explanation of the framework, analysis of the results and
potential future work that can be done.
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:13==
2
Energetic Bellman Ford Overview
2.1
Overview
The energetic BellmanFord (eВӯbf) is a specialized algorithm which aims to optimize an
electric vehicle routing by respecting the battery constraints. This algorithm is based on
classic Bellman Ford algorithm which specialize in finding the shortest path in a directed
weighted graph with positive and negative edge weights and it is able to find potential
negative cycles. EВӯBellmanFord is tailored to handle unique requirements that electric
vehicles have. In this section, we delve into how energetic BellmanFord works, the key
differences with classic BellmanFord, the choices made to represent the graphs, an exВӯ
planation behind disregarding the negative cycles and of course the complexity analysis
of the algorithm.
2.2
How Energetic Bellman Ford Works
Energetic Bellman Ford updates the minimum energetic costs for each vertex from a
known source vertex, in each iteration. It has to consider the total energy consumption
for each path, in order to not exceed the total battery capacity B that the electric vehiВӯ
cle has.Energetic BellmanFord use queue as a data structure, which process vertices in
a less efficient order, which may lead to more iterations and to longer overall execution
time, especially in dense graphs. By adjusting the costs with respect to energy efficiency,
the algorithm finds the optimal path that the electric vehicle must follow to reach each
vertex from the source vertex.
2.3
Difference from Classic BellmanВӯFord
BellmanFord algorithm finds the shortest path in a graph solely on the edge weights. In
comparison, energetic Bellman Ford has to respect the total battery capacity B. As it is
known, the electric vehicles can charge its battery while the brake is applied and when
the vehicle is driven on a downhill. For that reason, it is not possible to charge the battery
more than B and the path is marked as unreachable if there is an edge weight that totally
depletes the battery. So energetic Bellman Ford completely discards paths that during
the traversal of the car through the graph drops the battery level under the permissible
level.
2.4
Graph Representation and Input
The imported graphs are represented as adjacency lists instead of adjacency matrix for
the energetic Bellman Ford. This choice made for memory efficiency due to its space
complexity. Adjacency lists have a space complexity of O( V + E ), where V is the number
of vertices and E is the number of edges as opposed to adjacency matrix with a space
complexity of O(V 2) which may be inefficient in memory usage for sparse graphs, where
E is much smaller compared to V 2.
2.5
Disregarding Negative Cycles
Negative cycles are a big concern in the shortest path algorithms. BellmanFord has a
built in function to detect negative cycles. Energetic Bellman Ford and energetic Dijkstra
do not detect negative cycles due to the fact that in real life road maps does not contain
negative cycles. In the context of finding the most energetic path, the existence of a path
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
5
==PAGE:14==
that there is a negative cycle, it means that there is a path that you can keep driving for
ever while the battery keep charging endlessly. In simpler terms it means that there is a
path that contains only downhills, which is not possible.
2.6
Complexity Analysis
Energetic BellmanFord time complexity is O( V * E ), where V represents the number of
vertices and E denotes the number of edges in the graph. The time complexity is the
same as BellmanFord due to the fact that the battery constraints do not add up the time
complexity.
2.7
Energetic BellmanВӯFord Proof of correctness
To construct the proof of correctness for energetic BellmanFord, the proof of correctness
of classic BellmanFord will be used as the base case which can be found here [2].
Theorem Subpath Theorem
Let {v1, v2, . . . , vn} be a path which is the most energy efficient path in case we want to
travel from node v1 to vn. Then any sub sequence of this path {v1, v2, . . . , vn} like the vi
to vj must be the most energy efficient path from vi to vj.
Proof
To prove the Subpath Theorem lets suppose the opposite. Lets suppose that there is
another more energy efficient path from vi to vj with energy cost вҖҷeвҖҷ. Our initial path has
an energy cost of вҖҷEвҖҷ. So we say that e < E. Then we could create a new path from v1 to
vn which is more energy efficient by replacing the most energy efficient path from vi to vj.
Theorem Triangle Inequality
For all u, v, x вҲҲV , it is true that Оҙ(u, v) вүӨОҙ(u, x) + Оҙ(x, v).
Proof
Lets suppose the opposite. Lets say that Оҙ(u, v) > Оҙ(u, x) + Оҙ(x, v). This inequality says
that there is a more energy efficient path from u to v which is the path from u to x plus the
path from x to v. But this is a contradiction by definition as soon as the Оҙ(u, v) must be
the most energy efficient path.
Lemma 1: Upper Bound Property
It is always true that d[v] вүҘОҙ(s, v) and if we ever find a d[v] which is equal to Оҙ(s, v), then
d[v] must never change.
Proof
We will prove that d[v] вүҘОҙ(s, v) by using induction on the number of relaxation steps k.
Base Case:
For k = 0, we have d[s] = 0 as soon as d[s] is our starting node, and the
starting node can not have energy cost to be reached, and d[v] = вҲһfor all v вҲҲV \ {s} as
soon as in the iteration k = 0 all nodes other than the starting node are unreachable . In
our problem of finding the most energy efficient path, we do not need to include the case
of a negative weight cycle as soon as this scenario is not possible in a real life road map.
6
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:15==
Induction Step:
Lets assume that after k вҲ’1 relaxations, for each node v in the graph
it is true that d[v] вүҘОҙ(s, v). Lets talk about the kВӯth relaxation for the edge (u, v). It is true
that w вҲҲV \ {v}, d[w] does not change so by induction d[w] вүҘОҙ(s, w). Lets consider that
we set
d[v] = max(d[u] + w(u, v), вҲ’B) вүӨmax(Оҙ(s, u) + w(u, v), вҲ’B) вүӨОҙ(s, v)
. The last step is true by the triangle inequality we proved above.
Now if we reach d[v] = Оҙ(s, v), then we can never decrease d[v] as soon as we proved
that d[v] вүҘОҙ(s, v). Then we can never increase d[v] due to the fact that d[v] can only
change during the relaxation process and relaxation process is not able to increase d[v].
For that reasons, when we find d[v] = Оҙ(s, v) it can never change but remain the same.
Lemma 2 Path Relaxation
Lets suppose that we have a graph called G and this graph contains no negative cycles.
Lets suppose again that the path p = вҹЁv0, v1, . . . , vjвҹ©is the path that is the most energy
efficient path from v0 to vj. It is true that if we process the edges in that order (v0, v1),
(v1, v2), вҖҰ, (vjвҲ’1, vj) with any Relax operations it will result in d[vj] = Оҙ(v0, vj) after comВӯ
pleting all these relaxations. Further this equality stays true at all times. It is important to
note that this property remains true regardless of what other calls made at the relaxation
process.
Proof
To prove that induction will be used on the kth vertex in p, showing that after relaxations
(v0, v1), . . . , (vkвҲ’1, vk) have occurred that d[vk] = Оҙ(v0, vk) which means that the most
energy efficient path from the starting node to node k.
Base Case:
k = 0: After the initialization phase we have that d[v0] = 0 = Оҙ(v0, v0), due
to the fact that d[v0] is the starting node.
Induction Step:
Lets say that we relaxed, in order, edges (v0, v1), . . . , (vkвҲ’2, vkвҲ’1) and
d[vkвҲ’1] = Оҙ(v0, vkвҲ’1). Then Inevitably we will make a relaxation call to (vkвҲ’1, vk) since we
assume this call happens at least once after the call to (vkвҲ’2, vkвҲ’1). By the upper bound
property that we proved above, at the time of this call it is true that d[vk] вүҘОҙ(v0, vk).
Further, we have that Оҙ(v0, vk) = Оҙ(v0, vkвҲ’1) + w(vkвҲ’1, vk) because p is a shortest path.
Therefore, d[vk] вүҘd[vkвҲ’1] + w(vkвҲ’1, vk) and after this relaxation call we will have d[vk] =
d[vkвҲ’1] + w(vkвҲ’1, vk) = Оҙ(v0, vk). By the upper bound property, this stays true even after.
Lemma 3: Energetic BellmanВӯFord Correctness 1
Assume we have a graph called G with no negative cycles reachable by s. Then after
running energetic BellmanВӯFord, we have d[v] = Оҙ(s, v) for all v вҲҲV reachable from s.
Proof
If there is a node v which exist in the graph, and it is reachable from the starting node
вҖҷsвҖҷ, then there must exist a most energy efficient path p = вҹЁs, v1, . . . , vjвҹ©, which is not
acyclic, where vj = v. Since the path is acyclic, then it is not possible to contain more
than |V | vertices and for that reason not more than |V |вҲ’1 edges. The relaxation of every
edge happens when we run through the loop of energetic BellmanFord. Thus, in the first
iteration we relax (s, v1), in the second iteration we relax (v1, v2) etc. The moment we
reach |V | вҲ’1 iteration it is mandatory that we already relaxed every edge in the path
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
7
==PAGE:16==
in order. By considering the path relaxation property, on iteration |V | вҲ’1 it is true that
d[v] = Оҙ(s, v).
Corollary 1: Energetic BellmanВӯFord Correctness 2
For a vertex v that exist in the graph, it is only possible, at the termination of energetic
BellmanFord, to return d[v] = вҲһonly in the case that node v is not reachable from starting
node s. A node v can be unreachable if the node is not connected to the rest of the graph,
or the battery is not enough to reach that node.
Proof
Lets assume that d[v] = вҲһand indeed v is reachable from starting node s. This leads in
a contradiction by lemma 3, due to the fact that lemma3 will return d[v] = Оҙ(s, v) = вҲһ. If
we assume that the electric vehicle does not have enough battery to traverse the path to
v node, then by the upper bound property, we get that d[v] вүҘОҙ(s, v) at all times. But since
Оҙ(s, v) = вҲһwe must get that d[v] = вҲһconstantly.
Theorem1: Correctness of energetic BellmanВӯFord
If we have a graph called G which contains no negative cycles that are reachable from
starting node s then energetic BellmanFord returns TRUE and d[v] = Оҙ(s, v) for every node
v that exist in the graph.
Proof
If there are no negative cycles in the graph G, if we combine Lemma3 and Corollary1,
we get that d[v] = Оҙ(s, v) for each node v that exist in the graph when the energetic
BellmanFord finishes. For that reason d[v] = Оҙ(s, v) вүӨОҙ(s, u) + w(u, v) вүӨd[u] + w(u, v)
by the triangle inequality.
2.8
Summary
Energetic BellmanFord is a modified Bellman Ford which aims to find the path from a
source vertex to a destination vertex with the minimum energy cost, by respecting the
battery constraints of the electric vehicle. On the other hand, BellmanFordвҖҷs goal is to
find the shortest path in terms of distance from a source vertex вҖҷSвҖҷ to a destination vertex
вҖҷTвҖҷ without any additional constraints. Both algorithms share the same Big O complexity
which is O (V * E), where V is the number of vertices while E is the number of edges in
the directed graph. Energetic BellmanFord does not need to consider negative cycles in
the graph. Overall the application of energetic BellmanFord is particularly useful in the
scenarios that minimizing the energy consumption of an electric car is priority.
2.9
Energetic BellmanFord Pseudo code
8
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.1: Energetic BellmanFord pseudocode.
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
9
==PAGE:18==
10
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:19==
3
Energetic Dijkstra
3.1
Overview
The energetic Dijkstra (eВӯD) is inspired and modified by the classic Dijkstra algorithm,
which is tailored to find the shortest path in terms of distance in a directed non negative
edge weight graph. Energetic Dijkstra aims to find the minimum energetic cost path from
a source node вҖҷSвҖҷ to a destination node вҖҷTвҖҷ in a directed positive Вӯ negative edge weights
graph, while it respects the electric vehicle constraints. The battery that electric vehicle
has dictate the constraints. Battery has a capacity B, so it is not possible to traverse a
path that exceeds B and at the same time the battery can not be charged more than B.
This section will focus on how energetic Dijkstra works, the key differences from classic
Dijkstra, the potential function that energetic Dijkstra needs to execute properly, the choice
made to represent the graphs, and of course the complexity analysis of the algorithm.
3.2
How Energetic Dijkstra Works
Energetic Dijkstra is optimizing the energy cost a vehicle needs to consume to reach a
destination node from a source node while it respects the battery constraints that the elecВӯ
tric vehicle has. The vehicle starts with a battery capacity B. This battery is depleting while
driving or charging in scenarios where the car travel through a downhill or by braking. For
a path to be valid, the vehicle needs to have enough battery to reach the destination. If
the battery is not enough then the algorithm set this path as invalid, and try to find another
path. If no such paths exist then the destination node is set as unreachable.Energetic DiВӯ
jkstra use a minimum heap which is a data structure that always expand the least costly
vertex next, which can help reduce greatly the number of iterations and improve the exeВӯ
cution time. Energetic Dijkstra like classic Dijkstra can not work with negative weights, but
in our case negative edges are mandatory in order to represent the paths that the battery
is charged while the car is travelling on that road. For that reason a potential function is
used which is going to be explained later on, and makes energetic Dijkstra viable to work
with negative weights.
3.3
Difference from Classic Dijkstra
The main difference between Dijkstra and energetic Dijkstra is that the first one specializes
in finding the shortest distance from a source node to a destination node while the second
one specializes in finding the minimum energetic cost path from the source node to the
destination node while it is respecting the battery constraints that the electric vehicle has.
A vehicle in order to traverse through a path, can not consume more than the total battery
capacity in order to reach its destination and in the same way the battery can not be
charged for more than the battery can contain. So we say that the minimum energy cost
must be between ВӯB and B. Another difference is that classic Dijkstra can not work with
negative edge weights while energetic Dijkstra makes use of a potential function that helps
re weight the edges in order to be possible to process graphs with negative edge weights.
Additionally energetic Dijkstra need a proper potential function in order to be executed
when the graph contains negative edge weights.
3.4
Potential function
As discussed before, in order for the energetic Dijkstra to work with negative edge weights,
a proper potential function is needed for the algorithm to work with negative weights. A
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
11
==PAGE:20==
potential function to be valid, this equation must be respected: c(uv)вҲ’p(u)+p(v)вүҘ0, where
c(uv) is the energy cost we need to travel from node u to node v, p(u),p(v) is the potential
value assigned to these nodes by the potential function. In order to calculate a proper
potential function for a graph, we use BellmanВӯford algorithm to calculate the standard
distances from a given source vertex. By obtaining these standard distances, the values
are then negated to create a proper potential function.
3.5
Graph Representation and Input
The imported graphs are represented as adjacency lists instead of adjacency matrix for
the energetic Dijkstra. This option made due to the fact that adjacency lists offer better
memory efficiency.Adjacency lists have a space complexity of O( V + E ), where V is the
number of vertices and E is the number of edges as opposed to adjacency matrix with a
space complexity of O(V 2) which may be inefficient in memory usage for sparse graphs,
where E is much smaller compared to V 2.
3.6
Complexity Analysis
Energetic Dijkstra time complexity is O((V + E) log V), where V represents the number
of vertices and E denotes the number of edges in the graph. Which is the same time
complexity as classic Dijkstra when minimum priority queue is used for the implementation
of the algorithm.
3.7
Proof of correctness
A* and Dijkstra relationship
As discussed in this paper [1] if we have a graph which contains edges with weights that
can be negative and no negative cycles exist, then we can use a variant of the A* search
algorithm. A* is a modified Dijkstra algorithm that solves the minimum energetic path
problem in O(m + n log n) time. But it is mandatory to have a proper potential function.
A potential function can be valid only when c(uv) вҲ’p(u) + p(v) вүҘ0 is respected for
each edge. As discussed above a potential function can be properly generated when no
negative cycles exists in the graph.
The only difference of A* and Dijkstra is that the key of vertex v into the heap is d(v)+p(v),
where p is a valid potential function, instead of d(v). To justify the correctness of that
algorithm, it is only needed that p is a proper potential function. If that is the case, the A*
will delete each vertex v from the heap at most once. When v is removed, d(v) = ОҙB(s, v),
which is the cost of traveling from starting node s to destination node v.
An energetic version of A* is achieved just by replacing + by вҠ•B in the relaxation process.
The A* starts with d(s) = 0 and d(v) = вҲһfor each vertex that exist in the graph, and the
heap starts by containing s. As discussed the key of a vertex v in the heap is d(v) + p(v).
The following process is repeated until the heap is empty:
The vertex v with the minimum key d(u) + p(u) is removed from the heap. For each edge
uv, if d(u) вҠ•B c(uv) < d(v) then we relax uv and we set d(v) вҶҗd(u) вҠ•B c(uv)Нҫ ПҖ(v) вҶҗu.
Then we add v to the heap with a key of d(v) + p(v) only if v does not already exist in the
heap, or we decrease the key of v to d(v) + p(v) if v exist in the heap.
Lemma: In the case that we have a valid potential function the energetic Dijkstra maintains
this invariant: d(u) + p(u) вүӨd(v) + p(v) only if u has been removed from the heap while v
has not been removed yet from the heap. Note that each vertex from the graph must be
inserted and removed from the heap at most once.
12
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:21==
Proof: We can easily prove this lemma by use of induction on the number of heap opВӯ
erations. At the initialization phase the lemma stands true as soon as not vertexes have
been removed from the heap yet. LetвҖҷs suppose that the lemma stands true right before
the deletion of u from the heap. As soon as d(u)+p(u) is the minimum among all vertices
that exist in the heap, and as soon as d(u) = вҲһis true for all vertices that have not yet
inserted into the heap, this invariant stands true just after u is removed from heap. LetвҖҷs
assume that the invariant holds just before of the relaxation process of an edge uv. Right
after the relaxation we have: d(v) = d(u) вҠ•B c(uv) вүҘd(u) + c(uv), thus
d(v) + p(v) вүҘd(u) + c(uv) + p(v) вүҘd(u) + p(u),
where the last is true by the validity of p. But as soon as the relaxation process always
decrease d(v), it means that v is not possible to have been already removed from the heap
due to the fact that this means that we have a violation on d(u)+p(u) that is the maximum
from all vertices that have been already removed from the heap. For that reason v is
either in the heap or has not been inserted yet in the heap. In case of decreasing the key
of v to d(v) + p(v), or inserting v to the heap with this key does not occur any violation to
the invariant.
By using this lemma we can now easily prove the correctness of energetic Dijkstra.
Theorem: If the graph has no negative cycles and p is a proper potential function for the
graph, then energetic Dijkstra finds the minimum energetic paths from the starting node
s to all vertices in the graph in O(m + n log n) time.
Proof: When we have a vertex u removed from the heap, all outgoing edges uv of that
vertex are examined, and any relaxation process needed will happen. By the Lemma,
d(u) will remain unchanged till the termination of the algorithm. For that reason with the
termination of the algorithm it is true that d(v) вүӨd(u)вҠ•B c(uv) for every uv. The energetic
Dijkstra is known that execute at most n insertions to the heap and at most n deletions and
at most m decrease key operations. With the minimum heap that used, the total running
time is getting O(m + n log n).
Further lets analyze how to get a proper potential function. For that to happen it is viable
to use any classic shortest path algorithm like BellmanFord. If we have a starting node
where all vertices of the graph are reachable and there are no negative cycles in the
graph, then p(v) = вҲ’Оҙ(s, v) where Оҙ(s, v) is the distance from the source that the classic
shortest path algorithm returned. Then it is true that c(uv) вҲ’p(u) + p(v) вүҘ0 which is
validated by the triangle inequality.
With all the above we can compute the minimum energetic paths from a starting node to
all other nodes in O(m + n log n).
Conclusion
Thus, the energetic Dijkstra stands to be correct and he finds the minimum energetic costs
paths in a directed weighted graph while it respects the energetic constraints [ВӯB,B].
3.8
Summary
Energetic Dijkstra is a modified Dijkstra which aims to calculate the minimum energy cost
a vehicle needs to spend to reach from a source node to a destination node, through a
network of roads while respecting the battery constraints each electric vehicle has. In
order to use energetic Dijkstra to work with negative edge weights, we need to calculate a
proper potential function. Time complexity of energetic Dijkstra is O((V + E) log V) which
is exactly the same as DijkstraвҖҷs time complexity.
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
13
==PAGE:22==
3.9
Energetic Dijkstra Pseudocode
Figure 3.1: Energetic Dijkstra pseudocode.
14
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:23==
4
Result Comparison of energetic
BellmanFord and energetic Dijkstra
4.1
Overview
In the realm of algorithms, both of energetic BellmanFord and energetic Dijkstra solve the
problem of minimum energetic costs in a graph. Both of these algorithms takes as input a
graph in the form of adjacency list, which contains no negative cycles. Energy constraints
are the same, the total battery capacity is static at B and the minimum energetic costs
must be in the range of [ВӯB,B]. In the case that a path needs battery more than the total
battery capacity then it becomes non traversable and equal to infinity. In addition both
of the algorithms can work with negative edge weights that represents the paths that
the battery is getting charged. Although these similarities energetic BellmanFord and
energetic Dijkstra have different running times. This section is dedicated to present the
running time results of 2 different types of graphs for both energetic BellmanFord and
energetic Dijkstra.
4.2
Experimental setup
To evaluate the running time performance of the Energetic BellmanFord and Energetic
Dijkstra, the development of a framework was necessary. The framework implemented
in python language. It is designed to systematically assess the running time of each algoВӯ
rithm across a variety of graph structures. It is important to note that for energetic Dijkstra
the potential function calculated outside of the framework by another software. For that
reason for energetic Dijkstra two running times will be shown. One for the potential funcВӯ
tion and the other for the algorithm to run. These two numbers will be added together to
compare it with the running time of energetic BellmanFord. The following subsections outВӯ
line the components of the framework and include the input parameters, the methodology,
the analysis of time complexities, and the graphs followed to run the experiments.
4.2.1
Input parameters
The framework to work as indented, it needs some input parameters. First the energetic
BellmanFord and energetic Dijkstra codes needs to be set in the proper class of the frameВӯ
work. Afterwards the graphs needs to be set in a format of adjacency lists in another class.
It is important to include in each graph a proper potential function, so energetic Dijkstra
can be properly executed with negative edge weights. The total battery capacity needs
to be included too in each graph, and of course the total number of execution times per
graph needs to be set too.
4.2.2
Experimental Methodology
For each graph, energetic BellmanFord and energetic Dijkstra was executed 200 times to
ensure the reliability of the results. The following steps outline the methodology employed
in the experiments:
1. Initialization
For each algorithm, the framework initialize the graph and sets the source vertex
needed for the pathfinding process. In case for energetic Dijkstra we will not add to
execution time the time needed to get a proper potential function.
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
15
==PAGE:24==
2. Execution
The energetic BellmanFord and energetic Dijkstra executed on each graph, and the
running time was recorded.
3. Repetition
This process had to be made 200 times per graph and algorithm to account for
variability in execution time due to system load.
4. Data Collection
The running time for each execution stored to help us analyze the running times.
4.2.3
Analysis of time Complexities
As discussed before, energetic BellmanFord has a time complexity of O(V * E) and enerВӯ
getic Dijkstra a time complexity of O((V + E) * logV).
The time complexity of energetic BellmanFord scales linearly with the number of edges
E, and each edge affects V vertices.
The time complexity of energetic Dijkstra grows based on the logarithm of the number of
vertices V which is scaled based on the sum of vertices V and edges E.
That concludes that for sparse graphs where E is relatively small, energetic Dijkstra can
be faster in comparison to energetic BellmanFord. In addition in a dense graph, if E is
close to V 2 energetic BellmanFord complexity can grow quite large.
We can divide the possible tested graphs into sparse graphs and dense graphs.
1. Sparse graphs
If E is much smaller than V 2, then (V + E) is approximately V , making
O((V + E) log V ) вүҲO(V log V ).
In this case, O(V log V ) is generally much smaller compared to O(V В·E), especially
if E is not large.
2. Dense graphs
When E is close to V 2, then
O((V + E) log V )
can be approximated by
O(E log V ).
Since E вүҲV 2, E log V is comparable to V 2 log V . In this case,
O(V В· E)
becomes
O(V В· V 2) = O(V 3),
which typically grows faster than
O(V 2 log V ).
16
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:25==
3. Conclusion
In general O(V * E) is slower compared to O((V + E) * logV), especially for dense
graphs where E is close toV 2 . In addition for sparse graphs O((V + E) * logV) will
be again way faster than the 0(V * E). It is important to note that we do not include
the time needed to generate a proper potential function for energetic Dijkstra to
work with negative edge weights, which is an additional 0(V * E) time complexity as
described in the above sections. For that said, it is safe to conclude that energetic
Dijkstra is a faster minimum energetic path algorithm only in case that a proper
potential function is already generated.
4.2.4
Graph results samples
Sparse graph
Figure 4.1: Sparse graph
Sparse graph framework results
Figure 4.2: Sparse graph framework results
Figure 4.3: Sparse graph potential function generation time
As expected in a sparse graph like the one in Figure 4.1 the execution times of both
algorithms are extremely close, with energetic Dijkstra being a little bit faster. But as soon
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
17
==PAGE:26==
as we add the execution time needed for potential function to be generated, we observe
that energetic Dijkstra overall is slower.
Dense graph
Figure 4.4: Dense graph framework results
Dense graph framework results
Figure 4.5: Dense graph potential function generation time
Figure 4.6: Dense graph potential function generation time
As expected in a dense graph like the one in figure 4.4, energetic Dijkstra is faster than
energetic BellmanFord even if the execution times of both algorithms are close to each
other. However, as shown in picture 4.6, the execution time needed to generate a proper
potential function for energetic Dijkstra, takes a significant time, and makes energetic
Dijkstra overall slower than energetic BellmanFord.
4.3
Analysis and Discussion
By analysis of the results, we observe that there is a slight performance difference in
terms of running time between the energetic BellmanFord and energetic Dijkstra with the
18
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:27==
energetic BellmanFord being a little bit slower in each graph across the tested graphs.
4.3.1
Future Work
Analyzing and testing different graphs and types of graphs in the framework can be exВӯ
tremely time consuming. For that reason as a future work it would be nice the impleВӯ
mentation of another framework. This framework could generate automatically graphs,
with the number of edges, nodes, edge weights etc, generate potential functions for each
one of these graphs and return minimum energetic cost paths and the average execuВӯ
tion time per graph. This framework, will yield more accurate results and enhance the
understanding of the algorithms.
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
19
==PAGE:28==
20
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:29==
5
New algorithm to find minimum
energetic Вӯ distance cost paths (MED)
5.1
Overview
Figure 5.1: Energy cost graph
Figure 5.2: Distance cost graph
The MED algorithm (minimum energetic Вӯ distance cost paths) aims to optimize an electric
vehicle routing by respecting the battery constraints. The purpose to implement such an
algorithm, is that energetic BellmanFord and energetic Dijkstra takes into consideration
only the energy that the vehicle consumes during the traversal of the paths but takes no
consideration for the actual Km distance. There are cases like the one shown in figure
5.1 where there are two energy optimal paths вҖҷPath1вҖҷ and вҖҷPath2вҖҷ from a source node вҖҷAвҖҷ
to a destination node вҖҷEвҖҷ but вҖҷPath1вҖҷ can have a lower distance cost like the graph in figure
5.2. Energetic BellmanFord and energetic Dijkstra will return at random вҖҷPath1вҖҷ or вҖҷPath2вҖҷ
without taking into consideration the actual Km distance. MED algorithm finds the most
energy efficient path, but in case it finds two optimal paths, then chooses the path which
is shorter.
5.2
How MED works
The MED algorithm finds the optimal paths in terms of energy cost and distance in a graph
while it ensures that respect that battery constraints [ВӯB, B]. The algorithm starts from the
source node вҖҷSвҖҷ and explores all possible routes to neighboring points while it updates the
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
21
==PAGE:30==
best known so far energy and distance costs for each node, whenever it discovers a more
efficient path. A path is more efficient when the vehicle needs less energy to traverse this
path, or when it needs the same energy as the previous best known path, but the distance
is shorter. If a path needs more energy than the total battery capacity B then the path is
discarded. By continually refining the best paths, MED algorithm will eventually return the
best path for each node and the predecessors of each node.
5.3
Graph representation and input
To execute the MED algorithm, there is a need to import a graph. It would be either in the
form of adjacency list or adjacency matrix. Adjacency lists have a space complexity of O(
V + E ), where V is the number of vertices and E is the number of edges as opposed to
adjacency matrix with a space complexity of O(V 2) which may be inefficient in memory
usage for sparse graphs, where E is much smaller compared to V 2. For that reason
adjacency list was chosen to represent the graphs for MED algorithm.
5.4
Disregarding negative cycles
Med algorithm use graphs that does not contain negative cycles due to the fact that in
real life road map scenarios it is not possible for a negative cycle to exist. The existence
of a negative cycle, would mean that the vehicle could traverse a path for unlimited time
period and the battery could keep charging for ever.
5.5
Complexity Analysis
MED time complexity is O((V + E)logV), where V is the number of vertices and E is the
number of edges in the graph. The main loop stops when the priority queue is totally clear,
which priority queue can have at most V elements. In the loop we primarily execute heap
push and heap pop which as functions have a time complexity of O(logV). For each vertex
in the graph we must find all its neighbors, so we can have at most E edges in total. For
that reason, the overall time complexity is O((V + E)logv)).
5.6
Proof of Correctness
For that proof of correctness i used as based the standard Dijkstra proof of correctness
as it appears here : [3].
Theorem: Correctness of the MED Algorithm
Statement:
Given a directed graph G = (V, E), an energy budget B, and a source vertex s, the
algorithm MED returns the minimum energy costs d[v] from s to all reachable vertices v вҲҲV
while ensuring energy constraints are maintained. If two paths have the same energy cost,
the algorithm chooses the one with the shorter distance.
Priority queue(minВӯheap) proof:
MED algorithm use a minimum heap to process the nodes with first criterion of energetic
cost (currentВӯenergy) and second criterion the distance (currentВӯdistance).
Initialization of minВӯheap:
At the initialization phase the starting node вҖҷsвҖҷ initialized with a currentВӯenergy = 0 and
currentВӯdistance = 0, while all the other nodes are initialized with infinity. Since вҖҷsвҖҷ has a
value of 0 while all other nodes have value infinity, the starting node вҖҳsвҖҷ always have a
higher priority at the beginning of the algorithm.
22
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:31==
Selection of nodes:
Each node is inserted to the minimum heap with updated costs. It is the property of
minimum heap to maintain the smallest tuples(energyВӯdistance) at the front of the heap.
If the algorithm find a better path which can happen if a path with less energy cost found,
or a path with same energy cost but with less distance, then it updates the heap. The
heap always reordering it self to maintain the property of minimum heap.
Processing nodes:
When a node x is processed by the algorithm, which means that it just got removed from
the heap, it is always true that x had the smallest energy cost, or at least the same energy
cost with some other nodes but had the less distance cost. This is true because the
minimum heap operates this way. In the front of the heap, it is always the node with the
smallest energy cost, and in cases where many nodes share the same minimum energy
cost, then the node with the smallest distance cost out of these nodes will be ordered in
the front of the heap.
5.7
Proof by Induction MED
To prove the MED algorithm, lets say that d(v) is the result that MED returns when it
finishes for node v and let Оҙ(v) be the minimum energetic cost from the starting node s
to v. In order to prove MED we have to show that d(v) =< Оҙ(v) for every vertex v when
the algorithm terminates. Induction will be used for the proof on the number or vertices
added to the set R.
Lemma
For each node v which belong to the graph G, it must be true that d(v) = Оҙ(v) when the
algorithm terminates.
Proof by induction
Base Case:
R grows in size. The only case where R = 1 is when in the R only the starting node s
exist and d(s) = 0 = Оҙ(s), which is true.
Inductive Hypothesis:
Lets hypothesize that lemma stands true for the R set of k size: then for each node x that
exist in R then d(x) =< Оҙ(x).
Induction Step:
We need to prove that the lemma stands true for the set RвҖІ which has a size of k +1. Lets
assume that u is the last vertex added to set RвҖІ, and lets assume that RвҖІ = R вҲӘ{u}. We
can assume by the I.H that for every vertex x that belongs to R then d(x) =< Оҙ(x), so we
have to prove that d(u) =< Оҙ(u) also.
Lets suppose for the contradiction that Q is the shortest path from the starting node s to
u and it has an energy cost of Оҙ(Q) < d(u).
StepВӯbyВӯStep Proof Adaptation:
1. Initialization phase:
The starting node s has d(s) = 0, and all other nodes have d(v) = вҲһ.
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
23
==PAGE:32==
2. Initial R:
The set R initially contains only the starting node s.
3. Selection and Relaxation:
While there are nodes that have been not processed yet: Pick a node u that does not
belong to R yet with the smallest d(u). Insert u to R. For every vertex v that is neighbour
to u: d(v) > d(u)+energy(u, v) or if the energy cost is the same but the distance is smaller
then update d(v) and its predecessor.
4. Handling Energy Constraints:
Needs to make sure that the energy costs remains in the range of the electric vehicle
constraints which is [вҲ’B, B].
Proof of Correctness:
By using the I.H, we prove that MED algorithm correctly computes the energy and distance
for each vertex in the set R.
Base Case:
When in the set R only the starting node s exist then it is true that d(s) = 0 = Оҙ(s).
Inductive Step:
Lets suppose that for all vertices x that exist in set R, then d(x) =< Оҙ(x). Lets suppose
that vertex u is the next vertex that is added to set R. MED algorithm selects u such that
d(u) is the minimal. Lets suppose that Q is the shortest path from the starting node s to
node u and has an energy cost of Оҙ(u).
Lets suppose for a contradiction that Оҙ(u) < d(u). That means that there is another path P
where it has smaller energy cost than Q, which contradicts the selected u as the minimal
d(u).
Path Q and Edge (xy):
It is true that path Q starts in the set R and at some point leave R to reach the node u.
Lets suppose that we have an edge called xy that is the first edge that leaves the R set.
And lets suppose that Qx is the sub path from node s to node x.
As soon as d(x) is the cost of minimum energy cost for the path to x, by the I.H, we know
that:
d(x) вүӨОҙ(Qx)
and as soon as y is neighbour to x, the MED algorithm ensures:
d(y) вүӨd(x) + energy(x, y)
As soon as u was selected as the vertex with the smallest d(u), we know that:
d(u) вүӨd(y)
By the combination of these inequalities we get that:
d(u) вүӨd(y) вүӨd(x) + energy(x, y) вүӨОҙ(Q)
which is a contradiction to the assumption that Оҙ(u) < d(u).
For that reason,d(u) = Оҙ(u).
24
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:33==
5.8
Conclusion
By induction, we have shown that for all vertices v вҲҲV , d(v) = Оҙ(v) when MED algorithm
terminates. Therefore, the MED algorithm correctly computes the minimum energy cost
while maintaining the energy constraints and choosing the shortest distance when paths
share the same energy cost.
5.9
Summary
MED algorithm aims to find the most energy efficient path from a source node to all other
nodes. This algorithm differentiate from energetic BellmanFord and energetic Dijkstra due
to the fact that when it finds two energy optimal paths, it compares the distances of the
paths and chooses the one which is shorter. The time complexity of MED algorithm is
O((V + E)logV).
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
25
==PAGE:34==
26
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:35==
6
Few words about the implementation of
the algorithms
6.1
Programs implemented:
The major task in that thesis was the implementation of energetic BellmanFord, enerВӯ
getic Dijkstra and the design and implementation of a new algorithm called MED . These
three algorithms implemented in python programming language in the environment of
Pycharm. Each of these algorithms implemented separately into three different python
programs. For energetic Dijkstra it was important to create another program that genВӯ
erate and validate a proper potential function for each graph that energetic Dijkstra was
about to execute. Further for testing the average execution times of energetic Dijkstra
and energetic Bellmanford a framework needed to be designed and implemented. All the
above programs will be included with that thesis in a separate zip file, with a text file that
explains which program execute which algorithm.
6.2
Programs description:
1. Energetic BellmanFord program: It takes as input a graph in adjacency list format,
the total battery capacity that the electric vehicle has and returns the minimum enВӯ
ergetic cost to reach each destination node, and the running time that needed to be
executed.
2. Energetic Dijkstra program: It takes as input a graph in adjacency list format, the
total battery capacity the electric vehicle has, a potential function and returns the
minimum energetic cost to reach each destination node, and the running time that
needed to be executed.
3. Potential function program: It takes as input a graph that contains no negative cyВӯ
cles, and returns a potential function. Afterwards it mentions if the potential function
is valid for that graph or not. In case the potential function is not valid, the program
should be executed again until a proper potential function is generated.
4. Framework program: It takes as input the energetic Dijkstra and energetic BellmanВӯ
Ford, the graphs that needs to be tested, valid potential functions for each graph
tested, the number of executions per graph and algorithm and the total battery caВӯ
pacity per graph. It returns a csv file, with the running time of each execution and
the average running time per algorithm per graph.
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:37==
7
Summary
This thesis is a study of the minimum energetic paths problem. This study is focused on
the development and analysis of three algorithms, the energetic BellmanFord, energetic
Dijkstra and MED algorithm. Those algorithms, are modifications of two classic shortest
path algorithms. The minimum energetic path problem is framed within the context of
electric vehicles navigating a weighted directed graphs, where each edge is a road while
the weight on each edge is the energy cost the vehicle must pay to traverse the edge.
Positive edge weight means that the battery is depleted during the traversal of that path,
while the negative edge weight means that we charge the battery.
The research starts with a thorough introduction to the problem domain, with focus on the
importance of development energy efficient pathfinding algorithms. Theoretical foundaВӯ
tions are established, with details on the adaptations made to the classic Bellman Ford
and Dijkstra algorithm to accommodate the unique requirements that electric vehicle have.
An experimental framework developed to analyze the performance of both algorithms
across different types of graphs. Each graph was different in terms of density, edge weight
and size. The framework executed each graph 200 times per algorithm and the results
stored for further analysis.
The frameworkвҖҷs results indicate that while both algorithms effectively solves the minimum
energetic paths problems, energetic Dijkstra algorithm is faster than energetic BellmanВӯ
Ford but only in the case that a potential function is already generated. In case that a
potential function is not already generated then energetic BellmanFord always outperВӯ
forms energetic Dijkstra.
This thesis aims to contribute to the field of algorithms. By designing and implementing
the energetic BellmanFord, energetic Dijkstra and Med algorithm, this research addresses
the challenges associated with the minimum energetic costs paths in directed weighted
graphs.
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:39==
Bibliography
[1]
Dani Dorfman et al. Optimal energetic paths for electric cars. 2023. arXiv: 2305.19015
[cs.DS]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.19015.
[2]
Erik D. Demaine. BellmanВӯFord Algorithm. https://people.csail.mit.edu/alinush/6.006-
spring-2014/mit-fall-2010-bellman-ford.pdf. MIT Course. 2010.
[3]
Cora Glen. Proof of Correctness for DijkstraвҖҷs Shortest Path Algorithm. Accessed:
[Date of Access]. URL: https://web.engr.oregonstate.edu/~glencora/wiki/uploads/
dijkstra-proof.pdf.
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
==PAGE:41==
Algorithms for Path Finding for Electric Cars
33
==PAGE:42==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
