==PAGE:1==
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with
Acute Vertigo
Building a Calibration­Free Video Processing
Pipeline to Aid in the Diagnosis of Vertigo Cause
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
Building a Calibration­Free Video Processing Pipeline to Aid in the Diagnosis of Vertigo
Cause
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Lilja Ýr Guðmundsdóttir
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Brovej, Build­
ing 321, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Vertigo is a condition that affects many but is difficult to diagnose due to its wide array
of potential causes. To speed up this diagnosis process and narrow down the possible
causes, a headset was developed by EyeKnow, which can be used to record eye move­
ments as vertigo attacks happen. In this project a pipeline was created to process these
videos and graph the eye movement in degrees per second without the need to calibrate
the headset beforehand. A combination of infrared lighting and a camera is enough to
gain sufficient amount of information to track the eye. Using a combination of binariza­
tion and smoothing, the image becomes optimal for pupil and glint detection using Hough
Transform and Contour respectively. From there it is possible to map the saccadic move­
ments of the eye itself. Although there is room for improvement, this project lays the
groundwork for creating a state of the art eye tracking software for this headset. Then,
instead of waiting years for a diagnosis from the right doctor, patients can hopefully be
fast­tracked to an accurate diagnosis and improved health.
ii
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Lilja Ýr Guðmundsdóttir, MSc Human­Centered Aritficial Intelligence, DTU
Creator of this thesis project.
Per Bækgaard, Lektor Human­Centered Aritficial Intelligence, DTU
Supervisor of this project and member of EyeKnow.
Bjarki Ditlev Djurhuus, Doctor, Zealand University Hospital
Member of EyeKnow.
Casper Grønlund Larsen, Doctor, Zealand University Hospital
Member of EyeKnow.
Anders Ohlhues Baandrup, Doctor, Zealand University Hospital
Member of EyeKnow.
Ragnheiður Tryggvadóttir, Msc, Aerospace Engineer
Paper Reviewer
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Related Works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Method
15
2.1
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.2
Calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.3
Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.4
Feature Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.5
Eye Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3
Specific Architecture Overview
25
3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2
Programming Language and Libraries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4
Results
29
4.1
Calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.3
Feature Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.4
Eye Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5
Discussion
51
5.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6
Conclusion
55
Bibliography
57
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The diagnosis of the root cause of vertigo is an issue that many in the healthcare pro­
fession are aiming to solve. Eye movement can aid in narrowing down the source of the
vertigo itself to the brain, the ear, or the eyes themselves. But there is a difficulty in repli­
cating this movement in a doctor’s office to get an accurate diagnosis. To fix this, a headset
has been created that patients can bring home which can record the vertigo attacks as
they happen naturally. This report aims to create an accompanying algorithm pipeline to
analyze these recordings and accurately track the eye movements for diagnosis.
In order to fulfill this purpose, a few key statements must be fulfilled and questions an­
swered. They are:
1. What algorithms can be used to implement calibration­free eye tracking for vertigo
diagnosis?
2. How is calibration­free eye tracking useful for wearable devices in eye movement
tracking?
3. To create and validate an eye tracking pipeline with no need for calibration.
4. Design the pipeline for best patient usability while maintaining accuracy.
1.1
Motivation
In short, this project aims to implement an effective gaze direction tracking system that can
aid in speeding up the diagnosis process for the cause of vertigo in patients. Diagnosis
can be done through eye tracking because vertigo is caused by the rapid, involuntary
movement of the eyes, also known as nystagmus [1]. This condition has a profound
impact on people’s day to day lives and the root cause can be difficult to determine since
it can be cause by the brain, ear, or even the eyes themselves.
The headset that this project is centered around was created with the aim to make it
easier to accurately capture the vertigo attacks as they occur. By giving patients more
immediate access to this tool, reaching a diagnosis becomes quicker. This project will
cover the software that processes the video of these vertigo attacks and the steps taken
to develop it.
1.2
Background
In order to better understand the problem being tackled in this report, a few background
elements must be covered regarding eyes and their movements.
1.2.1
Eye Anatomy
First up are a few key elements of the eye. As can be seen in figure 1.1, there are many
notable components to eyes, but the most relevant to this project are the retina, fovea,
pupil, iris, cornea, and sclera. First up the retina is what allows us to see the world around
us by converting light into electrical signals that can be interpreted by the brain as images.
The fovea is a small depression in the retina where this visual acuity is highest and image
is the clearest. This section of the retina plays a major part in gaze direction and people’s
ability to focus on the world around them. The average range that people can focus at is
2 degrees, which is why it is necessary to move the eyes around to see more than just
what is in front of them. The rest of the retina makes up the peripheral vision and together
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Anatomy of the eye and location of the important elements [2].
the binocular visual field, another term for the visual field of both eyes, is formulated and
can stretch 180 degrees horizontally and 130 degrees vertically in total [3].
The retina and all its components are hidden from view of the camera so in order to find
gaze direction accurately from a simple video feed the pupil and surrounding area must
be considered. The center of the pupil sits directly opposite the fovea, making it a good
reference point to track eye gaze. The size can range from 4 mm to 8 mm depending
on the amount of light in the surrounding area. This pupil is located within the iris, which
doesn’t play as big a part in this project as of right now but could in the future. Covering
both is the cornea which gives the eye it’s not quite spherical shape but rather a sphere
within a sphere, as can be seen in figure 1.1. Around that is the white sclera, all of which
is covered in a thin layer of mucous, water, and oil. This membrane makes the eye wet
and affects how glints look on the eye when not within the pupil area, discussed in more
detail in the Method section [2] [3].
1.2.2
Eye Movement
Eye movements may look simple but they are more complex than they appear at first
glance. Smooth pursuit is when the eyes slowly track a moving object in one, fluid motion.
But eyes aren’t constantly smoothly tracking items in the real world, especially when it
comes to rapid movements. When the eye makes quick movements, shifting focus from
one place to another, it is called a saccade and is a very common eye maneuver when
investigating a scene.
A miniature, involuntary, jerky version of this movement is called a microsaccade. Mi­
crosaccades are small, jerky motions that occur while trying to hold a fixation or when
nystagmus, a cause of vertigo, occurs. Saccades and microsaccades are connected by
slow drifts. When an excessive amount of microsaccades occur in succession the vision
becomes blurred and unstable leading to nystagmus and vertigo [4].
2
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:11==
1.2.3
Nystagmus
Nystagmus is a vision condition characterized by repetitive, uncontrollable movements,
typically from side to side, up and down, or in circles. The method of movement can be
as varied as its direction and could be a drift in one direction followed by an abrupt jerk
back or more of a pendulum movement or anything in between. This erratic and disruptive
movement can have several root causes related to the brain, eyes, or ears.
For the brain, some causes could be Multiple Sclerosis (MS) which can damage the part of
the brain that controls eye movement and Vestibular Migraine can cause episodes of ver­
tigo and nystagmus by disrupting the brain’s ability to process sensory information. Eye
conditions such as myopia or nearsightedness and retinal diseases that cause degenera­
tion in the retina can also contribute to nystagmus by blurring the visual output of the eye.
Lastly nystagmus can stem from the ears due to Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo
(BPPV) where calcium carbonate crystals dislodge in the inner ear and Canal Dehiscence
Syndrome where thinning or absence of part of the temporal bone in the vestibular sys­
tem, both of which can lead to nystagmus and vertigo if the head is moved to certain
positions.
Regardless of the cause, symptoms of nystagmus and vertigo include shaky and blurry vi­
sion, balance issues, and dizziness, motivating research in this area. Diagnostic methods
such as eye movement recordings, videonystagmography, and electronystagmography
aid in identifying nystagmus, with this project focusing mainly on eye movement record­
ings [1] [5] [6] [7].
1.2.4
Headset
Figure 1.2: Headset being used in this project to track eye movement.
For this project a headset by EyeKnow was used. It is wireless to operate making it user
friendly and easy to use when vertigo attacks occur. Straps attach the headset firmly to
the user’s head, blocking out all light. This darkness gives best visibility to the three pairs
of infrared lights pointed at each eye and removes any possible distractions that can affect
eye movement data. The infrared lights give a stable point of reference to compare eye
movement to.
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
3
==PAGE:12==
Using the headset is very simple, there is just one button that, once pushed, activates the
built­in speakers, which convey instructions to the patient and guides them through the
process of using the headset. Once the recording is complete, the headset automatically
shuts off so the battery isn’t wasted. The camera, lights, button, and speakers are all
connected to a Raspberry Pi which can then be connected to through an Secure Shell
(SSH) connection where files can be transferred to the computer with ease. One thing
that is important to have in mind when exploring different possible methods is that the
distance between the camera and the eye is unknown due to the flexibility of headset
suctions. For the final architecture this must be either overcome or compensated for in
some manner by either calculating the distance from the glints or looking at the gaze
tracking as relative to other eye positions in the same video.
1.3
State of the Art
There are several companies out there that have their own established eye trackers with
varying goals.
Although these companies don’t disclose how they process eye data
specifically, it is still important to take a look at what they are doing and for what pur­
pose. Knowing this gives a good idea what direction is most effective to pursue and what
is already out there.
1.3.1
Tobii Eye Trackers
The most well known and commonly referenced eye tracking company is Tobii, located in
Sweden. They boast a wide range of eye tracking hardware and software, from screen
based to wearable along with tools to analyze the data collected. One such product is
the Tobii Pro Spectrum, which is advertized for use in detecting micro­saccades, among
other behavior. This eye tracker makes use of a chin rest at a designated distance from a
screen with a mounted camera. This, however, is not very useful for vertigo attacks since
it is not very portable.
A more portable product they provide is the Tobii Pro Glasses 3, which uses 4 cameras
and 16 illumination points. They look like normal glasses and are designed to observe
eye movement while the user is doing different tasks to give insights both neurologically
and psychologically. In this project it is important that there are no outside sources of
interference during recordings for the purest results, making the Tobii Pro Glasses 3 not
applicable [8].
1.3.2
SR Research EyeLink Systems
A company similar to Tobii based out of Canada is SR Research EyeLink. The two main
products that are most referenced in papers by SR Research EyeLink are the EyeLink II
­ a headmounted video based eye tracker ­ and EyeLink 1000 ­ a desktop mounted eye
tracking system. Both involve cameras pointed towards the user and have different levels
of portability and calibration capabilities. But once again there is nothing in either product
blocking out distractions from the user which makes neither applicable to this project [9].
1.3.3
Smart Eye Pro
Another popular company, located in Sweden, is Smart Eye. They have a lot of focus
on applying their products to research in neuroscience and aerospace. One product they
have is an eye tracking camera called Smart Eye Pro, usually used 2­8 at a time. It boasts
a great field of view and gaze tracking accuracy through the use of Artificial Intelligence
(AI) and corneal reflections.
To increase the accuracy and robustness of their tracking software they only track one
eye at a time. This is because there is an increase in error correction when the tracking of
4
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:13==
each eye is processed separately and the system becomes better at tracking any asym­
metrical eye movement. Although they make use of similar methodologies discussed later
in Related Works that could be applicable to this project, they once again do not remove
distractions from the user’s line of sight and the cameras are place at such a distance
from the face that there is more noise in the video feed [10].
1.3.4
Pupil Labs
In Germany there is a company called Pupil Labs that offers a variety of eye tracking
headsets depending on situation and budget. Their products are similar in appearance
to the Tobii Pro Glasses 3 with a sleek and lightweight design for use in a multitude of
behavior analysis experiments among other applications. Their newest product is called
Neon, equipped with one infrared light to provide adequate illumination regardless of the
environment. It has applications in both research and gaming, with processing on the
headset output done using AI, specifically Deep Learning. But all the products allow for
distractions to affect eye movement, much like the previous companies [11].
1.3.5
NVIDIA Gaze Tracking
NVIDIA developed their own way of eye tracking called the NVIDIA Gaze Tracking that
leverages artificial intelligence and their powerful computing technology to accurately
monitor and analyze eye movements. It has been used for virtual reality and augmented
reality products, especially in gaming since it enhances the user experience with real time
responses to the users gaze direction.
High­resolution cameras and sophisticated algorithms are used to track the position and
movement of both eyes. This allows optimization of graphics performance by reducing
the resolution of pixels not in the user’s direct line of focus. This saves computational
resources and improves the system’s efficiency. Here there is no physical product but
simply software but for this project the specific design of the headset is a large part of the
software design and is not compatible with the wide angle algorithm provided by NVIDIA
[12].
1.4
Related Works
It is difficult to see how these products at commercial companies actually operate. But
with enough scientific research we can infer which methods are most likely. So this seciton
will go into some notable works discussing specific methods in detail.
There are many papers out there discussing possible methods that can be used in eye
tracking, regardless of the application. So before deciding which path to go on for the final
design it is important to explore these different methods.
1.4.1
Calibration
The first step in any eye tracking project, regardless of which methods are used later on in
any of the other steps, is calibration. There are a multitude of calibration techniques that
can be utilized to calibrate gaze tracking devices and, more specifically head­mounted
gaze trackers.
One very common method is called the 9­point calibration method. This involves having
the user look at specific points on a screen and, from there, calculate the gaze coordinates
through a transformation process. This is not applicable in this project since there is
no screen connected to the headset but it is worth mentioning as an easy method of
calibration in projects that do have monitors incorporated into the solution [13]. In relation
to methods that are not used in this project but worth mentioning, some projects make use
of datasets of eyes, such as ARGaze, to bypass calibration altogether. Using a database
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
5
==PAGE:14==
ensures there is no need for infrared lighting and methods that have databases and, in
turn, models trained on those databases do not require calibration since the problem turns
into an image recognition problem instead of a pupil location one [14].
For this project there is one method that is more applicable. Given that the distance
between the camera and the eye is unknown and there are no calibration points on a
screen for the user to have as a reference, Zhang’s method can be utilized instead. It is a
flexible technique for camera calibration to estimate the intrinsic and extrinsic parameters
of a camera using multiple images of an object with known calibration points, usually a
checkerboard. These camera parameters are then used to fix any distortion of the video
which can be enough calibration in the right situations. Zhang’s method is overall a very
robust method that can be used in a wide variety of projects such as this one due to it’s
simple and controlled implementation [15].
1.4.2
Preprocessing
Once calibration is complete on the raw data preprocessing needs to take place to opti­
mize robustness and accuracy of eye tracking. There are quite a few different ways we
can go about doing that.
1. Filters
First up in preprocessing is using different filters to enhance certain parts of the frame.
Grayscale
One method that is used in practically every paper is to convert the image to grayscale.
Doing this helps reduce noise and makes it easier to focus just on the shape of objects in
the image with fewer distractions while still retaining the essential gradient information. In
addition to this it simplifies any calculations since instead of dealing with three separate
channels for red, green, and blue, there is only one channel to deal with which can be
further simplified to only have values at each pixel in the range of 0.0 and 1.0 instead of
the typical 0 to 255. [16]
Morphological Operators
Another widely used method is one of the morphological methods, a set of image process­
ing techniques. These techniques involve the manipulation of the structure of an image
by performing operations like dilation, erosion, opening, and closing which are used to
enhance, extract, and analyze shapes and features in the image [14]. This is especially
useful in this project since we need to locate and track a circular or elliptical pupil and
three pairs of circular infrared glints.
Gaussian and Median Filter
Two common filters to further enhance image quality are Gaussian and Median filters.
Both filters aid in normalizing the image. With the Gaussian filter, a Gaussian function is
applied to the image to smooth it, reducing high­frequency noise by averaging out the pixel
values with a kernel of a specific size. The Median filter also uses a kernel but instead
of applying a Gaussian function it uses the kernel to find the median of the neighboring
pixels within a certain range and replacing the processed pixel with that value. The latter
is proven to be better at smoothing while preserving edges [17] [18].
2. Edge Detection
The last step of preprocessing is edge detection. There are three main ones to discuss
in this area: Sobel Edge Detection, Mexican Hat Filter, and Canny Edge Detection.
6
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:15==
Sobel Edge Detector
The first such method is called the Sobel Operator. This is a popular method to use in
preprocessing when dealing with edges, as is done in pupil detection in this project. This
operator also makes use of kernels, like the two filters mentioned before, that are applied
vertically and horizontally. This helps highlight rapid intensity changes which are often
indicative of the presence of edges in the image. This method gives quick results but is
very sensitive to noise and produces thicker edges than other methods. It is however
used in the Canny edge detection where a non­max suppression is utilized to thin out the
edges and only leave the most prominent ones, discussed in more detail during Feature
Detection [19] [20].
Mexican Hat Filter
Another edge detection method is the Mexican Hat filter, also known as the Laplacian of
Gaussian (LoG) filter, which aids in highlighting relevant edges much like the previous
filters. It combines Gaussian smoothing, discussed earlier, with the Laplacian operator,
which highlights regions of rapid intensity change and reducing noise at the same time.
The Guassian smoothing filter mitigates the noise while the Laplacian operator accentu­
ates the areas where the pixel intensity changes abruptly and thus highlights the edges.
This gives an outcome that resembles a Mexican hat, hence the name. Using this filter
creates a detailed and noise­resistant edge map and helps set the stage for the next step
which is pupil detection [21] [22] [23].
Starburst
Another possible method of edge detection is Starburst, a way of using contour and ray
casting to detect the pupil. It casts ray from the geometric center of the region of interest
to detect the edges of the area, splitting the section into multiple segments. A threshold
is used to decide when an edge has been reached by the ray itself.
A paper by Pingping et al. uses it as an edge detector to locate feature points on the
pupil edge. From there RANSAC is used, discussed later, to fit an ellipse and find the
center [24]. Another paper Wayne et al. adapts the Starburst algorithm specifically for
elliptical iris segmentation, expanding the use of this method from just edge detection
into feature detection [17]. Lastly a paper by Yufeng et al. mixes the Starburst algorithm
with an AdaBoost Classifier, the latter which helps narrow down the search field for better
accuracy in the algorithm [25].
Canny Edge Detector
Lastly there is Canny edge, an algorithm well known for being useful to find the border of
items in images by highlighting areas of rapid intensity change. Canny edge is a useful
algorithm to find the border of items in images by highlighting areas of rapid intensity
change. It does this by following several steps. First it smooths the image using Gaussian
filtering to reduce noise and then applies non­maximum suppression to thin out the edges
and get more accurate results of only true edges. Then a threshold is used to filter out what
edges are kept in order to narrow the scope of edges observed [19] [preCanny]. Canny
can be utilized to detect certain features of the eye such as the eyelid and eyelashes as
well as assist in locating the pupil and iris [26].
1.4.3
Feature Detection
Once the image has been processed and the edges highlighted, detecting features such
as pupils and glints becomes easier.
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
7
==PAGE:16==
Hough Transform
The most widely used method for detecting geometric shapes is Hough Transform (HT).
This can be used to detect a wide variety of shapes including circles. In short the image
is transformed into Hough Space which paramaterizes the circles present in the image.
Then voting occurs to determine which edges belong to which circle, creating peaks in
the Hough Space and giving an idea of where circles are located in the image. This is
then mapped back to the image [32].
Hough Transform improvements
The Hough Transform has a lot of room for improvement, especially with regards to the
memory and time it takes to compute. Therefore there are a few papers out there that
recommend ways to improve Hough Transform through minor tweaks. The first of these
papers is by Bodi Yuan et al. which proposes to use power histograms instead of peaks
to detect circles in Hough space. Using power histograms allows for a more complex
analysis of the Hough space by looking at the space in its entirety, making it easier to
identify multiple circles at once.
Despite this there are advantages to Hough space in the way that it is direct and simple
to implement and very efficient. It is however at a disadvantage when it comes to noisy
images and has a heavy dependence on the resolution of the image and, in turn, of the
parameter space. This is where the power histogram comes in strong with a good ro­
bustness against noise since it is detecting and observing patterns rather than individual
peaks. It can also reveal more subtle features that are more apparent when observed in
consistent voting patterns. Some disadvantages, however, are that this method is much
more computationally complex and requires additional analysis beyond peak detection
which can be difficult to implement correctly [37].
Another paper by Huashan Ye et al. proposes another method to tackle the difficulties with
computing power of Hough Transform. To improve the computational complexity of Hough
Transform, they refine the parameter space discretization and accumulation process. This
reduces the load and enhances the speed and accuracy of the circle detection [38].
Another method that addresses the complexity of detecting objects with more parameters
than a line, such as circles, is a method proposed by Hollit et al. Here a convolution­based
method is proposed to find circles of an arbitrary radius. The method proposed makes
use of three­dimensional convolution with an appropriate Hough kernel tailored for circle
detection. Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) is used for the convolution since it has a low
computational complexity and was shown to increase the speed of the Hough Transform
algorithm. FFT is a faster version of Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) with a smaller
computation time but still utilizes the same equation
In Hough Transform, DFT is used in convolution by transforming both the image and the
filter to the frequency domain, multiplying them element­wise, and converting the results
back to the spatial domain. It is moved into the frequency domain since it is computation­
ally cheaper to perform functions there rather than in spatial domain, hence resulting in a
sped up convolution [33].
Other papers take another approach to improving Hough Transform by tackling the voting
scheme instead of the Hough space formation. One of these is a method proposed by L.A.
Fernandes et al. This approach operates on clusters of colinear pixels which enhances
efficiency and accuracy. In each pixel cluster, votes are cast using an oriented elliptical­
Guassian kernel, giving more weights to votes closer to the center of the ellipse. This
smooths the votes resulting in less noise and improves the detection of ellipses [34].
8
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:17==
Lastly there is a method proposed by Lili Pan et al. which also aims to improve the voting
scheme of Hough Transform. Here a method called Probabilistic Pairwise Voting (PPV)
is introduced, based on extending Hough Transform and improving its speed and robust­
ness. This method is built on looking at points in pairs rather than individually and voting
on their shape. This reduces computational complexity and improves robustness by in­
cluding the relationship between points in the voting scheme [39].
Canny and HT
By reducing the amount of data in an image using Canny then Hough Transform has
an easier time detecting any circular shapes. This combination has shown to decrease
computation time and increase robustness in finding circular objects in images. Some
papers that utilize this combination of these two methods are M.V.Caya et al. who used it
to detect and count red blood cells and Wenhua Qui et al. where the methods were used
for fast center localization of the center of circles of logos on planes. [31] [16] . Then
there are more papers that use it specifically for eye tracking and segmentation such as
one by Zhen Fu et al. where the pupil located with these methods is then tracked to
coordinates on a monitor, by Indrajit Das et al. who used these methods to track eye
position for entering a PIN number with just eye movement, and by S. Bhuvaneswari et
al. for improved iris segmentation in Iridology [28] [40] [27].
RANSAC
The RANSAC (Random Sample Consensus) algorithm is another robust method for de­
tecting circles, especially in the presence of noise and outliers and can be particularly
useful in pupil detection. First it iteratively selects random subsets of edge points and
from those subsets computes parameters of a circle defined by these points. Then in­
liers are determined based on which points lie within a specified distance from the circle.
These steps are repeated for either a certain number of iterations or until a satisfactory
model is found. In the end, once the iterations have run their course, a circle is chosen
that has the highest number of inliers and that is determined to be the final pupil bound­
ary. This method is efficient at filtering out noise and irrelevant edge points, delivering a
reliable and accurate pupil boundary [30].
RANSAC is not limited to just circular pupil detection. A paper by Kristian Sabo et al.
uses it to detect elliptical shapes. This is useful because even if the pupil is circular when
the user is looking forward, as soon as they look too far to one side or the other the pupil
shape is warped into a more elliptical form. [41]. Another paper by R.D. Labati proposes
an improvement to RANSAC using spline models. A spline model is a mathematical rep­
resentation used to approximate complex shapes and curves through a series of simpler
polynomial functions. This helps RANSAC detect more complex curves with more accu­
racy and simplifies them into a more linear form by transforming the image’s Cartesian
coordinates into Polar coordinates [36].
Contour
The previous methods have shown great promise when it comes to detecting large circles
such as the pupil. But that is not the only feature that needs to be detected. Finding
the glints is integral to making the eye tracking and degree/second calculations possible,
discussed in more detail in the Method section. The unit ’degree/second’ or ◦/sec is how
many degrees the eye moves per second, aiding in tracking where the eye is positioned
relative to the origin of the eye itself. The origin is defined by the position the eye is in
when it is looking straight forward. Here a method called ’findContours’ from OpenCV is
often utilized and it identifies and retrieves contours present in the image.
One paper by Bhuvaneswari uses it for reflection removal to aid in better pupil detection
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
9
==PAGE:18==
[27]. But for this project this could be used to locate and track the glints of a certain area
found in the eye. It can also be used to locate eyelids which can be useful when dealing
with recordings of vertigo attacks since oftentimes the pupils are partially occluded by the
eyelid. A paper by Yang et al. proposes using contour detection to locate eyelids while
ignoring common noise such as eyelashes [26].
Machine Learning and Dataset
With the multitude of developments in machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI)
in recent years, many papers opt to go that route instead of an adaptive algorithm. One
popular dataset that is utilized is the ARGaze, a large dataset that enables calibration­
free tracking in AR headsets. It contains over 2,400 images from 20 different participants.
Each image is annotated with a precise gaze direction across nine different target points.
To improve robustness the images are taken from different head positions and in diverse
lighting conditions, capturing both monocular and binocular (one camera versus two cam­
eras) setup. A model is then trained on that dataset to learn all the distinctive characteris­
tics that map to certain gaze directions and eye positions. These models, if they are well
trained, are quick to detect pupils in new environments and have shown to outperform
more traditional image processing methods.
There are however downsides to this method. First of all, collecting and labeling enough
data to train an accurate model on can be time consuming and difficult to manage. There
is also the danger of the data collected not being diverse enough in either what features
are captured or what gaze direction is recorded. However these issues could be fixed for
this project by utilizing the ARGaze dataset. Even then there are further downsides to this
method when it comes to actually training the model. There is always the danger that the
model could be poorly trained to the point where it either overfits to the data it is trained
on or isn’t accurate at all in detecting pupils. Training a ML model is complex with a lot
of room for error. On top of that, once the model is trained and in use, it takes up a lot of
computational power and resources [14] [4] [42] [43].
1.4.4
Eye Tracking Methods
Research into eye tracking techniques has been going on for decades which gives quite
a few options. The most common ones are discussed in this section.
Corneal Reflection
The first and most popular method, and the one most relevant to this project, is Corneal
Reflection, also referenced as Purkinje images in some papers. This method makes use
of light reflections on the eye from a controlled light source to track eye movement. The
most common light source used is infrared and vary in number depending on the resource,
although most use at least two light sources.
There is a paper by Zhou et al. compares five different combinations of lights and cameras
to determine which one works the best in eye tracking. Even though the end result was that
having multiple lights and multiple cameras had the best level of accuracy and robustness,
reducing the number of cameras to just one followed in a close second. In addition to good
robustness, it had lower complexity and computational cost than having many cameras
[44].
One paper talks about using eight light sources for corneal reflection. There, a corneal
reflection method by Fuhl is used where more than one light source is used for tracking. In
both they go for more than three pairs of lights to account for the influence of the sclera.
The sclera blurs or even completely obscures the glints most of the time making them
difficult to track. Both papers also show the importance of obtaining reflections of light
sources on the eye to eye­tracking accuracy. Lastly there is much emphasis on taking
10
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:19==
into account occlusions events from eyelid movements and eye rotations, something to
keep in mind for this project [45] [46].
Another paper by Zhen et al. also discusses the corneal reflection method, talked about
as the corneal reflex method. For this method to work, pupil center coordinates and glint
coordinates are important to acquire. But in addition to this method head pose parameters
(pitch, yaw, roll) are also considered. This showed improvement in robustness, however,
this paper has an eye tracker that is in no way connected to the users head while this
project is based around a headset so this might be overkill. There is however mention
of Active Appearance Models (AAM) which is used for boundary verification and image
segmentation and also known as the SNAKE model [47].
A paper by Raghavendran goes into detail about using Near Infrared Rays (NIR) in com­
bination with Corneal Reflections to track eye movements. Here it is discussed that pro­
longed exposure to traditional infrared (IR) lighting can cause lesions on the eyes over­
time, hence the use of NIR. Pupil and corneal reflections are detected in the video, much
like in this project, and then the Euclidean Distance is computed between the two to de­
termine the Point of Gaze (POG) [48]. To find the three­dimensional POG using corneal
reflections and pupil center, Snell’s law and the Levenberg­Marquardt algorithm are used
in a paper by Duchowski et al. [49]. There are even papers that adopt a similar approach
but instead of using IR lights they use the reflection of a phone screen on the eye to do
similar calculations such as in the paper by Huang et al. [50].
Machine Learning Methods
Much like with detecting pupils, machine learning can also be utilized to find gaze direc­
tion. This can be a combination of feature detection to remove noise while tracking eye
movement and building a model to find patterns in eye movement from a large dataset
of videos or frame series. There are several methods that are most popular to use. One
is a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) which has high recognition performance but
requires a large dataset and is computationally expensive and complex. Another is Sup­
port Vector Machines (SVMs) which are proficient in classifying eye movements based
on the extracted features discussed before. And lastly there is Random Forests which
are also proficient in identifying patterns in eye movement data. However, much like was
discussed in the Machine Learning and Dataset section of the pupil detection overview
earlier, there is little practical use for building and using a trained model due to it being so
computationally expensive and taking up so much space [42] [51].
Event Based Method
A rather novel approach proposed by Angelopoulos et al. proposes using event cameras
in combination with a dataset of 27 users to track eye movement. Event cameras are
different from normal RGB cameras in the way that they react to intensity changes in the
scene rather than constantly recording, therefore already reducing the amount of data
needed to go through. When these intensity changes are caught they are called ”events”
and a collection of them can reveal information that normal frames cannot. This method
therefore takes into account not only the physical properties of the movements but also
the temporal [52].
Other Methods
There are other, older methods that don’t make use of video analysis. One such method
is electrooculography (EOG) where electrodes are placed on the users face that output if
they are seeing the negative (moving away from electrode) or positive (moving towards
electrode) side of the retina. It is non­invasive and has a high time resolution, however it
has low accuracy and is very prone to human error depending on where the electrodes
are placed on the user. Another, more invasive method is using a sclera contact lens or
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
11
==PAGE:20==
search coil. This involves attaching a mechanical reference object mounted on a contact
lens worn directly on the eye and measures the position of the eye relative to the head.
Neither is suitable nor applicable to this project and won’t be discussed in any more detail
[51].
12
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:21==
Paper
Grayscale
Binary
Morph
Gaussian
Median
Sobel
Mexican Hat
Canny
Starburst
ShangFu
Lu [13]
X
X
X
/
/
S.
Bhu­
vaneswari
[27]
X
X
X
X
Zhen Fu
[28]
X
X
X
X
X
X
Yishan Li
[29]
X
X
X
X
Bozomitu
[30]
X
X
Chang
Quan
[19]
X
X
X
X
X
Meo [31]
X
X
X
X
X
Liu Yang
[26]
X
X
X
Yubo
Zhang
[21]
X
X
X
Pingping
[24]
X
X
X
X
Wayne
[17]
X
X
X
WenHua
[25]
X
X
X
Nova
[23]
X
/
/
X
X
Xing
Chen
[32]
X
X
X
X
Hollit [33]
X
X
X
Fern [34]
X
X
X
Deepika
[35]
X
X
X
X
Ruggero
[36]
X
X
X
Total
12
10
8
14
3
3
2
9
2
Table 1.1: Table overview of methods used for preprocessing in the papers discussed.
Here the ’X’ represents that a method was used, an empty cell means that it wasn’t used
and the ’/’ means that it is unclear if this method was used but language in the paper
suggests it was.
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
13
==PAGE:22==
Paper
Hough Transform
RANSAC
Contour
S. Bhuvaneswari [27]
X
X
Zhen Fu [28]
X
Yuhan Li [29]
X
Bozomit [30]
X
Chang Quan [19]
X
Meo [31]
X
Liu Yang [26]
X
Pingping [24]
X
X
Wayne [17]
X
Nova [23]
X
Xing Chen [32]
X
Bodi [37]
X
Hollit [33]
X
Fern [34]
X
Lili [39]
X
Deepika [35]
X
Ruggero [36]
X
Total
11
3
6
Table 1.2: Table overview of methods used for preprocessing in the papers discussed.
Here the ’X’ represents that a method was used, an empty cell means that it wasn’t used.
14
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:23==
2
Method
This chapter outlines the methodology utilized to address the goals of this project to track
eye movement and detect nystagmus. It goes over the general procedure and architec­
ture, the methods used in each step, and why.
Figure 2.1: General overview of specific architecture used in this project.
Figure 2.1 shows what the general flow of the architecture looks like. For this pipeline to
work it first needs to calibrate the camera itself. From there each frame of the video record­
ing is preprocessed to prepare for the next step to detect the relevant features. Then
these features are used to calculate pupil and glint centers for calibration­free movement
tracking. A more specific version of this architecture is shown in the Results section.
2.1
Procedure
Although there are many methods that can be implemented to achieve the project goal
there are a few specific ones that stood out and will be covered in more detail in this
chapter. But first the groundwork needs to be laid out with regards to the data, tools,
possible metrics, and general architecture.
Many methods that were covered in the Related Works section require massive datasets
to train an accurate model on. These datasets consist of multiple images of eyes in differ­
ent positions from a wide variety of participants. In this project, however, there is no need
for large datasets since a machine learning (ML) model is not used. The methods that
are used, discussed later in this chapter, require no prior training, Instead they make use
of videos of a real eye and an artificial eye, the first for real world testing and the latter for
known gaze angles to compare to. Python is the programming language of choice, with
libraries such as OpenCV and scikit­image put to use to read and process the data.
In order to determine if the methods are working correctly or not, certain metrics must
be considered. One possible metric is checking the difference between true gaze angle
and the measured gaze angle output from the program. This is possible when measuring
the angle from the artificial eye but not as applicable in the real world videos. Another
possible metric that can be used with both the artificial eye and the real eye is the program
latency, i.e. how long it takes the program to run from start to finish. This can be used
to compare different methodologies that might have similar results but take up different
amounts of computing time. Lastly the number of frames where a pupil is detected can be
counted to test the pupil detection code. There is the danger that a wrong pupil could be
detected if not implemented correctly so the output frame with detected pupil must also
be considered.
2.2
Calibration
This first step is not the typical calibration that must be performed with the user before each
recording but rather to find the camera parameters to fix distortion and aid in tracking
accuracy. A normal nine­point calibration methods won’t work given that the headset
blocks the patient’s view for best results with infrared light and no monitor is used at any
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
15
==PAGE:24==
point for gaze tracking. But this also makes calibration easier. Given that the user’s eye
movement isn’t being mapped to a monitor or VR scene we can instead consider the
relative eye movement within the video. But there is still a need to remove distortion from
the video feed and parameterize the camera matrix in order to localize the eye position in
3D space. For this Zhang’s method can be used to determine the intrinsic and extrinsic
parameters of the camera used.
The first step is to take multiple images of a chessboard (or of any other object with a
well known, repetitive, flat pattern) from different viewpoints. Then the corner points of
the pattern, in this case the corners of the squares, are located in each image and from
there an initial estimates of the camera parameters are found with those points. The 2D
corner points can then be translated to 3D coordinates in the real world that all lie on the
same plane, denoted as Pi =


Xi
Yi
0

.
The next step is to map the 3D object points to 2D image points by using the equation
sxi = HXi where s is a scaling factor and H is the homography matrix H computed for
each image using this equation. This computation is called the Direct Linear Transfor­
mation (DLT) and the scaling factor handles perspective transformations. Using these
homographies calculated for each image, the intrinsic parameters of the camera matrix K
can be extracted with the equation H = K[r1|r2|t]. Here r1 and r2 are the first two columns
of rotational matrix R and t is the translation vector.
Once the initial estimates are calculated they need to be refined through non­linear opti­
mization
argminK,Ri,ti
∑
i
∑
j
||xij −ˆxij||2
(2.1)
where K, Ri, and ti are the intrinsic matrix, rotational matrices, and translation vectors
respectively and xij are the observed image points and ˆxij are the projected points. The
output is the intrinsic matrix (also known as the pinhole camera model)
K =


fx
0
cx
0
fy
cy
0
0
1


(2.2)
where (fx, fy) is the focal length and (cx, cy) is the optical center or principal point.
The distortion coefficients
(
k1
k2
p1
p2
k3
)
are also estimated during this optimiza­
tion process to correct both radial and tangential distortion. Two other outputs from these
calculations are the rotation and translation vectors. They are calculated for each out­
put and used to verify that the estimated value for matrix K is accurate (discussed later).
They describe the rotation and orientation of the camera in relation to the chessboard.
With all of these outputs the camera lens distortion can be corrected and 3D camera coor­
dinates can be accurately transformed into 2D image coordinates. Rather than implement
this method from scratch, methods from the OpenCV (cv2) library are used in this project
[53].
16
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:25==
Verification that these outputs are valid needs to be done by calculating the reprojection
error. The reprojection error measures the discrepancy between observed 2D points pi
and the projected 3D points onto the image plane by using the estimated camera pa­
rameters discussed above, represented as point p′
i. This can be done by calculating the
Euclidean distance between point pi and point p′
i. To calculate the latter point (since we
already have the first one) we first need to get the Rotational matrix R by performing a
Rodrigues transformation on the rotational vector that came as part of the output with ma­
trix K. Once transformed then the accompanying translation vector t and K matrix can be
used to find p′
i with equation
p′
i = K [R | t] Pi
(2.3)
From here the reprojection error can be calculated with the Euclidean distance:
distancei =
√
(ui −u′
i)2 + (vi −v′
i)2
(2.4)
where pi = (ui, vi) and p′
i = (u′
i, v′
i). Since the rotational and translation vectors are
calculated multiple times then so is this distance and from there an average of the error
values is calculated. The lower the value is the more accurate the outputs are [15].
2.3
Preprocessing
Before any algorithm or method can be implemented on the video feed from the headset,
a few steps must be taken to enhance the frame being processed. Doing so reduces
the computational complexity and increases robustness so there is consistency when
processing a diverse amount of data.
Changing Contrast
The headset can fog up and images are not always the clearest when being used in real
life and not on artificial eyes. To counteract this unintentional blurring there are methods
to sharpen up the contrast. One method is using ’cv2.convertScaleAbs’, a python function
that applies a scaling factor (alpha) and an offset (beta) to the pixel values of the image.
This straightforward method adjusts the pixel values using the formula newpixel = alpha ∗
pixel + beta to affect the contrast and brightness of the image [54].
Another method that affects contrast is utilizing histogram equalization which spreads out
the intensity values, making the image appear more balanced and detailed [55]. Both were
tested since sometimes the image is foggy due to condensation and histogram equaliza­
tion is strong in increasing contrast in those situations and other times the image is simply
unclear and the cv2 method comes in handy then. Testing and comparing the two gives
us a good indication of which one to use since they are both rather similar in practice.
Grayscale
Converting the image to grayscale is a logical next step, especially given how many papers
used that in their preprocessing, seen in table 1.1.
Each pixel in an image has three color channels, red, green, and blue, that make up the
picture. When it comes to working with these images, however, it is much simpler to deal
with just one. Thus images are more often than not converted to grayscale which reduces
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
17
==PAGE:26==
the number of channels to one and, in turn, reduces computational complexity. Several
other improvements also accompany changing the color to grayscale. Once an image is
turned gray there is an improved focus on structural information since the distraction of
other colors is removed and therefore the features in the image itself are enhanced. This
also enhances algorithm performance and reduces memory usage due to the simplifica­
tion of the data being processed. An added bonus is that robustness of any operations
performed on this data is increased as well. For this project a simple grayscale conversion
function from cv2 is used but there are many ways to go about it [56].
Denoising Filter
Once the image is converted to grayscale a Gaussian filter is used. This filter is widely
used in image processing to reduce noise and detail by smoothing the image. It does this
by convolving the image with a kernel in a Gaussian function, which in this project is:
G(x, y) =
1
2πσ2 e−x2+y2
2σ2
(2.5)
where x and y are the horizontal and vertical distances to the kernel center and σ is the
standard deviation of the kernel. Changing the kernel size changes how much the image is
blurred, the bigger the kernel, the blurrier, and the greater the denoising. This is because
with a bigger kernel size there are more neighboring pixels to the center included in the
averaging [57] [58].
Another filter that serves the same function as the Gaussian filter is the median filter.
They both smooth and denoise the images but go about it in different manners. While the
Gaussian filter makes use of a Guassian function, the median filter finds the median of
all neighboring pixels within a kernel imposed on the pixel being processed and replacing
it with that median value [18]. When comparing the two methods, median blur does a
better job at preserving the edges in the image while still effectively removing noise. Both
methods are still tested and compared to choose the better of the two.
Binarization
As with grayscale, most of the papers in the 1.4 section binarize the frame to make object
detection easier, as can be seen in table 1.1.
To further reduce any noise that may still remain despite any filters used, a threshold can
be applied to the image in the form of binarizing the pixels. This process changes each
pixel value to either 0 (black) or 255 (white) depending on where the original pixel value
lies based on a threshold value. This gives a simple view of the most prominent features
in the image and is useful in detecting pupils given that they are typically darker than any
other component of the eye [59].
Morphological Operators
Sometimes features and shapes in images are incomplete or don’t turn out as expected
every single time. That’s where morphological operators such as erosion, dilation, open­
ing, and closing come into play. They are used to remove noise, fill in gaps, and define
object boundaries, all important steps to further refine any shapes revealed by the previ­
ous processing steps.
One of the operators is erosion which removes pixels on object boundaries by eroding
them based on a structuring element placed over the image. This can help refine object
18
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:27==
boundaries and remove noise and separate objects that are close to one another. The
opposite operator is dilation which adds pixels to the boundaries of objects in the image
which aids in filling small holes and connecting disjointed objects, thus enhancing features
after noise reduction. Another operator is called opening, a combination of erosion and
dilation to remove small objects and noise while still preserving the shape and size of
large objects. This operator is useful in removing background noise. Opposite of this is
the closing operator which reverses the order in which erosion and dilation are used by
first dilating and then eroding. By doing this it fills small gaps and holes within objects to
connect broken parts and enhancing the solidity of objects [60].
Using these operators can greatly improve the detection of pupils, especially in noisy or
unpredictable images and given that this project uses a headset where the pupil position
is not guaranteed to be in the center of the video, this can be useful in pupil location.
Canny Edge Detection
Once the image has been processed then detecting the edge is important. Many methods
were mentioned in the Related Works section. However, upon closer inspection, methods
such as Mexican Hat were often used in more complex cases where the entire face was
in view of the video feed. As for the Sobel Operator, that is rather involved within other
processes such as Canny. Therefore simply using the OpenCV method Canny is the best
course of action. Also, most of the papers looked at used Canny to find object edges, as
can be seen in table 1.1.
In the Contour method, the Gaussian filtering and the Sobel Operator are used as initial
steps to further process the image and find edges. The Sobel Operator shows detected
edges as very thick so a non­maximum suppression is used to highlight only the edges
that matter. To do this the non­maximum suppression utilizes the vertical and horizontal
gradients calculated with Sobel which is then compared to the gradients of neighboring
pixels. A threshold is applied to determine further what counts as an edge and what
doesn’t [19]. From there the detected edges are linked when possible, giving solid ground
for the next step of feature detection.
2.4
Feature Detection
The first step to take after processing the image and sharpening up any possible edges
is to detect features, such as pupils and glints, from those edges. Without this step the
calculations in eye gaze tracking would be impossible. Therefore we compare three of
the most commonly used methods, Contour, Hough Transform, and RANSAC. These
methods were the most used in all of the related works and showed the most consistent
and accurate results. In addition, given how popular and wide used these methods are,
implementing them couldn’t be simpler, leading to fewer errors.
2.4.1
Pupil Detection
There are many different methods out there for pupil detection, as was covered in Related
Works but this project will mainly look at Hough Transform, Canny Edge Detection, and
RANSAC. In this project the data input is a video but the processing is done on a frame
by frame basis for pupil detection.
Hough Transform
Through research it was found that Hough Transform (HT) (more specifically Circle and
Ellipse Hough Transform (CHT/EHT)) working with the Canny Edge Detector gave the
best result. Therefore, in this project, these two will be tested together to detect pupils
in the eye videos. The Canny method is covered in Preprocessing section earlier in this
chapter.
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
19
==PAGE:28==
Hough Transform is the second step in this process and widely used in feature extraction
due to its robustness against noise and occlusions and effectiveness at detecting basic
shapes such as lines and circles. The overall idea behind HT is to map points on features
in the image space into a parameter space and finding features based on peaks. For this
project HT is only used to find circles and ellipses.
The equation of a circle in Cartesian coordinates is
(x −a)2 + (y −b)2 = r2
(2.6)
where (x, y) are the edge pixel coordinates, (a, b) is the center of the circle, and r is the
radius. The edge pixels are translated into the parameter space of potential circle centers,
called Hough space. Votes are then cast by the image pixels in the Hough space and the
highest concentration of votes in the parameter space is shown as peaks and indicates a
high likelihood of the desired shape being present in that area. The center of those peaks
contains data about the center and radius of the circle in the image space which can then
be mapped back [32].
This combination leverages the strengths of each method with the precise edge localiza­
tion from Canny and the robust shape detection from Hough Transform. But there were
also multiple papers that used another method for pupil detection instead that is worth
looking into called RANSAC.
RANSAC
RANSAC, or Random Sample Consensus, is a robust algorithm to estimate parameters
of a model from a dataset that contains outliers. It is very effective at dealing with noise
and occlusions caused by eyelashes or eyelids. This is important to have in mind since in
this project it needs to be a program that works for people dealing with vertigo and usually
they have trouble keeping their eyes completely open during an attack. The general steps
followed are that the algorithm iteratively selects random subsets of the data points, fits
them to a model such as a circle, and evaluating the fit using the remaining data points.
Over the course of a few iterations inliers and outliers are determined based on the given
model.
In the case of pupil detection the model used is the same circle equation (2.6) used in
Hough Transform. Then, to determine the consensus set of which data points fit the
model and which don’t, a threshold distance from the circle center is calculated to find the
inliers:
distance =
√
(x −a)2 + (y −b)2 −r
(2.7)
Iterations over finding inliers continue until a certain number of inliers are found or a num­
ber of iterations is completed. This iteration improves robustness against a multitude of
noise and is very good at finding points that congregate in a circular pattern. Therefore it
is a good contender against the previous method of HT and Canny and worth comparing.
[30]
2.4.2
Glint Detection
Unlike with pupil detection, glints can sometimes be irregular shapes. But they are con­
sistently small and once located around the initial pupil area then they can be easily and
20
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:29==
consistently tracked since they don’t move positions as much as the pupil itself. Therefore
the contour method can be used here to locate and mark the glints in the image as well
as their coordinates.
Once the binary image is found through the preprocessing method, detecting the contours
is easy. In OpenCV this process is based on the Suzuki­Abe algorithm, a border­following
algorithm. This process identifies the first pixel on the boundary edge and then traces
along that border through neighboring pixels in a counter­clockwise direction until it arrives
at the first pixel.
When the contours have been detected then they can carry certain properties such as
area, perimeter, and center or centroid as it is called. From there the contours can be
filtered based on area to only find ones that are of a certain size. In this project, to find
the glints, only small contours are found within the rough boundary of the pupil detected
before [61].
2.5
Eye Tracking
Once these main features, pupil and glints, have been detected and their coordinates
located, further processing can commence to find the eye movement in degrees per sec­
ond, distance between the camera and the user, and eventually the position of the eye in
3D space.
2.5.1
Eye Movement Using Corneal Reflection
Figure 2.2: Location of glints in relation to pupil on the eye.
Figure 2.2 shows the general placement of the glints on the pupil when the user is looking
straight forward. These glints, also called Purkinje images or corneal reflections. Using
these points to track eye movement and gaze angle is the common method in all the
papers that were explored. The glints have coordinates g1 = (x1, y1), g2 = (x2, y2), and
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
21
==PAGE:30==
g3 = (x3, y3) as can be seen in figure 2.2. In the figure it can be observed that there
are two points at each glint location so to achieve only one set of coordinates rather than
two the middle of a line drawn between the two glints at each triangle corner is calculated,
making up the points g1, g2, and g3. At some points, depending on the position of the pupil,
the glints can become distorted or disappear entirely. When that happens the previous
coordinates of the points is used since it can be assumed that the glint locations are fairly
stable.
With these glint coordinates the centroid of the triangle formed by said glints can be found
with the formula:
C = (Cx, Cy) = (x1 + x2 + x3
3
, y1 + y2 + y3
3
)
(2.8)
This creates a semi­stable reference point to compare the pupil center with and calculate
the gaze angle with. To estimate the gaze angle the formula
θ = arctan( Cy −Py
Cx −PX
)
(2.9)
where (Cx, Cy) is the centroid coordinate and (Px, Py) is the pupil center coordinate. From
here the calculated angle is compared to previous angle and this calculates the movement
of the eye in ◦/sec.
2.5.2
Distance Between Eye and Camera
Finding the distance between the eye and the camera can be beneficial in that it can
improve the accuracy of the eye movement recordings. This is possible by verifying that
the focal length found with Zhang is accurate by calculating distance with that focal length
on a video with a known distance. The distance could also be used to help locate the eye
in 3D space which in turn would give more accurate results in eye movement tracking.
This calculation is built on the fact that an object placed at a distance D from the camera
and of width W in real life and P in the image can be used to find the focal F of the
camera. This equation, known as the lens equation, is F = PxD
W
but can also be written
as D = WxF
P
or, to show the relationship even better, as F
D = P
W [44].
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the lens equation to show how the different
measurements relate to one another.
Figure 2.3 shows where each variable is place in relation to the real world and the image
itself [62].
22
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:31==
A more complex way to find the distance is through triangulation. This concept is perfectly
suited for this project due to the fact that the glints create an equilateral triangle both at the
source and on the eye. Let the light sources be denoted as L1 = (x′
1, y′
1), L2 = (x′
2, y′
2),
and L3 = (x′
3, y′
3) and the glints be g1 = (x1, y1), g2 = (x2, y2), and g3 = (x3, y3) where
L1 pairs with glint g1 and so on. The center of the camera is considered the origin of the
graph being measured on and the coordinates are measured off of this basis.
Direction vectors are found and normalized using the glint coordinates and focal length of
the camera. Once all the vectors are found the incident angle of each glint can be found.
For instance, for g1 the angle of incidence is calculated as:
cos(θ1) = r1 · n1
|r1||n1|
(2.10)
where r1 is the direction vector and n1 is the normal. From here the angle of reflection can
be found since it is equal to angle of incidence. Then the reflection ray can be calculated
with
v1 = r1 −2(r1 · n1)n
(2.11)
where v1 is the reflection ray and the other variables are the same as before [63]. With
all of these values then the law of cosines can be used. The equation for this is
cos(θ12) = d2
31 + d2
23 −d2
12
2d31d23
(2.12)
where each d is the distance between two glints and the θ used here is the incidence
angle calculated before. There are a few tweaks to work out in these calculations but
they should deliver more accurate distance results than the first method [64].
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:33==
3
Specific Architecture Overview
Given the multitude of methods utilized in gaze tracking papers it is important to narrow
down which ones were tried. This was done in the previous Method section. In that
section there were still some methods to choose from based on results from testing on
real data. This section will go over the data itself and which methods ended up in the final
architecture which can be seen in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Overview of specific architecture used in this project. The
preprocessing and detection processes for the pupil and glints is split into
two. However, the detected pupil results are used to aid in detecting the right
glints.
3.1
Data
The data used in this project is recorded by the headset discussed in the Introduction
section. Due to the difficulty of capturing data from real vertigo attacks to test on and
display results due to healthcare laws, the eye movements needed to be simulated. To
start with an artificial eye was used, placed at a known distance from the camera and
moving at a known angle. Using only artificial eyes, however, is not useful in the big
picture so recordings of real eyes are also used. The algorithm is simply adjusted to fit
the new environment, discussed in detail in the Results section.
To simulate vertigo eye movements in real eyes a subject puts the headset on and is then
spun around in circles. The subject’s eyes automatically try to fixate on something as
they are spinning. Then the subject is brought to a sudden stop, causing microsaccades
similar to those that occur during vertigo attacks. Even though this is not a true attack,
the movement is similar enough to be used for testing and validation of the algorithm. It
is also a cleaner version of the true data since there is control over how much occlusion
there is of the eye, making it easier to develop a pipeline in increments. In addition to a
video recording is also a timestamps and sensor information output text file. The headset
saves these recordings on the raspberry pi and they are then moved to a computer over
an SSH connection and processed.
3.2
Programming Language and Libraries
Python is the chosen language for processing the data due to its effectiveness at data
processing and image analysis. Not only is it an easy language to work with and flexi­
ble when it comes to data manipulation, it also has many handy libraries that can aid in
the analysis of the recordings. The three main ones used are OpenCV, Matplotlib, and
NumPy. The first, OpenCV, has many useful image processing functions such as Hough
Transform and RANSAC. Matplotlib makes displaying results of angle calculations sim­
ple and readable and lastly, NumPy provides support for large, multi­dimensional arrays
along with mathematical operators to work with those arrays. NumPy makes it easy to
process and use the camera matrix from the Zhang method, among other uses.
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
25
==PAGE:34==
3.3
Architecture
Now that the groundwork has been laid and the methods have been narrowed down to a
select few the main architecture can be chosen, seen in figure 3.1.
Calibration and Preprocessing
Zhang’s method is used in the beginning to correct the distortion in the video with the
use of distortion coefficients computed with Zhang. It also gives the camera parameters
(focal length, principal point, skew points, translation vectors, and rotation vectors). These
parameters can then be used to find the distance between the camera and the eye as well
as the eye’s position in 3D space [15] [53]. The figure 3.2 shows a more detailed overview
of the steps taken to preprocess the frame for both detecting the pupil and glints, each
simply with different parameters at each step.
Figure 3.2: Detailed architecture of preprocessing steps taken and in what
order.
Next up is preprocessing. This is split into two, one for the pupil detection and another for
the glint detection due to the fact that they present differently in the video in brightness and
size. Despite this, the general steps to preprocess the video frames are still the same.
First up the frame is converted to grayscale for simpler processing since the colors are not
useful in this project. From there the image is denoised using a median filter to remove
extra noise and sharpen edges, making it easier to see both the pupil and the glints. Then
the frame’s contrast is increased using histogram equalization, especially when working
with a video of a real eye. This makes the features even more prominent and improves
the performance of the next step of binarization with a threshold. Different thresholds are
used for both the artificial and real eye as well as for detecting the pupil and glints in each
given a difference in light intensities and edges being looked for. The binary image is
dilated, a morphological operator, to slightly enlarge the area being looked for and make
it easier to spot and fill in any gaps that might be present. Lastly the edges are found using
a Canny edge detector with varying thresholds depending on the pipeline and video being
used. This delivers a frame that is ready to be used in the next step.
Feature Detection
For this step there are multiple options and different methods are chosen based on the
purpose they are being used for. When it comes to actually detecting the pupil, Hough
Transform delivers the best, most consistent results and was also most used in the papers
looked at as seen in table 1.2. Therefore the method chosen for this part of the pipeline for
both real and artificial eye videos. When it came to detecting glints, however, a different
method is chosen. Since the glints are not always round enough to be picked up by the
Hough Transform the contour method from OpenCV is used instead. By limiting both the
area of the objects being looked for and that it should be in the pupil area detected before,
the glints are accurately detected, as shown in the Results section.
Eye Movement Tracking
There are not many options in this section of the architecture given the headset setup.
So corneal reflection and calculating movement angle based off of those coordinates is
the path chosen here. From there it is possible to jump off with that information and figure
26
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:35==
out the distance between the camera and the eye and, even further, estimate the eye’s
position in 3D space.
Section Closing Remarks
Given this detailed architecture that was chosen for this project, next up is to look at the
results of the testing of the different methods covered in the Method section to show how
this architecture was decided.
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:37==
4
Results
Here is an overview of significant results, an analysis of them, and what course was cho­
sen from that analysis. Figure 4.1 shows the detailed architecture once more for refer­
ence.
Figure 4.1: Detailed architecture used in this project.
4.1
Calibration
Calibration is the first step in the pipeline to get it started on the right foot.
Figure 4.2: Mapping of corners detected by Zhang’s method.
Zhang’s method was applied on a series of frames extracted from a video of a chessboard.
Even with partial views of the chessboard, fairly accurate values were extracted from the
images to undistort the image with, as can be seen in figure 4.2 showing the original
distorted image compared to an undistorted version of the image. The values used to
undistort the image are the following distortion coefficients:
(
k1
k2
p1
p2
k3
)
=
(
−0.616
0.536
−0.011
0.008
−0.385
)
The result of using these coefficients to undistort an image of a chessboard can be seen
in figure 4.3. There it can be seen that the coefficients work effectively to straighten up
the lines.
In addition to the distortion coefficients, Zhang’s method outputs camera parameters
which can be shown in the following camera matrix:
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.3: Frame undistorted using values calculated by Zhang’s method.
K =


1242.8
0
458.6
0
1237.0
459.4
0
0
1


where the focal length in the x and y directions is (1242.8, 1237.0) and the principal point
is (458.6, 459.4). This output can then be used to calculate the distance between the
camera and eye as well as the eye’s 3D position in space, discussed in more detail in the
Method section.
In order to test whether these results are accurate enough, the reprojection error is cal­
culated. For these results a reprojection error of 0.0815 was found which is very good
because the closer the reprojection error is to 0, the more accurate the results are. With
these outputs the preprocessing of the video frame can commence.
4.2
Preprocessing
Figure 4.4: Detailed architecture of preprocessing steps and their order.
Preprocessing the video frames in the most optimal way makes the feature detection and
later calculations simpler and the steps taken can be seen in figure 4.4.
Grayscale
First step is converting the image to grayscale to simplify the data present in the image.
As can be seen in figure 4.5, the main features of the pupil, eyelid, and glints are already
looking sharper.
This conversion also benefits in processing an image of the real eye, as can be seen in
figure 4.6, although the edges are not as sharp. But the preprocessing is not over yet.
Denoising Filter
Next up the image needs to be denoised through smoothing. Here there are two main
filters to consider, Gaussian and median filters, along with different kernel sizes f 3, 5, and
7. Figures 4.7, 4.8, and 4.9 show a good comparison between the two filters and what
happens when the kernel size is altered. For both filters, as the kernel increases in size,
the images become blurrier. This is because in both instances, as the kernel increases in
size, more pixels contribute to the smoothing process. With these results a Median filter
30
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.5: Image of artificial eye converted to grayscale.
Figure 4.6: Image of real eye converted to grayscale.
is used in the final pipeline with a kernel size 5 since it smooths the image enough without
losing too much information. But this might not be the same for a real eye so each filter
with each kernel size was also tested on a frame from a video of the real eye.
Figures 4.10, 4.11, and 4.12 show that filtering with median filter with a kernel of size 5
also shows the best results, striking the best balance between denoising and retaining
information in the real eye like it did with the artificial eye. This result is a bit surprising
since in the Related Works section, in table 1.2, it is obvious that most papers used a
Gaussian filter. But based on the figures mentioned before, median works better with
the data in this project. With denoising completed the contrast can be changed to further
enhance the visibility of the desired edges.
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.7: Gaussian and Median filters with kernel size 3.
Figure 4.8: Gaussian and Median filters with kernel size 5.
Figure 4.9: Gaussian and Median filters with kernel size 7.
Contrast
Increasing the contrast and brightness of the image, especially of the real eye, makes
feature detection, the next step after preprocessing, that much easier. Two contrast meth­
ods were tried, OpenCV’s ’cv2.convertScaleAbs’ and histogram equalization, discussed
in more detail in the Method section. Figure 4.13 shows them performed on the artificial
eye and here it is apparent that ’cv2.convertScaleAbs’ works very well in enhancing the
look of the glints and brightening up the image itself to make it easier to find the pupil,
especially when alpha=2.0. The second figure, figure 4.14, shows both contrast methods
used on an image of a real eye. Here ’cv2.convertScaleAbs’ with alpha=1.5 works just
fine but histogram equalization works even better. And since it is apparent that histogram
equalization works well with both a real and fake eye, that is the method that is chosen
for all eye recordings.
32
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.10: Gaussian and Median filters with kernel size 3.
Figure 4.11: Gaussian and Median filters with kernel size 5.
Figure 4.12: Gaussian and Median filters with kernel size 7.
Figure 4.13: Comparison of contrast methods on artificial eye.
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.14: Comparison of contrast methods on real eye.
Binarization
Next up is binarization which involves thresholding the image to make features of an image
and their edges even more visible.
Figure 4.15: Result of binarization with different threshold values.
Binarization is an important step to further isolate the pupil position and increase the ro­
bustness of later pupil detection methods. Figure 4.15 shows how, with the proper thresh­
old, the pupil is clearly segmented from the rest of the image making it easy to find. From
this image it is clear that different thresholds are required for different tasks. In order to
detect the pupil, then a threshold of around 30 shows a clear boundary around it, making
segmentation easy. But in that image the glints start to blend into one another, making
later calculations difficult. Therefore, for glint segmentation, a threshold value of 50 or 65
would be more appropriate, even though the pupil starts to disappear at those values. But
since each feature detection is done separately then this works.
As with the denoising filter, the threshold value differs when dealing with a real eye, as
can be seen in figure 4.16. Here the best threshold value for pupil detection is around 50,
although more preprocessing is required to get a clear boundary (and is done for actual
feature detection in later section). For glint detection a threshold value around 90 gives
the clearest results which is quite a bit higher than with the artificial eye.
34
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.16: Result of binarization with different threshold values with real
eye.
Morphological Operators
Sometimes, even after going through all the steps of preprocessing the image, the ele­
ments are still not clear enough to locate due to being incomplete. Then different mor­
phological operators come in handy to fill in any gaps.
Figure 4.17: Morphological Operators with kernel size 3.
Figure 4.18: Morphological Operators with kernel size 5.
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.19: Morphological Operators with kernel size 7.
Figures 4.17, 4.18, and 4.19 show the effect of different methods with different kernel
sizes. In the figures it is clear to see that erosion makes the glints completely disappear
and the edges of the pupil become far too fuzzy to be useful. Dilation goes the other
direction where the glints become very big which can be useful when detecting glints
accurately. Opening has the same issue as erosion and is therefore not used according
to these figures while closing shows very little change. To show the results better the
same operations are performed on the images after the median filtering and binarization
of the image.
Figure 4.20: Morphological Operators on binary image with kernel size 3.
Figure 4.21: Morphological Operators on binary image with kernel size 5.
Figures 4.20, 4.21, and 4.22 give a better visual of how the morphological operators affect
36
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.22: Morphological Operators on binary image with kernel size 7.
the pupils and the glints. It is clear to see that either closing morph or dilation morph, each
with kernel size 3, give the best results and are both tried later on in Feature Detection.
The result from that is that dilation is the morphological operator to go with since it opens
up the features detected and fills in any gaps that might happen to make them easier to
detect.
As with all the previous preprocessing steps, there are often differences in parameters
when it comes to processing a real eye image compared to the artificial eye image. This
time binarization and filtering is utilized from the start since real eye images are noisier
than artificial eye images. For pupil detection, a threshold of 50 is used, proven before to
be best to isolate the pupil in an image, and figures 4.23, 4.24, and 4.25 show how each
morphological operator performs on the binary image.
Figure 4.23: Morphological Operators on binary image with kernel size 3.
Here opening with a kernel of size 7 is very good at closing up and forming a complete
circle where the pupil should be and is therefore used. Now for glints, the binarization
threshold is pushed up to 90 and gives figures 4.26, 4.27, and 4.28.
Here it is apparent that erosion and opening are once again not useful since the glints
completely disappear, even with a small kernel size. With dilation and closing, dilation
comes out on top with kernel size 3 or 5. Despite there still being noise in the image
with specks that are of similar size as the glints, this can be easily fixed by limiting glint
detection to be within the boundaries of the detected pupil, with a little bit of leeway for
when the glints go outside the pupil boundary.
Canny Edge Detection
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.24: Morphological Operators on binary image with kernel size 5.
Figure 4.25: Morphological Operators on binary image with kernel size 7.
Figure 4.26: Morphological Operators on binary image with higher threshold
to better see glints in real eye with kernel size 3.
The last step in the preprocessing section is Canny edge detection. Here the results to
find the edges with the artificial eye use similar thresholds regardless if it is trying to find
the pupil or the glints. These are a lower threshold of 100 and a higher one of 200 and
can be seen in figure 4.29. In that figure it can be seen that the when the binary threshold
is around 100 then the pupil can be clearly segmented but when it is pushed to between
150 and 200 then the glints become more visible. Therefore different thresholds need to
be used depending on which pipeline Canny is being used in and adjustments need to be
made to the binary threshold.
38
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.27: Morphological Operators on binary image with higher threshold
to better see glints in real eye with kernel size 5.
Figure 4.28: Morphological Operators on binary image with higher threshold
to better see glints in real eye with kernel size 7.
Figure 4.29: Canny edges found in image of artificial eye with different
binary thresholds.
With the real eye the Canny thresholds, both lower and upper, are kept the same and only
the binary threshold is lowered. This can be seen in figure 4.30 since the pupil and glints
become clearer and easier to detect.
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.30: Canny edges found in image of real eye with different binary
thresholds.
With this final Canny edge detection the preprocessing of the image is complete and
feature detection can commence using this simplified version of the original image.
4.3
Feature Detection
Next up is detecting features from the preprocessed image. The simple image that comes
out of the preprocessing process sets up good groundwork for easy feature detection
which can then be imposed onto the original image to ensure that the detection is correct,
as shown in the figures of this section. There are a few methods to considered for both
pupil and glint detection.
4.3.1
Pupil Detection
First up is finding the pupil in the image. The preprocessing has made it very easy to
segment the pupil from the rest of the image but the specific method for said segmentation
must be decided upon. The three that are focused on are RANSAC, Contour, and Hough
Transform, both of which are tested on the artificial and real eye.
RANSAC
First up is RANSAC. A custom circle model was created since the one from OpenCV
didn’t work. While testing the method on the artificial eye it became apparent that different
results could come up due to the innate randomness of the RANSAC method. This can
be illustrated by two runs of the method with a binary threshold of 30 where they both
delivered equally wrong but completely different results, seen in figures 4.31 and 4.32.
The method did not have much better luck with the real eye either, as can be seen in
figure 4.33.
This can possibly be due to the fact that this method is not an established method in
OpenCV like the following two are. Here a multitude of parameters need to be taken
into account and fine­tuned and in this case the right tuning was not found. Therefore
RANSAC is not a method to consider at the moment but could be revisited in later itera­
tions of the algorithm.
Contour
40
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.31: Pupil detection using RANSAC on artificial eye.
Figure 4.32: Repeat pupil detection using RANSAC on artificial eye.
Figure 4.33: Pupil detection using RANSAC on real eye.
Next up is Contour for pupil detection. In the artificial eye with binary threshold 50 there
is a clear boundary that is traceable around the pupil itself, as can be seen in figure 4.34.
For this detection to be possible the binary image had to be inverted but the pupil is clearly
detected.
With the real eye things become a bit more difficult. Getting an approximation of the pupil
boundaries is still possible and is shown in figure 4.35, with inverse binary just like before.
Despite how well it works on the still image it performs worse on the video. For it to work
a very specific area has to be defined since if anything in the image changes, a new
contour area is detected. And since the method doesn’t limit itself to only round shapes
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.34: Tracings of contours detected to find the pupil of an artificial
eye.
Figure 4.35: Tracings of contours detected to find the pupil of a real eye.
then any contour of a certain area range is valid. That brings us to the final method up for
consideration: Hough Transform.
Hough Transform
The last method to discuss is Hough Transform, a well known method to segment fea­
tures that are of a common shape such as a circle. Here it is used to find circle with pa­
rameters dp=1.2 (accumulator resolution), param1=40 (edge detection threshold value),
param2=26 (accumulator threshold for the circle centers), minRadius=65, and maxRa­
dius=80. The results can be seen in figure 4.36.
Figure 4.36: Pupil detection using Hough Transform on artificial eye.
The pupil is well segmented and located and Hough Transform also gives the radius and
center of the pupil, which is necessary for later calculations of eye movement. But it
42
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:51==
isn’t enough that this works only on the artificial eye so next up is the image of the real
eye. With some small changes to the Hough Transform parameters (namely changing
the maxRadius=70 and dp=1.1) the pupil is accurately detected, as seen in figure 4.37.
Figure 4.37: Pupil detection using Hough Transform on real eye.
With both the artificial eye and the real eye the Hough Transform performs very well. But
the pupil is not always circular in shape. Therefore an elliptical version of Circle Hough
Transform was tried but an error came up where said function is not viable in the newest
version of OpenCV.
Comparison of the methods
Hough Transform
RANSAC
Contour
228
0
187
Table 4.1: Table overview of how many frames a pupil was detected in. The number is
adjusted for when the pupil is detected correctly, therefore RANSAC results in 0 frames
of pupil detection. The total number of frames is 228 and the results show that Hough
Transform clearly detects the pupil the most often.
Based on these results, the front runner for pupil detection is the Hough Transform. Not
only is it the most commonly used method for pupil detection, but it also gives the best
results with the data in this project, as shown in the figures in this section. RANSAC failed
at even finding the pupil, as stated before and therefore is out of the running. Contour
performed well on the still images but has the possible drawbacks mentioned where er­
rors could occur due to the fact that the contour section detected is not limited to a round
shape. Hough Transform fixes that error possibility and also delivers the pupil center coor­
dinates and the radius which are both integral values to have when doing eye movement
calculations in the next step of the pipeline.
4.3.2
Glint Detection
Unlike with pupil detection, glints can sometimes be irregular shapes. However the area
of the glints on the eye are fairly regular and their positions are relatively stable. Therefore
the contour method can be used here to locate and mark the glints in the image as well
as their coordinates.
First up the method is tested on the artificial eye. In order to detect glints the threshold is
increased to 90 and the binary image is not inverted, as can be seen in figure 4.38. The
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
43
==PAGE:52==
glints are clearly detected but should any other contours of similar area be found then the
search area is also limited to be around where the pupil boundary is located.
Figure 4.38: Tracings of contours detected to find the glints of an artificial
eye.
Next up this method is tested on the real eye as well.
Here, even though the glints
can be clearly seen in the binary (middle) image in figure 4.39 they are not detected
with the contour method. To fix this the mode of the contour function is changed from
’RETR_EXTERNAL’ to ’RETR_TREE’. Doing this makes the function take into account
the entire hierarchy of the contours found and brings to light the nested ones, which the
glints most likely were.
Figure 4.39: Tracings of contours detected to find the glints of a real eye.
Despite them being visible in the binary image they are not detected by the
Contours function
Once this change is made the glint contours are easily detected and displayed as can be
seen in figure 4.40.
With all of this the glints are easy to track, as can be seen in figure 4.41 in relation to the
pupil boundary.
4.4
Eye Tracking
From the detected glints and pupil centers the gaze angle can be calculated with equa­
tions mentioned in the Method section. From there the movements can be mapped and
shown to be typical saccadic movements. Then, when there are quick eye movements,
microsaccadic movements can be observed.
44
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.40: Corrected tracings of contours detected to find the glints of a
real eye. Here they are found both in the binary and contour images.
Figure 4.41: Glints detected in artificial eye.
First the eye movement was tracked by simply tracking the pupil position, the results of
which can be seen in figure 4.42.
Figure 4.42: First plotting of saccadic movement based only on pupil
tracking and nothing else. The saccades are nonexistent here.
As can be seen, these results are all over the place and not much can be read out from it.
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
45
==PAGE:54==
In addition, tracking only the pupil movement is unstable and can give varying results from
user to user. Therefore additional calculations are required to get an accurate estimate of
eye movement.
Figure 4.43: Glints detected in artificial eye with calculated centroid.
Figure 4.44: Glints detected in real eye with calculated centroid.
These calculations are covered in the Method section but figures 4.43, and 4.44 show the
results of these calculations with the location of the centroid looking centered in both the
real and artificial eye based on the glint positions. In the figures the pupil is outlined with a
large green circle with it’s center denoted with a pink color. The glints are also shown with
green circles and their centroid is depicted with a red color. The calculations are done
using a comparison of the red and pink dots, results of which can be seen in 4.45 and
4.46.
46
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.45: First plotting of saccadic movement using both glints and pupil.
The first mapping of saccadic movement shown in figure 4.45 has some slopes that are
similar to a typical mapping of saccadic eye movements. But there are some sharp drops
that interrupt the smooth flow of this mapping. To fix this the outlier values are replaced
with an averaged smoothing found with the last acceptable value and the next acceptable
value of the triangle center. This is because the triangle center was the value that jumped
around the most due to inconsistencies in tracking the glint positions. The result of this
refinement can be seen in figure 4.46.
Figure 4.46: Second plotting of saccadic movement with more refinement.
The quick jerk up between each saccade is when the eye is quickly returning
to the original position and therefore has a large degree movement in a short
amount of time.
Figure 4.46 is still a bit jerky and the time interval is wrong since a default count interval
was used. Instead a smaller and more accurate time interval was used and the connection
between the points is further smoothed out to remove outliers. This result can be seen in
figure 4.47.
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.47: Third plotting of saccadic movement with more refinement.
Here the slopes of the saccades can be seen more clearly.
Even though figure 4.47 has familiar saccadic movements, the first few look closer to­
gether than they should be since the recording is of the artificial eye who’s movements
are very uniform. Adjusting the calculations of the timestamps in the code to fix this,
the graph in figure 4.48 is achieved, with even spacing between saccades and smoother
connections between data points.
Figure 4.48: Final plotting of the saccadic movements.
The slope of the saccades is m = 2.03x10−11, seen in figure 4.49. This indicates a very
slow movement of the eye which doesn’t match up with the actual eye movement at all.
It is unclear the reason behind this and is something to look into further in future work.
48
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.49: Plot of one of the saccades with its slope calculated. The time
intervals got flipped during plotting but it is the same as the downward
slopes in Figure 4.48 from between 5 and 6 seconds.
4.4.1
Distance Calculation
The first method discussed which used the Lens equation was initially used to calculate
the distance between the camera and the eye. This was tested on the artificial eye given
that the distance in those recordings was known. There are several recordings at differ­
ent distances to test the results on. First the focal length has already been found using
Zhang’s method during calibration and is F = 1242.8. The radius (and in turn the diame­
ter) of the pupil is then found also using the feature detection from earlier and is denoted
with P. Last, the real diameter of the pupil can be approximated based on most common
pupil diameters and is usually around W = 8mm. With all these values, the distance D
can be calculated with the equation mentioned in the Method section: D = WxF
P
.
Actual Distance
68.72
72.72
76.72
Calculated Distance
62.93
68.10
75.32
Table 4.2: Results table comparing actual distances to calculated distances using focal
length from Zhang’s method. All measurements are in mm.
Testing this on the different videos of the artificial eyes gives the results in table 4.2. The
values are fairly similar (close enough for an approximation) but have lots of room for error
with these results. When one of the videos with known distance is used to find the focal
length, F = 1265.88, the results become closer to their true value, using the same formula
as before, just rearranged.
The results can be seen in table 4.3 and while the values are closer than before, they
are still inaccurate for all the videos except the one that gave the new focal length value,
76.72. As for the second method of calculating distance, there wasn’t enough time to try
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
49
==PAGE:58==
Actual Distance
68.72
72.72
76.72
Calculated Distance
64.10
69.36
76.72
Table 4.3: Results table comparing actual distances to calculated distances with an ad­
justed focal length F = 1265.88. All measurements are in mm.
it and can be done in future work.
50
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:59==
5
Discussion
The primary objective of this report was to create reliable software for calibration­free eye
tracking so that a vertigo diagnosis is easier to reach. The results show that this is very
much possible given the headset setup and current capabilities in image analysis and
computer vision. This section will discuss these results and how they support the main
goal of this report.
Calibration
Despite the inability to use common calibration practices utilizing a screen such as the 9­
point calibration method, Zhang’s method proved to be more than enough to help calibrate
the headset. It provided enough parameters to be able to estimate relative eye movement
with the corneal reflections and the position of the eye in 3D space for more accurate
tracking.
Preprocessing
There are so many different ways to prepare images depending on the situation, and even
in situations that are similar to one another there are many possible paths to take. When
the process goes past preprocessing and into feature detection and eye movement, some
of the steps taken in the preprocessing could be considered redundant since some of the
same processes are used again. However, the preprocessing of the image helps set the
stage for more robust feature detection and, in turn, eye tracking.
Much of the performance of each step on the image was evaluated visually. The image
comparison before and after processing, with various parameters, showed clearly what
worked well and what didn’t. With each step the quality of the image was shown to improve
and the amount of noise present was reduced. By the end of the process, the pupil and
the glints were easy to locate in the image due to the clear edges found. Compared to
how the frame looked before preprocessing versus after, it became a lot brighter and the
boundaries of familiar objects such as the pupil and glints became a lot clearer. A good
preprocessing process makes segmentation that much easier and that was achieved in
this project.
Feature Detection
With the segmentation of features, namely the pupil and glints, many methods are used in
the papers explored. Based on this multitude of papers, RANSAC, Contour, and Hough
Transform were explored. RANSAC failed terribly given that it could never locate the pupil
no matter how the parameters were modified. Despite the many papers that made use
of it where it worked, it proved to be too error­prone for this project and was therefore
quickly dropped. When it comes to Contour versus Hough Transform, Hough Transform
comes out one top with pupil detection while contour is better suited for glint detection.
Despite the fact that contour is very good at finding the boundaries of objects in an image,
especially with the simplification of the frames, it still has a higher likelihood of false pupil
detection. This is due to the fact that the contours are filtered out using the area of each
segmented object and if a contour is found within the range of the pupil area but is not
located where the pupil is then this leads to a wrong detection. Therefore, to find the pupil,
Hough Transform is the best route to take due to its ease of use and consistent results.
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
51
==PAGE:60==
Now as for glint detection, contours work very well, better than Hough Transform. This is
because despite the glints being shown as round points in the drawing of their locations
on the pupil, they are often not completely round. The cause of this is the wet layer
surrounding the eye which distorts the shape of the lights. Instead of relying on Hough
Transform to accurately detect glints that are sometimes circular and sometimes not, it is
better to make use of contour. The reason why it is possible to use contour in this step
as opposed to in the location of the pupil is because pupil location is done first. With the
location of the pupil it is easy to limit the search area for contours to just being within the
boundaries of the pupil, plus a few extra pixels for when the eye moves. And given that
the pupil is one solid color and no other glints can appear due to the fact that all other
light is blocked out, it is fair to assume that any contours of a certain small area detected
around the pupil are the glints.
Eye Tracking
Many papers using the same corneal reflection methods either have only one infrared
light or have six or more infrared light sources. In this project, having three glint points
is proven to be enough to triangulate the eye position in 2D and, in the future, in 3D.
Although the tracking results look rather choppy, with a little bit of refinement they will
drastically improve. The slope of the actual saccades themselves should be the angle of
rotation of the eye per second, or velocity as it is also known. But based on the results in
this project, there seems to either be something wrong with the calculations or the eye is
moving extremely slow. Since the video shows that the eye is not moving at a snail’s pace,
then there is something wrong with the implementation of the calculations and requires
more work in the future.
Then there is also the distance calculation between the eye and the camera. Given the
three glint positions and focal length from Zhang’s method, finding the distance between
the eye and the camera is possible. Semi­accurate distances could be found with even
the crudest and simplest calculations and getting into even more complex calculations will
allow for even better results.
5.1
Limitations
No project is without it’s limitations and there is no exception in this case.
First up, eyelids are not considered in this iteration of the pipeline. Therefore, if the pupil
should be partially occluded by the eyelid then there is nothing to still track the eye move­
ment. This partial occlusion is commonplace in people suffering from vertigo attacks due
to the fact that keeping eyes completely open during an attack is difficult and uncomfort­
able.
Second, pupils are not always a nice, round, circular shape. When looking too far to
one corner of the eye or another it takes on a more elliptical shape which Circular Hough
Transform has difficulty detecting. In future iterations of this software it could be useful
to combine Hough Transform and Contour detection to find both circular and elliptical
pupils. Hough Transform could be used to find initial pupil and then, when the shape
becomes more distorted, Contour could be used to still locate the pupil based on finding
a segmentation close to previous pupil center.
As for the calculations of the distances and eye in 3D space, there is much room for
improvement to get accurate results involving more complex calculations. But the math
is out there, time simply ran out to be able to narrow it down. One possibility is to take
52
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:61==
more into account the spherical shape of the eye for more accurate calculations and use
the property of tangents on spheres to locate the eye in 3D space.
5.2
Future Work
Despite there being a full pipeline established from start to finish there is much room for
improvement to make it more robust and accurate. First up is making more use of the
calibration outputs from Zhang’s method. Although the intrinsic parameters and distortion
coefficients are aptly utilized, there are still extrinsic parameters that aren’t touched but
could prove to be useful in some contexts. There are also certain tradeoffs between best
processing and quick processing that aren’t taken into account in this project but should
in the future to deliver quicker results.
Next there is more work that can be done in preprocessing to better process each frame.
There is the possibility of adaptive thresholding that could work so that the pupil and
glint segmentation works no matter the condition or user. Given the rather controlled
environment of the headset, it is less imperative to refine the preprocessing process, but
it is still important to look at again.
Feature detection can be improved by adapting the algorithm to also account for elliptical
shapes when detecting pupils. There is also a missing incorporation of eyelid detection
and compensation for pupil occlusions and blinks which affect results and mess up sac­
cadic movements. Refinment of glint detection is also needed for more accurate results.
Lastly, in eye tracking, more complex forms of calculations can be performed for better
results. In this project there is no compensation made for the spherical shape of the eye
which affects the eye degree calculated. There could also be an incorporation of the
calculations of the distance and 3D position of the eye for less error, possibly making use
of the spherical tangent of the glint to get even better results.
Overall more robust testing is also needed with the pipeline on both real and artificial eyes
and it is clear there is much work to be done before real use.
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:63==
6
Conclusion
This thesis walks through the process of creating a calibration­free eye tracking algo­
rithm. To start with, established methods were gone over, specifically the steps taken to
create the best process. From there a pipeline was created with the necessary steps of
calibration to preprocessing to feature detection and finally eye tracking to create a graph­
ical output of the movements. Through this process it was found that Hough Transform
worked best to find the pupil while Contour was better suited to locate the more irregu­
lar glints. The preprocessing step using multiple filters made a big difference improving
the performance of these feature detection methods. Even with these findings there are
steps that need to be taken in the future to take into account noise such as the eyelid and
outlying cases such as when the pupil is more elliptical than circular. The findings of this
report are significant because they show that calibration­free eye tracking is possible so
that users don’t need to go through a tedious calibration step while they are suffering a
vertigo attack but can rather go straight into recording and diagnosing. In the end, the
output of this project is a good jumping off point to create a robust and accurate pipeline
for tracking and diagnosing the cause of vertigo.
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
American Optometric Association. Nystagmus. 2020. URL: https://www.aoa.org/
healthy-eyes/eye-and-vision-conditions/nystagmus?sso=y.
[2]
Holbert. How the Eye Works. 2015. URL: https://holbert.com/anatomy-of-the-eye/.
[3]
Pupil Dev Team. What is eye tracking? 2020. URL: https://pupil-labs.com/blog/
what-is-eye-tracking.
[4]
Yuexin Wang and Xuemin L. “Editorial: Eye movement tracking in ocular, neurologi­
cal, and mental diseases”. In: Frontiers in Neuroscience (2024). DOI: 10.3389/fnins.
2024.1364078.
[5]
Cleveland Clinic. Nystagmus. 2023. URL: https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/
diseases/22064-nystagmus.
[6]
Cleveland Clinic. Videonystagmography. 2022. URL: https://my.clevelandclinic.org/
health/diagnostics/22630-videonystagmography.
[7]
Cleveland Clinic. Vertigo. 2023. URL: https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/symptoms/
21769-vertigo.
[8]
Tobii. Tobii. 2001. URL: https://www.tobii.com/.
[9]
SR Research. EyeLink 1000 Plus. 2019. URL: https://www.sr-research.com/eyelink-
1000-plus/.
[10]
Smart Eye. Smart Eye Pro. 1999. URL: https://www.smarteye.se/smart-eye-pro/.
[11]
Pupil Labs. Neon. 2014. URL: https://pupil-labs.com/.
[12]
Pupil Labs. GazeNet Model Card. 2016. URL: https://catalog.ngc.nvidia.com/orgs/
nvidia/teams/tao/models/gazenet.
[13]
Richeng Li et al. Shengfu Lu. “An Eye Gaze Tracking Method of Virtual Reality
Headset Using A Single Camera and Multi­light Source”. In: Journal of Physics:
Conference Series (2020). DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/1518/1/012020.
[14]
Zihan Yan and Yue Wu et al. “A dataset of eye gaze images for calibration­free
eye tracking augmented reality headset”. In: Scientific Data (2022). DOI: 10.1038/
s41597-022-01200-0.
[15]
Zhang and Zhengyou. “A flexible new technique for camera calibration”. In: Ieee
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2000). DOI: 10.1109/
34.888718.
[16]
Liang Wang Wenhua Qiu and Zhenzhen Qiu. “Fast Center Location Method of Edge
Detection Based on Canny Operator”. In: Conference on Communication and Infor­
mation Systems (2021). DOI: 10.1109/ICCIS53528.2021.9645967.
[17]
Damon L. Woodard et al Wayne J. Ryan. “Adapting Starburst for Elliptical Iris Seg­
mentation”. In: IEEE (2008).
[18]
Tony Flores. Median Filtering with Python and OpenCV. 2019. URL: https://medium.
com/@florestony5454/median-filtering-with-python-and-opencv-2bce390be0d1.
[19]
Changquan Huang and Guoxiang Wu et al. “Research on Image Edge Analysis
and Application Based on Canny Algorithm”. In: IEEE International Conference
on Image Processing and Computer Applications (ICIPCA) (2023). DOI: 10.1109/
ICIPCA59209.2023.10257832.
[20]
Nick Kanopoulos and Nagesh Vasanthavada et al. “Design of an Image Edge De­
tection Filter Using the Sobel Operator”. In: IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID­STATE CIR­
CUITS (1988).
[21]
Liying Zheng Yubo Zhang and Yanbo Zhang. “Small Infrared Target Detection via a
Mexican­Hat Distribution”. In: MDPI (2019). DOI: 10.3390/app9245570.
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
57
==PAGE:66==
[22]
Diego Andrés Suárez and Ángel Salazar. “Comparative study of pattern correlation
using Mexican hat and Coiflet wavelet­based filtering”. In: Elsevier (2009). DOI:
10.1016/j.optcom.2009.07.041.
[23]
Nova Hadi Lestriandoko and Rifki Sadikin. “Circle Detection Based on Hough Trans­
form and Mexican Hat Filter”. In: International Conference on Computer, Control,
Informatics and its Applications (2016).
[24]
et al. Pingping Yu Wenjie Duan. “A Pupil­Positioning Method Based on the Starburst
Model”. In: Computers, Materials Continua (2020). DOI: 10.32604/cmc.2020.010384.
[25]
Zhiyi Qu et al. Yufeng Zhao. “An Effective and Rapid Localization Algorithm of Pupil
Center based on Starburst Model”. In: IEEE (2016).
[26]
Yue Xue Dong et al. Liu Yang. “Eyelid Location Using Asymmetry Canny Operator”.
In: International Conference On Computer Design And Appliations (ICCDA) (2010).
[27]
S. Bhuvaneswari and P. Subashini. “Red­Channel Based Iris Segmentation for Pupil
Detection”. In: ResearchGate (2023). DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-27762-7_22.
[28]
Zhen Fu and Gang Sun et al. “Research on Eye Tracking Control Technology Based
on Head Posture”. In: International Symposium on Computer Engineering and Intel­
ligent Communications (ISCEIC) (2023). DOI: 10.1109/ISCEIC59030.2023.10271114.
[29]
Yishan Li and Xiaogang Wang et al. “Ridge operator­assisted delineation of cap­
sulorhexis border for cataract surgery”. In: Quantitative Imaging in Medicine and
Surgery (2023). DOI: 10.21037/qims-22-1319.
[30]
Radu Gabriel Bozomitu1 and Alexandru Păsărică et al. “Pupil Detection Algorithm
Based on RANSAC Procedure”. In: IEEE (2017).
[31]
Meo Vincent Caya and Dionis Padilla et al. “Detection and Counting of Red Blood
Cells in Human Urine using Canny Edge Detection and Circle Hough Transform
Algorithms”. In: IEEE (2019).
[32]
Ling Lu Xing Chen and Yang Gao. “A New Concentric Circle Detection Method
Based on Hough Transform”. In: International Conference on Computer Science
Education (ICCSE 2012) (2012).
[33]
Christopher Hollitt. “A convolution approach to the circle Hough transform for arbi­
trary radius”. In: Machine Vision and Applications (2012). DOI: 10.1007/s00138-012-
0420-x.
[34]
Eduardo Vera et al. “Hough Transform for real­time plane detection in depth im­
ages”. In: Pattern Recognition Letters (2018). DOI: 10.1016/j.patrec.2017.12.027.
[35]
S. Deepika and A. S. Nivetha et al. “Development of eye gaze tracking system for
strabismus diagnosis”. In: AIP Conference Proceedings (2022). DOI: 10.1063/5.
0072823.
[36]
Ruggero Donida Labati and Enrique Muñoz et al. “Non­ideal iris segmentation using
Polar Spline RANSAC and illumination compensation”. In: Elsevier (2019). DOI:
10.1016/j.cviu.2019.07.007.
[37]
Min Liu, Bodi Yuan, and Jing Bai. “Ellipse Detection on Images Using Conic Power
of Two Points”. In: British Machine Vision Conference (2018). URL: https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:52283134.
[38]
Guocan Shang et al. Huashan Ye. “A new method based on Hough Transform for
quick line and circle detection”. In: BioMedical Engineering and Informatics (BMEI)
(2015).
[39]
Lili Pan and Wen­Sheng Chu et al. “Fast and Robust Circular Object Detection With
Probabilistic Pairwise Voting”. In: IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING LETTERS (2011).
[40]
Indrajit Das and Ria Das. “Design and Implementation of Eye Pupil 23 Movement
Based PIN Authentication System”. In: IEEE VLSI Device, Circuit and System Con­
ference (VLSI­DCS) (2020).
58
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:67==
[41]
Kristian Sabo and Rudolf Scitovski. “Multiple Ellipse Detection by using RANSAC
and DBSCAN Method”. In: nternational Conference on Pattern Recognition Appli­
cations and Methods (ICPRAM) (2020). DOI: 10.5220/0008879301290135.
[42]
Nikola Popovic1 and Dimitrios Christodoulou et al. “Model­aware 3D Eye Gaze from
Weak and Few­shot Supervisions”. In: arxiv (2023).
[43]
Xinmei Wu and Lin Li et al. “EG­Net: Appearance­based eye gaze estimation using
an efficient gaze network with attention mechanism”. In: Elsevier (2023). DOI: 10.
1016/j.eswa.2023.122363.
[44]
Xiaolong Zhou and Fanyang et al. Tang. “A Survey of 3D Eye Model Based Gaze
Tracking”. In: Institute of Computing Technology (2017).
[45]
Michiya Yamamoto and Ryoma Matsuo et al. “Modeling Corneal Reflection for Eye­
Tracking Considering Eyelid Occlusion”. In: Symposium on Eye Tracking Research
and Applications (2018). DOI: 10.1145/3204493.3208337.
[46]
D. Geisler et al. W. Fuhl T. Santini. “Eyelid Location and Eye Aperture Estimation
for Pervasive Eye Tracking in Real­world Scenarios”. In: ACM International Joint
Conference (2016). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/2968219.2968334.
[47]
Zhen Fu and Gang et al. Sun. “Corneal Reflex in Eye­Tracking Control Technology
Based on Head Posture”. In: International Symposium on Computer Engineering
and Intelligent Communications (ISCEIC) (2023). DOI: 10.1109/ISCEIC59030.2023.
10271114.
[48]
Sreenivas Raghavendran and Kanchana Devi Vadivel. “Corneal Reflection Based
Eye Tracking Technology to Overcome the Limitations of Infrared Rays Based Eye
Tracking”. In: AIP Conference (2023). DOI: 10.1063/5.0162849.
[49]
Kristian Lukander Miika Toivanen and Kai Puolamäki. “Probabilistic Approach to
Robust Wearable Gaze Tracking”. In: Journal of Eye Movement Research (2017).
DOI: 10.16910/jemr.10.4.2.
[50]
Michael Xuelin Huang and Jiajia Li et al. “ScreenGlint: Practical, In­situ Gaze Esti­
mation on Smartphones”. In: Improving Gaze Mechanisms (2017). DOI: 10.1145/
3025453.3025794.
[51]
P. Guo Z. Li and C. Song. “A Review of Main Eye Movement Tracking Methods”.
In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series (2020). DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/1802/
4/042066.
[52]
Anastasios N. Angelopoulos and Julien N.P. Martel et al. “Event­Based Near­Eye
Gaze Tracking Beyond 10,000 Hz”. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics (2022).
[53]
OpenCV. Camera Calibration. 2024. URL: https://docs.opencv.org/4.x/dc/dbb/
tutorial_py_calibration.html.
[54]
OpenCV. cv2.convertScaleAbs. 2024. URL: https://docs.opencv.org/4.x/d2/de8/
group__core__array.html#ga3460e9c9f37b563ab9dd550c4d8c4e7d.
[55]
Shreenidhi Sudhakar. Histogram Equalization. 2017. URL: https://towardsdatascience.
com/histogram-equalization-5d1013626e64.
[56]
Joseph Nelson. When to Use Grayscale as a Preprocessing Step. 2020. URL: https:
//blog.roboflow.com/when-to-use-grayscale-as-a-preprocessing-step/.
[57]
OpenCV. Smoothing Images ­ Gaussian Filtering. 2024. URL: https://docs.opencv.
org/4.x/d4/d13/tutorial_py_filtering.html.
[58]
Adrian Rosebrock. OpenCV Smoothing and Blurring. 2021. URL: https://pyimagesearch.
com/2021/04/28/opencv-smoothing-and-blurring/.
[59]
Data Flair. Image Conversion using OpenCV – Colored, Grayscale and Binary.
2024. URL: https://data-flair.training/blogs/image-conversion-using-opencv/.
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
59
==PAGE:68==
[60]
Prateek Chhikara. Understanding Morphological Image Processing and Its Oper­
ations. 2022. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/understanding-morphological-
image-processing-and-its-operations-7bcf1ed11756.
[61]
Michel Wedel et al. Qiuzhen Wang. “Effects of model eye gaze direction on con­
sumer visual processing: Evidence from China and America”. In: ScienceDirect
(2018). DOI: 10.1016/j.im.2017.12.003.
[62]
Istituto Nazionale di Ottica Applicata. “The lens equation revisited”. In: Physics Ed­
ucation (2005). DOI: 10.1088/0031-9120/40/2/004.
[63]
Bram de Greve. “Reflections and Refractions in Ray Tracing”. In: Stanford (2006).
[64]
Khan Academy. Solving for a side with the law of cosines. 2014. URL: https://www.
khanacademy.org/math/precalculus/x9e81a4f98389efdf:trig/x9e81a4f98389efdf:law-
of-cosines/v/law-of-cosines-example.
60
Analyzing Eye Movements for Patients with Acute Vertigo
==PAGE:69==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 321
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
