==PAGE:1==
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
System development and testing
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
System development and testing
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Carl Emil Hansen Thor
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section of Digital Building Tech-
nologies, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
Carl Emil Hansen Thor - s184125
Signature
Date
ii
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
19/07/2024
==PAGE:5==
This Master’s Thesis is dedicated to my wife, Astrid, and to our
soon-to-be-born daughter.
Carl Emil H. Thor
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Multi-material thermoset 3D printing systems, that rely on the principle of wet-
on-wet Material Extrusion Additive Manufacturing (MEX-AM), are often either lim-
ited by the size of their reservoirs, or by their compatibility with fibrous materials.
This thesis concerns the development and testing of a wet-on-wet MEX-AM print
head, that is compatible with fibrous materials, can switch continuously between
multiple thermosetting polymers, and is suitable for Big Area Additive Manufac-
turing (BAAM). The print head was implemented into DTU’s current BAAM sys-
tem, and its functionality was verified by printing a series of simple, multi-material,
and carbon reinforced structures. The print head was able to extrude thermosets
containing 2wt% carbon fiber granulates and was further capable of switching
continuously between two different thermosets with similar rheological properties.
Peristaltic pumps were utilized to pump the (two-component) thermosetting poly-
mers through a static mixer, thus inducing hardening of the material. The peri-
staltic pumps were therefore developed specifically for pumping highly viscous
fluids through the static mixer, of which they were found capable. An inherent
problem with peristaltic pumps is the flow rate variation that occurs when a roller
disengages from the pump’s tubing. A new solution to this problem was explored
by utilizing multiple phase-shifted rotors with overlapping rollers. While this was
found to be an effective method of limiting the flow rate variation, the pumps’
efficiency appeared to be sensitive to dimensional variation between their rotor
and housing. Due to the use of peristaltic pumps, minimizing the system’s pres-
sure losses became a central design challenge. A significant focus was therefore
directed towards identifying a static mixer that would cause the lowest possible
pressure losses while achieving a sufficient level of mixing. The mixer-model cho-
sen for this project was found to reduce the theoretically estimated losses by 76%
compared to the model used in DTU’s current system.
iv
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors for their support,
guidance, and availability throughout the entire duration of the project.
Carl Emil Hansen Thor, MSc Mechanical Engineering, DTU
Author of this thesis.
Jon Spangenberg, Head of Section, Associate Professor, DTU
Supervisor.
Daniel Helmut Meile, Phd student, DTU
Secondary supervisor.
Marco Brander, Phd student, DTU
Secondary supervisor.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project planning and thesis disposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
State-of-the-art
3
2.1
Wet-on-wet MEX-AM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Printing with thermoset polymers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Printing with carbon-fiber reinforced thermosets . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Multi-material printing with thermosets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Summary: This thesis’ contribution to further research . . . . . . .
6
3
Technical review of DTU’s current system
7
3.1
The thermosetting polymers used in this project . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
DTU’s current wet-on-wet MEX-AM system . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
System requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Conceptualisation
10
4.1
A system overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Analysis of the solution spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
Early prototyping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.4
The final concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Dimensioning
23
5.1
Pressure losses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Dimensioning the static mixer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
Parametric model of flow rate and RPM relation . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6
Overview of the final system
31
6.1
Detailed design overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.2
Final dimensions and pressure losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.3
The electrical system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
Tests and results
44
7.1
Measuring flow rate and RPM relation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.2
Testing the static mixer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.3
Testing the functionality of the final system . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8
Discussion
52
8.1
Evaluating the pumps’ efficiency and the flow rate variation . . . .
52
8.2
Evaluating the pumps’ robustness to variations in tolerances
. . .
53
8.3
Evaluating the geometric analysis used for dimensioning the pumps 53
8.4
Evaluating the estimation of pressure losses in the static mixer . .
53
8.5
Evaluating the passive switching nozzle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8.6
Future work and improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
vii
==PAGE:10==
9
Conclusion
56
Bibliography
57
A Appendix
59
A.1 Different static mixers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.2 Data sheet for the thermoset polymer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.3 Code used to control the motors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.4 Sensor data sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
viii
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The field of Mechanical Engineering has shown notable progresses in techniques
for developing extremely light and stiff structures. The Finite Element Method
(FEM) is commonly employed to examine the deformation behaviour of such struc-
tures, and Topology Optimization has progressed from being an academic subject
of interest to a commercially available tool. Unfortunately, these structures are of-
ten so intricate in their geometries, that they are unsuited for manufacturing by
conventional production methods. To fully benefit from this progress, it is there-
fore necessary to develop more sophisticated methods, for producing structures
with complex geometries, by which Additive Manufacturing (AM) poses as a vi-
able option.
AM is an umbrella term referring to a wide range of different methods for building
structures by adding material sequentially. These methods are in general capa-
ble of producing more complex geometries and are further capable of producing
structures consisting of multiple different materials. One specific branch of AM is
Material Extrusion Additive Manufacturing (MEX-AM), which relies on the concept
of gradually building the structure by sequentially extruding multiple layers of ma-
terial. Wet-on-wet MEX-AM refers to a specific technique of MEX-AM where the
printed layer remains fluid during extrusion, and a new layer is deposited before
the previous layer has completely solidified. This method is highly scalable and
is suitable for use with a wide range of materials.
The work presented in this thesis builds upon previous work at DTU, as a wet-on-
wet MEX-AM system, which is capable of printing large structures with thermoset-
ting polymers, has previously been developed [1]. This system, however, does
not tolerate carbon fibers, and can only print with one single material at a time.
This thesis contributes to further research in the field by developing a wet-on-wet
MEX-AM print head that is capable of continuously switching between of multiple
different thermosetting polymers. Thereby, enabling 3D printing of large, opti-
mized structures, where the mechanical properties can be programmed during
printing to fit a given requirement. In addition, this print head is developed to
withstand, that carbon fiber granulates are mixed into the thermosetting polymer.
Thus, enabling printing of fiber reinforced composite structures. While other sys-
tems with similar features have previously been developed, the system presented
in this thesis stands out as it is both compatible with fibrous materials and enables
continues switching between multiple materials. Additionally, this system can be
filled continuously while printing, thus making it highly usable for Big Area Additive
Manufacturing (BAAM). The print head developed in this project, will be mounted
onto the robotic arm which is used for movement in DTU’s current system. The
focus of this project is therefore primarily on the development of a new pumping
system, and a solution for mixing, and continuously switching between multiple
different thermosetting polymers, thereby leading to the mission statement:
Develop a wet-on-wet MEX-AM print head that is capable of printing large
fiber-reinforced structures, and enables continues switching between
multiple different (two-component) thermosetting polymers.
Mission statement
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
1
==PAGE:12==
1.1
Project planning and thesis disposition
The research and development activities of this project follows the chronology of
a typical development project, as described by Ulrich & Eppinger in [2]. Based
on this chronology, the project has been divided into several phases as shown in
Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Phases of the project
The individual activities of each phase has been planned using a detailed GANTT
chart. Figure 1.2 shows an overview of this GANTT chart, while a more detailed
version has been elaborated in the earlier submitted project plan. As this thesis
documents each of the below listed research and development activities, it has
been structured following a similar chronology as shown in Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: GANTT chart overview
2
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:13==
2
State-of-the-art
Due to an increasing interest in the field, it was known that DTU would be inter-
ested in a system capable of multi-material 3D printing with thermosetting poly-
mers. This would contribute to further research in the field of wet-on-wet Material
Extrusion Additive Manufacturing (MEX-AM). To ensure the developed system
would be usable for conducting this research, it was first necessary to investigate
the current trajectory of research in the field.
The following chapter provides an overview of the most recent developments in
the field of multi-material printing with thermoset polymers. First, the core princi-
ple of the technology is explored. Then, some of the most recent publications in
the field are presented. Finally, the information is assessed to clearly specify how
this thesis will contribute to further research in the field of wet-on-wet MEX-AM
systems.
2.1
Wet-on-wet MEX-AM
Material Extrusion Additive Manufacturing (MEX-AM) is a branch of 3D-printing
where the printed material is in a liquid state during extrusion and first completely
solidifies after being deposited on the substrate. Typically, multiple layers (com-
monly referred to as strands) are deposited on top of each other to gradually build
the printed structure. Wet-on-wet MEX-AM refers to a specific method of MEX-
AM, where the new layer is deposited before the previous layer has completely
solidified. In general, a wet-on-wet MEX-AM system consists of a pump, a noz-
zle, and several mechanical actuators. The pump is used to extrude the material
throughout the nozzle, the nozzle is used to shape the extruded strand, and sev-
eral mechanical actuators are employed to move the nozzle along a prescribed
toolpath. This method is applicable for use with a wide range of different materials,
which may not be printable using other extrusion-based 3D-printing methods [3].
Examples include: Printing with biological material for use in the medical indus-
try [4], printing large scale concrete structures [5], and using thermoset polymers
to print compliant mechanisms [6], and other mechanical components for various
industrial applications [7]. An additional advantage of wet-on-wet MEX-AM is the
wide range of sizes in which the method is applicable. Here, examples include
micro-printing with a nozzle diameter down to 0.2mm [8], to Big Area Additive
Manufacturing (BAAM), where the footprint of the printed structure reaches sev-
eral square meters [9].
2.2
Printing with thermoset polymers
Thermoset polymers are a group of cross-linked polymers that harden irreversibly
as they cure [10] [11]. This chemical process is often initiated by mixing a liquid
polymer with a catalyst [9] or by UV irradiation [12]. In both cases, the polymer is
transformed from its liquid viscous state to a glassy solid state [13]. When cured,
these polymers can exhibit excellent thermal and chemical resistance [3], and ad-
ditionally possess numerous attractive mechanical properties [13]. In small scale
systems, the catalyst is often mixed with the liquid polymer prior to being loaded
into the pump’s reservoir [6] [8] [14] [15]. However, in large scale systems this is
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
3
==PAGE:14==
usually not feasible due to issues with material curing and thickening inside the
system [9]. Instead, large scale systems may employ multiple pumps for pumping
the catalyst and liquid polymer separately through the system. The two compo-
nents are then mixed immediately before being deposited [9].
When depositing a new layer on top of a layer that is still wet, deformations are
caused to the previously printed layer [16]. These deformations are both affected
by the extrusion pressure, and by the material’s rheological properties [17]. Con-
sequently, the print quality is dependant on several different process parameters,
including: Print speed, layer height, extrusion speed, and the nozzle’s diameter.
Additionally, the print quality is dependant on the material’s rheological properties
[17], which for thermoset polymers are typically non-Newtonian. An example of
such is a Bingham fluid, which only behaves as a liquid when the applied stresses
exceed the material’s yield stress [18]. This property enables the already printed
strand to maintain its overall shape while depositing a subsequent layer on top of
it. Rheological modifiers, such as nanoclays, fumed silica or fibers can be mixed
with the polymer to achieve different rheological and mechanical properties [9] [3].
2.3
Printing with carbon-fiber reinforced thermosets
Figure 2.1: Carbon fiber gran-
ulates aligned with the print di-
rection (Picture source: [19])
Fibrous granulates can be mixed with the ther-
mosetting polymer to produce printable composite
materials with enhanced mechanical properties [20].
The mechanical properties of such composites are
by nature anisotropic and are thus strongly depen-
dant of the fiber’s orientation with respect to the ap-
plied load [21].
In 2014, Compton and Lewis re-
ported the development of a new fiber-reinforced ink
and used it to print structures where the fibers are
aligned with the print direction (as depicted in Fig-
ure 2.1) [19].
Figure 2.2: Left: Less ideal nozzle
design which may cause divergent
flow.
Right: Nozzle design sug-
gested by [22]. (Picture source: [22]).
A substantial academic interest in the subject
followed this publication [23]. In 2015, Maha-
jan and Cormier showed, that the most signifi-
cant parameters affecting the fiber’s alignment
are the print speed, the nozzle diameter, and
the amount of fibers that have been mixed with
the polymer [20]. Further, in 2017, Malek et al.
developed a carbon-fiber reinforced ink with an
almost six times higher concentration of fibers
[24].
A common problem when printing with fiber re-
inforced polymers, is clogging of the nozzle’s
outlet. In 2021, Croom et al. studied this prob-
lem and found that nozzle-clogging is usually caused by fibers which have be-
come strongly disorientated with respect to the direction of the extrusion flow [22].
Further, they suggested an improved nozzle design that hinders clogging. This
nozzle employs a smooth, gradually contracting outlet to avoid sudden changes in
the flow direction, which may cause the fibers to become disorientated. An illus-
tration of this nozzle is shown in Figure 2.2 in comparison to a less ideal nozzle.
4
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:15==
2.4
Multi-material printing with thermosets
Figure 2.3: Microfluidic multi-
material
printhead
from
[8].
(Picture source: [8])
Utilizing multiple materials in a wet-on-wet MEX-
AM system broadens the range of producible one-
part designs significantly. Examples include: Print-
ing of multi-material compliant mechanisms [6],
printing with multi-material core-shell strands [15]
[14], and printing bio-inspired multi-material com-
ponents, where the structure’s mechanical proper-
ties change gradually to reduce local stress con-
centrations [25].
In 2015, researchers from Harward School of Engi-
neering developed a microfluidic printhead which
is capable of printing small scale multi-material
structures with viscoelastic pre-mixed thermoset-
ting polymers (shown in Figure 2.3) [8]. This sys-
tem utilizes syringe pumps to extrude each respec-
tive material throughout the microfluidic printhead.
The material change is then accomplished by alter-
ing the flow rate from each syringe pump respec-
tively.
In 2019, a subsequent study presented the design of a system, that can switch be-
tween multiple pre-mixed thermosets simultaneously to produce voxelated multi-
material structures (as shown in Figure 2.4) [6]. This system utilizes pneumatically
actuated syringes to balance the pressure in each of the nozzle’s respective inlet
channels. The pressure is adjusted so the resulting stresses only exceed the ma-
terial’s yield stress in the material channel which is to be activated. This method
was found effective for switching between multiple materials at high frequencies.
However, the pressure-driven switching method was found to be highly depen-
dant on the materials rheological properties, and only applicable for ”inks” with a
non-zero yield stress.
Figure 2.4: Printing of voxelated multi-material structures from [6]. (Picture source: [6])
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.5:
Illustration of
core-shell extrusion with
substrate consisting of a
carbon
reinforced
shell
and a light foam core.
(Picture source: [15])
An alternative method of printing multi-material struc-
tures with wet-on-wet MEX-AM systems is to continu-
ously extrude both materials throughout one single noz-
zle. In 2021, a doctoral dissertation from the University
of Tennessee presented a wet-on-wet MEX-AM sys-
tem capable of printing with a multi-material core-shell
strand, consisting of a carbon-fiber reinforced shell and
a light foam core [15] (as illustrated in Figure 2.5). Here,
each respective material was mixed prior to printing,
and extruded through two overlapping nozzles.
In 2023, an article published in Nature presented a wet-
on-wet MEX-AM system capable of embedding helical
multi-material structures within a single printed strand
(as depicted in Figure 2.6). This system utilized a rotat-
ing core-shell nozzle to produce these helical structures
[14]. The system employed pneumatically actuated sy-
ringes, and each material was mixed prior to printing
and hardened post extrusion by UV irradiation.
Figure 2.6: Helical multi-material structures. (Picture source [14])
2.5
Summary: This thesis’ contribution to further research
Wet-on-wet MEX-AM a is highly scalable AM method and is suitable for use with
a wide range of different materials. Additionally, the method can be used to print
multi-material structures with complex geometries. Recent research in the field
covers a large variety of methods for printing multi-material and fiber reinforced
structures with thermosetting polymers. However, most research appears to be
focused on solutions for small or medium scaled systems, where the catalyst and
polymer are mixed prior to printing. Meanwhile, solutions that are suitable for
Big Area Additive Manufacturing (BAAM) appear to have not received the same
attention. This thesis contributes to further research in the field by developing
a wet-on-wet MEX-AM system which is both capable of switching continuously
between multiple materials, is compatible with fibrous materials, and is suitable
for BAAM. In the following chapters, the system is conceptualized, dimensioned,
constructed, and tested.
6
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:17==
3
Technical review of DTU’s current
system
This chapter documents DTU’s current wet-on-wet MEX-AM system, on which
the print head developed in this project was implemented. It was decided to use
the same thermosetting polymer as is used in DTU’s current system. Information
regarding this polymer is therefore presented in the first section of this chapter.
The working principle of DTU’s current system is presented in the second section
of this chapter. Information obtained while reviewing this system was summarised
in a list of functional and technical requirements, that were used throughout the
project to evaluate different mechanical concepts. These are presented in the last
section of this chapter.
3.1
The thermosetting polymers used in this project
The geometric accuracy of the printed structure is dependant on the material’s
rheological properties [17]. Different materials, with different rheological proper-
ties, might therefore require different print parameters to achieve a consistent and
geometrically accurate structure. However, it is not within the scope of this project
to study these rheological properties, nor their affect on the required print param-
eters. It was therefore decided, to use the same thermosetting polymer and print
parameters as used in DTU’s current system.
DTU’s current system uses a two-component constriction glue from SikaForce
as print material. The material is composed of a liquid polymer (commonly re-
ferred to as the A-component) and a catalyst containing isocyanates (refereed to
as the B-component). When mixed at room temperature, the material cures in
approximately 7 minutes. The A-component is highly viscous, and is assumed
to inhibit the same flow behaviour as a Bingham fluid, meaning that it first be-
haves as a liquid when it is stressed beyond its yield stress. The B-component
has a significantly lower viscosity and is known to be thixotropic, meaning that
its shear-thinning viscosity is dependant on its shear-history. SikaForce was con-
tacted early in the project to request additional information regarding these non-
Newtonian rheological properties. Unfortunately, they were unable to accommo-
date this request. Data sheets for each of the material components are attached
in Appendix A.2, and the known material parameters are listed in Table 3.1.
A-component
(SikaForce-7818 L7)
B-component
(SikaForce-7050)
Mixed material
(mean properties)
Viscosity (µ)
80 [Pa · s]
15 [Pa · s]
59.83 [Pa · s]
Density (ρ)
1250 [kg/m3]
1220 [kg/m3]
1240.69 [kg/m3]
Mixing ratio
100:45 (A:B by volume)
Table 3.1: Properties of the A- and B-component
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
7
==PAGE:18==
3.2
DTU’s current wet-on-wet MEX-AM system
An overview of DTU’s current system is presented in Figure 3.1. This system has
been designed specifically for BAAM with thermoset polymers and utilizes two
gear pumps to pump the A- and B-component separately throughout the system
(1). The two material components are then mixed immediately before extrusion,
using a spiral static mixer (2). The mixer is connected to each pump via a mixer-
coupler (3), which is mounted directly onto the robotic arm (4). The robotic arm is
utilized to move the mixer along a prescribed toolpath, which has previously been
defined in the robotic arm’s control software (5). The timing between movement
and extrusion is then synchronized using this software and is executed by send-
ing an electrical signal directly from the robotic arm’s control system (6) into the
gear pumps. A constant print speed of 20[mm/s], a layer height of 3[mm], and
a total flow rate of Qtotal = 1[ml/s] is usually employed when printing with this
setup. It was intended, that the print head developed in this project, should be be
mounted onto the robotic arm. The focus of this project was therefore primarily on
the development of a new (multi-material) print head, and not on facilitating the
necessary movements as these was already implemented. However, as the print
quality is highly dependant on the print speed, extrusion-speed, nozzle-diameter
and layer-height, these parameters were reused in the new system.
Figure 3.1: Overview of DTU’s current system.
8
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:19==
3.3
System requirements
The final list of system requirements is presented in Table 3.2. These require-
ments were defined based on the information provided in the two previous chap-
ters, and was further specified in dialog with the project supervisors. The require-
ments have been central to the development, as they were used to evaluate the
different mechanical concepts that were considered when developing the final
system.
Technical requirements
Need to have
Nice to have
Total flow rate
1[ml/s]
>1[ml/s]
Flow rate variation
As small as possible
N/A
Flow rate variation frequency
As high as possible
N/A
Total weight mounted on robotic arm
<250[kg]
<<250[kg]
Chemical resistance to printed material
X
N/A
Inner diameter of nozzle outlet
10[mm]
N/A
Layer height
3[mm]
N/A
Lenght of material transition gradient
<5 times layer height
Completely vertical transition
Print speed
20[mm/s]
N/A
Strand morphology in material transition
As smooth as possibe
No visible change
Functional requirements
Need to have
Nice to have
Safety
Follow material’s
MAL codes
Limit all exposure
to isocyanatic fumes
Continues loading of material reservoir
X
N/A
Adjustable mounting of print head
Angular adjustment
Height adjustment
Adjustable mixing ratio
X
N/A
Compatible with carbon-fiber granulate
X
N/A
Easy to clean
X
N/A
Additional requirements
Need to have
Nice to have
Price
<20.000 DKK
<10.000 DKK
Component delivery time
<2 weeks
<<2weeks
Academic relevance
Solution should be
usable for further experimental
reseach in the field.
The solution itself
should be academically
interesting.
Table 3.2: Final list of system requirements.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
9
==PAGE:20==
4
Conceptualisation
This chapter will present the conceptualisation phase of the project. The goal of
the conceptualisation phase was to determine which combination of mechanical
solutions, that was going to be most compatible with the system requirements.
Combined, these solutions constituted the final concept. A morphological design
approach was utilized to develop this concept [26]: First, the search for possi-
ble solutions was structured by dividing the system into its various functional ele-
ments, of which an overview will be presented in the first section of this chapter.
The solution space for each of these functional elements was then analysed and
evaluated with respect to the system requirements. The second section of this
chapter will cover this analysis. It is not always possible to choose a concept
based solely on the system requirements, as it might be difficult to properly eval-
uate all solutions based on the knowledge available this early in the project. Early
prototyping activities were therefore conducted to further evaluate solutions, that
otherwise would have been difficult to assess at this stage of the project. Findings
from these activities will be presented in the third section of this chapter. Finally,
the combination of mechanical solutions, that was found to be most compatible
with the requirements was combined into a final concept. This concept will be
presented in the fourth section of this chapter.
10
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:21==
4.1
A system overview
An overview of all functional elements within the system is presented in Figure
4.1. Here, the blue and green boxes represents the mechanical and electrical
solutions that needed to be developed and integrated into the existing system.
Figure 4.1: System overview showing the mechanical and electrical solutions to be de-
veloped.
Two functional elements appeared to be especially critical to the functionality of
the system (marked with red in Figure 4.1). First, the solution for pumping the
material was found to be critical, as it could be linked directly to a majority of the
aforementioned functional and technical requirements. Second, the solution for
switching between materials was found to be critical as it affected the design of
the nozzle, and the complexity of the electrical system. The focus was therefore
directed towards analysing the solution spaces of these two functional elements.
4.2
Analysis of the solution spaces
In theory, the chance of developing the best possible concept increases when
considering a great number of solutions [27]. Numerous different solutions for the
two critical functional elements were therefore explored.
4.2.1
Analysis of solutions for switching between materials
Printing structures with multiple materials requires a solution for switching contin-
uously between different materials. The goal was to achieve a sharp and vertical
material interface without affecting the morphology of the printed strand. In or-
der to achieve this, two different strategies were considered, both of which are
illustrated in Figure 4.2.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.2: Two different strategies for switching continuously between materials.
The material change can either be achieved by switching prior to extrusion, thereby
only using one single nozzle for depositing both materials. Alternatively, the ma-
terial change can be performed post extrusion by utilizing two separate nozzles
for depositing each material separately. Mechanical solutions that employ each
of these strategies were assessed.
Mechanical solutions for switching prior to extrusion:
Switching between materials prior to extrusion requires connecting each material
channel before the nozzle’s outlet. The connection should be placed as close
to the nozzle’s outlet as possible, to minimize the delay between the switching
and depositing of the new material. Further, the connection should be designed
so that only one single material is extruded at a time, while the other material
remains stationary inside the material channel. The different possible solutions
which employ this concept are illustrated in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Solutions for switching between materials prior to extrusion.
12
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:23==
As illustrated, the material change may either be achieved through a passive so-
lution (with no moving parts), or by an active solution which employs any kind
of mechanism to control the material change. In contrast, the passive solution
utilizes the materials’ Bingham property. The pressure in each inlet channel is
adjusted so the resulting shear stress only exceeds the yield stress in the mate-
rial, which is to be extruded, thus causing it to flow through the nozzle’s outlet.
In general, all active solutions were considered to increase the complexity of the
system, and likely to be ruined due to material hardening inside the system. For
these reasons, none of the active solutions were considered further. On the other
hand, it was assessed that the passive solution could be so simple to produce,
that discarding it together with the static mixer would be justifiable.
Mechanical solutions for switching materials post extrusion:
Switching materials post extrusion can be accomplished by using multiple noz-
zles. Here, the ”active” nozzle, needs to be moved into the exact position of the
previous nozzle. Opposite, the ”inactive” nozzle needs to be moved away from
the strand. All movements should be coordinated so no interaction occurs be-
tween the inactive nozzle and the already printed strand. The different solutions
considered for this concept are illustrated in Figure 4.4. The main drawback of
switching materials post extrusion, was expected to be an undesired ”tip”, which
might be caused by the inactive nozzle as it is removed from the layer. This was
deemed likely to ruin the morphology of the printed strand.
Figure 4.4: Mechanical solutions: Switching post extrusion
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
13
==PAGE:24==
Summary:
The pros and cons for each of the presented switching-solutions are listed in Fig-
ure 4.5. Here, the most feasible solution was considered to be passive switching
prior to extrusion. However, for this solution to work as intended, the pumping
system needed to be precise and adjustable.
Figure 4.5: Pros and cons of the different solutions for switching material.
4.2.2
Solutions for pumping the material
Developing a working pump was a prerequisite for the development of the re-
maining system. Additionally, the choice of pump was especially important as it
affected most of system requirements, including: Maintaining a constant flow rate,
delivering a sufficiently large pressure, and limiting the amount of back flow to en-
sure the correct mixing ratio between the material components. Further, the pump
should be compatible with fibers, be easy to maintain, and be chemically resistant
to the A- and B-component. Finally, the chosen pump should be within budget or
14
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:25==
be feasible to build within the timeline of the project. Due to the A-component’s
high viscosity and the requirement to avoid back flow, the search for pumping so-
lutions was limited to pumps with a positive displacement working principle. The
different types of pumps considered are presented and evaluated below.
4.2.3
Progressive Cavity pump
The progressive cavity pump works by rotating a complexly shaped screw within
an open, flexible, cavity (as illustrated in Figure 4.6).
Figure 4.6: Working principle of a
progressive cavity pump.
This type of pump is suitable for highly viscous
fluids and high pressure applications. Addition-
ally, it can deliver an accurate and constant
flow rate, and has previously been used in sim-
ilar systems [28].
Unfortunately, progressive
cavity pumps of a suitable size was found to
be too expensive for the project. Quotes from
VISCOTEC (a major progressive cavity pump
manufacturer), listed prices around AC50.000 pr.
pump.
4.2.4
Gear pump
Figure 4.7: Working principle of a gear
pump.
A gear pump (internal or external) works by
rotating multiple meshing gears, thus forc-
ing the fluid forward (as illustrated in Fig-
ure 4.7). Gear pumps are suitable for high
pressure applications, and are able to de-
liver a relatively constant flow rate. Addi-
tionally, they are cheap and available to
purchase in sizes that meets the require-
ments of the system.
Last, gear pumps
are used in DTU’s current system and thus
known to be viable option.
Regrettably,
gear pumps are not suited for pumping
mediums with fibers, because the fibers
become entangled with the gears.
This
might damage the fibers, and eventually ruin the pump itself.
4.2.5
Syringe pump
A syringe pump works by pressing a piston through a closed cylinder, thus forcing
material out of the system (as illustrated in Figure 4.8).
Figure 4.8: Working principle of a
syringe pump.
This pump offers precise control of the flow
rate and is also expected to be compatible
with fibers, as there are no moving parts for
the fibers to become entangled with.
Addi-
tionally, syringe pumps are commonly used in
similar small-scale multi-material MEX-AM sys-
tems [29]. Unfortunately, a syringe pump does
not allow material to be continuously loaded
into the pump, which limits the size of printed structure to the internal volume of
the pumps’ cylinder. Here, it should be noted, that the force acting on the piston
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
15
==PAGE:26==
increases rapidly with its diameter, meaning that an appropriately sized syringe
pump would either be impractically long, or need a relatively large motor be suited
for high pressure applications.
4.2.6
Piston pumps
The working principle of a piston pump is similar to that of a syringe pump. How-
ever, the pump is connected to a series of one-way valves, which allows the cylin-
der to be refilled as the piston moves back to its starting position (as illustrated in
Figure 4.9).
Figure 4.9: Working principle of a
piston pump.
Here, multiple cylinders can be employed to
achieve a more constant flow, although some
variation in the flow rate should be expected.
Further, piston pumps were found to be expen-
sive, and not considered feasible to build within
the project timeline, as they require several pre-
cisely machined components.
4.2.7
Peristaltic pump
Figure 4.10: Working principle of a peri-
staltic pump
A
peristaltic
pump
utilizes
a
number
of rollers to continuously squeeze fluid
through a flexible tubing (as illustrated in
Figure 4.10). New material is sucked into
the pump, as the tube regains its original
shape. The peristaltic pump is special in
the sense that the fluid remains inside the
tubing during pumping.
This makes the
pump easy to maintain, and suitable for
pumping mediums with fibers.
Last, the
peristaltic pump is relatively simple to man-
ufacture, as most of its components can be
3D printed [30].
The main disadvantage of the peristaltic
pump is considered to be its flexible tubing
which limits the allowable pressure in the
system. Additionally, variation in flow rate
occurs when a roller discharges from the tube, thus causing a cyclic variation of
the flow rate [31]. However, several studies have suggested, that the variation
can be dampened significantly by connecting a flexible valve to the outlet of the
pump [32], or by following the simple design guidelines listed below [31]:
1) Decreasing the tube’s inner diameter.
2) Decreasing the diameter of the rollers.
3) Increasing the disengagement arc of the rollers.
4) Increasing the number of rollers.
16
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:27==
4.2.8
Summary
The pros and cons for each pump is summarized in Figure 4.11
Figure 4.11: Pros and cons for the considered positive volume displacement pumps.
Based on this review, three options were considered viable. First, the gear pump
is a feasible solution, as it delivers a constant flow rate and is suited for high pres-
sure applications. However, it does not tolerate fibers, which is a requirement if
the system should be used for further research on this subject.
Second, the syringe pump offers high precision extrusion at a constant flow rate.
However, it would not be possible to refill the system while printing, and the com-
plexity of the system rises with its size, making it a less feasible solution for a
large-scale system.
Last, the peristaltic pump tolerates fibers, was considered feasible to build, and
enables the system to be filled continuously. If the variation in flow rate could
be sufficiently reduced, the peristaltic pump would be the best solution. However,
placing a dampening valve after the highly viscous A-component (as suggested by
[32]) would inevitable cause additional pressure losses in the system. As a result,
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
17
==PAGE:28==
it was considered challenging to design a peristaltic pump which is both suitable
for high pressure applications, and offers a sufficiently consistent flow rate. On the
other hand, it could be possible to achieve a similar dampening effect, simply by
connecting a flexible tubing to the outlet of the pump, thus utilizing the dampening
effect of the fluid and tubing’s coupled oscillations. To evaluate this further, early
prototyping activities were initiated.
4.3
Early prototyping
Early prototyping were conducted to further evaluate the peristaltic pump solution
before deciding on a final concept. The prototyping activities aimed to answer the
following two questions:
1) Can oscillations in the flow rate from a simple peristaltic pump, be sufficiently
dampened by attaching a flexible tube to the outlet of the pump?
2) Can the variation in flow rate caused by the peristaltic pump be sufficiently
minimized by following the aforementioned design guidelines (as suggested by
[31])?
To answer these questions, two different prototypes were build and tested.
4.3.1
Prototype #1 - Dampening the flow rate’s oscillations using flexible
tubing:
A small peristaltic pump (depicted in Figure 4.12) was build to test if the oscilla-
tion in flow rate could be sufficiently dampened by attaching a flexible tube to the
outlet of the pump. The design of this pump has previously been developed in
another project, and is elaborated in [30]. Yet, it contains a Ø5[mm] silicone tube
(SHORE A-57), which is mounted inside a static housing, and is further extended
25[cm] from the pumps outlet. Three rollers, which are all attached to a single
rotor, presses the tube against the housing.
Figure 4.12: Left: Small peristaltic pump used in the first prototyping test. Right: Exper-
imental setup.
Testing:
The experimental setup is depicted in Figure 4.12. During the experiment, the
pump was run at 80 [RPM] and the A-component was observed as it moved
through the outlet of the tube. It was noted, that the amplitude of the flow rate’s
18
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:29==
oscillations became significantly reduced as the A-component progressed further
throughout the outlet. When reaching the end of the outlet tubing, the variation in
flow rate was found to be insignificant.
4.3.2
Prototype #2 - Reducing the variation in flow rate by following the
design guidelines from [31]:
The second prototype, which was build to test if the variation in flow rate could be
sufficiently reduced by following the aforementioned design guidelines, is depicted
in Figure 4.13.
Figure 4.13: Left: Section view of second prototype. Right: The fully assemble second
prototype.
A stiffer tube (MASTERFLEX P/N 6437-24) was used to accommodate the ex-
pected rise in pressure, when connecting the pump to a static mixer. This tube
can be pressurized up to 2.4 [bar], but requires a larger bending radius, meaning
that the diameter of the rotor had to be increased as well. Increasing the rotor’s
diameter affected the design of the pump significantly:
First, it caused the rollers to disengage more gradually from the pump’s tubing
because the section of the tube, where the rollers disengages, was extended
(marked with yellow in Figure 4.13). This was expected to make the variation
in the flow rate less abrupt [31], and was thus considered to improve the morphol-
ogy of the printed structure. Second, increasing the rotor’s diameter increased
the spacing between each of the rollers. This causes the frequency in the flow
rate’s oscillation to be reduced and therefore might affect the resolution of the
printed strand negatively. To counteract this, five rollers were mounted on the
rotor, thereby maintaining a higher frequency despite the enlarged rotor diameter
(as shown in Figure 4.13). The aforementioned design guidelines suggest that the
roller’s diameter is minimized. This reduces their displacement of the tubes inter-
nal volume, thereby reducing the amplitude of the flow rate’s oscillations [31]. The
smallest suitable rollers (Ø10[mm]), were therefore used in the second prototype.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
19
==PAGE:30==
Testing:
Figure 4.14: Tube entangled with rollers.
The pump was first tested without the
static mixer, by running it at 20 [RPM]
and observing the flow from its out-
let. Regrettably, the flow was observed
to be extremely inconsistent. Yet, the
main variation in flow rate did not seem
to be caused by the rollers’ disengage-
ment from the tube.
Rather, it ap-
peared to be caused by the tube being
stretched by the rollers. This problem
became significantly worse when con-
necting the pump to the static mixer.
Here, the increased pressure, caused
by the static mixer, may have caused
the rolling resistance between the tub-
ing and the rollers to increase. This re-
sulted in complete failure of the pump,
as the tube was stretched to a point
where it became entangled with the
rollers (as shown in Figure 4.14).
4.3.3
Summary: Findings from early prototyping activities
It may be difficult to develop a peristaltic pump which is both able to pump highly
viscous fluids through a static mixer and is capable of delivering a sufficiently con-
sistent flow rate.
Testing the first prototype, showed that it is possible to dampen the flow rate’s
oscillation’s by attaching a flexible tube to the pump’s outlet. However, assuming
that the fluid is incompressible, this dampening is expected to be largest when
either using very flexible or long tube. In both cases, this will make the pump less
suitable for high pressure applications.
Testing the second prototype, suggested that reducing the diameter of the
rollers, to reduce the amplitude of the flow rate variation, may cause additional
stretching of the tube, as the rolling resistance is increased. This could make the
pump less suitable for high pressure applications, and thus for pumping highly
viscous fluids. Similarly, using a stiffer tube, which can withstand a higher pres-
sure, caused the radius of the rotor to increase, thereby decreasing the frequency
of the flow rate’s oscillations. Adding more rollers to increase this frequency (as
suggested in [31]) might result in additional stretching of the tube. Last, increas-
ing the length of the disengagement zone between the rollers and the tube might
make the variation in flow rate less abrupt. However, this also makes the angle,
at which the rollers disengage from the tube, less tangential with the pump’s out-
let. Consequently, this could increase the chance of the tube becoming entangled
with the rollers.
20
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:31==
Final review of the peristaltic pump solution:
A peristaltic pump is cheap, allows for continues refilling, is easy to clean, and can
handle fibers. For these reasons, the peristaltic pump makes for a very attractive
pumping solution for large scale wet-on-wet MEX-AM system. Yet, developing a
peristaltic pump suitable for a MEX-AM system requires careful balancing of mul-
tiple contradicting design parameters. Thus, focusing on further development of
the peristaltic pump may cause the rest of the system to be less developed within
the project timeline. However, development of such a pump could in itself be of
great value to the departments current research on large scale wet-on-wet MEX-
AM systems. For this reason, it was decided to continue the development of a
system based on peristaltic pumps.
The test made with the second prototype indicated, that the a main challenge of
developing such a pump would be to avoid stretching of the tube, as the pressure
inside the pump increases. To hinder this, it could be necessary to:
1) Increase the size of the rollers.
2) Decrease the length of the tube inside the pump.
3) Reduce the number of rollers which are simultaneously engaged with the tube.
4) Make outlet tangential to the movement of the rollers.
5) Minimize pressure losses in the rest of the system.
By adapting to these listed suggestions, the flow rate variation will inevitably in-
crease . A more successful approach may therefore be to utilize several, phase-
shifted, peristaltic pumps which are each designed specifically for pumping highly
viscous fluids. By adjusting the starting position of the rollers’ in each pump re-
spectively, so their disengagement from the tube is phase-shifted, it may be pos-
sible to achieve a combined consistent flow rate while delivering a combined suf-
ficiently high pressure. This approach was embedded into the final concept for
the system.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
21
==PAGE:32==
4.4
The final concept
The final concept is depicted in Figure 4.15. A pumping system, consisting of
multiple phase-shifted peristaltic pumps, was going to be used to pump each ma-
terial component. The A- and B-component for each material would be mixed,
using a static mixer, before proceeding through a ”passive” switching connection,
which was to be integrated as a part of the nozzle. Switching between materials
would be accomplished by activating (and deactivating) the two respective pump-
ing systems, thus changing which of the two materials is extruded. The entire
system was going to be mounted directly onto the robotic arm, thereby limiting
the length of tubing required, and thus also minimizing the pressure losses in the
system.
Figure 4.15: Final concept for print head.
22
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:33==
5
Dimensioning
This chapter outlines the theory which was used for dimensioning the final sys-
tem. As the final concept was based on peristaltic pumps, minimizing the system’s
pressure losses became a central design challenge. A significant focus was there-
fore directed towards estimating the pressure losses in the entire system. The first
section of this chapter outlines the general equations that were used to estimate
these pressure losses. It was expected, that a major part of the pressure losses
would be caused by the static mixer. Consequently, special attention was given
to the dimensioning the static mixer. Calculations were made, to determine which
static mixer-model would provide a satisfactory level of mixing while causing the
lowest possible pressure losses. The second section of this chapter covers these
calculations. Finally, it was found necessary to establish a relation between the
pump’s dimensions, its rotational velocity, and the expected resulting flow rate. A
simple geometric analysis was made to describe this relation. This analysis was
used to dimension the peristaltic pumps, and is presented in the chapter’s third,
and final, section.
5.1
Pressure losses
The following section presents the theory which was used to estimate the pressure
losses in the system.
5.1.1
Required flow rate of the A- and B-component
Because the pressure losses are dependant of the velocity of the fluid, it was first
necessary to estimate the expected flow rate of each seperate material compo-
nent.
The flow rate of the mixed material, Qtotal, can be expressed as:
Qtotal = QA + QB
(5.1)
Where QA and QB denote the flow rate of the A- and B-component respectively,
and have the following required mixing ratio:
QA = QB
100
45
(5.2)
Flow rates
Qtotal
1 [ ml
s ]
QA
20
29 [ml
s ]
QB
9
29 [ml
s ]
Table 5.1: Required
flow rates.
The required flow rate of each respective material component
was calculated by combining the two above equations. The
results are listed in Table 5.1.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
23
==PAGE:34==
5.1.2
Pressure losses in the tube
Tubes were both used inside the peristaltic pumps, and to connect each pump to
the static mixer. Pressure losses in these tubes were estimated using the Darcy-
Weisbach equation (5.3) which is presented in [33] and further elaborated in [34].
∆P = fd
ρV 2L
2D
(5.3)
Here, ρ is the density of the fluid and V is the fluids mean velocity, which is simply
calculated by dividing the aforementioned flow rate (Q) with the cross-sectional
area of the tube. Further, L is the tube’s length, D is its inner diameter, and fd is
the Darcy-Weisbach friction factor, which can be estimated using a Moody-chart,
or calculated as shown in Equation (5.4), depending on laminar (Red < 2300) or
turbulent (Red > 4000) flow [34]:
fdarcy =
{ Red
64
if Red < 2300
0.316Re
−1
4
d
if 4000 < Red < 105
(5.4)
Here, Red is the Reynolds number for flow in ducts and is calculated by the kine-
matic viscosity of the fluid (ν), and by using D as the characteristic length. For all
calculations in this project, the flow was found to be extremely laminar.
Red = V D
ν
= ρV D
µ
(5.5)
It should be noted that Darcy’s equation assumes fully developed, steady-state,
and in-compressible flow. These assumptions might be violated by the flow rate
variation caused by the peristaltic pumps and the compliance of the tube. Further,
the fluid’s viscosity is assumed to be constant, which might not be true given the
non-Newtonian rheological properties of the A- and B-component. Yet, due to the
limited knowledge of these properties, Equation (5.3) posed as the best known
option. Theoretical results, obtained with Equation (5.3), was later compared with
experimental measurements to assess the validity of these calculations, despite
the fluid’s non-Newtonian behaviour.
5.1.3
Minor losses:
Minor losses are caused by disturbances in the flow such as: Contractions, ex-
pansions, fittings, valves and bending of the flow-channel. In general, these can
be calculated by Equation 5.6, and should be added to the total pressure loss in
the system [34]:
∆Pminor = K ρV 2
2
(5.6)
Here, K is the minor loss coefficient, which depends on the specific disturbance
of the flow. When evaluating the final system, the minor losses were found to be
insignificant. However, design choices have been made to decrease minor losses
throughout the system. Thus, two examples of minor losses are presented below.
24
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:35==
Gradual contraction:
Values of K for a gradually contracting pipe are listed in [34] and depicted in Figure
5.1. The coefficient decreases with the angle of contraction (θ) and is, in general,
very small. The velocity (V ) in the smallest pipe section is used for calculating the
resulting minor loss by Equation 5.6.
Figure 5.1: Below: Table showing minor loss coefficients (K) for different contraction
angles (θ) (Source: [34] page 396). Above: Illustration of θ as used in the table.
Sudden contraction and expansion:
The minor loss coefficient for a sudden expansion (Kse), or a sudden contraction
(Ksc), can be calculated using the following equations [34].
Kse = (1 −d2
D2)2
(5.7)
Ksc ≈0.42(1 −d2
D2)
(5.8)
Here, d and D are the respective diameters of the small and large section of the
pipe. Again, the velocity in the smallest pipe section is used for calculating the
resulting minor losses. Note, that the losses decrease rapidly, as the diameter of
the two pipe sections approaches each other.
5.2
Dimensioning the static mixer
It was expected, that the static mixer would cause a substantial amount of pres-
sure losses in the system. These losses should be accounted for, when dimen-
sioning the pumps and choosing pump’s tubing. The following section presents
the equations, which were used to estimate these pressure losses, and to deter-
mine which static mixer-model would provide a satisfactory level of mixing while
causing the lowest possible pressure losses.
5.2.1
Pressure losses caused by the static mixer
The pressure losses in the static mixer was estimated by the following equation
from [33].
∆Pmixer = KL∆Ppipe
(5.9)
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
25
==PAGE:36==
Here, KL accounts for the ratio between the pressure loss in the static mixer and
the pressure loss in an equivalent ”empty” pipe (for laminar flows).
For the spiral-static-mixer (type KMS), which resembles the type of mixer used for
this project, KL is equal to 6.9 [33].
Thus, combining Equation (5.9) with Darcy’s equation (5.3), gives the following
expression for the pressure loss over the static mixer.
∆Pmixer = (fd
ρV 2L
2D )KL = (fd
ρV 2L
2D )6.9
(5.10)
5.2.2
Required length of the static mixer
It had been observed, that the static mixer used in DTU’s current system was
longer than needed, as the mixed material already appeared homogeneous halfway
through the mixer. It therefore seemed likely, that the pressure loss in the system
could be significantly reduced by using a more appropriately sized mixer-model.
The following calculations were made to investigate this further.
When using a static mixer, the achieved degree of mixing is dependant on the
mixer’s length (Lmixer), it’s internal diameter (Dmixer), and the coefficient, KiL,
which is the measure of the specific type of mixer’s expected performance [33].
For the type of mixer used in this project (KMS), KiL is equal to 0.87 [33]. The
pressure loss caused by the static mixer is also dependant on Lmixer and Dmixer.
To choose a static mixer, that achieves a satisfactory level of mixing, all the while
resulting in the lowest possible pressure losses, it is therefore necessary to esti-
mate the relation between Lmixer, Dmixer, and the achieved degree of mixing.
A statistical approach to this problem has been suggested by [33]. Here, the
quality of mixing is described by the coefficient of variation (CoV), which can be
calculated as:
CoV = σ
¯x
(5.11)
Where σ is the standard deviation obtained when taking several concentration-
measurements in the outlet of the mixer, and ¯x is the sample mean of these ob-
servations.
The efficiency of the static mixer can then be quantified by comparison with the
unmixed coefficient of variation (CoV0), which is calculated based on the unmixed
volume fraction (Cv) as shown below:
Cv =
QB
Qtotal
(5.12)
CoV0 = (1 −Cv
Cv
)0.5
(5.13)
The ratio between CoV and CoV0 is commonly described as the reduced volume
fraction (CoVr) which have the following relation to the mixers length, diameter,
and its performance coefficient (KiL) [35] [33]:
26
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:37==
CoVr = CoV
CoV0
= K
Lmixer
Dmixer
iL
(5.14)
The required ratio between Lmixer and Dmixer, needed for obtaining a desired de-
gree of mixing, may then be described by rewriting Equation (5.14) as follows
[35]:
Lmixer
Dmixer
= log(CoVr)
log(KiL)
(5.15)
When evaluating static mixer-models for the project, it was assumed that the sam-
ple mean concentration (¯x) approaches the unmixed volume fraction (Cv) as the
sample size increases. Meaning that:
¯x ≈Cv =
QB
Qtotal
= 9
29
(5.16)
Further, the allowed variation of concentration of the mixed material was set to
σ = 0.05, by recommendation from [33]. The required ratio of Lmixer and Dmixer
was thereby calculated as:
Lmixer
Dmixer
=
log
( (
σ Qtotal
Qb
)
( 1−Cv
Cv
)0.5
)
log(KiL)
≈15.97
(5.17)
This ratio was used, when evaluating different mixer-models. A comparison be-
tween the pressure losses caused by the final chosen mixer-model, and the mixer
used in DTU’s current system, is presented in the next chapter.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
27
==PAGE:38==
5.3
Parametric model of flow rate and RPM relation
When dimensioning the peristaltic pumps, it was found necessary to establish a
relation between the pump’s dimensions, its rotational velocity, and the expected
resulting flow rate. A simple parametric model was made to describe this relation.
The following model is based on a geometric analysis of the system, and was
inspired by a similar analysis conducted by [31].
First, consider the simple case of two rollers pressing down on a straight tube (as
depicted in Figure 5.2). The internal volume of the tube, which is not displaced by
the rollers, can be calculated as:
V OLint = V OLtube −V Oldisp
(5.18)
Here, V OLtube describes the volume of an equivalent tube section without rollers,
and V OLdisp describes the internal volume of the tube, which has been displaced
by the rollers.
Figure 5.2: Simple model depicting the displaced volume inside the pump.
Note, that V OLint is roughly equivalent to the volume discharged from a peristaltic
pump, as a single roller passes through the tubing. Thus, when the rotor has
completed a full rotation, the total discharged volume can then be estimated as:
V OLtotal = V OLintnrollers = (V OLtube −V OLdisp)nrollers
(5.19)
Where nrollers is the number of rollers which have been mounted on the pump’s
rotor.
28
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.3, depicts the parameters that were used for dimensioning the peristaltic
pump.
Figure 5.3: Parametric constants used for dimensioning the pump. Note: hdisp is depicted
smaller than the diameter of the tube for illustrative purpose only.
V OLtube was calculated by using these parameters in the following equation:
V OLtube = r2
tubeπLtube
(5.20)
V OLdisp was similarly approximated, by multiplying the internal diameter of the
tube, Dtube, with the displaced area inside the tube (Adisp, depicted in Figure 5.3).
V OLdisp = DtubeAdisp
(5.21)
Here, Adisp was calculated through the following series of steps: First, the cir-
cumference of Adisp, (Acirc), was parameterised as the section of a circle with the
radius rdisp = rroll + ttube, and with the height hdisp (as illustrated in Figure 5.4):
Acirc(x) =
(√
r2
disp −x2
)
−(rdisp −hdisp)
(5.22)
Figure 5.4: Parametric constants used for dimensioning the pump.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
29
==PAGE:40==
Adisp was then found by integration of Acirc(x) from a to b, where a and b denote
the points where the parameterisation of Acirc(x) intersects with the x-axis (as
shown in Figure 5.4). These points were simply found by solving the equation
Acirc(x) = 0. Finally, a complete expression for Adisp was formulated:
Adisp =
∫b
a
Acirc(x) dx
(5.23)
Combining equation (5.19), (5.20), (5.21), (5.22), and (5.23) gives the following
expression, thereby linking the design parameters depicted in Figure 5.3, to the
total volume discharged by the pump in one single rotation:
V OLtotal =
(
(r2
tubeπLtube) −Dtube
(∫b
a
√
r2
disp −x2 −(rdisp −hdisp) dx
))
nrollers
(5.24)
Equation 5.24 was used iteratively when dimensioning the pumps. Further, the
equation was also used for calculating the required rotational rate of each pump’s
rotor, which was necessary to estimate the fluid’s velocity inside the pump’s tubing.
5.3.1
The fluid’s maximum velocity inside the pumps tubing
The flow rate variation caused by the peristaltic pumps, means that the average
flow rate (Qaverage) will be smaller than the maximum flow rate (Qmax). This causes
the pressure inside the pump to oscillate. It was therefore necessary to calculate
the fluid’s maximum velocity, to dimension each pump after the largest expected
pressure in the system. First, the required rotational rate of the rotor (ωrotor) was
calculated as:
ωrotor = Qaverage
V OLtotal
(5.25)
Assuming, that the velocity of the fluid inside the pump (Vpump) is equal to the
velocity of the rollers, the following expression was then formulated:
Vpump = ωrotorrbend
(5.26)
Here, rbend, is the bending radius of the tube (as depicted in Figure 5.3).
The pressure losses inside each pump was then found by inserting Vpump in Darcy’s
equation (5.3). The final estimated pressure losses in each pump will be presented
in the following chapter, which offers a detailed overview of the final system and
its most important design parameters.
30
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:41==
6
Overview of the final system
The following chapter offers a detailed overview of the final developed system,
which is illustrated in Figure 6.1. The first section covers the design of the most
important mechanical components, each corresponding to the system’s respec-
tive functional elements. The second section lists the pump’s final dimensions and
the corresponding expected pressure losses. Finally, an overview of the system’s
electrical components are presented in the chapter’s third, and final, section.
Figure 6.1: Overview of final system: (1) Pump for B-component, (2) Pump for A-
component, (3) Material reservoir, (4) NEMA-34 stepper motor, (5) Connection to static
mixer, (6) Static mixer, (7) ”Passive” switching connection with integrated nozzle, (8)
Structural connection to robotic arm.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
31
==PAGE:42==
6.1
Detailed design overview
6.1.1
Choosing the static mixer
The different static mixers, that were considered for this project, are listed in Ap-
pendix A.1. It was known (from Equation 5.9), that a significant reduction in pres-
sure losses could be achieved by increasing the mixer’s diameter and reducing
its length. The shortest mixer, with the largest possible diameter, which still com-
plied with the required ratio of Lmixer
Dmixer > 15.97 (as calculated in Equation 5.17) was
therefore chosen for the project. The expected pressure losses caused by this
mixer have been compared to the mixer used in DTU’s current system. Calcu-
lations were made using Equation 5.9 and using the mean viscosity and density
when calculating Red. Further, the total flow rate Qtotal was used to calculate the
mixed material’s velocity in the mixer (Vmixer). The results are listed in Table 6.1.
P/N
Length
[mm]
Diameter
[mm]
∆P
[bar]
MS10-32T
352
10
5.92
MS13-18G
223
12.8
1.40
Table 6.1: Expected pressure losses caused by the
static mixer. (MS10-32T): The mixer used in DTU’s
current system, (MS13-18G): The mixer used in this
project
As seen, the expected losses
caused by the mixer have
been reduced by approximately
76 % by changing the model.
The chosen static mixer has
the additional advantage of
having a threaded end con-
nection, thus allowing the noz-
zle to be screwed directly onto
the static mixer (as illustrated
in Figure 6.2).
Figure 6.2: Above: (MS13-18G) which is used in this project , Below: (MS10-32T) which
is used in DTU’s current system.
6.1.2
The passive switching-nozzle
The switching-nozzle is depicted in Figure 6.3. Due to the hardening characteris-
tics of the mixed material, the nozzle is not reusable. It was therefore critical that
the nozzle could be manufactured quickly and at a low cost. For this purpose, the
nozzle was designed to be 3D printed on a regular FDM printer.
Figure 6.3: Left: Switching-nozzle, Right: Section view
32
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:43==
The nozzle contains two material inlet channels, that merge into a single outlet.
Each static mixer is screwed directly onto these inlets. The diameter of each
inlet channel contracts as slowly as possible to prevent the nozzle from becoming
clogged when printing with fibers (as recommended in [22]), and further to keep
the minor losses to a minimum (as calculated by Equation 5.6 and 5.1). The final
diameter of the nozzle’s outlet is Ø10[mm], matching the size of the nozzle in
DTU’s current system.
6.1.3
The static mixer coupler:
The coupler is used for connecting each respective pump-section to the static
mixer (as shown in Figure 6.4). The coupler consists of a top and a bottom part
that, when assembled, clamps around the inlet of the static mixer. The three bent
steel pipes, which are pressed into the top of the coupler, are each connected
to the three respective outlets of the A-component pump. The bend reduces the
required length of the tube between the pump and the coupler. All three pipes
are connected to a single cavity inside the top part of the coupler, allowing the
A-component to flow directly through this cavity and into the static mixer.
Figure 6.4: Coupler with static mixer and tubes. Note: Translucence is for illustrative
purpose only.
The straight steel pipe, which is pressed into the middle of the coupler, continues
directly through the cavity and into the inlet of the static mixer (as depicted in
Figure 6.5). This pipe is connected to both outlets from the B-component pump,
and ensures, that the A- and B-components first come into contact inside the static
mixer. The internal diameter of all pipes is Ø6[mm], and thus only 0.4[mm] smaller
than the internal diameter of the tube. This design choice was made specifically
to decrease the minor losses coefficient (Ksc) (as calculated in 5.8). All four steel
pipes have been firmly secured by filling the triangular recess on the top of the
coupler with epoxy-resin (as depicted in Figure 6.5).
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.5: Left: Steel pipes sealed with epoxy resin. Right: A- and B-component sep-
arated by the middle steel pipe.
6.1.4
Choosing the pump-tubing
The allowable pressure in the system is limited by the maximum pressure the
tube can withstand. A substantial effort was therefore made, to find a tube that
was both compliant enough to be used in a peristaltic pump, that was chemically
resistant to the solvents in the B-component, and that could withstand the largest
possible amount of pressure. Several options was identified and are listed in
Table 6.2. The main constraint, however, turned out to be the expected delivery
time, which for most of the tubes exceeded the project timeline. Because of this,
Masterflex 06508-24 ended up being the only feasible option. This tube has an
inner diameter of 6.4[mm] and can withstand 3[bar].
Manufacturer
P/N
Price
[DKK]
Pressure
[bar]
Delivery time
[weeks]
Material
Masterflex
06435-25
2435
2.4
6
PharmaPure
Masterflex
06504-15
1470
6.8
10
NBR
Masterflex
06435-17
2220
1.4
6
PharMed BPT
Masterflex
05664-24
2275
5.5
12
PharMed BPT
Masterflex
06508-24
3386
3
1
PharMed BPT
Masterflex
96410-15
1265
2.7
6
Platinum-cured Silicone
Table 6.2: Different tubes reviewed for the project
34
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:45==
6.1.5
Design of the pumps
An exploded view of the pump for the A-component is shown in Figure 6.6. All
dark-gray parts have been printed on a regular FDM 3D printer.
Figure 6.6: Exploded view of the pump for the A-component
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
35
==PAGE:46==
The pump is composed of three modules, each containing a tube, a rotor-section,
and a housing-section. The modular composition facilitates, that the pump can be
extended to include more modules, if necessary, thereby increasing its capacity
and further minimizing the flow rate variation. The different components of the
pump are described as follows:
Rollers and rotor:
The fully assembled rotor is depicted in Figure 6.7. Four rollers were mounted
on each rotor-section, and the angular position of each rotor-section was phase-
shifted to achieve an even angular distribution of α = 30◦between all 12 rollers
inside the pump (as depicted in Figure 6.7). Note, that the circumference of the
rollers in each rotor-section overlaps the adjacent rollers from the two other rotor-
sections. This was thought to further reduce the amplitude of the combined flow
rate variation.
The rollers were made by press fitting Ø16[mm] bearings onto Ø5[mm] dowel pins.
The outer diameter of the bearings was chosen to be as small as possible, while
still keeping the center of the rollers above the surface of the tube. This was done
to decrease rdisp (from Equation 5.24), as much as possible, while still ensuring
that the resulting moment on the rollers, would only act in their rotational direction,
thus limiting stretching of the tube.
Figure 6.7: Right: Fully assembled rotor for the A-component-pump. Left: Section view
of the fully assembled rotor. Dashed lines outline the rollers for each respective rotor-
section (section #1, #2 and #3).
Tubes:
All three tubes are connected to the same material reservoir, and are re-connected
later in the system, where they are attached to the same the static mixer coupler.
The tube follows the pump’s housing in a 95◦bend, before continuing throughout
its’ outlet (as depicted in Figure 6.7). Note, that only two rollers interact with the
tube simultaneously, and that the tube exits through the pump’s outlet at an an-
gle which is tangential to path of the rollers. These design choices were made to
reduce the chance of the tube becoming entangled with the rollers.
36
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:47==
Housing:
Two different types of housing-sections have been developed (as shown in Figure
6.8). The bottom housing-section is mounted directly onto the motor, while each
of the middle housing-sections are mounted directly onto the previous section.
These were designed so that an arbitrary number of sections can be stacked,
thereby increasing the capacity of the pump if necessary. When mounting several
components on top of each other, this causes the tolerance chain to increase.
Special care was therefore taken to ensure the exact positioning of each housing-
section. The red holes in Figure 6.8 are used for the exact placement of each
section. These holes have been drilled to their exact diameter using a reamer. The
yellow holes are used for securing the respective housing-sections further. These
were made slightly oversized, to avoid the position of each section becoming over-
constraint. The blue holes are tool-access holes. These were made, so that the
entire pump could be screwed onto the motor after being fully assembled. A lid
was mounted on top of the last housing-section. The function of the lid is to secure
the distance between the rotor and the housing, and to counteract the radial load,
which is caused by the rotor engaging with the tube.
Figure 6.8: Housing module: Red holes: For positioning housing-sections.
Yellow
holes: For securing housing-sections. Blue hole: Tool-access hole and motor mounting.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
37
==PAGE:48==
Outlet-clamp:
An outlet-clamp was designed to secure the tube inside the pump (depicted in
Figure 6.9). The clamp’s respective position to the housing has been made ad-
justable, so the length of the tube, which is inside the pump’s housing, can be
adjusted after the pump has been fully assembled.
Figure 6.9: Adjustable outlet clamps, securing the tube’s position with respect to the pump.
Material reservoir:
The material reservoirs were made from a sewer pipe coupling and a matching
end-cap. The capacity of each reservoir can be increased by mounting additional
sewer pipe sections onto the sewer pipe coupling. Each tube-coupling is screwed
directly onto the end-cap, as depicted in Figure 6.10.
Figure 6.10: Material Reservoir for the A-component pump.
38
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:49==
The B-component pump:
The B-component pump is depicted in Figure 6.11. Its overall dimensions are
identical to those of the A-component pump. However, the expected pressure loss
in the B-component pump was found to be much lower than in the A-component
pump. Two rotor -and housing sections were therefore sufficient. Yet, five rollers
were attached to each rotor-section to increase the frequency of the flow rate
variation despite the pump only having two rotor-sections.
Figure 6.11: Left: Final design of the A-component pump, Right: Final design of the
B-component pump.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
39
==PAGE:50==
Assembling the pumps
The pumps have been designed so that each pump-module can be assembled
separately, before mounting the final assembly onto the motor. A step-by-step
illustration of this assembly process is depicted in Figure 6.12.
Figure 6.12: Step-by-step assembly of the B-component pump.
40
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:51==
6.2
Final dimensions and pressure losses
6.2.1
Final dimensions of the pumps
The above presented components have been carefully dimensioned by iterative
calculation of the required RPM (using Equation 5.24) and the expected pressure
loss inside the pump (using Equation 5.3, and 5.26). Here, especially the size and
number of rollers, and the bending radius of the tube were found to be critical to
the design.
Decreasing the bending radius inside the pump (rbend), means that the radius of
the rotor (rrotor) is also decreased. This reduces the distance between each roller,
which increases the frequency of flow rate variation and is thus considered to
improve the morphology of the printed strand. Further, reducing rrotor, and in-
creasing the number of rollers (nrollers), makes the circumference of each roller
overlap more with its adjacent rollers (as depicted in Figure 6.7). This is thought
to minimize the amplitude of the flow rate variation, thus further improving the print
quality. However, reducing rbend also causes a reduction in the internal volume of
the tube, which is not displaced by the rollers (depicted as V OLint in Figure 5.2 ).
This causes a reduction in the total displaced volume pr. rotation (as calculated
by Equation 5.24), meaning that the pump’s RPM should be increased to achieve
the same required flow rate. Following Equation 5.26 and 5.3, this enlarges the
pressure losses inside the pump. Dimensioning the pump, to achieve the most
consistent flow rate, while keeping the total pressure losses below the tube’s ca-
pacity, therefore requires carefully balancing the pumps’ measurements. These
final measurements are listed in Table 6.3.
A-component pump
B-component pump
Parameter
Value
Value
Unit
rbend
35
35
[mm]
rrotor
27.8
27.8
[mm]
rroller
8
8
[mm]
Dtube
6.4
6.4
[mm]
ttube
2.4
2.4
[mm]
nrollers
4
5
Pcs
nsect
3
2
Pcs
a
-9.6
-9.6
[mm]
b
9.6
9.6
[mm]
Ltube
55
44
[mm]
Lconnect1
100
74
[mm]
Lconnect2
N/A
190
[mm]
Table 6.3: Parameters for the final dimensioned pumps.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
41
==PAGE:52==
6.2.2
Final estimation of pressure losses:
Pressure losses in the pumps:
Pressure losses inside each section of the pumps were calculated using Darcy’s
equation (5.3). Here, the velocity (Vpump) was calculated using Equation 5.25 and
5.26, by substituting the average flow rate (Qaverage) with the required flow rate for
each material component respectively, divided by the number of sections in the
respective pump (nsect). Thus resulting in the following equations:
ωrotorA =
QA
nsectAV OLtotalA
(6.1)
ωrotorB =
QB
nsectBV OLtotalB
(6.2)
And thereby giving:
VpumpA = ωrotorArbend
(6.3)
VpumpB = ωrotorBrbend
(6.4)
Further, the length in Darcy’s equation (L) was substituted with the length of the
tube between two rollers (Ltube illustrated in Figure 3.2).
Pressure losses in the connection tubes:
Pressure losses in the tube section between the pumps and the coupler (∆Pconnect)
were similarly calculated, using Vpump and Lconnect in Equation 5.3. Here, Lconnect
specifies the length of the tube between the pump and the coupler. It should be
noted, that the tubes from each section of the B-component pump are joined in a Y-
connection before entering the coupler (as depicted in Figure 6.1). Consequently,
the velocity is increased to = 2VpumpB after the Y-connection. This was accounted
for by calculating the specific pressure losses before and after the Y-connection
separately. The lengths of the tube sections before and after the Y-connection are
denoted as Lconnect1 and Lconnect2 in Table 6.3.
Results:
The combined pressure losses in the system are listed in Table 6.4. As seen, the
total pressure loss is largest in the A-component system (2.42 [bar]). Compared
to the tube’s capacity, this leaves a safety margin of approximately 0.58 [bar].
Pressure loss
A-component pump
B-component pump
Length
Velocity
∆Ppump
0.36 [bar]
0.04 [bar]
Ltube
Vpump
∆Pconnect1
0.66 [bar]
0.07 [bar]
Lconnect1
Vpump
∆Pconnect2
N/A
0.36 [bar]
Lconnect2
2Vpump
∆Pmixer
1.4 [bar]
1.4 [bar]
Lmixer
Vmixer
∆PTOTAL
2.42 [bar]
1.87 [bar]
N/A
N/A
Table 6.4: Overview of the final expected pressure losses.
42
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:53==
6.3
The electrical system
6.3.1
Electrical components:
A NEMA-34 stepper motor (P/N 34HE59-6004S) was used to drive each respec-
tive pump (shown in Figure 6.13). The motor has a holding torque of 12[Nm],
which was considered more than enough for the given task. Each motor was
driven by a stepper driver (DM860T), using micro-stepping to achieve a smooth ro-
tational motion. The movement was controlled using two (ESP32) micro-controllers.
Figure 6.13: Left: DM860T driver, Middle: NEMA-34 motor, Right: ESP32 micro-
controller.
6.3.2
The control box:
Figure 6.14: Control box used for testing the pumps.
Red buttons: Initiates extrusion of each respective
material (both A and B-component). Small buttons:
Activates each respective pump.
A control box was made, so
that each pump could be acti-
vated manually during testing
(shown in Figure 6.14).
All
buttons were wired directly to
the micro-controllers inside the
box. Each red button activates
both pumps for each respec-
tive material.
The small but-
tons activate each respective
pump separately. The system
was made, so it could be con-
nected directly to the output of
the robotic arm’s control sys-
tem, thus making it possible
to coordinate the movement
and extrusion directly from the
robotic arm’s control software.
The code that was written for
the control box is attached in
Appendix A.3.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
43
==PAGE:54==
7
Tests and results
A series of tests were conducted to evaluate the functionality of the system and to
asses the theoretical predictions that had been used for dimensioning the system.
A geometric analysis had earlier been made, to describe the relation between the
pump’s rotational rate and the resulting flow rate. This was compared with the
pump’s actual flow rate, as described in the first section of this chapter. Likewise,
a new static mixer-model had been chosen based on calculations of its expected
performance and the expected resulting pressure losses. This mixer was tested
by evaluating the achieved level of mixing, and by measuring the actual pressure
loss caused by the mixer. These tests are described in the chapter’s second
section. Finally, it was of interest to evaluate the performance of the final system.
A series of simple, multi-material, and carbon reinforced structures were printed
to test this. These are presented in the final section of this chapter.
7.1
Measuring flow rate and RPM relation
7.1.1
Method:
A series of tests were conducted to estimate the actual flow rate from each respec-
tive pump. The A- and B-component pumps were each tested separately, both
with and without being attached to the static mixer. Each test was conducted by
extruding the respective material component into a paper cup. The extrusion was
timed, and the cup was weighted before and after extrusion (as depicted in Figure
7.1). The flow rate was then calculated, based on these measurements and the
material’s density. Each test was repeated several times, and similar tests were
preformed while incrementally increasing the RPM of the pump’s rotor.
Figure 7.1: Flow rate measurements. Left: Weight used in the test. Right: Extrusion of
A-component during testing.
44
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:55==
7.1.2
Results:
Figure 7.2: Flow rate measurements conducted with the
A-component pump.
The measurements obtained
with the A-component pump
are shown in Figure 7.2.
Here, the red and blue
lines mark the observed
flow rates with and without
the static mixer being at-
tached to the pump. The
black line marks the ex-
pected flow rate, as calcu-
lated using Equation 5.24
and 5.25. The actual flow
rate was found to be sig-
nificantly lower than pre-
dicted, and was even fur-
ther reduced when attach-
ing the static mixer. This
was thought to be caused
by back flow in the pump, thus suggesting that the pump’s rollers did not entirely
close off the internal volume of the tube. Nevertheless, the pump was found able
to deliver the required flow rate at a sufficiently low rotational speed (marked with
the grey dashed line in Figure 7.2).
Figure 7.3: Flow rate measurements conducted with
the B-component pump.
Figure 7.3 shows similar mea-
surements obtained with the
B-component pump. The flow
rate was also here lower than
predicted, and became even
further reduced when attach-
ing the static mixer.
This
was considered problematic
for the B-component pump
as the pressure losses in
the
static
mixer
were
ex-
pected
to
increase
signifi-
cantly when pumping both
material components simul-
taneously.
Consequently,
the rotor in the B-component
pump would need to rotate at
an undesired high RPM to de-
liver the required flow rate. A
new rotor, with an increased
radius of rrotor + 0.4[mm], was
build resolve this problem. The idea being, that this would hinder back flow, and
thus make the pump more efficient. A similar test of the flow rate was conducted
after mounting the new rotor (depicted with the purple line in Figure 7.3). These
measurements showed a significant improvement of the pumps efficiency, and
the flow rate was observed to be much closer to the predicted results.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
45
==PAGE:56==
7.2
Testing the static mixer
7.2.1
Testing the quality of mixing
Method:
The static mixer was tested by pumping both material components through the
mixer simultaneously, and observing the change of color, as the two components
progressed through the mixer.
The RPM of each pump was adjusted, based
on the previous flow rate measurements, to match the required mixing ratio of
QA = 20
29[ ml
s ] and QB =
9
29[ ml
s ].
Results:
As seen in Figure 7.4, the color of the material became increasingly homoge-
neous as the material approached the mixers outlet. The final extruded material
appeared completely homogeneous and hardened shortly after being extruded.
Figure 7.4: Used static mixer containing both material components. White material: A-
component, Brown material: B-component. NOTE: Access the digital version of this
thesis for more accurately display of colours.
7.2.2
Measuring the pressure loss caused by the static mixer
Figure 7.5: Above: Setup used for sen-
sor calibration. Below: Voltage measure-
ments vs. theoretical calculations.
Sensor calibration:
The pressure in the static mixer was
measured using an analog gauge pres-
sure sensor (P/N ABPDANV150PGAA5),
which is capable of measuring pres-
sures in the range of 0-10[bar].
The
sensor was first calibrated by applying
a range of different pressures using a
JOFRA HPC400 pressure calibrator (as
depicted in Figure 7.5).
The sensor’s
output voltage was then measured and
compared to the expected output volt-
age for the applied pressure, which was
calculated using the equation provided in
the sensor’s data-sheet (Appendix A.4).
The results are plotted in Figure 7.5, and
was found to be sufficiently similar with
an R2 = 0.99. The sensors functional-
ity was confirmed based on this compar-
ison.
46
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:57==
Method:
Figure 7.6:
Sensor
mounted at the inlet of
the mixer.
The full experimental setup is depicted in Figure 7.7. The
sensor was mounted through a small hole near the inlet of
the static mixer and further secured using epoxy resin (as
seen in Figure 7.6). A NI-9215 voltage input module, was
used for collecting the data at a sample rate of 100[Hz].
First, two separate experiments were performed by solely
measuring the pressure caused by pumping each respec-
tive material component through the static mixer. Then, an
experiment was performed by pumping both material com-
ponents through the static mixer simultaneously. The RPM
of the rotor’s was set to ωA = 9RPM and ωB = 2.5RPM,
thus matching the required flow rate of QA =
20
29[ ml
s ] and
QB =
9
29[ ml
s ]. Note, that a new, clean, sensor and static
mixer was used for each experiment.
Figure 7.7: Experimental setup for measuring the pressure loss over the static mixer,
using the A-component pump.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
47
==PAGE:58==
Results:
The measurements obtained with the A-component pump are shown in Figure
7.8. Here, the blue points represent the average value of all data points collected
in a 0.2 [s] interval. The red vertical lines mark the duration between each full
rotation of the rotor. Note, that 12 rollers disengages from the tube during each
of these intervals. Thus, it was expected that the disengagement of each roller
would pose as the main cause of pressure variation in the pump. However, the
pressure was found to fluctuate periodically with respect to each full rotation of
the rotor. This was thought to indicate that the rotor’s axis of rotation and the
center axis of the housing were not completely collinear. The coupler and static
mixer was disconnected to evaluate this further by directly observing the flow from
each of the pump’s three outlets. It was seen, that the flow rate coming from the
outermost pumping section varied more than the flow rate delivered by the section
closest to the motor.
Figure 7.8: Gauge pressure measured at the inlet of the static mixer. Running the A-
component pump only. Red lines mark the duration of one single rotation.
Similar measurements obtained with the B-component pump are shown in Fig-
ure 7.9. Here, the distance between the red vertical lines correspond to each full
rotation of the B-component pump’s rotor. In total, 10 rollers disengages from
the tube during this interval. As seen, the measurements contain a high level of
noise, which might have been caused by the pressure being low in comparison
to the sensor’s measuring range. Yet, the average pressure measurements was
seen to fluctuate with approximately 0.02 [bar], and was neither observed to fluc-
tuate periodically with respect to the rate of the the rollers’ disengagement nor the
rotational rate of the rotor.
Figure 7.9: Gauge pressure measured at the inlet of the static mixer. Running the B-
component pump only. Red lines mark the duration of one single rotation.
48
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:59==
Finally, the pressure was measured while pumping both components simultane-
ously. The results are shown in Figure 7.10, where the red lines correspond to
the rotational rate of the A-component pump’s rotor. Again, the pressure was
observed to fluctuate periodically with respect to each full rotation of this rotor.
However, the variation in these fluctuations was found to be lower than when
solely pumping the A-competent. Further, the average pressure was found to be
approximately 1.75 [bar], and thus 25% higher than the 1.4 [bar] calculated in the
previous chapter.
Figure 7.10: Gauge pressure measured at the inlet of the static mixer. Running both the
A- and B-component pump. Red lines mark the duration of one single rotation of the A-
component pump.
7.3
Testing the functionality of the final system
After testing the flow rate of each respective pump, and verifying the functional-
ity of the static mixer, the final system could then be tested. As the system had
been developed specifically to enable continues switching between multiple mate-
rials, and to be compatible with carbon-fiber reinforced materials, it was of interest
to evaluate its performance with respect to these two specific requirements. This
was tested by printing variety of simple, carbon-fiber reinforced, and multi-material
structures,
each
consisting
of
five
straight,
Figure 7.11: Simple structures printed to test the final
system.
20[cm] long, layers (as de-
picted in Figure 7.11).
All
structures were printed with a
layer height of 3[mm], a print
speed of 20[ mm
s ], and a flow
rate of Qtotal
=
1[ ml
s ], thus
matching the print parameters
used in DTU’s current system.
The most notable findings from
these tests are presented in
the following section.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
49
==PAGE:60==
7.3.1
Test #1: Multi-material printing
Method:
The fully assembled system was mounted onto the robotic arm as depicted in
Figure 7.12. One of the two A-components was dyed by mixing it with a dry pur-
ple pigment, thus making it possible to distinguish between the two materials in
the printed strand. Note, that the purple A-component was loaded into the right
pumping system, while the white A-component (without pigment) was loaded into
the left pumping system. Then, the simple structure was printed, while using the
control box to manually activate, and deactivate, the two respective pumping sys-
tems.
Figure 7.12: Left: Experimental setup for testing the final system’s ability to switch mate-
rials continuously. Right: Printing sequence during material change.
Results:
The system was found capable of switching continuously between the two mate-
rials, and the printed structure hardened shortly after printing. When inspecting
the transitional region of the two materials, the interface appeared to be slightly
affected by the print direction. When printing from left to right, and changing mate-
rial from white to purple, the this resulted in a sharp vertical interface (as depicted
in Figure 7.13). However, when printing in the opposite direction, the resulting
interface appeared to be slightly less vertical.
Figure 7.13: Material interfaces and print direction.
50
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:61==
7.3.2
Test #2: Printing with carbon-fibers
Method:
A structure without carbon-fibers was first printed for comparison. The A-component
was then mixed with 2wt% (L = 100[µm], D = 7[µm]) carbon-fiber granulate be-
fore being loaded into the pump’s material reservoir (as shown in Figure 7.14).
The pump was completely flushed from the previous material, and a new static
mixer was mounted before printing the structure with carbon-fibers.
Figure 7.14: Mixing 2wt% carbon-fibers into the A-component.
Results:
The printed structures (with and without carbon-fibers) are depicted in Figure 7.15.
The system did not appear to be affected by the fibers in the material. Yet, a
moderate amount of variation in the strands width was observed in both structures.
This variation was thought to be caused by the eccentricity of the A-components
rotor, which had earlier been observed when measuring the pressure in the static
mixer.
Figure 7.15: Above: Simple structure printed without carbon fibers. Below: Simple struc-
ture printed with 2wt% carbon fibers.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
51
==PAGE:62==
8
Discussion
In this chapter, the mechanical design of the final system is discussed, and its per-
formance during testing is evaluated. Recommendations for future improvements
to the system are then presented.
8.1
Evaluating the pumps’ efficiency and the flow rate
variation
When evaluating the pumps’ efficiency, one must consider the difference between
the estimated and actual flow rate. The flow rate was observed to be significantly
lower than predicted and was further reduced when connecting the pumps to the
static mixer. This reduction could indicate, that the pumps’ efficiency was being
affected by the level of pressure losses in the system. It is therefore likely, that
the internal volume of the pumps’ tubing might not have been entirely sealed by
the rollers. This hypothesis may be further supported by the fact, that the B-
component pump became significantly more efficient after slightly increasing its
rotor’s diameter. Changing the rotor’s diameter is likely to have hindered back flow
in the B-component pump, thus making its efficiency independent of the pressure
losses caused by the static mixer.
Due to the B-component’s considerably lower viscosity, it seems reasonable to
assume that it is more prone to back flow than the A-component. This might ex-
plain why the A-component pump was still able to deliver the required flow rate
at a very low RPM. In fact, it could be argued, that a small amount of clearance
inside the A-component pump’s tubing is desirable.
There are two things to consider here. First, when pumping fibrous mediums, the
fibers can have an abrasive effect on the tube, thus reducing its lifespan. How-
ever, this might be limited by allowing a small clearance inside the tubing to avoid
the fibers from becoming completely embedded in the tube’s surface.
Second, a small clearance, and thus a small amount of back flow, might reduce
the variation in flow rate caused by the rollers discharging from the tube. At least,
the flow rate variation in the A-component pump was not observed to coincide with
the frequency at which the rollers discharged from the tube. Yet, this may also be
due to the design choice of employing multiple phase-shifted rotor sections with
overlapping rollers.
In all cases, the measured pressure losses indicated, that the main cause of flow
rate variation was a misalignment between the A-component pump’s rotor and the
housing. This seems likely considering that the pump’s efficiency was found to be
sensitive to changes in the distance between these components. Thus, while a
small clearance inside the A-component pump’s tubing might reduce the variation
in flow rate cased by the rollers, it might also increases the necessity of ensuring
that the pump’s rotor and housing sections are completely aligned.
52
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:63==
8.2
Evaluating the pumps’ robustness to variations in
tolerances
It should be considered that even a small change in the rotor’s dimensions, or in
the system’s pressure losses, can have a large effect on the pump’s efficiency.
In general, it is not ideal that a small dimensional adjustment can have such a
substantial impact on the pump’s efficiency. Therefore, it might be considered
whether changes can be made to improve the system’s robustness towards di-
mensional variation. The main reason for using peristaltic pumps in the system,
was that they can tolerate fibrous mediums. In hindsight, it can be argued that this
requirement only applies to the A-component pump. The B-component, however,
does not contain fibers, and could just as well have been pumped using another
volumetric displacement principle. For instance, using gear pumps could have
circumvented the problem with back flow of the B-component. While it would not
have been feasible within this project, to develop a system with multiple different
types of pumps, this might be considered for further development of the system.
8.3
Evaluating the geometric analysis used for dimensioning
the pumps
The measurements of the B-component’s flow rate, which were obtained with the
enlarged rotor, showed a much closer resemblance to the theoretical estimate.
However, the flow rate was observed to be slightly higher than predicted, sug-
gesting that the geometric analysis somewhat underestimated the amount of fluid
discharged by the pump. This analysis was based on calculating the internal
volume of the pump’s tubing that is not displaced by the rollers (V OLint in Equa-
tion 5.18). Still, several simplifications were made when calculating this volume.
Foremost, the volume displaced by the rollers (V OLdisp) was calculated by multi-
plying the displaced area (Adisp) with the internal diameter of the pump’s tubing.
This calculation did not account for the circular cross-sectional profile of the tube
and therefore slightly overestimated the volume that was displaced by the roller.
The actual internal volume of the pump’s tubing (V OLint) might therefore have
been slightly larger than estimated, which might explain the difference between
the measured and the predicted flow rate. On the other hand, it was also as-
sumed that no deflection occurs in the part of the tube, that is not displaced by the
rollers. Further, it was assumed that the tube’s circumference remains completely
circular despite being bent inside the pump’s housing. These assumptions might
have somewhat counteracted the inaccurate estimate of (V OLdisp). Nevertheless,
the geometric analysis was found extremely useful when dimensioning the pumps
and when evaluating their performance by comparison with the actual measured
flow rate. Based on this comparison, it was possible to locate the exact problem
with the B-component pump and fix it within the timeline of the project.
8.4
Evaluating the estimation of pressure losses in the static
mixer
The new mixer-model was chosen based on a statistical analysis of its expected
performance and was found capable of mixing the material sufficiently during test-
ing. However, measurements obtained while pumping both material components
through the mixer, showed that the actual pressure losses were on average 25%
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
53
==PAGE:64==
higher than calculated. This suggests that the method used to calculate the losses
was not entirely accurate. These losses were calculated by multiplying the equiva-
lent pressure losses in an empty pipe (calculated using Darcys-Weisbach’s equa-
tion 5.3) with the loss coefficient (KL) from [33]. Here, one source of error could
be, that the loss coefficient, KL, is a general coefficient related to the general type
of mixer rather than the specific model. Thus, there may be minor losses present
in the mixer, which are not accounted for by KL. Another likely source of error is
the several assumptions that were violated when employing Darcys-Weisbach’s
equation. First, the flow was assumed to be steady-state. However, measuring
the pressure clearly revealed periodic fluctuations in the flow. Second, the fluid
was assumed to have Newtonian rheological properties despite not knowing the
exact rheology of the two material components, nor the mixed material. While es-
timating how the pressure losses are affected by this remains out of scope for this
project, it is still likely to have caused additional pressure losses over the mixer
compared to the calculated losses.
8.5
Evaluating the passive switching nozzle
During testing, the passive switching nozzle was found capable of switching con-
tinuously between two different thermosetting polymers with similar rheological
properties. However, the gradient in the material interface appeared to be slightly
dependent on the print direction. This might lead to the conclusion that the quality
of the material interface is dependent on the print direction. However, the rela-
tive print direction, with respect to the position of the nozzle’s two inlet channels,
was identical during the entire print sequence. When printing from left to right, the
material was switched to purple, which was extruded from the nozzle’s right inlet
channel. Similarly, when printing in the left direction, the material was switched to
white, which was extruded from the nozzles left inlet channel. In both cases, the
inlet channel, that was located in the same side as the print direction, was acti-
vated during switching. Thus, it might be that the material interface only appeared
to be affected by the print direction because a small amount of the purple material
is more visible when mixed with the white material, than the other way around.
To evaluate this further, it would be necessary to conduct further experiments,
where switching is conducted in the opposite direction relative to the placement
of the nozzle’s inlet channels. While such tests have not been conducted, due to
the time constraint of the project, it is recommended for further research on the
subject.
54
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:65==
8.6
Future work and improvements
Although the system did function as intended, there are still changes which can
be made to further mature the system. Recommendations are listed as follows:
• Aligning the rotor and housing:
Some variation in the strands’ width was observed when reviewing the mor-
phology of the printed structures. This variation appeared to coincide with
the variation in flow rate, which was found to fluctuate periodically, with re-
spect to each full rotation of the A-component pump’s rotor. It is therefore
likely, that the strands’ morphology can be significantly improved by aligning
the rotor and housing of the pump more carefully.
• Increasing the size of the material reservoirs:
One of the main benefits of this system is that it allows for continuous filling,
thus making it usable for Big Area Additive Manufacturing. However, the ma-
terial reservoirs used in this project were quite small, as this was preferred
when testing the system. The size of these reservoirs should be increased
to make the system even more suitable for printing large structures. Alter-
natively, it may be considered to develop an additional system for filling the
reservoirs continuously while printing.
• Reconsider using gear pumps for pumping the B-component:
The B-component pump’s efficiency was found to be very sensitive to small
variations in the distance between the pump’s rotor and housing. It should
therefore be considered to employ another kind of positive displacement
pump to make the system more robust towards variation in tolerances. Here,
a gear pump could be a viable option as it also allows the system to be con-
tinuously filled.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
55
==PAGE:66==
9
Conclusion
The field of Mechanical Engineering has shown notable progresses in techniques
for developing extremely light and stiff structures. Yet, these structures are often
so intricate in their geometries, that they are unsuited for manufacturing by con-
ventional production methods. The aim of this thesis, has been to explore a new
approach for manufacturing such structures, and a new multi-material wet-on-wet
MEX-AM print head has been developed. This print head stands out, compared
to other systems which have been reviewed, as it is both compatible with fiber
reinforced thermosets, enables continues switching between multiple materials,
and is suitable for Big Area Additive Manufacturing (BAAM).
The functionality of the print head has been tested by printing a series of multi-
material, and carbon fiber reinforced, structures. In general, all parts of the system
functioned as intended. The print head was able to extrude thermosets containing
2wt% carbon fiber granulates and was further capable of switching continuously
between two different materials with similar rheological properties. Thus, while
several improvements are recommended to further mature this system, its work-
ing principle has been confirmed during this project.
The print head employs four peristaltic pumps, each consisting of several rotor and
housing modules. This modular architecture facilitates, that the pumps’ capacity
can be further increased, if necessary. Additionally, the reservoirs can be filled
continuously while printing, thus making it highly suitable for BAAM. An inherent
problem with peristaltic pumps is their inability to deliver a completely consistent
flow rate. A new solution to this problem has been explored, by employing multi-
ple phase-shifted rotor sections with overlapping rollers. This concept was found,
to be an effective method of limiting the amount of flow rate variation caused by
the pumps, while maintaining their ability to pump highly viscous fluids. However,
the pumps’ efficiency was found to be sensitive to changes in the distance be-
tween the rotor and housing. This was especially pronounced when pumping the
B-component, as it was more prone to back flow due to its lower viscosity. It is
therefore recommended to reconsider the use of peristaltic pumps for pumping the
B-component, or to ensure that no back flow can occur in this pumping system.
The flow rate of the A-component was further observed to fluctuate periodically,
with respect to each full rotation of its pump’s rotor. This is likely to have affected
the morphology of the printed structure and should be addressed in further de-
velopment of the system. Based on observations conducted during testing, it is
expected, that this variation in flow rate can be significantly reduced by aligning
the rotor and housing section more carefully.
The static mixer model that was chosen for this project, was found to reduce the
accumulated pressure losses in the system significantly. In fact, the theoretical
calculated losses were reduced by a 76% in comparison to the losses caused
by DTU’s current mixer-model. Without this reduction, it would not have been
possible to keep the pressure losses below the tube’s capacity. Changing the
mixer-model therefore ended up being crucial to the functionality of the system.
56
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
Jonathan Taulo Pedersen-Bjergaard and Mathias Michael Christensen. “Experi-
mental and Numerical Development of Robotic Arm Based 2K Thermoset Additive
Manufacturing”. DTU, 2022.
[2]
Karl T Ulrich and Steven D. Eppinger. PRODUCT DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT,
SIXTH EDITION. Mc Graw Hill Education, 2016.
[3]
Z. Jiang et al. “Extrusion 3D Printing of Polymeric Materials with Advanced Proper-
ties”. In: Research School of Chemistry Australian National University (2021).
[4]
L. Wanjun et al. “Rapid Continues Multimaterial Extrusion Bioprinting”. In: Advanced
Materials (2017).
[5]
R.A. Buswell et al. “3D printing using concrete extrusion: A roadmap for research”.
In: Cement and Concrete Research 112 (2018), pp. 37–49.
[6]
M. A. Skylar-Scott et al. “Voxelated soft matter via multimaterial multinozzle 3D
printing.” In: Nature 575 (2019), pp. 330–335.
[7]
B. Wang et al. “Current progress on the 3D printing of thermosets”. In: Advanced
Composites and Hybrid Materials (2020), pp. 462–472.
[8]
J. O. Hardin et al. “Microfluidic printheads for multimaterial 3D printing of viscoelastic
inks”. In: Advanced materials 27.21 (2015), pp. 3279–3284.
[9]
J. Lindahl et al. Large-scale additive manufacturing with reactive polymers. Tech.
rep. Oak Ridge National Lab.(ORNL), Oak Ridge, TN (United States), 2018.
[10]
H. Dodiuk. Handbook of Thermoset Plastics. ELSEVIER, 2022.
[11]
R. W. Cahn. The Coming of Material Science. ELSEVIER SCIENCE Ltd, 2001.
[12]
L. Baoyuan and M. M. Abu-Omar. “Rapid Continuous Multimaterial Extrusion Bio-
printing”. In: Advances in Inorganic Chemistry (2021).
[13]
E. Fernand & X. Zihui. “Nonlinear viscoelastic constitutive model for thermoset poly-
mers”. In: Journal of Engineering Materials and Technology (2006), pp. 579–585.
[14]
N M Larson et al. “Rotational multimaterial printing of filaments with subvoxel con-
trol”. In: Nature 613 (2023), pp. 682–688.
[15]
Robert Cody Pack. “3D Printing of Hybrid Architectures via Core-Shell Material Ex-
trusion Additive Manufacturing”. In: (2021).
[16]
Md Tusher Mollah et al. “Computational analysis of yield stress buildup and sta-
bility of deposited layers in material extrusion additive manufacturing”. In: Additive
Manufacturing 71 (2023).
[17]
Md Tusher Mollah et al. “Stability and deformations of deposited layers in material
extrusion additive manufacturing”. In: Additive Manufacturing 46 (2021).
[18]
N Heywood and N Alderman. “Fundamentals of rheological classification and mea-
surement of high solids concentration slurries and pastes”. In: Hydrotransport. Vol. 16.
2004, pp. 675–699.
[19]
Brett G Compton and Jennifer A Lewis. “3D-printing of lightweight cellular compos-
ites”. In: Advanced materials 26.34 (2014), pp. 5930–5935.
[20]
Chaitanya Mahajan and Denis Cormier. “3D printing of carbon fiber composites with
preferentially aligned fibers”. In: IIE annual conference. Proceedings. Institute of
Industrial and Systems Engineers (IISE). 2015, p. 2953.
[21]
D. Zenkert and Mark Battley. Foundations of Fibre Composites - Lecture Notes.
Polyteknisk Kompendie, 2022.
[22]
Brendan P Croom et al. “Mechanics of nozzle clogging during direct ink writing of
fiber-reinforced composites”. In: Additive Manufacturing 37 (2021), p. 101701.
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
57
==PAGE:68==
[23]
Elena Fagnani. “Extrusion-based additive manufacturing of thermoset fiber-reinforced
polymer composites: materials, technologies and applications”. In: (2021).
[24]
Sardar Malek et al. “Lightweight 3D cellular composites inspired by balsa”. In: Bioin-
spiration & biomimetics 12.2 (2017), p. 026014.
[25]
D. Kokkinis et al. “3D printing of materials with tunable failure via bioinspired me-
chanical gradients”. In: Advanced Materials 30.19 (2018), p. 1705808.
[26]
M. Myrup Andreasen and et al. Conceptual Design. Springer, 2015.
[27]
Y-C Liu, Amaresh Chakrabarti, and Thomas Bligh. “Towards an ‘ideal’approach for
concept generation”. In: Design studies 24.4 (2003), pp. 341–355.
[28]
Robert Cody Pack. “3D Printing of Hybrid Architectures via Core-Shell Material Ex-
trusion Additive Manufacturing”. In: University of Tennessee, Knoxville (2021).
[29]
Wanjun Liu and Zhang et al. “Rapid Continuous Multimaterial Extrusion Bioprinting”.
In: Advanced Materials 29.3 (2017).
[30]
Carl Sander Kruse and Daniel Helmut Meile. “Development of a Volumetric Addia-
tive Manufacturing Platform”. DTU, 2023.
[31]
Andrea Montalti* Patrich Ferretti Curzio Pagliari and Alfredo Liverani. “Design and
development of a peristaltic pump for constant flow applications”. In: Department of
Industrial Engineering, Alma Mater Studiorum University of Bologna (2022).
[32]
M. D. et al. Biviano. “Smoothing Oscillatory Peristaltic Pump Flow with Bioinspired
Passive Components”. In: Department of Physics Technical University of Denmark
(2022).
[33]
Edward L. Paul. Handbook of Industrial Mixing: science and pactice. Wiley-Interscience,
2004.
[34]
Frank M. White. FLUID MECHANICS, seventh edition. McGraw-Hill, 2011.
[35]
J. Ramsay et al. “Mixing performance of viscoelastic fluids in a Kenics KM in-line
static mixer”. In: Chemical Engineering Research and Design 115 (2016). 10th Eu-
ropean Congress of Chemical Engineering, pp. 310–324.
58
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:69==
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
59
==PAGE:70==
A
Appendix
A.1
Different static mixers
Figure A.1: Data sheet showing the different static mixers which have been considered
in the to project
60
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:71==
A.2
Data sheet for the thermoset polymer
Figure A.2: Data sheet for the thermoset polymer used in this project
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
61
==PAGE:72==
A.3
Code used to control the motors
Figure A.3: Code used to control the motors
62
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:73==
A.4
Sensor data sheet
NOTE: As the sensor’s data sheet contains information regarding all of the man-
ufacturers sensors, it is very long. Only the pages relevant to this project are
included in this Appendix.
Figure A.4: Front page of sensor data sheet
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
63
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.5: Expected voltage: NOTE: The analog version of the output voltage equation
was used in the project.
64
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.6: Wiring of sensor
3D printing with multiple thermoset polymers
65
==PAGE:76==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
