==PAGE:1==
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
Master Thesis
DTU Hearing Systems
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
Master Thesis
July 29, 2024
By Adriana Karolina Silwanowicz
Supervised by:
Maaike Charlotte Van Eeckhoutte
Jens Hjortkjær
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Sean Do, 2018
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 352,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months (= 35 ECTS) at the Hearing System Group,
Department of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfillment for the degree Master of Engineering Acoustics, MSc.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Adriana Karolina Silwanowicz ­ s213880
Signature
Date
ii
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The impact of playing video games on hearing health is an emerging concern, especially
among young adults who frequently engage in gaming sessions. This thesis investigated
changes in auditory thresholds and neural responses following extended exposure to
gaming soundscapes. Utilizing a combination of extended high­frequency audiometry,
sound exposure analysis, and auditory brainstem response (ABR), the study evaluated
the auditory health of participants before and after a gaming event. The results showed no
significant differences in hearing thresholds or wave I amplitudes as sound exposure lev­
els of subjects’ gaming sessions were found within safe limits. Consequently, extended
gaming sessions did not adversely affected hearing sensitivity or neural response in this
study. These findings underscore the importance of continuous monitoring and aware­
ness of auditory health in gaming environments.
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors, Maaike
Charlotte Van Eeckhoutte and Jens Hjortkjærr, for their unwavering support, patience, and
inspiration throughout this journey. Maaike, your guidance extended far beyond scientific
advice ­ your assistance in sorting out practicalities and your invaluable support in setting
up the measurement were crucial to the success of this thesis. Jens, your insights and
encouragement have been instrumental in shaping my research and keeping me moti­
vated.
I am profoundly grateful to Lena Dieu, whose knowledge and heartfelt support were ab­
solutely priceless. Your weekly check­ins during lunch and your willingness to rush to the
hospital to help with the experimental setup made a world of difference. This thesis would
not be the same without your dedication and kindness.
To my friend and thesis buddy, Rahul, thank you for being a constant source of knowl­
edge and emotional support. Your expertise in experimental design, statystical analysis
and your willingness to lend a shoulder to cry on have been an integral part of this ac­
complishment. Additionally, I am deeply thankful to my university friends, Cathrina, Hella,
and Tyson, for their continuous support throughout my master’s degree journey. Your
friendship and encouragement have been vital to my perseverance and success.
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to Henrik Hvidberg, Brandon Madsen, and
Erik Kjærbøl for their incredible support in providing the tools and resources I needed.
Your help was essential and deeply appreciated. Additionally, a special thanks to Jaime
Undurraga for his assistance with the ABR scripts. Your patience and expertise were
invaluable.
I am also immensely grateful to all my participants for their patience and understanding,
especially when things did not go as planned. Your willingness to dedicate a significant
amount of your time was crucial for the completion of this research.
Finally, I would like to extend my genuine thanks to all the people close to my heart for their
unwavering support. Your love, encouragement, and belief in me have been a constant
source of strength and motivation. This thesis is a testament to the collective efforts and
support of all these incredible individuals. I am truly fortunate to have had you all by my
side.
iv
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Goals of the Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.4
General Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Background
3
2.1
Noise­Induced Hearing Loss
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Assessment of Noise­Induced Hearing Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Methods
10
3.1
Procedure Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Questionnaires . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Extended High­Frequency Audiometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Sound Exposure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Results
19
4.1
Questionnaires . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Sound Exposure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3
Extended High Frequency Audiometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.4
Auditory Brainstem Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
Discussion
35
5.1
Questionnaire Findings and WHO study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2
Safe Sound Dosage and Gaming Sound Exposure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.3
Audiometric Thresholds and Gaming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.4
Gaming at the Neurological Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6
Conclusion
38
Bibliography
39
A Appendix: Questionnaires
41
A.1 Questionnaire 1: Before gaming
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.2 Questionnaire 2: At the session . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
A.3 Questionnaire 3: After the final round of measurements . . . . . . . . . . . 58
B Detailed Participant Responses to Auditory Effects Post­Gaming Session
61
C Appendix: Overview of the Computation of Annual Noise Exposure
62
D Appendix: Factors and Their Values Used in the Mixed­effect Model Analysis
of Sound Exposure
63
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
v
==PAGE:8==
E
Appendix: Total ANE Values
64
F
Appendix: Averages and Differences Between Before and After Gaming of
Audiometric Thresholds
65
G Appendix: Wave I amplitudes
66
vi
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
ABR
Auditory Brainstem Response
EE
Episodic Exposure
Ef
Episodic Frequency
EHFA
Extended High­Frequency Audiometry
HHL
Hidden Hearing Loss
NEQ
Noise Exposure Questionnaire
NIHL
Noise­Induced Hearing Loss
PTS
Permanent Threshold Shifts
SA
Standard Audiometry
TTS
Temporary Threshold Shifts
WHO
World Health Organization
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
vii
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The rapid expansion of the video gaming and electronic sports (esports) sectors has
shifted these pastimes from niche interests to forms of entertainment and professional
engagement. Recent data indicates that, over three billion individuals worldwide are in­
volved in gaming with 1.7 billion actively participating in PC and console gaming (Newzoo,
2023). This raise in popularity has brought health considerations, particularly concerning
auditory health. Despite the focus on the benefits of gaming, such as cognitive develop­
ment and social interaction, the potential risks have not been sufficiently addressed.
The inspiration for this study arises from increasing evidence indicating that prolonged
exposure to sounds during gaming can result in hearing issues such as noise­induced
hearing loss and tinnitus. As outlined in a report by the World Health Organization (WHO)
typical gaming sessions often surpass recommended exposure limits as many players
prefer volume settings that significantly elevate the risk of damage (Diviani et al., 2023).
Moreover a lack of awareness and precautionary measures, among gamers exacerbates
this risk with a minority taking breaks or monitoring their sound exposure levels.
The systematic scoping review, global online questionnaire and consultations, with stake­
holders outlined in the Safe Listening in Video Gaming & Esports report (World Health
Organization, 2024) highlight a deficiency in research and real world strategies aimed
at ensuring listening practices within gaming settings. The review underscores the im­
portance of game audio for an immersive and competitive gaming atmosphere. It also
reveals a notably inadequate focus on auditory health. Stakeholder interviews further
suggest that existing safe listening features are either underutilized or nonexistent, point­
ing to an urgent need for comprehensive guidelines and education programs tailored to
gamers and esports professionals.
1.2
Goals of the Project
The thesis aims to explore the behavior of game players, in terms of their interaction with
audio in games, its intensity and duration as well as the auditory health conditions that
result from such interactions. This is expected to lay the foundation for subsequent studies
and future policies. The growth and popularity of this gaming trend necessitates a study
on its effects on hearing health. This work seeks to emphasise on the need to create
awareness or setting up a basis for researches and interventions aimed at preserving
gamers’ hearing.
1.3
Research Question
This thesis addresses the central research question: How do gaming habits and sound
exposure impact hearing health among young adults? This question guides the investi­
gation into the auditory risks associated with gaming and aims to determine patterns and
consequences of sound exposure in this growing demographic.
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
1
==PAGE:11==
Based on the literature, it is hypothesized that frequent and prolonged exposure to high
sound levels during gaming will result in measurable changes in audiometric thresholds
and ABR responses. Specifically, it is expected that participants who engage in gam­
ing more frequently and for longer durations will exhibit higher thresholds in extended
high­frequency audiometry (EHFA) and altered ABR waveforms, indicating potential early
signs of noise­induced hearing loss. Additionally, it is anticipated that the questionnaire
responses will reveal a correlation between self­reported auditory symptoms and the in­
tensity and duration of gaming sessions.
1.4
General Structure of the Thesis
This thesis is structured as follows:
• Chapter 2 reviews theoretical concepts and current research on gaming, sound ex­
posure, and hearing health.
• Chapter 3 outlines the methodology, including experimental design, materials, and
data pre­processing strategies.
• Chapter 4 presents the study’s results and Chapter 5 discusses and analyzes them
in the context of existing literature.
• Chapter 6 summarizes the project, draws conclusions, suggests future research
areas, and reflects on broader implications.
2
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:12==
2
Theoretical Background
The relationship between video gaming and hearing loss is of increasing relevance given
the large number of gamers worldwide. This study by Dillard et al., 2023 has system­
atically reviewed evidence linking gaming to potential risks of hearing loss and tinnitus.
This review is critical since it involves a modifiable risk factor and underlines the need for
public health interventions in promoting safe listening practices among gamers.
2.1
Noise­Induced Hearing Loss
Noise­induced hearing loss is a major cause of sensorineural hearing loss and is the sec­
ond most common cause after age­related hearing loss, affecting about 5% of the global
population. Exposure to loud sounds from the work environment, environmental noise,
and leisure time activities are major risk factors for this disease. This condition results
from intricate interactions between genetic predispositions and environmental factors with
major differences in occupational noise exposure (Natarajan et al., 2023).
NIHL occurs because of the damage to the hair cells and the auditory nerve in the inner
ear by the sound waves. This may lead to a temporary threshold shift, TTS, where there
is no enduring decrease in hearing, or a permanent threshold shift, PTS, where damage
is lasting. The degree and duration of the NIHL are modulated by the extent and location
of cellular damage, related to the intensity and duration of the sound exposure. Repeated
TTS episodes can yield profound permanent threshold hearing loss when summed over
a lifetime. Any lost sensory cells of the organ of Corti—a critical structure within the in­
ner ear—cannot spontaneously regenerate. Thus, noise exposure that results in hair
cell or neural degeneration may produce permanent threshold shifts, especially follow­
ing repeated exposures. NIHL is, however, largely a preventable condition if appropriate
precautions are taken to protect hearing.
2.1.1
Noise­Induced Hearing Loss and Faming
The World Health Organization (WHO) acknowledges that exposure to high­intensity sounds,
also known as unsafe listening, is a significant modifiable risk factor for hearing loss and
tinnitus. Video gaming, a popular leisure activity globally, often involves prolonged ex­
posure to high­intensity sound levels, making it a potential source of NIHL (World Health
Organization, 2024).
Research suggests that video games are frequently played at sound levels that nearly ex­
ceed or exceed permissible exposure limits. On average, individuals play video games for
approximately three hours per week, with sound levels often reaching unsafe thresholds.
The prevalence of gaming varies widely, with studies reporting figures ranging from 20%
to 78%. High­intensity sound exposure during gaming can include impulse noises, es­
pecially in shooter games, which may lead to acoustical trauma. Additionally, numerous
studies have shown that prolonged exposure to broadband noise, such as from personal
music players, can lead to NIHL, which often presents an audiometric pattern with a spe­
cific gap between 3000 to 6000 Hz, (Schmuziger et al., 2007).
Exposure to high­intensity sounds can lead to various auditory symptoms:
• Tinnitus: A perceived ringing or buzzing without an external stimulus.
• Hyperacusis: Increased sensitivity to sound.
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
3
==PAGE:13==
• Difficulties in Speech Comprehension: Particularly in noisy environments.
• Hidden Hearing Loss: Symptoms of hearing loss without measurable changes in
audiometric thresholds, possibly more common among young people.
The review by Dillard et al., 2023 consolidated data from 14 peer­reviewed studies, en­
compassing both cohort and observational research, which examined the relationship
between gaming and hearing loss or tinnitus. The significant findings from these studies
indicate that the sound levels in gaming often approach or surpass safe limits. Individu­
als who play video games using headphones are especially at risk. Moreover, there is a
high prevalence of gaming among young people, who are more likely to engage in unsafe
listening practices frequently.
The study references guidelines from WHO and the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) on permissible noise exposure levels (Table 2.1). For example, a sound level
of 80 dB(A) over 40 hours a week is considered permissible for adults. Exceeding these
levels can lead to hearing loss. The review found that average sound levels in gaming
often surpass these limits, with some games reaching peak levels of 119 dB, especially
in shooter games.
Table 2.1: Safe sound dosage based on equal energy principle (World Health Organiza­
tion, 2019).
Safe sound dosage
Allowed duration per week
80 dB(A)
40 h
83 dB(A)
20 h
86 dB(A)
10 h
89 dB(A)
5 h
92 dB(A)
2.5 h
95 dB(A)
75 min
98 dB(A)
37.5 min
101 dB(A)
18.75 min
104 dB(A)
9.5 min
107 dB(A)
4.5 min
In Denmark, Arbejdstilsynet, the Danish Working Environment Authority, specifies that
noise levels should not exceed 85 dB(A) for more than 8 hours (Arbejdstilsynets vejledning
D.6.1­4 2007). Similar to WHO recommendations, the permitted exposure time is halved
for each 3­dB increase in sound level. This means that at 88 dB(A), the maximum safe
exposure time is 4 hours, and at 91 dB(A), it is reduced to 2 hours.
The limited evidence suggests that gaming is a common source of unsafe listening, poten­
tially placing many individuals at risk of permanent hearing loss and tinnitus. The WHO’s
Make Listening Safe initiative aims to promote safe listening practices, which could be ex­
tended to include gaming. There is a need for targeted interventions and global policies
to educate and protect gamers from the risks of high­intensity sound exposure.
2.1.2
Impact of Impulse Noise
Impulse noise, characterized by rapid sound pressure transients, differs from steady­state
noise in terms of peak level, rise and decay time, duration, and spectral content. These
bursts of sound can be more damaging to hearing due to their high intensity and sudden
onset. Common sources of impulse noise include machinery, gunfire, and explosions, all
4
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:14==
of which can cause significant hearing loss. Occupational exposure to impulse noise has
been shown to add an additional 5 to 12 dB loss at the 4 kHz frequency (Starck et al.,
2003).
The complexity of impulse noise makes consistent regulation challenging. EU directives
limit unweighted peak levels to 140 dB, while French guidelines cap A­weighted peak lev­
els at 135 dB. These standards aim to minimize the risk of hearing damage, but variations
in impulse characteristics require careful assessment. For instance, workers exposed to
high impulse noise environments often experience greater hearing loss than those ex­
posed to steady­state noise. Studies indicate that these workers suffer an additional 10
dB hearing loss beyond standard model predictions.
Figure 2.1: Peak output levels of different video games compared to permitted limits.
Impulse noises are an inherent aspect of certain types of games, such as shooters. Ian­
nace et al., 2019 indicates that the peak output levels of various game titles can, in ex­
treme cases, surpass permissible limits by nearly 20 decibels as depicted in Figure 2.1.
These peak levels are considerably higher than what is deemed safe for exposure, posing
a significant risk to auditory health.
2.2
Assessment of Noise­Induced Hearing Loss
2.2.1
Hidden Hearing Loss
Hidden hearing loss (HHL) refers to the difficulty in understanding speech in noisy en­
vironments despite normal hearing thresholds in standard audiometric tests. This con­
dition is often linked to cochlear synaptopathy (CS), a type of damage to the synapses
between inner hair cells and auditory nerve fibers. Individuals with HHL frequently expe­
rience symptoms like tinnitus and challenges in following conversations in noisy settings,
although their pure­tone audiograms show no signs of hearing loss (Barbee et al., 2018).
Conventional audiometric evaluations, which assess hearing thresholds between 0.25
and 8 kHz, do not detect HHL. Consequently, people with HHL often feel frustrated as their
hearing difficulties are not confirmed by standard tests. Research indicates that noise ex­
posure can cause cochlear damage, which may not be apparent in standard audiograms
but can be detected through other methods such as auditory brainstem response (ABR)
wave I amplitude, otoacoustic emissions (OAEs), and electrocochleography (ECochG).
These methods are crucial in identifying synaptic damage and providing a more thorough
assessment of auditory health.
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
5
==PAGE:15==
Studies using animal models have shown that noise exposure can lead to significant
synaptic loss in the cochlea without affecting hearing thresholds measured by standard
audiometry. These findings suggest that HHL might be common among people exposed
to noisy environments, even if they pass conventional hearing tests. Thus, incorporating
additional diagnostic tools into clinical practice is vital for the early detection and treatment
of HHL, which could prevent further auditory damage and improve patient outcomes.
2.2.2
Temporal Threshold Shift
Temporary threshold shift (TTS) describes a short­term decrease in hearing sensitivity
following exposure to loud noises. This condition is marked by an initial decline in hearing
thresholds, which generally return to normal over time. The recovery period for TTS can
vary from minutes to hours, and in some instances, days or weeks, depending on the
intensity and nature of the noise exposure (Ryan et al., 2016).
Figure 2.2: Audiogram illustrating NIHL, with notable hearing loss primarily in the 3–4 kHz
frequency range (from Natarajan et al., 2023).
Several factors contribute to TTS, including the type, intensity, and duration of the noise,
as well as individual susceptibility. The high­frequency areas of the cochlea are particu­
larly vulnerable to noise damage, with the ear canal’s resonance causing peak sensitivity
at frequencies around 4­6 kHz as shown in Figure 2.2. The primary targets of noise dam­
age are the cochlear hair cells and the synapses between these hair cells and auditory
nerve fibers. Noise exposure can cause these synapses to swell and retract, leading to
temporary disruptions in auditory processing. Even though hearing thresholds may re­
cover, these synaptic changes can result in lasting difficulties with auditory perception,
especially in noisy environments.
Research indicates that TTS can involve threshold shifts of up to approximately 50 dB im­
mediately after a single noise exposure, which may fully recover. However, more signifi­
cant initial hearing losses are likely to result in permanent threshold shifts (PTS). Continu­
ous or repeated noise exposures that induce TTS can eventually lead to PTS, particularly
in occupational settings with persistent noise exposure.
6
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:16==
2.2.3
Extended High­Frequency Audiometry
As mentioned before, conventional audiometry evaluates hearing thresholds between 125
and 8000 Hz, while the upper limit of human hearing extends to 20000 Hz. Extended high­
frequency audiometry (EHFA), covering 9000 to 20000 Hz, is crucial for early detection of
hearing loss, particularly from noise exposure (Mehrparvar et al., 2011). High­frequency
sounds are important for distinguishing speech cues and accurate sound localization,
especially in noisy environments. Hearing sensitivity at these frequencies declines with
age and exposure to loud sounds, making EHFA a valuable tool for identifying early signs
of hearing loss before they affect lower frequencies critical for speech.
Research has shown that high frequencies above 8000 Hz are more sensitive to noise ex­
posure. Early changes in hearing thresholds at these frequencies can predict subsequent
hearing loss at lower frequencies (250 to 8000 Hz), which are crucial for understanding
speech. Therefore, EHFA can serve as an early indicator of NIHL and is particularly useful
for monitoring individuals exposed to occupational noise or those using personal music
players at high volumes (Kumar et al., 2016). However, high­frequency audiometry has
limitations, such as its inability to detect hearing loss caused by acoustic trauma, as found
by Balatsouras et al., 2005. Nonetheless, EHFA is beneficial for early detection of noise­
induced changes, serving as an early indicator of occupational hearing loss and other
auditory issues.
Audiogram Estimation Using Bayesian Active Learning
Bayesian active (BA) learning is a novel method for fast and accurate high­frequency
audiometry. This method leverages a BA learning algorithm to improve the efficiency and
accuracy of audiogram testing compared to traditional methods. The BA method provides
reliable threshold estimates with high test­retest reliability, yielding median differences
within ±5 dB up to 10 kHz and within ±10 dB at higher frequencies (Schlittenlacher et
al., 2018). This consistency suggests that BA learning can provide reliable threshold
estimates with high test­retest reliability (Schlittenlacher et al., 2018).
One of the significant advantages of the BA method is its time efficiency. While traditional
SA and AFC methods can take up to 12 minutes, the BA test was completed in an average
of 3 minutes and 40 seconds. This time­saving aspect is crucial for clinical settings, where
reducing test duration without compromising accuracy is highly beneficial. The BA learn­
ing method also accounts for individual variations in ear canal acoustics and headphone
placement, which can influence audiogram results. By incorporating these variables, the
BA algorithm can adjust the testing process to improve precision and reliability. This
adaptability makes the BA method a promising tool, especially for high­frequency testing
where traditional methods may fall short (Casolani et al., 2024).
2.2.4
Auditory Brainstem Response
The Auditory Brainstem Response (ABR) is an electrophysiological measure used to as­
sess the functionality of the auditory pathways from the ear to the brainstem. It is com­
monly used in clinical and research settings to diagnose hearing loss and auditory neu­
ropathy. ABR testing involves placing electrodes on the scalp to measure the electrical
activity in response to sound stimuli, typically clicks or tone bursts.
ABR is particularly useful in identifying neural deficits that may not be evident in standard
audiometric tests. This is critical for diagnosing HHL, where individuals experience diffi­
culties in hearing, particularly in noisy environments, despite having normal audiograms.
Key components of the ABR include:
• Wave I: Originates from the auditory nerve.
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
7
==PAGE:17==
• Wave II to V: Reflects the activity of subsequent neural structures along the auditory
pathway, including the cochlear nucleus, superior olivary complex, lateral lemniscus,
and inferior colliculus.
Figure 2.3: Adult ABR with labelled waves (from De Silva and Schier, 2011).
Research has shown that noise exposure can lead to significant changes in ABR wave­
forms, particularly in wave I amplitudes, which are indicative of cochlear synaptopathy
— a type of neural damage involving the synapses between inner hair cells and auditory
nerve fibers.
The literature shows that noise exposure has significant effects on auditory ABR. Bramhall,
Konrad­Martin, et al., 2016 found that ABR wave I amplitudes were significantly reduced
in individuals with histories of noise exposure, even when their audiometric thresholds
remained normal. This finding suggests that ABR can detect early neural changes before
audiometric signs of hearing loss become apparent. In animal models, noise­induced
synaptopathy also resulted in reduced ABR wave I amplitudes, mirroring the findings in
human studies. Research by S. Kujawa and M. Liberman, 2009, and Lin et al., 2011
demonstrated similar patterns of reduced ABR wave I amplitudes due to noise expo­
sure, indicating cochlear synaptopathy. Additionally, reduced peripheral input, such as
decreased wave I amplitude, may lead to increased central auditory gain as described
by Bramhall, Reavis, et al., 2022. This compensatory mechanism is reflected in the later
waves of the ABR (waves III to V) and other evoked potentials like the Middle Latency
Response (MLR) and Late Latency Response (LLR).
ABR is valuable for early detection of noise­induced cochlear synaptopathy and HHL. It
provides a non­invasive method to assess auditory nerve integrity and can guide inter­
ventions to prevent further auditory damage. It can be beneficial for identifying subclinical
auditory deficits in individuals exposed to high levels of noise, even when their audiometric
thresholds are normal.
2.2.5
Noise Exposure Questionnaire
The Noise Exposure Questionnaire (NEQ) is a comprehensive, task­based tool devel­
oped to quantify an individual’s annual noise exposure from both occupational and non­
occupational sources. Recognizing the high prevalence of NIHL, the NEQ aims to provide
a detailed assessment of a person’s exposure to potentially harmful noise levels. This
8
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:18==
assessment is crucial for identifying individuals at high risk for NIHL, allowing targeting
hearing protection efforts more effectively. The NEQ includes a variety of questions de­
signed to capture the frequency and duration of participation in noisy activities, helping to
calculate a precise estimate of annual noise exposure. This task­based approach is par­
ticularly useful as it considers both the intensity and the duration of noise exposure, two
critical factors in assessing the risk of NIHL. NEQ considers the NIOSH recommended
limit of 85 dBA, using a 3­dB exchange rate, and extrapolates this to an annual equivalent
exposure limit of 78.6 LAeq8760h. Subjects in which the calculated LAeq8760h is 79 or
greater hold the highest risk for the development of NIHL (Johnson et al., 2017).
The relationship between video gaming and hearing loss is increasingly concerning due
to the high­intensity sound exposure inherent in gaming activities. Noise­induced hearing
loss (NIHL) and tinnitus are significant risks, with evidence suggesting that gaming often
exceeds safe sound levels, particularly in genres like shooter games. This exposure can
lead to various auditory symptoms, including temporary and permanent threshold shifts,
hidden hearing loss, and other auditory dysfunctions. Assessment methods such as ex­
tended high­frequency audiometry, Bayesian active learning for audiogram estimation,
and Auditory Brainstem Response (ABR) testing are crucial for detecting early signs of
hearing damage. The Noise Exposure Questionnaire (NEQ) further aids in quantifying
individual noise exposure.
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
9
==PAGE:19==
3
Methods
This chapter details the experimental design and procedures employed to investigate
the auditory risks associated with video gaming. This includes the incorporation of pure
tone audiometry, auditory brainstem response recordings, sound exposure level mea­
surements during gaming sessions, and the questionnaires.
3.1
Procedure Overview
The study was divided into three phases. Pre and post measurements were conducted ei­
ther at the Copenhagen Hearing and Balance Center at Rigshospitalet or at the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU, Building 354). The procedures varied between the locations
due to the absence of ABR equipment at DTU.
Figure 3.1: Procedure overview dependent on pre­post measurement location.
• Pre­measurement: This phase aimed to establish a baseline for each participant,
which involved assessing their attitudes towards hearing, noise exposure, and gam­
ing habits through a questionnaire and determining their hearing thresholds using
EHFA. At Rigshospitalet, ABR recordings were also conducted, and an additional
round of EHFA was performed to ensure any potential hearing changes were at­
tributed to the gaming session rather than the ABR stimulus. Participants were
required to avoid exposure to loud noises before the measurement.
• Gaming event: In this study, any gaming session is referred to as a gaming event.
Due to the time­sensitive nature of changes in hearing thresholds, particularly con­
cerning Temporary Threshold Shift (TTS), EHFA based on Bayesian active learning
was conducted immediately before and after the gaming event. This approach en­
sured that any variations in hearing sensitivity were promptly captured. Participants
were instructed to play as usual in terms of sound level, duration, and breaks. During
gameplay, sound levels were recorded using a binaural microphone placed under
the headset. To validate these recordings, sound levels were briefly measured with
a sound level meter and an artificial ear. The second questionnaire captured details
about the gaming setup and duration.
• Post­measurement: To accurately track any changes in hearing, post­measurement
assessments, including EHFA and ABR, were conducted at the earliest feasible
10
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:20==
opportunity following the gaming event, typically within one hour or less. Participants
also reported their hearing condition following the gaming event.
3.2
Participants
Eligible participants were required to be of legal age and preferably under 35 years old,
with a background in playing video games. The study did not specify a required frequency
of gaming, allowing for an examination of gaming habits and sound levels across varying
levels of gaming experience. The primary focus was on individuals who played games
characterized by impulse noises, such as first­person shooters.
Initially, the project aimed to investigate hearing changes also in social settings, such
as esports clubs and events, where background noise is prevalent. This approach was
motivated by a World Health Organization, 2024 highlighting the lack of research in such
environments and aimed to additionally determine if the sound output of the game was
increased in the presence of background noise. However, due to a lack of responses and
prohibitions from esports event organizers on conducting such activities, the study was
redirected to focus on gaming in more controlled, individual settings.
Participants were recruited through social media, DTU channels, and networking, ad­
hering to the ethical guidelines set by DTU Hearing Systems. All participants provided
informed consent, and the experiments were approved by the Science­Ethics Commit­
tee for the Capital Region of Denmark (reference H­16036391). All research data were
pseudo­anonymized to ensure participant privacy.
3.3
Questionnaires
All three questionnaires were implemented in Microsoft Forms and are available in the
Appendix A.
The first questionnaire was divided into four sections: Your Hearing, Noise in Daily Life,
Gaming, and Demographics. The Your Hearing section captured the history of hearing
disorders in the test subjects or their immediate families, ear surgeries, and the use of
ototoxic drugs. To assess daily noise exposure outside of gaming, the NEQ was used
according to the described procedure (Johnson et al., 2017). The Gaming section exam­
ined gaming habits in detail, including frequency and duration of play, the age at which
participants started gaming, types of games played, participation in social gaming ac­
tivities, preferred audio equipment, self­reported hearing conditions post­gameplay, and
attitudes towards these conditions. The Demographics section gathered basic informa­
tion such as age, gender, and education level, as the WHO report correlates education
level with sound exposure.
The second questionnaire focused on the conditions of the gaming event, recording de­
tails such as self­reported sound levels, duration, background noise, game type, and
breaks taken during gameplay. It also asked participants to reflect on whether gaming
affected their hearing.
The final questionnaire, administered at the end of the study, tracked any self­reported
changes in hearing, such as tinnitus or muffled hearing, and asked participants if they
believed these effects could have long­term impacts on their hearing.
3.4
Extended High­Frequency Audiometry
Pure­tone audiometry is a fundamental audiological assessment used to determine an in­
dividual’s hearing thresholds across a spectrum of frequencies. This procedure involved
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
11
==PAGE:21==
presenting a series of pure tones at various frequencies to the subject through head­
phones within an acoustically insulated sound booth (Figure 3.2a and 3.2b. The subject
was instructed to indicate when they could hear each tone by pressing a button.
Prior to the hearing tests, participants underwent an otoscopic examination to ensure that
the ear canal was not obstructed by excess cerumen. This step is crucial to guarantee
accurate audiometric results by eliminating any potential blockages that could affect sound
transmission.
The assessment began with a familiarization phase, where a tone was presented at a
30 dB HL level that was easily audible to the subject. The intensity of the tone was then
decreased in 10 dB HL increments until the subject no longer responded, followed by
increasing the intensity in 5 dB HL increments until the subject responded again.The test
subject threshold was determined at the dB level for which they responded to 3 times. This
method, known as the Hughson­Westlake procedure (ASHA, 2005), was repeated across
different frequencies to establish the subject’s hearing threshold at each frequency.
In this study, the AC440 protocol on the Interacoustics Affinity Suite software, along with
its corresponding hardware, was utilized at Rigshospitalet, whilst at DTU an AC40 au­
diometer was used (Figure 3.2c. Sixteen frequencies were assessed: 125 Hz, 250 Hz,
500 Hz, 1 kHz, 2 kHz, 4 kHz, 6 kHz, 8 kHz, 9 kHz, 10 kHz, 11.2 kHz, 12.5 kHz, 14 kHz, 16
kHz, 18 kHz, and 20 kHz. The initial threshold was presumed to be 0 dB HL unless oth­
erwise indicated by the the participants. The stimuli were delivered through a DD450 (at
Rigshospitalet)/ Senneheiser HDA200 (at DTU) high­frequency headset, and the starting
ear was randomized to prevent any potential bias.
(a) A sound booth
at Rigshospitalet.
(b) A HEA COM 1
sound booth at DTU.
(c) Interacoustics
AC40 audiometer.
Figure 3.2: Sound booths and an audiometer used for EHFA.
3.4.1
Extended High­Frequency Audiometry Based on Bayesian Learning
The method employed a portable setup, including an HP laptop, an RME FireFace UCX
sound card, and a pair of Sennheiser HDA200 headphones. The audiometry was im­
plemented in Matlab as described by Casolani et al., 2024, utilizing the Psychtoolbox­3
(Kleiner et al., 2007) and GPML toolbox (Rasmussen and Nickisch, 2010). The procedure
was conducted with minimal external noise, although not within an isolated sound booth.
12
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:22==
Calibration
Daily calibration of the setup was required before performing audiometry. The calibration
procedure outlined in the appendix was followed, using the HEA calibration software im­
plemented in Matlab, along with the following hardware: a Norsonic NOR139 sound level
meter, a Nor1253 electronic pistonphone, and a GRAS 43AC­S1 artificial ear kit.
Figure 3.3: The portable setup during the calibration.
Stimulus Details
• The BA test comprised 50 trials, each containing three tone pulses to minimize con­
fusion with potential steady tinnitus.
• Each pulse lasted 250 ms, with a rise/fall time of 20 ms and a 100 ms silence be­
tween pulses.
• All signals were generated at a sampling frequency of 48 kHz.
• The initial tone was presented at 60 dB SPL at 12 kHz, with the maximum level set
at 80 dB SPL.
• To account for potential bias due to lapses in attention, five silent trials were ran­
domly included among the 50 trials.
Procedure
1. The BA algorithm begins with an initial estimation of the participant’s hearing thresh­
olds across a broad range of frequencies. This initial setup is based on prior distri­
butions informed by existing audiometric data.
2. The algorithm dynamically selects the most informative frequency and intensity lev­
els for testing based on participant responses. This is achieved through the following
steps:
• The algorithm presents a sound stimulus at a specific frequency and intensity
level.
• The participant’s response (whether they heard the sound) is recorded.
• The BA algorithm updates its estimation of the hearing threshold based on the
participant’s response. This involves adjusting the probability distributions for
the tested frequency and intensity level.
• The algorithm selects the next frequency and intensity level that will provide
the most information about the participant’s hearing ability. This selection is
guided by minimizing the uncertainty in the threshold estimation.
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
13
==PAGE:23==
3. This iterative process continues until the algorithm converges on accurate hearing
threshold estimates. The test is designed to quickly refine these estimates, reducing
the number of required stimulus presentations compared to traditional methods.
3.4.2
Auditory Brainstem Response
The aep_gui script, developed by Jaime Undurraga, was utilized for generating the stimuli.
This script, operating within MATLAB and interfacing with the BioSemi/Actiview system,
facilitated synchronized recording and stimulus delivery. The software allowed for control
over stimulus parameters, including frequency, intensity, and duration, ensuring accu­
rate synchronization between stimulus presentation and EEG recording. The data files
generated were used for subsequent analysis.
Stimulus Generation
To prepare the stimulus, the command aep_gui was run in MATLAB’s command window,
launching the graphical user interface (GUI). The default screen of the GUI consisted of
four tabs — Sound Device Settings, Recording Device Settings, Stimulus Settings, and
Measurement.
First, in the Sound Device Settings tab, the sound card connected to the transducers and
the computer, typically the ASIO FIREFACE USB, was selected. The sampling frequency
was set to 48000 Hz and the mode to playback. Three channels were used for output:
17 for the trigger, 4 for the left insertphone, and 5 for the right insertphone. Next, in the
Recording Device Settings tab, the Biosemi device was selected. The sampling frequency
was set to 16384 Hz.
In the Stimulus Settings tab, the characteristics of the acoustic stimuli were defined.
The stimulus type, ”abr_clicks”, was chosen, and the parameters including sampling fre­
quency, duration, number of repetitions, amplitude, IPD, Alt IPD, IPM rate, carrier fre­
quency, and modulation frequency were set as shown in Figure 3.4b. After defining these
parameters, the sound card settings and output levels were calibrated.
(a) Calibration window.
(b) Signal generator window.
Figure 3.4: Tabs and windows from aep_gui.
Calibration
The calibration of the click stimuli produced by the insertphones involved several steps
to ensure accurate sound levels. Initially, a 1­kHz tone was adjusted to 115.5 dB SPL
using the Norsonic Nor139 sound level meter, a GRAS RA0045­S1 ear simulator, and
a Pico Technology 2204A digital oscilloscope along with the PicoScope 7.1.29 software.
14
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:24==
The peak­to­peak voltage (ppV) of this tone was recorded, serving as the reference for
calibrating the click stimuli. The 100­μs click stimuli were then adjusted to match the
ppV of the 1­kHz tone, ensuring equivalent intensity levels. Calibrated to 115.5 dB peak
equivalent sound pressure level (ppeSPL), the click stimuli were presented at an 80 dB
normal hearing level (nHL) with a presentation rate of 9 Hz.
Lastly, in the Measurement tab, the required details such as the subject name and con­
dition were filled in, and the folder to save the files was set. The measurement pro­
cess was started by pressing the Start Measurement button, which synchronized with
the Biosemi/Actiview system to record and save the data files accurately. The system
recording was verified by checking the triggers in the measurement tab and the Actiview
software.
Procedure
The ABR recording involved the use of two computers: the experiment computer for ex­
periment presentation and the EEG computer for data collection. The BioSemi ActiveTwo
system was used in speed mode 3, allowing high­speed data acquisition at a 16 kHz sam­
pling rate with a 3200 Hz bandwidth. The optical output fiber connected to a USB receiver
facilitated data transfer to the acquisition computer running ActiView 902 software. The
configuration file was adjusted to enable one­shot triggering with presentation software,
routing the trigger signal through the optical isolator and the ActiveTwo’s ergo input. A
plastic optical fiber was used to maintain signal integrity over a longer distance.
The setup began by connecting the AD box (as shown in Figure 3.5a) to a fully charged
battery, verified by checking the diode on the AD box. Once switched on, the AD box was
connected to the EEG computer via an optical cable, ensuring the speed mode was set
to 3 for proper data transfer rates. The head circumference was measured from nasion
to inion to determine the appropriate cap size, ensuring it fit securely while maintaining
comfort. In ActiView, the predefined configuration file was loaded by clicking ”Start File”
to connect the software to the hardware and check the electrode offsets. The Common
Mode Sense (CMS) active electrode was placed at the center of the measuring electrodes,
and the Driven Right Leg (DRL) passive electrode was placed away from the measuring
electrodes after cleaning the areas with alcohol swabs and applying highly conductive gel.
The proper connection was confirmed by the CM in range diode lighting up. Two types of
electrodes were used separately:
• Tiptrodes placed on the insert phones and connected with alligator clips to the ap­
paratus (Figure 3.5d). A wet gel surface electrode was used to attach the reference
electrode to the lower forehead (Figure 3.5b).
• Flat Electrodes attached to the mastoids (Figure 3.5e) using adhesive rings (Figure
3.5c) after cleaning the skin with abrasive paste and alcohol swabs. Gel was applied
to the electrode before attachment, with the reference electrode placement being the
same as for the tiptrodes (Figure 3.5f).
Participants were asked to switch off their electronic devices. After ensuring the electrode
offsets were within acceptable ranges, each participant adjusted the chair and was asked
to close their eyes and relax. Measurements were conducted in two rounds, one for each
set of electrodes. In each round, the stimulus was played first in one ear and then in the
other. With the setup ready, the ”Start Measurements” button in aep_gui was clicked,
followed by clicking the ”Pause” button in ActiView to start recording, indicated by the but­
ton changing to ”Saving.” Unchecking the ”Pause” button in aep_gui initiated the stimulus
generation, with the trigger being visible in ActiView. After the stimulus was completed,
the ”Stop” button was clicked in ActiView, and the files were saved automatically.
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
15
==PAGE:25==
(a) AD box connected
to the battery.
(b) Setup 1
(without tiptrodes).
(c) Setup 2
with adhesive rings.
(d) Tiptrode connected with
the alligator clib.
(e) Flat electrode
on the mastoid.
(f) Reference flat electrode
on the lower forehead.
Figure 3.5: Equipment and setup during the ABR recordings.
Post­processing
The post­processing of the ABR data was conducted using a custom pipeline implemented
in Python, utilizing several modules from the peegy library (Undurraga, 2020) for reading,
filtering, epoching, and analyzing the data.
Firstly, the raw EEG data files were read using the ReadInputData function, with data files
specified through the data_link object containing metadata and file paths. The EEG data
was then re­referenced using the ReferenceData function to reduce common noise and
enhance signal quality. To identify noise frequencies, an initial Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT) was performed. Subsequently, a notch filter was applied to eliminate specific fre­
quency noise. A band­pass filter was then applied to retain frequencies between 100 Hz
and 3000 Hz, which are pertinent for ABR analysis.
The filtered data was segmented into epochs using the EpochData function, based on
the event code and epoch length. Noisy epochs were rejected using the RejectEpochs
function, which applied a standard deviation threshold. The remaining epochs were av­
eraged using the AverageEpochs function to obtain a single waveform representing the
ABR for each condition. To improve peak detection accuracy, the averaged waveform was
up­sampled. Peaks and troughs in the ABR waveform were detected using the PeakDe­
tectionTimeDomain function, with specific time windows defined for characteristic peaks.
16
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:26==
The detected peaks and the ABR waveform were plotted using the PlotWaveforms func­
tion.
Finally, the processed data, including the detected peaks and the averaged waveform,
were saved to a SQLite database using the SaveToDatabase function. Metadata such as
subject information, measurement details, and recording parameters were also stored.
3.5
Sound Exposure
The setup aimed to measure sound exposure levels experienced during video gaming,
specifically targeting potential risks of hearing damage from high­intensity sound expo­
sure. The objective was to accurately quantify sound levels using calibrated recording
equipment to ensure precise measurement.
Setup
The recording setup consisted of the following components:
• Laptop used to generate and play audio signals and to process recorded data.
• GRAS 43AC­S1 artificial ear kit.
• Norsonic Nor 139 sound level meter, connected to the artificial ear, provided refer­
ence sound pressure level (SPL) values for calibration.
• DPA 4560 binaural headset microphone, connected to the RME Fireface UCX sound
card with XLR connectors.
• SteelSeries Arctis Pro headphones were used to produce audio signals to the arti­
ficial ear and binaural microphone.
One microphone of the binaural headset was positioned on the artificial ear and covered
by the headphones to capture the played audio signals.
Signal Generation and Recording
A MATLAB script generated two types of audio signals: a sweep signal (from 50 Hz to
16,000 Hz) and a 1 kHz pure tone. These signals were played through the headphones
and recorded by the binaural microphone. The recordings were taken from three different
positions to account for variability in headphone placement.
Calibration
The calibration aimed to adjust the recorded signals to match known SPL values, inspired
by HEA headphone calibration script:
• A reference sinusoidal signal at 1 kHz was generated and played through the head­
phones.
• The headphone’s response was recorded, and its RMS value was calculated.
• For each recording, a calibration factor was computed based on the difference be­
tween the reference SPL and the recorded signal’s SPL.
• Measurements were averaged over three headphone placements to improve accu­
racy.
The calibration factors were computed and averaged across three placements to account
for variability. The calibrated SPL values were calculated for the left and right ear using
A­weighting, as most recommendations for safe sound dosage are provided with this
weighting.
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
17
==PAGE:27==
Assessment of Sound Exposure During Gameplay
The setup was subsequently used to assess sound exposure during actual gameplay.
Test subjects wore the binaural microphone headset while playing video games using
the calibrated headphones. Depending on the participant’s comfort, some had their en­
tire gaming session recorded, while others had only a portion recorded, as the binaural
microphone is not comfortable for prolonged use.
To further validate the measurements, the headset was placed on the artificial ear con­
nected to the sound level meter while the test subject continued playing. This short mea­
surement ensured that the MATLAB script correctly analyzed the recorded audio data.
18
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:28==
4
Results
This section presents the findings from the dataset and discusses their implications. In
total, 24 participants were recruited. 21 participants completed a full series of measure­
ments, whereas three withdrew after the first stage, providing partial data. The demo­
graphic and educational details of the participants are summarized in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Participant demographics and educational background
Category
Initial (n=24)
Completed (n=21)
Gender
Male
20
18
Female
4
3
Age
Range
21–32
21–31
Average
25.75
25.38
Completed education
High school (bachelor students)
2
2
Bachelor’s degree (master students)
13
12
Master’s degree
8
6
PhD
1
1
Place of measurements
Rigshospitalet
23
20
DTU
1
1
In the next subsections, the results obtained from these measurements will be presented
and analyzed in relation to the objectives of the study.
4.1
Questionnaires
4.1.1
Hearing Health
While the majority of respondents claimed to have no significant hearing impairments,
25% admitted to having temporary issues. For example, two participants reported cases
of tinnitus and muffled hearing. In this case, the tinnitus was mainly after being in a noisy
environment like nightclubs and festivals. Four test subjects experienced certain problems
like ear infections and injuries to the eardrum. One respondent reported suffering from
several ear infections that later developed into a torn eardrum while another reported
continuous infections and scarring of the eardrum. Most of the subjects (95%) did not
report using any medications that would have affected their hearing. Except for one who
claimed to have used mild steroids for faster recovery from infections in the ears. As it
comes to operations, one respondent had water drained from their ear in early childhood.
Only two participants reported a hearing disorder in their immediate family. Both cases
involved hearing loss in elderly family members.
4.1.2
Exposure to Noisy Environments
There was wide variation in the reported level of exposure to noisy environments, as
shown in Figure 4.1. Two subjects (8%) had been working in very noisy environments for
many years where one wore hearing protection and the other did not. In the questions
about attending music concerts or nightclubs, most respondents attended these rarely,
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
19
==PAGE:29==
with the majority (66%) going every few months, and 16% of them going weekly. Playing
a musical instrument demonstrated some mixed participation, with 29% responding that
they play weekly while at the other extreme, 41% never played at all. The majority, 88% of
the respondents indicated that using personal headsets or earphones was a daily activity
for them, denoting a high prevalence of the use of personal audio devices. Listening to
audio speakers was also common, as many of the respondents (63%) listened daily to
them.
It was less common to operate motorised vehicles with a half of the participants never
having undertaken this activity, while 25% of them do this every few months. Few re­
sponded to shooting firearms, with only one respondent every few months, while majority
never did this. Respondents tended not to use power tools either, with many (54%) never
operating them, and 33% every few months.
Figure 4.1: Frequency of engaging in activities that could impact hearing.
The average duration of the session for these activities also differed (Figure 4.3). Attend­
ing music concert/s or nightclubs lasted one to four hours for most of the respondents
(58%). Playing a musical instrument usually took less than one hour for eight of them.
Using personal headsets or earphones took one to four hours for 11 test subjects (45%).
Listening to audio speakers followed a similar pattern where most, 41%, did so for one
to four hours. Operating motorized vehicles was less than one hour for 29% subjects.
Shooting firearms was a short activity that occurred in less than one hour for the only
subject who participated. Power tool use was also a brief activity, occurring in less than
one hour for 33% respondents.
In general, the levels of hearing protection use were low for these various activities (Figure
4.7). While attending music concerts or nightclubs, 33% responded sometimes using
ear protection, while rest never used it. Playing a musical instrument resulted in no one
responding always using ear protection and 58% responding never. Operating motorized
vehicles had one participant responding sometimes using ear protection and 20% not.
One respondent always used ear protection when shooting firearms. 29% test subject
used ear protection when using power tools, although 25% chose not to.
20
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.2: Average duration of session of activities that could impact hearing.
Figure 4.3: Average duration of session of activities that could impact hearing.
Figure 4.4: Frequency of using ear protection during activities that could impact hearing.
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
21
==PAGE:31==
4.1.3
Gaming Habits and Their Impact on Hearing
The frequency of playing video games ranged from daily (12%), through weekly for a
larger group of 46%, to monthly for one, and less than this for 38%, as depicted in Figure
4.5. For 75%, the length of these gaming sessions was usually between one to four
hours long, very few were less than one hour or went on up to eight hours long (12.5% in
both cases). 71% of the total respondents said that the perceived loudness during usual
gaming sessions was at a comfortable level. 12% participants classified it as soft, while
17% set it to loud. None of the respondents reported the sounds as inaudible, very soft,
very loud, or unbearable.
(a) Frequency of
playing games.
(b) Average duration of
gaming session.
(c) Perceived loudness
during gaming sessions.
Figure 4.5: Gaming habits and perceived loudness.
17% of the subjects reported ringing or buzzing sounds after gaming, which usually lasted
one to two minutes. One respondent noted these sounds could be there for as long as ten
minutes, especially during sleep time. Notably, those respondents who reported experi­
encing tinnitus after gaming did not identify it as a problem with their hearing in the first
part of the questionnaire (Subsection 4.1.2). Diminished or muffled hearing after gaming
was a very rare experience, with only one respondent experiencing this and lasting from
one to two minutes. The respondent characterized this discomfort as a little annoying.
62% of participants said they believed gaming could potentially have a long­term impact
on their hearing. These findings are summarised in Figure 4.6.
(a) Experience of ringing
or buzzing sounds.
(b) Experience of diminished
or muffled hearing.
(c) Belief in long­term impact
of gaming on hearing.
Figure 4.6: Self­reported impact of gaming on hearing.
The types of games played were diverse, with shooters being the most popular (63%),
followed by adventure with 60%, then role­playing games with 50%, simulation, strategy,
22
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:32==
and sports with 42% each, platformers with 25%, and others with 17%. The age which a
person started playing video games varies from 4­15 years with the average starting age
of approximately 9 years. Audio devices that the respondents applied in playing games
were speakers (50%), headphones (17%), gaming headsets (13%), and earphones (8%).
Two participants used a combination of the audio devices.
Figure 4.7: Types of games played by participants. Primary game type indicates the most
frequently played game type. All indicated game types bar includes both the primary game
type and any additional game types.
Attendance at esports events, social clubs, Local Area Network (LAN) parties, or other
gaming gatherings was generally low. The majority (45%) never attended such events,
33% every few years, 17% every few months, and one monthly. None attended weekly
or daily.
4.1.4
Post­Gaming Session Questionnaire
As previously stated at the beginning of this chapter, the questionnaires after the gaming
sessions were completed by only the 21 participants that remained throughout the entire
cycle.
The subjects were then asked to rate the loudness of these sounds while gaming. Most of
the subjects rated these sounds as loud (67%), some said comfortable (29%) or very loud
(5%). None of the subjects rated the sounds as inaudible, very soft, soft, or unbearable.
Most participants did not report considerable background noise in the gaming sessions
(81%). Some participants mentioned other sources of noise related to music and/or to
the environment of the game itself (14%). Only one participant mentioned people talking
in the background, while no one mentioned traffic or other gamers.
A part of the participants reported auditory effects following their gaming session. For
example, 19% of the group reporting ringing or buzzing and 24% reporting reduced or
muffled hearing. The details and duration of such auditory effects are summarized in
Tables B.1 and B.2 in Appendix B. For ringing or buzzing, duration ranged from 2 to 4
seconds up through 10 minutes. Most of the respondents perceived the sounds to be
loud and were moderately to slightly annoyed with buzzing sensation. A majority also
thought such sounds could affect their ability to hear over time. Similarly, for lowered
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
23
==PAGE:33==
or muffled hearing, the duration ranged from a few seconds to 30 minutes. Most of the
participants said that the sounds were very loud or loud, and they were moderately to
slightly annoyed with reduced hearing. Most participants agreed that these effects may
eventually produce harmful effects on hearing in the long term.
4.1.5
Total Annual Noise Exposure
The Total Annual Noise Exposure (ANE) was calculated based on the NEQ (Johnson et
al., 2017). Overview of this computation is shown in Appendix C. These values represent
the cumulative noise exposure from various activities over the past year.
The range of the obtained Total ANE values is relatively narrow, spanning from 74.6 to
77.2, suggesting that the participants had similar levels of noise exposure. None of the
subjects exceeded the LAeq8760h value of 79, which is considered the threshold for being
at risk for developing NIHL. The calculated mean of 75.7 is consistent with the mean value
reported in the NEQ. It is important to note that the Total ANE values presented here do not
include noise exposure from gaming activities. The impact of gaming on noise exposure
will be discussed in a separate section.
4.2
Sound Exposure
The analysis of sound exposure is performed based on measurements taken during recorded
gaming session and the responses to a post­gameplay questionnaire.
This includes
equivalent continuous sound level (LAeq), peak sound levels, perceived sound levels, the
duration of gaming and breaks taken, the length of these breaks, and the type of game
played.
The average LAeq was 71.0 dB(A) with a standard deviation of 10.8 dB. Minimum and max­
imum LAeq values were 46.6 dB(A) and 89.4 dB(A), respectively. The average peak sound
level was 92.1 dB with a standard deviation of 11.4 dB(A). Peak sound levels ranged from
66.5 dB(A) to 112.9 dB(A). Most participants classified the sound level as Loud, with one
describing it as Very loud and six as Comfortable. The average length of gaming sessions
equaled 2.7 hours, while the standard deviation equaled 1.4 hours. The minimum length
was 2 hours, with the maximum of 8.5 hours. Only four participants took breaks during
sessions. Of those, the mean length of a break was 0.5 hours.
To examine the relationships between the duration of gaming, LAeq, and peak sound lev­
els, the correlation was calculated. Firstly, the assumptions for standard Pearson correla­
tion were checked. The assumption of linearity was not upheld, while that of homoscedas­
ticity was met. Therefore, Pearson correlation could not be used. In its place, Spearman
rank correlation was performed since it is a non­parametric test and hence does not re­
quire the variables to be related linearly. The result of the Spearman’s rank correlation
showed there was a moderate positive relationship between length of gaming and LAeq
and peak sound level; the correlation coefficient was respectively 0.53 and 0.44. This in­
dicates that the longer a person has been gaming, the higher the measured sound levels.
A high positive correlation of 0.67 was observed between LAeq and peak sound levels.
Although this strong relation between LAeq and peak sound levels may be expected to
some extent, it could have been anticipated to be even higher given the direct relationship
between continuous and peak sound levels.
The influence of type of game on LAeq and subsequently on peaks was also investigated
through ANOVA and linear regression analysis. The Simulation and Sports categories
were combined into a single category to ensure sufficient data points for analysis. Shapiro­
Wilk tests for normality and Bartlett’s tests for homogeneity of variances were performed
prior to the main analysis, and the assumptions were met in both cases. The ANOVA
24
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:34==
results for LAeq showed a significant difference (p = 0.0245), indicating that the type of
game played has a significant impact on LAeq. The post hoc Tukey’s Honest Significance
Difference (HSD) test proved that the LAeq mean value for role playing games (RPG) was
significantly larger than for Shooter games (p = 0.0294). No other difference between
the remaining kinds of games reached statistical significance. For peak sound levels, the
ANOVA results did not show significant differences across game types (p = 0.0732). The
Tukey’s HSD post­hoc test confirmed that there were no significant differences between
any of the game types for Peak.
Linear regression models were fitted to evaluate the impact of different parameters on
LAeq and peak sound levels. The variance explained by the linear regression model of
LAeq was 46.8% (R­squared = 0.468), although the overall model was not significant (F­
statistic p­value = 0.210). From the coefficients of the type of game, the RPG category
shows a lower LAeq as compared to the reference category of Adventure, although it is not
statistically significant. Shooter had a coefficient of 1.2051 (p = 0.848), indicating a slight
but not statistically significant increase in LAeq compared to Adventure games. Similarly,
for peak sound levels, the amount of variance explained by the linear regression model
was 52.5% based on R­squared, though it was not statistically significant as indicated
by an F­statistic p­value of 0.125. The coefficients revealed Simulation and Sports were
related to a lesser peak sound level relative to the reference category, although this finding
was not statistically significant.
Other variables tested include the coefficients for game session duration, breaks, and
perceived Sound Level. For example, the coefficient for Duration, in relation to LAeq,
is 1.6607 with a p­value of 0.433. This means a positive but not statistically significant
relationship. Breaks had a coefficient of ­3.5015 and a p­value of 0.670, suggesting a
negative but not statistically significant relationship. For Perceived sound level, the Loud
coefficient was 1.7168 (p = 0.830), and the Very loud coefficient was ­2.8392 (p = 0.834).
Neither of these was statistically significant.
Figure 4.8 shows the relationship between LAeq and peak sound levels categorized by
type of game and perceived sound level. Figure 4.8a suggests that different game types
exhibit varying sound levels, with Shooter games generally having higher peak sound
levels compared to other game types. Figure 4.8 indicates that perceived loudness levels
may correlate with the measured sound levels, with Very loud perceived levels generally
corresponding to higher LAeq and peak sound levels.
(a) Categorized by type of game.
(b) Categorized by perceived sound level.
Figure 4.8: Scatter plot showing the relationship between Leq (dBA) and peak sound level
(dBA).
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
25
==PAGE:35==
On peak sound levels, the coefficient for Duration was 3.1008 (p = 0.154), indicating a
positive but not statistically significant relationship. The coefficient for Breaks was ­2.4605
with p = 0.764, indicating a negative but statistically not significant relationship. The per­
ceived sound level variables, Loud and Very loud, had coefficients of 5.1509 and ­5.4551
respectively, with p = 0.523 and p = 0.689, hence they were not statistically significant.
The analysis of the results has shown that there is a significant difference in the type of
game being played on the continuous sound levels — RPG games are louder compared
to Shooter games, based on ANOVA results. On the other hand, for peak sound levels,
no significant difference was found. The scatter plot suggested that Shooter games had
higher LAeq and peak sound levels. One reason it could be contradictory to the statistical
analysis is variability within the game types, whereby only some high values in Shooter
games may give a misleading visual impression, while the statistical tests account for
overall group differences. Moreover, non­parametric Kruskal­Wallis tests, which do not
assume normality, did not find significant differences in LAeq or Peak levels between game
type, further suggesting that observed differences in the scatter plot might not be statis­
tically robust. The linear regression models also was not proven to be statistically signif­
icant with respect to several factors, like Duration, Breaks, and Perceived sound level.
Thus, it cannot be ruled out that other factors not measured may also have an impact on
the resultant sound levels while gaming. Further studies are required to reconcile these
differences and find underlying causes.
4.2.1
Infuence of Gaming on Total ANE
The contribution that gaming can make to Total ANE was explored using the same proce­
dure as described in Johnson et al., 2017. As the paper does not define LAeq for playing
video games, the LAeq measured during sessions were used to obtain Total ANE that
takes into account gaming. The values for each test subject are shown in Appendix E.
To determine whether there is a significant difference between total ANE with and with­
out gaming, a series of statistical tests were conducted. Initially, the normality of both
datasets was assessed using the Shapiro­Wilk test, which confirmed that both distribu­
tions were normal (p­values of 0.6381 for Total ANE and 0.9895 for Total ANE with gam­
ing). Subsequently, Levene’s test was employed to check for homogeneity of variances,
and the results indicated that the variances between the two groups were equal (p­value
of 0.7423). Given that the assumptions of normality and homoscedasticity were met, a
paired t­test was performed to compare the means of the two conditions. The results of
the paired t­test revealed no statistically significant difference between total ANE with and
without gaming (p = 0.0875), suggesting that gaming does not significantly impact the
total ANE in the observed data.
4.3
Extended High Frequency Audiometry
EHFA analysis seeks to determine whether there are any significant changes in hearing
thresholds post­gaming, particularly within the extended high­frequency range of 8,000
Hz to 18,000 Hz, in which the first manifestations of NIHL would most likely be detected.
Figure 4.9 depicts audiometric thresholds of the left and right ear before and after playing
video games. The average threshold with standard deviation values can be found in Table
F.1 in Appendix F. In general, the threshold measurement results from this study suggest
that the subjects’ hearing could be classified as normal, as the thresholds fall within typ­
ical ranges for normal hearing. The threshold of hearing in both ears, before and after
gaming sessions, remains close to each other and relatively flat from 125 Hz to 4,000 Hz
of the low­to­mid­frequency range. Noticeably, there is a slight increase in the threshold
26
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:36==
of hearing at 500 Hz after gaming sessions, although this change is minimal and within
the margin of variability and measurement error. This would therefore indicate that hear­
ing sensitivity within this frequency range is not substantially affected by gaming sessions.
Nevertheless, the variability is increased in the high­frequency extended range from 8,000
Hz to 18,000 Hz, as reflected by broader error bars. Average thresholds of hearing mea­
sured before and after playing games differ marginally between 8 and 10 kHz, as well
as between 14 and 16 kHz for the left ear, and between 11.2 and 18 kHz for the right
ear. This could suggest some effect of gaming sessions on hearing sensitivity at these
frequencies, yet variability indicates this effect is not be consistent for all subjects, and
these differences remain within the measurement error.
Figure 4.9: Average audiometric threshold before and after gaming sessions. The points
show the mean threshold level at that frequency, while the error bars give the standard
deviation amongst participants.
In order to outline more clearly changes in hearing sensitivity due to gaming, differences in
thresholds before and after the gaming sessions for all subjects are shown in Figure 4.10.
The plots exhibits that most of the differences in threshold of hearing are within ±5 dB
HL, the margin of error; hence, changes attributed to gaming are minor. Noticeable vari­
ability in this very high­frequency range, however, occurs between 8,000 Hz to 20,000 Hz.
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
27
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.10: Difference in hearing thresholds due to gaming for both the left and right
ears. The individual data points represent the differences in hearing thresholds for each
participant, with the black line indicating the mean difference across all participants. The
shaded area represents the ±5 dB HL error margin. To provide a better understanding of
changes in the extended high frequencies, the x­axis has equidistant data entries instead
of a logarithmic scale.
Additionally, the average, minimum and maximum values of these differences are pre­
sented in Table F.2 in Appendix F. Particularly, the average absolute differences (Avg
Abs Diff, the), provide detailed information related to data variability. The average ab­
solute differences span from 1.90 dB HL to 4.40 dB HL for frequencies up to 8,000 Hz
and from 3.81 dB HL to 6.70 dB HL for those above 9,000 Hz. This thus indicates that
difference in the extended high­frequency range is more pronounced.
4.3.1
Statistical Analysis
Effect of the measured session
Statistical analysis was performed to examine the effect of gaming on hearing sensitivity.
The analysis sought to establish whether the hearing thresholds had significantly different
values before and after the gaming sessions for both standard audiometry and extended
high frequency audiometry. Data organization was done in the first step of data analysis
to eventually combine the mean values of hearing thresholds for each participant in every
ear before and after the gaming sessions. Frequencies were grouped into two ranges:
SA (as for standard audiometry frequencies, 125 Hz – 8,000 Hz) and EHFA (9,000 Hz –
20,000 Hz).
28
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:38==
Normality testing was conducted using the Shapiro­Wilk test. The test was done for each
unique combination of the condition, ear, and frequency range. The results indicated that
the assumption of normality was satisfied for all groups since all the p­values were above
the significance level of 0.05. Figure 4.11 illustrates the distribution of hearing thresholds
before and after gaming.
(a) Histogram
(b) Boxplot
Figure 4.11: Distribution of hearing thresholds before and after gaming.
A mixed­effects model was selected for the analysis since the assumption of normality
was met. This model accounts for both fixed effects (Condition) and random effects (par­
ticipants), hence is suitable for repeated measures data. Such a model was particularly
appropriate in this context for several reasons. First, it allows for subject variability through
the inclusion of the random effect of subjects. This is important in repeated measures de­
sign as every subject provided multiple observations. Second, the mixed­effects model
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
29
==PAGE:39==
offers flexibility with missing data, which is important in this case, as some subjects could
not hear the highest frequencies (18 and 20 kHz). Therefore, the missing data points
could have been handled without excluding the entire subject data from the analysis. Fi­
nally, the complexity of the design due to the presence of many factors (condition, ear,
frequency range) and their interactions, is more effectively dealt with by the mixed­effects
model than by repeated measures ANOVA.
The model was fitted to the overall data, showing no significant differences in the condi­
tions before and after with p = 0.772. The model was fitted to the overall data and the
returned results were there were no significant differences between the before and after
conditions, p = 0.772. To verify that the mixed­effects model result was valid, the Shapiro­
Wilk test was conducted, returning that the residuals were not normally distributed (p
= 0.002). A graphical representation of the data distribution in a form of a Q­Q plot is
shown in Figure 4.12a. A non­parametric test was then utilized to confirm the results. The
non­parametric test equivalent to the paired t­test for independent samples, Wilcoxon’s
signed­rank test, was applied to the before­and­after conditions. According to this test,
there was no significant difference in the overall data (p = 0.539).
(a) Overall data.
(b) SA data.
(c) EHFA data.
Figure 4.12: Q­Q plots for overall data and subsets.
Further subcategorization of the data into of SA and EHFA subsets was performed for
a more detailed analysis. The assumption of normality was verified again in each cate­
gory, and the mixed­effects model was applied where normality assumption was met. In
the SA data, the assumption of normality was met, and according to the mixed­effects
30
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:40==
model, there were no significant differences between the before and after conditions (p
= 0.820). However, residuals were not normally distributed (p = 0.005), therefore the
Wilcoxon Signed­Rank Test was used and it also yielded no significant differences (p =
0.539). In the EHFA data case, the normality assumption held, and the mixed­effects
model did not show any significant differences between the before and after conditions
(p = 0.862). The residuals were not normally distributed, with a p­value of 0.007, and
the Wilcoxon Signed­Rank Test confirmed that there were no significant differences (p =
0.892).
Statistical analysis showed that the assumption regarding normality was met for all groups.
However, no significant differences were noted in the overall data or the subsets including
SA and EHFA between the before and after conditions. This may suggest that there was
no significant effect of gaming on hearing threshold in this study.
Participants were also also categorized into groups based on their exposure to sound
levels during measured gameplay, classified as either Higher or Lower than the aver­
age sound level. The same statistical procedures were applied to examine whether this
categorization had a significant effect on hearing thresholds.
The mixed­effects model, which included the interaction between the condition (before
and after gaming) and the sound level exposure, showed no significant differences in hear­
ing thresholds before and after gaming sessions (p = 0.678). The coefficients for the con­
dition, sound level exposure, and their interaction were not significant. The Shapiro­Wilk
test for residuals indicated that the residuals were not normally distributed (p = 0.0027),
leading to the use of the Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE) approach. This method
also showed no significant differences (p = 0.444).
4.3.2
Effect of factors related to gaming
Further statistical analysis was performed on the initial audiometry data obtained for all
participants’ response (n=24) to assess the effects of variables that may have affected
hearing sensitivity.
The analysis evaluated whether there were any significant differ­
ences in mean hearing thresholds with regards to frequency and duration of playing, type
of game, age at which participants started playing, perceived loudness, and additional
continuous variables such as Episodic Exposure (EE) and Episodic Frequency (EF, cal­
culated as per procedure depicted in Appendix C).
The data was organized by averaging the mean hearing thresholds for each participant’s
left ear and right ear across all frequencies (125 to 20000 Hz). A mixed­effects was
chosen for this analysis as well, accounting for fixed (variables mentioned before) and
random effects (participants).
Prior to conducting mixed­effects model analysis, tests for normality of residuals and ho­
mogeneity of variances were conducted. The Shapiro­Wilk test indicated that the residu­
als were normally distributed. Bartlett’s test showed no significant difference in variances
across group (chi2 = 0.2455; p = 0.8845).
The mixed­effects model results indicated significant differences for several factors (pre­
sented in detail in Appendix D). The intercept, representing the mean hearing threshold
for the reference categories (Daily frequency of playing, 1 hour up to 4 hours duration,
Less than 10 age, Comfortable loudness, and Left ear), was found to be 12.370 with a p­
value of 0.002, indicating statistical significance. For Frequency of playing, (Figure 4.13)
there were significant differences for Monthly or less (p = 0.055 ) and Weekly (p = 0.028).
These tests indicated lower mean hearing thresholds compared with daily players. For
the duration, no significant differences were found for both 4 hours up to 8 hours (p =
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
31
==PAGE:41==
0.330) and Less than 1 hour (p = 0.638). Regarding age, participants who started playing
video games at the age of 10 or older had a marginally significant higher mean hearing
threshold compared to those who started below 10 years (p = 0.077). No significant differ­
ences were found for perceived loudness. Additionally, analysis of continuous variables,
EE and EF, was conducted, which also did not show to any significant influence on the
mean hearing thresholds (p = 0.679, and p = 0.374 respectively).
(a) Frequencies in playing video games.
(b) Age at which they started playing video
games.
Figure 4.13: Box plot of the distribution of mean hearing thresholds measured in dB HL.
A post hoc Tukey’s HSD test was done for each factor. In terms of playing frequency, no
significance differences were found between Daily and Monthly or less (p=0.3941), Daily
and Weekly (p=0.0846), or Monthly or less and Weekly (p=0.4157). For duration, there
are no significant differences between 1 hour up to 4 hours and 4 hours up to 8 hours (p =
0.9041); 1 hour up to 4 hours and Less than 1 hour (p­= 0.9665); and 4 hours up to 8 hours
and Less than 1 hour, (p = 0.8634). In the case of age, there was no significant difference
between Less than 10 and More than 10 p = 0.1112). It showed no significant difference
in the perceived loudness between Comfortable and Loud (p = 0.6592), Comfortable and
Soft (p = 0.8543), and Loud and Soft (p = 0.5342). Splitting the data into subsets for
SA and EHFA frequencies also did not alter the findings. In both subsets, the results did
support the findings observed in the overall data.
In summary, the gaming frequency had an initial significant effect on the hearing thresh­
olds, where, in comparison with daily players, less frequent players had better hearing
sensitivity. However, these differences were not confirmed as significant in the post hoc
Tukey’s HSD test. The age at which the participants started gaming showed a marginally
significant effect, but this again was not supported by the post hoc analysis. Other vari­
ables, such as the duration of playing and perceived loudness and ear, did not have any
effect on the thresholds of hearing.
4.4
Auditory Brainstem Response
The ABR measurements were conducted using standard protocols, with tiptrodes and
electrodes placed on the mastoid and scalp. Despite ensuring proper placement and
secure attachment of the tiptrodes, several challenges were encountered. The primary
difficulty lay in the consistent and stable setup of the tiptrodes, which is critical for obtaining
reliable data. Due to these challenges, the initial dataset was considerably reduced. After
32
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:42==
post­processing and visual inspection of the recorded signals, it was determined that only
10 data points were usable. These data points were all recorded from the mastoid and
were limited to one ear.
The data were analyzed to determine whether the ABR measurements, specifically wave I
amplitudes, taken before and after the gaming session differed statistically significantly. In
the statistical analysis, a Shapiro­Wilk test for normality and Levene’s test for homogeneity
of variances were conducted, as well as the paired t­test to compare the means between
both conditions. Table 4.2 shows the descriptive statistics of the ABR measurements
before and after gaming. The distribution of wave I amplitudes before and after gaming
is illustrated in Figure 4.14.
Table 4.2: Descriptive statistics for wave I amplitudes before and after Gaming
Before Gaming (µV)
After Gaming (µV)
Mean
0.223
0.206
Standard Deviation
0.053
0.066
Minimum
0.147
0.106
Maximum
0.307
0.316
(a) Histogram.
(b) Boxplot.
Figure 4.14: Distribution of wave I amplitudes before and after gaming
Shapiro­Wilk test results gave p­values of 0.3712 and 0.8560 for the before gaming and
after gaming conditions, respectively, thus satisfying the assumption of normality in both
groups. Homogeneity of variances was tested using Levene’s test, which also demon­
strated no significant differences between the two conditions in terms of variances (p =
0.3960). The result of the paired­sample t­test did not show any significant difference
between the two conditions (p = 0.1422).
It is interesting to note that an increase in wave I amplitude was observed in 3 cases (Table
?? in Appendix G). All of these measurements were conducted approximately 30 minutes
after gaming sessions. This can be associated with measurement error, but the observa­
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
33
==PAGE:43==
tion also align with a number of studies that have previously reported transient increases
in neural activity and auditory response amplitudes immediately following noise exposure,
often attributed to temporary changes in neural firing rates and synaptic efficiency (Maison
et al., 2013,M. C. Liberman and S. G. Kujawa, 2017).
34
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:44==
5
Discussion
This chapter presents the discussion of the findings presented in the results section, com­
paring them with the existing literature, particularly with the WHO report (World Health
Organization, 2024).
5.1
Questionnaire Findings and WHO study
The findings from the questionnaire link back to the WHO’s observations with regard to
high­intensity sound exposure in gaming. A substantial percentage of participants re­
ported experiencing auditory effects after gaming sessions, with 19% reporting ringing or
buzzing sounds and 24% experiencing reduced or muffled hearing. The majority of the re­
spondents to the questionnaire described the measured gaming sessions as loud or very
loud, 67% and 5%, respectively, thus indicating that the sound levels may reach or even
exceed the safe limits. In contrast, according to the answers to the initial questionnaire,
71% of the respondents perceived the loudness during usual gameplay as comfortable,
classifying it as soft and loud in 12% and 17% of the cases, respectively. It is noteworthy
that the subjects were instructed the participants to play as usual. This discrepancy illus­
trates how diverse game sessions can be regarding loudness and that unsafe listening
behaviors can occur among specific groups of gamers.
The questionnaire further brought out that a majority of the respondents did not have a
considerable background noise in their surrounding areas during any gaming sessions.
This, therefore, underlines that the major source of sound was from the game itself,
thereby making it further essential to check and control the level of sounds coming from
the games in order to avoid cases of hearing loss.
Moreover, the belief in the long­term effects of such auditory effects was rather high
amongst the subjects: 62% showed concern over probable loss of hearing sensitivity
before the gaming session, and 57% after the buzzing or muffled hearing had already
been experienced. Of those affected in each category, 75% of those affected by ringing
and 80% of those affected by reduced hearing believed that it could affect their hearing
in the long term. However, the fact that a substantial minority of participants believed that
these things would not have an impact on their hearing in the long term supports the WHO
call for increased awareness and education in safe listening practices.
5.2
Safe Sound Dosage and Gaming Sound Exposure
None of the subjects exceeded the safe sound dosage, assuming the equal energy prin­
ciple (introduced in Section 2.1.1). As per the WHO report, the safe sound dosage for
adults is 80 dB(A) for 40 h/week with adjustments for higher levels of sound. The average
LAeq recorded during this study was 71.0 dB(A), with a standard deviation of 10.8 dB. The
LAeq values ranged from 46.6 dB(A) to 89.4 dB(A), with minimum and maximum values.
In general, the results showed that participants were exposed to sound within safe limits
during all game sessions.
Although the greatest difference between LAeq and peak sound levels was 33.3 dB(A),
indicating that impulse noise was present, none of the subjects’ peak exposure measures
exceeded the 135 dB(A) limit (as described in Section 2.1.2). The mean peak sound level
recorded was 92.1 dB(A), with a standard error of 11.4 dB(A), and peak levels ranged
from 66.5 dB(A) to 112.9 dB(A). Impulse noise may present greater potential for hearing
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
35
==PAGE:45==
damage because of high intensity and sudden onset. However, the levels observed in this
study did not reach the thresholds that would pose a significant risk of hearing damage.
On average, participants played 2.7 hours per session, which is consistent with the find­
ings of the scoping review (Dillard et al., 2023), where the average gaming duration was
reported to be 3 hours. This is a period of exposure that is within safe limits when taking
into account the average LAeq levels recorded. However, it should be noted that the ab­
sence of rest periods still contributed to cumulative noise exposure over a given period of
time.
The study primarily focused on participants playing shooter games, which resulted in an
uneven distribution of observations across different game types. Consequently, the in­
fluence of game type on sound exposure was assessed not to be statistically significant.
However, scatter plots suggested that shooter games might actually have higher LAeq and
peak sound levels. This observation is consistent with a WHO report that specifies that
some game genres, particularly shooters, due to the nature of the audio in the game, such
as gunshots and explosions, can create higher sound levels.
A majority of participants did not take breaks during shorter gaming sessions, contributing
to continuous exposure. While lack of taking breaks can lead to continuous periods of
high sound exposure—although within safe limits in this study, the behavior might be a
significant health risk if the exposure duration or intensity is higher. The WHO report
emphasizes the importance of taking breaks to mitigate the risk of hearing damage from
continuous sound exposure.
5.3
Audiometric Thresholds and Gaming
The variability of the data was primarily observed in the extended high frequencies (EHFA).
The differences in the threshold of hearing were within ±5 dB HL, which is within the margin
of error for audiometric measurements. This indicates that changes attributed to gaming
are minor and within the expected range of variability.
No significant differences were found in the hearing thresholds before and after gam­
ing sessions, whether considering the overall frequencies or when subcategorizing them
into standard audiometry frequencies and EHFA. This suggests that short­term gaming
sessions do not have a substantial impact on hearing sensitivity within the measured fre­
quency ranges.
The frequency of gaming had an initial significant effect on hearing thresholds, with less
frequent players exhibiting better hearing sensitivity compared to daily players. However,
these differences were not confirmed as significant in the post hoc Tukey’s HSD test. It is
important to note that there were only two participants who played daily for 4­8 hours. With
a larger representation of frequent players with longer exposure (such as professional es­
ports players), the difference in hearing thresholds between them and occasional players
might be more pronounced. The WHO report also highlights that time spent gaming is as­
sociated with higher odds of hearing loss, particularly among those who play for extended
periods.
The age at which participants started gaming showed a marginally significant effect on
hearing thresholds, with those who started playing at age 10 or older exhibiting higher
thresholds. However, this finding was not supported by the post hoc analysis. Despite
similar exposure to recreational noise, there might be other unmeasured factors contribut­
ing to this difference. The WHO report indicates that starting gaming at a younger age
36
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:46==
should be approached with caution, as children have lower safe sound exposure limits
compared to adults.
Other variables, such as the duration of playing and perceived loudness, did not have
any significant effect on the hearing thresholds. This suggests that there may be other
unknown factors influencing hearing sensitivity that were not measured in this study. Ad­
ditionally, it is worth noting that there was a significant underrepresentation of women in
this study. The WHO report notes that boys tend to play at louder volumes and for longer
durations than girls, which could be a potential area for further investigation.
5.4
Gaming at the Neurological Level
The statistical analysis did not show significant differences in the ABR measurements
before and after gaming sessions. This suggests that short­term gaming does not have
a substantial impact on the ABR in the measured conditions. Some cases revealed an
increase in amplitude in wave I. As mentioned above, this might be an error in measure­
ment and/or post­processing. If the increase did occur, however, the phenomenon could
be understood from the point of view of synaptic mechanisms: noise exposure leads to
short­term enhancements in synaptic transmission, which could enhance wave I ampli­
tude for a short time through increased neurotransmitter release or heightened neural
synchronization (Ruel et al., 20o7). These transient changes usually last approximately
30­60 minutes after exposure, as the amplitude tends to normalize after the immediate
neural hyperactivity subsides.
Such an observation suggests that future studies should also consider ABR measures
shortly after exposure, where similar effects are bound to be observed. The captured
transient changes can also provide insights into deeper immediate neural impacts due to
noise exposure from gaming.
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
37
==PAGE:47==
6
Conclusion
This study investigated the auditory risks associated with video gaming, focusing on sound
exposure, audiometric thresholds, and ABR measurements. The findings were compared
with existing literature, particularly the WHO report on A Safe listening in video gaming &
esports.
Sound exposure analysis showed that none of the participants exceeded the safe sound
dosage. The average LAeq during gaming sessions was within safe limits, and peak sound
levels did not surpass 135 dB(A). The continuous exposure due to a lack of breaks high­
lights the importance of taking breaks to prevent hearing damage. No significant dif­
ferences in hearing thresholds were found before and after gaming sessions across all
frequencies. Although gaming frequency initially seemed to affect hearing thresholds, this
was not supported by further analysis. ABR measurements did not show significant differ­
ences pre­ and post­gaming sessions, though an increase in Wave I amplitude was noted
in some cases, suggesting future studies should measure ABR shortly after exposure to
detect transient changes.
The findings emphasize the need for increased awareness, regular hearing assessments,
and preventive measures to protect gamers’ hearing health. By addressing these issues,
we can contribute to the overall well­being of young adults and mitigate the public health
burden of noise­induced hearing loss.
Future research should explore the long­term effects of noise exposure in gamers through
longitudinal studies to provide deeper insights into the progression of noise­induced hear­
ing loss and the impact of early interventions. It is also crucial to investigate the effective­
ness of various preventive measures, such as the use of hearing protection devices and
the implementation of safe listening guidelines in gaming environments.
Additionally, the potential of innovative technologies, such as real­time sound level moni­
toring and adaptive audio systems, to enhance safe listening practices in gaming is could
be interesting to explore. Prospective studies could also focus on professional esports
players and esports events, where background noise can significantly contribute to overall
noise exposure. Unfortunately, due to time limitations and limited access to such events,
this research could not cover this aspect.
Moreover, future studies should aim for a larger and more diversified sample size, not
only in terms of the types of games played and other parameters investigated but also
in educational backgrounds. The WHO highlighted that less educated individuals are at
higher risk of engaging in higher noise exposure through gaming. All participants in this
study had at least a bachelor’s degree or higher, indicating a need to include participants
from varied educational backgrounds. It would also be interesting to compare gamers
with a control group of individuals not exposed to excessive noise.
While it is crucial to control sound exposure and implement appropriate policies, it is also
important to recognize the benefits of gaming. As the number of gamers continues to
grow, gaming can be a safe way to spend free time, offering cognitive development and
social interaction, as highlighted in the WHO report. By balancing the benefits and risks,
a healthier gaming environment for all can be promoted.
38
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:48==
Bibliography
[1]
Newzoo. “PC and Console Gaming Report”. In: Newzoo (2023).
[2]
N. Diviani, S. Rubinelli, S. Chadha, and P. Mulas. “Attitudes towards safe listening
behaviors among video gamers and e­sports players. Insights from an international
online survey”. In: Under publication (2023).
[3]
World Health Organization. “A Safe listening in video gaming
esports. A World
Health Organization background study”. In: World Health Organization (2024).
[4]
L. K. Dillard, P. Mulas, C. Der, X. Fu, and S. Chadha. “Risk of sound­induced hearing
loss from exposure to video gaming or esports: a systematic scoping review”. In:
BMJ Public Health (2023).
[5]
N. Natarajan, S. Batts, and K. M. Stankovic. “Noise­Induced Hearing Loss”. In: Jour­
nal of Clinical Medicine (2023).
[6]
N. Schmuziger, M. Brechbuehl, and R. Probst. “Acoustic measures of low­frequency
noise in extended high­frequency audiometry”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America (2007).
[7]
World Health Organization. “Safe listening devices and systems: a WHO­ITU stan­
dard”. In: World Health Organization (2019).
[8]
Arbejdstilsynets vejledning D.6.1­4. 2007. URL: https://at.dk/regler/at-vejledninger/
stoej-d-6-1/.
[9]
J. Starck, E. Toppila, and I. Pyykkö. “Impulse noise and risk criteria”. In: Noise health
(2003).
[10]
G. Iannace, G. Ciaburro, and A. Trematerra. “Video games noise exposure in teenagers
and young adults”. In: Noise Vibration Worldwide (2019).
[11]
C. Barbee, J. James, J. H. Park, E. Smith, C. Johnson, S. Clifton, and J. Danhauer.
“Effectiveness of Auditory Measures for Detecting Hidden Hearing Loss and/or Cochlear
Synaptopathy: A Systematic Review”. In: Seminars in Hearing (2018).
[12]
A. Ryan, S. Kujawa, T. Hammill, C. L. Prell, and J. Kil. “Temporary and Permanent
Noise­induced Threshold Shifts: A Review of Basic and Clinical Observations”. In:
Otology Neurotology (2016).
[13]
A. Mehrparvar, S. Mirmohammadi, A. Ghoreyshi, A. Mollasadeghi, and Z. Loukzadeh.
“High­frequency audiometry: A means for early diagnosis of noise­induced hearing
loss”. In: Noise health (2011).
[14]
P. Kumar, P. Upadhyay, A. Kumar, S. Kumar, and G. Singh. “Extended high fre­
quency audiometry in users of personal listening devices”. In: American Journal of
Otolaryngology 38 (Dec. 2016).
[15]
D. Balatsouras, E. Homsioglou, and V. Danielidis. “Extended high­frequency au­
diometry in patients with acoustic trauma”. In: Clinical otolaryngology : official jour­
nal of ENT­UK ; official journal of Netherlands Society for Oto­Rhino­Laryngology
Cervico­Facial Surgery (2005).
[16]
J. Schlittenlacher, R. Turner, and B. Moore. “Audiogram estimation using Bayesian
active learning”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America (2018).
[17]
C. Casolani, A. Borhan­Azad, R. Sørensen, J. Schlittenlacher, and B. Epp. “Evalu­
ation of a Fast Method to Measure High­Frequency Audiometry Based on Bayesian
Learning”. In: Trends in hearing (2024).
[18]
A. De Silva and M. Schier. “Evaluation of wavelet techniques in rapid extraction of
ABR variations from underlying EEG”. In: Physiological measurement (2011).
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
39
==PAGE:49==
[19]
N. Bramhall, D. Konrad­Martin, G. Mcmillan, and S. Griest. “Auditory Brainstem
Response Altered in Humans With Noise Exposure Despite Normal Outer Hair Cell
Function”. In: Ear and Hearing (2016).
[20]
S. Kujawa and M. Liberman. “Adding Insult to Injury: Cochlear Nerve Degeneration
after ”Temporary” Noise­Induced Hearing Loss”. In: The Journal of neuroscience :
the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience (2009).
[21]
H. Lin, A. Furman, S. Kujawa, and M. Liberman. “Primary Neural Degeneration in
the Guinea Pig Cochlea After Reversible Noise­Induced Threshold Shift”. In: Jour­
nal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology : JARO (2011).
[22]
N. Bramhall, K. Reavis, P. Feeney, and S. Kampel. “The Impacts of Noise Exposure
on the Middle Ear Muscle Reflex in a Veteran Population”. In: American journal of
audiology (2022).
[23]
T. Johnson, S. Cooper, G. Stamper, and M. Chertoff. “Noise Exposure Question­
naire (NEQ): A Tool for Quantifying Annual Noise Exposure”. In: Journal of the
American Academy of Audiology (2017).
[24]
ASHA. Guidelines for manual pure­tone threshold audiometry. 2005. URL: https:
//www.asha.org/policy/.
[25]
M. Kleiner, D. Brainard, D. Pelli, A. Ingling, R. Murray, and C. Broussard. “What’s
new in psychtoolbox­3”. In: Perception (2007).
[26]
C. Rasmussen and H. Nickisch. “Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning (GPML)
toolbox”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research, v.11, 3011­3015 (2010) (2010).
[27]
J. Undurraga. 2020. URL: https://gitlab.com/open-source-brain/peegy.
[28]
S. Maison, H. Usubuchi, and M. C. Liberman. “Efferent feedback minimizes cochlear
neuropathy from moderate noise exposure.” In: The Journal of neuroscience : the
official journal of the Society for Neuroscience (2013).
[29]
M. C. Liberman and S. G. Kujawa. “Cochlear synaptopathy in acquired sensorineu­
ral hearing loss: Manifestations and mechanisms”. In: Hearing Research (2017).
[30]
J. Ruel, J. Wang, G. Rebillard, M. Eybalin, R. Lloyd, R. Pujol, and J.­L. Puel. “Physi­
ology, pharmacology and plasticity at the inner hair cell synaptic complex.” In: Hear­
ing Research (20o7).
40
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:50==
A
Appendix: Questionnaires
A.1
Questionnaire 1: Before gaming
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
41
==PAGE:51==
42
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:52==
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
43
==PAGE:53==
44
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:54==
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
45
==PAGE:55==
46
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:56==
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
47
==PAGE:57==
48
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:58==
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
49
==PAGE:59==
50
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:60==
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
51
==PAGE:61==
52
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:62==
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
53
==PAGE:63==
A.2
Questionnaire 2: At the session
54
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:64==
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
55
==PAGE:65==
56
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:66==
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
57
==PAGE:67==
A.3
Questionnaire 3: After the final round of measurements
58
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:68==
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
59
==PAGE:69==
60
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:70==
B
Detailed Participant Responses to
Auditory Effects Post­Gaming Session
Table B.1: Details of participants who experienced ringing or buzzing sounds after the
gaming session.
Duration
Game type
Session
length
Perceived
sound level
Annoyance
level
Belief in long­
term impact
5 min
Shooter
2 h
Loud
2/10
No
2­4 s
Sport
2 h
Loud
6/10
Yes
1 min
Shooter
2 h
Loud
4/10
Yes
10 min
Sport
2.3 h
Loud
3/10
Yes
Table B.2: Details of participants who experienced reduced or muffled hearing after the
gaming session.
Duration
Game type
Session
length
Perceived
sound level
Annoyance
level
Belief in long­
term impact
30 min
Role­Playing
2 h
Very Loud
1/10
Yes
1 min
Adventure
2.3 h
Very Loud
6/10
Yes
4­5 s
Sport
2 h
Loud
6/10
Yes
5 min
Adventure
2 h
Loud
8/10
Yes
Not specified
Shooter
4 h
Loud
1/10
No
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
61
==PAGE:71==
C
Appendix: Overview of the
Computation of Annual Noise Exposure
Figure C.1: Diagram of the process of calculating ANE copied from Johnson et al., 2017.
62
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:72==
D
Appendix: Factors and Their Values
Used in the Mixed­effect Model
Analysis of Sound Exposure
ID
Frequency
of
playing
Duration
EE
EF
Primary game type
Age
How loud
NH01
Weekly
1 hour up to 4 hours
1.32
150
Shooters
Less than 10
Comfortable
NH02
Weekly
1 hour up to 4 hours
0.54
150
Adventure
More than 10
Comfortable
NH03
Weekly
Less than 1 hour
0.30
50
Strategy
Less than 10
Soft
NH04
Weekly
1 hour up to 4 hours
1.32
150
Shooters
Less than 10
Loud
NH05
Monthly or less
1 hour up to 4 hours
0.00
1.5
Simulation
Less than 10
Comfortable
NH06
Monthly or less
Less than 1 hour
0.01
1
Platform
More than 10
Comfortable
NH07
Monthly or less
1 hour up to 4 hours
0.02
3
Platform
Less than 10
Comfortable
NH08
Monthly or less
4 hours up to 8 hours
0.14
6
Strategy
More than 10
Comfortable
NH09
Weekly
1 hour up to 4 hours
1.11
150
Role­Playing
Less than 10
Loud
NH10
Monthly or less
1 hour up to 4 hours
0.71
36
Other
More than 10
Soft
NH11
Daily
4 hours up to 8 hours
17.58
1200
Simulation
Less than 10
Comfortable
NH12
Daily
4 hours up to 8 hours
10.67
1200
Role­Playing (RPGs)
Less than 10
Comfortable
NH13
Weekly
1 hour up to 4 hours
0.34
150
Role­Playing (RPGs)
More than 10
Comfortable
NH14
Monthly or less
1 hour up to 4 hours
0.02
3
Sports
More than 10
Loud
NH15
Monthly or less
Less than 1 hour
0.01
1
Sports
More than 10
Loud
NH16
Weekly
1 hour up to 4 hours
0.54
150
Role­Playing (RPGs)
Less than 10
Comfortable
NH17
Weekly
1 hour up to 4 hours
0.87
150
Shooters
Less than 10
Comfortable
NH18
Monthly or less
1 hour up to 4 hours
0.01
1.5
Adventure
More than 10
Comfortable
NH19
Weekly
1 hour up to 4 hours
1.11
150
Other
Less than 10
Comfortable
NH20
Weekly
1 hour up to 4 hours
0.51
150
Role­Playing (RPGs)
More than 10
Comfortable
NH21
Daily
1 hour up to 4 hours
4.32
600
Simulation
Less than 10
Comfortable
NH22
Monthly or less
1 hour up to 4 hours
0.00
3
Simulation
More than 10
Comfortable
NH23
Weekly
1 hour up to 4 hours
1.20
150
Simulation
More than 10
Soft
NH24
Monthly or less
1 hour up to 4 hours
0.05
3
Simulation
Less than 10
Comfortable
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
63
==PAGE:73==
E
Appendix: Total ANE Values
Table E.1: Total ANE values for each test subject with and without gaming taken into
account.
Total ANE without gaming
Total ANE with gaming
NH01
76.03
76.09
NH02
75.08
75.07
NH03
76.79
76.80
NH04
75.44
75.51
NH05
75.29
75.29
NH06
74.61
74.61
NH07
75.37
75.37
NH08
75.62
75.63
NH09
75.00
75.06
NH10
75.65
75.70
NH11
75.32
76.45
NH12
75.52
76.05
NH13
75.39
75.37
NH14
76.15
76.15
NH15
74.88
74.88
NH16
76.17
76.16
NH17
76.36
76.38
NH18
77.18
77.18
NH19
76.48
76.52
NH20
76.02
76.01
NH21
75.61
75.79
NH22
76.33
76.33
NH23
75.54
75.59
NH24
75.23
75.23
64
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:74==
F
Appendix: Averages and Differences
Between Before and After Gaming of
Audiometric Thresholds
Table F.1: Average threshold in decibels hearing level.
Frequency (Hz)
Before
After
125
4.88 ± 4.90
3.93 ± 3.73
250
3.33 ± 5.73
2.14 ± 4.71
500
4.40 ± 4.31
1.90 ± 3.97
1000
4.64 ± 4.48
2.50 ± 4.73
2000
4.17 ± 5.83
3.57 ± 6.25
4000
4.17 ± 6.29
3.93 ± 5.85
8000
4.88 ± 7.69
6.90 ± 8.24
9000
6.31 ± 7.01
6.90 ± 8.71
10000
4.88 ± 4.90
3.93 ± 3.73
11200
3.33 ± 5.73
2.14 ± 4.71
12500
4.40 ± 4.31
1.90 ± 3.97
14000
4.64 ± 4.48
2.50 ± 4.73
16000
4.17 ± 5.83
3.57 ± 6.25
18000
4.17 ± 6.29
3.93 ± 5.85
20000
4.88 ± 7.69
6.90 ± 8.24
Table F.2: Difference in threshold between before and after gaming: average (Avg Diff),
minimum (Min Diff) and maximum (Max Diff) difference and their corresponding average
(Avg Abs Diff), minimum (Min Abs Diff) and maximum (Max Abs Diff )values of absolute
difference.
Frequency (Hz)
Avg Diff
Min Diff
Max Diff
Avg Abs Diff
Min Abs Diff
Max Abs Diff
125
­0.95
­10.00
10.00
3.10
0.00
10.00
250
­1.19
­5.00
5.00
2.62
0.00
5.00
500
­2.50
­10.00
10.00
3.45
0.00
10.00
1000
­2.14
­10.00
10.00
3.33
0.00
10.00
2000
­0.60
­15.00
10.00
3.45
0.00
15.00
4000
­0.24
­5.00
10.00
1.90
0.00
10.00
8000
2.02
­10.00
15.00
3.93
0.00
15.00
9000
0.60
­20.00
15.00
4.40
0.00
20.00
10000
0.48
­15.00
10.00
3.81
0.00
15.00
11200
0.24
­15.00
15.00
4.05
0.00
15.00
12500
0.83
­20.00
30.00
4.64
0.00
30.00
14000
1.90
­10.00
10.00
4.29
0.00
10.00
16000
2.50
­20.00
15.00
5.60
0.00
20.00
18000
0.86
­15.00
25.00
6.70
0.00
25.00
20000
2.15
­15.00
20.00
5.69
0.00
20.00
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
65
==PAGE:75==
G
Appendix: Wave I amplitudes
Table G.1: Amplitudes of wave I before and after gaming chosen for statistical analysis.
ID
Amplitude Before (µV)
Amplitude After (µV)
NH04
0.147772
0.106184
NH05
0.271071
0.251741
NH08
0.164449
0.117301
NH12
0.250219
0.166622
NH13
0.307077
0.315954
NH15
0.245239
0.227883
NH16
0.232295
0.2416
NH17
0.239434
0.2582
NH19
0.220401
0.196775
NH22
0.15041
0.174079
66
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
==PAGE:76==
Changes in hearing after a gaming event
67
==PAGE:77==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
